Sixth Edition
NEUROLOGY 
for the Speech-Language Pathologist
WANDA G. WEBB, PhD, CCC-SLP
Assistant Professor
Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences
School of Medicine
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee

3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
NEUROLOGY FOR THE SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGIST,  
SIXTH EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-323-10027-4
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Previous editions copyrighted 2008, 2001, 1996, 1991, 1986.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further 
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such 
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: 
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical 
treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In 
using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of 
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the 
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each 
product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration 
of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own 
experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best 
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products 
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, 
or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Webb, Wanda G., author.
Title: Neurology for the speech-language pathologist / Wanda G. Webb, PhD,
  CCC-SLP, Assistant Professor, Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences,
  School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
Description: Sixth edition. | St. Louis, Missouri : Elsevier Inc., [2017] |
  Originally published: Neurology for the speech-language pathologist /
  Russell J. Love, Wanda G. Webb ; illustrations by Donna B. Halliburton. |
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016000517 | ISBN 9780323100274 (pbk.)
Subjects: LCSH: Language disorders--Pathophysiology. | Neurology.
Classification: LCC RC423 .L68 2017 | DDC 616.85/5--dc23 LC record  
available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2016000517
Content Strategy Director: Penny S. Rudolph
Content Development Manager: Jolynn Gower
Senior Content Development Specialist: Brian Loehr
Publishing Services Manager: Hemamalini Rajendrababu
Senior Project Manager: Divya Krishna Kumar
Designer: Ashley Miner
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit is the print number: 9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Dedication
This book is dedicated in loving memory to Dr. Russell J. Love,  
former senior author, who passed away in March 2006 at the age of 75.
Russell J. Love was born in Chicago, attended Tulane University, and graduated with his 
master’s degree and then later his PhD from Northwestern University. As a clinician, 
he served as a speech-language pathologist at the Moody School for Cerebral Palsied 
Children in Galveston, Texas; the VA hospital in Coral Gables, Florida; Michael Reese 
Hospital in Chicago, Illinois; and the Bill Wilkerson Center in Nashville, Tennessee. 
As a professor, he taught at DePaul University and at Vanderbilt University and retired 
as professor emeritus from Vanderbilt in 1995. Among other acknowledgments of his 
contribution, Dr. Love was awarded the Honors of the Tennessee Association of Audiolo-
gists and Speech-Language Pathologists and was made a fellow of the American Speech- 
Language-Hearing Association. He was most proud of his work as an advocate for the 
rights of persons with communication and physical disabilities.
Dr. Love’s memory is cherished by his family, his friends, and his colleagues as a man 
of perseverance, intelligence, compassion, and quick wit. He was a caring and devoted 
husband, father, grandfather, teacher, collaborator, and friend. My wish for every student 
reading this text is that you will find a teacher or mentor who will guide you in your stud-
ies and your career as carefully and with as much respect and insight as Dr. Love guided 
me and so many others.
This book is also dedicated in loving memory to my husband, Joe C. Luttrell, who 
passed away suddenly in December 2007.
Joe and I had been married only 2 or 3 years when Russell Love and I began the 
work on the first edition of this text. He and Russell were friends and Barbara, Russell’s 
wife, and Joe were the persons to whom the first edition was dedicated because of their 

vi
unfailing support of our work. He continued with that kind of support for me through 
the next three editions, through Russell’s death, and during the writing with Dr. Adler of 
the 5th edition. This new edition was done with only memories of the support and love 
he always gave me. He was my best friend and the love of my life. This book is dedicated 
to him with appreciation for the strength and spirit to “soldier on” that only a loving part-
nership like ours could engender.
My second wish for any student or anyone using this text is that your life will also be 
blessed with someone who provides you with such gifts.

vii
Acknowledgments
F
or an author primarily trained in the field of speech-
language pathology, rather than neurology, a project 
like this demands reliance on colleagues in neurology 
to assist in the development of the work. Howard S. 
Kirshner brought his expertise to bear on the earlier 
editions, which establish the foundation of the current 
text. I remain in his debt for that guidance.
I am indebted as well to several members of the edito-
rial staff, past and present, of Butterworth-Heinemann 
and now Elsevier. In past editions, specific individuals of 
the Butterworth-Heinemann staff have been named in 
the acknowledgments, as have various people in Nash-
ville who provided invaluable secretarial support for 
those earlier editions. I will not reiterate their names 
here, but that is not to detract from the value of their 
contributions. They will always be remembered as criti-
cal to the success this book has enjoyed. For this edition, 
I am most grateful for the guidance of Jolynn Gower 
and Penny Rudolph and for the editing expertise of 
Brian Loehr and Anna Schook.
During the best of times, no undertaking as com-
plex as this revision is completed without the support 
of coworkers, family, and friends. I first want to express 
my appreciation to Dr. Richard Adler for initiating this 
project with me. He and I began planning the sixth edi-
tion; he did a great deal of early research and turned 
all of it over to me when we decided I would continue 
writing the sixth edition. He did much of this research 
during times of illness and through a horrible Min-
nesota winter and the melting of spring! I very much 
appreciate the early assistance he so willingly provided 
and, of course, much of the content for which he was 
responsible in the fifth edition continues in the sixth 
edition. Thank you, Richard.
I am most grateful to my students and my colleagues 
at Vanderbilt University for all they have taught me and 
continue to teach me. I sometimes cannot believe how 
fortunate I am to be teaching such bright inquisitive 
future professionals and to work with faculty and staff 
at Vanderbilt who model for them the highest quality of 
professionalism in research, teaching, and patient care.
And finally I wish to acknowledge and thank my 
family and friends who have been extremely support-
ive through these very difficult years since the death of 
my husband and through this writing project. I know 
they will celebrate as much as I will its publication as 
they have stuck with me and listened to my whining and 
excuses for almost 2 years of writing! There are so many 
who deserve my recognition, and I can name only a few 
here. Acknowledging that, appreciation and affection 
are extended here to all the POMS, Linda Meyer, Judy 
Luna, Penny Powers, Lee and Jim Huddleston, Victoria 
Webb, Joe Simpson, and Lisa and Gayle Crowe for all 
your faith in me and your encouragement. There would 
be no sixth edition without it.
Wanda G. Webb
A
ddendum, August 30, 2015: On the very day I am 
writing these acknowledgments and dedications, 
one of my “Neurology Heroes” passed away. Dr. Oliver 
Sachs was a giant among researchers, teachers, and cli-
nicians who practice neurology. He possessed a fasci-
nation with the brain and an understanding of speech 
and language that surpassed most neurologists. In his 
writing he shared the stories of many of his patients 
with speech-language and other disorders, enabling 
the public to see the humanity in these patients. More 
than a million copies of his books, most of which are 
fascinating essays based on case histories, have been 
sold. If you are not familiar with his books, do yourself 
a favor and read one soon. The medical profession and 
the reading public in general will miss you, Dr. Sachs. 
Rest in Peace.

ix
Foreword
Speech Pathology and Neurology: 
Intersecting Specialties
Neurology is the study of the effects of disease in the 
nervous system—brain, spinal cord, cerebellum, nerves, 
and muscles—on human behavior. The neurologist 
examines specific functions—including higher cortical 
functions; cranial nerve functions; and motor, sensory, 
and cerebellar functions—all to localize disorders to 
specific areas of the nervous system. These lesion local-
izations, along with the clinical history of how the deficit 
developed, allow for a precise diagnosis of the disease 
process. Laboratory and brain imaging tests may help 
to confirm the diagnosis, but the process should always 
start with localization and disease diagnosis in a clinical 
neurologic evaluation.
Speech and communication are among the most 
complicated functions of the human brain, involv-
ing myriad interactions among personality, cognitive 
processes, imagination, language, emotion, and lower 
sensory and motor systems necessary for articulation 
and comprehension. These functions involve brain 
pathways and mechanisms, some well understood and 
others only beginning to be conceptualized. The brain 
mechanisms underlying higher functions such as lan-
guage are known largely through neurologic studies 
of human patients with acquired brain lesions. Animal 
models have shed only limited light on these complex 
disorders.
Stroke has historically been a great source of informa-
tion because this “experiment of nature” damages one 
brain area while leaving the rest of the nervous system 
intact. For more than a century, patients with strokes 
and other brain diseases have been studied in life, and 
the clinical syndromes have then been correlated with 
brain lesions found at autopsy. New methods of brain 
imaging have made possible the simultaneous study of 
a lesion in the brain and a deficit of communication 
in the same patient. These advances in brain imaging, 
including computed tomography, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), and positron emission tomography 
(PET), have brought about a burgeoning of knowledge 
in this area. Functional brain imaging modalities such 
as functional MRI and PET scanning now permit the 
visualization of brain activation in normal subjects dur-
ing language tasks, and these studies have contributed 
further to our knowledge of the organization of lan-
guage in the brain.
In this book, the factual groundwork has been laid 
for the understanding of the nervous system in terms 
of the organization of the brain, descending motor and 
ascending sensory pathways, and cranial nerves and 
muscles. Understanding these anatomic systems makes 
possible the understanding and classification of the syn-
dromes of aphasia, alexia, dysarthria, and dysphonia, as 
well as the effects of specific, localized disease processes 
on human speech and communication. All these sub-
jects are clearly and accurately reviewed. The speech-
language pathologist who studies this book should have 
a much improved comprehension of the brain mech-
anisms disrupted in speech-impaired and language-
impaired patients, and thereby a greater understanding 
of the disorders of speech and language themselves.
Perhaps the most important by-product of this 
book should be a closer interaction between neurolo-
gists and speech-language pathologists. Neurologists 
understand the anatomic relationships of the brain 
and its connections, but they often fail to use speech 
and language to their full limits in assessing the func-
tion of specific parts of the nervous system. A careful 
analysis of speech and language functions can supple-
ment the more cursory portions of the standard neu-
rologic examination devoted to these functions. Thus 
detailed aphasia testing supplements the neurologist’s 
bedside mental status examination, and close obser-
vation of palatal, lingual, and facial motion during 
articulation supplements the neurologist’s cranial 
nerve examination. The neurologist’s diagnosis of 
the patient’s disorder, on the other hand, should aid 
the speech-language pathologist in understanding the 
nature and prognosis of the speech and language dis-
order. The neurologist and speech-language patholo-
gist should ideally function as a team, complementing 
each other. For this teamwork to occur, however, each 
specialist must comprehend the other’s language. To 
this end, these authors have made the language of the 
neurologist understandable to the speech-language 
pathologist. As a neurologist who worked closely with 
Dr. Webb and Dr. Love, I applaud this important 
accomplishment.
I would like to end with a personal statement about 
Dr. Russell Love, one of the two original authors of this 
book. Dr. Love was an inspiring scientist and colleague 
who personified the relationship between speech-­
language pathologist and neurologist. In his long career, 
he taught generations of speech-language pathologists 
and neurologists. To the end, he was always gracious, 
optimistic, and informative in all of his interactions.
Howard S. Kirshner
Professor and Vice-Chair
Department of Neurology
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, Tennessee

xi
Preface
Introduction
It is indeed rare to find a speech-language pathologist 
in practice today who does not interact with the medical 
profession. The person practicing in hospitals, rehabili-
tation settings, nursing homes, or home health settings 
obviously will be a part of a medical team, whether for-
mal or informal. The person practicing in the school 
systems, where the majority of speech-language pathol-
ogists and many educational audiologists are employed, 
also frequently will need to interact in some way with the 
medical profession, as will persons in private practice. 
In both of these settings, medically fragile children and 
adults are treated who have a communication disorder 
associated with a medical condition. This evolution in 
patient population has made it critical for the speech-
language pathologist and audiologist to be well versed 
concerning anatomy and physiology of body systems 
related to speech, language, and hearing. Arguably the 
most important system is the nervous system—the foun-
dation of all movement and thought associated with 
speech and language.
Background
The idea for this text was first conceived by Russel and 
I out of a frustration that there was, at that time (1986), 
no textbook written by speech-language pathologists 
for that profession that was devoted strictly to the neu-
rology of “the human communication nervous system.” 
Over the years, there have been several textbooks 
published that are devoted to this topic and written 
by practicing speech-language pathologists. However, 
most of these texts only emphasize the anatomy and 
physiology of the nervous system underlying nor-
mal communication. Neurology for the Speech-Language 
Pathologist is dedicated not only to the study of the 
normal system function, but also to an introduction 
to the disorders that occur when the nervous system 
is developmentally abnormal or becomes diseased or 
damaged.
Audience
The targeted audience for this book is, of course, stu-
dents preparing to become practicing speech-language 
pathologists. Students intending to enter the profession 
of audiology frequently will be enrolled in a class on 
neurology of human communication. Although this 
text does not go into the depth of the auditory system 
that students will need later, they will find it useful for 
their future endeavors. The text is also written to serve 
as a reference for speech and hearing professionals 
already in practice who wish to update themselves in 
neurology or who may not have had a specific curricu-
lum regarding the neurologic foundation of communi-
cation and its disorders.
Concept and Importance to the 
Profession
As Dr. Howard Kirshner states in the foreword to this 
book, the speech-language pathologist and the neu-
rologist are able to work together more successfully for 
the patient’s benefit when they “speak the same lan-
guage.” This was one of the initial thrusts of the cre-
ation of this textbook. Ultimate benefit is also achieved 
when speech-language pathologists can understand 
the terminology and the concerns of other profes-
sions involved in the habilitation and rehabilitation of 
patients. Thus the content has evolved over the years to 
help the speech-language pathologist obtain a better 
understanding of nervous system function in related 
systems often treated by other professionals, such as 
those in physical therapy, occupational therapy, and 
neuropsychology.
In this new century, there is a demand for evidence-
based practice, meaning that there is a demand that 
the speech-language pathologist design and use diag-
nostic and treatment methodologies based on sound 
theory and research-based evidence that supports 
that theory and practice. Knowledge about nervous 
system function and how the brain develops, initiates, 
and maintains movement; learns and remembers; and 
recovers or changes after injury is critical to success-
ful practice. This book is dedicated to enhancing that 
knowledge.
Organization
The sixth edition is organized a bit differently from 
previous editions, and a separate chapter on the devel-
oping brain has been added, effectively giving the text 
a three-chapter section on pediatrics. In regard to the 
entire text, the introductory chapter discusses the inter-
twining histories of the professions of speech-language 
pathology and neurology. Chapters 2 and 3 are founda-
tion chapters, providing an overview of the anatomy of 
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Chapter 3 
also includes a section on some of the more popular 

PREFACE
xii
neurodiagnostic studies that are becoming increasingly 
important in our profession’s research and clinical lit-
erature. Chapters 4 and 5 describe anatomy and physi-
ology of neuronal function and the sensory systems of 
vision, hearing, and touch. Chapters 6 to 8 are devoted 
to anatomy and physiology of normal motor function, 
the cranial nerves, and the motor speech disorders that 
result from damage or disease affecting oral-motor func-
tion. Chapter 9 explores the neuroanatomy and neuro-
physiology underlying language and learning. Chapter 
10 discusses various language and cognitive disorders in 
adults with neurologic damage. Chapter 11 is the new 
chapter reviewing the development of the human brain 
from conception through the early postnatal period. 
Chapter 11 also contains the section on the examina-
tion of primitive reflexes of the newborn, which those 
familiar with previous editions will recognize. Chap-
ter 12 provides information on pediatric disorders of 
speech, and Chapter 13 examines pediatric language 
disorders.
The first four chapters provide the reader with 
­anatomic terms and location and function of struc-
tures in an overview of the entire nervous system with-
out ­getting too much into the details of the specific 
systems. The idea is to have a mental concept of the 
entire ­nervous system and the structural and functional 
relationships before studying in depth the systems most 
relevant to communication and related disorders.
Distinctive Features
	•	 The text combines information concerning both 
neuroanatomy and neurophysiology with informa-
tion about speech and language disorders associated 
with nervous system dysfunction.
	•	 The disorder section of the text includes separate 
chapters on speech and language, which are further 
divided into pediatric and adult disorders.
	•	 Included in the text is information designed to help 
the reader understand related disorders, such as 
disorders of visual processing and hearing and limb 
movement, that are treated by other members of the 
habilitation or rehabilitation team.
	•	 The text also includes a description of a neurolo-
gist’s typical bedside examination and assessment for 
adults and pediatric patients.
Learning Aids
	•	 There are 170 photos, scans, illustrations, and dia-
grams, many of them highlighted with the second 
color for clarity, that depict anatomic structure and 
function within the nervous system as well as charac-
teristics of neurologic disease or injury.
	•	 Detailed vocabulary listings are provided on the first 
page of each chapter, highlighted within the chapter 
discussion, and defined in the back-of-book glossary.
	•	 Certain chapters contain a case history and descrip-
tion of a patient with a condition pertinent to the 
­system or disorder discussed within that chapter. 
­Cases are followed by questions for consideration 
and discussion.
	•	 Detailed summary and application boxes appear at 
the end of each chapter and organize the informa-
tion into bulleted listings for ease of reference.
	•	 Appendices provide a listing and brief description 
of medical conditions related to communication 
­disorders, an outline of a bedside neurologic exami-
nation, and a screening neurologic examination— 
all invaluable references for student clinicians and 
practitioners.
Ancillary Materials
An Evolve website has been created specifically to 
accompany this sixth edition of Neurology for the Speech-
Language Pathologist. Resources are available free of cost 
to all students via the URL http://evolve.elsevier.com/
Webb/neurology/. Instructor resources are available to 
all adopting instructors, who can register for free access 
via their sales representative. Following is a summary of 
the resources available online:
For Instructors
	•	 A test bank features over 400 objective-style 
questions—­multiple-choice, true/false, and fill-in-
the-blank—each with an accompanying rationale 
for the correct answer and a page-number reference 
to direct the reader to the exact textbook page on 
which that content is discussed.
	•	 An image collection featuring artwork from the 
textbook—two-color renderings, photographs, and 
brain-imaging scans—is available for download into 
PowerPoint or other presentations.
For Students
	•	 Flashcards reproduce the book’s glossary into a 
fun and interactive tool that helps readers practice 
terminology and ensure content mastery. The flash-
cards are excellent resources for examination prep-
aration.

PREFACE
xiii
	•	 Answers to case study questions are included to 
help readers test their knowledge and understand 
chapter content as it applies to realistic patient 
situations.
	•	 Chapter reference lists are reproduced in a bib-
liography that contains Pubmed links, allowing 
readers to search quickly and easily for relevant 
literature and connect directly to specific journal 
articles.
	•	 Animations are also included, providing amazing 
views of various neuroanatomy and neurophysiology 
structures, concepts, and diseases and disorders.
Wanda G. Webb

1
1
K E Y  T E R M S
agnosias
anterior
aphasia
apraxias
association fiber 
tracts
asymmetry
behavioral neurology
Carl Wernicke
cephalic
clinical neurology
computed 
tomography (CT)
dorsal
dysarthrias
inferior
localization of 
function
Noam Chomsky
Norman Geschwind
Pierre Paul Broca
plasticity
posterior
rostral
superior
ventral
Introduction to 
Speech-Language 
Neurology
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Why Neurology?
Recent Contributors to the Study of Neurologic 
Communication Disorders
Historic Roots: Development of Speech-Language 
Pathology as a Brain Science
Early Language Models
World War I
Modern Times
Directions and Planes
How to Study
We must admit that the divine banquet of the brain was, 
and still is, a feast with dishes that remain elusive in their 
blending, and with sauces whose ingredients are even now  
a secret.
MacDonald Critchley, The Divine Banquet of the  
Brain, 1979

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
2
Why Neurology?
The 1990s were labeled by the U.S. Congress as the 
Decade of the Brain. Likewise, 1990 was the year of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). In 2006, Ameri-
can Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) 
members learned about the reauthorization of the IDEA 
(Individual Disability Education Act). Since the incep-
tion of the federal laws to help and protect Americans 
who have a variety of disabilities, including communica-
tion and hearing disorders, ASHA academic and clini-
cal standards have undergone major changes as well. A 
tremendous expansion of knowledge has occurred in 
the neurosciences, including increased complexities of 
the types and severity of disorders treated by all speech-
language pathologists (SLPs), from the school-based 
SLP and educational audiologist to the hospital-based 
certified SLP professional. ASHA has recognized these 
advances in neuroscience by realizing that an SLP or 
audiologist must have an expanded knowledge of neu-
roanatomy and physiology to remain a viable member 
of either the Individual Educational Plan (IEP) or the 
interdisciplinary team (IDT). That is why academic and 
clinical standards for all SLPs and audiologists under-
went a major change in the early twenty-first century.
For the student of speech-language pathology and 
audiology, these governmental reform acts and advances 
in neuroscience have played a significant role in form-
ing the current academic and clinical standards used by 
ASHA. The new certification standards required as of 
July 2004 mandate particular knowledge and skills for 
students to be prepared to serve a variety of communica-
tion and hearing disorders in children and adults. From 
an undergraduate’s general education, which is now 
required to include biologic and physical sciences, to the 
graduate student’s in-depth study of stroke, traumatic 
brain injury (TBI), or autism, academic programs have 
had to increase neuroscience offerings. The work of the 
linguist, the cognitive psychologist, and the neuroscien-
tist, as well as the SLP and audiologist, has brought to the 
field of communication sciences and disorders an accel-
erated knowledge of the specialized brain mechanisms 
that underlie speech, language, and hearing and their 
disorders. Specialists now possess the knowledge and 
skills to understand, implement, analyze, and synthesize 
the neurologic bases of speech, language, and hearing, 
as well as the skills required to meet the ADA, IDEA, and 
new ASHA standards.
Widespread interest in the study of neurogenic issues 
has increased among speech and language students as 
opportunities for clinical experiences and employment 
in schools, hospitals, rehabilitation centers, and other 
health care agencies continue to increase. Increased lon-
gevity of human beings has caused a greater incidence 
of hearing, speech, and language disorders such as 
presbycusis, dementia, aphasia, dysarthria, and apraxia. 
With improving medical technology, traumatically brain-
injured infants, children, and adults are now saved from 
death much more frequently than in the past. The 
speech and language disorders of these survivors present 
new and greater challenges to the SLP and audiologist.
In 1986, when the first edition of this text appeared, 
only half of undergraduate and graduate training pro-
grams in communication disorders offered specific 
coursework in neurology with an emphasis on speech and 
language mechanisms. As of this new edition, 30 years 
later, the majority of the 300 programs (www.asha.org) in 
the field provide such coursework. In 2004 Adler2 sur-
veyed all accredited ASHA programs in Speech-Language 
Pathology and Audiology. The survey consisted of questions 
asking academic programs to give information about 
the anatomy and physiology (A&P) and neuroanatomy 
and physiology (N&P) courses required in their under-
graduate and master’s degree course sequences. Results 
indicated that the A&P course is offered in every pro-
gram, and more than 70% of the accredited programs 
offered N&P courses. Many of these courses in neuro-
anatomy are on the graduate level, and all respondents 
made it clear that the N&P course is quite relevant and 
is required for all students to meet the standards and 
prepare students for challenging SLP positions.
Accompanying a growing interest among neurolo-
gists in communication sciences and disorders has been 
a parallel increase in the number of practicing SLPs. 
In the past 4 decades, membership in ASHA has risen 
from 2203 in 1952 to more than 173,000 members 
and affiliates in 2013 (www.asha.org). Although not all 
of these individuals are interested in neurologic disor-
ders, many are, and for those who wish to study and 
specialize in neurologic speech and language disorders, 
a certification body, the Academy of Neurologic Com-
munication Disorders and Sciences, accepts qualified 
members. Specialization in adult neurologic impair-
ment, child neurologic impairment, or both is possible. 
In the past 5 to 10 years, ASHA special interest divisions 
have begun the process of specialization certifications 
in many areas, including child language, swallowing, 
fluency, and intraoperative monitoring. Most SLPs 
and audiologists work in schools, hospitals, or medical 
center or university clinics. All settings currently use 
an IDT approach and call the team a variety of names, 
including IDT, IEP team, clinical rounds team, or inter-
disciplinary management team (IMT). Regardless of 
name, the main function is to assess the client, discuss 
results from all disciplines, write a treatment plan that 
includes goals and objectives, and ensure that all goals 
and objectives have one outcome—the improvement 
of speech and language functioning for that client.  

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
3
The client might be seen in a school setting, a hospital, 
an outpatient clinic, a developmental center, through 
a home health agency, in a rehabilitation center, a uni-
versity clinic, or in an office of a private practice. The 
SLP provides important information to what is usually a 
team of educational or medical professionals regarding 
a person’s speech and language deficits and assets as 
related to brain functioning.
Recent Contributors to the Study of 
Neurologic Communication Disorders
During the past 4 decades, two towering figures have 
dominated the field of language and speech. One, a 
neurologist, was Norman Geschwind (1926-1984). He 
almost single-handedly resurrected the early neurologic 
literature of Europe focusing on language disorders and 
related deficits. Geschwind brought this body of knowl-
edge to the attention of the American medical audi-
ence when interest in aphasia and related disorders was 
waning. He particularly highlighted the value of iden-
tifying lesions in the connective pathways of the brain, 
as well as diagnosing lesions in the traditional localized 
cortical areas of the brain that had been associated with 
language disorders for more than a century. His master-
work, “Disconnection Syndromes in Animals and Man,” 
was published in Brain more than 49 years ago.21
Geschwind taught brilliantly at Harvard University 
Medical School for many years and inspired genera-
tions of students to pursue neurology as a specialty and 
to concentrate on disorders of higher cerebral func-
tion. This area is now known as behavioral neurology. 
Aphasia and other related disorders, such as agnosia 
and apraxia, were considered minor aspects of a gen-
eral neurologic practice until Geschwind highlighted 
them in neurology and related fields.
Thanks to Geschwind’s original and incisive think-
ing, the study of language and its disorders returned to 
its rightful place of importance among the vast range of 
neurologic diseases. His thinking was so innovative that 
it influenced many other scientific disciplines, particu-
larly linguistics, psychology, and philosophy. Geschwind 
is one of the few physicians who has been honored by 
having their scientific papers collected and published 
before their death.22
The second towering figure in the latter half of the 
twentieth century in the field of neurology of speech 
and language has been Noam Chomsky, a linguist of 
international renown. Chomsky is credited with creat-
ing a scientific revolution in the understanding of syn-
tax and other components of language,28 and he has 
been called a major intellectual force, a “modern mas-
ter” of creative and scientific thought.42
Beginning in 1957 with his monograph Syntactic 
Structures,10 Chomsky developed a theory of grammar, 
stressing mental processes that replaced the structural 
analysis of language based on the mechanistic and 
behavioral viewpoint exemplified by the writings of 
Bloomfield.4 Chomsky disputes the traditional idea that 
language is essentially a system of habits established by 
training and forcefully argues that every human being 
has the innate capacity to use language. Innate gram-
matical processes, he believes, are triggered by exter-
nal stimuli but function autonomously. The concept of 
innateness implies a biologic, neurologic, and genetic 
basis for language.
Chomsky’s definition of grammar differs from that of 
structuralist linguists in that it is concerned with a spe-
cific and formal description of language, as well as neu-
rologic language processes as they work in the human 
brain. The details of these aspects of language, however, 
are not clearly explained in Chomsky’s writings, and 
it can be difficult, even with knowledge of transforma-
tional-generative grammar, to reconcile the details of the 
newer linguistic theory of Chomsky with the older neu-
rologic theory of Geschwind and his followers. Box 1-1 
Norman Geschwind (1926-1984)
	•	 Revitalized early neurologic literature focusing on 
language disorders and related deficits
	•	 Brought body of knowledge to attention of Ameri-
can medical audience
	•	 Highlighted the value of identification and diag-
nosis of lesions in areas associated with language 
disorders
	•	 Published masterwork “Disconnection Syndromes 
in Animals and Man” (1965) in Brain
	•	 Largely founded the field of behavioral neurology
	•	 Influenced other disciplines such as linguistics, psy-
chology, and philosophy
Noam Chomsky (1928-)
	•	 Created scientific revolution in understanding 
syntax and other components of language
	•	 Published Syntactic Structures in 1957, which out-
lined his theory of grammar
	•	 Argued the revolutionary notion that the capac-
ity for language learning and usage is innate, not 
learned
	•	 Theorized that grammar includes neurologic lan-
guage processes that parallel a formal description 
of language
	
BOX 1-1   
Two Key Leaders in Speech and Language

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
4
summarizes the work of both Geschwind and Chomsky 
in speech-language neurology.
The more recent literature, however, is beginning 
to synthesize the linguistic and neurologic positions 
in explaining disordered communication. Steven 
Pinker, a cognitive psychologist and linguist, wrote 
that language may be considered an “instinct” in the 
same sense that Charles Darwin conceived of animal 
instincts. Pinker asserts that grammar is a perfect exam-
ple of a biologic trait determined by the Darwinian 
principle of natural selection and that it is genetically 
based. In addition, Pinker stated that the intricately 
structured neural circuits that support language and 
speech are “laid down by a cascade of precisely timed 
genetic events.”45 A genetic nature of language is sup-
ported by cases of inherited disturbance that appear to 
be accompanied by specific defects of grammar.25Even 
earlier than Pinker’s work, a biologic defense of Chom-
sky’s concept of innateness appeared in a well-known 
but somewhat controversial book by Eric Lenneberg 
(1921-1975), The Biological Foundations of Language.36 
Lenneberg clearly placed language development in a 
developmental neurology context. One of the high-
lights of this book was Lenneberg’s attempt to define 
a critical period for the acquisition of early language. 
Lenneberg maintained that the acquisition of syntax 
was paced by the rate of cerebral maturation and the 
lateralization of language mechanisms. He asserted 
that the rapid acquisition of language starts at approxi-
mately 2 years of age, as the brain begins to grow rap-
idly, and slows at puberty (at approximately 12 years 
of age), when cerebral growth reaches a plateau. 
Although often criticized, the concept of critical peri-
ods is consistent with the importance of biologic and 
neurologic mechanisms for language development, 
and some have supported Lenneberg’s claims.34
Although the concepts of Lenneberg, Geschwind, 
and particularly Chomsky concerning neurologic 
aspects of language have been widely criticized, they 
have focused interest on the need to understand brain 
function in detail when studying speech and language 
disorders.
Not all biologic and neurologic theories of lan-
guage have come from linguists or cognitive-behav-
ioral psychologists. Harold Goodglass and Edith 
Kaplan were neuropsychologists and students of 
Geschwind who worked together at the Boston Vet-
erans Administration Hospital to develop diagnos-
tic theories of aphasia and assessment protocols for 
testing aphasic language behaviors,24 thereby con-
tributing to the SLP’s knowledge of language and 
neuroanatomy and neurology.
SLPs have provided a vast amount of assessment 
and intervention insights into the field of neurologic 
communication disorders from the vantage point of 
the therapy room. Although many SLPs have collabo-
rated with neurologists to make extremely important 
contributions, the work of Nancy Helm-Estabrooks 
serves as a focal model for clinicians. Helm-Estabrooks 
was employed at the Boston Veterans Administration 
Hospital for much of her career as an SLP. There she 
was strongly affected by the excitement generated by 
Norman Geschwind and his students as they developed 
the field of behavioral neurology. Helm-Estabrooks has 
worked closely with various neurologists and neuropsy-
chologists and is recognized worldwide for her innova-
tive contributions, particularly in testing and therapy 
techniques for patients with neurogenic disorders. An 
example of her work is the Manual of Aphasia Therapy30 
written with the internationally known neurologist  
Martin L. Albert.
The SLP must understand the results of speech and 
language assessment in terms of the underlying neu-
rologic mechanisms. Further, the SLP should be able 
to be conversant with current methods of neurologic 
diagnosis and treatment as they apply to persons with 
communication disorders. The neurologist’s point of 
view toward speech and language disorders should be 
familiar to every clinician. In turn, neurologists must 
be knowledgeable about the assessment methods and 
therapy procedures of the communication disorders 
specialist. The understanding of each other’s work is 
particularly crucial because neurology and the study of 
speech and language disorders have developed inde-
pendently for many years and are only now beginning 
to interact more closely. This increased interaction will 
certainly result in additional benefits for members of 
both professions and those they serve.
The clinical neurologist must work closely with the 
SLP in evaluating the communication disorders of the 
neurologic client. The SLP is clearly not responsible 
for making the final diagnosis of a neurologic disorder. 
Nevertheless, the SLP is responsible for assessing all 
relevant aspects of speech, language, and related dis-
orders in clients with a known or suspected neurologic 
disorder.
Historic Roots: Development  
of Speech-Language Pathology  
as a Brain Science
Speech-language pathology traces many of its roots 
to clinical neurology. In 1861 the French physician 
Pierre Paul Broca (1824-1880) studied the brains of two 
patients who had sustained language loss and motor 
speech disorders.5 This study allowed him to localize 
human language to a definite circumscribed area of 

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
5
the left hemisphere, thereby laying the foundation for 
a brain science of speech and language. Broca’s discov-
ery went far beyond the now-classic description of an 
interesting brain disorder called aphasia. Possibly fore-
most among his conclusions were the assertions that 
the two hemispheres of the brain are asymmetric in 
function and that the left cerebral hemisphere contains 
the language center in most human beings. Important 
implications of brain asymmetry are even now coming 
to light some 130 years later. Asymmetry of function 
is more pervasive than originally thought. It extends 
well beyond language to other brain areas and their 
functions.
Another conclusion that has had lasting importance 
for neurology since Broca’s death is that specific behav-
ioral functions appear to be associated with clearly local-
ized sites in the brain. The corollary of this observation 
is that behavioral dysfunction can point to lesions at 
specific sites in the nervous system. The concept of 
localization of function in the nervous system has been 
repeatedly demonstrated by clinical and research meth-
ods since Broca first articulated it more than a century 
ago. This observation was so profound that it became 
a significant historic force in the establishment of the 
medical discipline of clinical neurology. Much of clini-
cal neurology depends on the physician’s ability to lat-
eralize and localize a lesion in the nervous system.
An important fact for speech-language pathol-
ogy was that Broca’s discovery stimulated a period 
of intensive search for a workable explanation of the 
brain mechanisms of speech and language. Probably 
no period in the history of neurologic science has so 
advanced the understanding of communication and 
its disorders as those years between Broca’s discovery 
and World War I. An overview of Broca’s life work can 
be found in Box 1-2.
One of the first and foremost outcomes of this inten-
sive study of speech-language brain mechanisms was the 
establishment of neurologic substrata for modalities of 
language deficit other than the expressive oral language 
described by Broca. In 1867 William Ogle published a 
case that demonstrated that a cerebral writing center 
was independent of Broca’s center for oral language.39 
In 1874 Carl Wernicke (1848-1905) identified an audi-
tory speech center in the temporal lobe associated with 
comprehension of speech, as opposed to Broca’s area in 
the frontal lobe that was an expressive speech center.50 
In the terminology of that time, lesions in Broca’s area 
produced a motor aphasia, and one in Wernicke’s area 
produced a sensory aphasia. These terms are no longer 
used in medical terminology. The very general descrip-
tor terms now used are expressive (motor) and receptive 
(sensory) aphasia. In 1892 Joseph Dejerine identified 
mechanisms underlying reading disorders.16 Disorders 
of cortical sensory recognition, or the agnosias, were 
named by Sigmund Freud in 1891,19 and in 1900 Hugo 
Liepmann comprehensively analyzed the apraxias, dis-
orders of executing motor acts resulting from brain 
lesions.37
EARLY LANGUAGE MODELS
Of the many neurologic models of the cerebral lan-
guage mechanisms generated soon after Broca’s great 
discovery, Wernicke’s 1874 model has best withstood 
the test of time. Wernicke stressed the importance 
of cortical language centers associated with the vari-
ous language modalities, but he also emphasized the 
importance of association fiber tracts connecting 
areas or centers. Like his teacher Theodore Meynert 
(1833-1892), he understood that the connections in 
the brain were just as important as the centers for a 
complete picture of language performance.38 In addi-
tion, Wernicke organized the symptoms of language 
disturbance in such a way that they could be used diag-
nostically to predict the lesion site in either connective 
pathways or centers in the language system. Ironically, 
the Wernicke model was eclipsed until the last half 
of the twentieth century, when it was revitalized and 
expanded by Norman Geschwind and his followers.21
Wernicke’s model came under criticism by the English 
neurologist Henry Head in 1926.29 He lumped Wernicke 
with a cadre of early neurologists he considered the more 
flagrant of the “diagram makers,” implying that they 
constructed language models that were highly specula-
tive and not supported by empirical evidence. Current 
methods of neurologic investigation, including electri-
cal ­cortical stimulation, isotope localization of lesions, 
­computed tomography (CT), and regional blood flow 
studies in the brain.
	•	 Touchstone study in 1861 allowed Broca to local-
ize human language to a specific region of the left 
hemisphere, suggesting that the two hemispheres 
of the brain are asymmetric in function
	•	 First to identify the brain disorder aphasia
	•	 Articulated localization of function, leading to the 
establishment of the medical discipline of clinical 
neurology
	•	 Stimulated intensive research into a workable  
explanation of the brain mechanisms of speech 
and language
	
BOX 1-2   
The Work of Pierre Paul Broca (1824-1880)

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
6
Neurologic speech mechanisms, as opposed to 
language mechanisms, also received attention in the 
late nineteenth century. In 1871 the famous French 
neurologist Jean Charcot (1825-1893) described the 
“scanning speech” that he associated with “dissemi-
nated sclerosis,” now known as multiple sclerosis.8 
The term scanning, probably inappropriate, has also 
been widely used to describe speech with cerebellar 
or cerebellar pathway lesions (see Chapter 8). In 1888 
an English neurologist, William Gowers (1846-1915), 
surveyed the neurologic speech disorders, known as 
dysarthrias, in a well-known book titled A Manual of 
Diseases of the Nervous System.26
WORLD WAR I
World War I had a profound influence on the study 
of speech and language mechanisms resulting from 
neurologic insult. With a large population of head-
injured young men with penetrating skull wounds, 
some neurologists felt an urgency for treatment. A 
handful of dedicated neurologists provided therapy 
for these traumatic language disorders because the 
profession of speech pathology was not yet born. 
Not until the next decade did the profession really 
begin. Lee Edward Travis has the distinction of being 
the first individual in the United States to specialize 
in the field of speech and language disorders at the 
doctoral level. In 1927 he became the first director 
of the speech clinic at the University of Iowa. His 
special interest was in stuttering, which he began to 
study in a neurologic context. Influenced by the neu-
ropsychiatrist Samuel Terry Orton (1879-1948), Tra-
vis researched the hypothesis that stuttering was the 
result of brain dysfunction,47 specifically an imbal-
ance or competition between the two cerebral hemi-
spheres to control the normal bilateral functioning 
of the speech musculature. Orton’s hypothesis of 
dysfunctioning neural control of the speech muscu-
lature40 has generally been discredited, but his hemi-
sphere competition theory of stuttering still surfaces 
from time to time in different guises to explain cer-
tain communication disorders.
Although several of the founders of speech-language 
pathology in the United States believed that psychologi-
cal explanations were more rewarding for understand-
ing speech and language problems, notable exceptions 
existed. In particular, Harold Westlake of Northwestern 
University; Robert West of the University of Wisconsin; 
Jon Eisenson, formerly of California State University; 
and Joseph Wepman of the University of Chicago were 
all advocates of neurologic principles in communica-
tion disorders.
MODERN TIMES
During World War II, which brought in its wake thou-
sands of injured soldiers and other military personnel 
with traumatic aphasia, neurologists, psychologists, 
and SLPs were used in treatment programs for the 
first time. This effort produced a series of books and 
articles on aphasia rehabilitation; perhaps the most 
notable for the neurologically oriented SLP was Wep-
man’s Recovery from Aphasia (1951).49 It served as a 
textbook of language disorders for the growing num-
ber of students in the field and often served as their 
first introduction to the study of a major neurologic 
communication disorder.
The study of neurologic speech mechanisms was 
greatly advanced after World War II by the work of 
Wilder G. Penfield (1891-1976) and his colleagues 
in Canada. Penfield, a neurosurgeon, used the tech-
nique of electrical cortical stimulation to map corti-
cal areas directly, particularly speech and language 
centers. In 1959 in Speech and Brain Mechanisms41 
(written with Lamar Roberts), he documented his 
observations on cerebral control of speech and lan-
guage function and wrote on the concepts of sub-
cortical speech mechanisms and infantile cerebral 
plasticity.
The 1960s and 1970s were marked by several advances 
of neurologic concepts in communication and its dis-
orders. As already mentioned, newer linguistic theory, 
particularly that proposed by Noam Chomsky,11,12 
emphasized the universal features and innate mecha-
nisms reflected in language. The biologic aspects of lan-
guage and speech were highlighted by the linguist and 
psychologist Eric Lenneberg, who specifically placed 
language acquisition in the context of developmental 
neurology.36 The split-brain studies reported by Roger 
Sperry and his colleagues,44 in which the commissural 
tracts between the hemispheres were severed, indicated 
specific functions of the right hemisphere were differ-
ent from the left.
Major anatomic differences in the right and left lan-
guage centers were also demonstrated in the human 
brain. Most significant for SLPs and audiologists are 
larger areas in the left temporal lobe in the fetus, infant, 
and adult.23,48,51 These differences suggest an anatomic 
basis for cerebral dominance for language and appear 
to contradict a theory of progressive lateralization of 
speech centers.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s considerable 
attention was paid to neurologic speech disorders. 
Neurologists and SLPs in the Mayo Clinic Neurology 
Department13-15 documented the acoustic-perceptual 
characteristics of the major dysarthrias in a viable 

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
7
classification scheme. This work has stimulated wide-
spread study of the various adult dysarthrias in speech 
science laboratories around the country.
The 1960s and 1970s were also marked by the devel-
opment of two psychometrically sound and widely 
used aphasia tests: the Minnesota Test of Differential 
Diagnosis of Aphasia43 and the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia 
Examination.24
The 1980s found researchers talking about the 
importance of early stimulation and experience for 
brain and language development.27 The 1980s also 
brought further advances in aphasia diagnostic testing 
when the Western Aphasia Battery33 and the first edition 
of the Communication Activities in Daily Living32 were 
published. By the 1990s further advances in assess-
ment for aphasia, TBI, and, for the first time, language 
and communication problems caused by dementia 
produced the Scales of Cognitive Abilities for Traumatic 
Brain Injury,1 the Arizona Battery for Communication 
Disorders of Dementia,3 the third edition of Examining 
for Aphasia,17 the Burns Brief Inventory of Communica-
tion and Cognition,6 the second edition of the Commu-
nication Activities in Daily Living,32 the Comprehensive 
Aphasia Test,45 and the second edition of the Frenchay 
Aphasia Screening Test.18
The 1990s saw significant advances in knowledge 
about language development and the brain with 
the publication of The Language Instinct.42 In 1997 
Dr. Martha Taylor Sarno completed a 5-year study 
funded by National Institutes of Health on the effects 
of aphasia secondary to stroke on the quality of life 
in middle-aged and older people. Findings indicated 
that age was not a major factor in the recovery and 
quality of life of individuals with aphasia.46 During 
the decade of the 1990s, research into the incidence, 
prevalence, and rehabilitation needs of persons with 
TBI proliferated, and in 1999 a report to Congress 
was made highlighting the need for further research 
and rehabilitation funding for persons affected by 
TBI.7
And now we find ourselves in the twenty-first cen-
tury! A few of the more recent tests published related 
to neurologic basis of communication or disorders 
include the Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test (CLQT)31 
and the Multimodal Communication Screening Test for Per-
sons with Aphasia (MCST-A).35 Research and treatment 
have taken giant steps forward into the twenty-first 
century incorporating the use of advanced technol-
ogy. Many SLPs are experimenting with, refining, and 
documenting positive outcomes of service delivery 
models that incorporate telehealth in treatment of 
patients with neurogenic communication disorders.9 
Research designs developed by SLPs such as Dr. Julius 
Fridriksson, as well as many others, have resulted in 
collaboration with neurologists and radiologists to uti-
lize advanced technology such as functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) or transcranial stimulation 
to expand our knowledge of how neurodevelopmental 
problems or acquired brain damage alters language, 
speech, and/or swallowing.20
Directions and Planes
This text uses many drawings and photographs to 
aid in visualization. The human body itself may be 
defined in terms of a standard anatomic position, one 
in which the body is erect and the head, eyes, and 
toes are pointed forward. The limbs are at the side 
of the body, and the palms face forward (Fig. 1-1). 
When viewing drawings in texts or creating anatomic 
sketches, constantly orient yourself in terms of the 
standard anatomic positions and planes. From this 
fundamental position other positions, planes, and 
directions are defined (Fig. 1-2). Box 1-3 summarizes 
the major planes or sections used in anatomic draw-
ings to orient the reader to the view that was used. 
The orienting directional terms that may be used 
when navigating around an illustration of the brain 
may be slightly different because the brain itself is 
tilted inside our skull. Figure 1-3 illustrates the ana-
tomic planes of the brain.
To understand what you are reading as well as the 
drawings and pictures you will be seeing when studying 
neuroanatomy, it is imperative that you understand the 
directional terms and the different planes in which the 
views may be pictured. Conventional textbooks are only 
two-dimensional, and thus it is of excellent benefit to 
the student to use websites that are designed to picture 
anatomic structures with three-dimensional reconstruc-
tion technique.
Several terms are used to designate direction in 
neuroanatomy (Figs. 1-1 and 1-2). Some of these terms 
are used synonymously. Anterior and ventral mean 
toward the front or in front of when any part of the 
body (including the spinal cord) except the brain 
is illustrated. However, note in Figure 1-3 that if it is 
the brain that is being discussed or illustrated, ventral 
means ­inferior. When orienting in the brain, rostral is 
the synonymous term for anterior (Fig. 1-3). ­Posterior 
or dorsal indicates toward the back or behind for both. 
Superior refers to above or upward in both; ­inferior 
means below or downward in both but is ­synonymous 
with ventral in the brain. The terms cranial and cephalic 
can be used in place of superior when ­orienting direc-
tion in the body.

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
8
How to Study
Most students in speech-language pathology receive 
a limited introduction to the neurosciences in their 
undergraduate careers. The majority of students are 
enrolled in courses designed to acquaint them with the 
anatomy and physiology of speech, but these courses 
usually focus on speech musculature. Students often 
do not receive an adequate introduction to neuroanat-
omy and neurophysiology of speech and language. 
FIGURE 1-1
Standard anatomic position for study of the human body with anatomic planes and terms 
for type or direction of movement included. (From Standring, S. [2016]. Gray’s Anatomy: 
The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, [41st ed.]. London: Churchill Livingstone.)

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
9
It is assumed that students will learn these details in 
courses in aphasia, adult dysarthria, and rehabilitation 
of speech in cerebral palsy. Students find that neuro-
science courses taken as advanced undergraduates or 
beginning graduate students are difficult.
Students often say that neurology courses are 
difficult because they believe they must learn the 
technical term for each hill and valley in the com-
plex anatomy of the brain. In addition, the technical 
terms are unfamiliar, usually derived from Greek and 
Roman word roots. This text concentrates on cru-
cial terminology for an understanding of speech and 
language and the diseases and conditions that result 
in communication disorders. The number of terms 
Coronal plane
Median or
sagittal plane
Transverse or
horizontal plane
Supination
Pronation
Adduct
Abduct
Lateral rotation
Medial
rotation
Proximally
Distally
Eversion
Inversion
Extension
Flexion
FIGURE 1-2
Directional references for the human body. (Reprinted from Blaussen.com staff. 
“Blaussen gallery 2014.” Wikiversity Journal of Medicine. https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/ 
Wikiversity_Journal_of_Medicine/Blausen_gallery_2014#Other_anatomy)
	•	 The median plane, or section, passes longitudinally 
through the brain and divides the right  
hemisphere from the left hemisphere.
	•	 The sagittal plane divides the brain vertically  
at any point and parallels the medial plane.
	•	 A coronal, or frontal, section is any vertical cut  
that separates the brain into front and back halves.
	•	 A horizontal plane divides the brain into upper 
and lower halves and is at right angles to the  
median and coronal planes.
	•	 A transverse cut is any section that is at right  
angles to the longitudinal axis of the structure.
	
BOX 1-3   
Standard Anatomic Positions and Planes

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
10
believed to be important has increased over the vari-
ous editions of this text as the scope of practice for 
SLPs has expanded. Because of the crucial role that 
SLPs now play on many medical, rehabilitation, and 
educational teams, they also must be familiar with 
terminology used by other health professionals when 
discussing the client’s condition. A glossary is pro-
vided at the end of the text.
Part of the strategy in mastering any text in the 
biologic sciences is to give the study of drawings, dia-
grams, and tables in the text as much time as the nar-
rative sections. If the reader can come away from a 
study of this text with a set of working mental images 
of the structures and pathways of the nervous system 
that are important to communication and can recall 
them at critical times, then one of the purposes of 
the authors will be realized. With an emphasis on 
imagery as one of the better ways to learn neurol-
ogy, it should be no surprise that the authors urge 
readers to use as a teaching aid their own drawings of 
structures and pathways. Even crude sketches, care-
fully labeled, teach the necessary anatomic relations 
and fix pathways, structures, and names in the mind. 
Students (and instructors!) are also encouraged to 
use the vast resource of the Internet. There are now 
literally thousands of photos, illustrations, and vid-
eos dealing with neuroanatomy, neuroscience, and 
neurology on various websites sponsored by univer-
sities, government agencies, and research institutes. 
I encourage you to be careful; choose sites that are 
well established in terms of the credentials for pro-
viding such technical information. Because of the 
precipitous manner in which websites and the infor-
mation contained on them changes, only a few sites 
are recommended or referenced in these chapters. 
Your instructor is likely to be able to recommend or 
help you find valuable sites to assist your exploration 
of the nervous system.
Chapters 2 and 3 provide an overview of the ner-
vous system in total. Subsequent chapters often refer 
back to certain sections of these chapters to review the 
written information and the illustrations that provide 
a beginning foundation of knowledge regarding the 
neurologic characteristics of the communicative ner-
vous system. Chapters 4, 5, and 6 expand teaching on 
the structure and physiology of neurons; the sensory 
systems of touch, vision, and hearing; and the motor 
system. Chapters 7 and 8 discuss cranial nerves and the 
disorders of speech production that SLPs commonly 
assess and treat in adults. Chapter 9 deals with the anat-
omy and physiology of the parts of the nervous system 
primarily concerned with language and learning, and 
Chapter 10 discusses acquired language disorders in 
adults. The last three chapters of this text are dedicated 
to learning how the brain develops from birth (Chapter 
11), to pediatric speech (Chapter 12), and to language 
(Chapter 13) disorders.
A synopsis of facts and clinical applications impor-
tant to the SLP are presented at the end of each chap-
ter. Students should be aware that these are not the only 
important facts in the chapter! This synopsis should 
not be the only thing you study for your examinations 
because your task is not to memorize a lot of facts with 
little understanding as to how they relate to the human 
communication nervous system.
Chapters 5 through 8, 10, 12, and 13 also provide 
case studies, that is, a description of a patient and the 
signs and symptoms of his or her disorder. Questions 
are provided to consider regarding the patient’s symp-
toms. Answers can be found on the Evolve website.
The reader is encouraged to attempt to integrate 
verbal material with eidetic imagery, as well as with 
thoughtful consideration of what patients with these 
conditions experience. Students must call on all their 
brainpower, bringing into play the special capacities 
of both the right and left hemispheres of the brain. 
The left hemisphere is specialized for its capacities of 
verbal analysis and reasoning, whereas the right hemi-
sphere is specialized for its visual-spatial functions. 
However, it will become clear to you that, though 
this specialization exists, the right and the left hemi-
spheres are integrated in communication and cogni-
tion. Both hemispheres also use subcortical areas to 
retrieve memories and empathize with others. There-
fore, readers will use their whole brain to learn about 
the whole brain!
Rostral
(anterior)
Superior
Dorsal
Posterior
Ventral
(inferior)
Ventral
(anterior)
Dorsal
(posterior)
Caudal
FIGURE 1-3
Axes of the human brain. (Reprinted from Martin, J. G. 
[1989]. Neuroanatomy. New York: Elsevier.)

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
11
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Adamovich, B., & Henderson, J. (1992). Scales of Cognitive 
Abilities for Traumatic Brain Injury. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
	 2.	 Adler, R. K. (2004). The anatomy and physiology of speech and 
the neuroanatomy and physiology of speech courses: State of the 
art. Chicago: ASHA Convention.
	 3.	 Bayles, K., & Tomoeda, C. (1993). Arizona Battery for Com-
munication Disorders of Dementia. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
	 4.	 Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston.
	 5.	 Broca, P. (1861). Remarques sur le siége de la faculté du lan-
gage articulé, suivies d’une observation d’aphémie (perte de la 
parole). Bulletin: Société.
	 6.	 Burns, M. (1997). Burns Brief Inventory of Communication and 
Cognition. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
	 7.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. 
­Traumatic brain injury in the United States: A report to 
Congress. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbra
ininjury/pubs/tbi_report_to_congress.html.
	 8.	 Charcot, J. M. (1890). Oeuvres compléte de J. M. Charcot. 
Paris: Lecrosnier et Babe.
	 9.	 Cherney, L. R., & van Vuuren, S. (2012). Telerehabilita-
tion, virtual therapists and acquired neurologic speech 
and language disorders. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
33, 243–257.
	10.	 Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague: 
­Mouton.
	11.	 Chomsky, N. (1972). Language and mind. New York: 
­Harcourt and Brace.
	12.	 Chomsky, N. (1975). Reflections on language. New York: 
Pantheon Books.
	13.	 Darley, F. L., Aronson, A. E., & Brown, J. R. (1969a). Dif-
ferential diagnostic patterns of dysarthria. Journal of Speech 
and Hearing Research, 12, 246–249.
	14.	 Darley, F. L., Aronson, A. E., & Brown, J. R. (1969b). Clus-
ters of deviant speech dimensions in the dysarthrias. Jour-
nal of Speech and Hearing Research, 12, 462–469.
	15.	 Darley, F. L., Aronson, A. E., & Brown, J. R. (1975). Motor 
speech disorders. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
	16.	 Dejerine, J. (1892). Contribution a etude anatomo-
pathologique et clinique des differentes varietes de cectie 
verbal. Mémoires de la Société de Biologie, 27, 1–330.
	17.	 Eisenson, J. (1994). Examining for aphasia (3rd ed.). Aus-
tin, TX: Pro-Ed.
	18.	 Enderby, P., Wood, V., & Wade, D. (2006). Frenchay Apha-
sia Screening Test. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishers.
	19.	 Freud, S. (1953). On aphasia: A critical study. Translated by 
F. Stengel. New York: International Universities Press.
	20.	 Fridriksson, J. (2011). Measuring and inducing brain plas-
ticity in chronic aphasia. Journal of Communication Disor-
ders, 44, 557–563.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The source of all speech and language behavior is 
the brain
	•	 1990: Americans with Disabilities Act
	•	 2004: New ASHA clinical and academic standards
	•	 2005: IDEA was reauthorized
	•	 2008: Revised ASHA clinical and academic standards
	•	 ASHA membership, 2013 = more than 173,000
	•	 Norman Geschwind: First neurologist to outline 
the literature focusing on language disorders and 
related deficits
	•	 Geschwind influenced linguistics, psychology, and 
philosophy
	•	 Noam Chomsky: First international linguist to cor-
relate language and speech with brain functioning
	•	 Chomsky: Language is innate and implies a bio-
logic, neurologic, and genetic basis for language
	•	 Pinker: Synthesized the linguistic and neurologic 
bases of language
	•	 Lenneberg: Wrote The Biological Foundations of 
Language
	•	 Goodglass and Kaplan: Neuropsychologists and 
students of Geschwind
	•	 Broca: First to localize human language to the left 
hemisphere
	•	 Behavioral functions are attributed to specific sites 
in the brain
	•	 Ogle: Identified a writing center in the brain inde-
pendent of Broca’s area
	•	 Carl Wernicke: Identified an auditory center for 
speech associated with comprehension of speech, 
opposing Broca, who identified the expressive 
center
	•	 The temporal lobe has become identified with lan-
guage and speech comprehension and the frontal 
lobe with language and speech expression
	•	 Freud: First to identify cortical sensory areas or 
agnosias
	•	 Liepmann: First to identify the apraxias of motor 
execution
	•	 Travis: First identified stuttering to be the result 
of brain dysfunction, specifically the imbalance 
between the two hemispheres
	•	 Neurologic aspects of communication disorders by 
Harold Westlake, Joseph Wepman, Robert West, 
and Jon Eisenson
	•	 Wepman’s Recovery from Aphasia served as the 
first textbook of language disorders in the field of 
speech pathology
	•	 Penfield: First to use cortical mapping for identifying 
areas of language and speech functions in the brain
	•	 Directions and planes help orient you to identify 
structures and site of lesions and injuries

INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH-LANGUAGE NEUROLOGY  CHAPTER ONE
12
	21.	 Geschwind, N. (1965). Disconnection syndromes in ani-
mals and man. Brain, 88, 237–294, 585–644.
	22.	 Geschwind, N. (1974). Selected papers on language and the 
brain. Boston: D. Reidel.
	23.	 Geschwind, N., & Levitsky, W. (1968). Human brain: 
Right-left asymmetries in temporal speech region. Science, 
168, 186–187.
	24.	 Goodglass, H., & Kaplan, E. (1972). Assessment of aphasia 
and related disorders. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
	25.	 Gopnik, M., & Crago, M. (1991). Family aggregation of 
developmental language disorder. Cognition, 39, 1–50.
	26.	 Gowers, W. R. (1888). A manual of diseases of the nervous 
system. Philadelphia: Blakiston.
	27.	 Greenough, W. T., Black, J. E., & Wallace, C. S. (1987). 
Experience and brain development. Developmental Psycho-
biology, 22, 727–252.
	28.	 Harris, R. A. (1993). The linguistics wars. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
	29.	 Head, H. (1926). Aphasia and kindred disorders. (2 vols). 
London: Cambridge University Press.
	30.	 Helm-Estabrooks, N., & Albert, M. L. (1991). Manual of 
aphasia therapy. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
	31.	 Helm-Estabrooks, N. (2001). Cognitive Linguistic Quick 
Test. Menlo Park, CA: Pearson.
	32.	 Holland, A., Frattali, C., & Fromm, D. (1999). Communica-
tion activities in daily living (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
	33.	 Kertesz, A. (1982). Western Aphasia Battery. Austin, TX: 
Pro-Ed.
	34.	 Kolb, B., & Gibb, R. (2011). Brain plasticity and behavior 
in the developing brain. Journal of the Canadian Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 20, 265–277.
	35.	 Lasker, J. P., & Garrett, K. L. (2006). Using the Multi-
modal Communication Screening Test for Persons with 
Aphasia (MCST-A) to guide the selection of alternative 
communication strategies for people with aphasia. Aphasi-
ology, 20, 2–4.
	36.	 Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. 
New York: Wiley.
	37.	 Liepmann, H. (1900). Das Krankheitbild der apraxie 
(“motorischen asymbolie”). Monatsschrift fur Psychiatrie 
und Neurologie, 8, 15–40.
	38.	 Meynert, T. (1885). Psychiatry. Translated by B. Sachs. 
New York: Putnam.
	39.	 Ogle, W. (1867). Aphasia and agraphia. St. George’s Hospi-
tal Reports, 2, 83–122.
	40.	 Orton, S. T. (1937). Reading, writing and speech problems in 
children. New York: W. W. Norton.
	41.	 Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain mecha-
nisms. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
	42.	 Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct. New York: William 
Morrow.
	43.	 Schuell, H. (1965). The Minnesota Test for Differential Di-
agnosis of Aphasia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.
	44.	 Sperry, R. W., Gazzaniga, M. S., & Bogen, J. E. (1969). 
Interhemispheric relationships: The neocortical commis-
sures; syndromes of hemispheric disconnection. In P. J. 
Vinken, & G. W. Bruyn (Eds.), Handbook of clinical neurol-
ogy. vol. 4. Amsterdam: North Holland.
	45.	 Swinburn, K., Porter, G., & Howard, D. (2004). Comprehen-
sive Aphasia Test. New York: Psychology Press.
	46.	 Taylor-Sarno, M. (1997). Quality of life in the first post-
stroke year. Aphasiology, 11(7), 665–679.
	47.	 Travis, L. E. (1931). Speech pathology. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
	48.	 Wada, J. A., Clark, R., & Hamm, A. (1975). Cerebral asym-
metry in humans. Archives of Neurology, 2, 239–246.
	49.	 Wepman, J. (1951). Recovery from aphasia. New York: The 
Ronald Press.
	50.	 Wernicke, C. (1874). Der aphasische symptomenkomplex. Bre-
slau: Cohn and Weigert. Translated in Eggert, G. H. (1977). 
Wernicke’s works on aphasia. A sourcebook and review. 
The Hague: Mouton.
	51.	 Whitelson, S. F., & Pallie, W. (1973). Left hemisphere spe-
cialization for language in the newborn: Neuroanatomi-
cal evidence of asymmetry. Brain, 96, 641–647.

13
2
K E Y  T E R M S
angular gyrus
arcuate fasciculus
association cortex
astrocytes
ATP
axon
axon hillock
axoplasm
basal ganglia
blood-brain barrier
boutons
brainstem
Broca’s area
cell respiration
CNS
cerebellum
cerebrum
choroid plexuses
cingulate gyrus
colliculi
corpus callosum
corpus striatum
dendrites
dendritic spines
diencephalon
ependymal cells
fasciculus
fissure
ganglia
glial
gray matter
Heschl’s gyrus
homunculus
hypothalamus
innervate
insula
internal capsule
lentiform or lenticular 
nucleus
limbic system
medulla oblongata
mesencephalon
microglia
midbrain
myelin
neuroglial cells
neurons
neurotransmitters
nucleolus
occipital lobe
oligodendrocytes
parahippocampal 
gyrus
paralimbic areas
parietal lobe
PNS
perisylvian zone
pons
premotor area
primary cortical areas
reflex arc
Schwann cells
somatosensory
striatum
substantia nigra
subthalamus
sulcus
Supplementary or 
secondary motor 
area
supramarginal gyrus
synapse
tectum
temporal lobe
thalamus
uncus
Wernicke’s area
white matter
Organization 
of the Nervous 
System I
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Human Communication Nervous System
Foundations of the Nervous System
Organization
Central Nervous System
Cortical Divisions
Cerebral Connections
Specific Cortical Areas
Primary Motor Projection Cortex
Primary Somatosensory Cortex
Primary Auditory Receptor Cortex
Primary Visual Receptor Cortex
Primary Olfactory Receptor Cortex
Cerebellum and Brainstem
Spinal Cord
The brain is the organ of destiny. It holds within its humming 
mechanism secrets that will determine the future of the human race.
Wilder Graves Penfield, The Second Career, 1963

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
14
Human Communication Nervous 
System
The nervous system is the source of all communi-
cation in human beings. Only human beings can 
express novel utterances to each other through oral 
or gestural language. Our highly advanced system of 
oral and ­gestural language identifies us as unique in 
the animal kingdom. This facility is the result of an 
aggregate of intricate nervous system mechanisms 
that have developed in the human brain through 
a series of dramatic evolutionary changes. Over a 
period of thousands of years, a novel representation 
and organization of neural structures and processes 
has been created in the human brain that results in 
what may be called the human communication ner-
vous system. How does this nervous system differ from 
the ­communication ­nervous system of other animals? 
A clear answer to this question began to emerge from 
attempts to teach the great apes, particularly chim-
panzees, different types of ­communication systems; 
attempts to teach oral speech to chimpanzees were 
notably unsuccessful. Only human beings have the 
specialized vocal tract enabling the potential for pro-
ducing the ­complex acoustic ­signal known as speech 
or oral language. On the other hand, attempts to 
teach ­chimpanzees by using visual and gestural rep-
resentations of human language have been somewhat 
­successful. ­Chimpanzees have been taught to use 
­colored plastic chips to represent morphemes and 
in other cases have learned to use some signs taken 
from ­American Sign Language to the extent that they 
can communicate adequately, and even creatively, 
in a ­rudimentary manner. Whether these nonver-
bal ­languages are ­characteristically human is open 
to question, but human beings and chimpanzees do 
share some characteristics of communication. The 
chimpanzee most likely uses cortical structures of the 
brain to ­master visual and gestural components of 
human language.
Some have suggested that overall brain size, which 
reflects the total volume of the cerebral cortex, the total 
number of nerve cells in the brain, and the degree of 
dendrite growth or proliferation of the processes of 
the nerve cell, is crucial to information processing and 
communication processing. Considering these factors, 
what are the differences between the human brain and 
that of the chimpanzee?
The chimpanzee’s impressive but limited gestural 
language is reflected by its average brain weight of 
450 g compared with an average weight of 1350 g 
for the human brain. Generally, a lack of unique-
ness has been found in the parietal, occipital, and 
temporal lobes of both chimpanzees and human 
beings. In the frontal lobe of the brain, however, 
human beings are distinguished by an area of cortex 
that has been named Broca’s area. This specialized 
cortical area has been associated with the control of 
expressive language. With the exception of Broca’s 
area, the primary difference between the human and 
chimpanzee cortex is quantitative, with the temporal 
lobe, inferior parietal lobe, and frontal lobe ante-
rior to Broca’s area being larger in human beings. 
These areas, as detailed in later chapters, are por-
tions of the cerebral cortex that make an advanced 
language system possible. These particular species-
specific brain structures, plus the human being’s spe-
cial vocal tract and the significant increase in the size 
of the information- and communication-processing 
cortex, account for the exceptional capability for 
communication.23
FOUNDATIONS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Chapters 2 and 3 provide an overview of the anat-
omy and physiology of the human nervous system. 
After ­discussing the “building blocks” of the nervous 
­system, this text takes a “top-down” approach to the 
gross ­anatomy, beginning with the cortex and ending 
with the spinal cord anatomy. This organization was 
chosen because as human beings, cortical processing 
and control are vital to all but the most basic motor, 
cognitive, and emotional functions. It is not your 
ears that hear; it is really your brain. Your thoughts 
are initiated through cortical networks. Your memo-
ries and their associated emotions are stored in your 
brain. Therefore it seems appropriate to start with 
the “boss” and work our way down the organizational 
ladder of the nervous system in order to understand 
it better. Before we begin looking more closely at the 
individual structures of the brain and spinal cord, 
however, a study of the microstructure and founda-
tion of this miraculous nervous system of ours will be 
helpful for understanding the complex function of 
the larger structures.
Anatomically, the human nervous system has two 
major divisions: the central nervous system (CNS) 
and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS, 
also called the neuraxis, consists of the brain and 
spinal cord. Two types of nerves are found within 
both systems, the cranial and the spinal nerves, and 
their ganglia. The term ganglia refers to the masses of 
nerve cell bodies associated with the particular nerve 
and located as an enlargement on that nerve or at 
the juncture or separation point of that nerve with 
another peripheral nerve. The nerves of the PNS 
connect the brain and spinal cord with peripheral 
structures such as muscles, glands, and organs. Both 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
15
divisions of the nervous system contain somatic parts 
that control bodily movements and innervate sensory 
organs as well as autonomic parts that innervate vis-
ceral organs.
The Chemical Makeup of Nerve Cells
As taught in elementary science classes, all living things 
are composed of cells, the building blocks of life. The 
nervous system is no exception. It is a collection of two 
types of cells: nerve cells, also called neurons, and neu-
roglial cells. Recent research1 found approximately 86 
billion neurons with an almost equal number of neuro-
glial cells making up the human nervous system.
Although cells are the building blocks on which the 
human body is structured, they themselves are also 
composed of smaller units. These units are organelles, 
functional units within the cytoplasm that have their 
own bilipid membrane. Breaking down the organelles, 
we see that they, like all living matter, are composed 
of molecules. As is typical in living matter, nerve cells 
have four major classes of molecules: lipids, proteins, 
carbohydrates, and nucleic acid. There are two types 
of nucleic acid within each cell, deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
All cells contain an organelle called the nucleus. The 
nucleus contains most of the DNA of the cell and is 
bound by a bilipid membrane that has several openings 
or pores in it. DNA carries the genetic code of each liv-
ing organism. It is helpful when studying genetic-based 
disorders in children to know at least basic facts about 
DNA, RNA, and the chromosomes that each carry a 
copy of the genetic code of a person.
The code stored in our DNA is made up of four 
chemical bases with the four chemicals typically 
referred to by the first letter: A, adenine; G, guanine; 
C, cytosine; and T, thymine. Each chemical base is 
attached to complex made up of a two-sugar mol-
ecule and a one-phosphate molecule. This combi-
nation of sugar molecules and phosphate molecule 
is referred to as a nucleotide. The nucleotide and its 
attached chemical base will pair up with another such 
structure and form a unit called a base pair; base pair 
units are formed by the pairing of A with T and the 
pairing of C with G. DNA is arranged in two long 
strands that form a spiral called a double helix. This 
double helix looks somewhat like a ladder with the 
base pairs forming the ladder’s rungs and the sugar 
and phosphate molecules forming the vertical sides 
of the ladder (Fig. 2-1). In human beings, the human 
genome (the entire genetic set) is found in the 46 
chromosomes duplicated in each cell of the body. 
This is possible because the DNA can make copies 
of itself. Within the double helix, each strand can 
duplicate the pattern and sequence of the bases. This 
allows for exact copies of the DNA in the cell to be 
present in the new cell when cell division takes place 
in the embryo.
The genetic information contained in the DNA is 
encoded into proteins. Proteins are the “worker bees” 
of the cell, performing most of the various cellular 
reactions that constitute life. The other nucleic acid 
molecule in the cell, RNA, serves both storage and 
transcoder functions as an intermediary between 
the DNA and a targeted protein. The nucleus of the 
cell contains at least one prominent dense area, the 
nucleolus, where RNA is synthesized. RNA is only sin-
gle stranded and is made up of four bases as well, but 
there is no thymine base; rather the chemical uracil 
(U) is present instead. There are ­different types of 
RNA in a cell: messenger (mRNA), ribosomal (rRNA), 
and transfer (tRNA). rRNA is the most abundant and 
works with proteins to form the ­ribosomes (discussed 
later in the chapter) of a cell. mRNA leaves the cell, 
moving to the cytoplasm where proteins are synthe-
sized. In protein synthesis, the base sequence carried 
in the genetic code on the RNA is “read” by the ribo-
some and translated into corresponding amino acids. 
Cellular proteins are formed by the chemical link-
ing of two or more amino acids, forming peptides. 
These peptides are then linked in a series becoming 
polypeptides. One or more polypeptides make up 
all cellular proteins. The tRNA transfers a particular 
amino acid to the polypeptide chain during protein 
synthesis
As alluded to earlier, surrounding the nucleus is a 
mass of cytoplasm containing organelles that serve 
to synthesize proteins and maintain cellular meta-
bolic ­balance. Found in this cytoplasm are: rough 
G
G
G
G
G
G
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
T
T
T
T
T
A
A
A
A
A
A
Chromosome
Sugar phosphate
backbone
DNA
Cytosine
Adenine
Nitrogenous bases
Thymine
Guanine
FIGURE 2-1
The structure of DNA.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
16
and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, free ribosomes, 
Golgi ­apparatus, lysosomes, and mitochondria. The 
­endoplasmic reticulum and the ribosomes are in abun-
dance in ­neuronal cell bodies because of their key 
participation in lipid and protein synthesis, which is 
constantly needed for optimal nervous system function. 
Vesicles, which are little transporter membrane sacs, 
“bud” off from the endoplasmic reticulum and help 
deliver the proteins and lipids to the Golgi apparatus 
organelles. The Golgi apparatus organelle sorts the sub-
stances, and the vesicles eventually deliver them to the 
plasma membrane where they may fuse with the mem-
brane delivering ­proteins to it or shed their contents 
to the outside of the cell. The vesicles may also carry 
digestive enzymes and become the organelles called 
lysosomes.4
Mitochondria are the power source of the cell, 
providing the energy a cell needs to function by con-
verting the energy from food into a useable form for 
cellular function. The mitochrondria produce ade-
nosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main energy 
source. Cells in the nervous system have the high-
est metabolic rate of any cells in the human body 
and therefore must continually renew their energy 
source. Our bodies, through the action of ATP, con-
vert energy from the sun into a usable form for cel-
lular function. A process called cell ­respiration, which 
is driven by enzymes in the body regenerates ATP 
constantly. Only about 250 g of ATP are available at 
any one time in the body (about as much energy as 
provided by an AA battery), and this small amount is 
being used persistently in healthy cells.20 Therefore, it 
 must be reproduced repetitively by the cells.
Although most of your DNA is contained in chro-
mosomes within the cell’s nucleus, mitochrondria 
have a small amount of their own DNA (37 genes) 
that is vital for normal mitochondria cell function-
ing. The mitochondrial DNA is, except in rare cases, 
inherited from maternal lineage, being provided by 
the egg rather than by the sperm. Thus this DNA 
changes much more slowly through the generations 
than nuclear DNA.
Because lipids do not dissolve in water, the ­bilipid 
membrane surrounding the nerve cell body forms a 
barrier between what is inside the cell (the intracellu-
lar material) and what surrounds it on the ­outside (the 
extracellular material). This membrane is also studded 
with globular proteins that serve as channels that allow 
molecules of certain chemicals ­(neurotransmitters) to 
pass through when the membrane is appropriately 
stimulated. These channels are usually specific to 
one type of molecule, barring others from ­entering 
the cell. Understanding the function of the chan-
nels becomes important when we study how neural 
impulses are generated and how neurons communi-
cate within networks.
The Structure and Function of Neurons
Like other cells in your body, both neurons and 
­neuroglial cells consist of a cell body, also known 
as a soma or perikaryon. Also, as with other cells in 
the body, cells of the nervous system maintain their 
defined ­structure with a cytoskeleton. A cytoskeleton 
is composed of ­microtubules, intermediate ­filaments 
­(neurofilaments), 
and 
microfilaments. 
Neurons 
can also be seen microscopically to have processes 
­extending from them; these processes include one 
axon per ­neuron and many dendrites. The axon and 
the ­dendrites are critical to neuronal communication 
between ­different parts of the nervous system. The 
­cytoskeleton of these appendages provides scaffold-
ing for transport of ­molecules along these structures. 
Cytoskeleton dysfunction has been linked to disorders 
affecting the human nervous system, such as neurofibro-
matosis and type 2 and ­Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Figure 2-2 shows a multipolar neuron or nerve cell. 
Neurons are specialized to receive, conduct, and trans-
mit nerve impulses. This transmission may be to or 
from a muscle, gland, or another nerve cell. Although 
nerve cells vary widely in terms of size and shape, they 
all have certain characteristics in common. They all 
have two types of processes extending from the cell 
body. The ­processes specialized to receive the impulses 
moving toward the cell are dendrites. They have a broad 
base, taper away from the cell body, and branch some-
where in the vicinity of the cell body. Most neurons are 
­multipolar and have ­several dendrites extending from 
the cell body. Effectively, these dendrites expand the 
area of the neuron available for contact by other neu-
rons, thus allowing convergence of neural impulses onto 
one neuron from many other neurons. Small protru-
sions, called dendritic spines, help expand the area of 
contact even farther. These dendritic spines appear as 
small hairlike or bulbous structures on the dendrite’s 
membrane.
The other type of process extending from a neuron 
conducts the impulse away from the cell and is called the 
axon. Each neuron has only one axon, and it connects 
with the body of the neuron at a site called the axon 
­hillock. Collateral branches, however, are frequently 
found coming off the axon itself. Because the axon 
carries all the neural information out of the cell, this 
branching increases the opportunity for divergence in 
the nervous system.
The cytoplasm of an axon contains structural ele-
ments called microtubules and neurofilaments that 
help maintain its cytoskeleton. These elements also 
help transport organelles and metabolic substances 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
17
along the axon. Axons come in different diameters 
and lengths. The thicker axons conduct impulses more 
rapidly than thinner ones because they are usually 
­myelinated (i.e., covered by a white, glistening lipopro-
tein sheath called the myelin sheath). This fatty sheath 
of myelin insulates the axon and allows more rapid 
propagation of the impulse along the axon. Most axons 
(and some dendrites) are well myelinated, although 
some thinner axons are either unmyelinated or thinly 
myelinated. Figure 2-3 shows a longitudinal cut of a 
myelinated axon.
The axon loses any myelin sheath at its destination 
and divides into several small terminal branches. At 
the end of these branches there are usually swellings, 
referred to as axon terminals or boutons. The bouton 
establishes contact with another neuron or the cells of a 
muscle or gland. The site of this contact is a synapse or a 
synaptic junction. The synapse is the primary means by 
which the neuron elicits responses in target cells, typi-
cally by a release of a chemical known as a neurotrans-
mitter. Chapter 4 provides a more in-depth discussion 
of the synapse.
Aside from the movement of neural impulses down 
an axon, proteins and other organelles move along the 
axon in its protoplasm (known as axoplasm), a pro-
cess called axoplasmic transport. This helps maintain 
the structural and functional integrity of the axon. 
This transport may be anterograde, from the cell body 
Cell body
Axon
Dendrites
Axon
Neurilemma
Myelin sheath
Nodes of
Ranvier
Axon
terminals
FIGURE 2-2
Structure of a neuron. (From Herlihy, B. [2007]. The human body in health and illness [3rd ed.]. 
St. Louis: Saunders.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
18
distally, and retrograde, back toward the cell body from 
the axon terminal. The retrograde transport mediates 
the movement of substances providing trophic, or nutri-
tional, support for the neuron. An example of trophic 
support is substances known as nerve growth factors.
Clusters of interconnected neurons with specific 
functions can be found throughout the nervous 
­system. These groups are called neuronal pools and are 
­discussed in Chapter 4.
Neuroglia
Composing the majority of cells in the nervous system 
are the glial, or neuroglial, cells. The CNS contains 
four types of neuroglial cells: astrocytes, oligodendro-
cytes (called Schwann cells in the PNS), microglia, and 
ependyma.
Glial cells do not propagate neural impulses but pro-
vide extremely important supportive and ­facilitative 
functions to the nervous system. Although we spend 
a majority of our study looking at signals generated 
by the neurons and the ensuing activations (or lack 
thereof), you must understand that the neuroglia 
make it possible for neurons to function ­optimally. 
Many of the disorders you will study result from a 
breakdown in the neuroglial support for the nervous 
system. Brain tumors often form in the neuroglial cells 
(example: astrocytoma); diseases that affect children 
(example: mitochondrial disease) and adults (exam-
ple: multiple sclerosis) involve neuroglia and affect 
central and/or peripheral nervous system functioning 
with consequent effect on speech and language. The 
following neuroglia are critical to optimal nervous 
­system function.
Astrocytes provide the structural matrix surrounding 
neuron cell bodies in the CNS and modulate ­neuronal 
activity locally and regionally. Astrocytes of the CNS 
also play a major role in maintaining the extracellular 
environment around the neuron. Astrocytes are respon-
sive to and may have specific receptors for ­certain 
­neurotransmitters. They are now thought to take an 
active role in modulating neuronal activity and synaptic 
plasticity.19
In many tissues of the body, solutes can pass rather 
freely from the blood into the cells of that tissue by 
diffusing through gaps between the endothelial cells, 
those cells that line the interior surface of blood and 
lymphatic vessels. In the CNS, however, the astrocytes 
cause the walls of the capillaries to form tight endothe-
lial junctions, forming what is called the blood-brain 
barrier. Therefore most solutes passing into neural 
­tissue must go through the endothelial cells ­themselves. 
Water, gases, and small lipid-soluble ­molecules may 
pass easily across the endothelial cells, but most other 
substances must be carried across by transport ­systems. 
Consequently, the passage of ­substances into ­neural tis-
sue from the blood is not always easily ­accomplished. 
Dysfunction of the ­astroglial cells or the ­complex sur-
rounding ­particular ­neuronal networks is receiving 
more and more attention in research into neurogen-
erative diseases as a possible etiology or major con-
tributor to the disease process. The astroglia are also 
being studied due to possibly serving a neuroprotec-
tive role.22
Oligodendrocytes are found within the central ner-
vous system; here they form and maintain myelin, the 
white fatty sheath covering on the CNS axons. In the 
PNS, Schwann cells perform this function for nerves and 
nerve roots.
Microglia are numerous and perform “scavenger” 
functions. They may migrate to the site of injury in 
the brain, multiply, and become brain macrophages, 
­cleaning out debris after neural cell death. They are 
sometimes referred to as the brain’s immune system 
because the microglia mediate immune response to 
injury or infection.
As is further discussed in Chapter 3, there are 
­cavities within the central nervous system through 
which ­cerebrospinal fluid circulates. These cavities 
within the brain are called ventricles. The spinal cord 
also contains a central cavity called a canal through 
which the fluid flows. Ependymal cells line these 
­cavities in the brain and spinal cord. Specialized epen-
dymal cells form structures called choroid plexuses, 
which are found in each ventricle of the brain. The 
choroidal epithelial cells on the surface of the choroid 
plexus structures are responsible for the ­manufacture 
of cerebrospinal fluid.
Glial cells called satellite cells are found in the PNS, 
forming thin sheaths that surround individual ganglia 
associated with sensory, sympathetic, and parasympa-
thetic nerves. These cells surround the cell bodies, and 
Astrocyte
processes
Loops of
oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm
Neurofilaments
Microtubules
Mitochondrion
Astrocyte
processes
Loops of
oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm
Neurofilaments
Microtubules
Mitochondrion
Myelin
Myelin
FIGURE 2-3
Longitudinal view of a myelinated axon in the CNS. (Re-
printed from Haines, D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience 
[3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
19
although their specific physiologic role is not well under-
stood, some current theories suggest that they may have 
a significant role in maintaining the ­microenvironment 
of the ganglion cells.8
Beyond the functions stated previously for glial cells, 
they are also important in the early development of the 
CNS. Study of the embryology of the nervous system 
indicates that glia serve to guide developing neurons in 
their migration to the correct location. Box 2-1 outlines 
the basic structure of neuroglial cells in the human 
­nervous system.
Gray Matter
Some areas of the brain and spinal cord appear gray 
and others appear white. The white areas, called white 
matter, contain many myelinated axons, with the pearly 
white myelin covering responsible for the color of the 
area. The cortex is the superficial covering of gray 
­matter found over the cerebral hemispheres and in the 
cerebellum. Gray matter contains aggregations of nerve 
cell bodies embedded in delicate nerve processes. The 
gray matter seen in the interior of the brain consists 
of large groups of nerve cell bodies; these are called 
­subcortical nuclei. The thalamus and the ­structures 
making up the basal nuclei (also known as the basal 
­ganglia) are ­composed of subcortical nuclei. Gray 
matter is also found in the spinal cord; the cell bodies 
aggregate as columns in the spinal cord and form the 
H-shaped midportion of the cord.
The cells of the cerebral cortex are horizontally 
­organized into six cell layers. The organization of these 
layers is known as the cytoarchitecture of the brain. Each 
layer contains a different type of cell, with the ­pyramidal 
cells, the largest cells in the brain, found in layer 5. The 
cortex is organized vertically as well as ­horizontally. 
­Vertical columns of interconnected ­neurons each hold 
a functional unit of cells that share a related purpose 
and a related location of the stimulus that drives their 
function. For example, the visual cortex has visual ori-
entation columns.
ORGANIZATION
To comprehend the human communicative nervous 
­system thoroughly, a basic understanding of the organi-
zation of the system as a whole is required. The nervous 
system should be thought of as separate from the other 
tissues and structures of the body. Imagine the major 
parts of the nervous system as if they were displayed on a 
dissection table spread out for study. On the table would 
be an oval-shaped brain with a tail-like appendage, called 
the spinal cord, hanging from its base. The cranial nerves, 
which we will study in the most depth, are attached to the 
base of the brain. Another set of nerves, the spinal nerves, 
project from both sides of the spinal cord (Fig. 2-4). Of all 
these parts—the brain, cord, and nerves—the brain is by 
far the most important for communication. Within the 
brain, evolutionary neural mechanisms of the communi-
cation nervous system are developed.
The nerves that exit the brain merely transmit sen-
sory or motor information to and from the brain to 
control the speech, language, and hearing mechanisms. 
The nerves attached to the spinal cord innervate, or 
send nerve impulses to, muscles of the neck, trunk, and 
limbs and bring sensation from these parts to the brain.
From this oversimplified first mental image of the 
structure and function of the communication nervous 
system, a more precise and complex picture will be 
developed of the aspects of anatomy, physiology, and 
	•	 Provide supportive functions in the nervous system
	•	 Do not propagate neural impulses
	•	 Serve in early development of CNS, guiding devel-
oping neurons to their correct locations
Astrocytes
	•	 Provide structural matrix for cell bodies in the CNS
	•	 Cause capillary walls to form tight endothelial 
junctions to ensure that most solutes must pass 
through endothelial cells
	•	 Help maintain appropriate environment for neu-
ronal function
	•	 Allow for neural plasticity and help brain adapt to 
injury
Oligodendrocytes
	•	 Form and maintain myelin
Microglia
	•	 Perform scavenger functions such as cleaning out 
debris after neural cell damage and forming brain 
macrophages
	•	 Mediate immune response after injury or infection 
to the brain
Ependyma
	•	 Line ventricles in the brain and spinal cord
	•	 Specialized types form choroid plexus, which 
manufactures cerebrospinal fluid
Satellite Cells
	•	 Found in CNS and PNS
	•	 Surround neuron bodies but function unknown
	
BOX 2-1   
Summary of Glial (Neuroglial) Cells

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
20
diagnosis of neurogenic speech, language, and hearing 
disorders. This chapter and the next take an ­in-depth 
look at the two major divisions of your nervous ­system, 
beginning with the CNS. Chapter 3 deals with the 
anatomy of the PNS and will also discuss a third ­system 
important to both the CNS and the PNS, called the 
autonomic nervous system. Chapter 3 also introduces 
you to the anatomic structures and the processes that 
nourish and protect these systems.
Central Nervous System
The brain is gray, shaped like an oval, and slightly soft 
to the touch. The average brain weighs approximately 
1350 g, or roughly 3 pounds. The brain is housed 
in the part of the bony skull called the cranium. A 
­synonym for brain is encephalon. The largest mass of 
brain tissue is identified as the cerebrum. The human 
cerebrum has evolved to include three parts: the 
­cerebral hemispheres, limbic system (in earlier termi-
nology, rhinencephalon), and basal nuclei (aka, basal 
ganglia).
The cerebral hemispheres are the two readily 
­discernible large halves of the brain. The cerebral 
hemispheres are connected by a mass of white matter 
called the corpus callosum. During development the 
cerebral hemispheres become enormously enlarged 
and overhang the structures deep in the brain called 
the diencephalon and brainstem. The cerebral hemi-
spheres are crucial for communication, particularly the 
left hemisphere, where the major neurologic mecha-
nisms of speech and language are found.
CORTICAL DIVISIONS
The cerebral hemispheres are identical twins in looks, 
but the functions of their parts dramatically differ. Each 
cortical mantle, or cover, of a hemisphere is anatomi-
cally divided into four different principal lobes: ­­frontal, 
temporal, parietal, and occipital. These lobes can be 
located on the brain’s outer and medial (between the 
hemispheres) surfaces by using certain landmarks, the 
gyri and sulci. A gyrus is formed from the enfolding of 
the cortex during development; a gyrus appears as a 
slight elevation on the surface. A sulcus is a groove-like 
depression that separates the gyri. Another name for a 
sulcus is fissure. The gyri and sulci seen on the surfaces 
of the two cerebral hemispheres serve as boundaries for 
the lobes (Figs. 2-4 and 2-5).
Cortical Localization Maps
For more than a century, neuroanatomists have divided 
and classified the human cortex into different areas. 
These tireless attempts to fractionate the cortex followed 
the unparalleled achievement of Paul Broca. In 1861 
Broca demonstrated that different cortical regions were 
associated with different mental functions, one of which 
was expression of speech.3 The localization systems that 
followed have most frequently been based on cell study 
of the cortex made by histologic methods. This allows 
the development of cytoarchitectural diagrams or maps 
based on the varied cell structures of the cortex. The 
most popular map, developed by the German neurolo-
gist Korbinian Brodmann (1868-1918), is represented in 
Figures 2-5 and 2-6. Note that each area of the cortex 
is numbered, providing a much more convenient way 
to specify a cortical site than by a complex description 
of gyri and sulci. Brodmann’s map is open to criticism 
on the grounds that it chops the cortex into innumer-
able specific centers, implying that cortical areas have 
sharply defined limits, but it is a convenient tool in clini-
cal ­practice for indicating cortical localization. Brodma-
nn’s ­classification numbers are sometimes provided in 
this text to orient the reader to Figures 2-5 and 2-6.
Cerebral Lobes
Why Is This important for Speech-Language 
Pathology?
Contemporary practice in speech-language pathology, 
regardless of where one practices, often requires medi-
cal record review and understanding. The cerebral 
Cranial nerves
Spinal nerves
Cauda equina
CNS=Brain+Spinal cord
Neuraxis=CNS
Spinal cord
Brain
FIGURE 2-4
The central nervous system (CNS), including the brain and 
spinal cord. The CNS is synonymous with the term neuraxis.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
21
hemispheres contain networks for information pro-
cessing and contain the primary cortical areas that acti-
vate muscles and initially receive sensory input. When 
these mechanisms are underdeveloped or disrupted 
by disease or injury, speech, swallowing, hearing, 
and/or language deficits as well as cognitive deficits 
may occur. It is important as a practitioner to know 
the location in the cerebral hemispheres of the pri-
mary areas and to know the key processing functions 
thought to be associated with each of the principal 
lobes. I often recommend that in the beginning you 
“tag” the lobes in your memory as containing certain 
structures and ­performing certain critical functions 
for speech, language, or hearing (e.g., temporal lobe 
= Heschl’s gyrus, Wernicke’s area, hearing, ­auditory 
comprehension).
Frontal Lobe
The frontal lobe is bounded anteriorly by the lateral 
sulcus, or sylvian fissure, and posteriorly by the central 
sulcus, or rolandic fissure. The frontal lobe accounts 
for approximately one third of the surface of the 
hemisphere. In the frontal lobe is a long gyrus imme-
diately anterior to the central sulcus. This prominent 
gyrus is called the precentral gyrus, and it comprises 
the majority of what is known as the primary motor 
cortex (area 4). The term motor strip is also used for 
this area. Nerve fibers composing a large motor path-
way called the pyramidal tract descend into the brain 
and spinal cord from starting points in the primary 
motor area. The cells in this area are responsible for 
voluntary control of skeletal muscles on the opposite, 
or contralateral, side of the body. This fact has impor-
tant clinical significance, which is discussed later in 
the chapter.
The connections between the controlling area on 
the primary motor cortex and the voluntary muscles 
served are arranged so that a map of motor control can 
be drawn on the cerebral cortex to show the pattern of 
LATERAL SULCUS
OR SYLVIAN FISSURE
CENTRAL SULCUS
OR ROLANDIC FISSURE
FIGURE 2-5
Superior view of the cerebral hemispheres with cortical binding, according to Brodmann. 
(Reprinted from Werner, J. J. [2001]. Atlas of neuroanatomy. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
22
cortical innervation (Fig. 2-7, B). This map is referred 
to as a homunculus, which is Latin for “little man.” The 
areas are represented in an almost upside-down or 
inverted fashion. The area of cortical representation 
given to a particular part does not appear to be strongly 
related to the size of that part of the body, because the 
leg and arm are given a smaller area of cortical tissue 
than the hand or mouth. Rather, the body parts that 
require the most precision in motor control are appor-
tioned the larger cortical areas. Shown in Figure 2-7, 
A, is the cortical sensory map or sensory homunculus, 
which is a mirror image of the motor map and repre-
sents the pattern of sensory input from the body to the 
somatosensory cortex on the post central gyrus which is 
located not in the frontal but in the parietal lobe.
Immediately anterior to the primary motor area 
are the premotor cortex and another area with motor 
assignment, the supplementary motor area. These 
ancillary motor areas (area 6) are important in motor 
learning and in the performance of routine and less-
practiced motor sequences.
In the frontal lobe of the left hemisphere is an impor-
tant region known as Broca’s area (areas 44 and 45). 
Located in the inferior (third) frontal gyrus of the lobe 
(2, 3, and 4), Broca’s area in most people appears to be 
important for the production of fluent, well-articulated 
speech. The left hemisphere is the dominant hemisphere 
in most persons, meaning that this hemisphere controls 
language functions. Approximately 90% of the popula-
tion is right handed with left hemisphere dominance 
for language. Even the majority of persons who are left 
handed show left dominance for language. If damage to 
Broca’s area occurs in adults who are left hemisphere–
dominant for language, a characteristic breakdown usu-
ally occurs in the normally fluent production of verbal 
language; if the damage is limited to Broca’s area specifi-
cally, this breakdown is usually transient. If the damage 
results from a larger lesion that includes Broca’s area 
but also surrounding cortical tissue in what is known as 
the perisylvian zone, a classic syndrome of acquired lan-
guage disorders or aphasia, called Broca’s aphasia, may 
be diagnosed (discussed further in Chapter 10). Ablation 
of the area in the nondominant hemisphere correspond-
ing to Broca’s area has an effect on language in only a 
small percentage of the population.
Another part of the frontal lobe also concerned 
with initiation of movement is the area devoted to con-
trol of the eyes. The frontal eye fields (area 8) lie just 
Frontal eye fields 
(BA 8)
Supplementary and 
premotor cortex (BA 6)
Motor cortex (BA 4)
Somatosensory cortex
(BA 3,1,2)
Posterior association area
(BA 7)
Visual cortex
(BA 17, 18, 19)
Parietal-occipital
sulcus
Calcarine
sulcus
FIGURE 2-6
Medial view of the right hemisphere. (Reprinted from Werner, J. J. [2001]. Atlas of neuro-
anatomy. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
23
Genitals
Toes
Foot
Leg
Hip
Trunk
Neck
Head
Shoulder
Arm
Elbow
Forearm
Wrist
Hand
Little finger
Ring finger
Middle finger
Index finger
Thumb
Eye
Nose
Face
Lips, teeth,
gums, and jaw
Tongue
Pharynx
Intraabdominal
Primary
somatic
sensory area
Left
hemisphere
Toes
Ankle
Knee
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Upper arm
Elbow
Arm
Wrist
Hand
Little finger
Middle finger
Ring finger
Index finger
Thumb
Neck
Eyelid and eyeball
Face
Lips and jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
Left hemisphere
Primary
somatic
motor area
Motor
Sensory
S
L
I
M
S
L
I
M
A
B
FIGURE 2-7
Primary somatic sensory (A) and motor (B) areas of the cortex. The illustrations show which parts of the body are mapped to 
specific areas of the postcentral (sensory) and precentral (motor) gyri. The exaggerated face indicates that more cortical area 
is devoted to processing information to and from the face than, for example, the leg or arm. This disparity is due the precision 
of motor control and distinct sensory processing needed for speech and swallowing. (Reprinted from Thibodeau, G., & 
Patton, K. [2006]. Anatomy & physiology [6th ed.]. St. Louis: Mosby.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
24
anterior to the premotor cortical area. These areas are 
involved in initiating rapid eye movements and direct-
ing attention.
The rest of the frontal lobe is composed of ­association 
cortex, a different type of cortical tissue with less-
defined functional assignment. This frontal area is 
often referred to as the prefrontal cortex (areas 9, 10, 
11, 46, and 47) and contains the frontal association 
areas. Frontal association areas are vital to successful 
executive functioning. Appropriate and well-developed 
executive functioning allows the execution of nonrou-
tine processes that require planning, analysis, feedback, 
self-regulation, and so forth. The ability to participate 
successfully in school, work, family, and social settings 
depends on these frontal association areas.
Parietal Lobe
The parietal lobe is bounded anteriorly by the central sul-
cus, inferiorly by the posterior end of the lateral sulcus, 
and posteriorly by an imaginary borderline. The primary 
sensory, also known as somatosensory or somesthetic, 
cortex is found in the parietal lobe (areas 1, 2, and 3), 
the major portion of which is the postcentral gyrus (see 
Fig. 2-5). It is also known as the sensory strip, but it is help-
ful to use the term somatosensory to help remember 
that bodily sensations, as opposed to visual and auditory 
sensations, are processed here. This gyrus lies directly 
posterior to the central sulcus, or rolandic fissure. On 
this sensory cortex can be mapped the sensory control 
of various parts of the body. Somesthetic sensations (e.g., 
pain, temperature, touch) are sent to the sensory cortex 
from the opposite side of the body. This arrangement is a 
mirror image of the motor strip (see Fig. 2-7).
Two gyri in the parietal lobe are important to locate 
and become familiar with in regard to language. The 
first is the supramarginal gyrus (area 40), which curves 
around the posterior end of the lateral sylvian fissure. 
The second, the angular gyrus (area 39), lies directly pos-
terior to the supramarginal gyrus. It curves around the 
end of a prominent sulcus in the temporal lobe, the supe-
rior temporal sulcus (see Fig. 2-5). Damage in the area of 
the angular gyrus in the dominant left hemisphere may 
cause word-finding problems (anomia), reading and 
writing deficits (alexia with agraphia), as well as left-right 
disorientation, finger agnosia (inability to identify the 
fingers), and difficulty with arithmetic (acalculia).
The postcentral gyrus (somatosensory cortex) is 
a primary cortical area, whereas the majority of the 
remaining parietal lobe cortex is composed of asso-
ciation cortex, mostly concerned with somatosensory 
and visual association function. The parietal lobe has 
been characterized as the “association area of associa-
tion areas” because of the multimodal processing that 
takes place there. As a whole, the parietal lobes may be 
the most lateralized in function of all the lobes in the 
cerebrum, although the specialization is not complete. 
Language functions tend to be concentrated in the 
left parietal lobe around the gyri just discussed. In the 
nondominant hemisphere, the parietal lobe associa-
tion cortex primarily processes spatial information and 
related selective attention. Damage here may result in 
difficulty attending to or a complete neglect of the con-
tralateral side of space. Visuospatial and constructional 
deficits (such as in drawing, building small models, and 
so on) may be found on testing the patient with right-
hemisphere parietal lobe damage.
Temporal Lobe
The temporal lobe is the seat of auditory processing 
in the brain. It is bounded superiorly by the sylvian 
fissure and posteriorly by an imaginary line that forms 
the anterior border of the occipital lobe. Two gyri of 
the temporal lobe are prominent on the lateral sur-
face of the brain: the superior and middle temporal 
gyri. The third important gyrus, the inferior gyrus, can 
be seen on the lateral surface but continues onto the 
interior surface of the lobe as well (see Fig. 2-5). Less 
visible on the lateral surface are the transverse tempo-
ral gyri (areas 41 and 42), which can be found on the 
upper edge of the temporal lobe, extending deep in 
the medial surface of the brain. The transverse gyrus 
of Heschl (most commonly called Heschl’s gyrus), 
area 41, forms the primary auditory cortex, represent-
ing the cortical center for hearing in each hemisphere. 
There is bilateral representation of the auditory sig-
nal though more fibers terminate in the gyrus of the 
contralateral hemisphere than will terminate on the 
ipsilateral side of the brain. The ability to detect the 
presence of sound is a function of the peripheral hear-
ing mechanism and the auditory nerves. The corti-
cal area is the site of conscious processing of those 
impulses as “sound,” allowing us to perceive these sig-
nals as sound and do what we call “hear.”
Area 42 is adjacent to Heschl’s gyrus and is an audi-
tory association area, although it is frequently pre-
sented as part of the primary cortical area of hearing. 
It has been found to participate in the processing of 
harmonic and rhythmic patterns. Unilateral damage 
in areas 41 and/or 42 of the auditory cortex does not 
cause deafness in one ear but rather may result in diffi-
culty interpreting a sound or locating a sound in space. 
Bilateral lesions in the auditory cortex cause what is 
known as cortical deafness (see Chapter 5).
The posterior part of the superior temporal gyrus in 
the left temporal lobe is the auditory association area, 
best known as Wernicke’s area (area 22), which is impor-
tant to the development and use of language. Damage 
to Wernicke’s area may result in a particular classifica-
tion of acquired language disorder called ­Wernicke’s 
aphasia (see Chapter 10).

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
25
On the medial aspect of the temporal lobes, near the 
sagittal plane between the two hemispheres one can 
locate several important deep brain areas important to 
memory. These include the hippocampal region and 
the parahippocampal gyrus. On the parahippocampal 
gyrus can be found subcortical areas known as the peri-
rhinal, parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices.
If the two borders of the lateral (Sylvian) fissure are 
pulled apart, a cortical structure called the insula, or the 
island of Reil, may be seen hidden under the area where 
the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes come together. It 
includes some of the oldest cortical tissue in the brain. The 
insula is not part of the temporal lobe or any of the four 
major lobes but is considered a lobe unto itself. Fiber con-
nections to the insula are not well defined and the func-
tions are not well understood, but the insula is thought to 
receive input regarding pain and viscerosensory input. As 
discussed in Chapter 10, lesions involving the insula in the 
dominant hemisphere may also contribute to difficulty 
producing well-articulated, fluent speech.
Occipital Lobe
The occipital lobe occupies the small area behind the 
parietal lobe and is marked on the lateral surface by 
imaginary lines rather than prominent sulci. Two sulci 
that can be found on the medial surface of the brain 
that help locate the occipital lobe are the parietal-occip-
ital sulcus and the calcarine sulcus (see Fig. 2-6). The 
occipital lobe is concerned with vision, with the primary 
visual area (area 17) located in gyri that border the cal-
carine sulcus.
Perisylvian Zone
The cortex surrounding the sylvian fissure in the domi-
nant temporal lobe (left for the majority of the popu-
lation) is identified as the perisylvian zone, where the 
major neurologic components for understanding and 
producing language are found. These components 
include Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area, the supramar-
ginal and angular gyri, as well as major long association 
tracts that connect the components (Fig. 2-8). The cen-
tral language mechanism and its disorders are discussed 
in depth in Chapters 9 and 10.
CEREBRAL CONNECTIONS
Why Is This Important for Speech-Language 
Pathology?
We have acknowledged that the cerebrum is the “boss” 
of the nervous system. This must mean that the connec-
tions between and within the cerebral hemispheres and 
with lower structures are a vital part of how the nervous 
system works. Knowledge of the nervous system must 
include the types of fibers found in these areas. This 
eventually leads you to an understanding of how the vari-
ous structures are connected and form pathways for neu-
ral impulses to traverse. Figure 2-9 schematically depicts 
the different types of fibers discussed later in the chapter.
Projection Fibers
Projection fibers are long axons of neurons that send 
impulses to a distant structure in the CNS. The most 
notable projection fibers are the corticospinal fibers, 
which project from the primary motor cortex down 
to the spinal cord, and the corticobulbar fibers, which 
project from the primary motor cortex down to the 
cranial nerve nuclei. Corticopontine fibers are also 
projection fibers, projecting from the motor areas to 
the brainstem and then down to the cerebellum.
Association Fibers
Association fibers form association tracts, connecting 
areas within the hemisphere. Short association tracts 
            Prefontal
association area
Broca's area
Anterior temporal area
Parietal-temporal-
occipital areas
Arcuate fasciculus
Wernicke's area
FIGURE 2-8
Primary language and association areas of the cortex.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
26
are within lobes, and long tracts are between lobes. 
Fasciculus, meaning “little bundle,” is the type of name 
given to many of these tracts important to language and 
speech. Figure 2-10, A, is a graphic depiction of some of 
these fiber tracts.
One important association tract is the arcuate fas-
ciculus (AF). The AF is important to language because 
a large number of its fibers travel from the posterior 
temporal lobe forward by way of another set of fibers, 
the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), to the motor 
association cortex in the frontal lobe. Lesions in the area 
of the arcuate fasciculus may cause a major syndrome 
of aphasia (an acquired language disorder caused by 
brain damage) called conduction aphasia. There are 
also indirect AF fiber connections between Broca’s area 
and the parietal lobe as well as connecting the parietal 
lobe with Wernicke’s area.14
The uncinate fasciculus (UF) gathers fibers from the 
temporal pole, uncus, hippocampal gyrus, and amyg-
dala in the rostral portion of the temporal lobe. The 
UF follows a complicated path and eventually extends 
into the orbitofrontal cortex and prefrontal cortex. 
Thus it links areas of the temporal lobe important for 
sound recognition, object recognition, and recognition 
memory with areas of the frontal lobe involved in emo-
tion, inhibition, and self-regulation.14 The functional 
significance of this pathway is not totally understood, 
although it has been suggested that it allows the reward/
punishment biased association memories stored in the 
orbitofrontal cortex to access mnemonic associations 
(e.g., names, facial features, voice) stored in the tempo-
ral lobe, thus perhaps influencing decisions, learning, 
and memory as well as social behavior.21
The inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF) runs along 
with and lateral to a fasciculus known as the inferior 
fronto-occipital fasciculus (FOF) whose fibers eventually 
enter the frontal lobe. The ILF has vertical fibers aris-
ing in the occipital lobe outside the striate cortex (in 
extrastriate cortical areas). There are also horizontal 
fibers that run along the length of the temporal lobe, 
terminating in the anterior temporal region. The ILF 
appears to have a role in object recognition as well as 
memory and visual discrimination. ­Catani and Mesalum5 
propose a role for the ILF in linking object recognition 
with the lexical label. Table 2-1 describes some of the 
important fasciculi in the cerebral hemispheres.
Commissural Fibers
Commissural fibers connect an area in one hemisphere 
with an area in the opposite hemisphere. The corpus 
­callosum is the largest set of commissural fibers in the 
brain and is a pathway of crucial importance to speech-
language functions (Fig. 2-10, B). The corpus callosum 
serves as the major connection between the hemispheres 
and conveys neural information from one hemisphere 
to the other. The corpus callosum is the largest of the 
Longitudinal
association fibers
Cortex
Commissural fibers
(corpus collosum)
Short association fibers
Projection fibers
FIGURE 2-9
Schematic representation of the types of connective fibers in the CNS.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
27
side-to-side interconnections between the two hemi-
spheres and, in ­general, connects analogous areas in the 
two hemispheres.
The anterior and posterior commissures are other 
small bundles of interhemispheric fibers, located 
anteriorly and posteriorly to the corpus callosum. 
The anterior commissure connects the olfactory 
bulbs, amygdaloid nuclei, and the medial and inferior 
temporal lobes. The posterior commissure fibers con-
nect areas in the occipital lobes, primarily areas con-
cerned with pupillary response and eye movement 
control.
Split-Brain Research
The corpus callosum and its role in the transfer 
of information from one hemisphere to another 
Genu
Body
Rostrum
Genu
Body
Splenium
Superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF)
Inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF)
Arcuate fasciculus (AF)
Uncinate fasciculus (UF)
Fronto-occipital fasciculus (FOF)
Claustrum
A
B
FIGURE 2-10
A, Association fiber tracts of the left cerebral hemisphere with particular emphasis on the 
arcuate fasciculus and the uncinate fasciculus. B, The corpus callosum in a medial view and 
transverse section. It is the largest of the commissures connecting the two hemispheres.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
28
attracted wide attention when split-brain opera-
tions were first performed on human beings in the 
1960s.15 This large bundle of commissural fibers may 
be cleanly and completely severed surgically with-
out damage to other tissue. This operation, called a 
commissurotomy, has been performed on patients 
plagued by chronic and severe epileptic seizures that 
could not be controlled by massive doses of anticon-
vulsive medication. A seizure that begins in one cere-
bral hemisphere may easily travel across the corpus 
callosum to the other hemisphere, producing a bilat-
eral generalized seizure. Neurosurgeons reasoned 
that sectioning the corpus callosum would contain 
the seizure to one hemisphere.
Results of the early commissurotomies were even 
more beneficial than had been anticipated. Not only did 
the surgery contain seizures to a single hemisphere, but 
it also reduced seizures overall because of the severing 
of apparent reciprocal actions between the hemispheres.
The surgery also provided information on the differing 
psychological functions of each hemisphere and on the role 
of the corpus callosum in the brain mechanisms for speech 
and language. The split-brain patients clearly showed asym-
metry for speech and language functions, indicating that 
the corpus callosum plays a decisive role in transmitting 
language received at the right primary auditory area and 
heard in the right ear to the left hemisphere, where it is pro-
cessed by the major mechanisms for speech and language.
TABLE 2-1
White Matter Association Pathways, Location, and Function
ASSOCIATION FIBERS
MAIN PATHWAY(S)
FUNCTION
Superior longitudinal fasciculus
Posterior arm fanning out into parietal, 
­occipital, and posterior temporal lobes; 
anterior arm recurves to the anterior 
temporal lobe
Interconnects frontal with the other  
three lobes
Significant for initiation of motor activity, 
spatial attention, gesture, and orofacial 
memory
Arcuate fasciculus
Connects Wernicke’s area with Broca’s 
area. Different segments connect 
inferior parietal lobule with those two 
areas; connects Broca’s with middle 
frontal and precentral gyri; connects 
Wernicke’s with middle temporal gyrus
Ability to recognize language and 
respond to it appropriately
Uncinate fasciculus
Complex pathway from rostral temporal 
lobe (temporal pole, uncus, hippo-
campal gyrus, amygdala) to the white 
matter of the orbitofrontal cortex (may 
ascend and reach prefrontal areas)
Ventral limbic path; significant for 
processing novel information, self-
regulation, and positive/negative 
evaluation of emotional information
May be important for visual learning
Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus
Fibers from occipital and parietal lobes 
join and run horizontal and forward to 
prefrontal and premotor cortex
Significant for peripheral vision, visual 
motion perception, and visual-spatial 
processing
Inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus
Superior parietal, posterior temporal, and 
inferior occipital fibers follow complex 
dorsal and ventral paths to frontal and 
prefrontal cortical areas
May be important to object recogni-
tion and discrimination, semantic 
processing, and emotional-cognitive 
interaction
Inferior longitudinal fasciculus
From extrastriate visual association areas 
in occipital lobe to anterior temporal 
lobe, uncus, parahippocampal gyrus, 
and amygdala
Significant for its role in object rec-
ognition, visual discrimination, and 
memory
May link visual object recognition to 
lexical label
Cingulum bundle
Forms most of white matter of the 
cingulate gyrus. Longer fibers connect 
multiple areas around corpus callosum
Major component of dorsal limbic 
pathway
Involved in motivation and emotion as 
well as spatial working memory
Summarized from Nadich, T. P., Krayenbuhl, N., Kollias, S., Bou-Haidar, P., Bluestone, A. Y., & Carpenter D. M. (2010). White matter. In T. P. Nadich, M. Castillo, 
S. Cha, & J. G. Smirniotopoulos (Eds.), Imaging of the brain (pp. 205-244). Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
29
Experiments on patients who underwent the split-
brain procedure suggested that the right hemisphere 
was responsible for spatial, tactile, and constructional 
tasks. These experiments led to speculations that the 
two hemispheres function in different ways, each having 
its own cognitive style. The left hemisphere was charac-
terized as logical, analytic, and verbal, the right as intui-
tive, holistic, and perceptual/spatial. However, as will 
become increasingly clear to you, they are unquestion-
ably integrated in intact brain function.
SPECIFIC CORTICAL AREAS
The cortical areas can be divided into three major divi-
sions: primary motor projection areas, primary sensory 
reception areas, and association areas. Association areas 
comprise the majority of the cortex, making up approx-
imately 86% of it.
The primary motor projection cortices are found in 
the frontal lobes on the precentral gyri, the bilateral 
cortical strips from which voluntary movement pat-
terns are initiated. The motor strip serves as a source of 
descending motor pathways, projecting to lower levels 
of the nervous system.
The primary sensory reception areas register sensory 
impulses relayed from the periphery to the thalamus 
and upward to the cortex. The pathways from thala-
mus to cortex are called thalamic radiations. The pri-
mary sensory reception areas of the cortex are (1) the 
primary auditory cortex (areas 41 and 42), located in 
Heschl’s gyrus in the temporal lobes; (2) the primary 
somatosensory cortex in the postcentral gyri of the pari-
etal lobes (areas 1, 2, and 3); and (3) the primary visual 
cortex (area 17) in the occipital lobes.
PRIMARY MOTOR PROJECTION CORTEX
The primary motor projection cortex is known as the 
motor area, or motor strip. In Brodmann’s system, it is 
area 4. The motor area is located on the anterior wall 
of the central sulcus and the adjacent precentral gyrus. 
Figure 2-6 shows the areas devoted to the motor control 
of the different parts of the body. Recall that this area 
allows contralateral motor control of the limbs. Some 
of the muscles of the oral mechanism have contralat-
eral control, but many are bilaterally innervated. The 
inverted arrangement of motor control areas on the 
bilateral motor cortices reveals that cortical control for 
the muscles and functions of the speech mechanism is 
represented at the lower end of the motor area on the 
lateral wall of the cerebrum. The large areas given over 
to motor control of the oral mechanism contribute to 
the coordination of its rapid and precise movements 
during talking, singing, and changing facial expression.
Anterior to the motor area is the premotor area (area 
6), considered a supplement to the primary motor pro-
jection cortex and related to the extrapyramidal sys-
tem. If areas 4 and 6 are ablated, spasticity in the limbs 
results. A third motor area, discovered by Wilder G. 
Penfield, is found on the ventral surface of the precen-
tral and postcentral gyri. It is called the supplementary, 
or secondary, motor area.
In more recent years the supplementary motor area 
has received considerable attention. One of its pri-
mary functions appears to be to work in conjunction 
with other structures in the control of sequential move-
ments, and speech production is a prime example of 
sequential movement. Research is also finding support 
for the supplementary area’s involvement in the timing 
of speech for fluent speech production.6
PRIMARY SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX
The primary somatosensory cortex (areas 1, 2, and 3) 
is on the postcentral gyrus and is a primary receptor of 
general bodily sensation. Thalamic radiations relay sen-
sory data from skin, muscles, tendons, and joints of the 
body to the primary somatosensory cortex. Lesions of 
this cortex produce partial sensory loss (paresthesia); 
rarely does complete sensory loss (anesthesia) occur. 
A lesion causes numbness and tingling in the opposite 
side of the body. Widespread destructive lesions produce 
gross sensory loss with an inability to localize sensation.
PRIMARY AUDITORY RECEPTOR CORTEX
Heschl’s gyrus (areas 41 and 42), as previously described, 
is the primary auditory receptor cortex. The area is found 
in each temporal lobe, but the left Heschl’s area appears 
to be somewhat larger in most individuals. The signifi-
cance of this neuroanatomic difference is not completely 
clear, but it may be related to language dominance.
PRIMARY VISUAL RECEPTOR CORTEX
The primary visual receptor cortex is in the occipital 
lobe along the calcarine fissure, which can be seen 
from the medial surface of the hemisphere and is not 
obvious on the outside of the brain. The area, 17 in the 
Brodmann scheme, is also known as the striate area. It 
receives fibers from the optic tract. Lesions of the optic 
pathways cause various degrees of blindness. This par-
tial blindness is considered a visual field defect.
PRIMARY OLFACTORY RECEPTOR CORTEX
The cortical area that allows appreciation of smell is 
deep in the temporal lobe and is called the primary 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
30
olfactory receptor cortex (area 28, medial surface). It 
includes an area called the uncus and the nearby parts 
of the parahippocampal gyri of the temporal lobe. The 
olfactory nerves, the end organs for smell, lie in a bony 
structure in the nose. The nerves end in the olfactory 
bulb, which is an extension of brain tissue in the nasal 
area. The bulbs are supported by an olfactory stalk. 
Destruction of the olfactory system causes anosmia, or 
lack of smell. Irritative lesions produce olfactory hallu-
cinations or uncinate fits.
Association Cortex
Specific Association Areas
Cortical Motor Speech Association Areas.  Surround-
ing the foot of the motor and premotor cortices are ar-
eas considered motor association areas. These areas are 
numbered 44, 45, 46, and 47 in the Brodmann system. 
They are called the opercular gyri. Areas 44 and 45 in-
clude the pars opercularis, the pars triangularis, and the 
pars orbitalis. Areas 44 and 45 in the left hemisphere 
are sometimes called the frontal operculum. Area 44 
is known best as Broca’s area. Although its function is 
controversial, Broca’s area usually is associated with the 
formation of motor speech plans for oral expression. 
The cytoarchitecture of the area is similar in both right 
and left hemispheres, but traditional theory maintains 
that only the left is involved with verbal formulation. 
Regional cerebral blood flow and metabolic rate stud-
ies have suggested that right cortical areas may also be 
activated during some speech and language activities.
Sensory Association Areas.  The sensory association 
areas, where elaboration of sensation occurs, can best 
be considered as extensions of the primary sensory re-
ceptor areas. They are also known as secondary associa-
tion areas or unimodal association areas because only 
one type of sensory input is processed there. Their mar-
gins are necessarily vague, and what the exact functions 
of certain areas are is controversial. The sensory associa-
tion areas are richly connected to the receptor areas by 
a host of association fibers, but these association fibers 
are often difficult to follow because of the vast number 
of relays in the cortical association system. Areas 5 and 
7 in the parietal lobe are related to general somesthet-
ic sensation. Areas 42 (part of Heschl’s gyrus) and 22 
(Wernicke’s area) are related to language comprehen-
sion. Areas 18 and 19 in the occipital lobe are visual 
association areas, important for visual perception and 
for some visual reflexes such as visual fixation. Lesions 
in this area may cause visual hallucinatory symptoms.
The function of the sensory association areas is that 
of gnosis, or knowing. A deficit in the sensory associa-
tion function is known as agnosia, a perceptual-cognitive 
deficit presumed to follow a destructive cerebral lesion; 
agnosia means lack of recognition. Lesions in auditory 
association areas affecting the appreciation of incoming 
sound produce language disorders. Areas surrounding 
Heschl’s gyrus are involved in adding meaning to sound 
and providing comprehension of language. Lesions in 
area 42 destroy the ability to appreciate the meaning of 
sound, and lesions in area 22 compromise the ability to 
understand spoken language. Lesions of visual association 
areas may cause different types of visual agnosia in which 
the patient cannot, through the visual modality alone, rec-
ognize certain visual patterns (e.g., objects or faces).
Categories of Association Cortex.  The cytoarchitec-
ture of association cortex is different for different areas 
and determines what kind of neural information can be 
processed by those cells. Generally, the association areas 
adjacent to primary motor and sensory areas are uni-
modal; that is, only one type of information is processed 
by those cells. These association areas elaborate on the 
information received at the specific primary motor and 
sensory areas to which they are adjacent.
Further removed from the primary motor or sensory 
cortical areas, other types of association cortices are 
found, termed polymodal and supramodal. Polymodal 
is sometimes referred to as multimodal, and supramo-
dal may be referred to as heteromodal in some texts.
Polymodal association areas are found somewhat 
close to the unimodal areas near the primary recep-
tion cortex. Polymodal association cortex is linked 
to processing of two or more sensory modalities. For 
example, polymodal association cortex, processing 
both auditory and visual information, can be found 
in the temporal lobe and in the occipital lobe. The 
­parahippocampal gyrus receives input from all areas of 
the cerebral cortex, processing several types of sensory 
information.
The association areas add meaning and significance 
to the sensory or motor information received in the 
primary motor or sensory areas. The matching of pres-
ent sensory information with past sensory information 
drawn from memory probably takes place in the poly-
modal association areas, which are linked to several sen-
sory modalities. Motor association areas are sites where 
motor plans, programs, and commands are formulated 
with input from auditory and somatosensory process-
ing, particularly touch, as well as other modalities.
Certain sensory association areas blend and mingle 
sensory information from several association areas to 
establish a higher level of cortical sensory information. 
This type of processing results in a complex level of 
awareness that is above and beyond mere recognition of 
sensory data. This level of sensory awareness is known 
as perception, which is defined as the mental process of 
becoming aware of or recognizing an object or idea. The 
processes are primarily cognitive rather than affective 
or conative, although all three aspects are manifested.17 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
31
For example, if someone places a door key in your hand 
in the dark, you must recognize its shape and judge its 
size, weight, texture, and metallic surface to match this 
information with memories and concepts of keys. This 
is called stereognostic perception. Only when you can 
identify your perception of the key can you name the 
key and relate its function if asked. The everyday sensory 
recognition of objects relies on complex sensory integra-
tion of multiple sensations enhanced by memory and 
conceptual knowledge of objects with similar qualities. 
This complex activity of knowing is called gnosis. Other 
common kinds of perception are such skills as depth per-
ception and visual-spatial perception. Intuition can be 
thought of as a type of perception.
The highest level of processing is carried on in asso-
ciation areas best described as supramodal, meaning 
that these cortical areas are concerned with neural pro-
cessing that is not directly linked to sensory or motor 
functions. This kind of association cortex and cortical 
function can be found primarily in the following areas:
	•	 The prefrontal area, for higher executive function
	•	 Perisylvian cortex, subserving language
	•	 Limbic lobe, subserving emotion and motivation
The prefrontal cortex and the perisylvian cortical 
area and function were previously outlined and are dis-
cussed in depth in Chapter 9. The limbic lobe, its struc-
tures, and probable association functions are examined 
next. A summary of categories of the association cortex 
is provided in Box 2-2.
The Limbic System
Why Is This Important for Speech-Language 
Pathology?
Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) will encounter 
disorders that have caused dysfunction of deeper struc-
tures of the cerebral hemispheres. This is especially true 
with more diffuse brain damage caused by a traumatic 
brain injury. A critical cognitive skill, memory, is often 
affected with damage to these structures, resulting in 
major alterations to the treatment plan. Emotional 
processing is an important function of some of these 
structures and the client’s emotional state also impacts 
the treatment plan and the success of therapy. The SLP 
should be familiar with these structures and their func-
tions so that this may be anticipated in planning.
Cortical-Like Tissue
The associative function of the structures of the ­limbic 
system have been discussed and supported by Mesulam11 
and Benson.2 They indicate that these areas of the brain 
are architecturally considered cortical areas, although 
not named as part of the cortex in most instances. As 
most other anatomists do, these authors include in 
their overviews of association cortex what Mesulam 
calls heteromodal cortex, which is composed of the six-
layer formation accepted as cortical tissue. These asso-
ciative areas include the supramodal cortex previously 
discussed. This cortex has the six-layer formation found 
in 90% of cortex, including the primary motor and sen-
sory areas as well as the multimodal and supramodal 
association areas. The six-cell-layer cortex is called neo-
cortex or isocortex.
Cortical regions with tissue composed of fewer than 
six cell layers are functionally associated with the limbic 
system and are classified as allocortex. Allocortex can 
also be broken down into different types or regions. 
Cortical structures with three to five cellular layers are 
classified as paleocortex, whereas structures with only 
three cellular layers are classified as archicortex.
Mesulam’s and Benson’s discussions of these other 
types of associative cortices focus on patterns formed 
by regions sharing common functions. Beyond the pri-
mary association areas and the secondary motor and 
sensory association areas previously discussed, neuro-
anatomists of this school point to the higher level asso-
ciative functions of the more primitive cortex found 
deep to the neocortex and best seen on the medial 
surface of the brain (Fig. 2-11). The cytoarchitecture 
of these structures reveals a composition of primarily 
three layers, rather than six layers, with some structures 
Unimodal
	•	 Only one type of information is processed by the 
cells in these areas
	•	 Areas elaborate on information received at adja-
cent primary motor and sensory areas
	•	 Information can be related to either motor or sen-
sory input
Polymodal
	•	 Found in close proximity to unimodal areas, near 
the primary reception cortex
	•	 Linked to processing two or more kinds of sensory 
information (e.g., auditory and visual information)
	•	 Matches present sensory information with past 
sensory information
Supramodal
	•	 Highest level of processing
	•	 Areas concerned with neural processing not linked 
directly with sensory or motor functions
	•	 Found primarily in prefrontal area, perisylvian 
cortex, and limbic lobe
	
BOX 2-2   
Categories of the Association Cortex

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
32
showing transition between the six- and three-layer for-
mation. Thus these structures are cortical-like in nature 
because true cortex has six layers.
Parahippocampal and Hippocampal Gyri
The parahippocampal gyrus (see Fig. 2-11) is a transi-
tional architecture representing a six-layer formation 
laterally with a change to a three-layer formation more 
medially. Folded within the parahippocampal gyrus is 
the hippocampus. The hippocampal gyrus is actually 
part of the hippocampal formation, which is a curved, 
rolled-in-and-under area of cortex bulging into the 
floor of the temporal (inferior) horn of the lateral ven-
tricle. The hippocampal formation consists of the den-
tate gyrus, hippocampal gyrus, and white matter, called 
fimbria, that issues from this area and eventually forms 
the crus (or leg) of the fornix. Traditionally included as 
part of the limbic system, most anatomists now separate 
these hippocampal structures from the limbic system 
because of their involvement in encoding new memo-
ries.13 For the sake of discussion of anatomic location, 
the hippocampal formation will be discussed with the 
limbic system here.
Limbic and Paralimbic Structures
The limbic system or limbic lobe (see Fig. 2-11) was 
named by Pierre Paul Broca, who thought of it as the 
fifth lobe of the brain. It is occasionally referred to 
as Broca’s lobe because of this. The “lobe” is on the 
medial surfaces of the two hemispheres. An archlike 
pattern of cortex surrounding the nonconvoluted 
central portions of the brain can be observed on the 
medial surfaces of the hemispheres with the brainstem 
removed. This internal circular arch is called the lim-
bic lobe (or limbic system or formation). The limbic 
system includes the oldest or most primitive cortex, 
the rhinencephalon, also called the “smell brain.” The 
prefix rhino means “nose”; the functions of the old ani-
mal brain dealt primarily with the sense of olfaction, or 
smell. Because smell is a much more crucial sense for 
animals in their adaptation to the environment than 
it is to human beings, the old brain is relatively large 
in animals, and the cerebral hemispheres are less well 
developed.
The histologic makeup of the rest of the limbic sys-
tem is phylogenetically old in relation to the cerebral 
hemispheres (neocortex) but not as old as the olfactory 
brain tissue. The limbic system structures have many 
connections among themselves as well as connections 
to the hypothalamus (see “Diencephalon” later in this 
chapter) and to neocortical structures. In the evolution 
of the human brain, the older parts have come under 
the direction of the newer cortical systems, creating a 
hierarchy. Autonomic and hormonal responses caused 
by hypothalamic action are under the direction of the 
limbic structures, which in turn are under the direc-
tion of the higher cortical structures. Through these 
connections, the limbic area helps shape behavioral 
reaction to sensory input through analysis, reaction, 
and remembrance of stimuli, situations, reactions, and 
Cingulate
gyrus
Corpus
callosum
Septum
pellucidum
Fornix
Anterior nucleus
of thalamus
Olfactory bulb
Optic chiasm
Amygdaloid complex
Mammillary body
Uncus
Parahippocampal
gyrus
Dentate gyrus
Hippocampus
FIGURE 2-11
The limbic system with limbic and paralimbic structures. (Netter illustrations from www.
netterimages.com © Elsevier, Inc., All Rights Reserved.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
33
results.12 Heimer9 asserts that the anatomic and func-
tional characteristics of some of the structures of this 
area are distinct enough to be considered apart from 
the others, and he questions the concept of a limbic sys-
tem. For example, the amygdala is the key structure in 
emotional behavior and the hippocampus and related 
structures are of primary importance when discussing 
memory (see Chapter 9).
Mesulam11 conceives of the limbic system as being 
formed by several smaller structures, including the sub-
callosal gyrus, cingulate gyrus, isthmus, hippocampal 
gyrus, and uncus. A medial view of the left hemisphere 
indicates some of these structures (see Fig. 2-11). The 
cingulate gyrus (gyrus cinguli) arches over the corpus 
callosum, beginning at the anterior subcallosal area and 
arching back to the junction with the parahippocam-
pal gyrus. This juncture is called the isthmus. The uncus 
is the knob or hooklike area of the parahippocampal 
gyrus. Mesulam includes in the limbic system structures 
that are cortical-like in archetype. Cortical-like refers to 
the fact that their formations are part cortical and part 
subcortical nuclear in architecture. These structures 
are the amygdala (or amygdaloid body), substantia 
innominata, and septal area. They are formed by the 
simplest and most undifferentiated type of cortex in the 
forebrain.
A second associative area of cortex is composed of 
the paralimbic areas (see Fig. 2-11). Although some 
neuroanatomists include these areas as part of the lim-
bic system rather than refer to them as paralimbic,12 
Mesulam11 points out that gradual increases in com-
plexity of the cortex can be found in these areas when 
compared with the previously mentioned limbic system 
formations. These structures form an uninterrupted 
girdle around the medial and basal aspects of the cere-
bral hemispheres. The paralimbic areas include the 
caudal orbitofrontal cortex, insula, temporal pole, para-
hippocampal gyrus (proper), and cingulate complex. 
The caudal orbitofrontal cortex includes Brodmann 
areas 10, 11, and 4710 (see Fig. 2-5). The cingulate com-
plex includes the tissue of the anterior cingulate and 
middle cingulate cortex. Studies of these areas have 
shown different functional connections for these ana-
tomically close areas. Strong connections with limbic 
and autonomic functional areas have been traced for 
the anterior cingulate cortex. The middle cingulate cor-
tex connections are primarily with cognitive processing 
and sensorimotor processing areas.18
The parahippocampal gyrus completes the C shape 
of the “limbic lobe.” Most of the rostral part of the para-
hippocampal gyrus is occupied by an area known as the 
entorhinal area, which can be identified by its irregular 
surface (similar to an orange peel). The entorhinal cor-
tex is closely related to the hippocampus.
If the premise is accepted that cortical function-
ing is hierarchical and a vast network of interrelated 
functional systems have different, but similar, neuro-
anatomic substrates, then the study of the functional 
systems (such as language, memory, emotion) and their 
disorders must be tempered with the knowledge that 
brain function is highly complex, with interdependent 
systems throughout, and only partially understood. 
While functional subunits of brain operations are stud-
ied, attempts to analyze and synthesize the integration 
of the neural systems that control human behavior con-
tinue at a rapid pace.
Other Structures of the Central Nervous System
Cell bodies of other structures are amassed into 
nuclei below the level of the cortex and appear gray 
in fresh dissection, although a large number of white 
matter tracts pass through these areas. The structures 
or areas of the CNS discussed in this section are the 
diencephalon (thalamus and related structures), 
basal ganglia, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal 
cord.
Why Is This Important for Speech-Language 
Pathology?
The functions of the following structures are primar-
ily associated with sensory and motor processing rather 
than information processing. Speech-language patholo-
gists diagnose and treat a number of conditions in which 
information processing remains intact but sensory and/
or motor systems are impaired affecting speech, voice, 
hearing, and swallowing. As discussion of these struc-
tures continues in this text, it also will be pointed out 
that connections with cortical and limbic areas that do 
contribute to cognitive and emotional processing are 
also found in these areas. Discussion of these important 
structures begins with the diencephalon and takes you 
down to the spinal cord.
Diencephalon
Buried deep within the cerebral hemispheres is a group 
of structures known collectively as the diencephalon 
(Fig. 2-12). This region is composed of the following 
four primary structures:
	•	 Thalamus
	•	 Hypothalamus
	•	 Epithalamus
	•	 Subthalamus
The pituitary gland is also considered part of the 
diencephalon.
Thalamus
The thalamus is located ventrally (toward the belly), and 
the hypothalamus is located dorsally (toward the back). 
The thalamus is a large, rounded structure consisting 
of gray matter. It is made up of two egglike masses that 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
34
lie on either side of the third ventricle, one of the large 
openings in the brain through which cerebrospinal 
fluid flows. The posterior end of the thalamus expands 
in a large swelling, the pulvinar. Wilder G. Penfield, a 
famous twentieth-century neurosurgeon, was the first to 
ascribe special subcortical speech and language func-
tions to this structure.
The thalamus integrates sensation in the nervous 
system. It brings together and organizes sensation 
from all the classic sensory systems except olfaction. 
Anatomists usually divide the thalamus into regions 
and discuss the important nuclei in a particular region. 
These nuclei act as thalamic relays, sending sensory 
information upward to sensory areas of the cerebral 
cortex. The to-and-fro sensory pathways between the 
thalamus and cerebral cortex are so numerous, and 
the two structures so interdependent, that assigning 
a sensory deficit to the thalamus versus the sensory 
cortical areas of the cerebrum is sometimes difficult. 
Relays from the cerebellar, limbic, and basal ganglia 
pathways are also found in the thalamus, subserving 
motor and autonomic functions as well. The thalamus 
in the left hemisphere may also play a role in speech 
and language (see Chapters 6 and 9).
Hypothalamus
The lower part of the lateral wall and the floor of the 
third ventricle make up the hypothalamus (see Fig. 
2-12). Also on the floor of the third ventricle are two 
nipple-shaped protuberances called the mammillary 
bodies (see Fig. 2-11), containing nuclei important to 
hypothalamic function. The hypothalamus is a critical 
structure to autonomic and endocrine function (see 
Chapter 3). It controls several aspects of emotional 
behavior, such as rage and aggression, as well as escape 
behavior. In addition, it helps regulate body tempera-
ture, food and water intake, and sexual and sleep behav-
ior. The hypothalamus exerts neural control over the 
pituitary gland, which releases hormones involved in 
many bodily functions.
Epithalamus and Subthalamus
The epithalamus is a small region of the diencephalon 
consisting of the pineal gland, habenular nuclei, and 
stria medullaris thalami. The pineal gland contains no 
true neurons, only glial cells. Through a complicated 
process involving the hormone melatonin, it partici-
pates in regulation of the body’s circadian (24-hour) 
rhythms. The stria medullaris connects fibers from the 
habenular nuclei with the limbic system. The specific 
function of the habenular nuclei in human beings is 
unclear.
The subthalamus consists of a large subthalamic 
nucleus that is functionally considered a part of the 
basal ganglia, as discussed in the next section. The 
subthalamus also consists of a caudal area called the 
zona incerta. Fibers from neurons in the zona incerta 
project to many areas, including the cerebral cor-
tex, and may exert an inhibitory effect on the motor 
pathways.
Basal Ganglia
The basal ganglia, or basal nuclei as some texts use, are 
large masses of gray matter deep within the cerebrum, 
below its outer surface or cerebral cortex. The divi-
sion of the structures known as basal ganglia has been 
confusing in the literature because various anatomists 
have categorized the structures differently. A review of 
current literature indicates that most neuroanatomists 
include the following structures as basal ganglia (or 
basal nuclei):
	•	 Caudate nucleus
	•	 Putamen
	•	 Globus pallidus
	•	 Substantia nigra
	•	 Subthalamic nucleus
The putamen and globus pallidus are sometimes 
grouped and called the lentiform or lenticular nucleus. 
The caudate and the putamen grouped together are 
called the striatum (or neostriatum in some texts). 
These three main parts—caudate, putamen, and globus 
pallidus—when grouped together are referred to as the 
corpus striatum. Figure 2-13 illustrates the basal ganglia 
as seen in a coronal section with Figure 2-14 represent-
ing a medial view of the nuclei.
Squire et al.16 also include nuclei that are not tra-
ditionally included as basal ganglia structures but 
which, they point out, are analogous to those tradi-
tionally discussed. This set of nuclei consists of the 
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Epithalamus
FIGURE 2-12
The structures of the diencephalon. (Modified from Lundy-
Ekman, L. [2013]. Neuroscience: Fundamentals for rehabilita-
tion [4th ed.; Fig. 1-12, p. 11] St. Louis: Saunders.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
35
nucleus accumbens (see Fig. 2-14) and the olfactory 
tubercle, which they refer to collectively as the ven-
tral striatum (as opposed to the neostriatum). Other 
nuclei ­corresponding to the globus pallidus are 
termed the ventral pallidum by these authors. These 
nuclei are mentioned because you may see these struc-
tures included in the basal ganglia in other texts or in 
articles. This text will not discuss the function of these 
structures as part of the basal ganglia. Research lit-
erature, particularly on motivation and emotion, may 
present you with more discussion on these structures 
and their relation to the basal ganglia.
The Striatum
Making up the striatum (or neostriatum) are the cau-
date nucleus and the putamen. The term striatum 
resulted from the striped appearance of the area due 
to the many axon fibers passing through it. The cau-
date nucleus is a C-shaped formation. Because of the 
C shape, a coronal view of the basal ganglia will reveal 
only a small portion of the caudate and may show part 
of the head, the body, or the tail. The head of the cau-
date is enlarged, and the structure tapers into a narrow 
tail. It lies close to the thalamus and adjacent to the wall 
of the lateral ventricle. The caudate is connected to the 
putamen by strands of gray matter but is separated phys-
ically from it by the anterior portion of the large white 
band of descending axons called the internal capsule. 
The striatum receives most of the excitatory input that 
is provided to the basal ganglia from the cortex. In turn, 
the striatum transmits inhibitory impulses to the globus 
pallidus and the substantia nigra, using the neurotrans-
mitter GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid).
Substantia Nigra
The substantia nigra (“black substance” in Latin) is a 
long nucleus located in the midbrain but considered 
functionally a part of the basal ganglia because of its 
reciprocal connections with other brainstem nuclei. 
It consists of two components, the pars compacta and 
the pars reticulata, which have different connections 
and use different neurotransmitters. Degeneration of 
the pars compacta of the substantia nigra results in the 
reduction of the availability of the neurotransmitter 
dopamine. This lack of dopaminergic innervation to the 
striatum results in disorders associated with hypokinesia 
or reduced motor movements. Parkinson’s disease is a 
result of reduced functioning of the substantia nigra.
Subthalamic Nucleus
The subthalamic nucleus is the large nucleus of the 
subthalamus, which is anatomically a part of the 
­diencephalon. The subthalamic nucleus itself, how-
ever, is functionally considered a part of the basal 
ganglia. It receives projections from the globus pal-
lidus, the cerebral cortex, the substantia nigra, and 
the reticular formation of the pons. The subthalamic 
nucleus sends projections to the globus pallidus and 
FIGURE 2-13
The structures of the basal ganglia illustrated in a horizontal section through the ­cerebrum. 
(Redrawn from Guyton, A.C. [1991]. Basic Neuroscience: Anatomy and ­Physiology [2nd ed.].  
Philadelphia: Saunders. In Drain, C. B. [2009]. Perianesthesia nursing: A Critical Care ­Approach 
[5th ed.]. St. Louis: Saunders.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
36
the ­substantia nigra. The neurons of this nucleus use 
an excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamate. The neu-
rons of the ­subthalamic nucleus are, in normal motor 
function, ­usually inhibited from firing by thalamic 
override. When damage occurs to the basal ganglia 
pathways and subthalamic or related neurons are not 
inhibited from firing (i.e., disinhibition occurs), an 
abnormal increase in involuntary motor movements is 
seen. This results in disorders associated with hyper-
kinesia or increased motor movements, such as Hun-
tington’s chorea.
Input to the basal ganglia is generally considered 
to be through the caudate nucleus and the putamen, 
that is, the striatum. Received here are afferents from 
all four lobes of the cortex, thalamic nuclei, and part of 
the substantia nigra (the pars compacta). The output 
fibers of the basal ganglia usually are from the globus 
pallidus and another part of the substantia nigra (the 
pars reticulata). The output of these structures usually 
is projected to certain thalamic nuclei, the brainstem 
reticular formation, the superior colliculus, and cortical 
motor areas in the frontal lobe.
CEREBELLUM AND BRAINSTEM
The brain contains two other quickly identifiable 
parts in addition to the large cerebrum: the cerebel-
lum and the brainstem. Both structures are extremely 
important to an understanding of the neurology of 
speech.
Caudate nucleus (body)
Putamen and
globus pallidus
  (external segment)
Lentiform nucleus
Lentiform Nucleus
Globus pallidus
(internal segment)
Caudate nucleus (head)
Nucleus accumbens
Nucleus accumbens
Gray matter connecting
caudate with putamen
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra
Red nucleus
Caudate nucleus (tail)
Anterior commissure
Amygdala
Midbrain
Thalamus
A
B
FIGURE 2-14
Basal ganglia: illustration of dissection allowing a medial view of the nuclei of the basal 
ganglia.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
37
Cerebellum
The word cerebellum means “little brain,” and the cere-
bellum is indeed a much smaller structure than the cere-
brum, weighing approximately one eighth as much. The 
cerebellum is located at the rear of the brain, below and at 
the base of the cerebrum (Fig. 2-15). It resembles a small 
orange wedged in the juncture of the attachment of the 
spinal cord to the melon-shaped cerebrum. The cerebel-
lum as it is understood is a relatively recent evolutionary 
addition to the nervous system. Initially it was found in fish 
and was almost solely related to vestibular functioning. As 
movement on four legs evolved, the cerebellum developed 
a rich mass of connections to the spinal cord. As upright 
posture developed and human beings continued to learn 
new physical skills, the cerebellum, particularly the poste-
rior lobes, developed many linkages with the cerebrum.
Similar to the cerebrum, the cerebellum consists 
of two hemispheres. Each is primarily concerned with 
coordination of movements ipsilaterally, providing 
fine coordination of movement. The cerebellum plays 
an important role in postural stability and fixation, as 
well as in learning a novel motor act. Coordination of 
the extremely rapid and precise movements of normal 
articulation of speech also depends on intact cerebel-
lar functioning. Damage may result in a particular type 
of motor speech disorder, one of the classic dysarthria 
types called ataxic dysarthria (see Chapter 8). The cer-
ebellum may also have a role in cognitive processing 
with linkages found with the lateral prefrontal cor-
tex. Cerebellar anatomy and function are discussed in 
Chapter 6.
Brainstem
The fourth major part of the brain is the brainstem (see 
Fig. 2-15). The brainstem and its subdivisions cannot be 
directly viewed unless the cerebral hemispheres are cut 
away to reveal the internal structures of the brain. The 
brainstem appears as a series of structures that seem 
to be an upward extension of the spinal cord, thrust 
upward into the brain between the cerebral hemi-
spheres. Often the parts of the brainstem are depicted 
as extending as vertical segments one above the other, 
but the parts of the brainstem actually do not sit in a ver-
tical plane. The upper structures are crowded together 
to fit within the cranium. In some texts and, in fact, pre-
vious editions of this text, the diencephalon is included 
as part of the brainstem. Contemporary neuroanatomy 
teaching separates the diencephalon and includes only 
three structures. Moving from the rostral (head) to the 
caudal (tail) segments, the three brainstem structures 
are as follows (Figs. 2-16 and 2-17):
	•	 Mesencephalon (midbrain)
	•	 Pons
	•	 Medulla oblongata
Internal Anatomy of the Brainstem
The brainstem also has internal regions, with the presence 
and function of these regions depending on which struc-
ture is being examined. The midbrain has three regions: 
the tectum, tegmentum, and basis. The pons has a tegmen-
tum and a basis. The tegmental regions are always found 
in the dorsal (posterior) aspect of the structures, whereas 
the basilar areas are on the anterior (ventral) aspect. The 
medulla is not considered to have a tegmental or basilar 
region as such, but the function of the areas of the medulla 
that are continuous with the tegmentum and the basis of 
the other two structures are quite similar in nature. Thus 
they are referred to as being contiguous areas with the teg-
mentum and the basilar regions of the midbrain and pons. 
Basically, the tegmental areas of the brainstem contain 
cranial nerve nuclei from which the axons of the cranial 
nerves exit the brain and become part of the PNS. The bas-
ilar areas of the brainstem structures all contain ascending 
and descending sensory and motor fibers. These regions 
are illustrated in Figures 2-15 and 2-17.
Midbrain.  The midbrain (see Fig. 2-17), located 
­immediately below the thalamus and hypothalamus, 
is also called the mesencephalon. The midbrain is 
the narrowest part of the brainstem and contains the 
­tectum, or roof, one of the three longitudinal divisions 
of the brainstem. On the tectum are four swellings 
called colliculi(“little hills”): two inferior colliculi and 
two ­superior colliculi. The tectum and the four colli-
culi are known collectively as the corpus quadrigemina. 
The ­inferior colliculi serve as way stations in the central 
­auditory nervous system, and the superior colliculi are 
way stations in the visual nervous system.
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Tegmentum
Brainstem
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Basis
Tectum
FIGURE 2-15
Medial view of the right cerebrum, brainstem, and cerebellum.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
38
The crus cerebri is a massive fiber bundle found at 
the base of the midbrain. It includes fibers descending 
to the spine (corticospinal), the medulla (corticobul-
bar), and the pons (corticopontine). The tegmentum 
of the midbrain contains all the ascending and many 
of the descending systems of the spinal cord or lower 
brainstem. The term cerebral peduncles is often used inter-
changeably with the term crus cerebri, but according to 
Haines,7 cerebral peduncle should be used to represent 
the area of the entire midbrain below the tectum. The 
base of the midbrain also contains the substantia nigra, 
which, as explained earlier, is a basal ganglia structure.
Pons.  Just below the midbrain in the neuraxis is the 
pons, a massive rounded structure that serves in part as 
a connection to the hemispheres of the cerebellum (see 
Fig. 2-17). The connections to the cerebellum are made 
by a number of transverse fibers on the anterior surface 
of the pons, forming the cerebellar peduncles. The pons 
is aptly named; the Latin word for “bridge” is pons, and 
the pons is a bridge to the cerebellum. Several cranial 
nerves exit the brain from the pons, including three that 
are important to speech and hearing, cranial nerves V 
(trigeminal), VII (facial), and VIII (vestibulocochlear).
Medulla Oblongata.  The medulla oblongata is the 
most caudal brainstem structure. Older terminology 
identified it as the bulb. It is a rounded bulge that is an 
enlargement of the upper spinal cord (see Fig. 2-17). A 
median fissure (furrow) is present on the anterior sur-
face. On either side of this fissure are landmark swell-
ings called pyramids. The pyramids arise from the ­basilar 
pons and extend caudally to an area known as the pyram-
idal decussation. This area is formed by the decussation 
(crossing to the opposite side) of ­motor ­fibers traveling 
from the precentral gyrus in the ­frontal lobe to the spinal 
cord (corticospinal fibers of the ­pyramidal tract). Pos-
terior to the pyramids are oval ­elevations, called olives, 
produced by the olivary nuclei. The olives are important 
way stations on the pathways of the auditory nervous sys-
tem. The inferior cerebellar ­peduncles are also found on 
the medulla. The peduncles connect the cerebellum to 
the brainstem at the ­level of the ­medulla. The nuclei of 
several cranial nerves important to speech production 
can be found in the medulla, with their axons exiting 
the brain at this level. Because older terminology for the 
medulla was bulb, these ­motor ­fibers of cranial nerves 
that terminate in nuclei in brainstem structures are often 
referred to as corticobulbar fibers. These fibers are also 
sometimes referred to as corticonuclear fibers because 
their destination in the brainstem is the nuclei of the cra-
nial nerves.
Mammillary body
Crus cerebri
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Olive
Pyramid
Decussation of pyramids
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
FIGURE 2-16
Ventral aspect of the brainstem. (From Crossman, A., & Neary, D. [2015]. ­Neuroanatomy 
[5th ed.]. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
39
SPINAL CORD
Recall a mental image of the dissection of the nervous 
system. Looking at the brain, a long pigtail of flesh is 
visible hanging from its base; this is the spinal cord. It 
is normally found in an opening running through the 
center of the bony vertebral column. The spinal cord 
is strictly defined. It is caudal to the large opening at 
the base of the skull called the magnum foramen; the 
nervous tissue encased in the skull proper is the brain.
The spinal cord is divided into five regions. Each of 
these regions is named for a section of the 31 spinal ver-
tebrae that surround the spinal cord itself. The regions 
of the cord are cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and 
coccygeal. The spinal cord does not extend the com-
plete length of the vertebral column. In the adult it 
terminates at the level of the lower border of the first 
lumbar vertebra. In the child it is longer, ending at the 
upper border of the third lumbar vertebra. Figure 2-18 
shows the segmental spinal nerve and the comparable 
vertebral levels.
A cross section of the spinal cord (Fig. 2-19) reveals 
an H-shaped mass of gray matter in the center of the 
spinal segment. As in other parts of the CNS, the gray 
matter contains neuronal and glial cell bodies, axons, 
and dendrites. Laminar organization is present in the 
gray matter, with 10 layers identified. Each layer is com-
posed of neurons that respond to different sensory 
stimuli or innervate different muscle fibers.
The ventral, or anterior, portion of the cord mediates 
motor output. The anterior horn cell of the ventral gray 
matter is the point of synapse of the descending motor 
tracts (corticospinal) with the ventral roots of the spinal 
cord. The dorsal, or posterior, portion of the cord medi-
ates sensory input coming into the spinal cord through 
the dorsal root of the spinal nerves.
Each lateral half of the spinal cord also has white 
matter columns: a dorsal or posterior column, a ventral 
or anterior column, and a lateral column. This white 
matter is composed of myelinated and unmyelinated 
nerve fibers as well as glial cells. The myelinated fibers 
form bundles or fasciculi that rapidly conduct nerve 
impulses that ascend or descend for varying distances. 
Bundles of white matter with a common function are 
called tracts. Major anatomic landmarks of a cross 
section of the spinal cord are shown in Figure 2-19. 
Refer often to this drawing when studying sensory and 
motor pathways.
Close inspection of the form and quantity of gray ver-
sus white matter reveals variations at the different levels 
of the spinal cord. The proportion of gray to white is 
A
B
C
Colliculi
Cerebellar
peduncles
Medulla
Pons
Posterior
commissure
Tectum
Basilar pons
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
Basilar pons
Pyramid
Pyramidal decussation
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Midbrain
Mammillary
body
II
III
IV
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XI
XII
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
FIGURE 2-17
Anterior (ventral; A), midsagittal (B), and posterior (dorsal; C) views of the brainstem, with 
cranial nerves referenced by Roman numerals. In C, the cerebellum is removed to expose 
the posterior surface of the brainstem and fourth ventricle. (Reprinted from Haines, D. 
[2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
40
greatest in the lumbar and cervical regions where the 
major motor and sensory neurons for the arms and legs 
are found. In the cervical regions the dorsal column 
(mediating sensory input) is somewhat narrow and the 
ventral column (mediating motor output) is broad and 
expansive. Both columns are broad and expansive in 
the lumbar region, and in the thoracic region both are 
narrow.
Combined with a careful sensory examination, test-
ing of muscle functions can be most valuable to the phy-
sician in assessing the extent of a lesion. Most muscles 
are innervated by axons from several adjacent spinal 
roots. This peripheral nerve innervation pattern is dis-
cussed in Chapter 3.
Reflexes
Reflexes are subconscious automatic stimulus response 
mechanisms. The behavior of lower animals is primar-
ily governed by reflexes. In human beings, reflexes 
are basic defense mechanisms to painful or potentially 
damaging sensory stimulation. If, for instance, you acci-
dentally touch a hot stove, the sensation of pain does 
not need to be sent up the sensory tracts to the cor-
tex. Motor commands from the cortex need not be 
sent down motor tracts to allow movement. The rapid 
response to noxious stimuli is processed quickly at the 
spinal level by a mechanism called the simple reflex arc. 
The reflex arc contains a receptor and an afferent neu-
ron, which transmits an impulse along the peripheral 
nerve to the CNS, where the nerve synapses through 
an intercalated neuron with a lower motor or efferent 
neuron. From this point an impulse is sent to an effer-
ent nerve, and then an efferent impulse passes outward 
in the nerve, which moves the effector (i.e., the muscle 
Occipital bone
1st cervical nerve
Vertebra T1
1st thoracic nerve
Vertebra L1
1st lumbar nerve
Vertebra S1
1st sacral nerve
1st cervical cord
segment
1st thoracic cord
segment
1st lumbar cord
segment
1st sacral cord
segment
FIGURE 2-18
Comparison of the level of the vertebral column and spinal 
cord. Spinal nerves C1-C7 emerge above the correspond-
ing vertebrae, whereas the remaining nerves emerge below. 
(Reprinted from FitzGerald, M. J. T., & Folan-Curran, J. 
[2002]. Clinical neuroanatomy and related neuroscience [4th 
ed.]. Philadelphia: Saunders.)
Sacral
Lumbar Gracile fasciculus
Thoracic
Cervical
Cuneate fasciculus
Dorsal root
Spinal ganglion
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Lateral spinothalamic tract
Anterior spinocerebellar tract
Ventral root
Cervical
Sacral Anterior spinothalamic tract
Ascending
pathways
Descending
pathways
Anterior corticospinal tract
Vestibulospinal tract
Anterior horn of gray matter
Rubrospinal tract
Lumbar
Cervical
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Post horn
of gray matter
FIGURE 2-19
Cross section of the spinal cord.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
41
or gland). A response is then elicited—you simply sud-
denly withdraw your finger (see Fig. 2-20).
There are several types of reflexes: superficial or 
skin reflexes, deep tendon or myotactic reflexes, vis-
ceral reflexes, and pathologic reflexes. Reflexes occur 
at different levels in the nervous system: spinal level, 
bulbar level, midbrain level, and cerebellar level. Reflex 
assessment is a vital tool for assessing the intactness of 
various sensory motor systems. Reflexes are discussed in 
more detail in Chapters 6 and 11.
Dorsal root
Ventral root
Intercalated neuron
Efferent neuron
Afferent neuron
Muscle (effector)
SPINAL CORD
Spinal ganglion
Skin (receptor)
FIGURE 2-20
A simple reflex arc.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The uniqueness of Broca’s area, a specialized vocal 
tract, and the expanse of information and commu-
nication processing areas give human beings their 
exceptional ability to communicate.
	•	 The human communication nervous system 
consists of the CNS and the PNS. The autonomic 
nervous system is subsumed under both.
	•	 Neurons are composed of organelles, which are 
composed of molecules. The four major classes 
of molecules in cells are lipids, proteins, carbohy-
drates, and nucleic acid.
	•	 A bilipid layer surrounds the cell body of a neuron. 
The neuron has one axon, which typically carries 
impulses away from the cell body and may have 
many dendrites that carry information toward the 
cell body.
	•	 Retrograde transport up the axon mediates move-
ment of trophic substances, which provide nour-
ishment for the cell.
	•	 Astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and 
ependyma cells are the main types of neuro-
glial cells. Each has its own specific purpose, 
primarily providing the structural support and 
environmental maintenance for the work of 
the neurons. For example, after cerebral injury, 
microglia clean up the debris caused by cellular 
deterioration.
	•	 Gray-appearing areas of the brain contain the nu-
clei of cell bodies. White-appearing areas signal the 
presence of myelinated fiber tracts.
	•	 The cortex is organized into six horizontal layers. The 
most recent (phylogenetically) cortical tissue is called 
neocortex. Cortical-like tissue with five to three layers 
is found in paralimbic and limbic system structures.
	•	 The brain is divided into two hemispheres, left 
and right, with communication between the two 
primarily occurring through the commissural 
fiber pathway called the corpus callosum. In most 
people the left hemisphere is the dominant hemi-
sphere for language.
	•	 Gyri (elevations) and sulci (depressions) on the 
lateral and medial surfaces of the brain provide 
important landmarks for delineating the four lobes: 
frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital. Particular 
types of language and other types of neurobe-
havioral disorders may result from developmental 
interruption or acquired injury to these areas.
	•	 Important functional areas located in the frontal 
lobe are primary motor cortex, premotor cortex, 
supplementary motor area, Broca’s area, and the 
prefrontal association cortex.
	•	 Important functional areas in the temporal lobes 
are Heschl’s gyrus (primary auditory cortex) and 
Wernicke’s area.
Continued

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
42
	•	 Important functional areas of the parietal lobe are 
the primary sensory cortex, angular gyrus, and 
supramarginal gyrus.
	•	 Important functional areas in the occipital lobes are 
the primary visual cortex and visual association cortex.
	•	 The insula is an older area of cortex located deep 
to the sylvian fissure. It may have a role in motor 
programming for speech.
	•	 The perisylvian area in the dominant hemisphere 
is the major area for understanding and producing 
language.
	•	 Cerebral connections are made by projection fibers 
(to distant structures), association fibers (intrahemi-
spheric), and commissural fibers (interhemispheric).
	•	 Approximately 86% of cortex is categorized as asso-
ciation cortex. Some association areas are unimodal 
(process only one type of information) and some 
are polymodal (processing two or more types of in-
formation). The highest level of processing is carried 
on in supramodal association areas, which are not 
associated with any particular type of information. 
The prefrontal association area, perisylvian area, and 
the limbic areas have supramodal capability.
	•	 Allocortex is composed of fewer than six layers, is 
inferior to the cortical mantle, and can be found in 
paralimbic and limbic system structures. Some of 
the limbic system structures are the rhinencepha-
lon, cingulate gyrus, isthmus, hippocampal gyrus, 
and uncus. Paralimbic structures include the tem-
poral pole, parahippocampal gyrus, and the cin-
gulate complex. These paralimbic and limbic areas 
are primarily involved with emotion and memory.
	•	 The diencephalon is composed of the thalamus, 
hypothalamus, epithalamus, and subthalamus, as 
well as the pituitary gland. The thalamus is the main 
relay structure of the brain. The hypothalamus is 
concerned with autonomic and endocrine functions.
	•	 The brainstem consists of three divisions: midbrain, 
pons, and medulla. The tectum, tegmentum, and 
basis are longitudinal divisions of the three struc-
tures. The brainstem contains the nuclei of most of 
the cranial nerves, which control the sensory input 
and motor output of the oral and facial musculature.
	•	 The basal ganglia or basal nuclei are groups of 
subcortical nuclei found deep within the brain. 
The structures of the basal ganglia are the caudate 
nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, and substantia 
nigra. These function in regulation and control of 
motor movement, muscle tone, and planning for 
movement. Damage may result in hypokinesia or hy-
perkinesia and characteristic motor speech disorders.
	•	 The cerebellum has two hemispheres and is located 
at the base of the cerebrum, connected through 
peduncles primarily to the pons. It plays an impor-
tant part in postural stability and fixation and in 
learning a novel motor act. A specific motor speech 
disorder may follow damage to the cerebellum.
	•	 The spinal cord is divided into five regions, each 
named for a section of the spinal vertebrae sur-
rounding the cord: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, 
sacral, and coccygeal.
	•	 The center of the spinal cord consists of gray mat-
ter. The ventral portion contains motor nuclei, and 
the anterior contains horn cells. The dorsal part medi-
ates sensation through the dorsal nuclei. White matter 
tracts ascend from and descend to the spinal cord, 
mediating motor output and sensation to the limbs 
and trunk.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Azevedo, F. A., Carvalho, L. R., Grinberg, L. T., Farfel, J. M.,  
Ferretti, R. E., Leite, R. E., et al. (2009). Equal numbers of 
neuronal and non-neuronal cells make the human brain 
an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. The Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 513, 532–541.
	 2.	 Benson, D. F. (1994). The neurology of thinking. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
	 3.	 Broca, P. (1861). Remarques sur le siège de la faculté du 
langage articulé suivis d’une observation d’aphemie. Bul-
letin de la Société d’Anatomie, 6, 330–364.
	 4.	 Cain, M., Damman, H., Lue, R. A., & Yoon, C. K. (2006). 
Discover biology (3rd ed.). New York: W. W. Norton; Sun-
derland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
	 5.	 Catani, M., & Mesalum, M. (2008). The arcuate fasciculus 
and the disconnection theme in language and aphasia. 
Cortex, 44, 953–961.
	 6.	 Etchell, A. C., Johnson, B. W., & Sowman, P. F. (2014). 
Behavioral and multimodal neuroimaging evidence for a 
deficit in brain timing networks in stuttering: a hypoth-
esis and theory. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 8, 1–10. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00467.
	 7.	 Haines, D. (2006). Fundamental neuroscience for basic and clinical 
applications (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.
	 8.	 Hanani, M. (2010). Satellite glial cells: More than just 
“rings around the neuron.” Neuron Glia Biology, 6, 1–2.
	 9.	 Heimer, L. (1995). The human brain and spinal cord: Func-
tional neuroanatomy and dissection guide (2nd ed.). New 
York: Springer-Verlag.
	10.	 Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The orbitofrontal cortex: 
Linking reward to hedonic experience. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 6, 691–702.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I  CHAPTER TWO
43
	11.	 Mesulam, M. M. (1985). Principles of behavioral neurology. 
Boston: F. A. Davis.
	12.	 Mosenthal, W. T. (1995). A textbook of neuroanatomy with 
atlas and dissection guide. New York: Parthenon Publishing 
Group.
	13.	 Nadeau, S. E., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. J., 
Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. (2005). Medical 
neuroscience. Philadelphia: Saunders.
	14.	 Nadich, T. P., Krayenbuhl, N., Kollias, S., Bou-Haidar, Blue-
stone, A. Y., & Carpenter, D. M. (2010). White matter. In 
T. P. Nadich, M. Castillo, S. Cha, & J. G. Smirniotopoulos 
(Eds.), Imaging of the brain. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
	15.	 Sperry, R. W., Gazzaniga, M. S., & Bogen, J. E. (1969). 
Interhemispheric relationships: The neocortical com-
missures; syndromes of hemispheric disconnection. In  
P. J. Vinken, & G. W. Bruyn (Eds.), Handbook of clinical 
neurology (Vol. 4). North Holland: Amsterdam.
	16.	 Squire, L. R., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., du Lac, S., Ghosh, A., 
& Spitzer, N. C. (2013). Fundamental neuroscience (4th ed.). 
Waltham, MA: Elsevier Academic Press.
	17.	 Stedman’s Medical Dictionary for the Health Professions and 
Nursing (7th ed.) (2011). Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
liams and Wilkins.
	18.	 Stevens, F. L., Hurley, R. A., & Taber, K. H. (2011). Ante-
rior cingulate cortex: Unique role in cognition and emo-
tion. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 23, 
121–125.
	19.	 Taber, K. H., & Hurley, R. A. (2008). Astroglia: Not just 
glue. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 
20(2), iv–129.
	20.	 University of Leeds. (2010, May 25). “Nature’s batteries”  
may have helped power early lifeforms. Science Daily. Re-
trieved from http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/ 
05/100525094906.htm.
	21.	 Von Der Heide, R. J., Skipper, L. M., Klobusicky, E., & Ol-
son, I. R. (2013). Dissecting the uncinate fasciculus: Dis-
orders, controversies and a hypothesis. Brain, 136(Pt 6), 
1692–1707. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt094.
	22.	 Verkhratsky, A., Rodriguez, J. J., & Parpura, V. (2013). As-
troglia in neurological diseases. Future Neurology, 8, 149–
158.
	23.	 Wallman, J. (1992). Aping language. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.

44
3
K E Y  T E R M S
afferent
afferent fibers
anterior (ventral) 
horn cells
aqueduct of Sylvius
arachnoid 
granulations
arachnoid mater
autonomic nervous 
system
bilateral
Broca’s (expressive) 
aphasia
cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF)
choroid plexus
circle of Willis
constructional 
disturbances
contralateral
cranial nerves
diaphragma sella
dura mater
efferent fibers
encephalitis
enteric nervous 
system
falx cerebelli
falx cerebri
foramen
foramina
hemorrhage
homeostasis
internal carotid 
arteries
intervertebral 
foramina
ipsilateral
ischemia
lesion
meninges
motor fibers
nucleus solitarius
parasympathetic 
divisions
peripheral nervous 
system (PNS)
phrenic nerves
pia mater
postganglionic
preganglionic
sensory fibers
septa
somites
spinal peripheral 
nerves
subarachnoid space
sympathetic divisions
tentorium cerebelli
unilateral
venous sinuses
ventricular system
vertebral artery
Wernicke’s 
(receptive) aphasia
x-ray
Organization 
of the Nervous 
System II
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Peripheral Nervous System
Spinal Nerves
Cranial Nerves
Autonomic Nervous System
Protection and Nourishment of the Brain
Meninges
Ventricular System
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Blood Supply of the Brain
General Principles of Neurologic Organization
Contralateral Motor Control
Ipsilateral Motor Control
Bilateral Speech Motor Control
Unilateral Language Mechanisms
Scheme of Cortical Organization
Neurodiagnostic Studies in Speech and Language
Static Brain Imaging
Dynamic or Functional Brain Imaging
Measures of Neural Connectivity
Measures of Timing of Neural Activity
Vascular Imaging
Transcranial Doppler
Cerebral Angiography and Magnetic Resonance 
Angiography
Summary of Neuroimaging
Overview of the Human Communication Nervous 
System
Appendix 3-1
The charm of neurology . . . lies in the way it forces us into 
daily contact with principles. A knowledge of the structure 
and function of the nervous system is necessary to explain the 
simplest phenomena of disease, and it can only be attained by 
thinking scientifically.
Henry Head

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
45
The central nervous system (CNS) with its vast net-
work of neurons and neural connections is the control-
ling influence in the human communication nervous 
system. Glial cells reside within the CNS and provide 
structure and metabolic support for the neurons. tThe 
CNS, however, would not be functional, or necessary, 
without the lower level structures reviewed in this chap-
ter. The nervous system consists of separate peripheral 
and central components organized into two parts—not 
independent from each other, but interdependent on 
each other. This chapter outlines the functions of the 
peripheral nervous system that allow this interdepen-
dence with the CNS (Fig. 3-1).
Peripheral Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) includes (1) the 
cranial nerves with their roots and rami (branches), (2) 
the peripheral (spinal) nerves, and (3) the peripheral 
parts of the autonomic nervous system. The peripheral 
ganglia are groups of nerve cell bodies located outside 
the CNS forming an enlargement on a nerve or on two 
or more nerves at their junction. They are primarily 
sensory in nature, although motor ganglia are found 
particularly in the autonomic nervous system.
The cranial nerves exit from the neuraxis at various lev-
els of the brainstem and the uppermost part of the spinal 
cord. When we use the term peripheral nerves, we are typi-
cally referring to the spinal nerves plus their branches.
Cranial nerves V (the trigeminal nerve), VII (the 
facial nerve), IX (the glossopharyngeal nerve), and X 
(the vagus nerve) have dedicated sensory ganglia origi-
nating from the neural crest during embryonic devel-
opment. They contain pseudounipolar cell bodies. 
These sensory ganglia are classified as the trigeminal 
or semilunar ganglion (cranial nerve V); the geniculate 
ganglion of cranial nerve VII; the superior and inferior 
ganglia of cranial nerve IX, or the glossopharyngeal 
nerve; and the jugular and nodose ganglia of cranial 
nerve X, or the vagus nerve. The jugular and nodose 
ganglia are often referred to as the superior and infe-
rior ganglia of the vagus nerve. Cranial nerve VIII, the 
vestibulocochlear nerve, primarily arises from the otic 
placodes. Figure 3-2 illustrates the cranial nerve nuclei 
and their juxtaposition within the brainstem.
SPINAL NERVES
Spinal peripheral nerves are described as mixed nerves, 
meaning they carry both sensory and motor fibers. 
Each spinal nerve is connected to the spinal cord by 
two roots: the anterior root and the posterior root. The 
anterior root of the spinal nerve consists of bundles of 
nerve fibers that transmit nerve impulses away from 
the CNS. These nerve fibers are called efferent fibers. 
A
B
1 Cerebral hemisphere
2  Diencephalon
3  Midbrain
4  Pons
5  Cerebellum
6  Medulla
7  Spinal cord
FIGURE 3-1
A, Location of the central nervous system (CNS) in the body. B, Seven major divisions of 
the CNS: (1) cerebral hemisphere, (2) diencephalon, (3) midbrain, (4) pons, (5) cerebel-
lum, (6) medulla, and (7) spinal cord. The midbrain, pons, and medulla comprise the 
brainstem. (Reprinted from Martin, J. H. [1996]. Neuroanatomy text and atlas [2nd ed.]. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
46
Efferent fibers that go to the muscles and make them 
contract are also called motor fibers. The motor fibers 
of the spinal nerves originate from a group of cells or 
motor nuclei in the spinal cord called the anterior (ven-
tral) horn cells. The anterior horn cells are the point of 
synapse, or connection, with the spinal nerves as they 
leave the neuraxis. When nerve impulses have left the 
neuraxis, they have reached what the great British neu-
rophysiologist Charles Sherrington (1857-1952) called 
the final common pathway, or the terminal route of all 
neural impulses acting on the muscles.
The posterior root of the spinal nerve consists of 
afferent fibers that carry information about the sensa-
tions of touch, pain, temperature, and vibration into the 
CNS via the spinal cord. They are also called sensory 
fibers. The cell bodies of the sensory fibers are a swell-
ing on the posterior root of the spinal nerve called the 
posterior root ganglion.
The motor and sensory roots leave and enter the spi-
nal cord at the intervertebral foramina, where the roots 
unite to form a spinal nerve. At this point the motor 
and sensory fibers mix together.
Clinical principles have been developed based on the 
organization of the spinal roots that can be used when 
damage occurs to the spinal cord or spinal nerves. First, 
recall that a generalization can be made that the ante-
rior, or ventral, half of the spinal cord is devoted to motor 
or efferent activity, and the posterior, or dorsal, half is 
devoted to sensory or afferent activity. Which motor and 
sensory activities are impaired depends on the specific site 
Trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Optic chiasm
Optic nerve (CN II)
Internal carotid artery
Posterior communicating
artery
Posterior cerebral
artery
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Superior cerebellar
artery
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducens nerve (CN VI)
Facial nerve (CN VII)
Intermediate nerve
(part of CN VII)
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN IX)
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Hypoglossal nerve
(CN XII)
Inferior olivary
eminence
Pyramid
Accessory nerve
(CN XI)
Preolivary sulcus
(groove)
Postolivary sulcus
(groove)
CN X
CN IX
CN VIII
CN VII
Basilar pons
Basilar artery
Uncus
CN III
Optic tract
Infundibulum
FIGURE 3-2
An interior (ventral) view of the brainstem with particular emphasis on cranial nerves. 
(Reprinted from Haines, D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
47
of lesion in the spinal cord. A lesion, or damaged area, 
impairs motor and/or sensory activities at and below that 
cord level depending on the specific site of the lesion and 
the particular tracks interrupted. Naturally, large lesions in 
the spinal cord impair both sensory and motor functions.
As discussed later in this text, in early embryologic 
development, paired structures called somites are 
formed on the embryo. These somites differentiate into 
nonneural tissue (e.g., muscle, bone, and connective tis-
sue). This somitic differentiation results in segmentally 
distributed zones called dermatomes. The dermatome 
region of each somite gives rise to a myotome, which is a 
muscle-forming body, and a skin plate, which is involved 
in formation of dermal tissue. The sensory component 
of each spinal nerve is distributed to a dermatome. Fig-
ure 3-3 shows the segmental distribution of cutaneous 
Ophthalmic n.
Maxillary n.
Trigeminal n.
Mandibular n.
Great auricular n.
Transverse cervical n.
Supraclavicular nn.
INTERCOSTAL NN.
1. Anterior cutaneous rami
2. Lateral cutaneous rami
Axillary n.
Medial brachial cutaneous
and intercostobrachial nn.
Medial antebrachial
cutaneous n.
Lower lateral brachial
cutaneous n.
Lateral antebrachial
cutaneous n.
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
Iliohypogastric n.
Ilioinguinal n.
Genitofemoral n.
Obturator n.
Dorsal nerve of penis
Scrotal branch of perineal n.
Deep peroneal (fibular) n.
Sural n.
Superficial peroneal (fibular) n.
Lateral sural cutaneous n.
Saphenous n.
Anterior femoral cutaneous n.
Lateral femoral cutaneous n.
C2
T2
T3
T9
T12
T7
T5
T4
T6
T8
T10
T11
T1
C4
C3
C5
C6
C7
C8
L1
L2
L3
L5
S1
L4
FIGURE 3-3
Dermatomal patterns (left) and peripheral nerve fields (right). (Modified from Gilman, S., 
& Newman, S. W. [2003]. Manter and Gatz’s essentials of clinical neuroanatomy and neuro-
physiology. [10th ed.]. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
48
innervation, showing on the left side of the figure which 
area of skin is supplied by which spinal nerve. The 
peripheral nerve field illustration on the right refers to 
an area of skin that is supplied by a particular peripheral 
nerve in that spinal nerve’s distribution. Myotomes gen-
erally follow the same distribution as the dermatome, 
although there is more overlap of control. Box 3-1 lists 
the general myotome distribution for muscle innerva-
tion of upper and lower limbs by spinal nerves.
If there is a high spinal cord injury or lesion at the 
level of the cervical vertebrae, speech production may 
be affected because the respiratory muscles are con-
trolled by spinal nerves exiting from the intervertebral 
foramina of the cervical and thoracic regions. The 
phrenic nerves, which supply motor signals to the dia-
phragm, originate mainly from C4, but contributions 
are also from C3 and C5. If respiration is stopped, death 
may follow with a lesion above the third, fourth, and 
fifth cervical nerves. Spinal cord injuries involving the 
caudal portion of the cord do not affect speech produc-
tion but are of interest to the speech-language patholo-
gist, who may work with spinal cord–injured patients on 
language or other related problems. These injuries are 
instructive in understanding the effect of lesions at vari-
ous levels of the nervous system. Injuries in the spinal 
cord may produce partial or complete loss of function 
at the level of the lesion. Function is also completely or 
partially impaired below the level of the lesion. Spinal 
cord injuries must be considered very serious because 
they impair functions beyond those directly controlled 
at the lesion point.
CRANIAL NERVES
The cranial nerves, in contrast to the spinal nerves, are 
of more significance to the speech pathologist because 
most of the cranial nerves have some relation to the 
speech, language, and hearing process and seven of the 
12 nerves are directly related to speech production and 
hearing.
On dissection, the 12 pairs of cranial nerves look like 
thin, gray-white cords. They consist of nerve fiber bundles 
surrounded by connective tissue. Like the spinal nerves, 
they are relatively unprotected and may be damaged 
by trauma. The cranial nerves leave the brain and pass 
through foramina of the skull to reach the sense organs or 
muscles of the head and neck with which they are associ-
ated. Some are associated with special senses such as vision, 
olfaction, and hearing. Cranial nerves innervate the mus-
cles of the jaw, face, pharynx, larynx, tongue, and neck.
Unlike the spinal nerves, which attach to the cord 
at regular intervals, the cranial nerves are attached to 
the brain at irregular intervals. They do not all have 
dorsal (sensory) and ventral (motor) roots. Some 
have motor functions, some have sensory functions, 
and some have mixed functions. Their origin, distri-
bution, brain and brainstem connections, functions, 
and evolution are complicated. (The cranial nerves 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.) They are tra-
ditionally designated by Roman numerals: cranial 
nerve I, olfactory; cranial nerve II, optic; cranial 
nerve III, oculomotor; cranial nerve IV, trochlear; 
cranial nerve V, trigeminal; cranial nerve VI, abdu-
cens; cranial nerve VII, facial; cranial nerve VIII, 
acoustic-vestibular; cranial nerve IX, glossopharyn-
geal; cranial nerve X, vagus; cranial nerve XI, spinal 
accessory; and cranial nerve XII, hypoglossal.
The cranial nerves from the brainstem are explic-
itly illustrated in Figure 3-2 and further outlined in 
Figure 3-4 regarding their location in the anterior 
(ventral) view and the anterolateral (ventrolateral) 
view of the brainstem.
Autonomic Nervous System
The innervation of involuntary structures such as the 
heart, smooth muscles, and glands is accomplished 
through the autonomic nervous system. Although this 
system has primarily indirect effects on speech, lan-
guage, and hearing, the speech-language pathology and 
audiology student must be familiar with its contribution 
to total body function to understand how involuntary 
but vital functions such as hormonal secretions, visual 
reflexes, and blood pressure are controlled within the 
nervous system.
C1/C2: neck flexion/extension
C3: neck lateral flexion
C4: shoulder elevation
C5: shoulder abduction
C6: elbow flexion/wrist extension
C7: elbow extension/wrist flexion
C8: finger flexion
T1: finger abduction
L2: hip flexion
L3: knee extension
L4: ankle dorsiflexion
L5: great toe extension
S1: ankle plantar flexion/ankle eversion/hip extension
S2: knee flexion
S3-S4: perineal reflex
	
BOX 3-1   
Myotome Distributions of the Upper and Lower 
Extremity
(From Magee, D. J. [2009]. Orthopaedic physical assessment [4th ed., pp. 
­467-566]. St. Louis: Elsevier.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
49
The autonomic nervous system is distributed 
throughout both the CNS and the PNS. The enteric 
nervous system, which is formed by neuronal plexus in 
the gastrointestinal tract, is considered a division of the 
autonomic nervous system. Enteric functioning has a 
direct effect on the deglutition and digestion of food.
Aside from the enteric system that deals directly 
with swallowing and digestion, the major divisions of 
the autonomic nervous system are the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic divisions, which have almost antago-
nistic functions. The sympathetic system is the body’s 
alerting system, sometimes referred to as the fight-or-
flight system. This part of the autonomic nervous sys-
tem is responsible for such preparatory measures as 
accelerating the heart rate, causing constriction of the 
peripheral blood vessels, raising the blood pressure, 
and redistributing the blood so that it leaves the skin 
and intestines to be used in the brain, heart, and skel-
etal muscles if needed. It serves to raise the eyelids and 
dilate the pupils. The sympathetic part also decreases 
peristalsis (the propelling contractions of the intestine) 
and closes the sphincters.
The parasympathetic part of the autonomic nervous 
system has an almost opposite calming effect on bodily 
function. It serves to conserve and restore energy by 
slowing the heart rate, increasing intestinal peristal-
sis, and opening the sphincters. As a result of para-
sympathetic action, other functions, such as increased 
salivation and increased secretion of the glands of the 
gastrointestinal tract, may take place.
The autonomic nervous system is composed of 
both efferent (conducting away from the CNS) and 
afferent (conducting toward the CNS) nerve fibers. 
Several similarities and differences exist between the 
neural control of skeletal muscle and visceral effectors 
such as smooth muscle. Lower motor neurons func-
tion as the final common pathway linking the CNS to 
skeletal muscle fibers. Similarly, the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic outflows serve as the final, but often 
dual, common neural pathway from the CNS to visceral 
Foramen of Luschka
CN X
Postolivary sulcus
(groove)
CN XII
CN XI
Pyramid
Pyramid
CN XI
CN XII
CN X
CN IX
Flocculus
CN VIII
CN VII
CN V
CNs VI
CN III
Uncus
Infundibulum
CN II
CN III
Superior
cerebellar
artery
CN IV
CN V
CN VII
CN VIII
CN IX
FIGURE 3-4
An anterolateral (ventrolateral) view of the brainstem with special emphasis on cranial 
nerves. Note the position and relations of the foramen of Luschka. (Reprinted from Haines, 
D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
50
effectors. However, unlike the somatic nervous system, 
the peripheral visceral motor pathway consists of two 
neurons. The first is the preganglionic neuron, which 
has its cell body in either the brainstem or the spinal 
cord. Its axons project as a thinly myelinated pregangli-
onic fiber to an autonomic ganglion. The second, the 
postganglionic neuron, has its cell body in the ganglion 
and sends unmyelinated axon (postganglionic fiber) to 
visceral effector cells such as smooth muscle. Typically, 
parasympathetic ganglia are close to the effector tissue 
and sympathetic ganglia are close to the CNS. Conse-
quently, parasympathetic pathways typically have long 
preganglionic fibers and short postganglionic fibers, 
whereas sympathetic pathways more often have short 
preganglionic and long postganglionic fibers.
The autonomic system also provides neural control 
of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, glandular secretory 
cells, or a combination of these. For example, the gut 
wall is composed of smooth muscle and glandular epi-
thelium. The sympathetic and parasympathetic systems 
have overlapping and, as stated previously, antagonis-
tic influences on those viscera located in body cavities 
and on some structures of the head such as the iris. Vis-
ceral targets are also present in the body wall and limbs. 
These are found in skeletal muscle (blood vessels) and 
in the skin (blood vessels and sweat glands). Visceral 
structures of the body wall and extremities are gener-
ally regulated by the sympathetic division alone. Thus 
the sympathetic outflow has a global distribution in that 
it innervates visceral structures in all parts of the body, 
whereas the parasympathetic outflow serves only the 
head and body cavities.
Rarely is autonomic activity solely sympathetic or 
parasympathetic. Both parts work together in the auto-
nomic nervous system along with the endocrine system 
to maintain the stability of the body’s internal environ-
ment or homeostasis. The endocrine system is a group 
of glands and other structures that release internal 
secretions called hormones into the circulatory system. 
These hormones influence metabolism and other body 
processes. The endocrine system includes such organs 
as the pancreas, pineal gland, pituitary gland, gonads, 
thyroid, and adrenal glands. These work more slowly 
than the autonomic nervous system.
The integration of the autonomic activity with endo-
crine and somatic responses, allowing homeostasis 
to be maintained, is regulated by the hypothalamus. 
Evidence exists for a network of central neuronal cir-
cuits that includes the hypothalamus and the insula, 
the amygdala, and an area in the midbrain called the 
periaqueductal gray matter. These structures receive 
input from the nucleus solitarius, a prominent nucleus 
of the medulla that receives input from all visceral 
organs. Input is also received from other nuclei in the 
brainstem and spinal cord. This network is referred 
to as the central autonomic network and is probably 
responsible for adjustments to basic cardiovascular and 
respiratory functions as they relate to a range of body 
activities, such as food intake, emotional behavior, and 
mental activity.13
As stated earlier, the autonomic nervous system is of 
importance to the speech-language pathologist because 
of its indirect effect on communication functioning. A 
good example of the power of the autonomic nervous 
system is the sweaty palms, dry mouth, blushing, and 
upset stomach some people experience before deliver-
ing a speech. Those indirect effects may make a great 
deal of difference in how well one communicates.
Protection and Nourishment  
of the Brain
The brain and the spinal cord, which make up part 
of the CNS, PNS, and autonomic nervous system and 
house most of their mechanisms, must be protected 
and nourished to continue to function. Following is a 
discussion of the protection and nourishment of these 
structures.
MENINGES
The spinal cord and brain are the major coordinating 
and integrating structures for all physical and men-
tal activities of the body and fortunately are well pro-
tected. The brain and spinal cord are covered by layers 
of tissue called the meninges. Within certain layers of 
these meninges is a cushioning layer of fluid called 
cerebrospinal fluid. The meninges are composed of 
three membranes; moving from the outermost to the 
innermost covering, they are known as the dura mater 
(“tough mother” in Latin), the arachnoid mater, and 
the pia mater.
The dura mater of the spinal cord is continuous 
with that of the brain through the opening in the 
skull called the foramen magnum. It consists of two 
layers that are closely united except where, in certain 
spots, they separate. In some parts of the dura mater 
of the brain they separate to form the venous sinuses 
(Fig. 3-5). In other parts of the brain, the inner layer 
also separates from the outer layer to reflect inward 
and form partitions, described as complex folds that 
divide the contents of the cranial cavity into differ-
ent cerebral subdivisions. These infoldings or septa 
of the dura join with those formed in the opposite 
hemisphere to create three different double-layered 
partitions: the falx cerebri, the tentorium cerebelli, 
and the falx cerebelli (Fig. 3-6).

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
51
The falx cerebri develops first as two portions that 
become a single continuous structure later. It reflects 
downward between the hemispheres, attaching ante-
riorly and laterally to points on the skull and posteri-
orly to another partition, the tentorium cerebelli (also 
known simply as the tentorium). The falx cerebelli is 
located below the tentorium cerebelli on the middle of 
the occipital bone. This small dural infolding extends 
into the space between the cerebellar hemispheres, 
attaching to the occipital crest of the skull and the pos-
terior portion of the tentorium. Part of it encloses the 
occipital venous sinuses. The tentorium cerebelli is the 
second largest of the dural folds. It attaches to bony 
walls of the skull in the temporal, occipital, and parietal 
regions. The tentorium cerebelli is the infolding found 
between the cerebral hemispheres above and the cer-
ebellar hemispheres below. It is only found in mammals 
and birds, being absent in fish, amphibians, and rep-
tiles.11 There is another very small infolding of the dura, 
the diaphragma sella, which forms the roof of the sella 
turcica, the structure that encloses the pituitary gland. 
There is a tiny hole in the center of it, allowing the stalk 
(or infundibulum) of the pituitary to pass through. The 
anterior and posterior intercavernous sinuses are found 
in their respective edges of the diaphragma sella. These 
infoldings are illustrated in Figures 3-6 and 3-7. They 
are pictured as they appear on a magnetic resonance 
imaging scan.
When you consider the placement of these sturdy 
partitions being under and between the cerebral hemi-
spheres as well as over and between the cerebellar hemi-
spheres, it is fairly easy to understand how the dural 
infoldings brace the brain against rotary displacement.
There is no subdural space between the dura mater 
and the next layer of the meninges. When there is sub-
dural space identified, it means that tissue damage has 
occurred to the deepest layer, creating a space.
Because there is no normal subdural space, the next 
meningeal layer can be found immediately below the 
dura. This second layer is the arachnoid mater. This 
membrane bridges over the sulci or folds of the brain. 
In some areas it projects into the venous sinuses to form 
arachnoid villi. The arachnoid villi aggregate to form 
the arachnoid granulations. The arachnoid granula-
tions are from where the cerebrospinal fluid diffuses 
into the bloodstream.
Beneath the arachnoid mater layer is a space called 
the subarachnoid space, which is filled with cerebro-
spinal fluid. All cerebral arteries and veins, as well as 
the cranial nerves, pass through this space. This is why 
you often hear of subarachnoid hemorrhage or bleed 
because damage to the brain has resulted in artery or 
vein tears and blood is released into this subarachnoid 
space.
Falx
cerebri
Cerebellum
Cerebral
aqueduct
Third ventricle
Cerebrum
Coccyx
Filum terminale externum
Filum terminale internum
Lumbar cistern
Cauda equina
Conus medullaris
Epidural space
Vertebrae
Spinal nerve
Denticulate ligament
Intervertebral foramen
and posterior root
ganglion
Subarachnoid space
Fourth ventricle
Cistern
Tentorium
cerebelli
Transverse
sinus
Lateral
ventricle
Dura mater
Arachnoid and pia
Subarachnoid
space
Superior sagittal sinus
Arachnoid villus
FIGURE 3-5
The relation of the meninges to the brain and spinal cord 
and to their surrounding bony structures. The dura is 
represented in light green, the arachnoid in dark green. 
(Reprinted from Haines, D. E. [2000]. Neuroanatomy: An 
atlas of structures, sections, and systems [5th ed.]. Baltimore: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
52
The third meningeal layer, the pia mater, closely 
adheres to the surface of the brain, covering the gyri 
(ridges) and going down into the sulci. The pia mater 
also fuses with the ependyma (a cellular membrane lin-
ing the ventricles) to form the choroid plexus of the 
ventricles. Figure 3-8 illustrates the meningeal layers.
VENTRICULAR SYSTEM
The ventricular system of the brain has three parts: the 
lateral ventricles, the third ventricle, and the fourth ven-
tricle. These actually are small cavities within the brain 
joined to each other by small ducts and canals. Each 
ventricle contains a tuftlike structure called the choroid 
plexus, which mainly is concerned with the production 
of cerebrospinal fluid.
Figure 3-9 is an example of a midsagittal view of the 
brain showing the third and fourth ventricles in rela-
tion to the cerebral aqueduct and nearby structures.
The lateral ventricles are paired, one in each hemi-
sphere. Each is a C-shaped cavity and can be divided into 
a body, located in the parietal lobe, and anterior, poste-
rior, and inferior or temporal horns, extending into the 
frontal, occipital, and temporal lobes, respectively. The 
lateral ventricle is connected to the third ventricle by 
an opening called the intraventricular foramen, or the 
foramen of Munro. The choroid plexus of the lateral 
ventricle projects into the cavity on its medial aspect 
(see Fig. 3-9).
The third ventricle is a small slit between the 
thalami. It also is connected to the fourth ventricle 
through the cerebral aqueduct or the aqueduct of  
Sylvius. The choroid plexus is situated above the roof 
of the ventricle.
The fourth ventricle sits anterior to the cerebellum 
and posterior to the pons and the superior half of the 
medulla. It is continuous superiorly with the cerebral 
aqueduct and the central canal below. The fourth ven-
tricle has a tent-shaped roof, two lateral walls, and a 
floor (see Fig. 3-9). It contains three small openings: 
the two lateral foramina of Luschka and the median 
foramen of Magendie. Through these openings the 
cerebrospinal fluid enters the subarachnoid space. The 
ventricular system serves as a pathway for the circula-
tion of the cerebrospinal fluid. The choroid plexus of 
the ventricles appears to secrete cerebrospinal fluid 
actively, although some of the fluid may originate as tis-
sue fluid formed in the brain substance.
Inferior sagittal sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Straight sinus
Confluence of sinuses
Great cerebral vein
Right transverse sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Inferior petrosal sinus
Cavernous sinus
Pterygoid plexus of veins
Sigmoid sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Basilar sinus
Sphenoparietal sinus
Intercavernous sinus
Ophthalmic vein
FIGURE 3-6
Veins, meninges, and dural sinuses. (Reprinted from Drake, R., Vogl, W., & Mitchell 
[2006]. Gray’s anatomy for students [2nd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
53
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
The brain and the spinal cord are suspended in a clear, 
colorless fluid called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which 
serves as a cushion between the CNS and the surround-
ing bones, thereby protecting the brain against direct 
trauma. This fluid aids in regulation of intracranial pres-
sure, nourishment of the nervous tissue, and removal of 
waste products.
The path of circulation of the CSF is illustrated in 
Figure 3-10. It flows from the lateral ventricles into the 
third ventricle, to the fourth ventricle, and into the 
subarachnoid space. It then travels to reach the infe-
rior surface of the cerebrum and moves superiorly over 
the lateral aspect of each hemisphere. Some of it moves 
into the subarachnoid space around the spinal cord.
The CSF produced by the choroid plexus passes 
through the ventricular system to exit the fourth 
C
B
C
A
Hemisphere in right
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in right
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in left
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in left
supratentorial
compartment
Falx cerebri
Falx cerebri
Choroid plexus
in atrium
Cerebellum in
infratentorial
compartment
Cerebellum in
infratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in
supratentorial
compartment
Tentorium
cerebelli
Tentorium
cerebelli
Choroid plexus
in atrium
FIGURE 3-7
Axial (A), coronal (B), and sagittal (C) T1-weighted magnetic resonance images showing 
the relations of the falx cerebri (A and B) and the tentorium cerebelli (B and C). Note the 
positions of the right and left supratentorial compartments and the infratentorial compart-
ment in relation to these large dural reflections in all three planes. (Reprinted from Haines, 
D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
54
ventricle through the foramina of Luschka and 
Magendie. At this point, the CSF enters the subarach-
noid space, which is continuous around the brain and 
spinal cord. The CSF in this subarachnoid space pro-
vides the buoyancy necessary to prevent the weight of 
the brain from crushing nerve roots and blood vessels 
against the internal surface of the skull. The weight of 
the brain, approximately 1400 g in air, is reduced to 45 
g when it is suspended in CSF. Consequently, the tethers 
formed by delicate connective tissue strands traversing 
the subarachnoid space, the arachnoid trabeculae (see 
Fig. 3-8), are adequate to maintain the brain in a stable 
position.
The movement of the CSF through the ventricular 
system and the subarachnoid space is influenced by two 
major factors. A subtle pressure gradient exists between 
the points of production of CSF (the choroid plexus 
in the cerebral ventricles) and the points of transfer 
into the venous system (arachnoid villi). Because CSF 
is not compressible, it tends to move along this gradi-
ent. It also moves into the subarachnoid space by purely 
mechanical means, including gentle movements of the 
brain on its arachnoid trabecular tethers during normal 
activities and the pulsations of the numerous arteries 
found in the subarachnoid space.
Blockage of the CSF movement or a failure of the 
absorption mechanism results in the accumulation 
of fluid in the ventricles or around the brain tissue  
(Fig. 3-11). This results in hydrocephalus and is char-
acterized by an increase in CSF volume enlargement of 
one or more of the ventricles, and usually an increase 
in CSF pressure.
Subarachnoid
space
Pia mater
Arachnoid membrane
Arachnoid trabecula
Arachnoid villus
Superior sagittal sinus
Endothelium
Blood
vessel
Dura mater
Cerebral
cortex
FIGURE 3-8
Relation of the brain to the dura, arachnoid, and pia maters. (Redrawn from Bullock, T. H., 
Orkland, R., & Grinnel, A. [1977]. Introduction to the nervous system. San Francisco: W. H. 
Freeman.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
55
Choroid
plexus
Choroid
plexus
Right lateral
ventricle
Left
lateral
ventricle
Foramina
of Monro
(right and left)
3rd ventricle
4th
ventricle
Cerebral
aqueduct
(of Sylvius)
Foramen of Luschka
(left lateral aperture)
Central canal
of the spinal cord
Foramen of Magendie
(median aperture)
FIGURE 3-9
The brain ventricles and the cerebrospinal fluid. This is a transparent view, looking from the 
left side of the brain. The two lateral ventricles communicate with the third ventricle, which 
in turn communicates with the fourth ventricle. (Modified from Boron, W., & Boulpaep, E. 
[2009]. Medical Physiology [2nd ed.]. St. Louis: Elsevier.)
Superior sagittal sinus
Choroid plexus
Interventricular
foramen
Third ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Lateral aperture
(Foramen of Luschka)
Fourth ventricle
Arachnoid mater with arachnoid tubercles
Arachnoid granulation
Subarachnoid space
Meningeal dura mater
Right lateral ventricle
Median aperture
(foramen of Magendie)
Central canal
FIGURE 3-10
CFS circulation.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
56
Corpus callosum
Lateral ventricle
Thalamus
Pons
Corpus callosum
Anterior horn 
Septum pellucidum
Corpus callosum
Corpus callosum
Body of lateral ventricle
Pons
Normal
Hydrocephalus
Interpeduncular fossa
Lateral ventricle:
Body
Area of atrium
A
B
 C
Thalamus
Third ventricle
FIGURE 3-11
Comparison of normal and hydrocephalic brains in sagittal (A), axial (B), and coronal (C) 
planes as seen on magnetic resonance images. (Reprinted from Haines, D. [2006]. Funda-
mental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)
The CSF is important in medical diagnostic proce-
dures. The pressure of the fluid can be measured; if 
it is abnormally high, intracranial tumor, hemorrhage, 
hydrocephalus, meningitis, or encephalitis may be 
suspected. Chemical and cell studies may be made on 
CSF that is drawn out of the nervous system through 
a procedure called a lumbar puncture or spinal tap. 
This route also may be used to inject drugs to combat 
infection or induce anesthesia. Circulation of the CSF 
is illustrated in Figure 3-10.
BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE BRAIN
The blood serves the brain much as food serves the 
body; it nourishes it by supplying its most important 
element, oxygen. The brain uses approximately 20% 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
57
of the blood in the body at any given time and requires 
approximately 25% of the oxygen of the body to func-
tion maximally. Initially blood is delivered to the 
brain through four main arteries. Two large internal 
carotid arteries are on either side of the neck; these 
are a result of bifurcation, or splitting, of the common 
carotid artery from the heart. The other two main 
arteries supplying the brain are the vertebral arteries 
(Fig. 3-12).
Internal Carotid Arteries and Their Branches
The internal carotid arteries ascend in the neck 
and pass through the base of the skull at the carotid 
canal of the temporal bone. Each artery then runs 
horizontally forward and perforates the dura mater. 
After entering the subarachnoid space, the artery 
turns posteriorly and, at the medial end of the lat-
eral sulcus, divides into the anterior and middle cere-
bral arteries. Other cerebral arteries are also given 
off by the internal carotid artery. The ophthalmic 
artery supplies the eye, the frontal area of the scalp, 
the dorsum of the nose, and the ethmoid and fron-
tal sinuses. The posterior communicating artery runs 
posteriorly above the oculomotor nerve and joins the 
posterior cerebral artery, forming part of the circle of 
Willis. The anterior communicating artery joins the 
two anterior cerebral arteries together in the circle of 
Willis (Fig. 3-13).
Through these cortical branches, the internal 
carotid artery provides the blood supply to a large por-
tion of the cerebral hemisphere. The anterior cere-
bral artery supplies the medial surface of the cortex 
as far back as the parietal-temporal-occipital sulcus. 
It also supplies the so-called leg areas of the motor 
strip. Branches of this artery supply a small portion of 
the caudate nucleus, lentiform nucleus, and internal 
Anterior
cerebral
artery
Middle
cerebral
artery
Portion of
temporal 
lobe 
removed
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Vertebral
artery
Internal 
carotid
artery
Basilar
artery
Anterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Anterior
communicating
artery
Posterior
communicating
artery
Basilar artery 
(to pons)
Posterior
cerebral artery
(to midbrain)
FIGURE 3-12
The major arteries of the brain. Ventral view: the enlarge-
ment of the boxed area showing the circle of Willis. (From 
Aitken, L., Marshall, A., & Chaboyer, W. [2012]. ACCCN’s 
Critical Care Nursing [2nd ed.]. Mosby Australia: Sydney.)
Anterior cerebral a.
Middle cerebral a.
Internal carotid a.
Posterior communicating a.
Anterior communicating a.
Posterior cerebral a.
Basilar a.
A
B
FIGURE 3-13
The cerebral arterial circle (circle of Willis; A) The circle of 
Willis. (From Nolte, J. [2010]. Essentials of the Human Brain. 
St. Louis: Mosby.) (B) The large cerebral arteries: anterior, 
middle, and posterior. The area supplied by the anterior 
cerebral artery is green, the area supplied by the middle cer-
ebral artery is pink, and the area supplied by the posterior 
cerebral artery is yellow. (From Lundy-Eckman, L. [2013]. 
Neuroscience [4th ed.]. Saunders: St. Louis.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
58
capsule. Following is a summary of the internal carotid 
artery branches (see Fig. 3-12):
	•	 The ophthalmic artery gives rise to the central artery 
of the retina; damage to this artery (including oph-
thalmic aneurysms) causes ipsilateral visual loss.
	•	 The posterior communicating artery joins the poste-
rior cerebral artery and the anterior choroidal artery 
and follows along the optic tract.
	•	 The anterior cerebral artery passes superiorly over 
the optic chiasm and is joined by its counterpart the 
anterior communicating artery; it supplies blood to 
the hypothalamus and the optic chiasm.
	•	 The middle cerebral artery usually is the larger of 
the two terminal branches of the internal carotid  
artery (Fig. 3-14).
The middle cerebral artery is the largest branch 
of the internal carotid. Its branches supply the entire 
lateral surface of the hemisphere except for the small 
area of the motor strip supplied by the anterior cere-
bral artery, the occipital pole, and the inferolateral 
surface of the hemisphere, which is supplied by the 
posterior cerebral artery. The middle cerebral artery’s 
central branches also provide the primary blood sup-
ply to the lentiform and caudate nuclei and the inter-
nal capsule.
Vertebral Artery and Its Branches
The vertebral artery passes through the foramina in 
the upper six cervical vertebrae and enters the skull 
through the foramen magnum. It passes upward and 
forward along the medulla and at the lower border of 
the pons and joins the vertebral artery from the oppo-
site side to form the basilar artery. Before the formula-
tion of the basilar artery, several branches are given off, 
including the following:
	•	 The meningeal branches, which supply the bone and 
dura of the posterior cranial fossa
	•	 The posterior spinal artery, which supplies the poste-
rior third of the spinal cord
	•	 The anterior spinal artery, which supplies the ante-
rior two thirds of the spinal cord
	•	 The posterior inferior cerebellar artery, which sup-
plies part of the cerebellum, the medulla, and the 
choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle
	•	 The medullary arteries, which are distributed to the 
medulla
After the basilar artery is formed by the union of the 
opposite vertebral arteries, it ascends and then divides 
at the upper border of the pons into the two posterior 
cerebral arteries. These arteries supply the inferolateral 
surface of the temporal lobe and the lateral and medial 
surfaces of the occipital lobe (i.e., the visual cortex). 
They also supply parts of the thalamus and other inter-
nal structures (see Fig. 3-13).
Other branches of the basilar artery include the fol-
lowing (see Fig. 3-12):
	•	 The pontine arteries, which enter the pons
	•	 The labyrinthine artery, which supplies the internal  
ear
	•	 The anterior inferior cerebellar artery, which supplies 
the anterior and inferior parts of the cerebellum
	•	 The superior cerebellar artery, which supplies the  
superior portion of the cerebellum
Circle of Willis
The circle of Willis, or the circulus arteriosus, is formed 
by the anastomosis of the two internal carotid arteries 
with the two vertebral arteries. The anterior commu-
nicating, anterior cerebral, internal carotid, posterior 
communicating, posterior cerebral, and basilar arteries 
are all part of the circle of Willis (see Fig. 3-13). This 
formation of arteries allows distribution of the blood 
entering from the internal carotid artery or vertebral 
artery to any part of both hemispheres. Cortical and 
central branches arise from the circle and further sup-
ply the brain.
The bloodstreams from the internal carotid artery 
and vertebral artery on both sides come together at a 
certain point in the posterior communicating artery. 
At that point the pressure is equal, and they do not 
mix. Should, however, the internal carotid artery or 
the vertebral artery be occluded or blocked, the blood 
will pass forward or backward across that point to 
compensate for the reduced flow. The circle of Wil-
lis also allows blood to flow across the midline of the 
brain if an artery on one side is occluded. The circle 
of Willis thereby serves a safety valve function for the 
brain, allowing collateral circulation (or flow of blood 
through an alternate route) to take place if the flow is 
reduced to one area. The state of a person’s collateral 
circulation helps determine the outcome after a vas-
cular insult, such as a stroke, occurs and affects blood 
flow to the brain.
FIGURE 3-14
Middle cerebral artery. (From Kenyon, K., & Kenyon, J. [2010]. 
The Physiotherapist’s Pocket Book [2nd ed.]. St. Louis.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
59
General Principles of Neurologic 
Organization
Certain fundamental principles of neurologic organiza-
tion are particularly crucial to the understanding and 
diagnosis of communication disorders. The following 
principles will also be built on in later chapters.
CONTRALATERAL MOTOR CONTROL
The first principle to remember is that major move-
ment patterns in human beings have contralateral 
neurologic control in the brain. The arms and legs 
are represented in the motor strip of the cerebral 
cortex in a contralateral fashion. In other words, the 
cerebral hemisphere on one side of the body controls 
movements of the arm and leg on the other side of 
the body. This contralateral motor control is brought 
about by the crossing of the major voluntary motor 
pathway at the level of the lower brainstem. Auditory 
and visual sensory systems also have some contralat-
eral organization, a fact that will become clinically 
important (see Chapters 5 and 6). The cranial nerves, 
as discussed subsequently, have mixed control so that 
you have to know which cranial nerve and/or muscle 
group considered in order to know the innervation 
pattern.
If a patient sent to the speech-language pathologist 
has a severe language disorder and some paralysis of 
the right arm and leg, these symptoms suggest that the 
brain lesion causing this motor deficit is probably in 
the left cerebral hemisphere (Fig. 3-15). The severe 
language disturbance accompanying the right limb 
paralysis serves as a confirming sign of left-sided brain 
lesion because in the majority of the population lan-
guage dominance is located in the left hemisphere. 
Why the nervous system provides contralateral motor 
control of the limbs is not completely known, but the 
fact illustrates that knowledge of principles of neuro-
logic organization can be used to posit the location 
of causative lesions seen in neurology and speech 
pathology.
IPSILATERAL MOTOR CONTROL
If a lesion occurs in the nervous system below the cross-
ing of the major descending motor pathways, the effect 
is observed below the level of the lesion on the same 
side of the body where the lesion occurs. In many spinal 
cord injuries, paralysis and sensory loss occur below the 
point of injury. Thus a second important principle is to 
determine whether effects of lesions are ipsilateral or 
contralateral. An illustration of how the tongue might 
deviate ipsilateral to a lesion is shown in Figure 3-16. In 
this figure, the tongue is paralyzed on the left side from 
surgery to remove a lymph node from the left side of 
the neck, resulting in damage to the ipsilateral hypo-
glossal nerve fibers.
BILATERAL SPEECH MOTOR CONTROL
For the most part, the midline muscles of the body 
in the head, neck, and trunk tend to be represented 
bilaterally, and the nerve fibers supplying these 
regions, with certain exceptions, descend from both 
cerebral hemispheres. This bilateral neural control 
provides smooth, symmetric movement for those 
muscles used in speaking: the lips, tongue, soft pal-
ate, jaw, abdominal muscles, and diaphragm. The 
principle of bilateral control of speech muscles sug-
gests that serious involvement of the speech muscles 
usually results from diseases that affect bilateral neu-
rologic mechanisms. With unilateral damage to the 
nervous system, effects on speech are generally less 
serious, and compensatory mechanisms are made 
available from the other side of the midline speech 
system.
Patient’s left
Patient’s right
FIGURE 3-15
Patient with a lesion of the internal capsule on the left 
side. This man exhibits a right hemiparesis, drooping of 
the lower part of the face on the right, and slight turning 
of the head to the left (weak left sternocleidomastoid 
muscle).

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
60
Representation of the body is found in an inverted 
fashion on the motor areas of the cerebral cortex. Path-
ways concerned with movements of the lower limbs 
originate in the upper parts of the motor strip, whereas 
movements of the head and neck originate at the lower 
end of the motor strip, just above the sylvian fissure. 
The area surrounding the left sylvian fissure contains 
major areas for language processing. The anatomic 
relations of motor speech areas and language suggest 
that speech and language disturbances may commonly 
coexist because of the close proximity of their control 
areas on the cortex.
An example of bilateral damage effects of motor 
speech lesions may be seen in spastic dysarthria. When 
damage to the upper motor neurons occurs, spasticity 
results. With spasticity, affected muscles (in this case, 
those dealing with articulation, respiration, and pho-
nation) show an increased resistance to passive move-
ments or movement manipulation. The more rapidly 
the individual tries to move the articulators (or even 
an upper or lower extremity, as in cerebral palsy) the 
greater is the resistance to the movement. In spastic dys-
arthria, bilateral damage to the upper motor neurons 
usually is caused by stroke, head trauma, or a degen-
erative disease (see Chapter 8). The bilateral damage 
is within both direct activation pathways (corticobulbar 
and corticospinal tracts) and indirect pathways (extra-
pyramidal tract).
UNILATERAL LANGUAGE MECHANISMS
An impressive facet of cerebral asymmetry is that 
language mechanisms, for the most part, are unilat-
erally controlled in the brain, in contrast to the bilat-
eral speech muscle mechanism. Handedness usually 
appears between 18 and 48 months of age. Among 
the adult population, more than 95% of right-handed 
people have their language mechanisms in the left 
cerebral hemisphere. Language dominance the 
world over is primarily in the left brain. Left-handed 
people are more variable. Some are right brained for 
language; others have bilateral representation of lan-
guage. Figure 3-17 illustrates the left hemisphere and 
its relation to the motor and sensory (receptive) lan-
guage areas. The obvious clinical principle suggested 
by these facts is that major language disturbance is a 
neurologic sign of left cerebral injury and that the 
left hemisphere has special anatomic properties for 
language.
A
B
FIGURE 3-16
Paralysis of the tongue on the left side. Removal of a lymph 
node from the left side of the neck (A, arrow) inadvertently 
resulted in damage to peripheral fibers of the hypoglossal 
nerve on that side. The tongue deviates to the left (side of 
the lesion) on protrusion (B). (Reprinted from Haines, D. 
[2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone.)
Sensory language
area (Wernicke’s
area)
Broca’s motor
speech area
FIGURE 3-17
Motor and sensory language areas. (Reprinted from Castro, 
A., Merchut, M. P., Neafsey, E. J., & Wurster, R. D. [2002]. 
Neuroscience: An outline approach. Philadelphia: Mosby.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
61
SCHEME OF CORTICAL ORGANIZATION
Students and clinicians should have in mind a general 
scheme of organization of the cortex because it is the 
site of most language functions. Although any such 
scheme is oversimplified and exaggerated, it neverthe-
less provides a crude but workable framework for con-
ceptualizing functional localization. Later chapters in 
this text detail the specifics of cortical localization.
The right and left hemispheres may be designated as 
nonverbal and verbal, and the anterior and posterior por-
tions may be characterized as motor and sensory areas. 
The central sulcus divides the cerebral hemispheres into 
anterior and posterior regions. Figure 3-18 provides a 
lateral view of the cerebral hemisphere, showing lobes 
and the sensory and motor cortices. In human beings, 
approximately half of the volume of the cerebral cortex 
is taken up by the frontal cortex. The frontal lobe con-
tains the primary motor cortex, the premotor cortex, 
and Broca’s area, the primary motor speech associa-
tion area. In the anterior portion of the frontal lobes 
are the prefrontal areas, which are generally concerned 
with behavioral control of both cognitive and emotional 
functions.
Castro et al.5 described lesions in the prefrontal cor-
tex that may produce an “internal agnosia or the inabil-
ity to communicate with one’s limbic system as though 
suffering from an impairment of the ‘sixth sense’ that 
distinguishes appropriate from inappropriate behaviors 
and right from wrong.” Mental shifts become difficult, 
and perseveration and rigidity are observed, as are a 
lack of self-awareness and a tendency toward concrete-
ness. In brief, the frontal lobe appears to excel in the 
control, integration, and regulation of emotional and 
cognitive behavior. Cortical areas of the left hemisphere 
that mediate the processing of language are shown in 
Figure 3-19. Lesions in the inferior frontal lobe may 
result in Broca’s, or expressive, aphasia, whereas dam-
age to the angular gyrus, the supramarginal gyrus, and 
the superior temporal gyrus may result in Wernicke’s, 
or receptive, aphasia.
In contrast, the posterior cortex appears to domi-
nate the control, integration, and regulation of sensory 
behavior. The defects arising from the posterior cor-
tex are related to the specific sensory association areas 
implicated by a lesion.
The occipital lobe, as previously noted, contains the 
primary visual cortex and visual association areas. Defi-
cits in the primary cortex result in blind spots in the 
visual field, and total destruction of the cortex produces 
Primary
somatosensory
cortex
Primary
visual
cortex
Primary
auditory
cortex
Sylvian fissure
Central sulcus
Primary
motor
cortex
Temporal
lobe
Occipital
lobe
Parietal
lobe
Frontal
lobe
FIGURE 3-18
Lateral view of the cerebral hemisphere. Dashed lines de-
marcate major lobes. (Reprinted from Castro, A., Merchut, 
M. P., Neafsey, E. J., & Wurster, R. D. [2002]. Neuroscience: 
An outline approach. Philadelphia: Mosby.)
Supramarginal gyrus
Angular gyrus
Superior temporal gyrus
Pars orbitalis
Pars triangularis
Precentral gyrus
FIGURE 3-19
Cortical areas that mediate the processing of language. Lesions in the pars orbitalis and 
pars triangularis of the inferior frontal lobe result in Broca’s aphasia, whereas damage in 
the supramarginal and angular gyri and adjacent superior temporal gyrus results in Wer-
nicke’s aphasia.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
62
complete blindness. Visual imperception and agnosias 
(see Chapter 5) are associated with the visual associa-
tion areas.
The left parietal lobe is associated with construc-
tional disturbances and visuospatial defects. Disor-
ders of recognition, called agnosias, are common. 
The inferior parietal lobe is concerned with language 
association tasks, and lesions there cause defects in 
reading and writing. Contralateral neglect is associ-
ated with hemispheric lesions of the nondominant 
parietal association cortex. Such patients usually 
neglect stimuli on their left, as illustrated in Figure 
3-20. In extreme cases the patient does not recog-
nize the left side of his or her own body, a condition 
termed asomatognosia. An example is when a patient 
has a left neglect and ignores the left side when get-
ting dressed or grooming.
The temporal lobe on the left is concerned with 
hearing and related functions. It contains the primary 
auditory and auditory association areas. Auditory 
memory storage and complex auditory perception are 
among the functions of the temporal lobe. An area 
known as the speech zone surrounds the sylvian fissure 
and appears to contain the major components of the 
language mechanism. Damage in the speech zone pro-
duces Wernicke’s aphasia (see Fig. 3-19).
With a clinical knowledge of primary sensory and 
related association areas and behavioral correlates to 
these areas, the speech-language pathologist is able 
to infer the approximate location of a lesion from the 














 










 





Patient's copy
Doctor's version
The cat ran up the tree to catch a
squirrel for his lunch. The squirrel
was smart and ran out to the end of
a thin branch.  The branch broke, but
the cat landed on his feet. No fat
squirrel for lunch today, No sir!
A
C
D
B
FIGURE 3-20
Signs (A to D) of damage to the nondominant parietal association cortex. (Reprinted from 
Haines, D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
63
patient’s behavioral symptoms and to recognize the 
well-known speech-language syndromes associated with 
cortical dysfunction. The general clinical principle is 
that specific cortical deficits can be associated with spe-
cific behavioral syndromes. A major exception to this is 
difficulty with word-finding or naming which is typically 
a non-localizable symptom.
Neurodiagnostic Studies in Speech 
and Language
The structures of the brain believed to be critical for 
speech and language function have been established 
by what is called the clinicopathologic method in neu-
rology. Developed into a powerful technique by the 
great French neurologist Jean Charcot, this method 
establishes a relation between the site of a lesion and 
the behavioral functions that are lost or modified. 
The underlying assumption is that the area of lesion is 
related to the lost or disordered function. This simple 
logic is important in clinical neurology; it forms the 
basis of neurologic diagnosis and is the foundation of 
the historically traditional neurologic examination. 
Some of these neurobehavioral signs have been dis-
cussed in Chapter 2 and in this chapter.
Fortunately for the evolution of medical science 
and clinical treatment, the field of neurology has been 
advanced through the years by technology that has 
vastly clarified the actual sites of lesions and made diag-
noses more valid and reliable, now through relatively 
noninvasive means. Objective neurodiagnostic tests, 
such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI), electroencephalography (EEG), 
and evoked related potentials (ERPs) as well as other 
clinical neurodiagnostic tests, have established the 
value of the clinicopathologic method in medicine yet 
dramatically enhanced the identification and treatment 
of neurologic disorders, including those which impact 
communication. Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) 
are expected to be somewhat familiar with these types 
of studies and use the reported information (if avail-
able) to plan diagnostic and treatment procedures. Use 
of the information provided by these studies can also 
help the SLP to identify inconsistencies between the 
behaviorally based diagnostic findings and the findings 
of the reported study. Speech and language function is 
quite vulnerable to neurologic changes; the results of 
the imaging or electrophysiologic study may not be con-
sistent, perhaps warranting more exploration by one or 
both. Therefore, as we come to the end of our overview 
of the communicative nervous system, a brief discussion 
of some of the more commonly used neurodiagnostic 
methodologies that the SLP might find reported in 
the medical record or research articles seems fitting to 
include at this point.
STATIC BRAIN IMAGING
CT and MRI were the foundation tools of early neuro-
logic imaging, permitting study of the structure of the 
human brain with a degree of detail that is occasion-
ally comparable with the detail revealed by postmortem 
examination. In fact, MRI, which generates fine cross 
sections of brain structure without penetrating radia-
tion, may even go beyond postmortem examination 
because it allows views of multiple slices of the brain.
The CT scan yields a three-dimensional representa-
tion of the brain (Fig. 3-21), unlike the conventional 
radiograph, which provides a two-dimensional projec-
tion of a three-dimensional object. On a radiograph, 
the body appears on x-ray films as overlapping struc-
tures that are sometimes difficult to distinguish. The 
CT scanner uses an x-ray beam that is passed through 
the brain from one side of the head, and the radiation 
not absorbed by the intervening tissue is absorbed by a 
series of detectors revolving around the subject’s head. 
The data from the radiation detectors allow a calcula-
tion of the density of tissue in a particular slice of brain. 
A computer then reconstructs a two-dimensional cross-
sectional picture of the brain observed by the camera. 
Several cross sections may be printed corresponding to 
different planes through the head. Contrast substances 
are sometimes injected in the patient to increase the 
density of damaged tissue. This enhancement tech-
nique allows clearer visualization and more accurate 
diagnosis. Spiral CT, in which the x-ray tube rotates 
continuously around the patients while the table moves, 
was developed in the early 1990s along with a computa-
tional method that would eliminate the motion artifact 
this introduced. Spiral CT allowed much more flexible 
and rapid study. Because CT studies are quicker and 
less expensive to perform than MRI, the technology is 
more widely available in general medical settings. CT 
is frequently used in the emergency department and 
other acute settings. It is more sensitive to skull fracture 
and can detect the presence of foreign bodies, such as 
glass and metal, that are radiopaque. It can reveal the 
presence of blood in the linings and parenchyma of 
the brain and, therefore, is the first study of choice in a 
vascular event of unknown etiology so that hemorrhage 
could be ruled out first. Because MRI uses a magnetic 
field, CT is the study that would be chosen for patients 
with pacemakers, defibrillators, and other such devices.
MRI, probably the most widely used diagnostic imag-
ing technique in neurology, generates cross-sectional 
images by using radio waves, a strong magnetic field, 
and gradient coils to detect the distribution of water 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
64
C
D
B
A
Blood
FIGURE 3-21
Computed tomography (CT) scans of a 2-month-old infant with shaken baby syndrome 
(A and B) and magnetic resonance (MR) images of a normal 20-year-old woman (C and 
D). On the CT study, note that the brain detail is less than on the MR images but that the 
presence of blood (A, in the interhemispheric fissure between the hemisphere and the 
brain substance) is obvious. In the same patient, the bone window (B) clearly illustrates 
the outline of the skull but also clearly shows skull fractures (arrows in A and B). In this 
infant, the ventricles on the left are largely compressed, and the gyri have largely disap-
peared because of pressure from bleeding into the hemisphere. The pressure results in the 
effacement of the sulci and gyri on the left side. In the T2-weighted image (C), cerebro-
spinal fluid is white, internal brain structures are seen in excellent detail, and vessels are 
obvious. In the T1-weighted image (D), cerebrospinal fluid is dark and internal structures 
of the brain are somewhat less obvious. (Reprinted from Haines, D. [2006]. Fundamental 
neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
65
molecules in living tissue (Figs. 3-22 and 3-23). The 
technique allows accurate assessment of brain tissue 
densities, and an excellent pictorial image can be gen-
erated by the computer. The explanation of the tech-
nology is beyond the scope of this text but it is helpful 
to know what “tissue weighting,” which you will see as 
T1, T2, or proton density (PDW), does for an image. 
These parameters determine the contrast between tis-
sues, allowing certain tissues to be more easily seen in 
an image. A T1-weighted image highlights tissues such 
A
B
CC
DD
A
Coronal 
view
B
D
Axial view
C
Posteri
or (d
ors
al)
 
Anterio
r (ve
ntra
l) 
P
o
s
t
e
r
i
A
n
t
e
r
i
o
FIGURE 3-22
The relation of imaging planes to the brain. The diagram shows the usual orientation of a 
patient in an MRI machine and the planes of the four scans (T1-weighted images) that are 
shown. A and B, Coronal scans; C and D, axial scans. (Reprinted from Haines, D. [2006]. 
Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
66
as fat (like white matter) and proteins, whereas CSF will 
appear dark. A T2-weighted image makes CSF lighter 
and fat appears darker, which may make this weighting 
more useful for identifying pathologies. If the contrast 
between these T1 tissues and CSF is not what is of inter-
est, a PDW will be used, which will highlight differences 
in the proton densities of the two tissues with the denser 
tissue emphasized in the image and gray matter appear-
ing brighter than white matter.12
Generally, MRI is more sensitive to abnormalities 
than CT. However, it is significantly more expensive to 
generate the image. Damasio and Damasio7 pointed 
out that the analysis of CT and MRI images is sometimes 
difficult in that the number of brain slices provided 
for viewing may vary from institution to institution 
and from patient to patient. The number of slices may 
even vary in the same patient as scanning devices are 
improved over time.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is another way of 
enhancing the usefulness of MRI in some cases. DWI 
allows the imaging of molecular motion or diffusion 
of water protons within tissue. DWI which highlights 
reduced diffusion has been found to be very useful to 
rapidly identify acute cerebral ischemia or loss of blood 
flow to an area. MRI study using DWI can be positive for 
reduced diffusion in these cases as early as 30 minutes 
after onset.12 Figure 3-24 shows the usefulness of DWI 
in identifying axonal shearing which has been typically 
difficult to verify in traumatic injury.
Another advance in imaging to better see the white 
and gray matter in the brain is through voxel-based 
morphometry (VBM). This is primarily a research tool 
in which statistical methods originally applied to posi-
tron emission tomography (PET) scans are used on 
MRI scans. A voxel is the basic unit of computed tomog-
raphy measurement, and the term comes from a combi-
nation of the words volume and pixel. It is essentially an 
imaged “slab” of tissue that has been divided into small 
volume elements called voxels with each voxel having 
an x, y, and z dimension on which statistical and other 
manipulations can be studied.1 VBM has been used to 
study changes in gray matter volume in normal develop-
ment, aging, and disease.16 It also has been employed 
in anatomic studies of speech and language disorders.15 
Comparing the images of MRI, functional MRI (fMRI), 
and VBM has made it possible for advances in VBM for 
future research and clinical assessment.
DYNAMIC OR FUNCTIONAL  
BRAIN IMAGING
CT and MRI are unable to detect certain forms of 
cellular and subcellular brain pathology directly. 
Dynamic neuroimaging procedures that use emission 
tomography (PET and single-photon emission com-
puted tomography [SPECT]) are helpful in cases in 
which imaging of brain structures alone is not deci-
sive. For instance, in some cases of early dementia, 
CT and MRI scans appear normal, but language and 
neuropsychological testing reveals serious cerebral 
dysfunction.
Functional MRI (fMRI) uses an MRI scanner to mea-
sure regional blood flow, cerebral blood volume, and 
the change in blood oxygenation. fMRI study results in 
inferences about the location of brain activity. The most 
common fMRI study is a BOLD study, which stands 
for blood oxygenation level–dependent contrast. This study 
tracks the hemodynamic response to neural activity. 
This means that changes in blood flow and blood oxy-
genation are traced. fMRI has begun to be a popular 
technology for research by SLPs in collaboration with 
neurology and radiology. Brain activity in such areas 
as acquired language disorders, autism, and other 
communication disorders have been investigated with 
BOLD MRI.6,8,10
A
B
Frontal
Frontal
Occipital
Occipital
FIGURE 3-23
MRI of the brain in the median sagittal plane (A) and in the 
sagittal plane but off the midline (B). The frontal lobe is to 
the left, and the occipital lobe is to the right. (Reprinted 
from Haines, D. [2006]. Fundamental neuroscience [3rd ed.]. 
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone.)

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
67
Positron emission tomograpy (PET) is a visual tech-
nique in which the subject is given a radioactively labeled 
form of glucose, which is metabolized by the brain. 
The radioactivity is later recorded by a special detec-
tor. Unlike CT and MRI scans, a PET scan measures 
metabolic activity in different brain areas. More active 
areas metabolize more glucose, focusing more radioac-
tivity in these areas. Thus regional three-dimensional 
quantification of glucose and oxygen metabolism or 
blood flow in the human brain is achieved. This tech-
nique is advantageous in that glucose metabolism is a 
more direct measure of the function of neural tissue 
than is cerebral blood flow, particularly in patients 
whose regulatory vascular mechanisms are affected by 
cerebral injury or disease. PET scan studies have been 
used to research higher mental functions during differ-
ent cognitive and language tasks and appear to offer an 
excellent tool for the study of language in the human 
brain. This technology is expensive because it requires 
a cyclotron or atomic accelerator. Because of the color 
limitations of this text, an example PET scan cannot be 
displayed, but many can be found through a search of 
web images. One interesting example is found from the 
Berkeley Labs site (www.lbl.gov).
Single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) uses the mechanism of CT scan reconstruc-
tion, but instead of detecting x-rays, the instrument 
detects single photons emitted from an external tracer. 
Radioactive compounds that emit gamma rays are 
injected into the subject. As these biochemicals reach 
the brain, emissions are picked up that are converted 
into patterns of metabolism or blood flow in three-
dimensional cross sections of the brain. SPECT has 
somewhat better temporal resolution than PET but its 
spatial resolution is less than PET or MRI and it is more 
invasive. The equipment is less expensive because a 
cyclotron is not required and it therefore may be used 
at small medical centers.
MEASURES OF NEURAL CONNECTIVITY
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is the preferred method 
used to study white matter as is VBM for gray matter. DTI 
is a recently developed technique that is an extended 
version of DWI. It can measure neuronal activity and, 
in particular, the white matter neuronal cell networks 
(including the directionality of the actual tracts). Diffu-
sion of water can be described as isotropic which means 
that diffusion occurs in the same degree in all directions 
or anisotropic, meaning that diffusion pattern is depen-
dent on the direction being viewed. Because diffusion 
of water molecules occurs in the brain much more eas-
ily along lines that are parallel to axon bundles rather 
than perpendicular to them, the diffusion is anisotro-
pic. Therefore this diffusion in the brain tissue has to 
be assessed in multiple directions with the resulting 
images then combined into an isotropic map, imaging 
the integrity of white matter tracts. DTI considers three 
factors in constructing the final image. One of these 
A
B
FIGURE 3-24
Axonal shearing injury.  A, Axial T2-weighted image shows 
a subtle area of reduced diffusion within the right parame-
dian corpus callosum (arrow). B, Axial diffusion-weighted 
image more clearly demonstrates abnormal reduced diffu-
sion within the callosal lesion (arrow). (From Nadich, T.P., 
Krayenbuhl, N., Kollias, S., et al. [2013]. White Matter. In 
T.P. Nadich, M. Castillo, S. Cha, & Smirniotopoulos (Eds.), 
Imaging of the brain, Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
68
factors is the fractional anisotropy (FA); this results in 
essentially a gray scale representing the degree of varia-
tion of fiber direction at any point. The other two fac-
tors considered are (1) the mean diffusivity (MD), or 
overall displacement of the molecules in that voxel, 
and (2) the direction of greatest water mobility or the 
principal eigenvector (PE). FA values have been estab-
lished for the normal brain, which will allow differentia-
tion between gray and white matter. Intensity (FA) and 
directionality (PE) data can be combined into spectacu-
lar images called DTI color maps. In these maps, red 
signifies diffusion in a left-right direction, blue predom-
inantly in a superior-inferior direction, and green repre-
sents diffusion in the anterior-posterior plane. Diffusion 
tensor tractography uses the data from DTI to construct 
a 3-D image of axon bundles. The Human Connectome 
Project is a large, National Institutes of Health–funded 
research project to map the human brain. Breathtaking 
images made from DTI studies can be found at the proj-
ect’s website gallery.18
A promising recent functional imaging technique 
that has been put to use both clinically and in research 
protocols is that of optical imaging, which uses the 
technology called near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)14 
to assess response to brain activation. It is similar to 
fMRI in its objective, but unlike fMRI, which measures 
changes in deoxygenated hemoglobin, NIRS can moni-
tor changes in deoxygenated and oxygenated hemo-
globin plus changes in localized blood volume. Optical 
imaging is based on measuring the light absorption of 
different tissue properties through use of various infra-
red sources and detectors. It is noninvasive and can be 
done during motor, sensory, and cognitive tasks. Zeller 
et al.17 used optical imaging in a visual-spatial task with 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease and found decreased 
activation in the parietal lobe compared with control 
subjects.
MEASURES OF TIMING OF NEURAL 
ACTIVITY
It is well known that neurons emit small currents of elec-
trical activity. In 1924 Hans Berger developed the first 
method to capture this activity. Other methods evolved 
from his early invention of the electroencephalogram 
(EEG).
Electroencephalography
An older diagnostic technique, electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG), has been used for decades to diagnose 
lesions of the brain and help clarify their nature. EEG 
measures voltage fluctuations resulting from ionic cur-
rents between neurons in the brain. It measures these 
changes with the use of noninvasive scalp electrodes. 
EEG is used to study seizure activity and diagnose epi-
lepsy and its subtypes. The temporal resolution of EEG 
is excellent, but the limitation is that it is not correlated 
with any specific brain activity.
Another current use of EEG technology is the pre-
diction of outcomes from patients with coma-related 
injuries. According to Boccagni and colleagues,3 stan-
dard EEG has been proven to be a predictor of recovery 
of cognitive functioning in patients after coma caused 
by cerebral anoxia.
Evoked Potentials
Measurement of evoked potentials is a derivative of 
EEG. Rather than measuring spontaneous potentials 
detected from nervous system activity, this study reveals 
specific electrical potentials evoked and time-locked to 
the presentation of a known stimulus. The stimuli used 
are usually sensory (visual, auditory, somatosensory). If 
a stimulus is repeated enough times and each repeti-
tion produces a circumscribed electrical response, com-
puter averaging can establish the onset of a response 
and its termination. Measurement called event-related 
potentials (ERPs) involves using an averaging computer 
to separate the electrical activity surrounding more 
complex processing events from the ongoing electrical 
background activity of the brain. It may be a response to 
internal or external stimulation of the nervous system. 
ERPs are often used in cognitive research. Although 
this technique has been used widely by some speech 
and psychological researchers, it is not without prob-
lems.4 Both its validity and reliability can be questioned. 
Whether an electrical potential that occurs after a stim-
ulus is of cerebral origin or is brought about by a motor 
act is not always certain. When a language stimulus 
evokes a cerebral potential, brain activity is not always 
present, and the absence of an electrical potential to a 
language stimulus does not mean no electrical activity 
occurred. Many electrical currents simply do not reach 
the surface electrodes; some are too small and erratic. 
In addition, the waveforms derived from stimulation 
are highly complex; therefore determining which sec-
tion of the waveform that was generated in response 
to the language stimulus has psychological meaning is 
sometimes difficult.
Despite these limitations, event-related potential has 
the capacity to measure events in the brain millisecond 
by millisecond. A research paradigm frequently used 
in language studies yields a readiness potential. The 
subject is asked to repeat a word or phrase or speak 
freely with pauses of 3 or 4 seconds between portions 
of an utterance. The continuous EEG recording that 
precedes the onset of speech is analyzed by averaging 
waveforms across several utterances to discover what is 
termed the readiness potential.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
69
Audiology has made good use of evoked potentials 
with a study known as an auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) or brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER). 
For this study, electrodes are placed on the scalp and 
electrical activity is recorded in response to click stim-
uli. The recordings from an ABR are displayed in verti-
cal waves and waves I through V can be used to evaluate 
the integrity of the brainstem’s response following the 
response from the cranial nerve to the upper brainstem.
Magnetoencephalography
Those electrical currents inside the head also produce 
magnetic field oscillations around active neurons. The 
strength and orientation of these magnetic fields can 
be detected from above the scalp by use of a magnetom-
eter (MEG), which marks spontaneous or event-related 
activity (event-related magnetic fields or ERFs). The 
MEG locates the sources of the neural activity and the 
locations are superimposed on anatomic images such 
as MRI. MEG has been used to map the brain prior to 
surgical intervention, such as for epilepsy, and can be a 
useful research tool for mapping language.9
VASCULAR IMAGING
Noncontrast CT, contrast-enhanced CT, and MRI are the 
most frequently used studies at this time to identify the 
presence and extent of vascular infarction or disease. 
For the acute stroke, the most important task of the phy-
sician is to exclude hemorrhage. Hemorrhage would be 
a contraindication to any procedure introducing blood 
thinners or to the use of thrombolytic drugs or “clot bust-
ers” to perfuse an area of the brain deprived of blood 
flow by the presence of a thrombus or an embolus. The 
noncontrast CT is the most frequently used study for this 
purpose if the patient is seen early in the progression of 
the stroke. If it is available and there are no contraindi-
cations MRI is somewhat superior to CT for the acute-
stage studies. Contrast-enhanced CT presents more risk 
to the patient but may better identify lesions.
It may be important for the physician to know the 
patency of the vascular system of a patient with suspected 
neurologic disease or injury. Once it is determined by a 
functional study that there is reduced blood flow to an 
area, it will be necessary to determine where the vascu-
lar perfusion has been interrupted or which vasculature 
is at risk of future occlusion, hemorrhage, or spasm.
TRANSCRANIAL DOPPLER
A transcranial Doppler study is a noninvasive procedure 
done by passing inaudible low frequency sound waves 
to the base of the brain. This is done by placing the 
probes over areas where thin bones are located: above 
the cheekbone, beneath the jaw, at the orbit of the eyes, 
or at the back of the head. It depends on where the best 
signal is found. The Doppler analyzes reflected sound 
waves coming from the major blood vessels. It can reveal 
disruption of blood flow and identify the affected ves-
sels. Doppler studies of the carotid arteries are often 
done after a transient ischemic attack (TIA) to assess the 
patency of the major vessel from the heart to the brain.
CEREBRAL ANGIOGRAPHY AND 
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ANGIOGRAPHY
Conventional cerebral angiography is an invasive proce-
dure because it involves the injection of a contrast media 
into the carotid artery. Once this dye is injected, a radio-
graphic study is done while it works its way through the 
circulation paths of the brain, providing a radiographic 
picture of the vascular distribution to the brain. The 
risks of this procedure, especially in the acute stages of 
possible vascular compromise, are obvious. A plaque on 
the wall on the artery could be dislodged by the cath-
eter carrying the dye resulting in an embolism, causing 
further deprivation of blood to the brain. In addition, 
allergic reaction to the contrast is possible. Therefore 
conventional angiography is used now only in selected 
patients and has been replaced, especially in the case 
of cerebrovascular accident, with magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA).2
SUMMARY OF NEUROIMAGING
As pointed out in the beginning of this section, it is clin-
ically useful for the practicing SLP to have knowledge 
of different types of neuroimaging studies that may be 
used by the physicians in the care of their patient. This 
familiarity will also be quite useful in reading research 
in speech-language pathology and audiology. Increas-
ing collaboration is seen between SLPs and medical 
researchers using the various neuroimaging methods 
to understand normal brain function underlying com-
munication and to identify brain differences related to 
acquired or developmental problems with communi-
cation. In addition to the techniques discussed in this 
section, additional neuroimaging methods are briefly 
described in Box 3-2.
OVERVIEW OF THE HUMAN 
COMMUNICATION NERVOUS SYSTEM
The organization of the human communication ner-
vous system is fundamental to understand and recall. 
In the first three chapters of this text, you have been 
introduced to the history of the interaction between 
neurology and speech-language pathology, to structural 

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
70
anatomy and functionality of the main components 
of the central and peripheral nervous systems, and to 
some typical methods of imaging those structures in 
static images and in functional studies. From this point 
on, we further explore various aspects of this complex 
nervous system of ours. We will look at how neurons 
communicate with each other, briefly explore sensory 
systems intimately involved in communication (touch 
and vision), and then, in more depth, explore the struc-
tures and their function that are primarily responsible 
for our miraculous ability to hear, speak, and process 
information in order to communicate with each other 
efficiently and effectively. The outline in Appendix 3-1 
is a summary figure of the levels and an outline of the 
most important structures of the CNS. You may wish 
to quiz yourself at this point and, if necessary, review 
the preliminary information from this and the previ-
ous chapter on these structures. We go into more depth 
about them and the disorders associated with break-
down in their various systems in later chapters, and at 
times you will be reminded to review some of the infor-
mation in these chapters.
Type
Description
Magnetic resonance microscopy
Uses high-field scanners and specific scanning technique to display information 
about internal composition of the cortex: Differing thickness of the cortical layers, 
definition of the layers (agranular vs. granular), variation in myelination of regions 
of brain.
CT perfusion (CTP)
Computed tomography study using intervenous injection of a contrast agent, 
cinefluoroscopy, and rapid temporal sampling methodology. Higher spatial reso-
lution than MRP but limited by spatial issues.
Magnetic resonance perfusion  
(MRP)
MR study using a paramagnetic contrast agent (gadolinium). Yields information 
about vascularity of a region of interest. Vulnerable to patient motion and leakage 
across blood-brain barrier.
Arterial spin labeling (ASL)
A noninvasive MRI study quantifying CBF without the use of an exogenous agent. 
Uses “tagging” of endogenous arterial spinning through a complicated post-study 
comparison technique. Study largely limited to large research centers at present.
Magnetization transfer imaging
MRI technique sensitive to the exchange of magnetization between a liquid pool of 
free protons and a semi-solid pool of restricted protons. A magnetization transfer 
ratio (MTR) will quantify transfer between free and restricted water molecules. Used 
to study white matter and gray matter. Has been found to be useful in studies of 
patients with multiple sclerosis and other progressive diseases where brain tissue may 
appear normal in other studies.
	
BOX 3-2   
Additional Neuroimaging Technologies
Synopsis of Clinical Information or Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The CNS is the controlling influence for the human 
communication nervous system.
	•	 The PNS is composed of the cranial nerves, periph-
eral nerves, and peripheral parts of the autonomic 
nervous system.
	•	 Mixed nerves carry both sensory and motor fibers.
	•	 Sensory and motor nerves exit at the intervertebral 
foramina.
	•	 Roots unite to form a spinal nerve, whereas sensory 
and motor fibers mix.
	•	 A lesion is a damaged area in the brain.
	•	 Injury at the cervical cord (C1-C8) could affect 
speech production because of respiratory  
weakness.
	•	 Cranial nerves have some relation to the speech, 
language, and hearing process.
	•	 Seven of the 12 cranial nerves are directly related 
to speech production.
	•	 Cranial nerves are unprotected and are vulnerable 
to trauma damage due to their point of exit from 
the brainstem.
	•	 Some cranial nerves are motor, some are sensory, 
and some are mixed.
	•	 Cranial nerve I, olfactory: Sensory/afferent; smell
	•	 Cranial nerve II, optic: Sensory/afferent; vision
	•	 Cranial nerve III, oculomotor: Motor/efferent; eye 
movement
	•	 Cranial nerve IV, trochlear: Motor/efferent; eye
	•	 Cranial nerve V, trigeminal: Mixed; pharynx, mastica-
tion, mandible, maxillary, eye, teeth, upper lip, scalp
	•	 Cranial nerve VI, abducens: Motor/efferent; eye
	•	 Cranial nerve VII, facial: Mixed; tongue/taste, 
oral cavity, facial movement, expression, salivary 
glands, Bell’s palsy
	•	 Cranial nerve VIII, vestibulocochlear: Sensory/affer-
ent; hearing and balance

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
71
	•	 Cranial nerve IX, glossopharyngeal: Mixed; gag 
reflex, swallowing, taste, external ear
	•	 Cranial nerve X, vagus: Mixed; larynx, pharynx, 
taste buds, heart
	•	 Cranial nerve XI, spinal, accessory: Motor/efferent; 
sternocleidomastoid muscles, trapezius muscles
	•	 Cranial nerve XII, hypoglossal: Motor/efferent;  
intrinsic muscles of the tongue, movement,  
fasciculations, fibrillations of tongue
	•	 The enteric nervous system is part of the auto-
nomic nervous system and controls digestion and 
deglutition.
	•	 The autonomic nervous system is composed of  
the sympathetic (flight or fight reaction) and  
parasympathetic (calming effect of bodily func-
tions) systems.
	•	 The autonomic nervous system involves neural 
control of smooth and cardiac muscles and gland 
secretions.
	•	 The autonomic nervous system allows homeostasis 
to be maintained.
	•	 The brain and spinal cord are protected and cov-
ered by meninges and a cushioning layer of tissue 
from CSF.
	•	 Dura mater is the outermost layer of protection for 
the brain from rotary displacement.
	•	 Arachnoid mater and subarachnoid space compose 
the middle layer in the meninges; all cranial nerves 
and cerebral arteries and veins pass through this 
space.
	•	 Pia mater is the most internal layer of meninges; 
it adheres to the surface of the brain and contains 
blood supply.
	•	 The brain has a three-part ventricle system: the 
lateral (two), third, and fourth ventricles.
	•	 The ventricles are connected by small ducts and 
canals.
	•	 Each ventricle contains a choroid plexus, which is 
responsible for the production of CSF.
	•	 CSF is a clear, colorless fluid that cushions the CNS 
from the surrounding bones and protects against 
direct trauma.
	•	 CSF helps regulate intracranial pressure, remove 
waste products, and nourish the nervous tissues.
	•	 Hydrocephalus is a blockage of CSF or failure to 
absorb CSF.
	•	 Elevated intracranial pressure may also be in-
dicative of a tumor, hemorrhage, meningitis, or 
encephalitis.
	•	 The brain requires approximately 25% of the 
body’s oxygen.
	•	 Two large internal carotid arteries and two vertebral 
arteries are the main suppliers of blood to the brain.
	•	 The internal carotid divides into the anterior and 
middle cerebral arteries.
	•	 The internal carotid also divides into the oph-
thalmic artery, and the posterior communicating 
artery, posterior cerebral artery, which are part of 
the circle of Willis.
	•	 The anterior communicating artery joins anterior 
cerebral arteries at the circle of Willis.
	•	 The internal carotid supplies much of the cerebral 
hemisphere.
	•	 The middle cerebral artery is the largest branch of 
the internal carotid.
	•	 The vertebral artery divides into the meningeal 
branch, posterior spinal branch, anterior spinal 
branch, posterior inferior cerebellar artery, and 
medullary branches.
	•	 The basilar artery divides in the pontine arteries, 
labyrinthine artery, anterior inferior cerebellar  
artery, and superior cerebellar artery.
	•	 The circle of Willis is formed by the anastomosis 
of the two internal carotids with the two vertebral 
arteries and its branches.
	•	 Contralateral refers to a lesion affecting the oppo-
site side of the body.
	•	 Ipsilateral refers to a lesion affecting the same side 
of the body.
	•	 Major movements in human beings have contralat-
eral neurologic control because of fiber decussation 
(crossing) at the medullary location.
	•	 Left cerebrovascular accident (stroke) results in con-
tralateral (right side) paralysis or paresis (weakness).
	•	 Right cerebrovascular accident (stroke) results in 
contralateral (left side) paralysis or paresis  
(weakness).
	•	 If a lesion occurs after decussation, the affected 
side is ipsilateral.
	•	 Bilateral damage to cortical areas (upper motor 
neurons) controlling speech musculature results in 
spastic dysarthria.
	•	 In general, the right hemisphere of the brain governs 
nonverbal activity, and the left hemisphere of the 
brain governs verbal activity.
	•	 In general, the anterior portions of the brain govern 
motor activity, and posterior portions of the brain 
govern sensory activity.
	•	 Neuroimaging studies are used frequently in current 
practice with the most common being variations of 
computed tomography, magnetic resonance imag-
ining, and evoked potentials.
Synopsis of Clinical Information or Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
72
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Ashburner, J., & Friston, K. J. (2000). Voxel-based mor-
phometry—The methods. Neuroimage, 11, 805–821.
	 2.	 Avin, R. I., Bitar, R., Letourneau-Guillion, L., Young, R., 
Symons, S. P., & Fox, A. J. (2013). Atherosclerosis and the 
chronology of infarction. In T. P. Nadich, M. Castillo, S. 
Cha, & J. G. Smirniotopoulos (Eds.), Imaging of the brain 
(pp. 399–450). Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
	 3.	 Boccagni, C., Bagnato, S. S. A., Prestandrea, C., & Galardi, 
G. (2011). Usefulness of standard EEG in predicting the 
outcome of patients with disorders of consciousness after 
anoxic coma. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 28, 489–492.
	 4.	 Caplan, D. (1987). Cerebral evoked potentials and language. 
In D. Caplan (Ed.), Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology: 
An introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press.
	 5.	 Castro, A. J., Merchut, M. P., Neafsey, E. J., & Wurster, R. D. 
(2002). Neuroscience: An outline approach. St. Louis: Mosby.
	 6.	 Crosson, B., McGregor, K., Kaundinva, S. G., Conway, T. W.,  
Benjamin, M., Chang, Y., Moore, A. B., & White, K. D. 
(2007). Functional MRI of language in aphasia: A review 
of the literature and the methodological challenges. Neu-
ropsychological Review, 17, 157–177.
	 7.	 Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (1989). Lesion analysis in 
neuropsychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
	 8.	 Dichter, G. S. (2012). Functional magnetic resonance im-
aging of autism spectrum disorders. Dialogues in Clinical 
Neuroscience, 14, 319–351.
	 9.	 Frye, R. E., Rezaie, R., & Papanicolaou, A. C. (2009). 
Functional neuroimaging of language using magnetoen-
cephalography. Physics of Life Reviews, 6, 1–10.
	10.	 Gaillard, W. D., Balsamo, L., Xu, B., McKinney, C., Pap-
ero, P. H., Weinstein, S., et al. (2004). fMRI language tasks 
panel improves determination of language dominance. 
Neurology, 63, 1403–1408.
	11.	 Galper, M. W., Nadich, T. P., Kleinman, G. M., Stein, E. G., 
& Lento, P. A. (2013). Cranial meninges. In T. P. Nadich, 
M. Castillo, S. Cha, & J. G. Smirniotopoulos (Eds.), Imaging 
of the brain (pp. 101–125). Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
	12.	 Kim, J. J., & Mukherjee, P. (2013). Static anatomic 
techniques. In T. P. Nadich, M. Castillo, S. Cha, & J. G. 
Smirniotopoulos (Eds.), Imaging of the brain (pp. 3–22). 
­Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
	13.	 Mummery, C. J., Patterson, K., Price, C. J., Ashburner, J., 
Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Hodges, J. R. (2000). A voxel-based 
morphometry study of semantic dementia: Relationship 
between temporal lobe atrophy and semantic memory. 
Annals of Neurology, 47, 36–45.
	14.	 Taber, K. H., Hillman, E. M., & Hurley, R. A. Optical imag-
ing: A new window to the adult brain. Journal of Neuropsy-
chiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 22, 4.
	15.	 Watkins, F., Vargha-Khadem, J., Ashburner, R. E., Passing-
ham, A. C., Friston, K. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., et al. (2002). 
MRI analysis of an inherited speech and language disor-
der: Structural brain abnormalities. Brain, 125, 465–478.
	16.	 Wright, I. C., McGuire, P. K., Poline, J. B., Travere,  
J. M., Murray, R. M., Frith, C. D., et al. (1995). A voxel-based 
method for the statistical analysis of gray and white matter 
density applied to schizophrenia. Neuroimage, 2, 244–252.
	17.	 Zeller, J. B., Herrmann, M. J., Ehlis, A. C., Polak, T., & Fall-
gatter, A. J. (2010). Altered parietal brain oxygenation in 
Alzheimer’s disease as assessed with near infrared spectros-
copy. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 433–441.
	18.	 Human Connectome Project (n.d.). Gallery. Retrieved from  
www.humanconnectomeproject.org/gallery
Appendix 3-1
A vast amount of information is provided in Chapters 
2 and 3. Figure 3-25 is a summary drawing of the levels 
of the CNS to organize the information in Chapter 2. 
Referring to this figure while reading subsequent chap-
ters will be helpful. An outline of the most important 
structures discussed in these chapters is also provided 
for review and organization. For each item, ask the fol-
lowing questions:
	•	 What is it?
	•	 Where is it?
	•	 What does it do?
When appropriate, attempt to label drawings of some 
of the various structures for which illustrations were 
used. The effort put into doing this will be rewarded in 
understanding subsequent chapters.
	I.	 The human nervous system
	
A.	 Central nervous system
	
1.	 Brain
	
B.	 Cerebral hemispheres
	
1.	 Four lobes
	
2.	 Fissures
	
3.	 Sulci
	
4.	 Gyri
	
5.	 Association cortex
	
6.	 Connecting fibers
	
C.	 Basal ganglia
	
1.	 Corpus striatum
	
(a)	 Caudate nucleus
	
(b)	 Lentiform nucleus: putamen, globus  
pallidus
	
2.	 Claustrum
	
D.	 Limbic system

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM II  CHAPTER THREE
73
	
E.	 Cerebellum
	
F.	 Brainstem
	
1.	 Medulla oblongata
	
(a)	 Pyramids
	
(b)	 Olives
	
(c)	 Peduncles
	
2.	 Pons
	
3.	 Mesencephalon
	
(a)	 Tectum
	
(b)	 Colliculi
	
4.	 Spinal cord
	II. Spinal nerves
	III. Peripheral nerves
	IV. Five regions
	
A.	 Meninges
	V.	Dura mater
	VI. Arachnoid mater
	VII. Pia mater
	
A.	 Ventricles
	VIII. Choroid plexus
	IX. CSF
	
A.	 Blood supply
	X.	Internal carotid artery and its branch
	XI. Vertebral artery and its branches
	XII. Circle of Willis
	
A.	 PNS
	
1.	 Spinal peripheral nerves
	XIII. Anterior horn cell
	XIV. Efferent fibers
	XV. Afferent fibers
Cranial nerves
	XVI. Twelve pairs
	
A.	 Autonomic nervous system
	
1.	 Parasympathetic division
	
2.	 Sympathetic division
	
3.	 Enteric division (deglutition and peristalsis)
	XVII. Clinical principles of neurologic organization
	
A.	 Contralateral motor control
	
B.	 Ipsilateral motor control
	
C.	 Bilateral speech motor control
	
D.	 Unilateral language mechanisms
	
E.	 Scheme of cortical organization
FIGURE 3-25
The levels of the central nervous system.

74
4
K E Y  T E R M S
absolute refractory 
period
action potential (AP)
adequate stimulus
anastomosis
anion
anterograde
axon
axoplasm
bipolar cell
bouton
cations
cerebrovascular 
accident (CVA)
concentration 
gradient
convergence
dendrites
depolarization
distal
divergence
excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP)
graded potential
hyperpolarization
inhibitory 
postsynaptic 
potential (IPSP)
interstitial fluid
irritability
ligand-sensitive
microtubules
motor endplate
multipolar cell
myasthenia gravis
myelin
necrose
neurofilaments
neuron
neurotransmitters
orthograde 
transneuronal 
atrophy
osmotic force
perikaryon
postsynaptic 
terminal (receptor 
membrane)
potential
presynaptic terminal
proximal
pseudounipolar cell
relative refractory 
period
resting potential
retrograde
retrograde 
transneuronal 
degeneration
saltatory transmission
sodium-potassium 
pump
soma
spatial summation
summation
synapse
synaptic cleft
temporal summation
Neuronal 
Function in the 
Nervous System
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Neuronal Physiology
Neuron
Chemical and Electrical Properties of Cells
Ionic Concentration Gradients
Electrical Forces
Cellular Potential
Neural Messaging
Graded Potentials
Hyperpolarization
Action Potential
Myelin
Myelin Disorders
The Synapse
Neurotransmitters
Chemical Transmission in the Motor System
Electrical Synapses (Gap Junctions)
Principles of Neuronal Operation
Degeneration and Regeneration of Neurons and 
Their Connections
But strange that I was not told
That the brain can hold
In a tiny ivory cage
God’s heaven and hell.
Oscar Wilde, Poems and Fairy Tales of Oscar Wilde, 1932

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
75
Neuronal Physiology
NEURON
The neuron, or nerve cell, is the basic anatomic and 
functional unit of the nervous system, underlying 
all neural behavior, including speech, language, and 
hearing. Each neuron consists of a cell body known as 
a soma, or perikaryon. These cell bodies actively syn-
thesize proteins, illustrated by the large size of the cell 
nucleus of diffuse chromatin and at least one nucleolus 
where RNA is synthesized. In the cell’s cytoplasm, ribo-
somes are abundant, and the endoplasmic reticulum 
and Golgi apparatus are extensive. (Review Fig. 2-2 for 
a refresher of the basic structure of the neuron.)
Neurons vary greatly in size, but most of the billions 
of neurons of the central nervous system (CNS) are 
small. Classifying on the basis of shape, three types of 
neurons may be identified: multipolar, pseudounipolar, 
and bipolar cells. Figure 4-1 outlines diagrammatically 
the various types of neurons. Each nerve cell contains 
a nucleus and one to a dozen projections of varying 
length. These projections receive neural signals and con-
duct neural impulses. Those receiving neural stimuli are 
called dendrites and are the shorter and more numerous 
projections of the nerve cell. The dendrites of a neuron 
generally are no more than a few millimeters in length.
Dendrites usually branch extensively, giving an 
appearance similar to a tree branch configuration. The 
dendrites have specialized receptors through which 
they receive signals from other neurons at the synapse 
(the contact point with another neuron). Information 
travels from a distal to a proximal point along dendrites 
to the cell body.
Dendrites often display several thorn-like protuber-
ances called dendritic spines (see Fig. 4-1), usually on 
the most distal branches of the dendrite “tree.” They 
are most prolific in the central nervous system (CNS) 
and are typically the sites of the synaptic contacts, form-
ing an anastomosis, or connection.
The other process of a neuron is the axon, a longer 
single fiber that conducts nerve impulses away from the 
neuron to other parts of the nervous system, glands, or 
muscle (see Fig. 4-1). Axons arise from the cell body 
at an area called the axon initial segment or the axon 
hillock. Axons do not contain ribosomes, which is 
how scientists distinguish them from dendrites at the 
ultrastructural level. Axons range in length from sev-
eral micrometers to more than 2 m. The diameter of 
individual axons varies greatly, and conduction velocity 
along the axon ranges from 2 to 100 m/s depending 
on the fiber size. The larger the diameter, the greater is 
the conduction velocity. In a physiologic sense, the term 
axon refers to a nerve fiber that conducts impulses away 
from a nerve cell body. Any long nerve fiber, however, 
may be referred to as an axon regardless of the direc-
tion of the flow of nervous impulses.
The cytoplasm of the axon, called axoplasm, con-
tains dense bundles of microtubules and neurofila-
ments. Each axon ends at a terminal button, or bouton, 
which is the point of contact with another neuron.
The site at which this bouton, or axon terminal, com-
municates with another neuron is called the synapse. 
The synapse is usually the point of contact between 
one neuron (typically the axon of that neuron) with 
another neuron’s cell body, dendrites, dendritic spines, 
or axon. Axonal transport occurs either slowly or fast. If 
the transport occurs from the cell body toward the axon 
terminal, it is known as anterograde. Transport up the 
axon from the terminal toward the cell is also possible 
and is called retrograde. Figure 4-2 shows anterograde 
and retrograde axonal transport.
Neurons do the work of the nervous system by trans-
mitting electrical signals or neural impulses to glands, 
muscles, and other neurons. Basically, the purpose of 
the neuron is to communicate, to send a “neural mes-
sage.” In the peripheral nervous system (PNS) many 
neuromuscular (i.e., neuron to muscle fiber) transmis-
sions take place. In the brain itself, most of the neurons 
conduct neural impulses to other neurons, which are 
clustered quite close together, providing a high neuro-
nal density in the cerebrum. This high density creates 
an almost unlimited capacity for complex neuronal 
activity. This neuronal activity, or brain activation, pro-
duces sensations, perceptions and thoughts as well as 
nerve signals eventually resulting in voluntary muscle 
movement. Activation is the result of rapid biochemical 
and biophysical changes at the cellular level and in the 
neurons and glial cells of the brain.6
In this chapter we examine this process very sim-
plistically, looking at a basic communication process of 
neurons: the generation of an action potential (AP) for 
the types of neurons that conduct this straightforward 
type of firing pattern, an AP generated one spike at a 
time. We concentrate on learning the process through 
which this occurs. Once you understand the properties 
of neurons that enable this basic transmission, you will 
be better able to understand how other neurons may be 
different in their firing patterns. These other patterns 
are mentioned in this chapter, but further elucidation 
of these patterns is beyond the scope of this text. If you 
understand the cellular properties of neurons and how 
basic communication between neurons occurs, you will 
be on your way to exploring more advanced material 
should you choose to do so.
To begin looking at this process, we need to step back 
and look at the macro level to answer the larger ques-
tion: How does a neuron communicate with another 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
76
MULTIPOLAR
Cell body
Cell body
Cell body
Axon
Axon
Peripheral
process
Central
process
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendrites
Axon
BIPOLAR
(PSEUDO)UNIPOLAR
A
B
C
FIGURE 4-1
Structural classification of neurons A, Multipolar neuron: neuron with multiple extensions from 
the cell body. B, Bipolar neuron: neuron with exactly two extensions from the cell body. C, 
(Pseudo) unipolar neuron: neuron with only one extension from the cell body. The central pro-
cess is an axon; the peripheral process is a modified axon with branched dendrites at its extrem-
ity. (The red arrows show the direction of impulse travel.) (Courtesy of Dr. Huxley H.E. [1988]. 
In C.R. Leeson, T. Leeson, & A. Paparo (Eds.). Text/Atlas of Histology. St. Louis: Saunders.)
Soma
Retrograde transport
Empty vesicle
membrane
Neurotransmitter
release
Anterograde transport
Synaptic vesicle
Golgi apparatus
FIGURE 4-2
Axoplasmic transport. Substances required by the axon are delivered from the soma via 
anterograde transport. Retrograde transport moves substances from the axon to the 
soma. The proteins that “walk” the vesicles along the microtubules are shown in red. 
(From Lundy-Eckman, L. [2013]. Neuroscience [4th ed.]. St. Louis: Saunders.)
cell? To begin the discussion, the process is first summa-
rized and then we will break it down into details.
The neural “message” is a chemical or electrical 
signal sent to another neuron or another cell (such 
as a muscle cell). This neural message is most often 
chemical in nature, though there are electrical-only 
transmissions in the brain as well. The following 10 
steps summarize the generation of an AP (the neu-
ral impulse propagated down an axon) resulting in 
a basic chemical synaptic transmission. Following the 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
77
summary, details of the process are discussed and 
illustrated and an electrical transmission will also be 
described.
Steps in the neural transmission process: a summary:
	 1.	 Neurons contain fluid inside the cell (intracellu-
lar) and are bathed in fluid outside (extracellu-
lar fluid). These fluids are made up of water mol-
ecules and of chemicals that are ionic in nature, 
that is, they carry a positive or negative electrical 
charge.
	 2.	 The membrane surrounding the neuron and its 
extensions is an “excitable” membrane. When in-
active, or not “firing,” the neuron is at rest. This 
resting state is a result of the maintenance of a 
particular polarity or relative charge across that 
membrane. This resting polarity is obtained when 
the intracellular fluid surrounding the point of 
the axon hillock (initial segment of the axon) is  
approximately 70 mV more negative (–70 mV) than 
the fluid outside the cell membrane.
	 3.	 Due to this excitable state, the polarity at differ-
ent points along the membrane is constantly being 
changed because there are neural signals being 
sent throughout your nervous system all the time. 
There is a certain threshold of change in polarity 
that will cause the neuron to “fire” or generate a 
neural electrical “spike” called an AP. An AP can 
be generated only at the axon hillock. However, 
most of the singular neural signals that reach the 
membrane of a neuron are not strong enough to 
generate movement around the membrane of the 
cell to the axon hillock to generate an AP. These 
signals do cause a change in polarity at a point 
on the cell membrane, resulting in what is called 
a graded potential. The changes in polarity can 
either depolarize (excitatory) or hyperpolarize 
(inhibitory) that section of the cell’s membrane. 
Thus neural firing (an AP) most often results not 
from a single transmission but from the summative 
effect of many signals resulting in a spatial and/or 
a temporal summation of signaling effects on the 
membrane. This summation will result in a strong 
enough change in polarity at the axon hillock to 
generate an AP.
	 4.	 The threshold for an AP is reached through a depo-
larization causing the intracellular fluid to become 
more positive (or less negative) relative to the out-
side. This occurs through an influx of sodium (Na+) 
ions. At the point of the axon hillock, this threshold 
for depolarization is approximately –55 mV.
	 5.	 Once generated, an AP (in a healthy neuron with a 
normal axon) is propagated in an “all-or-nothing” 
fashion down the axon to the end of it, the terminal 
bouton (the presynaptic terminal).
	 6.	 The AP triggers calcium channels in the presynap-
tic terminal to open and release calcium. The cal-
cium influx causes synaptic vesicles in the presynap-
tic terminal to fuse with the membrane and release 
neurotransmitters that have been synthesized and 
stored in them.
	 7.	 The neurotransmitters diffuse out into a small 
space, the synaptic cleft, between the presynaptic 
terminal and the membrane of a postsynaptic 
terminal (e.g., the membrane of a receiving den-
drite).
	 8.	 The postsynaptic membrane usually contains spe-
cialized receptor proteins for the neurotransmitters 
involved. With channel activation, the transmitter 
molecules will bind with the membrane. Binding of 
the principal neurotransmitters allows an exchange 
of ions across the postsynaptic membrane. Ionic 
transfer will result in either a brief excitatory postsyn-
aptic potential (EPSP) or an inhibitory postsynaptic 
potential (IPSP).
	 9.	 Other neurotransmitters may be released at the 
same time and bind with their receptor proteins but 
serve as neuromodulators of the effect of the principal  
chemical. This occurs through a longer response 
called a second messenger system. The action that 
occurs in the receiving neuron or cell depends on 
whether the overall summation of the transmis-
sions to it (the EPSPs, IPSPs, and second messen-
ger action) results in another AP being generated, 
cell activity enhancement, or overall inhibition of 
activity.
	10.	 The excess neurotransmitter substance left in the 
space of the synaptic cleft will be either taken up 
(reuptake) by the presynaptic membrane to be 
recycled or will be inactivated by enzymes.
CHEMICAL AND ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES 
OF CELLS
As discussed in Chapter 2, the neuron is enclosed by a 
membrane composed of protein channels and a bilipid 
layer. Water makes up a large percentage of our body 
(an estimated 55%-65% of an adult’s body weight), and 
the brain contains more water than many other parts. A 
well-functioning nervous system depends on an appro-
priate volume of water content in the cells of the CNS 
and PNS. Too much water cannot be tolerated inside 
the cell, however, because an excess will cause swelling 
and cell integrity may be compromised. The chemical 
composition of the fluid inside and outside the cell 
membrane of the neuron ensures that this balance will 
be maintained. This chemical makeup of the intracel-
lular and extracellular fluid also adapts the nervous 
system for both the chemical (primarily) and electrical 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
78
signaling that must take place for neural transfer of 
information to occur.
What is this chemical composition? As noted ear-
lier, the membrane of the neuron is permeable to the 
diffusion of the small molecules that compose water. 
The chemical composition of the other fluids of the 
cell is such that the diffusion across the membrane is 
not so simple. The other chemical molecules found 
in the intracellular and extracellular fluid are ions. 
Ions are atoms or molecules in which the number 
of electrons and protons are not equal, resulting in 
an excess positive or negative electrical charge. A 
positively charged ion is a cation, and a negatively 
charged ion is known as an anion. The intracellular 
fluid of a neuron contains a number of large protein 
anions. The membrane of the neuron is not perme-
able to these anions, and they cannot pass out of the 
cell. These large proteins, carrying a negative electri-
cal charge, displace space that would be taken up by 
water if they were not there.
The fluid in and outside the nerve cell also contains 
solutions of sodium, potassium, calcium, and chlo-
ride ions. Chloride (Cl–) ions carry a negative charge, 
and sodium (Na+) and potassium (K+) carry a positive 
charge. Calcium (Ca++) ions are also present and carry 
two positive charges. The extracellular fluid (or intersti-
tial fluid) bathing the cells of the brain and spinal cord 
is cerebrospinal fluid, which contains the same chemi-
cal ions and a much higher concentration of water 
than the intracellular fluid. Therefore the fluid inside 
the cell is said to be less dilute (a lower concentration 
of water molecules) than the fluid in the extracellular 
space. The dilution ratio of fluid inside the cell to that 
present outside the cell can be said to be a concentra-
tion gradient. Laws governing movement along a con-
centration gradient dictate that normal movement is 
from a region of higher concentration to a region of 
lower concentration (movement by osmotic force). To 
counteract this force and maintain stability for nerve 
cell functioning, there must be a mechanism to change 
the concentration gradient across this permeable mem-
brane. The presence of a high concentration of sodium 
in the extracellular fluid provides this balance.
The membrane of the neuron ordinarily is imperme-
able to sodium ions; they cannot diffuse freely across the 
membrane, although they can be transported through 
selective channel proteins on the membrane (Box 4-1). 
Because the sodium ions do not easily move across the 
membrane and they are in high concentration in the 
extracellular space, the extracellular fluid becomes less 
dilute and more like that inside the cell. The concen-
tration gradient is more balanced so that water volume 
is not excessive outside the cell and osmotic forces are 
counteracted.
Although these forces are essentially balanced, the 
relative electrical charge across the membrane that 
results from the ionic composition of the two fluids 
must be unbalanced for a neuron to be in a “resting” 
state. As is true of your own resting state, this does 
not mean that there is no activity at all. For a neu-
ron, it means that it is not firing a neural impulse at 
that moment. At rest, there is a net negative charge of 
about 70 mV (–70 mV) with the fluid inside the cell 
being the more negative. In the intracellular fluid, 
there are many potassium ions contributing a positive 
ionic charge but the negative charge of those large 
protein anions helps maintain the overall net negative 
charge inside that is necessary for the resting state. 
The lack of anions outside the cell combined with 
the high number of sodium ions helps maintain a net 
positive charge relative to the inside; thus there is an 
unbalanced electrical charge across the membrane, 
and the cell is “at rest.” For “activity” or neural firing, 
the inside of the cell has to become less negative rela-
tive to the outside, reaching a certain threshold to 
break the state of rest. This will be discussed soon, but 
first we must further elucidate how these extracellular 
and intracellular ionic differences are maintained.
IONIC CONCENTRATION GRADIENTS
The concentration gradient required for the appropriate 
ion ratio across the membrane is primarily maintained 
Channel Proteins
	•	 Allow small molecules to pass back and forth 
through a membrane; selective to one ion only.
	•	 Sodium, potassium, and chloride channels in mem­
brane of neuron important to neuronal function.
	•	 Nongated: channels that are always open.
	•	 Gated: channels that open and close conditionally 
and quickly.
	•	 Voltage-gated: channels that open and close by 
voltage-sensitive mechanisms.
	•	 Ligand-sensitive: channels that open and close in 
the presence of chemicals or neurotransmitters.
Protein Pumps
	•	 Pumps open one side of a membrane at a time.
	•	 Sodium-potassium pump: most important neu-
ronal pump; provides energy to a cell along an 
electrical gradient powered by positively charged 
ions (cations) and negatively charged ions (anions).
	
BOX 4-1   
Key Protein Membrane Channels and Pumps

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
79
by channels and pumps in the cell membrane (Fig. 4-3). 
Channels in the cell membrane consist of water-filled 
proteins that allow small molecules of a certain ion to 
pass back and forth depending on the need. The chan-
nels are selective to one ion only. Important to neuronal 
function are sodium, potassium, chloride, and calcium 
channels in the membrane of a neuron. The channels 
are classified according to the way that they open:
	•	 Nongated channels—always open
	•	 Gated channels—open under certain conditions and 
can close and open quickly
	
•	 Voltage-gated—open and close at specific mem-
brane potentials; operated by a voltage sensor 
mechanism in the protein.
	
•	 Chemical or ligand-sensitive—open or close in the 
presence of certain chemicals or neurotransmitters.
	
•	 Voltage-gated ligand-sensitive—opening of chemical-­
gated channels depends on depolarization caused 
by the voltage gating before the chemical can affect 
an opening.
As stated, the channels in the membrane of a nerve 
cell are selective to one ion only, these being sodium, 
potassium, chloride, or calcium. These chemicals are 
found inside and outside the cell, but potassium (K+) 
is much more concentrated inside the cell (along with 
those anions), whereas sodium (Na+), chloride (Cl–), 
and calcium (Ca++) are more concentrated in the extra-
cellular fluid. The exchange of sodium and potassium 
across the membrane is the most important to initia-
tion of an AP, basic to neural activity. Sodium is more 
likely to enter the cell through its channel; potassium is 
more likely to leave the cell through its dedicated chan-
nel. Because of this tendency and the need to maintain 
the proper ionic gradient across the membrane, it is 
important to have an extra mechanism to ensure the 
sodium and potassium levels can be in correct ratio. 
The sodium-potassium pump is the most important 
to the neuron, helping maintain the steep gradient of 
sodium to potassium and providing energy to a cell by 
increasing sodium transport into the cell.
Like the channels, the pumps in the membrane are 
water-filled proteins, but unlike the channels, which 
are completely open passages, the pump will open 
only on one side of the membrane at a time. The 
energy fueling this pump is adenosine triphosphate or 
ATP (review in Chapter 2 if needed). The interaction 
of the ATP results in a phosphate ion group binding 
with the transport channel protein. This phosphoryla-
tion changes the shape of the transport channel (the 
pump channel), driving out three sodium ions. That 
change in shape results in the transport channel now 
attracting potassium ions in the extracellular fluid. 
Two potassium ions then bind with the newly inviting 
channel and are pumped through the opening to the 
intracellular fluid. It is always a “3 sodium out, 2 potas-
sium in” mechanism. Thereby, the excess of sodium in 
Extracellular space
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
Axoplasm
Na+ channels
Na+
Cl–
Cl– channel
K+ leak channels
FIGURE 4-3
Schematic diagram of the establishment of the resting potential in a typical neuron. 
Observe that the potassium ion (K+) leak channels outnumber the sodium ion (Na+) and 
calcium ion (Cl–) channels; consequently, more K+ can leave the cell than Na+ or Cl– can 
enter. Because there are more positive ions outside than inside the cell, the outside is 
more positive than the inside, establishing a potential difference across the membrane. 
Ion channels and ion pumps not directly responsible for the establishment of resting 
membrane potential are not shown. (From Gartner, L.P., & Hiatt, J.L. [2007]. Color Text-
book of Histology, [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Saunders.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
80
the extracellular fluid is maintained. The concentra-
tion of sodium to potassium will also play an impor-
tant part in the generation of chemical and electrical 
signals in the nervous system. An illustrated summary 
of membrane channels is shown in Figure 4-3. An illus-
tration of the mechanisms of the sodium-potassium 
pump is shown in Figure 4-4.
ELECTRICAL FORCES
Neurons, like other cells, must exist at a steady state; that 
is, they must at times be at rest, without neural firing. As 
previously mentioned, osmotic forces are balanced so that 
the steady state is partially reached in healthy cells. Electri-
cal forces across a cell membrane also must be balanced 
Extracellular
Intracellular
Sodium-potassium
ATPase
Na+
Na+
P
Overview
Na+
P
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
ATP
ATP
ADP
P
FIGURE 4-4
Sodium-potassium pump. Three sodium ions (Na+) bind to sodium binding sites on the 
pump’s inner face. At the same time, an energy-containing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
molecule produced by the cell’s mitochondria binds to the pump. The ATP breaks apart, 
and its stored energy is transferred to the pump. The pump then changes shape, releases 
the three Na+ ions to the outside of the cell, and attracts two potassium ions (K+) to its 
potassium binding sites. The pump then returns to its original shape, and the two K+ ions 
and the remnant of the ATP molecule are released to the inside of the cell. The pump is 
now ready for another pumping cycle. ATPase, Adenosine triphosphatase. The small inset 
is a simplified view of Na+-K+ pump activity. (Adapted from McCance, K., & Huether, S. 
[2002]. Pathophysiology [4th ed.]. St. Louis: Mosby.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
81
so that this steady or resting state can be maintained in 
all cells at some time. Positively charged ions are called 
cations, and any negatively charged ion is called an anion. 
The sodium, potassium, and chloride ions that make up 
the solute inside and outside the cell all carry a particular 
electrical charge. Chloride ions carry a negative charge 
and sodium and potassium carry a positive charge. Cal-
cium ions are also present and carry two positive charges. 
Their particular role is discussed later in this chapter.
The intracellular portion of the neuron contains a 
high concentration of potassium and a low concentra-
tion of sodium and chloride in relation to the extra-
cellular fluid. Also remember that large, negatively 
charged protein anions are found in the intracellular 
fluid, but not in the extracellular fluid. Outside the cell, 
sodium and chloride are found in high concentrations, 
approximately 10 times greater than inside the cell, and 
potassium is found in low concentration. The differ-
ence in chemical concentration produces ionic differ-
ences across the membrane of the cell. Because ions are 
charged molecules, these ionic differences create small 
electrical potentials across the surface membrane of the 
neuron.
Cellular Potential
Potential is defined as the relative amount of voltage 
in an electrical field. Think of the neuron as having 
two electrical fields, one outside and one inside the 
cell. At rest the electrical charge within the nerve cell 
is negative (dominated by the presence of the protein 
anions) relative to the outside of the cell (dominated 
by sodium ions).
The importance of ions to nervous system function-
ing may be understood through a discussion of their 
electrical properties and movements. The major func-
tions of neurons, including integration (i.e., cognition 
or thinking), always depend on their electrical proper-
ties and how the ions move, eventually resulting in the 
firing of neural impulses or the inhibition of neural fir-
ing. Because of their critical role in neural messaging, 
most of the energy consumed by the nervous system is 
used for ionic movement. Ion currents are responsible 
for the creation of electrical events in biologic systems. 
During stimulation of some part of the body (e.g., oral 
mechanism for speaking, brain cells for thinking), neg-
ative ions attract positive ions and repel other negative 
ions; the opposite occurs for a positive ion. Ions move 
because of voltage gradients (opposite ions attract and 
same ions repel), chemical gradients, and metabolic 
activity (sodium and potassium ions expending high-
energy phosphates [ATP → adenosine diphosphate], 
thus producing what is known as metabolic energy).
The ionic difference across the membrane at steady 
state is called the cell’s resting potential. At resting 
potential, the difference in potential, or the separa-
tion of electrical charge, across the cell membrane is 
calculated to be approximately –70 mV. This means 
that a probe inserted into the cytoplasm inside the cell 
would find its charge to be 70 mV more negative than 
the charge measured in the fluid outside the cell. The 
resting potential is one aspect of the cell’s characteristic 
irritability, or ability to respond to outside influences. 
At the resting potential the cell is not responding to 
any outside influences and it is not firing an impulse. 
An adequate stimulus is required, one that is capable 
of changing the cell’s potential, to change the resting 
state. An adequate stimulus may be mechanical, ther-
mal, electrical, or chemical in nature.
NEURAL MESSAGING
What an adequate stimulus may do to the membrane of a 
neuron is perturb it enough to (1) cause ion channels to 
open and (2) allow movement of the ions across the cell 
membrane, effecting a change in the relative charge, or 
polarization, across the membrane. An influx of the posi-
tively charged sodium ions causes a depolarization of the 
cell. Depolarization means that the inside of the cell has 
become less negative (or, if you prefer, more positive) rela-
tive to the outside of the cell. If that change in potential 
reaches a certain threshold (approximately –55 mV) at a 
certain point on the cell, the axon hillock, the generation 
of a neural impulse down the axon of the cell will begin. 
The neural impulse is in reality a trail of depolarization 
or spikes in electrical current traveling down the axon 
membrane. This brief spike is called an AP. There are few 
instances in which only one stimulation or neural signal to 
the membrane of a neuron will be of adequate strength 
to depolarize the membrane all on its own. This is why we 
must look at graded potentials before we get to the AP.
GRADED POTENTIALS
Graded potentials are primarily generated by sensory 
input, causing a change in the conductance of the 
membrane of the sensory receptor cell. Graded 
potentials also are those generated at a localized 
place on the cell membrane where an excitatory or 
inhibitory synapse has taken place. Graded potentials 
(also called local, or generator, potentials), which 
are excitatory in nature, are generated in the same 
way an AP is generated at the axon hillock, that is, by 
the influx of positively charged sodium ions into the 
intracellular fluid, decreasing the negativity of the 
charge inside relative to the outside of the cell. If this 
change in difference across the membrane reaches 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
82
a certain threshold, a graded potential is generated 
at a segment of the cell membrane of the neuron or 
dendrite at which the stimulation occurred; that is, 
the change in the positive to negative ratio causes a 
local flow of current.
Unlike an AP, which is an all-or-nothing phenom-
enon, a graded potential is not likely to be fully prop-
agated along the membrane; rather, the voltage will 
tend to decrease as the current spreads due to leakage 
of sodium ions through the resistance and capacitance 
of the membrane. The current may remain more 
localized, and potential may decrease in strength the 
further along the membrane it spreads. If the graded, 
or generator, potential initially is not strong enough 
to reach the threshold required for generation of an 
AP, it likely will decrease by the time it travels along 
the membrane to the axon hillock and an AP will not 
be generated at that time. Because of this decrement, 
graded potentials usually must summate either in time 
(a number of graded potentials occurring on the cell 
membrane at once) or in space (a number of graded 
potentials occurring at the same point on the mem-
brane) to generate a signal strong enough to generate 
an AP.
HYPERPOLARIZATION
The ionic exchange that takes place as the cell’s rest-
ing potential is changed may also result in a state called 
hyperpolarization. In this case the inside of the cell at 
the point of signaling to the membrane has become 
more negative relative to the outside of the cell. This 
occurs because of the influx of chloride anions.
ACTION POTENTIAL
APs are brief electrical transients visible when 
recorded as intracellular voltages or extracellular cur-
rents (Fig. 4-5).4 If a neural signal is strong enough 
or the temporal or spatial summation of electrical 
signals is strong enough to depolarize the receiving 
cell at the point called the axon hillock, the result will 
be this electrical impulse, or action current (the AP), 
sent down the axon of that cell.
APs occur throughout the body’s tissues, regulating 
secretions of hormones and even signaling fertiliza-
tion of the egg by the sperm. In a nervous system, APs 
serve to integrate neural messages sent to cell bodies 
from sense organs and from other parts of the nervous 
system.
Once an AP is initiated at the axon hillock, a series 
of these depolarizations along the cell membrane of the 
axon is begun. The action current is thus propagated 
along an axon for long distances without a change in 
the waveform and at a constant velocity. This means that 
all the neuronal signals of coded information transmit-
ted along axons in the nervous system are conveyed by 
a series of uniformly sized impulses. The information 
transmitted is therefore signaled by the frequency of 
APs generated rather than by their amplitude. The AP 
functions in an all-or-nothing manner. A stimulus sets 
up either a full-sized impulse or nothing.
NREM
EMG
EEG
BP
(mmHg)
Spike
            
(mV)
Action Potentials
rate
         (Hz)
0.2
0
0.5
0
150
100
2
0
10
0
REM
W
60 sec
FIGURE 4-5
An example of a cholinergic neuron in the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus whose firing dur-
ing REM sleep is correlated with fluctuations in blood pressure. BP, blood pressure; EEG elec-
troencephalogram; EMG, electromyogram of neck muscle; rate, firing rate of the neuron; 
spike, trace of action potentials; SWS, slow wave sleep; W, wake. (From Séi, H. [2012]. Blood 
pressure surges in REM sleep: A mini review, Pathophysiology,19:4, 233–241. September.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
83
During the passage of an AP across a nerve cell 
membrane, that part of the membrane becomes 
briefly incapable of responding to another stimulus. 
This period of unresponsiveness is called an absolute 
refractory period. The absolute refractory period 
is relatively short, lasting approximately 0.8 ms. The 
absolute refractory period prevents an AP from travel-
ing back up the axon, thus forcing the impulse down 
the fiber toward the terminal bouton of the axon. 
After the absolute refractory period, there is a rela-
tive refractory period during which an AP may be pro-
duced by an intense stimulus and then by stimuli of 
less intensity (Fig. 4-6).
Myelin
Nerve fibers, or axons, may be classified as myelinated 
or unmyelinated. Large peripheral nerves and the large 
axons of the CNS acquire a white fatty sheath of wrapping 
as the brain develops. Layers of myelin are incorporated 
in the cells that produce myelin—oligodendrocytes in 
the CNS and Schwann cells in the PNS. Myelin is white, 
contrasting these nerves sharply with the gray unmy-
elinated nerves, and the myelin sheet is thick. It can be 
revealed by a special myelin stain. The thick insulation 
of myelin is interrupted at intervals by structures called 
the nodes of Ranvier. Because of how the myelin sheaths 
are designed, these nodes enhance rapid propagation 
of the electrical impulse along the nerve fiber. The APs 
necessary to propagate a signal down a myelinated axon 
develop only at these nodes (Fig. 4-7). The impulse is 
vastly increased in speed by hopping from node to node 
on a myelinated axon without any active contribution 
from the long internodal spaces.
This mode of transmission is extremely efficient com-
pared with the slow gliding along of the nerve impulses on 
unmyelinated fibers. The type of transmission in myelin-
ated fibers is called saltatory transmission. The efficiency 
of saltatory transmission is achieved because of the insu-
lation that prevents current flow between nodes; in addi-
tion, little leakage of current from the fibers occurs. The 
conduction velocity of a myelinated fiber is directly pro-
portional to the diameter of the fiber, whereas in an unmy-
elinated fiber the velocity is approximately proportional to 
the square root of the diameter. On average, transmission 
along a myelinated fiber is roughly 50 times as fast as one 
along an unmyelinated fiber.
Unmyelinated fibers are more common in the 
smaller nerve fibers of the PNS, although the cranial 
nerves, which are part of the PNS, are relatively large in 
diameter and are myelinated. Six of the cranial nerves 
innervate the speech muscles and provide neuromo-
tor control for talking. The rapid muscular movements 
underlying speech would require the fastest mode of 
transmission of neural impulses.
MYELIN DISORDERS
In demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, 
groups of oligodendrocytes and their myelin segments 
degenerate and are replaced by astrocytic plaques. This 
loss of myelin results in an interruption of the propaga-
tion of the AP. The axons that become demyelinized 
survive temporarily, and some may even regenerate. 
The particular variety of motor, visual, or general sen-
sory losses in multiple sclerosis reflects the location of 
the demyelization processes. Multiple sclerosis is caused 
by an autoimmune inflammatory response that dam-
ages the myelin sheath. If this inflammatory reaction 
is intense, the axons, too, may be damaged, producing 
irreversible neurologic deficits that show irregular fluc-
tuating periods of exacerbation and remission.
Impairment of speech is found in approximately half of 
the population afflicted with multiple sclerosis. A speech 
disorder resulting from involvement of the neuromuscu-
lar aspect of the nervous system is called dysarthria. Clini-
cal symptoms of dysarthria are detailed in Chapter 8.
The Synapse
As the electrical nerve impulse, in the form of an AP, 
moves along an axon, it comes to a point where it must 
be transmitted to another neuron, a gland, or a muscle. 
This point is known as a synapse. Until the discovery 
that small junctures occur at the synapse, researchers 
assumed that neurons were connected in one contin-
uous network. Science now knows that between the 
membrane at the end of the axon (called the presyn-
aptic terminal) and the membrane of the receiving cell 
(called the postsynaptic terminal or receptor mem-
brane) is a small space called the synaptic cleft.
The transmission of a neural impulse across this 
synaptic juncture or gap is primarily a chemical pro-
cess, sometimes an electrical process, and occasionally 
a combination of both. Electrical synapses will be dis-
cussed later in this chapter.
Most neural transmission is carried out through chem-
ical messaging accomplished at the synapse. The trans-
mission of nerve impulses to muscle in the PNS was the 
first well-established example of chemical synaptic trans-
mission and remains the best understood. As recently as 
the twentieth century, many neurophysiologists believed 
that the impulse transmission of one thousandth of a sec-
ond was too fast for any type of chemical mediation. An 
electrical nerve impulse was believed to excite the mus-
cle fiber directly. The large electrical mismatch, however, 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
84
ENa
Threshold
Rest
EK
Membrane potential
Single
EPSP
Depolarization
             phase
Repolarization
phase
Action
potential
Absolute refractory
period
Relative refractory
period
Hyperpolarization
         phase
Initial
phase
Time
  Multiple
summated
  EPSPs
FIGURE 4-6
Response of the neuron to the release of excitatory neurotransmitter by presynaptic 
neurons. The membrane potential (ordinate) becomes more positive as the binding of 
neurotransmitter released by firing of the presynaptic neuron increases sodium perme-
ability through chemical-gated sodium channels, producing an EPSP. One EPSP of 
exaggerated amplitude is shown, after which sufficient EPSPs occur in quick succession 
to summate and elicit enough membrane depolarization to open up voltage-sensitive 
sodium channels. This reaches the threshold of depolarization necessary to gener-
ate an AP. The AP is terminated as the various sodium channels are inactivated, and 
voltage-sensitive potassium channels open and repolarize the membrane and, in this 
example, actually hyperpolarize it through efflux of potassium through opened potas-
sium channels. (Reprinted from Nadeau, S., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck,  
C. J., Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. [2004]. Medical neuroscience. Philadelphia: 
Saunders/Elsevier.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
85
between the tiny nerve fiber and the large muscle fiber 
indicated that an electrical explanation would be faulty by 
at least two orders of magnitude. In the 1930s researchers 
established that synaptic transmission in nerve-to-muscle 
synapses was entirely attributable to chemical mediation 
by a substance called acetylcholine.
Neurons primarily communicate with each other by a 
special type of junction called the synapse. The synapse 
includes a presynaptic terminal membrane, a postsynap-
tic receptor membrane, and a tiny space between called 
the synaptic cleft. When a neural impulse is generated 
down the axon by an AP, it travels to a point on the pre-
synaptic membrane called the terminal bouton. At this 
point the AP causes opening of special voltage-gated cal-
cium channels, allowing calcium to rush into the nerve 
terminal. This calcium release triggers synaptic vesicles 
in the axon to fuse with the presynaptic membrane and 
release chemicals called neurotransmitters, which have 
been synthesized and stored in those vesicles. These neu-
rotransmitters are what determine whether the sending 
neuron is an excitatory neuron or an inhibitory neuron. 
Neurons are either one or the other, never both.
Looking through a powerful microscope, each neu-
rotransmitter can be differentiated by molecular shape; 
no two are the same. Likewise, protein receptors dedi-
cated to particular neurotransmitters also can be differ-
entiated in the same manner. At the synapse the released 
transmitter chemical diffuses across the synaptic cleft. 
Slightly protruding from the surface membrane of a 
receiving neuron will be a part of each receptor molecule 
associated with that neuron. This protruding part can 
“sense” the presence of its neurotransmitter and bind it 
to the membrane. This binding is described as similar 
to a key (the molecular shape of the neurotransmitter 
molecule) fitting into a lock (the matching shape of the 
receptor molecule). What happens after the binding to 
the receptor depends on the effect of that particular neu-
rotransmitter and the type of receptor to which it binds.
Because the transmitter does effect a change in the 
target membrane, it must be rapidly inactivated so that 
too much is not released at one time. This inactivation 
may occur through action of an enzyme within the 
synaptic cleft (catabolism), a combination of enzyme 
action and reuptake, or a mix of diffusion out of the 
cleft and reuptake. The steps in neurotransmitter pro-
cessing are shown in Figure 4-8.
The most frequently used example of neurotransmit-
ter action is that of a neurotransmitter such as glutamate, 
which is excitatory to the postsynaptic cell. In this kind of 
transmission (and in many others), the transmitter release 
changes the potential of the receptor membrane to a recep-
tor potential by opening ionic channels. In an excitatory 
postsynaptic potential (EPSP), the neurotransmitter binds 
to chemical-gated sodium channel receptors. The conduc-
tance of these channels is briefly increased, and sodium is 
allowed to flow into the cell. This partially depolarizes the 
membrane. If a sufficient number of EPSPs arrive at the 
membrane in a synchronous fashion, the depolarization is 
larger in strength. If strong enough, the threshold to open 
the voltage-gated sodium channels at the axon hillock is 
reached and an AP is generated. If the EPSP is not strong 
enough and does not summate with others, it decreases 
and an AP is not generated at that time.
A neurotransmitter such as gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), the primary inhibitory transmitter sub-
stance in the nervous system, has the opposite effect on 
Axon hillock
FIGURE 4-7
A neuron with myelin sheathing of its axon. The interruptions in the myelin sheath are the 
nodes of Ranvier. The arrows indicate regions of high-density, voltage-sensitive sodium 
channels; current flow; and action potential generation. (Reprinted from Nadeau S., 
Ferguson T. S., Valenstein E., Vierck C. J., Petruska J. C., Streit W. J., & Ritz L. A. [2004]. 
Medical neuroscience. Philadelphia: Saunders.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
86
the postsynaptic membrane. The binding of GABA with 
the membrane results in the influx of chloride ions or 
the efflux of potassium ions, either of which result in 
hyperpolarization of the membrane and an inhibitory 
postsynaptic potential (IPSP). With this, the receptor 
neuron becomes somewhat less likely to generate a neu-
ral impulse or spike.
It is the summation of all the EPSPs, the IPSPs, 
and the modulating effects of postsynaptic activity 
that will eventually determine whether neural firing 
occurs at that particular moment. The action of the 
protein receptors on the receiving neuron may make 
a great deal of difference as to how the neuron reacts 
to the signaling of a particular neuron or group of 
neurons. Receptor proteins can be classified into two 
broad categories.4 Ionotropic receptors work to form 
ion channels or pores through which ions may easily 
move into the receptor neuron and alter the electric 
properties of the cell. Metabotropic receptors work 
by coupling with intracellular proteins called G-pro-
tein coupled receptors (GPCR). These G-proteins 
may have direct effects on the membrane ion chan-
nels or may regulate enzymes that work as second mes-
senger molecules to alter cell properties. There are 
other postsynaptic actions that may occur, such as the 
influx of calcium through ion channels or the activa-
tion of receptors through membrane permeable sub-
stances such as nitric oxide.
In the next section we discuss some basic infor-
mation about neurotransmitters. Elaboration on sec-
ond messenger or other neuromodulation actions 
is beyond the scope of this text. It should be under-
stood, however, that these events serve as neuromodu-
lators and work with neurotransmitters, both natural 
and designed, to possibly alter properties of neurons 
and their synapses. These alterations might include 
1. Synthesis
2. Storage
5. Reuptake
PRESYNAPTIC
SYNAPTIC CLEFT
POST-
SYNAPTIC
5. Diffusion
R
e
l
e
a
s
e
 
R
e
c
e
p
ti
o
n
 
3
4
5. Catabolism
FIGURE 4-8
The major steps in neurotransmitter processing. (Reprinted from Nadeau, S., Ferguson, 
T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. J., Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. [2004]. Medical 
neuroscience. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier.)

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
87
changes in the firing rate, spike duration, ion channel 
selectivity, synaptic strength, and synaptic plasticity to 
mention a few. Obviously we have only scratched the 
surface of what is to be understood about how neurons 
communicate with each other, but the understanding 
of this basic information will enable you to explore 
further if you wish.
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
Neurotransmitters are the fundamental basis for chemi-
cal action in the nervous system. Table 4-1 illustrates the 
criteria generally agreed on as necessary to define a sub-
stance as a neurotransmitter.
There are many different neurotransmitters in the 
nervous system. Squire et al.9 classified them into three 
broad categories: Classical, Nonclassical, and Uncon-
ventional neurotransmitters. See Box 4-2 for a list of 
some of the neurotransmitters in each of these clas-
sifications. Early studies of neurons presented them 
as containing only one neurotransmitter, but it is now 
known that a single neuron usually contains more than 
one and sometimes as many as three neurotransmit-
ters.4 Neurotransmitters carry information about and 
provide stimulation for changes in the functional state 
of a presynaptic or postsynaptic neuron. The effect 
on the postsynaptic membrane can be excitatory or 
inhibitory, but most serve to modulate the excitability 
of the neuron. For classification purposes, neurotrans-
mitter specificity also can be used to describe neurons 
and their axons. For example, cells that contain the 
neurotransmitter dopamine are called dopaminergic 
neurons. If they contain glutamate, they are called 
glutamatergic.
Speech-language pathologists and audiologists often 
are confronted with patients who are diagnosed with 
disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism. Parkinson’s 
disease results from a decrease in dopamine production 
in the substantia nigra. The decreased dopamine pro-
duction accounts for the characteristic tremor and the 
inability to control movements. Research in Parkinson’s 
disease is striving to determine what triggers the rapid 
death of the dopaminergic cells.
The original treatment for Parkinson’s disease 
included administration of a form of l-dopa, a pre-
cursor of dopamine. This helped the nervous system 
increase dopamine synthesis, but it did not last long. 
More current pharmacologic therapy includes a com-
bination of l-dopa with carbidopa because carbidopa 
cannot cross the blood-brain barrier (see Chapter 2). 
Carbidopa decreases l-dopa metabolism in the periph-
eral tissues, thus making it more readily available for 
the CNS to increase dopamine synthesis in the healthy 
neurons that are left.
Patients with seizures experience the effects of 
abnormal activity of glutamatergic neurons. Because it 
is an excitatory neurotransmitter, rapid and sustained 
firing of even a small group of these neurons in one 
area of the brain may lead to successive excitation of 
other similar neurons until a region, or in the case of a 
grand mal seizure, the entire brain, experiences a par-
oxysmal discharge, which is the seizure activity. Phar-
macologic treatment is targeted toward utilization of 
GABA transmitters to inhibit neural firing. Drugs such 
as phenobarbital are used for long-term management 
of seizures.
CHEMICAL TRANSMISSION  
IN THE MOTOR SYSTEM
In peripheral nerve-to-muscle transmission, or neu-
romuscular transmission, the nerve is known to be 
a structure on the muscle surface, making contact 
with the muscle fiber but not fusing with it. A special 
TABLE 4-1
What Makes a Chemical Substance  
a Neurotransmitter?
Production
A neurotransmitter must be synthesized 
by the neuron and released from 
the neuron. The presynaptic termi-
nal should therefore contain the 
neurotransmitter and the enzymes 
necessary to synthesize it.
Identification
The substance should be released in a 
form that can be chemically or phar-
macologically identified. Therefore 
it should be possible to isolate it and 
know its structure.
Reproduction 
capability
The events that occur on stimulation 
of the presynaptic terminal should 
be reproduced by the effect of this 
substance on the postsynaptic cell.
Blocking
The effects of the substance should be 
blocked by a competitive antagonist 
of the receptor in a dose-dependent 
manner. Treatments that inhibit the 
synthesis of the substance should 
block the effect of presynaptic  
stimulation as well.
Termination
There should be a mechanism that will 
terminate the action of the substance 
on the cell, such as uptake, enzymatic 
inactivation, etc.
Modified from Squire, L. R., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., du Lac, S., Ghosh, A., & 
Spitzer, N. C. (2013). Fundamental neuroscience (4th ed.). Oxford, England: 
Academic Press.

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
88
structural enlargement of the muscle fiber called the 
motor endplate is at the synaptic junction. In the PNS, 
electrical currents generated by the action of the trans-
mitter substance acetylcholine flow across the synapse 
to the postsynaptic membrane. In nerve-to-muscle 
impulses, this is the membrane of the motor endplate. 
An impulse is then generated along the muscle fiber, 
which sets off a complex series of events for muscle 
contraction.
Myasthenia gravis is an unusual disorder of neu-
rotransmitter transmission in the motor system. 
With this neuromuscular disease, the patient shows 
muscle weakness on sustained effort. Neuromuscular 
transmission appears to fail after continuous muscle 
contraction as a result of reduced availability of ace-
tylcholine at the synapse between nerve and muscle. 
Antibodies interfere with the transmission of the ace-
tylcholine. These antibodies are an autoimmune dis-
ease reaction to postsynaptic receptor protein, with 
an involvement of the postsynaptic membranes. In the 
earlier stages, if the muscle is allowed to rest, normal 
function is restored until further use again depletes 
the acetylcholine.
The primary symptom of weakness often affects 
the speech muscles. The nerves innervating the lar-
ynx and velum are sometimes the first to be affected 
by the disease. The weakened vocal folds do not 
close appropriately, and the voice becomes breathy 
and weak in intensity. A hypernasal voice quality may 
develop after sustained speaking because of weak-
ness of the soft palate. As the speech deteriorates, 
the tongue, lips, and respiratory muscles may be 
involved. Speech symptoms are discussed further in 
Chapter 8.
Certain drugs (e.g., neostigmine [Prostigmin] and 
edrophonium [Tensilon]) temporarily and promptly 
relieve the symptoms and help the neurologist diag-
nose the disease. Treatment to reduce the antibodies 
blocking the acetylcholine transmission is effective in 
reversing the neuromuscular problem in the muscles 
of the body, as well as the speech muscles.
ELECTRICAL SYNAPSES (GAP JUNCTIONS)
Although chemical synapses are by far the most com-
mon signaling mechanism in the nervous system, 
electrical synapses occur more frequently than once 
thought. In vertebrates, they occur often at sensory 
synapses (for example, in the retina), in some nuclei 
of the thalamus, and also in some cortical-cortical neu-
ron transmissions. They allow more rapid signaling 
because there is no electrical-to-chemical-to-electrical 
Classical
GABA
Glycine
Glutamate
Aspartate
Homocysteine
Taurine
Acetylcholine
Monoamines
Catecholamines
Dopamine
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Serotonin
Adenosine
Adenosine triphosphate
Nitric oxide
Non-classical: Neuropeptides
β-Endorphin
Dynorphin
Neoendorphin
Arginine vasopressin
Oxytocin
Substance P
Kassinin
Neurokinin A
Neurokinin B
Eledoisin
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Glucagon
Secretin
Growth hormone-releasing hormone
Methionine enkephalin
Leucine enkephalin
Unconventional
Endocannabinoids
Nitric oxide
	
BOX 4-2   
Classical, Non-classical, and Unconventional Neurotransmitters

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
89
transition necessary. When they do occur, it is primar-
ily at what are called gap junctions, rather than syn-
aptic clefts, between dendrites or between two closely 
adjacent neuron cell bodies. Electrical synapses are 
excitatory only; there are no inhibitory electrical syn-
apses. No neurotransmitter is involved, and no delay 
at the synapse occurs. Thus no modulation of the 
transmission would be possible. According to Fitzger-
ald and Folan-Curran,3 electrical synapses occur to 
ensure that neurons that must participate in a com-
mon activity fire in synchrony. An example of this 
occurs in the medulla for synchronous discharge dur-
ing inspiration.
Principles of Neuronal Operation
The CNS is constantly bombarded by volleys of sensory 
nerve impulses. Both excitation and inhibition play a 
large role in the nervous system. The excitatory and 
inhibitory influences provide a process of selectivity 
of impulses for transmission at the level of the syn-
apse. This selectivity of transmission of nerve impulse 
may be the basic function of the synapse. The synapse 
also allows transmission in an all-or-nothing manner. 
In other words, all that can be transmitted is either 
a full-sized response for the condition of the axon or 
nothing.
Furthermore, the CNS is characterized by the prin-
ciple of divergence. Charles Sherrington7 observed 
that within the human nervous system are numer-
ous branchings of all axons with a great opportunity 
for wide dispersal of impulses because the impulses 
discharged by a neuron travel along its branches to 
activate all its synapses. Synaptic divergence means 
that an AP can trigger multiple excitatory postsyn-
aptic potentials simultaneously, affecting many den-
dritic terminals at once. This amplifies the activity of 
a single axon. This kind of divergent synaptic action 
is found, for example, in the cerebellum, which dem-
onstrates great divergence, and in the sensory affer-
ents of the thalamus. Another method of achieving 
divergence, involving axons, is also found in the ner-
vous system. Axons branch into collaterals and give 
rise to multiple terminals, thus resulting in numerous 
synaptic contacts. This kind of divergence is common 
in the cortical cells. Thus the CNS is composed of an 
almost infinite series of sources and routes for wide-
spread or accessory neuronal activity. This accessory 
neuronal activity forms what may be considered neu-
ronal pools of activity.
A complementary principle of convergence exists 
in the nervous system. This principle, also enumer-
ated by Sherrington, implies that all neurons receive 
synaptic information from many other neurons, 
some of an excitatory nature and some of an inhibi-
tory nature. Synaptic convergence occurs when mul-
tiple synapses occur on one postsynaptic dendrite. 
The number of synapses on individual neurons is 
generally large, measured in hundreds or thousands, 
with the largest being approximately 80,000. When 
convergence occurs, two kinds of summation, or 
additive effects, may take place. Temporal summation 
may occur in which the effect of the neurotransmit-
ters may be enhanced, for example, if the additive 
effect of all synapses is excitatory. The convergence 
could also summate in time with the excitatory and 
inhibitory potentials canceling each other out, result-
ing in the resting potential being maintained. The 
integration of the excitatory and inhibitory synapses 
usually functions, however, to modulate action. With 
modulation, there is a change in potential, but it is 
not as great a change as it would have been without 
the convergence.
Another kind of convergence summation is spatial 
summation. During this, the varied sites of synapse along 
the dendritic surface of the neuron cause responses to 
rise in the different parts of the neuron (graded poten-
tials). The summation may increase the possibility of 
more local mechanisms during activation from the site 
on one dendritic tree to another.
Principles of divergence and convergence also 
suggest that certain neuronal systems can act primar-
ily as either excitatory or inhibitory mechanisms for 
effective overall neuronal functioning. An example 
is the large excitatory and inhibitory neuronal sys-
tem in the reticular formation deep within the brain, 
which both activates and suppresses levels of con-
sciousness during wakefulness and sleep, respectively. 
Box 4-3 summarizes the principles of divergence and 
convergence.
The complexity of the neuronal firings and syn-
aptic connections, particularly on the surface of the 
brain called the cerebral cortex, provides an intricate 
weaving of impulses into complex spatial and tempo-
ral patterns. Sherrington has compared this neuro-
nal activity with the weaving of an enchanted loom. 
Today, in the age of technology, we tend to compare 
it with an extremely complex “network.” No doubt 
these ever-changing neuronal designs are the basis 
for the integrative activity of the nervous system and 
are the foundations of emotion, thought, language, 
and action, as well as that most human of behaviors, 
speaking.
The range of behavior that is assumed to be specifi-
cally human, including our rich and complex language 
system, is sometimes difficult to grasp. Even harder to 
believe is that this range ultimately can be reduced to 

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
90
and equated with the mere ebb and flow of minute 
chemical and electrical changes in tiny, but intricate, 
synaptic mechanisms. This contemporary interpreta-
tion of neuronal function, reductionist as it appears, 
highlights the vast and mysterious frontier between 
mind and brain that faces the neuroscientist. Despite 
this great gulf between mind and matter, the speech-
language pathologist should remember that this view 
of neuronal functioning provides the neurophysiolo-
gist with a basis for seeing the workings of the brain 
as a vast abstract complex of neuronal design on the 
enchanted loom of Sherrington. Despite the sophisti-
cation of stu­dying neuronal function, the specifics of 
the neuronal patterns for understanding and produc-
ing language and speech in the brain remain largely a 
mystery.
DEGENERATION AND REGENERATION OF 
NEURONS AND THEIR CONNECTIONS
Degeneration
Primary neuronal loss refers to the immediate 
necrotic degeneration of neurons directly affected 
by, for instance, anoxia, physical trauma, or vascu-
lar insult such as a cerebrovascular accident (CVA). 
Secondary neuronal loss, on the other hand, refers 
to the degeneration of neurons that occurs hours, 
days, or weeks after the primary insult. The second-
ary neuronal loss is variable and can have an effect 
on prognosis.
If the axon of the neuron is damaged or severed, 
degeneration, but not death, of the neuron may 
occur. In the case of damage to the nerves of the 
peripheral nervous system, the damage to the axon 
may be at a point close to the cell body of origin or to 
a point far away because they often extend some dis-
tance. In the central nervous system, especially with 
cortical lesions or lesions in the spinal cord, because 
the cells are so close in proximity, secondary neuro-
nal loss and degeneration of neurons may occur in 
the region just adjacent to the primary area of infarc-
tion. Several variables have an effect on the mecha-
nisms of degeneration. These could include blood 
flow levels, the integrity of the blood-brain barrier, 
edema, and inflammation.
Two types of damage may occur in axons. Antero-
grade degeneration refers to the degradation of axo-
nal structure that spreads away from the cell body. 
Wallerian degeneration is the most common type of 
anterograde degeneration and is often considered a 
synonymous term. Wallerian degeneration is the type 
of deterioration of axons and the myelin sheath result-
ing from more proximal axonal or neuronal damage. 
Deterioration consists of a pulling away of the myelin 
sheath and swelling of the axon with it eventually 
breaking into segments. The terminals continue to 
deteriorate, and the distal segment eventually dies. 
Glial cells then will go through the area and rid it of 
the debris.
In the PNS, retrograde degeneration, or spread of 
deterioration toward the cell body, may occur and the 
cell body itself may undergo chromatolysis, or loss of 
color, from the loss of the Nissl cells. This may eventu-
ally lead to cell death.
Regeneration
Axonal regeneration most likely occurs in the PNS 
when a peripheral nerve is either compressed or 
crushed but not severed and permanently damaged. 
The injured axon degenerates distal to the lesion, and 
the myelin sheath begins to break up. Monocytes from 
the blood enter and become macrophages to clean up 
the debris. The macrophages also signal the Schwann 
cells to secrete trophic substances to feed and guide 
the growth of new axonal sprouts. The axonal sprout-
ing begins at the site of injury days to weeks after the 
injury. If regeneration is to be successful, the sprout-
ing axons must make contact with the Schwann cells 
of the distal stump. The sprouting axons exhibit swell-
ings on their tips. These swellings are called growth 
cones. The Schwann cells on the distal stump send out 
processes toward these growth cones. Regeneration 
usually proceeds at approximately 5 mm/day in the 
larger nerve trunks, with growth in the finer branches 
at approximately 2 mm/day.
If the nerve trunk of a peripheral nerve has been 
completely severed, spontaneous regeneration is not 
Divergence
	•	 Branching of all axons within the human nervous 
system allows activation of all proximate synapses.
	•	 Creates limitless pathways for potential neuronal 
activity.
	•	 Allows grouping of neuronal activity: excitation or 
inhibition.
Convergence
	•	 Individual neurons receive multiple signals simulta-
neously from many other neurons.
	•	 Signals from multiple neurons can be conflicting 
(some that excite and some that inhibit).
	•	 Activation or suppression of an individual neuron 
is based on these incoming signals.
	
BOX 4-3   
Principles of Divergence and Convergence

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
91
as successful because the axonal sprouts are not as 
likely to reach the appropriate distal stump targets. 
If the proximal axon sprouts fail to make contact, a 
neuroma may form, with whorls of these regener-
ating axons trapped in scar tissue at the injury site. 
Surgical repair of a severed nerve trunk is not usually 
attempted for a few weeks; delay is desired so that con-
nective sheaths can thicken somewhat to be able to 
hold sutures better.
Central Nervous System Regeneration
If injury occurs to white matter in the CNS, degenera-
tion distal to the point of injury occurs as it does in the 
PNS. However, clearance of the debris by the microglial 
cells and monocytes proceeds quite slowly, with debris 
found months later. Rather than the chromatolysis noted 
in parent cell bodies of peripheral nerves, the neurons 
in the CNS that are injured tend to necrose, or die. Sur-
viving neurons in the area may appear wasted and usu-
ally do not make many synaptic contacts. This large-scale 
death of neurons is caused by a process known as ortho-
grade transneuronal atrophy. Neurons of the CNS nor-
mally have a trophic effect on each other; that is, they 
sustain each other. When the main input to a group of 
neurons is damaged and no longer effective, the whole 
group is likely to waste away. Sometimes a phenomenon 
called retrograde transneuronal degeneration occurs in 
neurons upstream to those initially affected by the lesion. 
Astrocytes may initiate the formation of a glial scar, which 
replaces the neuronal debris in the case of a small lesion. 
With a large lesion, cystic cavities containing cerebrospi-
nal fluid and blood may be left.
Animal studies in the laboratory have provided hope 
that CNS neurons have regenerative capacity because 
they have shown sprouting of axons and invasion of 
planted peripheral nerves. In the CNS, deterrents to 
spontaneous regeneration like that seen in the PNS are 
the glial scar tissue that develops and the growth inhibi-
tion caused by breakdown of oligodendrocyte products. 
Unfortunately, oligodendrocytes of the CNS do not gen-
erate growth signals (like the active signaling for growth 
by the Schwann cells in the PNS). In general the CNS in 
mammals seems to lack trophic factors required to initi-
ate the significant sprouting of axons. Injured motor and 
sensory pathways will regenerate only for a few millime-
ters, and if synapses develop, they are usually on nearby 
neurons.
At this writing, active areas of research for provision 
of trophic factors for regeneration in the CNS are the 
use of embryonic and adult-derived stem cells,1,5 con-
trol of reactive astrogliosis,8 and injection of the sub-
stance secreted by stem cells (secretome).2 Although 
medical science has not found a way to regenerate 
neurons or hasten connections, there is promising 
research, including clinical trials, giving hope for the 
future of rehabilitation.
Synopsis of Clinical Information or Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 A neuron is a nerve cell that is the basic anatomic 
and functional unit of the nervous system.
	•	 Neurons have a cell body that synthesizes proteins.
	•	 The three types of neuronal cells are classified by 
shape: multipolar, pseudounipolar, and bipolar.
	•	 Each cell contains a nucleus and 1 to 12 projec-
tions of varying length that receive stimuli and 
conduct neural impulses.
	•	 Dendrites receive neural stimuli; shorter ones re-
ceive signals from other neurons.
	•	 Axons are longer single fibers that conduct nerve 
impulses away from the neuron to other parts of 
the nervous system, glands, and muscles.
	•	 A synapse is the point of contact between the axon 
of one neuron and another neuron’s cell body.
	•	 This action produces neuronal activity or brain 
activation, thus producing perceptions, thoughts, 
and voluntary muscle movements.
	•	 Cellular potential is the relative amount of voltage 
in an electrical field.
	•	 Neurons have two electrical fields—one inside and 
one outside the cell body.
	•	 Functions of neuron integration (thinking or 
­cognition) depend on electrical properties and 
how the ions move.
	•	 Resting potential is the ionic difference across the 
membrane at a steady state in the cell.
	•	 AP is the neural impulse that travels to another cell 
body, dendrite, or axon.
	•	 APs are brief electrical transients visible when recorded.
	•	 APs occur throughout the body’s tissues and regulate 
secretions of hormones and signal fertilization of the 
egg by the sperm. In a nervous system, APs integrate 
neural messages from cell bodies from sense organs.
	•	 Nerve fibers, or axons, are either myelinated or 
unmyelinated.
	•	 Myelin is a white, fatty, lipid substance that sur-
rounds the axon for protection and transmission.
	•	 Myelin in the CNS is oligodendrocytes.
	•	 Myelin in the PNS is Schwann cells.
	•	 Myelin is white, as opposed to the nonmyelinated 
cells, which appear gray.
	•	 Myelin develops as the brain develops from the 
embryonic state.
Continued

NEURONAL FUNCTION IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  CHAPTER FOUR
92
	•	 Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune inflammatory 
response that damages the myelin sheath; it may 
cause irreversible damage.
	•	 Dysarthria is a speech disorder found in some 
­neurological diseases.
	•	 The synapse is the point at which an electrical 
nerve impulse in the form of an AP must be trans-
mitted to another neuron, gland, or muscle.
	•	 The presynaptic terminal is at the axon sending the 
impulse.
	•	 The postsynaptic terminal is the receiving area of 
the receiving axon.
	•	 The synapse between the presynaptic and postsyn-
aptic space, called the synaptic cleft, is transmitted 
by chemical reaction.
	•	 Chemical substances known as neurotransmitters 
are released by the presynaptic terminal; they dif-
fuse across the synaptic cleft and bind with recep-
tors in the postsynaptic terminal.
	•	 Neurotransmitters provide excitatory action from 
the presynaptic terminal; to ensure completion of 
the synapse across the cleft, neurotransmitters also 
provide an inhibitory action from the postsynaptic 
terminal.
	•	 Neurotransmitters are the fundamental basis for 
chemical action in the nervous system.
	•	 Neurotransmitter types are named specifically to 
describe the neurons and axons that are part of the 
synapse process.
	•	 The neurotransmitter dopamine has cells called do-
paminergic neurons; if the cells contain glutamate, 
they are called glutamatergic cells.
	•	 GABA and glutamate are the most prevalent neuro-
transmitters.
	•	 Glutamate is a major excitatory neurotransmitter.
	•	 GABA is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter.
	•	 Disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism include 
Parkinson’s disease, which is caused by a decrease 
in dopamine in the substantia nigra.
	•	 Myasthenia gravis is a condition caused by reduced 
acetylcholine at the synapse between nerve and 
muscle.
	•	 Primary neuronal loss is necrotic degeneration of 
neurons affected by anoxia or CVA.
	•	 Secondary neuronal loss is degeneration of neu-
rons that occurs within hours, days, or weeks after 
a primary insult; it may include effects on blood 
flow, integrity of the blood-brain barrier, edema, 
and inflammation.
	•	 Neurons in the adult brain that are lost to trauma 
or disease are not replaced.
	•	 In Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease, 
neurons die in large numbers and leave those areas 
of the brain nonfunctional for motor function or 
cognition.
	•	 If axons are simply damaged, then regeneration 
may be possible.
	•	 Axonal damage is categorized as anterograde or 
retrograde.
	•	 Anterograde damage is disintegration of the my-
elin sheath that depends on the Schwann cells or 
oligodendrocytes.
	•	 Retrograde damage is characterized by swollen 
cell bodies, an enlarged nucleus, and dissolution of 
endoplasm.
	•	 Large-scale death of neurons is called orthograde 
transneuronal atrophy.
	•	 Research on stem cells, astrogliosis, and the 
secretome is currently being done to investigate 
neuronal regeneration in the CNS and PNS.
Synopsis of Clinical Information or Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d
REFERENCES
	1.	 Ali, F., Stott, S. R. W., & Barker, R. A. (2014). Stem cells and 
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Experimental Neurol-
ogy, 260, 3–11.
	2.	 Drago, D., Cossetti, C., Nunzio, I., Gaude, E., Musco, G., 
Bachi, A., & Pluchino, S. (2013). The stem cell secretome 
and its role in brain repair. Biochimie, 95, 2271–2285. Re-
trieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4061727.
	3.	 Fitzgerald, M. J. T., & Folan-Curran, J. (2002). Clinical 
neuroanatomy and related neuroscience (4th ed.). Edinburgh:  
W. B. Saunders.
	4.	 Haines, D. E. (2006). Fundamentals of neuroscience (3rd ed.). 
St. Louis: Elsevier.
	5.	 Hu, Z., & Ulfendahl, M. (2013). The potential of stem cells 
for the restoration of auditory function in humans. Regen-
erative Medicine, 8, 309.
	6.	 Roland, P. E. (1993). Brain activation. New York: Wiley.
	7.	 Sherrington, S. C. (1926). The integrative action of the ­nervous 
system. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
	8.	 Sofroniew, M. V., & Vinters, H. V. (2010). Astrocytes: Biol-
ogy and pathology. Acta Neuropathologica, 119, 7–35.
	9.	 Squire, L. R., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., du Lac, S., Ghosh, A., 
& Spitzer, N. C. (2013). Fundamental neuroscience (4th ed.). 
Oxford, England: Academic Press.

93
5
K E Y  T E R M S
agnosia
analgesia
anterior spinothalamic 
tract
astereognosis
atopognosis
audition
auditory agnosia
auditory brainstem 
responses (ABRs)
basilar membrane
cerebellopontine 
angle
cochlea
cochlear duct
dermatome
dorsal column 
pathway
endolymph
exteroceptors
fasciculi
helicotrema
hemianopsia
hyperalgesia
hyperesthesia
hypoalgesia
hypoesthesia
interoceptors
lateral spinothalamic 
tract
mechanicoreceptors
modiolus
nociceptors
optic chiasm
optic disk
organ of Corti
perilymph
peristriate cortex
photoreceptors
proprioceptors
Romberg test
scalae
spinocerebellar 
pathway
spiral ganglion
splenium
stereognosis
stereocilia
striate cortex
tectal (collicular) 
pathway
tectorial membrane
temporal visual cortex
tonotopic
visual agnosia
Neurosensory 
Organization
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Classification
Sherrington’s Scheme
Sensory Association Cortices
The Sense of Hearing
Receptor Level
Cranial Nerve Level
Brainstem Level
Auditory Radiations and Cortex
Auditory Physiology
Lesions of the Auditory System
The Sense of Touch
Somatic Sensation
Sensory Examination
Light Touch
Two-Point Discrimination
Pain and Temperature
Recognition of Limb Position
Stereognosis
Vibratory Sensibility Test
Body Sway Test
Neuroanatomy of Oral Sensation
Oral Sensory Receptors
The Sense of Vision
Retina
Path of the Optic Nerve
Primary Visual Cortex
Visual Association Cortex
Visual Integration
Visual Agnosia
Speech is normally controlled by the ear.
Raymond Carhart, Hearing and Deafness, 1947

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
94
Classification
During the nineteenth century, neurophysiologists pri-
marily conceived the execution of skilled motor acts as the 
result of programming in the motor areas of the cerebral 
cortex, with some additional influences on the descend-
ing motor impulses from cerebellar and extrapyramidal 
mechanisms. This view of the nervous system was modified 
during the twentieth century to include the concept of sen-
sory feedback control in motor acts. Audition, of course, 
plays a special and primary feedback role in the control of 
speech. More recently, specific efforts have been directed 
at determining the nature of other neurosensory con-
trols exercised in speaking. Before discussion of sensory 
control in speech, an understanding of the general types  
of sensation mediated by the nervous system is necessary.
SHERRINGTON’S SCHEME
Charles Sherrington9 proposed a classification of sen-
sation that has application for the sensory control of 
speech. He divided the sensory receptors into three 
broad classes: exteroceptors, proprioceptors, and intero-
ceptors. Exteroceptors mediate sight, sound, smell, and 
cutaneous sensation. Cutaneous superficial skin sensa-
tion includes light touch or pressure, fine touch (also 
known as two-point or discriminative touch), superficial 
pain, temperature, itching, and tickling. Proprioceptors 
mediate deep somatic sensation from receptors beneath 
the skin, in muscles and joints, and in the inner ear. 
Proprioception includes the senses of movement, vibra-
tion, position, and equilibrium. Interoceptors mediate 
sensation from the viscera as well as visceral pain and 
pressure or distention. Pain receptors, either from cel-
lular or tissue injury, are known as nociceptors.
Neurophysiologists have classified the senses as spe-
cial and general. The term special senses reflects the 
traditional layperson’s concept that certain senses are 
primary. For the neurophysiologist, hearing, vision, 
taste, smell, and balance are the special senses. The 
general senses, in this classification scheme, include the 
remainder of the senses. Further breakdown into visceral 
and somatic sensations has also been added to the clas-
sification schemes. General visceral afferent interocep-
tors monitor events within the body, including bladder 
distention and pH changes in the blood. Special visceral 
afferent receptors are those of taste and smell (olfac-
tion). Special somatic afferent receptors are concerned 
with vision, audition, and balance or equilibrium.
SENSORY ASSOCIATION CORTICES
In Chapter 2 the functional typology of association 
cortex was discussed, with unimodal and polymodal 
association cortices found in the sensory processing 
areas of the brain. Afferent projections of sensory infor-
mation initially are processed in unimodal cortex found 
in the primary sensory cortices, including the visual 
cortex (area 17 along the calcarine fissure), the audi-
tory cortex (areas 41 and 42 in Heschl’s gyrus), and the 
somatosensory cortex (areas 1, 2, and 3 in the postcen-
tral gyrus). Areas around the primary sensory cortices 
usually are polymodal association cortex. The visual 
association cortex includes the entire medial surface of 
the occipital lobe beyond the primary area, the lateral 
surface of the occipital lobe (areas 18 and 19), the infe-
rior and middle temporal gyri, and the entire inferior 
surface of the temporal lobe (areas 20, 21, and 37). The 
auditory association cortices include the areas around 
Heschl’s gyrus and area 22, a portion of the superior 
temporal gyrus. Area 22 in the left temporal lobe, how-
ever, is considered more of a supramodal association 
area than simply a polymodal processor because of the 
language processing capability.
Recognition and identification or classification of a 
sensory stimulus is a critical function and can preclude 
or complicate evaluation of communication skills. Per-
ception of a word requires adequate hearing acuity, but 
the stimulus must also be recognized to be a word. The 
features must be visually, audibly, or tactically perceived 
before an object can be recognized. Sensory disorders 
resulting in an inability to interpret a sensory stimulus 
and recognize it are called agnosias.
The term agnosia was introduced to neurology by 
Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) in 1891. Agnosia is a dis-
order of recognition caused by cerebral injury. Classic 
theory places the lesion responsible for the disorder 
in the sensory association areas of the cerebral cor-
tex, leaving the primary sensory receptor areas intact. 
To diagnose the classic disorder correctly, certain 
precautions must be observed. First, the lesion must 
be determined to be at the level of the cortical asso-
ciation area rather than at the level of the sensory 
receptor, the sensory pathway, or the primary sen-
sory receptor area in the cortex. Second, unfamiliar-
ity with the test item must be ruled out as a reason 
for failure to recognize the sensory stimuli. To estab-
lish basic knowledge of an item, the patient should 
match items. If an item can be matched or recognized 
in other modalities, unfamiliarity can be ruled out 
as a possible cause for the lack of recognition. The 
concept of agnosia has been highly criticized in con-
temporary neurology. Although true agnosias are not 
common, some patients in clinical practice appear 
to demonstrate a tactile, visual, or auditory agnosia. 
Table 5-1 defines the various types of agnosias that 
may be seen in a clinical practice specializing in neu-
robehavioral disorders.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
95
The Sense of Hearing
A major aspect of speech and language function 
depends on audition. Audition generally is classified as 
one of the special senses and as an exteroceptive sense. 
Knowledge of the neurologic functions of the central 
auditory pathways is crucial for an understanding of the 
mechanisms of the communication nervous system.
Before discussing the specific levels of the central 
auditory pathway, a review of how sound is transmit-
ted to the inner ear and the auditory nerve, cranial 
nerve VIII, is warranted. The physical signal known as 
sound undergoes a series of complex transformations 
for it to be heard. These transformations begin when 
a mechanical disturbance causes molecules in the air 
to alternately expand and compress (vibrate) and sets 
up a displacement that is passed along among the mol-
ecules. The resulting sound waves are channeled by 
the external ear structures into the external auditory 
meatus, or ear canal, the resonating canal that ends 
at a taut membrane called the eardrum, or tympanic 
membrane (Fig. 5-1). The eardrum is at the entrance 
to the middle ear, an air-filled cavity containing the 
three tiniest bones of the body, the malleus, incus, 
and stapes, collectively known as the ossicles. This 
ossicular chain has one end attached to the eardrum 
and the other to a small opening at the inferior part 
of the cavity called the oval window. Mechanical trans-
mission of vibration through the ossicular chain helps 
increase the force that reaches the oval window. The 
force causes the oval window to move and transmit the 
movement into the fluid-filled cavity of the inner ear. 
The inner ear contains the coiled cochlea (Fig. 5-2). 
On the membranes of the cochlea are the sensory hair 
cells that contain neurotransmitters to be released to 
stimulate the auditory nerve, cranial nerve VIII. This 
auditory nerve then carries this signal to the cochlear 
nucleus in the brainstem and on to its final destination, 
the auditory cortex.
TABLE 5-1
Agnosias
TYPE OF AGNOSIA
CHARACTERISTICS
Agnosia
A disorder of recognition caused 
by damage to cortical sensory 
association areas or pathways
Visual agnosia
Inability to recognize objects, 
colors, and pictures
Auditory agnosia
Inability to comprehend speech or 
nonspeech sounds (pure forms: 
auditory nonverbal agnosia 
and pure word deafness)
Tactile syndrome
Inability to recognize objects 
by touch; characterized by 
bilateral parietal lobe lesions
Gerstmann  
syndrome
Includes finger agnosia, right-left 
disorientation, acalculia, and 
agraphia; usually characterized 
by left parietal lobe lesions
Ossicles
Pinna
Ear canal
Oval and
round
windows
Inner ear
Tympanic
membrane
Outer ear
Middle
ear
Vestibular
apparatus
Cochlea
Cochlear
nerve
Eustachian
tube
FIGURE 5-1
Three divisions of the ear. In the outer ear sound waves are directed to the middle ear, 
where they are converted to oscillations of the ossicles. In the inner ear the oscillations 
are converted to pressure waves, which in turn are converted to neuronal activity. (From 
Castro, A., Neafsey, E. J., Merchut, M. P., & Wurster, R. D. [2002]. Neuroscience: An outline 
approach. Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier.)

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
96
RECEPTOR LEVEL
The cochlea of the inner ear serves as an acoustic trans-
ducer, changing fluid vibrations to nerve impulses. 
The design and function of the cochlea are incredibly 
complex and intricate. A summary of this fascinating 
structure for study by the speech-language pathologist 
is, of necessity, brief. More in-depth information can be 
found in other texts.3,10
Figure 5-2 depicts a cross section of the cochlea. 
This coiled structure has a central bony, hollow core 
called the modiolus, which is in the axis of the inter-
nal auditory meatus. Running through the modiolus is 
the cochlear division of cranial nerve VIII, the acoustic-
vestibular nerve. The cell bodies of its neurons form the 
spiral ganglion, and these are the primary or first-order 
neurons of the auditory pathway.
Forming a coil of two and a half turns around the 
modiolus are three separate fluid-filled columns called 
scalae (see Fig. 5-2). The upper compartment is the scala 
vestibuli, and the lower chamber is the scala tympani. 
These two chambers communicate at the apex of the 
modiolus at a site called the helicotrema. Between these 
two compartments is a third chamber called the scala 
media, also known as the cochlear duct. The scala ves-
tibuli and the scala tympani are filled with a fluid called 
perilymph. The cochlear duct is filled with a different 
fluid, endolymph. These two fluids do not mix because 
of a tight barrier of epithelium lining the cochlear duct. 
The vestibular membrane, or Reissner’s membrane, 
separates the cochlear duct and the scala vestibuli and 
the basilar membrane separates the cochlear duct from 
the scala tympani.
Membranes of fibrous connective tissue also run 
between the epithelium and the bones of the cochlea. 
The spiral lamina projects from the modiolus. Attached 
to the tip of the spiral lamina is the basilar membrane.
This membrane reaches across the cavity of the 
cochlea, forming the floor of the cochlear duct, and 
attaches to the spiral ligament on the outer wall of the 
cochlea. Figure 5-3 shows a cross section of the cochlear 
duct, looking at the cochlea in an upright position 
rather than its usual position on its side.
The basilar membrane is an important structure 
because it contains the organ of Corti, the sensory epi-
thelium of hearing. When sound occurs, causing vibra-
tion of the tympanic membrane and movement of the 
ossicles of the middle ear, movement of the oval window 
leading into the scala vestibule occurs. This creates a 
pressure wave in the perilymph in the scala vestibuli. 
The pressure waves are transmitted through the vestib-
ular membrane to the basilar membrane. This move-
ment then sets up a neural chain of events in the organ 
of Corti.
Scala tympani
(perilymph)
Scala vestibuli
(perilymph)
Modiolus
Cochlear nerve
Vestibular nerve
Cochlear Duct
(endolymph)
FIGURE 5-2
Cross section of the cochlea. (Netter illustrations from www.netterimages.com, © Elsevier, 
Inc., All Rights Reserved.)

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
97
In the organ of Corti are several types of cells, with 
the two most important being the inner hair cells and 
the outer hair cells. These cell types are separated by a 
central tunnel, with the outer hair cells located on the 
outer side of the tunnel. The hair cells rest on support-
ing cells; other ancillary cells also are in the structure. 
On the top of the hair cells are stereocilia, extremely 
long microvilli extending from the surface. Overlying 
the hair cells and their stereocilia is a gelatinous struc-
ture called the tectorial membrane. The stereocilia of 
the inner hair cells lie just below the tectorial mem-
brane, whereas those of the outer hair cells are embed-
ded in the tectorial membrane (see Fig. 5-3). The outer 
hair cells outnumber the inner cells by approximately 
3:1, but most of the neurons of the spiral ganglion 
innervate inner hair cells, with up to 20 large affer-
ent neurons synapsing on each inner hair cell. These 
myelinated neurons innervating the inner hair cells are 
called type I cells, and each one responds best to a cer-
tain frequency.
The organ of Corti also receives efferent innervation 
coming from the olivocochlear bundle of the superior 
olivary complex in the brainstem. Thus some informa-
tion comes from the brain to the cochlea rather than 
it all being unidirectional, from cochlea to brain. Some 
neurons go to the outer hair cells. These well-myelinated 
efferent neurons (medial olivocochlear bundle) typically 
cross the midline and exit the brain with the vestibular 
portion of cranial nerve VIII. They eventually join the 
cochlear division and travel in the spiral ganglion. They 
then enter the organ of Corti and synapse on the outer 
hair cells. Although none of the efferent fiber functions 
of the auditory system is well understood, these cells 
are believed to inhibit or reduce the movement of the 
outer hair cells, effectively reducing the sensitivity of the 
cochlea at that particular region.
Some efferent neurons also go to the inner hair cells 
(lateral olivocochlear bundle); these are unmyelinated, 
usually do not decussate, and follow the same pathway 
to synapse just under the inner hair cells. These fibers 
appear to influence the type I spiral ganglion cells by 
making them more difficult to excite. These efferent 
pathways of innervation to the cochlea are believed to 
combine to assist the auditory system in selective listen-
ing so that certain auditory input can be attuned to and 
background noise or other input can be ignored.
CRANIAL NERVE LEVEL
The nerve of hearing, cranial nerve VIII, has two divi-
sions: the cochlear branch, associated with hearing, and 
the vestibular branch, associated with balance. Central 
processes of the cochlear nerve (the first-order neu-
rons) proceed from the spiral ganglion through the 
Bone
Scala vestibuli
  (perilymph)
Reissner's
membrane
        Stria
vascularis
Cochlear duct
 (endolymph)
Hair cells
inner
outer
Tectorial
membrane
Nerve
fibers
Spiral
ganglion
Scala tympani
  (perilymph)
   Basilar
membrane
Bone
FIGURE 5-3
Cross section of the cochlear duct. (From Nadeau S. et al. [2004]. Medical neuroscience. 
Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier.)

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
98
internal auditory canal. The cochlear nerve is accom-
panied by cranial nerve VII, the facial nerve, in the 
auditory canal. The two nerves enter the brainstem at 
the sulcus between the pons and the medulla, an area 
known as the cerebellopontine angle. The cochlear 
nuclear complex spans the border between the pons 
and the medulla.
BRAINSTEM LEVEL
The fibers of the cochlear division of cranial nerve VIII 
end in the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei, which are 
draped around the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The 
cochlear nuclei contain the second-order neurons of the 
auditory pathway. From the cochlear nuclei, most fibers 
of the auditory pathway proceed to the upper medulla 
and pons and cross the midline. Other fibers ascend in 
the brainstem ipsilaterally. Fibers course upward in the 
ascending central auditory pathway of the brainstem 
called the lateral lemniscus. The fibers take one of sev-
eral routes, and synapses in the auditory system may 
occur at one or more of the following structures: the 
superior olives, the inferior colliculus, and the nucleus 
of the lateral lemniscus. The superior olivary nuclei play 
an important role in localizing sound through neural 
response to the time and intensity differences arriving 
from both ears. All of the ascending auditory fibers ter-
minate in the medial geniculate body, a thalamic nucleus.
AUDITORY RADIATIONS AND CORTEX
The fibers arising from the medial geniculate body, 
coursing to the temporal cortex, are called auditory 
radiations. They pass through the internal capsule in 
their route to the bilateral primary auditory areas of 
the brain in the superior and transverse temporal gyri. 
These areas are numbered 41 and 42 and are known as 
Heschl’s gyrus.
The nuclei of the auditory pathway—the superior 
olivary complex, the nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, 
and the inferior colliculi—serve as relay nuclei as well 
as reflex centers. The reflex centers make connections 
with the eyes, head, and trunk, where automatic reflex 
actions occur in response to sound.
Descending efferent fibers, in addition to the ascend-
ing afferent fibers, are present in all parts of the cen-
tral auditory pathway. They probably serve as feedback 
loops within the pathways. Figure 5-4 shows a simplified 
schema of connections along the auditory pathway.
AUDITORY PHYSIOLOGY
Sound is transmitted to the central auditory pathways 
by a traveling wave set up on the basilar membrane of 
the cochlea. The basilar membrane is narrower at the 
base of the cochlea than at its apex. The mechanics of 
the membrane on which the organ of Corti is located 
vary slightly from base to apex. Traveling pressure waves 
of a specific frequency cause the basilar membrane to 
vibrate maximally at a specific point along the length of 
the membrane. Higher pitched sounds (high-pitched 
frequency waves) cause the shorter fibers at the basal 
turn of the cochlea to absorb their energy, whereas 
lower pitched sounds are absorbed by the longer fibers 
at the apical turn of the cochlea. Thus the basilar 
membrane is said to be tonotopic in its organization 
of fibers. This tonotopic organization extends to the 
inner hair cells as well. These hair cells receive afferent 
input from the peripheral processes of the spiral gan-
glion cells. When a local response to a certain frequency 
occurs in the hair cells, the vibration produces shear-
ing forces, causing depolarization. Electrical charges in 
Wernicke's
Area
midline
auditory radiations
internal lemniscus
commissural
neurons
cochlear division
cranial nerve VIII
trapezoid body
cerebellopontine
angle
spiral ganglion
of cochlea
Heschl's
Gyrus
Medial
Geniculate
Body
Medial
Geniculate
Body
Heschl's
Gyrus
Inferior
Colliculus
Inferior
Colliculus
Superior
Olivary
Complex
Ventral
Cochlear
Nucleus
Dorsal
Cochlear
Nucleus
CORTEX
THALAMUS
MIDBRAIN
PONS
MEDULLA
FIGURE 5-4
The afferent pathways of the central auditory system and 
the major auditory way stations. The bold lines indicate that 
the majority of fibers in the auditory pathways decussate, 
although some do travel ipsilaterally (dotted lines). For most 
of the population, perceptual analysis and comprehension 
of language occur in Wernicke’s area of the left hemisphere, 
and information coming in to the left ear has to cross to 
Wernicke’s area on the left after reaching Heschl’s gyrus in 
the right hemisphere.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
99
the dendrites of the spiral ganglion are set up and, in 
turn, cause the nerve cells to fire, releasing excitatory 
neurotransmitters.
Auditory nerve impulses ascend in the pathways of 
the central auditory nervous system. The organ of Corti 
serves as an analyzer of sound frequencies. Because 
of its tonotopic organization, the highest frequencies 
stimulate hair cells in the most basilar portion of the 
cochlea, where the basilar membrane is narrowest. The 
lowest frequencies stimulate the portions of the mem-
brane at the apex. Frequency discrimination is therefore 
dependent on the frequency of the tone and the spatial 
response of the basilar membrane. Intensity discrimina-
tion depends on the length of the basilar membrane 
set in motion and the amplitude of the vibration. Dis-
placement of a longer area of the membrane activates 
more nerve fibers, and a greater amplitude of vibration 
increases the frequency of the neural discharge.
Localizing the source of a sound depends on a com-
parison between the arrival time and the intensity of the 
sound at the two ears. Localization of sound occurs at 
higher levels in the auditory pathways. Central auditory 
structures, generally above the level of the inferior col-
liculus, are capable of making appropriate comparisons 
for sound localization. Thus in mammals and human 
beings the temporal auditory cortex is not needed for 
simple sound recognition, but it is essential for sound 
localization and recognition of changes in the temporal 
sequencing of sounds.
Temporal sequencing is a crucial higher auditory 
function because it is a significant aspect of speech. 
Sound localization probably requires the inferior collic-
ulus and auditory cortex, whereas temporal sequencing 
may require the cochlear nuclei, the medial geniculate 
nuclei, and the auditory cortex. A tonotopic organiza-
tion is present in all the central auditory nuclei, but the 
nuclei are used for analysis of several auditory proper-
ties of sound other than the recognition of tones or dif-
ferent frequencies.
LESIONS OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM
The integrity of part of the central auditory system, the 
auditory brainstem, may be assessed by recording audi-
tory brainstem responses (ABRs). Surface electrodes 
are placed on the mastoid bone and on the top of the 
head. Repetitive clicks are presented, evoking responses 
in a large number of central fibers of cranial nerve 
VIII. These responses stimulate activity at the cochlear 
nuclear level, the superior olivary complex, the lateral 
lemniscus tracts, and the inferior colliculi. The com-
bined potential is enough to be picked up by the skin 
electrodes. This method may be used to assess hearing 
objectively in infants and persons who cannot cooperate 
in subjective testing. A normal ABR is a strong indica-
tion that the middle ear, cochlea, and auditory brain-
stem are functioning normally. Abnormal ABRs may 
be caused by a middle ear or cochlear problem or may 
indicate a pathologic condition at sites in the brainstem 
such as at the level of the geniculate bodies, the medial 
colliculus, and the lateral lemniscus. If abnormal ABRs 
are found, further testing is necessary.
If a lesion occurs unilaterally and involves the audi-
tory nerve in its path from the ear and includes the 
cochlear nuclei, the person will be deaf in one ear. The 
results of unilateral cortical damage do not produce 
complete deafness. Lesions in Heschl’s gyrus bilaterally 
may produce cortical deafness, nonverbal agnosia, or 
auditory agnosia.
The term auditory agnosia usually refers to the inabil-
ity to identify auditory nonlinguistic stimuli, although 
many use the term when referring to the inability to 
recognize nonlinguistic as well as verbal stimuli. Most 
appropriate is the label auditory nonverbal agnosia for 
a pure deficit in which identification of nonlinguistic 
stimuli is impaired and the term pure word deafness if 
referring to the disorder in which nonverbal stimuli 
can be identified but speech cannot be understood. All 
auditory agnosias occur in the face of normal hearing 
acuity. The site of lesion for auditory nonverbal agnosia 
is in dispute but is assumed to be in the auditory associa-
tion areas of both hemispheres.
Pure word deafness is an uncommon syndrome in 
which the patient cannot comprehend verbal language 
but usually reads, speaks, and writes functionally. Errors 
in speech are often noted and a mild measurable lan-
guage disorder (aphasia) may be present. Both uni-
lateral and bilateral temporal lobe lesions have been 
described. Unilateral lesions are deep in the temporal 
lobe in the fibers projecting to Heschl’s gyrus. Bilateral 
lesions usually have been described as occurring in the 
midportion of the superior temporal gyri of both hemi-
spheres. Geschwind4 notes that in pure word deafness 
with a unilateral lesion, the lesion must be located sub-
cortically in the left temporal lobe so that the auditory 
radiations as well as the callosal fibers from the opposite 
auditory region are interrupted, preventing Wernicke’s 
area from receiving auditory stimulation.
In bilateral pure word deafness, the lesions in the 
temporal lobe spare Heschl’s gyrus. The lesions on the 
left are assumed to cut off connections between the pri-
mary auditory receptor cortex and Wernicke’s area. A 
lesion on the right would cut off the origin of the callo-
sal fibers from the right auditory cortex. Auditory non-
verbal agnosia, in addition to pure word deafness, may 
be the basis of the syndrome known as cortical deafness, 
which is probably associated with bilateral temporal 
lobe lesions.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
100
The Sense of Touch
SOMATIC SENSATION
The neuroanatomy of the senses is complex. The gen-
eral somatic sensory pathways—those dealing with 
bodily sensation—use the spinal cord and spinal nerves. 
Sensation to the head and vocal mechanism—larynx, 
pharynx, soft palate, and tongue—use the cranial nerve 
pathways. When these pathways are assessed for integ-
rity during a routine office examination, the attempt is 
made to isolate a sensory function, like touch to a par-
ticular part of the body. Keep in mind that when you 
actually touch something and can describe or at least 
crudely perceive features of it (like weight, temperature, 
pressure, place on the body that is touching it, etc.), you 
are using many integrated pathways. In general, most 
sensory pathways are three-neuron pathways from the 
periphery to the cerebral cortex, although some varia-
tion exists within this three-neuron organization for the 
sensations of touch, pain, temperature, and proprio-
ception. For most bodily sensations carried to the brain 
through spinal nerves, the first-order, or prime, neuron 
is found on the dorsal or posterior spinal root in a mass 
known as a spinal ganglion. The axons then ascend and 
synapse on a second-order neuron. A general name for 
the tract formed by the axon of the second-order neu-
ron is lemniscus. In most systems, fibers of the second-
order neuron then cross the midline, and ascend to 
the third-order neuron in the thalamus. Table 5-2 sum-
marizes the touch pathways for the body, excluding the 
pathways for the oral musculature, which is discussed in 
Chapter 7.
Lateral Spinothalamic Tract
The crossed ascending sensory pathway in the spinal 
cord, known as the lateral spinothalamic tract, transmits 
the sensations of pain and temperature and perhaps 
itch (Fig. 5-5). The fibers enter the cord through the 
spinal root ganglion, travel up or down a few segments 
in Lissauer’s tract, and end in the dorsal root of the gray 
matter. At this point the first-order neuron synapses 
with the second-order neuron and promptly crosses to 
the other side of the spinal cord. There the fibers enter 
the lateral white column or the lateral spinothalamic 
tract and ascend to the ventral posterior lateral nucleus 
in the thalamus. The axons of the lateral spinothalamic 
tract synapse with a third-order neuron that leaves the 
thalamus, ascends in the internal capsule, and reaches 
the postcentral cortical gyri in the parietal lobe (areas 
3, 1, and 2).
Anterior Spinothalamic Tract
Approximately 10% of the spinothalamic fibers are 
sometimes separated in anatomic texts and presented 
to be fibers of the anterior spinothalamic tract. The 
anterior (or ventral) spinothalamic tract carries sen-
sory information of crude (nondiscriminative) touch, 
as well as itch and tickle sensations (see Fig. 5-5). These 
fibers synapse within the dorsal gray horn cells in the 
spinal cord, cross midline, and ascend in the anterior 
spinothalamic tract to the brainstem and the posterior 
TABLE 5-2
The Sensory Modalities Represented by the Somatosensory Systems
MODALITY
SUB MODALITY
SUB-SUB MODALITY
SOMATOSENSORY PATHWAY (BODY)
Pain
Sharp cutting pain
Dull burning pain
Deep aching pain
Lateral spinothalamic
Anterior spinothalamic, tectospinal, and  
reticulospinal tracts
Older multisynaptic diffuse tract through RF 
and periaqueductal gray. Sends fibers to 
hypothalamus and limbic system; mediates 
visceral, emotional, and autonomic reactions
Temperature
Warm/hot
Cool/cold
Anterior spinothalamic, tectospinal, and  
reticulospinal tracts
Lateral spinothalamic
Touch
Itch/tickle and crude touch
Discriminative touch
Touch
Pressure
Flutter
Vibration
Muscle tension
Joint pressure
Anterior spinothalamic, tectospinal, and  
reticulospinal tracts
Medial lemniscal

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
101
ventral nucleus of the thalamus. The fibers associated 
with crude touch particularly branch extensively. The 
anterior spinothalamic tract also ends in the postcentral 
gyrus of the parietal lobe.
As the fibers of the spinothalamic tracts ascend, axon 
collaterals provide for additional neuronal connec-
tions, most notable to the reticular nuclei in the brain-
stem. The reticular nuclei then send projections to the 
thalamus, hypothalamus, and hippocampus. Descend-
ing fibers from these structures provide for media-
tion of somatic and visceral responses to pain, such as 
changes in respiration and heartbeat as well as nausea 
and fainting.
Effect of Damage
Damage to the spinothalamic tracts of pain and tem-
perature usually results in loss to the opposite side of 
the body. Because of the extensive branching of ascend-
ing crude touch fibers, this type of touch is unlikely to 
be abolished by injury to a specific pathway in the spinal 
cord.
Proprioception Pathways
Proprioception, two-point discrimination, vibration, and 
form perception follow different pathways than do those 
of the spinothalamic tracts. Proprioception is the sense 
of knowing exactly where body parts are in space and in 
relation to one another. Two-point discrimination allows 
two adjacent points on the skin to be distinguished. Two-
point sensitivity varies over the brain surface. The lips 
and fingertips are the most sensitive and the back the 
least sensitive. Vibratory sensation allows the recognition 
of vibration from touch. Form perception allows recogni-
tion of objects by touch alone. Table 5-3 summarizes the 
human proprioceptive pathways.
Spinocerebellar Tract
Proprioception is conveyed by fibers from muscle ten-
dons and joints and takes two major routes after enter-
ing the spinal cord. One of these major pathways is the 
spinocerebellar pathway and the other is the dorsal col-
umn pathway.
The spinocerebellar pathways are of lesser impor-
tance in human neurology because of the poor local-
izing information available about these tracts. The 
spinocerebellar pathway has two tracts, dorsal and ven-
tral. These tracts arise from the posterior and medial 
gray matter of the cord. The dorsal tract ascends ipsi-
laterally, but the ventral tract crosses in the cord. Both 
tracts terminate in the cerebellum and allow proprio-
ceptive impulses from all parts of the body to be inte-
grated in the cerebellum. The spinocerebellar pathway 
has been proposed to function in unconscious percep-
tion of already-learned motor patterns.
Dorsal Columns
Conscious proprioception, two-point discrimination, 
and form perception have been called the sensory 
modalities of the dorsal, or posterior, columns of the 
spinal cord. The first-order neuron of the posterior col-
umn pathway can be found in the dorsal root ganglion 
(Fig. 5-6). The axon of the first-order neuron enters the 
spinal cord and ascends to the medulla aggregately as 
the dorsal white columns. However, two fiber bundles, 
or fasciculi, comprise these columns. Axons entering 
the cord at the sacral and lumbar regions, which medi-
ate proprioception from the leg and lower body, travel 
in the fasciculus gracilis, which comprises the medial 
SENSORY
AXON
SENSORY
CORTEX
VENTRAL
POST. LAT.
NUCLEUS
DORSAL
ROOT
DORSAL
COLUMN
NEURON
1st Order
Neuron
2nd Order
Neuron
ANTERIOR SPINOTHALAMIC TRACT
(Crude Touch)
LATERAL SPINOTHALAMIC TRACT
(Pain and Temperature)
Midline
THALAMUS
PARIETAL
LOBE
FIGURE 5-5
Flowchart depicting the lateral spinothalamic tract, which 
mediates pain and temperature, and the anterior spinotha-
lamic tract, which mediates light or crude touch. POST. LAT., 
Posterior lateral.
TABLE 5-3
Human Proprioceptive Pathways
PATHWAY
DESCRIPTION
Proprioception
Allows temporal and spatial com-
prehension among body parts
Two-point  
discrimination
Cognition of adjacent points on 
dermis
Vibratory sensation
Sensory pathway to detect vibra-
tions by touch
Form perception
Recognition of objects by touch

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
102
dorsal column. Axons from the thoracic and cervical 
regions, generally related to the arm and upper body, 
travel in the fasciculus cuneatus, comprising the lateral 
dorsal columns. These first-order neuron axons termi-
nate in the nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus in the 
medulla. The second-order neuron axons then cross 
over to the other side of the medulla, where they form a 
bundle called the medial lemniscus. Fibers of the medial 
lemniscus ascend to the third-order neuron in the ven-
tral posterior nucleus of the thalamus and then proceed 
to the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe.
Proprioceptive Deficits
Damage to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe, 
the dorsal columns, or the dorsal root ganglion may 
produce a loss of proprioception, astereognosis, loss 
of vibratory sense, and loss of two-point discrimination 
in the trunk or extremities. If damage to these dorsal 
column fibers occurs below the level of the medulla 
(that is, below the decussation of the fibers), the loss 
in proprioception is ipsilateral (on the same side) of 
the injury. Damage above the level of decussation in the 
medulla produces a loss in proprioception on the oppo-
site side of the body (contralateral to the site of injury).
Sensory Examination
The neurologist uses several traditional and standard 
procedures for determining sensory loss. These are 
incorporated into the standard neurologic examination 
(see Appendix C).
CERVICAL
DORSAL
ROOT
THORACIC
DORSAL
ROOT
LUMBAR
DORSAL
ROOT
SACRAL
DORSAL
ROOT
NUCLEUS
CUNEATUS
NUCLEUS
GRACILIS
SENSORY
CORTEX
3rd Order
Neuron
2nd Order
Neuron
1st Order
Neuron
LATERAL DORSAL COLUMN
(FASCICULUS CUNEATUS)
MEDIAL DORSAL COLUMN
(FASCICULUS GRACILIS)
Midline
THALAMUS
MEDIAL
LEMNISCUS
PARIETAL
LOBE
MEDULLA
Peripheral
Nerves
Arm and
Upper Body
Peripheral
Nerves
Leg and
Lower Body
LEMNISCAL
DECUSSATION
FIGURE 5-6
Flowchart of pathways mediating proprioception. The pathways are known as the dorsal 
column modalities.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
103
The senses of light touch, pain, and temperature 
are mediated by the fibers of the dorsal root of the 
spinal cord, which come from a circumscribed area of 
the skin known as a dermatome. In peripheral nerve 
injuries, impairment of touch corresponds to dermato-
mal zones; however, at the boundary of each segmental 
dermatome is an overlap area supplied by the adjacent 
segmental nerves. For instance, if the fifth thoracic 
nerve (T5) is severed, T3 and T6 will carry many of the 
pain and temperature sensations supplied by T5. This 
segmental overlap also is present in the spinal cord. 
Thus overlap is greater for pain and temperature than 
for touch.
LIGHT TOUCH
The sense of light touch is tested by determining the 
patient’s ability to perceive light stroking of the skin 
with a wisp of cotton. Disorders of the sensory path-
ways from skin to cortex show abnormal sensory reac-
tions. Decreased tactile sensation is called hypoesthesia, 
and complete loss of sensation is called anesthesia. 
Abnormally increased tactile sensation is known as 
hyperesthesia.
Inability to localize touch is called atopognosis. 
­Topagnosis is tested by touching the patient’s body. 
With the eyes closed, the patient is asked to point to the 
spot where touch occurred. The neurologist compares 
similar areas on both sides of the body. Atopognosia 
usually is associated with a lesion of the parietal lobe.
TWO-POINT DISCRIMINATION
Two-point discrimination, or the ability to discriminate 
the shortest distance between two tactile points on the 
skin, is sometimes tested with points of a caliper. Right 
and left sides of the body are compared. Loss of dis-
crimination suggests a parietal lobe lesion.
Double stimulation may also be used to determine 
a cortical sensory disorder. Two simultaneous tactile 
stimulations are presented to both sides of the body in 
similar areas or to different areas. Lateralized sensory 
loss can then be determined. Sensory pathway or cor-
tical sensory losses frequently accompany lesions that 
produce cerebral language disorders.
PAIN AND TEMPERATURE
Pain and temperature disturbance are more likely to 
be sensory pathway disorders, and lesions of the ventral 
and lateral spinothalamic tracts may be present. Pain 
perception is lost on the side contralateral to the lesion. 
Pain is tested by the ability to perceive a pinprick or 
deep pressure. Increased pain, or tenderness, is called 
hyperalgesia. A diminished sense of pain is hypoalgesia, 
and a complete lack of pain sensibility is analgesia.
Temperature disturbances are tested by the ability to 
distinguish between warm and cold. For this test, the 
neurologist usually asks the patient to identify a test 
tube of warm water and one of cold water.
RECOGNITION OF LIMB POSITION
The patient with proprioceptive deficits may not be 
able to determine, without looking, whether a joint of 
an arm, hand, or leg is in flexion or extension and may 
have difficulty identifying the direction of displacement 
of limbs or digits during movement.
STEREOGNOSIS
Stereognosis is the ability to perceive the weight, form, 
and other details of a body by touch. Astereognosis 
is the inability to recognize common objects, such as 
coins, keys, and small blocks, by touch. The examiner 
has the patient close his or her eyes and then places 
various objects in the person’s hand, first one and then 
another, to be identified.
If this recognition disorder is caused by a cortical sen-
sory lesion rather than a dorsal column proprioceptive 
lesion, it is called tactile agnosia. A lesion in the right 
somesthetic association area or in the corpus callosum 
may produce a true tactile agnosia in the right hand. 
Beauvois et al.1 have reported a syndrome, which they 
named bilateral tactile aphasia, in a bilaterally dam-
aged patient. This aphasia is analogous to the auditory 
and visual agnosia disorders. The patient was unable 
to name objects by touching them but could give the 
name when hearing the sound an object made. In this 
disorder, the lesion is presumed to be in both parietal 
lobes.
VIBRATORY SENSIBILITY TEST
The sensation evoked when a vibrating tuning fork is 
applied to the base of a bony prominence is lost with 
dorsal column problems. The patient cannot differenti-
ate a vibrating tuning fork from a silent one on bony 
surfaces.
BODY SWAY TEST
This test, called the Romberg test, requires the patient 
to stand with his or her feet together. The neurologist 
notes the amount of sway with the patient’s eyes open 
and compares it with the amount of sway with the eyes 
closed. An abnormal accentuation of swaying with the 
eyes closed or actual loss of balance is called a positive 

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
104
Romberg sign. The visual sense can compensate for this 
loss of proprioception of muscle and joint position if 
it is caused by a dorsal column disorder, so the patient 
may correct balance problems by opening his or her 
eyes. If the lesion is in the cerebellum rather than the 
dorsal columns, the cerebellar ataxia of balance will not 
be corrected by visual compensation, as is the case in 
the sensory ataxia of the dorsal column.
Neuroanatomy of Oral Sensation
The neuroanatomy of oral sensation is different from 
that of the trunk and extremities in that the cranial and 
oral sensations are mediated by the cranial nerves, as 
opposed to mediation by the spinal nerves, as in bodily 
sensations. The sensory innervation of the speech mech-
anism is summarized in Table 5-4. Of particular impor-
tance to oral sensation is the trigeminal nerve (cranial 
nerve V). This cranial nerve is the primary somatic sen-
sory nerve for the skin of the face, the anterior portion 
of the scalp, the anterior two thirds of the tongue, the 
teeth, and the outer surface of the eardrum. It mediates 
the sensations of pain, temperature, touch, pressure, 
and proprioception for the oral and cranial regions.
The glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX), 
which is primarily sensory, also plays a role in mediat-
ing general somatic sensation in the cranial and oral 
regions. It mediates sensation from the posterior third 
of the tongue, the palatopharyngeal mucosa, and 
the external ear. Cranial nerve X mediates laryngeal 
sensation as well as sensation from the lower two thirds 
of the pharynx. The cranial nerves, their distribution 
and anatomy, motor innervation, and sensory media-
tion function are detailed further in Chapter 7.
Oral Sensory Receptors
Sensory receptors in the oral region and respiratory 
system generally are excited by chemical or mechani-
cal stimulation. Taste, of course, is based on chemical 
stimulation. Mechanicoreceptors respond when stimuli 
distort them. For instance, the tongue touching the 
teeth, alveolar ridge, or palate compresses mechanico-
receptors, and the receptors in turn generate electrical 
impulses to the fibers.
The tongue mucosa and the tongue surface in par-
ticular are served by many types of mechanicorecep-
tors. The endings in these receptors have been divided 
into diffuse, or free, endings and compact, or orga-
nized, endings. Some speech experts believe that free 
endings provide a general sense of touch in sensory 
control of speech articulation and that organized end-
ings provide sensitive acuity in speech articulation. 
Figure 5-7 illustrates the sensory innervation pattern 
for the tongue. Further discussion of oral sensation 
and its role in speech and swallowing are discussed in 
Chapter 7.
The Sense of Vision
RETINA
The visual system processes and decodes a wealth of 
information, more than any other afferent system in the 
body. To begin this processing, the eye absorbs the light 
from an image and passes it through the pupil. The 
TABLE 5-4
Sensory Innervation of the Speech 
Mechanism
STRUCTURE
CRANIAL 
NERVE
FUNCTION
Face
V
Pain, temperature, touch to 
face
VII
Proprioception to face
Tongue
V
Touch to anterior two thirds
IX
Touch to posterior third
Palate
IX
Sensory to soft palate
Pharynx
IX
Sensory to lateral and  
posterior pharyngeal walls
X
Sensory to lower two thirds of 
pharynx (forms pharyngeal 
plexus with cranial nerve IX)
Larynx
X
Sensory to most of the  
laryngeal muscles
Taste
General
sensation
IX
IX
Bitter
Sour
VII
Salt
Sw
e
e
t 
V
FIGURE 5-7
Cranial nerve sensory innervation for mediation of taste and 
general sensation for the tongue.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
105
image is then passed into the lens, where it is reversed 
and inverted. The lens focuses and projects the light 
onto the retina, which is a light-sensitive 10-layer for-
mation of nerve cells lining the inside of the eyeball. 
The retina is composed of two types of photoreceptors 
(rods and cones) and four types of neurons (bipolar 
cells, ganglion cells, horizontal cells, and amacrine 
cells). Rods play a special role in peripheral vision and 
in vision under low light. Cones, on the other hand, 
function under bright light and are responsible for dis-
criminative vision and color detection. The rods and 
cones synapse with the first-order neurons, the bipolar 
cells. These cells in turn synapse with the ganglion cells, 
which are second-order neurons. The axons of these 
cells converge to leave the eye within the optic nerve. 
After leaving the eye the axons acquire myelin sheaths.
This series of transmissions from first- to third-order 
sensory neurons is modified by horizontal cells and 
amacrine cells. They essentially sharpen the response of 
the ganglion cells to certain formations of light.
PATH OF THE OPTIC NERVE
The point of exit for the optic nerve is called the optic 
disk, which can be seen through an ophthalmoscope. 
Because rods and cones do not overlay the optic disk, it 
is essentially a small blind spot in each eye. The area on 
the retina for central fixated vision during good light is 
the macula. A small central pit in the macula called the 
fovea centralis is composed of closely packed cones, and 
vision here is sharpest and color vision most acute.
The optic nerve conveys visual impulses. It con-
sists of approximately one million nerve fibers, which 
course through the optic canal of the skull to form the 
optic chiasm (see Fig. 5-4). The fibers from the retina 
of each eye originate from two different areas on each 
retina. The retinal fibers can be thought of as exiting 
either as temporal fibers, which come from the lateral 
half of the retina nearest the temple, or as nasal fibers, 
which originate from the lateral half nearest the nose. 
As Figure 5-8 shows, at the optic chiasm the nasal fibers 
from each eye decussate while the temporal fibers con-
tinue ipsilaterally. This shift makes stereoscopic three-
dimensional vision possible.
Figure 5-8 shows that the optics of the eye are such 
that the temporal half of one retina and the nasal half of 
the other retina receive information from the same half 
of the visual field. In other words, the temporal fibers 
of the left retina and the nasal fibers of the right retina 
carry information from the right half of the visual field, 
and the temporal fibers of the right retina and the nasal 
fibers of the left retina receive information from the left 
side of the visual field. Because of the decussation of 
the nasal fibers at the optic chiasm, all the information 
from the contralateral side of the visual field travels in 
one pathway down the optic tract to the visual cortex. 
Left eye Right eye
Visual field defects
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
6
4
3
2
1
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Meyer's loop
Optic radiations
Lateral
geniculate
body
Optic 
tract
FIGURE 5-8
Visual pathways with lesion sites and resulting visual field defects. The occipital lobe has 
been cut away to show the medial aspect and the calcarine sulci.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
106
The visual cortex in the left hemisphere receives infor-
mation about the contralateral right side of the visual 
field, whereas the right hemisphere processes informa-
tion from the left visual field. This information is criti-
cal to understanding how a visual field deficit occurs 
after brain injury.
After passing the point of the optic chiasm, most of 
the axons forming the optic tract course to the lateral 
geniculate body, which is a small swelling located under 
the pulvinar of the thalamus. They then pass through 
the internal capsule and around the lateral ventricle, 
curving posteriorly. Some fibers travel far over the tem-
poral horn of the lateral ventricle and form what is 
called the temporal loop, or Meyer’s loop (see Fig. 5-8). 
These fibers terminate in the visual cortex below the cal-
carine sulcus. Meyer’s loop carries fibers representing 
the upper part of the central visual field. Other optic 
fibers travel from the lateral geniculate body to the visual 
cortex above the calcarine sulcus. These fibers represent 
the lower part of the central visual field.
Some retinal ganglion cells terminate in the superior 
colliculus of the midbrain. The superior colliculus also 
receives synapses from the visual cortex. Fibers from the 
superior colliculus project to the spinal cord through 
the tectospinal tracts. These tracts control reflex move-
ments of the head, neck, and eyes in response to visual 
stimuli.
PRIMARY VISUAL CORTEX
The characteristics of neurons in the visual cortex and 
the responses of individual cells have been studied in 
a wide variety of experimental animals. Scientists are 
interested in how patterns are perceived and recog-
nized by the eye. Hubel and Wiesel,5 among others, 
have found many different types of receptive fields 
in the neurons of the visual cortex. These receptive 
fields are termed simple, complex, hypercomplex, and 
higher order hypercomplex. Simple receptive field cells 
respond to a slit of light of particular width, slant, or 
orientation and place on the retina. Complex receptive 
fields respond to slit-shaped stimuli over a large area of 
the retina rather than a specific place. For hypercom-
plex fields, the line stimulus must be of a certain length. 
Cells with higher order hypercomplex fields require 
more elaborate visual stimuli to respond.
The visual cortex is organized in columns of cells 
with similar properties. Some columns respond only 
to one eye and are monocular. Others respond to both 
eyes and are binocular. Because the eyes are located in 
different positions on the head, a difference of position 
exists on the retinas for a stimulus, giving binocular dis-
parity to the columnar cells. This provides information 
about the depth of objects.
In addition to the primary visual pathways, two other 
major visual pathways can be distinguished: the tectal, 
or collicular, pathway and the pretectal nuclei pathway. 
Thus fibers from the optic tracts do not all go to the 
lateral geniculate body. Some of them project to the 
subcortical pretectal nuclei and ascend to the thalamus 
and out from there to various regions of the cortex. This 
system seems to be important in the control of certain 
visual reflexes, such as the pupillary reflex, and certain 
eye movements.
The tectal, or collicular, pathway projects to the supe-
rior colliculi in the brainstem and to the thalamus and 
out to many regions of the cortex. The superior collic-
uli also receive input from somatosensory and auditory 
systems. The tectal pathway seems to be involved in a 
major way in the ability to orient toward and follow a 
visual stimulus.
The visual pathways do not operate independently. 
They are interconnected at every level from retina to 
cortex, and each receives descending input from the 
cerebral cortex, providing for the richness of visual 
perception.
VISUAL ASSOCIATION CORTEX
The area surrounding the striate cortex, the peristriate 
cortex (Brodmann’s areas 18 and 19), is composed of 
neurons that have firing properties much like those of 
the primary visual cortex; however, these neurons also 
tend to show regional specialization for analyzing more 
complex aspects of visual stimuli such as motion, color, 
and form. Anatomists have been able to identify at least 
five regions of this peristriate area, each with a different 
processing role.
The second major part of the visual association cor-
tex is the temporal visual cortex located within the mid-
dle and inferior temporal areas. This association area 
receives input from the peristriate cortex and has four 
major cortical output pathways: (1) to the contralat-
eral temporal visual area, (2) to the prefrontal cortical 
area, (3) to the ipsilateral posterior association cortex 
of the superior temporal area, and (4) to the paralim-
bic and limbic areas of the medial temporal lobe. As 
with other neurons in primary and secondary visual 
cortex, neurons in the temporal visual association areas 
are sensitive to properties of the visual stimulus such 
as wavelength, size, length, and movement. These neu-
rons, however, also seem to trigger in response to spe-
cific objects, including faces. Thus this part of the visual 
system may extract complex features from visual stimuli 
so that neurons become responsive to individual pat-
terns rather than to isolated stimulus features. This 
may provide the mechanism for object discrimination. 
Box 5-1 outlines the two cortices associated with vision.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
107
VISUAL INTEGRATION
As Mesulam6 points out, object recognition or identifi-
cation requires interaction between the visual represen-
tation in the association areas and other components of 
mental operation, including integration with past expe-
rience. This process requires relay of information from 
these temporal visual association areas to paralimbic 
and limbic areas of the brain.
Damage to the association areas in the peristriate 
cortex or temporal lobes or to their connections to 
other parts of the brain may have a number of different 
effects on visual processing. Mesulam lists the following 
four consequences as possibilities:
	1.	 Impaired specialized visual processing and impaired 
formation of visual templates.
	2.	 Loss of visual templates previously formed.
	3.	 Disconnection of visual-auditory, visual-motor, visual-
somatosensory, and visual-verbal pathways caused 
by interruption of input from the visual association  
areas to the frontal and parietal association areas.
	4.	 Interruption of pathways providing input to paralim-
bic and limbic structures from the visual association 
area.
Lesions in the peristriate areas have been noted to 
cause specific disorders, such as difficulty with color 
vision or movement perception, yet they cause no dis-
turbance to other visual functions. In 1982 Mishkin 
and Ungerleider,7 scientists at the National Institutes 
of Health, published a study discussing two cortical 
pathways separating the function of object perception 
and recognition from location and movement percep-
tion. Nadeau et al.8 referred to these as the “what” and 
“where” systems in vision. This differentiation of visual 
processing capabilities begins at the retina, with rod 
and cone receptors projecting to both pathways. The 
“where” system allows visually guided hand and eye 
movements, permitting individuals to direct the eyes at 
what they want to look at and coordinate the touching 
or capture of a desired object with a part of the body. 
The “where” pathway is described as beginning in the 
occipital cortex and extending dorsally and medially 
into the parietal cortex (Fig. 5-9).
The “what” system is critical because it allows percep-
tion and recognition of objects located anywhere in the 
visual field; that is, independent of location, the abstract 
features of an object can be perceived and recognized. 
The pathway for this system begins in the occipital cor-
tex and extends ventrally along the inferior temporal 
cortex, progressing into anterior areas of that cortex 
(see Fig. 5-9). With anterior progression, neurologic 
responsiveness of the visual receptive fields increases 
both in the number of neurons responding and the 
complexity of the stimulus features that generate a 
response. As Mesulam implies, a point exists at which 
what is seen is paired with what is already known, and 
the stimulus can be recognized in many orientations 
and backgrounds. Lesions in this pathway may result in 
impairment of object recognition or a visual agnosia.
Peristriate Cortex
	•	 Consists of five regions, each having a different 
role in processing visual stimuli.
	•	 Includes neurons that function as those of the 
primary visual cortex and show regional specializa-
tion for analyzing complex stimuli.
Temporal Visual Cortex
Consists of cortical output pathways to the following 
four areas:
	1.	Contralateral temporal visual area
	2.	Prefrontal cortical area
	3.	Ipsilateral posterior association cortex of the  
superior temporal area
	4.	Paralimbic and limbic areas of the medial  
temporal lobe
	
a.	 Neurons trigger in response to specific objects 
and individual patterns
	
b.	 May play key role in object discrimination
	
BOX 5-1   
Cortical Output Regions and Pathways for Vision 
Association
Where?
What?
Dorsal
stream
Ventral stream
Vision
FIGURE 5-9
Dorsal and ventral parallel processing streams shown 
emerging from the primary visual cortex in the occipital 
lobe. The dorsal stream, directed toward the parietal lobe, 
processes where the stimulus is, its direction of movement, 
and its speed of movement. The ventral stream, directed to-
ward the temporal lobe, processes stimulus shape, what the 
stimulus is, and what it is called. (From Castro, A., Neafsey, 
E. J., Merchut, M. P., & Wurster, R. D. [2002]. Neuroscience: 
An outline approach. Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier.)

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
108
VISUAL AGNOSIA
Analyzed in disconnection terms, classical visual agno-
sia is produced when visual associations are lost because 
of a disconnection of the visual areas from the language 
area. Also known as associative visual agnosia, the con-
dition results in difficulty in recognizing pictures and 
objects along with a surprisingly good ability to describe, 
copy, and match visual stimuli. Patients correctly name 
the stimulus after tactile or auditory presentation. Bilat-
eral occipital lobe lesions with extension on one side or 
the other into the medial temporal lobe involving the 
hippocampus have been found on autopsy. With such 
lesions both the naming and the memory of objects pre-
sented visually are affected.
Visual agnosia may also result from unilateral lesions. 
With destruction of the left visual cortex in addition 
to a lesion of the splenium of the corpus callosum, or 
extensive involvement of the white matter of the asso-
ciation cortex of the left occipital and parietal lobes, a 
unilateral left visual agnosia may result.
Benson2 observed that in the few cases of visual 
agnosia reported, associated findings are common. 
These may include hemianopsia and prosopagnosia, a 
visual agnosia for faces. In addition, other associated 
disorders include constructional impairment, alexia 
without agraphia, amnesia, and some degree of ano-
mia. A color-naming deficit may also be present; this 
inability to match seen colors to their spoken names is 
called color agnosia by Benson2 and color anomia by 
Geschwind.4 Lesions in the calcarine fissure and sple-
nium are usually present. These lesions, according to 
Geschwind, disconnect the right visual cortex from the 
left language areas.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The speech-language pathologist should be quite 
familiar with the auditory pathways and vigilant in 
identification of possible hearing loss.
	•	 The central auditory pathway is complex, with the 
primary auditory receptor in the spiral ganglion of 
the organ of Corti of the cochlea of the inner ear. 
The auditory nerve (cranial nerve VIII) enters at the 
pontomedullary juncture, and damage in this area 
or to the auditory nerve often results in accompa-
nying damage to cranial nerve VII (the facial nerve) 
because it also runs through the auditory canal.
	•	 Bilateral damage to Heschl’s gyrus or the tem-
poral lobe auditory processing areas produces a 
spectrum of deficits, including cortical deafness, 
nonverbal agnosia, and auditory agnosia. Unilat-
eral cortical damage to Heschl’s gyrus does not 
produce total deafness.
	•	 A unilateral lesion along the auditory nerve path-
way from the ear and including the cochlear nuclei 
causes deafness in one ear.
	•	 The lateral and anterior spinothalamic tracts carry 
sensory impulses of pain and temperature, light 
touch and pressure, and tactile discrimination from 
the periphery to the sensory cortex.
	•	 Cerebral lesions marked by language loss may have 
accompanying sensory loss involving the parietal 
lobe or subcortical pathways.
	•	 An agnosia is a disorder of recognition of a sensory 
stimulus. Agnosias result from bilateral damage to 
the primary cortical receptor areas associated with 
the particular sensory input affected.
	•	 The oral cavity is rich in sensory receptors and the 
tactile receptors of the mouth, tongue, pharynx, 
and teeth; however, the role of sensory feedback 
in speech production is currently not clear, and no 
standard clinical method of assessment is widely 
accepted.
	•	 Interruptions of the visual pathway from the retina to 
the occipital cortex cause visual field deficits, with the 
extent and type of deficit depending on the point of 
interruption in this double-crossed pathway.
	•	 Patients with language disorders caused by poste-
rior lesions are most at risk for visual field deficits 
that particularly affect reading and writing.

NEUROSENSORY ORGANIZATION  CHAPTER FIVE
109
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Beauvois, M. F., Sailliant, B., Meininger, V., & Lhermitte, 
F. (1978). Bilateral tactile aphasia: A tacto-verbal dysfunc-
tion. Brain, 101, 381–402.
	 2.	 Benson, D. F. (1979). Aphasia, alexia and agraphia. New 
York: Churchill Livingstone.
	 3.	 Cohen, H. (1999). Neuroscience for rehabilitation. Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
	 4.	 Geschwind, N. (1965). Disconnection syndromes in ani-
mals and man. Brain, 88, 237–294 585–644.
	 5.	 Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1968). Receptive fields and 
functional architecture of the monkey striate cortex. Jour-
nal of Physiology, 206, 419–436.
	 6.	 Mesulam, M. M. (1985). Principles of behavioral neurology. 
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
	 7.	 Mishkin, M., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1982). Contribution of 
striate inputs to the visuospatial functions of the parieto-
preoccipital cortex in monkeys. Behavioral Brain Research, 
6, 57–77.
	 8.	 Nadeau, S. E., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. J., 
Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. (2004). Medical 
neuroscience. St. Louis: Elsevier.
	 9.	 Sherrington, S. C. (1926). The integrative action of the 
­nervous system. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
	10.	 Webster, D. B. (1999). Neuroscience of communication. San 
Diego: Singular.
 CASE STUDY
A 26-year-old male soldier was on duty in Iraq, driving a 
supply truck. An improvised explosive device detonated 
on the road near the left side of the truck, causing some 
damage to the truck and breaking the left window. 
The soldier had some cuts to his face and arm from the 
glass and also experienced severe difficulty hearing from 
both ears after the incident. Fortunately, rupture of the 
tympanic membranes was ruled out on examination. 
In approximately 2 weeks, he found that he could hear 
out of the right ear much better than from the left. He 
was sent for audiometric testing and consequent radio-
graphs. The radiographs showed a fracture of the left 
temporal bone.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	What type of hearing loss would the audiogram 
show as resulting from a fracture of the temporal 
bone?
	2.	What part of the ear would most likely be affected?
	3.	What cranial nerve would be involved?

110
6
K E Y  T E R M S
action tremor
adiadochokinesia 
(dysdiadochokinesia)
akinesia
alpha motor neuron 
(AMN)
apraxia
areflexia
asynergia
ataxia
ataxic dysarthria
athetosis
atrophy
Babinski sign
bilateral innervation
bilateral symmetry
caudate nucleus (CN)
chorea
clonus
contralateral 
innervation
contralateral motor 
control
corona radiata
corpus striatum
corticonuclear fibers
corticopontine tract
corticospinal tract
decussation
denervation
direct activation 
pathway
dyskinesia
dysmetria
dystonia
extrafusal fibers
extrapyramidal system
feedback
feedforward
flocculi
genu
globus pallidus (GP)
Golgi tendon organs
hemiparalysis
hemiplegia
hyperkinesia
hyperreflexia
hypertonia
hypokinesia
hyporeflexia
hypotonia
indirect activation 
pathway
intention tremor
intrafusal fibers
lateral corticospinal 
tract
lower motor neuron
motor unit
muscle spindle
muscle tone
myoclonus
neocerebellum
nucleus accumbens
nystagmus
paralysis
paresis
peduncles
phasic tone
postural tone
premotor
putamen
pyramidal tract
rest tremor
servomechanism 
control systems
spasticity
striatum
substantia nigra (SN)
subthalamic nucleus 
(STN)
synergy
tardive dyskinesia
tremors
upper motor neurons
volitional
Neuromotor 
Control of 
Speech
We cannot state exactly the number of muscles that are 
necessary for speech and that are active during speech. But 
if we consider that ordinarily the muscles of the thoracic and 
abdominal walls, the neck and the face, the larynx and phar-
ynx, and the oral cavity are all properly coordinated during 
the act of speaking, it becomes obvious that over 100 muscles 
must be controlled centrally.
Eric H. Lenneberg, Biological Foundations  
of Language, 1967
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Speech Production versus Limb and Trunk 
Movement
The Motor System in Speech Ontogeny
A Hierarchical System
Motor Planning
Trunk and Limb Movement: The Corticospinal 
Tract
Facial and Oral Movement: The Corticonuclear 
Tract
Upper and Lower Motor Neurons
Upper Motor Neurons (UMNs)
Lower Motor Neurons
Bilateral Symmetry
Indicators of Upper versus Lower Motor Neuron 
Damage
Neuromuscular Control
The Influence of Other Systems on Movement
The Basal Ganglia (or Basal Nuclei)
The Cerebellar System
Servomechanism Theory and Speech Motor 
Control
Feedback
Open and Closed Control Systems

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
111
Speech is one of the most complex behaviors performed 
by human beings. On average, a person utters approxi-
mately 14 recognizable speech sounds per second when 
asked to produce nonsense syllables as rapidly as pos-
sible. This unusually brisk rate is maintained even when 
speaking conversationally or reading aloud. The num-
ber of separate neural events supporting this complex 
coordination of the articulatory muscles is, of course, 
quite large, and the degree of neural integration in the 
motor system for routine, everyday talk is truly amazing. 
The statement that normal speech production requires 
the finest motor control in the body is no exaggeration.
Speech Production versus Limb  
and Trunk Movement
The competent speech-language pathologist (SLP) of 
today must be familiar with how limb, trunk, and speech 
production muscles work. SLPs work on teams with 
respiratory, physical, and occupational therapists. It is 
important that SLPs understand such things as how to 
reposition a child for the best motor control for feeding 
or what muscles of the trunk and limbs were affected in 
a spinal cord injury and how that injury may affect work 
on speech and language. But, of course, what is most 
critical to the SLP is an understanding of the muscles of 
speech production. As we reviewed in Chapters 2 and 3, 
the most obvious difference in these muscles and limb 
and trunk muscles is that the muscles of speech produc-
tion receive sensory and motor innervation through 
the cranial nerves, whereas limb and trunk muscles rely 
on the spinal nerve innervation. In his excellent discus-
sion of the uniqueness of the speech muscles, Kent16 
provides us with information retrieved from a search of 
the literature on how the speech muscles are different 
in their genetic, developmental, functional, and pheno-
typical properties as well as their innervation. It would 
be useful for the student of speech-language pathology 
to read this article, but the main points are summarized 
in Box 6-1. Review this information before moving on to 
the discussion of the levels and systems of motor control 
for both spinal and cranial muscles.
THE MOTOR SYSTEM IN SPEECH 
ONTOGENY
The student of speech-language pathology about to 
explore the motor system underlying the production 
of speech should also keep in mind the structure of 
the basic unit of speech and how speech is thought to 
have evolved in humans. Although a great deal of time 
is spent in early academic classes learning all the pho-
nemes of our language and their distinctive features, it 
is not the phoneme but the syllable that is the basic unit 
of speech. The basic or modal syllable frame in English 
is that of a vowel nucleus alternating with a consonant 
(usually a CV structure).19
This text also adopts the frame/context (F/C) theory17 
of the evolution of human speech as a basis for looking 
at why motor control evolved as it did resulting in the 
complicated motor pathways and relationships between 
structures. In formulating the F/C theory, MacNeilage 
acknowledged the relatively well-accepted theory that 
before speech output, the content elements (conso-
nants and vowels) are inserted into a syllabic structure 
or frame. This is based on the fact that when speech 
errors are made by adults (whether originating from 
a person with normal brain function or a person with 
brain damage), the syllable structure does not change; 
	•	 Muscles of speech production are more complex 
in nature. The more than 100 muscles involved are 
composed of several types of muscles that can be 
grouped into structural and functional classes:
	
•	 Joint-related (for example, masseter and digas-
tric muscles)
	
•	 Sphincteric (for example, orbicularis oris; palatal 
and pharyngeal constrictors)
	
•	 Muscular hydrostat (for example, intrinsic mus-
cles of the tongue)
	
•	 Specialized for vibration and airway valving (for 
example, intrinsic laryngeal muscles)
	
•	 Respiratory muscles that inflate and deflate the 
lungs
	•	 With the exception of the muscles that close the 
jaw, muscles of speech production are specialized 
more for speed than for force.
	•	 Speech muscles are capable of more precise coor-
dination of movement sequences.
	•	 The kinematics and force features of speech mus-
cle movements are maintained at normal and fast 
rates but are different at slow rates.
	•	 Like the skeletal muscles, there is contralateral 
motor control of the lips, tongue, and jaw with 
ipsilateral innervation to many of the muscles as 
well; however, the ipsilateral pathway provides 
much more assistance in speech muscles, generat-
ing bilateral synergistic movements though the 
contralateral innervation is stronger.
	
BOX 6-1   
Some Differences in Biomechanical and Func-
tional Properties between Speech Muscles and 
Limb Muscles
(Data from Kent, R. [2004]. The uniqueness of speech among motor systems. 
Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 18, 495-505.)

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
112
the consonants and vowels never occupy each other’s 
positions in the syllable.20 MacNeilage has suggested in 
his F/C theory that in the evolution of human speech 
the rhythmic and repetitive opening and closing of the 
mandible necessary for the intake of food (and thus 
survival) was combined with vocalization to produce 
syllables. The open mandible for vowels and the more 
closed posturing for consonants thus were perpetuated 
through the evolutionary cycles and never biologically 
had an opportunity to be substituted for one another. 
MacNeilage19 theorizes that there may have been an 
intermediate stage in evolution of speech where the 
open/close mandible cycle was combined with other 
structure movements to produce tongue clicks or lip 
smacking, for instance; these kind of oral gestures do 
appear to be used for communication by some primates 
whose evolution preceded that of humans.
In the study of normal stages of speech develop-
ment in children, the progression or refinement of 
the motor movements necessary for increasingly more 
varied consonant and vowel production can easily be 
seen. The progress a child makes when going from bab-
bling to reduplicative babbling to variegated babbling 
to word production to sentence production showcases 
the advancement of the ability of the motor system to 
quickly and effortlessly respond to the commands of 
the language system. It appears miraculous, especially 
in such a short time, and it is the result of the develop-
ment and coordination of the nervous system structures 
we are about to explore.
A Hierarchical System
The motor system for all voluntary and reflexive move-
ment is considered a hierarchical system that becomes 
progressively less sophisticated as it is descended or 
more sophisticated as it is ascended. The great neurolo-
gist Hughlings Jackson asserted that each level of this 
hierarchy has a certain autonomy, but the autonomy at 
the lower levels is partially constrained by the higher lev-
els of the motor system. This is also true for sensation, 
cognition, and emotion. Speech production requires, 
as does most motor activity, the action of major mecha-
nisms at every significant motor integration level of the 
nervous system. The Jacksonian principle that higher 
centers bring more refinement to neuronal processing 
while also inhibiting the neural activity of certain lower 
centers is often demonstrated when disease or injury to 
the motor system occurs. This loss of refinement and/or 
effect of disinhibition will become clear when signs and 
symptoms of the different motor speech disorders are 
discussed in subsequent chapters. An attempt must first 
be made to understand the functioning of the motor 
system as a whole. Though we are most interested in 
speech, we will also look at how movement for extremi-
ties occurs since the corticospinal pathway is important 
as well to total patient rehabilitation. As we did when 
discussing the motor system in Chapters 2 and 3, we 
begin with the higher levels of control and work our 
way through subcortical systems and out to the muscle.
MOTOR PLANNING
At the highest level of the motor system hierarchy is the 
input of cortical areas involved in motor planning to the 
primary motor area of the cortex. For body movements, 
this is primarily the premotor and supplementary motor 
areas (Brodmann’s area 6). When considering motor plan-
ning for speech production, the supplementary motor 
area, Broca’s area, and the insula must also be discussed.
Premotor and Supplementary Motor Areas
The premotor area (a part of Brodmann’s area 6) is 
usually active bilaterally. It has a major projection to 
the brainstem nuclei that give origin primarily to the 
reticulospinal tracts and have minor projections to the 
major motor tracts. Its primary function appears to be 
bilateral postural fixation as needed to fixate the shoul-
ders and stabilize the hips. It receives cognitive input 
from the prefrontal cortex in terms of motor intention 
and from the parietal lobe in regard to tactile and visual 
signals. It does get quite active when motor routines are 
run in response to visual or somatosensory cues (e.g., 
reaching for an object). The premotor area responds 
mostly to external cues.
The supplementary motor area (SMA) is involved 
in motor planning and motor execution. Research on 
the functional anatomy of the medial wall of the hemi-
spheres found a difference between what has come 
to be called the pre-SMA area and the SMA proper.23 
For our purposes these two areas can be thought of as 
being located approximately anterior to (pre-SMA) and 
posterior to (SMA proper) the anterior commissure in 
each hemisphere. The SMA proper, in humans and in 
monkeys, was found to have connections to the primary 
motor cortex and to the spinal cord. The area desig-
nated as the pre-SMA, however, had few projections 
to the primary motor area but instead had numerous 
interconnections with the prefrontal cortex and other 
nonprimary motor areas.
This concept of a pre-SMA and SMA-proper was 
expanded for the role of the SMA in word production 
by Alario and colleagues2 in 2006. Using functional 
magnetic resonance imaging and intricate research 
design involving word generation versus reading and 
repetition, they found the SMA proper to be involved 
in actual execution of the motor movements for 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
113
articulation. This functional imaging study also sug-
gested that in word production the pre-SMA area could 
be further subdivided functionally into an anterior pre-
SMA area and a posterior pre-SMA area; word selection 
during word generation tasks resulted in activation in 
the anterior pre-SMA. The subsequent “linear encod-
ing” (defined by the authors as the selection, organiza-
tion, and sequencing of the phonemes to be articulated) 
resulted in activation of a smaller posterior section of 
the pre-SMA. This linear encoding is part of what this 
text calls motor programming for speech.
Thus there is strong evidence to support the exis-
tence of a pre-SMA and an SMA proper in Brodmann’s 
area 6 as well as some evidence to support a section of 
the pre-SMA area being involved in motor encoding 
for speech and the SMA proper being responsible for 
providing input into the primary motor cortex for the 
execution of the associated movements.
Broca’s Area
As we said in Chapter 2, Broca’s area is found in the 
motor association cortical area at the foot of the pri-
mary motor and the premotor cortices. This area was 
named after the French neurologist, Pierre Paul Broca, 
who first described the expressive language disorder 
we now refer to as Broca’s aphasia and described an 
area on the lateral surface of the brain as the area of 
damage causing the expressive problem. Described by 
Broca as the posterior inferior frontal gyrus, roughly 
the third left frontal convolution, this area in gen-
eral became known as “Broca’s area.” The location 
now considered Broca’s area includes the pars oper-
cularis (Brodmann’s area 44) and the pars triangu-
laris (Brodmann’s area 45) in the posterior inferior 
frontal gyrus.12 Review Figure 2-5 to remind yourself 
of the location on the lateral brain surface of the left 
hemisphere. The area of the brain designated “Broca’s 
area” is only found in the hemisphere dominant for 
language (typically the left) and is differentiated from 
tissue in the frontal operculum of the nondominant 
hemisphere only by function.
In 1978 Mohr and colleagues22 found that lesions 
confined to Broca’s area caused muteness and difficulty 
with fluent and accurate articulation; however, with this 
lesion site, the difficulty with speech production was, in 
most cases, slight or transient. Only lesions extending 
outside the subscribed areas 44 and 45 resulted in true 
difficulty with language or with language and motor 
speech programming. Thus a diagnosis of “Broca’s 
aphasia,” which is a language (not speech) disorder that 
may occur after damage to the brain, was supported 
as resulting from lesions that might include Broca’s 
area but must extend outside Broca’s area. These two 
lesion sites, which resulted in different outcomes and 
prognoses, came to be termed baby Broca’s and big Bro-
ca’s lesions.
Price and colleagues24 used positron emission 
tomography scanning technology to look at the possible 
participation of Broca’s area as a site of internal mod-
els or “higher level representations” of already learned 
words that enable the speaker to unconsciously predict 
the auditory output of a spoken word and send these 
predictions to auditory processing areas in the tempo-
ral lobe. This would perhaps allow adjustments to be 
made in articulation after a mismatch occurs, improv-
ing the precision of speech. This predictive/compara-
tive/corrective system seems reasonable and important 
in such situations as early language acquisition, speech 
output with a hearing loss, or learning a new language. 
As the authors note, this theory requires connectivity 
studies to be done to confirm and clarify the functional 
pathways.
The Insula
Apraxia is a disorder that impairs performance of volun-
tary learned motor acts while similar automatic gestures 
remain intact. It is caused by a lesion in motor associa-
tion areas and association pathways. Apraxia of speech 
(AOS) is a disorder of motor planning for speech pro-
duction. A person with acquired AOS shows difficulty 
with accurate and rapid movement of the articulators 
to produce purposeful speech but has little discernable 
paralysis or weakness of the articulators to account for 
this. Movement of the oral mechanism for motor activi-
ties such as eating, blowing out a match, or licking an 
ice cream cone, for example, are typically unaffected. 
AOS in adults with brain damage most often occurs 
accompanied by a language disorder, and this disorder 
is often diagnosed as a Broca’s aphasia (although the 
apraxic component is not necessary for a diagnosis of 
Broca’s aphasia to be warranted). The anatomic etiol-
ogy of apraxia of speech had generally been placed in 
the traditional Broca’s area, although it could not be 
explained why some patients with a nonfluent aphasia 
also had an accompanying apraxia of speech whereas 
others with similar lesions (it appeared from the studies 
available at the time) did not. A 1996 study of the com-
puted tomography (CT) scans of patients with acquired 
apraxia of speech by Dronkers11 persuasively implicated 
the left superior precentral gyrus of the insula in motor 
programming for speech production, with follow-up 
studies continuing to show the involvement of this area 
in all studied patients who had apraxia of speech.12 
Though the study could clearly suggest that all patients 
with apraxia of speech had damage to the insula, it and 
subsequent clinical studies could not strongly support 
the contention that all patients with damage to the 
insula had apraxia of speech.5,10,20

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
114
In 2010, in a masterful review of the literature to 
that time concerning the role of the insula in speech 
production, Ackerman and Riecker1 summarized the 
research looking at clinical cases and functional imag-
ing studies. The clinical case studies were variable and 
inconclusive regarding the contribution of the insular 
cortex. The functional imaging studies as a group, how-
ever, did support hemodynamic activity in the insula in 
conjunction with motor aspects of speech production. 
The most consistent activity was found in a small area of 
the rostral insula at the junction with the fronto-oper-
cular cortex. Because the insular cortex is the floor of 
the lateral sulcus, this area could not be identified on 
the lateral surface. The small size of the dynamic tissue 
could explain why it is so difficult to find patients with 
lesions confined to the insula who demonstrate residual 
problems with motor speech.
TRUNK AND LIMB MOVEMENT: THE 
CORTICOSPINAL TRACT
The pyramidal tract is the major voluntary pathway for all 
movement mediated by the spinal cord (trunk and limbs). 
Figure 6-1 is a simple illustration of the paths these fibers 
take. Because this tract passes through and actually makes 
up the bulk of a certain point in the medulla that looks 
like a small pyramid, the corticospinal tract is also known 
as the pyramidal tract. The corticospinal tract controls the 
skilled movements in the distal muscles of the limbs and 
digits and is particularly responsible for the precise move-
ments made by the hands and fingers.
The corticospinal tract descends from the cerebral 
cortex to different levels of the spinal cord; it begins 
in the motor cortex of the two cerebral hemispheres. 
As we discuss later in this chapter, the fibers of the 
corticospinal tract originating from the cerebral cor-
tex are known as upper motor neurons until they synapse 
in nuclei located in the spinal cord. A majority of the 
corticospinal fibers originate from pyramidal neurons 
of the primary motor cortex. These motor neurons 
receive afferent input from the primary sensory cor-
tex and the dorsal column sensory nuclei in the spinal 
cord. The basal ganglia and the cerebellum also serve 
as “consultants” to the cortical motor system, influ-
encing timing and coordination of movement. The 
influence of these inputs occurs before neural firing 
initiated in the motor cortex and through the cortico-
spinal tract.
Lentiform nucleus
Internal capsule
Cerebellum
Medulla
oblongata
Muscle
Second-order neuron (2)
Decussation
of fibers
First-order
neuron (1)
First-order neuron (1)
Cerebral cortex
Corona radiata
Thalamus
FIGURE 6-1
Simple illustration of the corticospinal tract descending from the cerebral motor cortex to 
the skeletal muscle. Note the reference to the neurons involved and the classification of 
those neurons. (Modified from Snell, R. [2007]. Clinical neuroanatomy [7th ed.]. Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.)

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
115
Descending corticospinal fibers also originate from 
the postcentral gyrus and the parietal lobe. Those fibers 
are of sensory area origin and terminate on sensory, 
rather than motor, relay nuclei in the brainstem and 
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord; they modulate 
sensory transmission.
The corticospinal system is actually composed of 
several tracts that innervate spinal neurons and, even-
tually, muscles controlled by spinal nerves. The corti-
cospinal tract itself descends from the motor cortex in 
each hemisphere to subcortical white matter in a fan-
shaped distribution of fibers called the corona radiata, 
or radiating crown. The fibers converge to enter into an 
L-shaped subcortical structure called the internal cap-
sule. The corticospinal fibers pass through the posterior 
limb of the internal capsule. As they pass through the 
internal capsule, they join axons from other areas, such 
as those projecting to and from other cortical areas, the 
thalamus, and the brainstem. Damage in the pathway 
through the internal capsule can result in devastating 
motor deficits because of the number of fibers going 
through this narrow point.
From the point of the internal capsule, they descend 
below the thalamus and lie on the ventral brainstem 
surface, forming part of the cerebral peduncles of the 
midbrain. These white matter tracts are found in the 
ventral portion of the peduncles, a portion called the 
crus cerebri. Some of the descending fibers may end in 
or send collaterals to the red nucleus at this point.
Descending to the level of the pons, some cortical 
axons may begin to intermix with pontine neurons at 
the base (basis pontis). Many of these axons will syn-
apse on the pontine neurons and become part of the 
corticopontine tract, which exits through the cerebellar 
peduncles and out to the cerebellum. This tract allows 
input from the cortex to be conveyed to the cerebel-
lum. At this point in the pons, some other fibers of 
the descending cortical axons may synapse in the pon-
tomedullary reticular formation and provide cortical 
input to the reticulospinal system.
The corticospinal tract neurons that continue to 
descend collect at the point called the pyramids of the 
medulla situated at the medullary-cervical juncture. 
More collaterals are given off by the axons, innervating 
nuclei of the inferior olivary complex, the posterior col-
umn nuclei, and some reticular nuclei of the medulla. 
At the level of the pyramids, approximately 85% to 90% 
of the corticospinal fibers cross over (decussate) to 
the other side of the neuraxis, providing contralateral 
motor control of the extremities.
Decussation
The crossing of the right and left corticospinal tract is 
known as decussation, sometimes called the decussation 
of the pyramids. The few fibers, variable in number, that 
do not cross are collectively known as the anterior cor-
ticospinal tract. The primary crossed corticospinal tract 
is the lateral corticospinal tract. The decussation means 
that a lesion interrupting the fibers above the crossing 
has an effect on the side of the body opposite the site 
of the lesion. If the corticospinal tract is interrupted in 
the cerebrum or at any level above the pyramids of the 
medulla, voluntary movement of the innervated struc-
ture is limited on the contralateral side of the body. By 
contrast, a lesion below the decussation impairs volun-
tary movement on the same, or ipsilateral, side.
After the corticospinal fibers enter the spinal cord, 
they synapse in the anterior horn cells of the spinal 
cord segment dedicated to control of the particular 
body part associated with that level of the spinal cord 
(remember cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coc-
cygeal segments from Chapter 3). At synapse a new 
axon is sent out to the muscle fiber controlling or add-
ing to control of a particular muscle or muscle group. 
At this point, the new fibers resulting from this synapse 
are now lower motor neuron fibers.
Brainstem Centers for Tone and Posture
When a cross section of the spinal cord is examined, 
other descending motor tracts besides the lateral and 
anterior corticospinal tracts can be seen. These addi-
tional descending motor tracts found terminating in the 
spinal cord are the reticulospinal tracts, vestibulospinal 
tracts, tectospinal tracts, and rubrospinal tracts. These 
tracts are the major tracts in what is sometimes called 
the extrapyramidal system, defined as being made up 
of fibers descending to the spinal cord outside of the 
corticospinal tracts. Duffy13 refers to these tracts as the 
indirect activation pathway. These fiber pathways pro-
vide primary input to motor neurons for maintenance 
of normal tone, body posturing, and reflex responses to 
sensory stimuli.
According to Duffy,13 the components of the indirect 
activation pathway consist of many short pathways and 
interconnections with structures between the origin 
of the pathway in the cortex and its termination at the 
lower motor neuron. The nuclei and tracts considered 
to be components of the indirect activation system are 
listed in Table 6-1.
The reticular formation itself is also thought of 
as part of the subcortical extrapyramidal system. The 
extrapyramidal system is concerned with coarse stereo-
typed movements. It has more influence over proximal 
(midline) than distal (peripheral) muscles. It maintains 
proper tone and posture. Even with destruction of the 
pyramidal tract, it can allow a person to eat and walk.
Because muscle tone and body posture are impor-
tant to the neurologist’s examination of the body, this is 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
116
a good point to discuss those terms as they relate to the 
neurologic control. Muscle tone is the resistance of the 
muscle to stretch. The two types of tone are phasic and 
postural. Phasic tone is a rapid contraction in reaction 
to a high-intensity stretch (or change in muscle length) 
and is assessed by testing tendon reflexes. Postural tone 
is a prolonged contraction in response to a low-intensity 
stretch. Gravity provides a low-intensity stretch on anti-
gravity muscles, which respond with prolonged contrac-
tion and the normal posturing of the head, neck, and 
extremities that persons without neurologic damage 
usually maintain.
FACIAL AND ORAL MOVEMENT: THE 
CORTICONUCLEAR TRACT
Before a recommended terminology change, the cortico-
nuclear fibers were called the corticobulbar fibers, a term that 
is still used in some quarters. Because that name errone-
ously implies that all fibers terminate in the medulla (the 
old term for the medulla was the bulb), the term corticonu-
clear  replaced corticobulbar in the international terminol-
ogy of neuroanatomic terms in 1998. The corticonuclear 
fibers of the pyramidal tract innervate the cranial nerves 
and make up the voluntary pathway for the movements of 
all speech muscles, except those of respiration. They are 
the most important motor fibers for the SLP.
Their course is not as direct as that of the cortico-
spinal fibers. Figure 6-2 illustrates the general decus-
sation point of the corticobulbar fibers that do cross. 
Chapter 7 discusses these neuron pathways individu-
ally for the cranial nerves. As the illustration shows, 
the corticonuclear fibers begin with the corticospinal 
fibers at the cortex but terminate at the motor nuclei 
of the cranial nerves located at various points in the 
brainstem. Unlike the corticospinal fibers, the corti-
conuclear fibers have many ipsilateral (terminating in 
motor nuclei in the brainstem on the same side of the 
brain as the primary site from which the axon began) 
as well as contralateral fibers (terminating in nuclei on 
the opposite side from which they began). After the 
axons of the corticonuclear fibers leave the cortical 
motor areas, they travel the same path that the corti-
cospinal fibers do through the corona radiata and the 
internal capsule. The corticonuclear fibers, however, 
transverse the genu, or bend, of the internal capsule 
rather than the posterior limb.
The corticospinal and corticonuclear fibers separate 
at the upper brainstem level. Each of the different cra-
nial nerve axons terminates at its own designated nuclei 
at some point along the brainstem. Some decussate and 
others primarily travel ipsilaterally. If they cross, they do 
so at various levels of the brainstem. The general loca-
tion of each of the nuclei for the cranial nerves most 
important to speech is discussed in Chapter 7.
Upper and Lower Motor Neurons
This point in our discussion of the motor system seems 
like an appropriate place to briefly discuss a useful con-
cept in clinical neurology, the notion of upper motor 
neurons (UMNs) and lower motor neurons (LMNs). This 
division of designation of the general location in the 
neural pathway of the axon has been applied in clinical 
neurologic teaching and practice for a very long time. 
Knowledge of the different symptoms and signs of dam-
age to each type of neuron pathway will often be useful 
to SLPs performing motor speech examinations or to 
the SLP in general trying to understand the basis of the 
neurologic examination findings in the patients with 
whom they are working.
UPPER MOTOR NEURONS (UMNs)
All the neurons of the anterior and lateral corticospinal 
tracts, which send axons from the primary motor area 
in the cerebral cortex down to the anterior horn cells of 
the spinal cord, are considered upper motor neurons. The 
neurons of the corticonuclear tracts that send axons 
from the primary motor area in the cerebral cortex to 
the nuclei in the brainstem also are upper motor neurons. 
An important concept in trying to learn the difference 
in upper versus lower motor neurons is this: No axons 
of upper motor neurons leave the neuraxis. In other 
words, they are contained within the brain, brainstem, 
and spinal cord. The pyramidal tract, with its upper 
motor neuron activation, can be thought of as the direct 
TABLE 6-1
Major Components of the Indirect 
Activation Pathway of the 
Extrapyramidal System
COMPONENTS  
(NUCLEI OR TRACTS)
FUNCTIONAL ROLE IN 
MOTOR CONTROL
Reticular formation  
or reticulospinal  
tracts
Excitation or inhibition of flexors 
and extensors; facilitation or 
inhibition of reflexes and  
ascending sensory information
Vestibular nuclei or 
vestibulospinal  
tract
Facilitation of reflex activity and 
spinal mechanisms controlling 
muscle tone
Red nucleus or  
rubrospinal tract
Facilitation of flexor and  
inhibition of extensor neurons
(Modified from Duffy, J. R. [2005]. Motor speech disorders: Substrates, differen-
tial diagnosis and management. St. Louis: Mosby/Elsevier.)

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
117
activation pathway, or direct motor system, because of 
the direct connection of its upper motor neurons with 
the lower motor neurons that subsequently send their 
axons outside the neuraxis.6 These upper motor neu-
rons in the primary motor area have a major activating 
influence on their LMN targets.
LOWER MOTOR NEURONS
Lower motor neurons are all the neurons that send motor 
axons outside the neuraxis into the peripheral nerves: 
both cranial and spinal nerves. LMNs are designated sec-
ond-order neurons. Sherrington27 called the lower motor 
neuron the final common pathway. By this he meant that 
the peripheral nerves, both cranial and spinal, serve as 
a final route for all the complex motor interactions that 
occur in the neuraxis above the level of the lower motor 
neurons. The final muscle contraction is the product 
of all the interactions that have occurred in the central 
nervous system.
The concept of the motor unit helps explain the 
lower motor neuron pathway (Fig. 6-3). A motor unit 
is a structural and functional entity that can be defined 
as (1) a single anterior horn cell in the spinal cord or 
cranial nerve neuron in the brainstem, (2) its periph-
eral axon and its branches, (3) the myoneural junc-
ture. which is the point where the nerve synapses on 
 MOTOR 
CORTEX
Thalamus
Internal
capsule
CN III, IV, VI
         Midbrain
(cerebral peduncle)
CN V, VII
Pons
Upper medulla
     pyramids
CN IX, X, XI, XII
           Lower medulla
(medullary-cervical junction)
Decussation
of pyramids
     Lateral
corticospinal
       tract
Spinal cord
Midline
    Anterior
corticospinal
      tract
Corticonuclear tract
FIGURE 6-2
Simple outline of the corticonuclear fiber pathways (bold green circles). The corticospinal 
tract pathway is included for comparison and review.
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 6-3
The motor unit and typical lesion sites producing different 
signs and symptoms of lower motor neuron damage: 1, 
Anterior horn cell—motor neuron disease; 2, nerve axon—
denervation, neuropathy; 3, myoneural juncture—neuro-
myopathy, myasthenia gravis; 4, muscle fiber—myopathy or 
dystrophy.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
118
the muscle fiber, and (4) each muscle fiber innervated 
by the branches. Lesions may occur at many points 
within the motor unit and produce lower motor neu-
ron signs.
BILATERAL SYMMETRY
Because the movements of limbs and digits would not 
be efficient or effective if the movement of one side 
mirrored the other, the corticospinal system allows 
for control of one side of the body to come from only 
one source (for at least 90% of the fibers), the oppo-
site hemisphere’s cortical motor areas. In comparison, 
because the oral musculature movements on one side 
of the body typically are mirrored by the same move-
ments on the other side, the majority of the midline 
speech muscles work in bilateral symmetry, making 
speech more efficient. This is the result of the bilateral 
innervation to the cranial nerve nuclei that the cor-
ticonuclear fibers provide. If a cranial nerve’s nuclei 
are said to receive bilateral innervation, the nuclei 
on the right side of the brainstem (in this example) 
receive axons from the primary motor cortices of both 
hemispheres. However, if that cranial nerve were to 
be one of those only receiving contralateral innerva-
tion, the axons providing neural input would come 
only from the left hemisphere’s cortical motor areas. 
The majority of the paired muscles of the face, pal-
ate, vocal folds, and diaphragm work together in syn-
chrony most of the time in wrinkling the forehead, 
smiling, chewing, swallowing, and talking and thus are 
bilaterally innervated.
This bilateral input to most of the speech muscles 
has important implications for the effect of damage to 
the nervous system on the speech musculature in cases 
of the motor speech disorders we call the dysarthrias 
(see full discussion in Chapter 8). After damage to the 
corticonuclear pathway, this bilateral innervation pro-
vides a safety feature or compensatory mechanism for 
speech production. For example, if the left corticonu-
clear fibers coming from the motor cortex to the nuclei 
of a cranial nerve are damaged, the motor nuclei of a 
bilaterally innervated neuron will still receive impulses 
by way of the intact right corticonuclear tract, and paral-
ysis of the muscle will not be severe. The innervation 
of the limbs, on the other hand, is primarily contralat-
eral rather than bilateral. Therefore, if the pyramidal 
tract input from the left side of the brain to the spinal 
motor nuclei were damaged, there would be little input 
to those spinal neurons from the opposite side; a severe 
right limb paralysis would result. Unilateral lesions to 
corticonuclear fibers typically do not produce a severe 
weakness because of redundancy provided by the bilat-
eral innervation.
Contralateral and Unilateral Innervation
Even though the cranial nerve nuclei are primarily 
bilaterally supplied, some of the muscle groups moving 
the facial and oral musculature have mixed innervation 
patterns with much variation among the nuclei regard-
ing the amount of unilateral innervation versus contra-
lateral innervation each receives. Areas with a greater 
ratio of unilateral supply suffer more damage after a 
unilateral lesion. Because of their primarily contralat-
eral innervation, the muscles of the lower face and the 
trapezius muscles are most affected by unilateral dam-
age (to the contralateral side). An intermediate paralytic 
effect, meaning significant weakness but not paralysis, is 
found in the tongue with a unilateral lesion because the 
mixture contains a greater ratio of bilateral innervation 
to the different muscles of the tongue. The diaphragm, 
ocular muscles, upper face, jaw, pharynx, and muscles 
of the larynx show little paresis with a unilateral lesion 
because of primarily bilateral innervation of the mus-
cles controlling movement of these structures.
The nuclei for the facial nerve are complex. The 
facial nucleus is made up of a ventral and a dorsal com-
ponent and combines bilateral innervation with contra-
lateral innervation. The muscles of the upper half of 
the face, supplied by the ventral portion, are far more 
bilaterally innervated than the muscles of the lower 
half of the face, which are supplied by the dorsal por-
tion of the motor nucleus and receive more contralat-
eral innervation. In practical terms, among the healthy 
population most people can wrinkle the forehead or lift 
both eyebrows together. Only a few people, with more 
contralateral fibers, are able to lift their eyebrows one at 
a time. The muscles of the midface receive a more equal 
combination of bilateral and contralateral innervation. 
Most, but not all, people can wink one eye at a time 
because of the increase of contralateral fibers to eyelid 
muscles compared with forehead muscles.
In the lower face the innervation is primarily con-
tralateral. Most people are able to retract one corner 
of the mouth alone when asked to do so because of the 
limited bilateral innervation of the lower face muscles. 
Table 6-2 summarizes the innervation for the cranial 
nerves of speech production. Figure 6-4 shows the dif-
ference in effect on facial movement of an upper motor 
neuron lesion compared with a lower motor neuron 
lesion as a result of this unusual innervation pattern. 
The principles of bilateral and contralateral inner-
vation are practically applied when a speech cranial 
nerve examination is performed to determine whether 
lesions are present affecting the corticonuclear fibers, 
cranial nerve nuclei, or the cranial nerves themselves.
The concepts of bilateral symmetry and contralat-
eral independence are of crucial clinical utility when 
analyzing and understanding muscle involvement in 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
119
dysarthria. This is explained further in Chapter 7 in 
the discussion of testing the cranial nerves involved in 
speech.
INDICATORS OF UPPER VERSUS LOWER 
MOTOR NEURON DAMAGE
Once an understanding has been grasped of the anat-
omy of the pyramidal tract and the final common path-
way, the concepts of upper and lower motor neurons, 
and the concept of bilateral versus contralateral inner-
vation, it is important to understand and be able to 
identify the signs of upper versus lower motor neuron 
damage.
Lesions of the upper and lower motor neurons pro-
duce fairly different sets of signs and symptoms. Many 
of the symptoms are easier to identify in the gross 
TABLE 6-2
Corticonuclear Innervation in the 
Cranial Nerves for Speech
Trigeminal (V)
Bilateral innervation
Facial (VII)
Mixed bilateral and contralat-
eral innervation
Glossopharyngeal (IX)
Bilateral innervation (motor 
­innervation of IX is only to a 
single muscle)
Vagus (X)
Bilateral innervation
Spinal accessory (XI)
Contralateral innervation
Hypoglossal (XII)
Primarily bilateral innervation 
with contralateral innervation 
of one muscle (genioglossus)
Motor area
of face
Lower motor
neuron lesion
Facial nerve
Nucleus of facial
nerve
Corticobulbar
tract
Upper motor
neuron lesion
FIGURE 6-4
Upper versus lower motor neuron facial paralysis. The shaded areas of the face show the 
distribution of the facial muscles paralyzed after an upper motor neuron lesion and a 
lower motor neuron lesion. (Modified from Gilman, S., & Winans, S. S. [1987]. Manter 
and Gatz’s essentials of clinical neuroanatomy and neurophysiology [7th ed.]. Philadelphia:  
F. A. Davis.)

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
120
muscles of the limbs but it is critical to the SLP that 
these signs/symptoms are recognized and considered 
whenever an examination is done on the oral muscula-
ture. Table 6-3 presents a contrast of the signs of dam-
age to these two systems. This distinction provides the 
neurologist with a powerful tool in neurologic exami-
nation for deciding where a lesion is located in the ner-
vous system. The most striking sign of a lesion in both 
upper and lower motor neurons is paralysis. The type 
of paralysis, however, is quite different depending on 
the site of the lesion that produces the paralysis. The 
neurologist would note paresis or paralysis and proceed 
by assessing muscle tone, muscle strength, and reflexes. 
Understanding the differences in the type of paraly-
sis, tone, and other confirmatory signs is a large step 
toward establishing a correct diagnosis of a neurologic 
disease involving motor disturbance. The differences in 
strength, tone, and reflexes are much more difficult to 
assess in the oral musculature than in the larger limb 
muscles. However, there are differences that can be 
identified. It is also important that the SLP help con-
firm these signs, if possible, in the oral musculature to 
assist in a correct diagnosis of the underlying etiology. 
It is also important that the SLP recognize these signs 
in the larger limb muscles so that identification of new 
problems can be made early or progression could be 
questioned.
Paralysis, Paresis, and Plegia
A gross limitation of movement is called paralysis, and 
an incomplete paralysis is known as paresis. A com-
plete or near-complete paralysis of one side of the body 
is hemiparalysis or, more commonly, hemiplegia. The 
presence of right-sided hemiplegia or hemiparesis is an 
extremely important sign for the SLP. Paralysis or paresis 
on the right side of the body suggests left hemisphere 
involvement. As previously noted, the left hemisphere is 
the primary site of brain mechanisms for language, so 
right hemiplegia is often associated with language dis-
orders. Lesions of the bilateral motor strip or the cor-
ticonuclear tract alone may produce the motor speech 
disorder of dysarthria.
Upper Motor Neuron Signs and Symptoms
Damage to the corticospinal tract anywhere along its 
course produces spastic paralysis. Spastic muscles dis-
play increased tone, or resistance to movement, a con-
dition called hypertonia. Spastic hypertonicity can be 
identified by moving a limb through its full range of 
motion so that the joint is flexed or bent. The neuro-
logic examiner puts an increased stretch on the muscles 
during range-of-motion testing. He or she thereby elic-
its a muscle stretch reflex, an increase in tone or ten-
sion that resists the flexion of the joint. The examiner 
can feel this increased resistance to movement. (The 
muscle stretch reflex controls the degree of contraction 
in a normal muscle and provides muscles with tonus, 
or tone.) When an injury occurs to the corticospinal 
or corticonuclear tract, such as in a vascular stroke, this 
spasticity may take several days to weeks to develop and 
stabilize. Temporary flaccid hemiplegia may initially 
be present, with a more permanent spastic paralysis 
developing over time. The increasing spasticity of the 
muscles after a corticospinal injury may be caused by a 
buildup of collagen in the muscles as well as biochemi-
cal changes.4
A “clasp knife” reaction occurs in a spastic muscle 
when the neurologist feels increased tone or resis-
tance to movement in the muscle after the joint has 
been briskly flexed and then feels the resistance fade. 
This reaction, which identifies spastic hypertonicity, is 
analogous to the resistance felt when a knife blade is 
first opened, followed by the reduction of resistance 
when the blade is straightened. This reaction occurs 
more typically in extension rather than in flexion of the 
elbow. A short span of no tone is usually present, then a 
rapid buildup of tone and a sudden release as the joint 
is moved, just as with opening a clasp knife.
Spasticity is also associated with exaggerated mus-
cle stretch reflexes, resulting in hyperreflexia. Reflex 
action is tested at joints by putting stretch on tendons. 
This elicits the exaggerated muscle stretch reflex. Spas-
tic paralysis, hypertonia, and hyperreflexia have most 
often been associated with pyramidal tract damage, 
particularly lesions of the corticospinal tract. However, 
the corticonuclear tracts are often also involved when 
a lesion interrupts the corticospinal tract, and signs of 
spasticity may be found in the midline speech muscles as 
well as in the distal limb muscles. Therefore the clinical 
TABLE 6-3
Signs of Upper and Lower Motor 
Neuron Disorders
UMN DISORDERS
LMN DISORDERS
Spastic paralysis
Flaccid paralysis
Hypertonia
Hypotonia
Hyperreflexia
Hyporeflexia
Clonus
No clonus
Babinski sign
No Babinski sign
Little or no atrophy
Marked atrophy
No fasciculations
Fasciculations
Diminished abdominal and 
cremasteric reflexes
Normal abdominal and 
cremasteric reflexes

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
121
signs of spasticity, or an upper motor neuron lesion, 
are of equal interest to the speech-language patholo-
gist and the neurologist. Spastic speech muscles may be 
weak, slow, and limited in range or movement. Hyper-
tonia may decrease muscle flexibility of the articulators 
and limit the ability to achieve a full range of motion of 
the speech muscles.
Other Confirmatory Signs
Several signs, in addition to a clinical demonstration of 
clasp knife spasticity, hypertonia, and hyperreflexia, are 
used by the neurologist to help verify the diagnosis of 
spasticity and localize the lesion to the pyramidal tract.
The Babinski sign, or extensor plantar sign, in partic-
ular has been identified as an abnormal reflex sign that 
develops with corticospinal damage. The lesion causes 
the release of cortical inhibition. The sign has achieved 
considerable status in the diagnosis of upper motor 
neuron lesions because it is a highly reliable abnormal 
reflex, is new behavior released by the presence of a 
lesion, and is clearly associated with a relatively specific 
lesion site—the cortex or the corticospinal tract. The 
speech-language pathologist is not directly interested 
in it because it does not involve the midline speech 
muscles, but its presence as a confirmation of an upper 
motor neuron lesion of the spastic type is important to 
all who manage neurologic patients.
The Babinski sign is observed as a reflex toe sign. 
It is elicited by stimulating the sole of the foot with a 
strong scratching maneuver. The normal response to 
stimulation of the sole, or plantar portion of the foot, 
is a slight withdrawal of the foot and downward turning 
or curling under of the toes. With a corticospinal lesion, 
the great toe extends upward and the other toes fan as 
the foot withdraws slightly. Physicians test this response 
several times to convince themselves that the upturn-
ing great toe sign can be repeatedly and automatically 
elicited. Automatic repetition of a given response such 
as this defines it as a reflex. The presence of a repeat-
able abnormal reflex sharply increases the probability 
of predicting with accuracy the possible site or sites of 
a neurologic lesion, though it may not be present if the 
patient with a vascular lesion is tested early after onset 
of the insult.
The Babinski sign is more reliable in adults than in 
infants and children. Normal infants are highly variable 
in display of the sign. The explanation usually given for 
this variability is that the immature nervous system and 
the damaged nervous system often show similar symp-
toms and signs. Damage to the nervous system often 
releases early reflex behavior that has become inhibited 
by development of higher centers, so signs of damage 
at that point in time are signs of immaturity at an ear-
lier time. Clinical neurologists believe that the exten-
sor plantar sign usually reaches stability by age 2 years. 
Other signs, such as a persisting asymmetric tonic neck 
reflex and the Moro reflex, can be tested to suggest 
an upper motor neuron lesion in young children (see 
Chapter 11).
Another confirmatory sign of spasticity is clonus. 
Hyperactive muscle stretch reflexes associated with 
spasticity may show a sustained series of rhythmic beats 
or jerks when a neurologic examiner maintains one ten-
don of a muscle in extension. To test for clonus, the 
Achilles tendon in the ankle is often put under exten-
sion. If an upper motor neuron lesion is present, the 
ankle and the calf show sustained jerks. A few clonic 
jerks, called abortive clonus, are not clinically signifi-
cant, but if the clonus is sustained over time, it is consid-
ered pathologic and an indicator of hyperreflexia. This 
sign is part of the clinical syndrome resulting from an 
upper motor neuron lesion.
With bilateral upper motor neuron lesions, a charac-
teristic dysarthria may be present. This motor speech 
disorder, called spastic dysarthria, is discussed in 
Chapter 8.
Lower Motor Neuron Signs and Symptoms
If a lesion directly damages a cranial or peripheral 
nerve, or is in the cell bodies of the anterior horn cell 
in the spinal cord or the nuclei of cranial nerves in the 
brainstem, neural impulses will not be transmitted to 
the muscles. This condition is called denervation. The 
result is that the muscles innervated by the cranial or 
spinal nerve become soft and flabby from a loss of mus-
cle tone. This is a lower motor neuron paralysis.
The loss of muscle tone is called hypotonia. Hypo-
tonia results in flaccid muscles, thus the term flaccid 
paralysis. Hypotonia may be an acquired condition, with 
disease or injury affecting the peripheral nervous sys-
tem pathway, but it may also be a condition found at 
birth or developing shortly after birth. Infantile hypo-
tonia may result from conditions such as chromosome 
disorders (e.g., Prader-Willi syndrome), genetic defects, 
spinal cord disorders, spinal muscular atrophy, muscu-
lar dystrophy, metabolic myopathies, or other problems 
that affect the peripheral pathways.14 Figure 6-5 shows 
the posture, the frog-leg position, typically assumed by 
an infant with hypotonia.
Lower motor neuron paralysis also is sometimes 
associated with loss of muscle bulk, a condition called 
atrophy. Muscles undergoing atrophy display some 
degree of degeneration because they have become 
denervated. Signs of this degeneration can be 
observed clinically. Atrophic muscles show fibrilla-
tions and fasciculations. These signs are caused by 
electrical disturbances in muscle fibers resulting from 
denervation. Fibrillations are fine twitches of single 
muscle fibers. These generally cannot be seen on 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
122
clinical examination but must be detected by electro-
myographic (EMG) examination. Fasciculations, on 
the other hand, are contractions of groups of muscle 
fibers that can be identified, with training, in skeletal 
muscles through the skin.
When muscle bulk is lost through atrophy in motor 
neuron disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), 
fasciculations are sometimes seen in the muscles of 
the head and neck as well as other parts of the body. 
These muscle twitches may be particularly observed in 
the relatively large muscle mass of the tongue if the bul-
bar muscles are involved. Fasciculations have no direct 
effect on speech itself but serve as a sign of lower motor 
neuron disease.
Interruption of a peripheral nerve by a lower motor 
neuron lesion also damages the reflex arc involved with 
that nerve. The result is that normal reflex responses 
mediated through the sensory and motor limbs of the 
arc become diminished. Reduced reflex response is 
called hyporeflexia. Complete lack of reflex is known as 
areflexia. Hyporeflexia and areflexia are also associated 
with lower motor neuron disease.
Referring back to Figure 6-3 with some explanations 
of typical disorders can help the reader understand 
damage caused by more typical types of lower motor 
neuron disorders. The most obvious example of a dis-
order is a lesion or cut in the spinal nerve (point 2). 
This damage paralyzes the muscle innervated by the 
nerve. In addition, the denervated muscle becomes 
hypotonic, areflexic, and atrophic. Finally, fascicula-
tions appear. If a cranial nerve is denervated, weakness 
of speech muscles results from hypotonia and loss of 
muscle bulk.
A lesion may also occur in the cell body itself and 
produce paralysis and related lower motor neuron signs 
(see point 1 of Fig. 6-3). An example is acute bulbar 
poliomyelitis, which attacks the high cervical anterior 
horns as well as the cranial nerve nuclei of the bulbar 
muscles controlling speech. Speech muscles again may 
become weak and atrophic.
Lesions of the lower motor neuron type may also 
directly occur in muscles (point 4). An example of this 
type of disorder is seen in muscular dystrophy. Speech 
muscles lose strength and show disturbances of muscle 
bulk. This lower motor neuron disease within a mus-
cle is called a myopathy, as opposed to a disease of the 
peripheral nerves, which is called a neuropathy. Lesions 
may also occur at the neuromuscular junction (point 3),  
as seen in myasthenia gravis. Speech muscles show 
weakness as well as notable fatigue with use in this myo-
neural disorder.
A Pause to Review
The study of the levels of control of the motor system 
and the terms associated with the different levels and 
different disorders is complicated. Here we will pause 
and review what has been discussed so far. Basic move-
ment is generated by a neural impulse generated by 
motor neurons of the primary motor cortex and sent 
down to either the spinal cord (for movement of the 
extremities and trunk) or to the cranial nerve nuclei 
located primarily in brainstem structures. Before the 
neural firing to muscles of speech production from 
the motor cortex, there is cortical activity that takes 
place in the supplementary motor area (pre-SMA 
portion) and insula (rostral portion), with, perhaps, 
some participation of part of Broca’s area. This cor-
tical activity is concerned with motor planning or 
motor programming of the movements that need to 
occur to accomplish the task at hand. If the task is to 
produce speech, current research suggests that the 
motor planning takes place primarily in the pre-SMA 
segment, in the insula, and in a small part of Broca’s 
area.
The corticospinal (pyramidal) tract and the cortico-
nuclear (corticobulbar) tract follow similar descend-
ing pathways for a short while. They both descend in a 
FIGURE 6-5
Typical frog-leg position assumed at rest by an infant with 
hypotonia. The thighs are fully abducted, and the arms lie 
in a flaccid position next to the head.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
123
fan-shaped manner forming the corona radiata. Both 
then pass through the narrow space called the inter-
nal capsule with the corticospinal fibers traversing the 
posterior limb and the corticonuclear fibers passing 
through the genu. From this point the corticobulbar 
fibers will descend to synapse on their various target 
nuclei, primarily in the structures of the brainstem. 
Some of these fibers will decussate and others will con-
tinue ipsilaterally. Many of the cranial nerve nuclei 
receive bilateral innervation, meaning that fibers 
from both sides of the brain will synapse on the motor 
nuclei in the brainstem.
There is a different path for the corticospinal fibers 
from the point of the internal capsule. They descend 
below the thalamus and form part of the cerebral pedun-
cles of the midbrain, a part called the crus cerebri. They 
will give off some fibers to nuclei in the pons, and these 
will become part of the corticopontine fiber pathway 
taking neural signaling out to the cerebellum. Most 
fibers will continue descending though some collaterals 
are given off to the red nucleus, the olivary nuclei, retic-
ular formation nuclei, and posterior column nuclei. 
Ninety percent of pyramidal tract fibers will decussate 
at the level of the pyramids of the medulla at the junc-
tion of the medulla and the cervical spinal cord. These 
fibers make up the lateral corticospinal tract. The other 
10% will continue into the spinal cord ipsilaterally and 
make up the anterior corticospinal tract.
There are other descending tracts of fibers that form 
indirect activation pathways and make up the extrapy-
ramidal tracts. These are the reticulospinal tract, the 
vestibulospinal tract, and the tectospinal tract. They 
consist of many short pathways with interconnections 
between the motor cortex and the spinal cord. They 
are concerned with coarse, stereotyped movements and 
with maintaining body tone and posture.
Two important concepts of clinical neurology 
were also discussed: upper motor neurons (UMN) 
and lower motor neurons (LMN). The neurons and 
their axons that make up the pathway from the motor 
cortex down to the nuclei on which they synapse in 
either the spinal cord (for the corticospinal tract) or 
the brainstem (for corticobulbar fibers) are known 
as UMNs. They provide direct input into those tar-
geted nuclei, carrying motor “directives” planned 
and implemented in the cortex. The second-order 
neurons found in the nuclei of either the anterior 
horn cells of the spinal column (for the corticospinal 
tract) or in the nuclei of the cranial nerves (for cor-
ticobulbar fibers) are known as LMNs. The axons of 
the LMNs take the transmitted information or motor 
directive out to the peripheral nervous system, exit-
ing the brain or the spinal cord and synapsing on the 
muscle fibers. The motor unit is a helpful concept in 
understanding the LMN.
Other terms and concepts included as important to 
understanding the effect of damage to the pyramidal, 
corticobulbar, and extrapyramidal tracts were: uni-
lateral and contralateral innervation, bilateral symmetry, 
tone (hypertonicity and hypotonicity), Babinski sign, reflexes, 
paralysis, and muscular weakness. If these terms and con-
cepts are not firm in your mind at this point, please 
go back and study this section before advancing to the 
next sections, which will take you to more in-depth 
information about neural control within muscles and 
then will introduce other influences on the motor 
pathways.
NEUROMUSCULAR CONTROL
In the final analysis, motor control of speech mus-
cles, or any other musculature, is brought about by 
muscle contraction. At one time it was believed that 
the only route for control of voluntary muscle con-
traction was by way of the several descending motor 
pathways in the nervous system that end in nerve 
cells called alpha motor neurons. In the spinal cord 
these motor neurons are called anterior horn cells 
and are in the largest cells in the spinal cord. Homol-
ogous motor neurons are the cranial nerve neurons 
of the brainstem. Along with gamma motor neurons, 
the alpha motor neurons supply skeletal muscles. 
They discharge impulses through the spinal nerves 
to contract muscles of the trunk and limbs in the cor-
ticospinal system. Most motor commands for a given 
articulatory act, other oral-motor acts, or facial move-
ment are transmitted by the alpha motor neuron sys-
tem through contraction of muscles innervated by 
cranial nerves.
Alpha Motor Neurons
The alpha motor neuron (AMN) innervates the main 
fibers that cause muscle contraction. These fibers lie 
within the muscle and are called extrafusal fibers. 
Figure 6-6 illustrates the structure of a muscle fiber 
including the input from the AMN. The axon of each 
AMN branches to supply the fibers. An axon may sup-
ply only a few fibers, as in the case of a small muscle 
with precisely controlled contraction, or it may con-
trol several hundred fibers, as in the case of large 
muscles with strong, crude movements. This fact is 
consistent with what you saw on the homunculus illus-
trated in Figure 2-7. The oral musculature involved in 
speech and swallowing requires a much larger area on 
the motor strip because the innervation and control 
of these muscles requires the involvement of a vastly 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
124
Motor endplate on nuclear
chain muscle fiber
Gamma motor 
neuron fibers
Type II fiber
Ia fiber
Nuclear bag
Nuclear chain
Gamma motor
neuron fibers
Motor endplate on nuclear
bag muscle fiber
Flower spray
nerve endings
Annulospiral
nerve endings
FIGURE 6-6
A muscle fiber including the alpha motor neuron and gamma motor neuron, extrafusal 
fibers, and the structures of the muscle spindle.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
125
larger number of neurons to allow fine and precise 
motor control for these acts.
The alpha motor neuron supplies the trophic, or 
nutritional, factors, which direct differentiation of mus-
cle fibers and keep the muscle healthy. These substances 
are called myotrophic factors. The motor neuron also 
supplies the acetylcholine that stimulates contraction of 
muscle.
Three types of extrafusal fibers can be differentiated 
in skeletal muscle. All muscles contain all three types of 
fibers, but all muscle fibers in one motor unit are of the 
same type. The type is determined by the myotrophic 
influences of the innervating neuron. The first of the 
three types of fibers are slow twitch (type I) fibers that 
contract slowly and are resistant to fatigue. These fibers 
predominate in sustaining postural activities, including 
standing. Fast twitch fibers (type IIx in humans) con-
tract faster but fatigue more rapidly. They exert a more 
powerful force and are primarily found in superficial 
muscles. An intermediate fiber (Type IIA) has proper-
ties between the other two types in terms of speed of 
contraction and amount of force; it is considered a fast 
twitch fiber, however.
Muscle Spindles
Another level of neuromuscular control has been iden-
tified at the level of the muscle spindle (see Fig. 6-6). 
Muscle spindles serve as sensory, or afferent, receptors 
within some striated muscles. They provide sensory 
information on the status of the normal stretch mecha-
nisms in muscle. In muscles that have muscle spindles, 
the spindle is the mechanism through which, in passive 
stretch, the muscle contraction is elicited. The spindles 
receive efferent innervation through gamma (γ) motor 
neurons (GMN). Because muscle spindles serve as 
afferent (sensory) receptors yet they themselves receive 
efferent (motor) innervation, they are considered more 
complex sensory receptors than those found in the ten-
dons and joints. Muscle spindles are most commonly 
found in the slow twitch (Type I) fibers and are plenti-
ful in the muscles along the vertebral column, the mus-
cles of the neck, and the intrinsic muscles of the hand. 
They have been found to be present in large numbers 
in the muscles that close the jaw as well. The muscle 
spindle is encapsulated and is fusiform, meaning tapered 
at both ends. It contains a limited number of short 
fibers that are parallel to other muscle fibers. The extra-
fusal muscle fibers are outside of the spindle. Fibers of 
the muscle spindle itself are called intrafusal fibers, and 
they connect to those extrafusal fibers outside the spin-
dle. Intrafusal fibers provide the nervous system with 
information about the length and the rate of change in 
length of the muscle. The number of intrafusal fibers 
within a spindle varies. To accomplish monitoring and 
informing the nervous system about length as well as 
rate of change, there are two types of fibers within the 
intrafusal fibers: nuclear chain and nuclear bag fibers. 
There are also two types of sensory endings associated 
with these fibers: primary endings or annulospiral end-
ings and secondary endings or “flower spray” endings.
Nuclear bag fibers look “chubby” in the middle due 
to a clustering of nuclei there in this central region. The 
nuclear chain fibers have nuclei that are arranged in 
single file and are thinner appearing. These two types 
of fibers are the sensory receptors within a muscle and 
need to be associated with a sensory neuron to get the 
information to the nervous system about the status of 
stretch on the muscle. This information is conveyed 
to the central nervous system (CNS) by the primary 
fibers, the annulospiral endings, and secondary affer-
ent fibers, the flower spray endings. The annulospiral 
endings are wrapped around the center of both nuclear 
bag and nuclear chain fibers and are rapidly conducting 
afferent fibers. The flower spray endings are the more 
slowly conducting secondary afferents and are found 
mainly on nuclear chain fibers. These two types of fibers 
carry information toward the CNS and are thus affer-
ent pathways. Because a majority of the muscle spindles 
are associated with spinal nerves (as opposed to cra-
nial nerves), most of the body’s information regarding 
muscle stretch enters the spinal cord and goes through 
the dorsal root ganglion associated with that body part. 
Muscle spindles associated with cranial nerve inner-
vated muscles will synapse on sensory nuclei associated 
with that cranial nerve.
When the muscle is stretched, the sensory neurons 
wrapped around the intrafusal fibers act as length 
detectors and send information about the stretch into 
the CNS. The nuclear bag fibers can sense the onset 
of stretch, and the nuclear chain fibers sense sustained 
stretch. Both types of fibers will respond immediately, 
however, to rapid stretch, which is a protective mecha-
nism for the muscle. The rate of firing of these fibers 
is proportional to the change in length of the muscle. 
The greater the stretch on the muscle, the more rapid 
the rate of firing.
Upon the onset of stretch on the muscle, muscle 
spindles are elongated. Both primary (annulospiral) 
and secondary (flower spray) afferents are stimulated 
by the lengthening of the intrafusal fibers within the 
muscle spindle and the rate of change of their length. 
This will result in the initiation of action potentials 
traveling through these afferents to the spinal cord 
(or the nuclei of the cranial nerve) and synapsing with 
the AMN, which in turn will fire neural impulses to the 
extrafusal fibers. It is the efferent signal of the alpha 
motor neuron to the extrafusal fibers of the muscle that 
causes the muscle to contract.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
126
Gamma Motor Neurons
Recall that both the alpha and the gamma motor neu-
rons synapse with the sensory afferents coming into the 
CNS. As with the alpha motor neurons, the GMNs are 
part of a motor nerve. They are relatively small in size 
compared with the alpha efferents, but they make up 
approximately 30% of the motor neurons leaving the 
spinal cord. Whereas the AMN signals the extrafusal 
fibers causing muscle contraction, the gamma motor 
neurons (GMNs) supply efferent innervation to the 
muscle spindle fibers, the intrafusal fibers.
The central region of an intrafusal fiber does not 
contract; only the ends have contractile properties. The 
gamma motor neurons innervate the muscle spindle at 
each end. At the same time that the sensory afferent syn-
apses in the CNS with the AMN, there is also a synapse 
with GMNs. The firing of the gamma motor neuron car-
ries an efferent signal back to the ends of the intrafusal 
fiber causing it to contract. This is an important part of 
the muscle contraction because when muscle contrac-
tion takes place, the muscle spindle’s intrafusal fibers 
tend to go a little slack. Proper functioning of the sen-
sory afferents of the muscle spindle depends heavily 
on the appropriate amount of tension on the nuclear 
bag and nuclear chain fibers in the central region of 
the intrafusal fiber. The coactivation of both the AMN 
and the GMN allows the contraction of both extrafusal 
and intrafusal fibers. The GMN activation is at a slightly 
slower pace than the AMN action. When the ends of 
the intrafusal fibers contract, the appropriate amount 
of tension is “reset” within the muscle spindle so that 
it can be sensitive to any stretch placed on the muscle. 
This functional contractile process is known as the 
gamma loop system. Through this system the gamma 
motor neurons form an important muscle stretch reflex 
mechanism that acts in conjunction with the alpha 
motor neurons. This sensitivity to stretch provides fine 
compensations of muscle length and velocity and helps 
maintain muscle tone.
The speed with which the spindles convey sensory 
feedback information to the central nervous system 
would seem to mark them as likely candidates for the 
neural mechanisms controlling the fine and rapid 
movements of speech muscles. Evidence from the 
speech science laboratory indicates that rapid com-
pensatory motor behavior is necessary for intelligible 
speech. Motor speech acts are rarely performed exactly 
the same way twice, but in most cases motor speech pro-
duction meets the broad specifications of the motor 
commands in such a way that the listener can recog-
nize an individual speech sound, or phon, as a mem-
ber of a phoneme class. In the case of density of muscle 
spindles, the jaw-closing muscles have been found to 
be rich with muscle spindles.7 Liss18 employed cadaver 
study with particular staining and light microscopy and 
identified a significant density of spindles in the leva-
tor palatini and palatoglossal muscles of the velum. A 
cadaver study by Cooper in 19539 found the presence of 
muscle spindles in the intrinsic muscles of the tongue, 
particularly the superior longitudinal muscle at a point 
proximal and posterior to the tip. Studies by Saigusa 
et  al.25,26 have found muscle spindles present in the 
transverse lingual muscles at the base of the tongue and 
in the genioglossus muscle with the primary distribu-
tion being toward the base of the tongue.
Golgi Tendon Organs
Beyond the muscle spindle system are joint recep-
tors and special tendon receptors called Golgi tendon 
organs, which are involved in sensorimotor control of 
some of the muscles of the body. The Golgi tendon 
organs are directly attached to the tendons of muscles. 
They respond when either stretching or contraction 
places tension on the tendon, or they signal the force 
of muscle contraction. The Golgi tendon organs tem-
per motor activity and inhibit activity in muscles when 
high levels of tension are placed on the tendon. Golgi 
tendon organs dampen oscillation of the limbs, at times 
producing joint stiffness. If these afferents allow too 
much freedom (such as in Parkinson’s disease), the 
tendency to oscillate is not inhibited and tremor is seen.
A Pause to Review
In the foregoing section, the neural anatomy concerned 
with muscle fiber and neural innervation of muscle con-
traction was discussed. The main fibers within muscles 
that result in muscle contraction are the extrafusal 
fibers. These are innervated by large neurons called 
alpha motor neurons (AMNs). The axon of an AMN 
will branch out to control more than one muscle fiber 
depending on the precision of muscle control needed 
to accomplish that movement. Therefore a large num-
ber of fibers may be controlled by only a few AMNs 
when the movements are cruder, large movements (like 
the muscles of the quadriceps, for instance); muscles 
requiring fine, precise movements to accomplish the 
motor task (like muscles of the finger or tongue, for 
instance) will require many AMNs because each axon 
will branch to control only a small number of fibers. 
The AMNs supply the trophic factors that determine 
the type of muscle fibers in a motor unit (Type I, Type 
IIx, or Type IIA most frequently in skeletal muscle in 
humans). AMNs also supply the primary neurotransmit-
ter, acetylcholine.
Another important level of control at the muscle 
fiber level is the muscle spindle, which is the sensory 
mechanism or afferent receptor present in some striated 
muscles. The muscle spindle contains intrafusal fibers. 
The muscle spindle provides the AMN information on 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
127
the status of stretch on a muscle and can elicit muscle 
contraction. The spindle is a complicated structure with 
both afferent and efferent mechanisms. Most of the 
muscles under spinal control contain muscle spindles 
but research has shown that some of the oral muscles 
also contain muscle spindles, which is important to the 
successful use of neuromuscular therapy methodology 
in treatment of oral-motor deficits.8
Other mechanisms or terms in the previous section 
were nuclear bag and nuclear chain fibers, annulospiral and 
flower spray endings, gamma motor neurons, and Golgi ten-
don organs. Please review these if needed before advanc-
ing to study other influences on the motor system.
The Influence of Other Systems on 
Movement
Even if you have only limited experience with patients 
with neurologic disorders, you likely realize that there 
are many patients for whom subconscious planning of 
the movement pattern or grossly implementing move-
ment does not seem to be the main problem. For many 
patients it is the finer aspects of motor control, the effi-
ciency and coordination of the movements, that appear 
to be the locus of the disorder. There may be no prob-
lem in the direct corticospinal or corticonuclear tracts 
but, instead (or, sometimes, in addition), there may be 
damage to pathways associated with the basal nuclei (or 
basal ganglia as many texts still use) and/or the cerebel-
lum. These structures and their input and output path-
ways are quite complex, and this text will not attempt 
to fully explain them. However, it is important for the 
SLP to be somewhat familiar with their composition 
and their contribution to movement control so that 
the effects of damage to these structures can be better 
understood.
THE BASAL GANGLIA (OR BASAL NUCLEI)
Before beginning the discussion of the basal ganglia, 
review Figures 2-13 and 2-14 in Chapter 2. The termi-
nology for these structures as a whole has changed 
through the years with many contemporary texts 
using basal nuclei in place of basal ganglia. To acquaint 
the student with both, the terms are used inter-
changeably here. These structures include the cau-
date nucleus, the putamen, the nucleus accumbens, 
the globus pallidus (both the internal and external 
segments), the subthalamic nucleus, and the substan-
tia nigra. With the exception of the nucleus accum-
bens, these deep subcortical nuclei serve to modulate 
the activity of the motor cortex and brainstem nuclei 
of the motor system.
The caudate nucleus (CN) lies just medial to the 
anterior limb of the internal capsule and adjacent to 
the wall of the lateral ventricle, close to the thalamus. 
The structure is divided into a head, body, and tail by 
some neuroanatomists, but others divide the caudate 
into only a head and tail. The entire caudate cannot be 
illustrated in a coronal section because of its C-shape. 
Only a part of it (or none at all) will be seen depending 
on where the sectioning occurs in the anterior-posterior 
plane. It follows the body of the lateral ventricle with 
the tail end at about the level of the temporal lobe; it 
terminates at the amygdaloid nucleus.
The putamen is located anterior to the genu of the 
internal capsule. In humans, the caudate and the puta-
men are separated structurally by the internal capsule. 
Functionally, together the caudate and the putamen 
make up what is known as the striatum or, in some texts, 
the neostriatum. The putamen and caudate are con-
nected by bridges of cells that span across the internal 
capsule; these strands give the area its striped or striated 
appearance and, thus, the name striatum was given it at 
some point. Converging excitatory input comes into 
the striatum from almost the entire cortex, but espe-
cially the sensorimotor and frontal areas of the cortex. 
The thalamus also provides input into the striatum.
The nucleus accumbens lies between the caudate 
and the putamen and is sometimes called the ventral 
striatum or dorsal striatum. It is part of a mesolimbic 
circuit involved in dopamine signaling that seems to be 
involved in establishing associations between rewarding 
or adversive stimuli and the environment surrounding 
that experience. It is not involved much at all in control 
of movement and will not be discussed here further.
The globus pallidus (GP) is located medial to the 
putamen and rostral to the hypothalamus. In primates 
the GP is separated by a fiber tract (the internal med-
ullary lamina) into two segments, an internal segment 
(GPi) and an external one (GPe). The putamen and 
globus pallidus (as a whole) together comprise the len-
tiform nucleus, a thumb-sized structure wedged against 
the internal capsule. The lentiform nucleus (i.e., the 
putamen and the globus pallidus), combined with the 
caudate nucleus, comprises what is known as the corpus 
striatum (Table 6-4).
The other structures of the basal nuclei, the subtha-
lamic nucleus (STN) and the substantia nigra (SN), are 
found near the reticular formation of the midbrain. 
The STN is located at the junction of the diencephalon 
and the midbrain, ventral to the thalamus. The SN is 
located in the ventral part of the midbrain between the 
red nucleus and the crus cerebri; although it is located 
in the midbrain, it is functionally a part of the basal 
ganglia system. There are two segments comprising the 
substantia nigra: the pars reticulata (SNpr), which is 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
128
composed of few cells, and the pars compacta (SNpc), 
which is densely packed with cells. The SNpc provides a 
critical supply of dopamine to the neostriatum.
Excitatory afferent input to the basal nuclei is pri-
marily through the striatum and comes from the entire 
cerebral cortex and parts of the thalamus. There are 
projections from frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipi-
tal cortical areas stratified throughout the basal ganglia; 
the head of the caudate receives the largest number of 
input fibers, those coming from the frontal lobe. The 
basal ganglia also contain a motor homunculus similar 
to the one in the primary motor cortex. The projections 
from the motor cortex to the basal nuclei maintain this 
somatotopic organization from the source area to the 
targeted basal ganglia region and could be traced.
Only two structures of the basal ganglia transmit out-
side of this circuitry: the globus pallidus (internal seg-
ment, GPi) and the substantia nigra (pars reticulata 
segment, SNpr). Output transmissions from the basal 
nuclei project primarily to the thalamus and are relayed 
back to parts of the cortex. A limited number of fibers 
also project to the brainstem and some of the SNpr 
fibers project to the superior colliculus for control of 
eye movement.
The neurotransmitter secreted by these output basal 
ganglia structures is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 
and the transmission is inhibitory. The strength of the 
final inhibitory transmission will depend on the path-
way taken between the striatum and the output neu-
rons of the GPi or the SNpr. There is more than one 
pathway, particularly between the striatum and the GPi; 
there are some excitatory and many inhibitory con-
nections along the various routes. These intervening 
connections and the neural signaling involved could 
significantly alter the effectiveness of the final trans-
mission from the output basal ganglia structure (the 
GPi or the SNpr) and, subsequently, the thalamus. 
Students wishing to explore these connections further 
are referred to Bolam et al.3
There is a somatotopic organization of the output of 
the basal ganglia such that output associated with leg and 
arm movement is from the GPi and from the face and eyes, 
the SNpr. The GPi sends approximately 70% of its output 
to the thalamus and the brainstem. The thalamic nuclei 
in turn send projections to different parts of the cortex, 
including the motor, premotor, supplementary motor, 
and prefrontal areas. Some project back to the striatum 
for possible feedback loops. Brainstem connections in 
the midbrain and pons project to reticulospinal neurons. 
There are some output neurons of the GPi whose eventual 
connections are not known as of this time.
The other structures of the basal nuclei transmit only 
within the circuitry. Box 6-2 lists the output targets and 
the type and target of transmission of the structures. 
Note that within the basal ganglia circuitry, the SNpc is 
the source of dopamine to the striatum and that dopa-
mine transmission may result in an eventual transmis-
sion that is excitatory or inhibitory. It just depends on 
what type of receptor (D1 = excitatory; D2 = inhibitory) 
within the striatum receives the neural signal. Please 
keep in mind that most connections within this cir-
cuitry are inhibitory so that the net effect (strength of 
inhibition or excitation) of the output transmission of 
the GPi and the SNpr depends on how many inhibitory 
versus excitatory connections have been made before 
the final output. The ramifications of too little or too 
much inhibition or excitation of the cortical motor 
areas will be obvious when we review the motor speech 
disorders associated with damage to the basal ganglia.
The basal ganglia indirectly affect motor function. 
The input fed into the thalamus and then to the cortex 
or brainstem can facilitate initiating movement, execut-
ing movement or terminating movement. Through this 
Internal Connections
	•	 Caudate and putamen (striatum) = inhibitory 
(GABA) → GPi, GPe, SNpr, SNpc
	•	 Globus pallidus internal (GPi) = inhibitory (GABA) 
→ subthalamic nucleus
	•	 Globus pallidus external (GPe) = inhibitory → sub-
thalamic nucleus
	•	 Subthalamic nucleus = excitatory (glutamate) → 
GPi, GPe, and SNpr
	•	 Substantia nigra (SNpc) = mixed (depends on the 
receptor) dopamine → striatum
	
BOX 6-2   
Basal Ganglia
TABLE 6-4
Nomenclature of the Basal Nuclei
Globus pallidus
Lentiform 
nucleus
Corpus striatum
Putamen
Striatum
Caudate nucleus
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
129
complex circuitry, learned movement patterns can be 
selectively activated or suppressed so that the intended 
movement can be accomplished with involvement of 
appropriate muscle tone, body posturing, and with-
out interference from other unnecessary or disruptive 
movements.
Damage to the Basal Ganglia
Lesions of the basal ganglia generally produce two 
major types of movement disorders: poverty of move-
ment (akinesia) and excessive involuntary movement 
(dyskinesia).27 Akinesia is often accompanied by 
muscular rigidity, as in Parkinson’s disease. The basal 
ganglia particularly influence movements related to 
posture, automatic movements, and skilled voluntary 
movements.
Marsden21 argues that the basal ganglia are respon-
sible for the automatic execution of learned motor 
plans. This involves subconscious selection, sequenc-
ing, and delivery of the motor programs of a learned 
or practiced motor strategy, such as playing an instru-
ment or writing by hand. When the basal ganglia are 
damaged, the individual appears to revert to slower, 
less automatic, and less accurate cortical mechanisms 
for motor behavior. Civier and colleagues6 provide an 
excellent review of studies that support the possibility 
that the basal ganglia–thalamocortical circuit plays an 
important role in the pathophysiology of stuttering.
Dyskinesia
Damage to some parts of the basal ganglia produce 
motor disturbances usually classified as involuntary 
movement disorders. The most commonly used techni-
cal term for them is dyskinesia (dys, meaning disordered, 
and kinesia, meaning movement). These disorders 
encompass a full range of bizarre postures and unusual 
movement patterns. The dyskinesias have long been 
described by such terms as tremor, writhing, fidgeting, 
flailing, restlessness, jerking, and flinging. Often the 
unusual movements that dominate the trunk and limbs 
of the dyskinetic patient are also reflected in the face 
and speech mechanism. The result is a serious and typi-
cal dysarthria classified under hyperkinetic dysarthria 
(see Chapter 8). In general, the dysarthria reflects the 
specific symptoms of each specific type of dyskinesia.
The term dyskinesia may be used in a broad sense 
to include any excess of movement (hyperkinesia) 
or reduction in movement (akinesia). Hyperkinesia 
has been used to indicate dyskinesias that present too 
much movement. Hypokinesia and akinesia, on the 
other hand, refer to too little movement and reduced 
movement, respectively. In actual clinical use, the terms 
may not always be strictly applied to a person with an 
identified neurologic lesion. For instance, neurologists 
may apply hyperkinesia to the well-known twitching or 
fidgeting of Huntington’s chorea as well as the abnor-
mal hyperactivity of children in whom there may not 
be evidence of an organic lesion in the nervous system, 
let alone knowledge of a lesion localized to the central 
nervous system.
Hypokinesia also may be used to describe the 
reduced activity level of a depressive patient with no 
suspected neurologic lesion. By tradition, neurologists 
do not apply the term hypokinesia to limitations in move-
ment resulting from lesions of the pyramidal tract or 
peripheral nerves. In other words, lesions that paralyze 
voluntary movement are not labeled hypokinetic. Thus 
hemiplegia, quadriplegia, and paraplegia are not con-
sidered hypokinetic disorders.
Dyskinetic Types.  The responsibilities of speech-lan-
guage pathologists do not extend to the identification 
of lesion sites in the complex circuitry of the motor sys-
tem, but SLPs should attempt to recognize the standard 
dyskinesias and determine the effect of the symptoms 
of specific dyskinesias on the accompanying dysarthria. 
Undiagnosed cases of movement disorders demand re-
ferral to a neurologist. Dyskinesia has several distinct 
patterns, but not all of them are related to the dysar-
thrias. Described next are only those motor signs that 
can produce motor speech symptoms.
Tremors
Tremors are defined as purposeless movements that are 
rhythmic, oscillatory, involuntary actions. Normal (or 
physiologic) and abnormal (or pathologic) tremors are 
usually distinguished. Tremors are pathologic if they 
occur in a disease and are characteristic of that disease. 
Normal tremor is called physiologic tremor. Several 
classifications of tremor are in use today. The speech-
language pathologist should be familiar with three types 
of tremor associated with vocal performance in normal 
and pathologic conditions.
Rest Tremor.  Rest tremor designates a tremor that 
occurs in Parkinson’s disease. A tremor of three to 
­seven movements per second occurs in the patient’s 
limbs and hands at rest. The tremor is temporarily 
suppressed when the limb is moved, and it sometimes 
can be inhibited by conscious effort. The voice may be 
affected by the tremor. Tremulous voice has been de-
scribed in approximately 14% of a large sample of par-
kinsonian patients. It is a salient vocal deviation that is 
easily ­recognized among the other vocal deviations of 
the hypokinetic dysarthria of parkinsonism.
Physiologic, or Action, Tremor.  Healthy people demon-
strate a fine tremor of the hands when maintaining pos-
ture. The rate may vary with age but usually falls within 
the range of 4 to 12 cycles per second. This normal trem-
or is distinguished from pathologic tremors ­associated 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
130
with known neurologic diseases such as Parkinson’s and 
cerebellar disorders. An abnormal action tremor may af-
fect the laryngeal muscles and produce a voice disorder 
known as organic or essential voice tremor.
Intention Tremor.  Intention tremor refers to a tremor 
that occurs during movement and is intensified at the 
termination of the movement. Intention tremor has 
been associated with the ataxic dysarthria seen in cer-
ebellar disease. It is often seen in cerebellar disorders 
but is not exclusive to cerebellar dysfunction.
Chorea
Chorea refers to quick, random, hyperkinetic move-
ments simulating fragments of normal movements. 
Speech, facial, and respiratory movements, as well as 
movements of the extremities, are affected by choreic 
symptoms in this dyskinesia. The movement is close to 
what is popularly described as fidgets. Chorea is one 
symptom of a hereditary disorder known as Hunting-
ton’s disease, or Huntington’s chorea, and is seen in 
other movement disorders as well.
Athetosis
The hyperkinesia of athetosis is a slow, irregular, coarse, 
writhing, or squirming movement. It usually involves 
the extremities as well as the face, neck, and trunk. 
The movements directly interfere with the fine and 
controlled actions of the larynx, tongue, palate, phar-
ynx, and respiratory mechanism. As with most other 
involuntary movements, the involuntary movements 
of athetosis disappear in sleep. In congenital athetosis, 
the most common type of spastic paralysis may also be 
observed. Lesion sites in pure athetosis are often in the 
putamen and the caudate nucleus. Hypoxia, or lack of 
oxygen at birth, is a common cause, producing death 
of brain cells before or during birth. Choreoathetotic 
movements have also been described; they appear to 
be a dyskinesia that lies somewhere between choreic 
and athetoid movements in terms of rate and rhythm 
of movement or that includes both types of movement. 
In fact, many of the involuntary movement disorders 
appear to blend one or more of the different clinical 
dyskinesias, as the term choreoathetosis implies.
Dystonia
In dystonia the limbs assume distorted static postures 
resulting from excess tone in selected parts of the body. 
The dyskinetic postures are slow, bizarre, and often gro-
tesque, involving writhing, twisting, and turning. Dys-
arthria and obvious motor involvement of the speech 
mechanism are common. Often differential motor 
involvement occurs in the speech muscles, and some 
dysarthrias have been observed that primarily affect the 
larynx. Others affect the face, tongue, lips, palate, and 
jaw. A rare dystonic disorder of childhood is called dys-
tonia musculorum deformans. It may be accompanied 
by dysarthria in its later stages.
Fragmentary, or focal, dystonias have been described, 
and some neurologists assert that they contribute to 
spastic or spasmodic dysphonia, a bizarre voice disor-
der that mixes aphonia (lack of voice) with a strained, 
labored whisper. The etiology of spastic dysphonia is 
unclear. Injections of botulinum are often effective in 
reducing the dystonia.
Myoclonus
Myoclonus has been used to describe differing motor 
abnormalities, but basically a myoclonic movement is 
an abrupt, brief, almost lightning-like contraction of 
muscle. An example of a normal or physiologic myo-
clonic reaction occurs when a person is drifting off to 
sleep but suddenly is awakened by a rapid muscle jerk. 
This muscle jerk is myoclonus.
Pathologic myoclonus is most common in the limbs 
and trunk but also may involve the facial muscles, jaws, 
tongue, and pharynx. Repetitive myoclonus in these 
muscles, of course, may affect speech. Myoclonic move-
ments in the muscles of speech have been described 
as having a rate of 10 to 50 per minute, but they can 
be more rapid. The pathology underlying these move-
ments has been debated, but because they have been 
associated with degenerative brain disease, the cerebral 
cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum have all been consid-
ered as possible lesion sites.
A special myoclonic syndrome involving speech 
muscles called palatal myoclonus has been described. It 
involves rapid movements of the soft palate and phar-
ynx and sometimes includes the larynx, diaphragm, 
and other muscles. The symptoms most often present 
in later life and are characteristic of several diseases. 
This myoclonus has a specific pathology in the central 
tegmental tract of the brainstem, but the etiology can 
be varied. The most common cause is a stroke, or cere-
brovascular accident, in the brainstem.
Orofacial Dyskinesia (Tardive Dyskinesia)
In orofacial or tardive dyskinesia bizarre movements 
are limited to the mouth, face, jaw, and tongue. This 
movement includes grimacing, pursing of the mouth 
and lips, and writhing of the tongue. These dyski-
netic movements often alter articulation of speech. 
The motor speech signs of orofacial dyskinesia usually 
develop after the prolonged use of powerful tranquil-
izing drugs, the most common class of which are phe-
nothiazines. Drug-induced dyskinesias associated with 
the phenothiazines and related medications may even 
produce athetoid movements or dystonic movements 
of the body. Parkinsonian signs and other symptoms 
associated with movement disorders are also caused by 
these drugs. Orofacial dyskinesia also occurs in elderly 
patients without drug use. A rare disorder that includes 
dyskinesia of the eyelids, face, tongue, and refractory 
muscles is called Meige syndrome.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
131
Other dyskinesias are included in the spectrum 
of movement disorders but generally do not include 
motor involvement of the speech mechanism. These 
include hemiballismus, which causes forceful, fling-
ing unilateral movements and may involve half of 
the body. Akathisia refers to motor restlessness or 
the inability to sit still. Restless leg syndrome is an 
example of this dyskinesia. Box 6-3 summarizes the 
dyskinesias.
THE CEREBELLAR SYSTEM
The third major subcomponent of the motor system that 
affects speech is the cerebellum. Interacting with the 
other systems of motor control we have been studying, 
the cerebellum is known to provide significant coordi-
nation for motor speech. As previously noted, the cer-
ebellum is located dorsal to the medulla and pons. The 
occipital lobes of the cerebral hemispheres overlap the 
top of the cerebellum. The anatomy of the cerebellum 
is complex, and the speech-language pathologist need 
only understand it in a gross sense to see the relation of 
the cerebellum to speech performance.
Anatomy of the Cerebellum
The cerebellum can be divided into three parts. The 
thin middle portion is called the vermis because of 
its serpentine, or snakelike, shape. The vermis lies 
between two large lateral masses of the cerebellum, 
the cerebellar hemispheres (Fig. 6-7). The vermis 
connects these two hemispheres. The vermis and 
hemispheres are divided by fissures and sulci into 
lobes and also into smaller divisions called lobules. 
The division into lobes and lobules is helpful in clari-
fying the physiologic function of the cerebellum. 
Although the lobes and lobules have been classified 
differently by different investigators, this text uses a 
classification system that divides the cerebellum into 
three lobes.
Three Cerebellar Lobes
The three cerebellar lobes are the anterior lobe, the 
posterior lobe, and the flocculonodular lobe. The ante-
rior lobe, which is modest in size, is superior to the 
primary fissure. This part of the cerebellum roughly 
corresponds to what is known as the paleocerebellum, 
the second oldest part of the cerebellum in a phylo-
genetic sense. The anterior lobe receives most of the 
	•	 Tremors: Purposeless movements that are rhythmic, 
oscillatory, involuntary actions. Designated as either 
normal (physiologic) or abnormal (pathologic).
	•	 Rest tremor: Designated tremor caused by Parkin-
son’s disease. Presenting signs include tremor when 
affected limb is at rest and may include tremulous 
voice. Range of three to seven movements per  
second.
	•	 Action (physiologic) tremor: Fine tremor of hands 
while maintaining posture. Can affect laryngeal 
muscles, causing voice tremor. Range of 4 to 12 
cycles per second.
	•	 Intention tremor: Tremor intensified at termination 
of movement. Associated with ataxic dysarthria and 
other cerebellar disorders.
	•	 Chorea: Quick, random, hyperkinetic movements 
simulating fragments of normal movement. Move-
ments are close to what is commonly described as 
“fidgets” and present as a symptom of Huntington’s 
disease.
	•	 Athetosis: Slow, irregular, coarse, writhing, or 
squirming movement. Involves extremities and 
can also directly interfere with fine and controlled 
actions of the swallowing and respiratory  
mechanisms.
	•	 Dystonia: Limbs assume distorted, static postures re-
sulting in excess tone in selected body parts. Move-
ments include slow, bizarre, and often grotesque 
writhing, twisting, and turning motions.
	•	 Myoclonus: Abrupt, brief, almost lightning-like con-
traction of muscle. Pathology is still debatable. Has 
been associated with degenerative brain disease, 
cerebral cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum. Palatal 
myoclonus is a special type involving rapid move-
ments of the soft palate and pharynx, commonly 
caused by stroke or cerebrovascular accident in the 
brainstem.
	•	 Orofacial (tardive) dyskinesia: Bizarre movements limit-
ed to mouth, face, jaw, and tongue characterized by 
grimacing, pursing of mouth and lips, and writhing 
of the tongue. Shown to develop from prolonged use 
of tranquilizing drugs, especially phenothiazines. A 
dyskinesia called Meige syndrome affects the eyelids, 
face, tongue, and refractory muscles.
Non–Speech-Related Dyskinesias
	•	 Hemiballismus: Forceful, flinging, unilateral move-
ments that may involve the whole body.
	•	 Akathisia: Motor restlessness or the inability to sit 
still (e.g., restless leg syndrome).
	
BOX 6-3   
Common Dyskinetic Types

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
132
proprioceptive impulses from the spinal cord and regu-
lates posture.
The posterior lobe, the largest part of the cerebel-
lum, is located between the other two lobes. It com-
prises the major portion of the cerebellar hemispheres. 
It is the newest part of the cerebellum and is therefore 
also known as the neocerebellum. The posterior lobe 
receives the cerebellar connections from the cerebrum 
and regulates coordination of muscle movement.
The flocculonodular lobe consists of two small wispy 
appendages, known as flocculi, in the posterior and 
inferior region of the cerebellum. The flocculi are sepa-
rated by the nodulus, the inferior part of the vermis. 
The flocculonodular lobe, the oldest portion of the cer-
ebellum, contains the fastigial nucleus, which is com-
posed of fibers that travel from the nucleus to the four 
vestibular nuclei in the upper medulla. The cerebellum 
mediates equilibrium by way of these fibers.
Longitudinal Zones and Deep Nuclei
The cerebellum is also in some texts divided into lon-
gitudinal zones that relate to deep nuclei within the 
cerebellum. The nuclei receive input from the cerebel-
lar cortex and are named (going from medial to lateral 
placement deep within the cerebellum): the fastigial, 
the interpositus, and dentate nuclei. The longitudinal 
zones relate to these nuclei and are called the medial, 
intermediate, and lateral zones. The fastigial nuclei 
receive input from the medial zone. This zone receives 
sensory input from sensory systems such as visual, vestib-
ular and auditory systems. The related fastigial nucleus 
will output to vestibular, and reticulospinal systems, the 
thalamus, and the superior colliculus. The interposi-
tus nuclei receive input from the longitudinal division 
called the intermediate zone. This zone receives infor-
mation from the spinal cord and also receives input 
from the motor cortex via the corticopontine fibers. 
The interpositus nuclei send output to the red nucleus 
and to the contralateral thalamus. The third zone, the 
lateral zone, gets input from widespread areas of the 
cortex, through the corticopontine fiber tracts. This 
zone projects to the dentate nucleus, which primar-
ily communicates with the thalamus and the reticular 
formation.
Synergy and Asynergy
The connections that the cerebellum has with other 
parts of the central nervous system are important to its 
function. Through these connections the cerebellum 
sends and receives afferent and efferent impulses and 
executes its primary function: a synergistic coordina-
tion of muscles and muscle groups. Synergy is defined as 
the cooperative action of muscles. Ensuring the smooth 
coordination of muscles is the prime task of the cere-
bellum. Specifically, the cerebellum, along with other 
structures of the nervous system, maintains proper pos-
ture and balance in walking and in the sequential move-
ments of eating, dressing, and writing. It also guides the 
production of rapid, alternating, repetitive movements, 
such as those involved in speaking, and smooth pursuit 
movements. Voluntary movement, without assistance 
from the cerebellum, is clumsy, uncoordinated, and 
disorganized. Motor defect of the cerebellar system has 
been called asynergia or dyssynergia. Asynergia is a lack 
of coordination in agonistic and antagonistic muscles 
and is manifested as deterioration of smooth, complex 
movements.
Cerebellar Peduncles and Pathways
The cerebellum is connected to the rest of the nervous 
system by three pairs of peduncles, or feet. The cer-
ebellar peduncles anchor the cerebellum to the brain-
stem. All afferent and efferent fibers of the cerebellum 
pass through the three peduncles and the pons to the 
other levels of the nervous system. The pons, which 
Lingula
Central lobule
Anterior lobe
Posterior
lobe
Posterolateral fissure
Paraflocculus
Flocculonodular lobe
Simple
lobule
Ant.
quadrangular
lobule
Post.
quadrang.
lobule
Superior
semilunar
lobule
Inferior
semilunar
lobule
Tonsil
Uvula
Nodulus
Flocculus
Vermis
FIGURE 6-7
A schematic illustration of the cerebellum showing hemispheres, lobes, and lobules. Ant., 
Anterior; Post., posterior; Quadrang., quadrangular.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
133
means bridge, is aptly named; it is literally a bridge 
from the cerebellum to the rest of the nervous system 
(Fig. 6-8).
The inferior cerebellar peduncle, or restiform body, 
carries primary afferent fibers from the structures close 
to it: the medulla, spinal cord, and cranial nerve VIII. 
Thus spinocerebellar, medullocerebellar, and vestibular 
fibers pass through the inferior peduncle.
The middle cerebellar peduncle, or brachium 
pontis, connects the cerebellum with the cerebral 
cortex by the pathways that traverse it. The middle 
peduncle is easily recognized; it is the largest of the 
three peduncles and also conveys the largest number 
of fibers from the cerebral cortex and pons. It carries 
pontocerebellar fibers as well as the majority of the 
corticopontocerebellar fibers. These fibers convey 
afferent information from the temporal and frontal 
lobes of the cerebrum to the posterior lobe of the 
contralateral cerebellum.
The superior cerebellar peduncle, or brachium con-
junctivum, conveys the bulk of efferent fibers that leave 
the cerebellum. The primary efferent fibers arise from 
an important nucleus deep in the cerebellum called the 
dentate nucleus. The rubrospinal and dentatothalamic 
pathways, along with several other tracts, leave by way of 
the superior peduncle and terminate in the contralat-
eral red nucleus and ventrolateral nucleus of the thala-
mus. From here impulses are relayed to the cerebral 
cortex.
Cerebellar Role in Speech
The major pathways and structures of the cerebellum 
have been outlined to suggest a rough schematic of the 
feedback nature of the afferent and efferent connec-
tions of the structure. Basic as the presentation is, it 
still highlights the fact that the cerebellar motor sub-
system significantly influences the function of the other 
motor systems in the production of motor speech. The 
fact that the cerebellum plays an important part in the 
synergy of rapid alternating movements and the fine 
coordination of muscles suggests that it interacts in a 
crucial way with the corticonuclear fibers to provide the 
specialized rapid and precise motor control needed for 
ongoing connected speech.
Auditory, tactile, and visual areas also exist in the 
cerebellum. These centers in the cerebellum, both 
cortical and subcortical, project to similar areas in the 
cerebrum, which in turn project back to correspond-
ing cerebellar areas. The cerebellum therefore is nei-
ther completely vestibular, proprioceptive, nor motor 
in function. Rather, it serves to reinforce or diminish 
sensory and motor impulses, acting as a critical mod-
ulator of neuronal function. There is an abundance 
of sensory and cortical information conveyed to and 
from the cerebellum resulting in indirect influence on 
motor nuclei. There are also many connections with 
nonmotor areas. Because of this, some have theorized, 
and it has now been supported through behavioral 
studies,28 that the cerebellum’s primary role is to eval-
uate sensory or cortical information during ongoing 
movement. In this way, the cerebellum is important 
not only to coordination of learned movements but 
also in motor learning itself. The cerebellum appears 
to be primary in comparing the intended movement 
with the actual movement and, if a mismatch occurs, 
sending corrective information back to the cortex 
and brainstem to modify the ongoing program with-
out major disruption of the movement. In the same 
way that it does for movement of larger muscles and 
motor systems, the cerebellum assists in coordinating 
the respiratory, articulatory, and phonatory muscles 
for speech production.13
Clinical Signs of Cerebellar Dysfunction
Cerebellar or cerebellar pathway lesions manifest them-
selves by affecting coordination of volitional movements 
and often volitionally maintained postures. Clinical 
Vestibular
Nuclei
Thalamus
Primary Motor Cortex
Supplementary MC
Premotor Cortex
CORTICAL
MOTOR AREAS
CEREBELLUM
Input
Output
BRAINSTEM
STRUCTURES
CEREBELLAR
PEDUNCLES
Superior
Medial
Inferior
Input to cerebellum
Output from cerebellum
Spinal
Cord
Pons
Red
Nucleus
Reticular
Formation
Inferior
Olivary
Complex
FIGURE 6-8
Major pathways of the cerebellum. MC, Motor cortex.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
134
signs usually appear on the same side of the body as the 
cerebellar lesion. Upper motor neuron lesions of pyra-
midal pathways yield contralateral effects, whereas the 
cerebellum and its pathways manifest ipsilateral effects. 
Several classic signs of cerebellar disorders follow and 
are summarized in Table 6-5, along with tests used to 
determine the abnormality.
Ataxia
Ataxia is the prime sign of a cerebellar lesion (taxis 
means “ordering in rank and file”). The term ataxia is 
often used in several senses. It may refer to the general 
incoordination of motor acts seen with cerebellar sys-
tem lesions. In this sense it often describes a staggering 
or reeling gait and abnormal posture seen with cerebel-
lar lesions. The patient compensates for the ataxic gait 
by standing and walking with feet wide apart in what is 
called a broad-based gait.
Decomposition of Movement
Decomposition of movement is also related to ataxia. 
The patient breaks a complex motor act into its com-
ponents and executes the act movement by movement 
so that the act seems as if it were being performed by 
a robot. Decomposition of movement is considered an 
ataxic movement.
Dysmetria
Dysmetria is the inability to gauge the distance, speed, 
and power of movement. A patient may stop before 
the movement is performed or may overshoot the 
motor goal.
Adiadochokinesia or Dysdiadochokinesia
Adiadochokinesia, or dysdiadochokinesia, is the inability 
to perform rapid alternating muscle movements. Often 
the rate of alternating movement may be recorded in a 
neurologic examination. This measure is called an alter-
nate motion rate. Diadochokinetic rate measures of the 
muscles of the oral mechanism during speech and non-
speech activities have long been used as an assessment 
task by the clinical SLP. These rates, however, are used as 
measures of the integrity of the oral muscles in speech 
pathology and have not specifically been related to cer-
ebellar function.
The neurologist may test alternating movements in 
many muscle groups in persons suspected of cerebel-
lar disorders. Successive pronation or supination of the 
hands, rapid tapping of the fingers, and rapid opening 
and closing of the fists are all diadochokinetic diag-
nostic tests. During the testing of diadochokinesis or 
alternate motion rates, awkwardness or clumsiness of 
alternate movements may be seen.
Rebound
The rebound phenomenon is the inability to check 
the contraction of the flexors and rapidly contract the 
extensor. It may account for the lack of smooth diado-
chokinetic movements.
Hypotonia
Hypotonia (or muscle flaccidity) with a decrease in 
resistance to passive movement is seen in cerebellar dys-
function. The muscles of the body are flabby and lack 
normal tone.
Tremor
Tremor is seen as part of cerebellar disease. It is usually 
an intention or kinetic tremor not present at rest.
Nystagmus
Nystagmus involves oscillatory abnormalities of the 
pupil of the eye often seen in cerebellar disorders. The 
rhythmic oscillations may be vertical, horizontal, or 
rotary.
Muscle Stretch Reflexes
Muscle stretch reflexes are normal or diminished. Pen-
dular reflexes often may be seen in cerebellar disease. 
When the knee-jerk reflex is elicited, a series of smooth 
to-and-fro movements of the limb often occur before it 
comes to rest, as seen with a pendulum. This pendular 
reflex differs from a normal knee-jerk response.
Dysarthria
Dysarthria associated with damage to the cerebellum is 
called ataxic dysarthria. Its characteristics are discussed 
in Chapter 8.
A Pause to Review
In the last section we concentrated on the basal nuclei and 
the cerebellum and their influence on the coordination, 
TABLE 6-5
Cerebellar Dysfunction Signs and 
Tests
ABNORMALITY
SIGNS AND TESTS
Gait ataxia
Broad-based gait seen on tandem 
walking test
Arm ataxia
Finger to nose test, hand prona-
tion to supination test results in 
overshooting of nose and slowed 
pronation and supination
Overshooting
Rebound noted on arm-pulling test
Hypotonia
Flaccid muscle tone noted on pas-
sive movement testing; pendular 
reflexes elicited on reflex testing; 
“rag-doll” postures observed
Nystagmus
Pupil oscillation seen when patient 
attempts to follow finger through 
field of gaze
Dysarthria
Ataxic dysarthria with disturbance 
in speech rate and prosody; often 
associated with left cerebellar 
hemisphere lesion

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
135
efficiency, and effectiveness of movement initiated 
at the cortex. The basal nuclei (aka, basal ganglia) 
structures are the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the 
globus pallidus, the subthalamic nucleus, and the 
substantia nigra. The nucleus accumbens is also a 
part of the basal ganglia but is not involved in move-
ment control. As is typical in neuroanatomy, some 
structures have been combined and the combination 
given a different name: the caudate and the putamen 
together are called the striatum (or neostriatum); the 
putamen and the globus pallidus together are called 
the lenticular nucleus; the three structures together 
make up the corpus striatum. As is also typical in neu-
roanatomy, some structures have been found to be 
segmented into different functional parts. The glo-
bus pallidus can be segmented into an internal part 
(GPi) and an external part (GPe) with the internal 
part sending transmission outside the basal nuclei. 
The substantia nigra can be separated into the pars 
reticulata (SNpr) and the pars compacta (SNpc) with 
the SNpr sending transmission outside of the basal 
ganglia and the SNpc supplying dopamine to the 
structures of the basal nuclei. The neurotransmitter 
of the output of the basal ganglia is GABA and the 
transmission is inhibitory. The strength of the final 
transmission depends on the complicated dopamine 
transmissions within the circuitry, some being excit-
atory and some inhibitory to the circuit structures. 
The output transmission of the basal ganglia is pri-
marily to the thalamus, which then relays the trans-
mission to the cortex. There is some transmission to 
brainstem structures, particularly the superior collicu-
lus, contributing to control of movement of the eyes. 
Some of the terms and concepts to be learned and 
associated with basal ganglia function are: akinesia, 
dyskinesia, hyperkinesia, hypokinesia, tremor, chorea, dysto-
nia, athetosis, and myoclonus.
The cerebellum contributes significantly to coor-
dination of movement for speech and other motor 
activities. It is located at the base of the brain and is 
connected to the brainstem by cerebellar peduncles 
through which corticopontine fibers traverse. It has 
three parts, two hemispheres and a middle portion 
called the vermis. There are also three lobes of the 
cerebellum, each concerned with a different func-
tion including proprioception, motor coordination, 
and equilibrium. The cerebellum is also made up 
of different zones and nuclei, which are deep inside 
the cerebellum. These zones and their nuclei receive 
input from the cortex, the spinal cord, and sensory 
systems such as the auditory, vestibular, and visual sys-
tems. They then will project output to the thalamus, 
the reticular formation, or various sensory systems. 
The cerebellar system has been found to be critical 
to synergistic motor control to enable movements to 
be smooth, well timed, and coordinated. The cerebel-
lum has been supported in research as functioning to 
compare the actual movement with intended move-
ment. It appears to send corrective information back 
to the cortex and brainstem about mismatch between 
the two, enabling “online” nondisruptive modifica-
tion of the motor program. It is believed that the 
cerebellum participates in this manner in the coor-
dination of respiration, articulation, and voice for 
speech production.
Servomechanism Theory and Speech 
Motor Control
FEEDBACK
Several fruitful engineering concepts have been 
applied to neuronal transmission problems in the ner-
vous system. These concepts have been particularly 
useful in explaining the possible control of neural 
impulses in the speech mechanism. The basic con-
cept, known as the theory of servomechanism control 
systems, implies the concept of feedback. Feedback 
describes the functioning principle in self-regulating 
systems, either mechanical or biologic. Feedback 
assumes that the output of any self-regulating system, 
such as a thermostat, is fed back into the system at 
some point to control or regulate the output of the 
system. This concept of self-monitoring is most appro-
priate for understanding the biologic system known 
as the speech motor control system. For instance, the 
questions of how a speaker monitors speech and what 
neuronal feedback mechanisms are available to con-
trol speech movements seem likely ones for explana-
tion by servomechanism theory.
OPEN AND CLOSED CONTROL SYSTEMS
Two types of bioengineering control systems have been 
described as applicable to neuronal transmission in 
speech production: closed-loop and open-loop control 
systems. A closed-loop system uses positive feedback in 
which output is returned as input to control further 
output. For example, when copying a complex and 
delicate drawing, the sensory input to the visual system 
guides the motor output of the hand. Similarly, hearing 
one’s own speech while talking may at times control the 
motor speech output as one continues to talk more. In 
these two examples, motor output by hand or speech 
is assumed to be guided by the sensory input of vision 

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
136
or audition. Furthermore, if the sensory feedback were 
blocked, the drawing or speech would be assumed to 
go awry.
In an open-loop system, the output is generally pre-
programmed, and the performance of the system is 
not matched with the system. For instance, if a person 
has learned a short poem by heart and has practiced 
it repeatedly, that person may be able to say the pho-
nemes of the words in the poem without error even 
though his or her ears are stuffed with cotton. In an 
open-loop system the notion of feedforward, rather 
than feedback, is important. Once a phrase of a well-
learned poem has been uttered, it cues the next pre-
programmed phrase of speech without the need to 
hear what was said through auditory feedback. An 
open-loop system thus typically generates another 
input by its output system. The term negative feedback 
is also used in control systems of the servomechanism 
type. That term implies that when errors are fed back 
into the system, the error information acts to keep a 
given output activity within certain limits. Correcting 
an articulation error on hearing it is an example of the 
use of negative feedback in speech activity.
Much speech research has viewed speech motor 
control as the product of a closed-loop feedback sys-
tem with sensory monitoring from hearing, touch, 
and deep muscle sense guiding the movements of the 
speech muscles. Circumstantial evidence for this posi-
tion has come from studies of sensory dysfunction in 
some speech disorders. Yet evidence exists that much of 
speech motor control is preprogrammed by the brain 
and that feedforward control is also critical to speech 
output. Guenther and colleagues15 developed a model 
of feedforward control that works in concert with audi-
tory and somatosensory feedback called the DIVA 
(Directions into Velocities of Articulators) that can 
be implemented in computer simulations producing 
“articulation” and acoustic signals. This model is shown 
in Figure 6-9 and theorizes the probable feedback and 
feedforward mechanisms that may be in play in neural 
processing for speech production. Neurologic control 
of speech may well involve combinations of both open 
and closed loops in a multiple-pathway, hierarchical sys-
tem that provides the necessary flexibility, speed, and 
precision to program and execute the everyday move-
ments of speech with such complexity and ease.
Feedforward
control
subsystem
Speech sound map
(Left frontal operculum)
Cerebellum
Feedback
commands
Articulatory velocity
and position maps
(Motor cortex)
To articulatory
musculature
via subcortical
nuclei
Auditory state map
(Sup. temporal cortex)
Auditory feedback via
subcortical nuclei
Somatosensory feedback via subcortical nuclei
Somatosensory error map
(Inf. parietal cortex)
Somatosensory stage map
(Inf. parietal cortex)
Auditory error map
(Sup. temporal cortex)
Feedforward
commands
Feedback control subsystem
Auditory target region
Somatosensory target region
FIGURE 6-9
Schematic of the DIVA (Directions into Velocities of Articulators) model of speech acqui-
sition and production. Projections to and from the cerebellum are simplified for clarity. 
(From Guenther, F. H. [2006]. Cortical interactions underlying the production of speech 
sounds. Journal of Communication Disorders, 39, 350-365.)

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
137
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The motor system has a hierarchy. It becomes  
progressively more sophisticated as the paths 
ascend and progressively less sophisticated as the 
paths descend.
	•	 The lower levels of the motor system are partially 
constrained by the upper levels, but all have a 
certain autonomy.
	•	 The levels of the motor system can be enumerated 
as Broca’s area and the motor association cortex 
areas, the corticospinal and corticonuclear tracts, 
the spinal cord and the brainstem nuclei (lower 
motor neuron), the basal nuclei, the cerebellum, 
and the extrapyramidal or indirect activation  
pathway tracts.
	•	 Motor speech commands are organized in the 
premotor and SMA (motor association areas) and 
Broca’s area as well as the insula. Apraxia of speech 
is the disorder associated with damage to the  
motor speech programming areas.
	•	 The pyramidal system includes the corticospinal 
tract for motor control of limbs and the cortico-
nuclear tract, which provides motor control for 
muscles of the face, tongue, pharynx, and larynx.
	•	 The corticospinal tract is a primarily contralateral 
innervation system, with 90% of the fibers decus-
sating at the level of the pyramids of the medulla 
and terminating in the opposite side of the spinal 
cord.
	•	 The corticonuclear tract provides primarily bilateral 
innervation for the majority of the musculature 
innervated, with the decussation occurring at 
various levels of the brainstem. Although most of 
the nuclei receive both unilateral and contralateral 
fibers, the amount of unilateral versus contralateral 
innervation varies.
	•	 Upper motor neurons are the first-order neurons in 
the corticospinal and corticonuclear tracts. The up-
per motor neurons send axons to the nuclei of the 
spinal cord or the cranial nerves in the brainstem. 
They comprise the first fiber pathway of the direct 
activation pathway that is the pyramidal tract.
	•	 Lower motor neurons are the second-order neu-
rons in the direct activation pathway. They send 
axons out of the spinal cord or brainstem and  
become the peripheral nerves. Sherrington called 
the lower motor neuron the final common path-
way because it is the final route for all the complex 
motor activity occurring above the level of the 
lower motor neurons.
	•	 The motor unit is a useful concept when studying 
the lower motor neurons. The motor unit consists 
of the cell body, the axon (the nerve itself), the 
junction of the nerve and muscle fiber (neuromus-
cular juncture), and the muscle fiber.
	•	 The facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) is unusual in 
that it has a dorsal and ventral component to its 
nucleus. The ventral portion, supplying the upper 
face, is far more bilaterally innervated than the 
­dorsal part, which supplies the lower part of the 
face. The clinical implication of this is that a unilat-
eral upper motor neuron lesion affecting this nerve 
results in paresis or paralysis of the opposite side 
of the lower face, whereas the upper half of the 
face is relatively unaffected because of its bilateral 
innervation.
	•	 Lesions of the upper motor neuron tract produce 
different clinical symptoms than lesions of the 
lower motor neuron tract. The speech-language 
pathologist must be able to recognize these signs. 
Damage to either of the two pathways produces 
different types of dysarthria as well.
	•	 Alpha motor neurons are the nerve cells that  
comprise the lower motor neuron. They are found 
in the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and in 
the nuclei of the cranial nerves in the brainstem. 
They supply skeletal muscles through innervation 
of the extrafusal fibers of the muscles.
	•	 The muscle spindle is present in many skeletal 
muscles and provides the sensory feedback to the 
muscle regarding length. This feedback results in 
the muscle stretch reflex. With the exception of the 
jaw-closing muscles, muscle spindles are few and 
scattered in the muscles concerned with speech 
and swallowing.
	•	 The extrapyramidal system is composed of the 
descending indirect activation pathways (vestibu-
lospinal, reticulospinal, rubrospinal, and tectospinal 
tracts). The reticular formation can also be included.
	•	 The primary structures of the basal ganglia are the 
caudate nucleus, globus pallidus, and putamen. 
The substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus are 
also included. Four different functional circuits 
seem to operate in the basal ganglia system: a 
motor loop, a limbic loop, a cognitive loop, and 
an oculomotor loop.
	•	 Basal ganglia disease can cause movement  
disorders and associated dysarthrias. The dysarthria 
of Parkinson’s disease is an example of a  
hypokinetic dysarthria, and the motor speech 
disorder associated with Huntington’s chorea is 
an example of hyperkinetic dysarthria. Both result 
from damage to parts of the basal ganglia.
Continued

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
138
	•	 The small hemispheres at the base of the brain are 
the lobes of the cerebellum. The cerebellum, like 
the basal ganglia, serves as a “consultant” to the 
motor system and provides coordination needed 
for smooth, synergistic movement. Signs of  
cerebellar damage include ataxia, nystagmus, 
dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesis, and sometimes an 
ataxic dysarthria.
	•	 Speech motor control seems to be a product of 
both an open-loop and a closed-loop feedback 
system according to servomechanism theory. The 
open-loop system contains feedforward control, 
with the brain partially preprogramming move-
ments that will be made to accomplish certain 
productions. The concept of speech motor control 
as a product of a closed-loop system has been 
generally accepted as the prime system controlling 
speech output, meaning that sensory monitor-
ing from hearing, touch, and deep muscle sense 
guides production. Sufficient evidence exists that 
feedforward occurs, and both types of systems are 
probably in operation.
 C A S E  S T U D Y
A 63-year-old man awoke in the early morning with 
disorientation, inability to speak, and inability to move 
his right side. He was admitted through the emer-
gency department with a preliminary diagnosis of 
acute left hemisphere cerebrovascular accident (also 
known as a stroke). A computed tomography scan was 
done early to rule out hemorrhage but did not show 
a lesion site. He was put on blood-thinning medica-
tion and began to show some movement of the right 
lower extremity and some ability to speak, although 
speech was very hesitant, nonfluent, and difficult to 
understand. He was able to answer yes/no questions 
accurately and could read fairly well. Further testing 
during the next few days revealed difficulty follow-
ing body movement commands involving facial and 
oral movements and found him “awkward and slow” 
in following commands involving movements of the 
left hand. He was diagnosed with a mild nonfluent 
aphasia with accompanying apraxia of speech, right 
hemiparesis, mild right facial weakness affecting the 
movement of the right side of the lips, and “clumsy 
hand syndrome” (sympathetic apraxia) on the left 
side. He was discharged to an acute rehabilitation 
center, where he participated in occupational therapy, 
physical therapy, and speech therapy. He did well in 
treatment. At discharge 3 weeks later, he was walking 
with a cane, and movement and use of the right arm 
had improved, providing some gross functional use. 
Speech was still effortful with simple sentence struc-
ture and was distorted though intelligible.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	Considering the right hemiparesis, mild nonfluent 
aphasia, apraxia of speech, and sympathetic apraxia, 
what are the likely structures damaged by this 
stroke?
	2.	What is meant by a “sympathetic apraxia”? (You 
will have to research this outside of this text). How 
might this complicate the SLP’s treatment plan for 
this patient?
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Ackermann, H., & Riecker, A. (2010). The contribution(s) 
of the insula to speech production: A review of the clini-
cal and functional imaging literature. Brain Structure and 
Function, 214, 419–433.
	 2.	 Alario, F. X., Chainay, H., Lehericy, S., & Cohen, L. (2006). 
The role of the supplementary motor area (SMA) in word 
production. Brain Research, 129–143.
	 3.	 Bolam, J. P., Hanley, J. J., Booth, P. A. C., & Bevan, M. D. 
(2000). Synaptic organisation of the basal ganglia. Journal 
of Anatomy, 196, 527–542.
	 4.	 Booth, C. M., Cortina-Borja, M. J., & Theologis, T. N. 
(2001). Collagen accumulation in muscles of children 
with cerebral palsy and correlation with severity of spastic-
ity. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 43, 314–320.
	 5.	 Cereda, C., Ghika, J., Maeder, P., & Bogousslavsky, J. 
(2002). Strokes restricted to the insular cortex. Neurology, 
59, 1950–1955.
	 6.	 Civier, O., Bullock, D., Ludo, M., & Guenther, F. H. 
(2013). Computational modeling of stuttering caused by 
impairments in a basal ganglia thalamo-cortical circuit in-
volved in syllable selection and initiation. Brain and Lan-
guage, 126, 263–278.

NEUROMOTOR CONTROL OF SPEECH  CHAPTER SIX
139
	 7.	 Clark, H. M. (2003). Neuromuscular treatments for 
speech and swallowing: A tutorial. American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 12, 400–415.
	 8.	 Clark, H. M. (2005, June). Clinical decision making and 
oral motor treatments. The ASHA Leader, 14, 34–35.
	 9.	 Cooper, S. (1953). Muscle spindles in the intrinsic muscles 
of the human tongue. Journal of Physiology, 122, 193–202.
	10.	 Duffau, H., Bauchet, L., Lehéricy, S., & Capelle, L. (2001). 
Functional compensation of the left dominant insula for 
language. Neuroreport, 12, 2159–2163.
	11.	 Dronkers, N. F. (1996). A new brain region for coordinat-
ing speech articulation. Nature, 384, 159–161.
	12.	 Dronkers, N. F., Plaisant, O., Iba-Zizen, M. T., & Cabanis,  
E. A. (2007). Paul Broca’s historic cases: High MR imaging of 
the brains of Leborgne and Lelong. Brain, 130, 1432–1441.
	13.	 Duffy, J. R. (2005). Motor speech disorders: Substrates, differen-
tial diagnosis and management (2nd ed.). St. Louis: Mosby/
Elsevier.
	14.	 Fenichel, G. M. (1993). Clinical pediatric neurology: A signs 
and symptoms approach. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
	15.	 Guenther, F. H. (2006). Cortical interactions underlying 
the production of speech sounds. Journal of Communica-
tion Disorders, 39, 350–365.
	16.	 Kent, R. (2004). The uniqueness of speech among motor 
systems. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 18, 495–505.
	17.	 Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articula-
tion. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
	18.	 Liss, J. M. (1990). Muscle spindles in the human levator 
veli palatine and palatoglossus muscles. Journal of Speech 
and Hearing Research, 33, 736–746.
	19.	 MacNeilage, P. F. (1998). The frame/content theory of 
evolution of speech production. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 21, 499–511.
	20.	 MacNeilage, P. F., & Davis, B. L. (2001). Motor mecha-
nisms in speech ontogeny: Phylogenetic, neurobiological 
and linguistic implications. Current Opinions in Neurobiol-
ogy, 11, 696–700.
	21.	 Marsden, C. D. (1982). The mysterious function of the 
basal ganglia. Neurology, 32, 514–539.
	22.	 Mohr, J. P., Pessin, M. S., Finkelstein, S., Funkenstein,  
H. H., Duncan, G. W., & Davis, K. R. (1978). Broca’s apha-
sia. Neurology, 28, 311–324.
	23.	 Picard, N., & Strick, P. L. (1996). Motor areas of the me-
dial wall: A review of their location and functional activa-
tion. Cerebral Cortex, 6, 342–353.
	24.	 Price, C. J., Crinion, J. T., & MacSweeney, M. (2011). A 
generative model of speech production in Broca’s and 
Wernicke’s area. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1–9.
	25.	 Saigusa, H., Niimi, S., Yamashita, K., Gotoh, T., & Kuma-
da, M. (2001). Morphological and histochemical studies 
of the genioglossus muscle. The Annals of Otology, Rhinology 
and Laryngology, 110, 779–784.
	26.	 Saigusa, H., Yamashita, K., Tanuma, K., Saigusa, M., &  
Niimi, S. (2004). Morphological studies for retrusive 
movement of the human adult tongue. Clinical Anatomy, 
17, 93–98.
	27.	 Sherrington, C. S. (1926). The integrative action of the 
­nervous system. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
	28.	 Weiner, W. J., & Lang, A. E. (1989). Movement disorders: A 
comprehensive survey. Mount Kisco, NY: Futura.

140
7
K E Y  T E R M S
abducens
abduction
branchial
central pattern 
generator
chorda tympani
cranial nerves
diplopia
flaccid
genioglossus
glottal coup
hyoglossus
internuncial
lacrimal
palpate
primary olfactory 
cortex
ptosis
secretomotor
solely special sensory
styloglossus
tinnitus
The Cranial 
Nerves
To those I address, it is unnecessary to go further than to 
indicate that the nerves treated in these papers are the instru-
ments of expression from the smile of the infant’s cheek to the 
last agony of life.
Charles Bell, 1824
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Origin of the Cranial Nerves
Names and Numbers
Embryologic Origin
The Corticonuclear Tract and the Cranial Nerves
Cranial Nerves for Smell and Vision
Cranial Nerves for Speech and Hearing
Cranial Nerve V: Trigeminal
Cranial Nerve VII: Facial
Cranial Nerve VIII: Acoustic-Vestibular or 
Vestibulocochlear
Cranial Nerve IX: Glossopharyngeal
Cranial Nerve X: Vagus
Cranial Nerve XI: Spinal Accessory
Cranial Nerve XII: Hypoglossal
Instrumental Measurement of Strength
Cranial Nerve Cooperation: The Act of Swallowing
Assessment of Swallowing

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
141
This chapter is intended to help the speech-language 
pathologist (SLP) understand one of the most impor-
tant components of the nervous system in regard to 
the acts of hearing, speaking and swallowing. The 
cranial nerves comprise a part of the peripheral ner-
vous system that provides crucial sensory and motor 
information for the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal 
musculature and the auditory and vestibular systems. 
The speech-language pathologist should be familiar 
with the names, structure, innervation, testing proce-
dures, and signs of abnormal function of the cranial 
nerves. This information is especially critical when 
working with an adult or child with dysarthria and/or 
dysphagia.
Origin of the Cranial Nerves
NAMES AND NUMBERS
Twelve pairs of cranial nerves leave the brain and pass 
through the foramina of the skull. They are referred 
to by their numbers, written in Roman numerals, and 
by their names. The names sometimes give a clue to 
the function of the nerves, but the number, name, 
and concise descriptions of the various functions 
should all be learned (Table 7-1). Many students use a 
suggested mnemonic device to help them remember 
the cranial nerves (e.g., “On Old Olympus’ Towering 
Top A Finn And German Vend At Hops”) or create 
their own, maybe more interesting, mnemonic to aid 
their memory.
EMBRYOLOGIC ORIGIN
As you will learn in Chapter 11 (or have learned if you 
were already assigned to read it), the body develops in 
the embryo from transverse segments as well as from 
longitudinal tubes. The viscera, including the neuraxis, 
are developed from the elaboration, or diverticula-
tion, of the hollow longitudinal tubes. The transverse 
segments are of two types: somites and arches. Somites 
eventually give rise to muscle, bone, and connective tis-
sue of the body wall. The arches are the branchial or 
pharyngeal arches and these give rise to structures of 
the face and neck.
The nuclei of the cranial nerves are of three differ-
ent types. The motor nuclei are distinguished by the 
embryologic origin of the muscles they innervate. In 
the development of the embryo, the branchial (gill) 
arches are responsible for the structure, muscles, and 
nerves of the face and neck. Cranial nerves V, VII, IX, 
X, and XI are thus known as the branchial set. Cranial 
nerves III, IV, VI, and XII are derived from this somatic 
segmentation and thus are called the somatomotor, or 
somitic, set. The elaboration of the longitudinal tubes 
gives rise to three cranial nerves (I, II, and VIII) known 
as the solely special sensory set.
TABLE 7-1
The Cranial Nerves
NUMBER
NAME
SUMMARY OF FUNCTION
I
Olfactory
Smell
II
Optic
Vision
III
Oculomotor
Innervation of muscles to move eyeball, pupil, and upper lid
IV
Trochlear
Innervation of superior oblique muscle of eye
V
Trigeminal
Chewing and sensation to face, teeth, anterior tongue
VI
Abducens
Abduction of eye
VII
Facial
Movement of facial muscles, taste, salivary glands
VIII
(Vestibular) acoustic
Equilibrium and hearing
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Taste, swallowing, elevation of pharynx and larynx, parotid salivary gland, 
sensation to posterior tongue, upper pharynx
X
Vagus
Taste, swallowing, elevation of palate, phonation, parasympathetic outflow 
to visceral organs
XI
Accessory
Turning of head and shrugging of shoulders
XII
Hypoglossal
Movement of tongue

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
142
Some branchial and somitic cranial nerves have a 
visceral component: III, VII, IX, and X. Cranial nerves 
V, VII, IX, and X also have a general sensory compo-
nent (i.e., they participate in sensation of pain, pressure 
touch, vibration, and proprioception).
THE CORTICONUCLEAR TRACT AND THE 
CRANIAL NERVES
The cranial nerves themselves are part of the periph-
eral nervous system and consist of efferent motor 
fibers that arise from nuclei in the brainstem and 
afferent sensory fibers that originate in the periph-
eral ganglia. The motor nuclei of the cranial nerves 
receive impulses from the cerebral cortex through 
the corticonuclear tracts. The tracts begin in the 
upper motor neurons found as pyramidal cells in 
the inferior part of the precentral gyrus and also in 
the adjacent part of the postcentral gyrus. The tracts 
then follow the path illustrated in Figure 6-2. They 
descend through the corona radiata and the genu of 
the internal capsule and then pass through the mid-
brain in the cerebral peduncles. They then synapse 
either with the lower motor neuron directly or indi-
rectly through internuncial neurons, a chain of neu-
rons situated between the primary efferent neuron 
and the final motor neuron.
The majority of the corticonuclear fibers to the 
motor cranial nerve nuclei cross the midline, or decus-
sate, before reaching the nuclei. All the cranial nerve 
motor nuclei have bilateral innervation except for por-
tions of the trigeminal, facial, and hypoglossal fibers, 
which are discussed later.
The motor fibers of the cranial nerves are formed 
by axons of nerve cells within the brain, but the 
sensory, or afferent, fibers of the cranial nerves are 
formed from processes of nerve cells found outside 
the brain. These sensory nerve cells are usually found 
in “clumps” of nerve cells called peripheral ganglia. 
They are situated on the nerve trunks or in the sen-
sory organ itself (e.g., the nose, ear, or eye). The 
central processes of these cells enter the brain and 
terminate by synapsing with cells grouped together 
to form the nuclei of termination. These cells have 
axons that cross the midline and ascend and synapse 
on other sensory nuclei, such as in the thalamus. The 
axons of the resulting cells then terminate in the 
cerebral cortex.
Cranial Nerves for Smell and Vision
Cranial nerve I, the olfactory nerve, is a plexus of thin 
fibers that unite in approximately 20 small bundles 
called fila olfactoria. The olfactory receptors are sit-
uated in the mucous membrane of the nasal cavity. 
The nerve fibers synapse with other cells in the olfac-
tory bulb and finally end in the olfactory areas of 
the cerebral cortex, the periamygdaloid and prepiri-
form areas. Together these are known as the primary 
olfactory cortex. They also send fibers to many other 
centers within the brain to establish connections 
for automatic and emotional responses to olfactory 
stimulation.
Cranial nerves II, III, IV, and VI are concerned 
with vision. The optic nerve (II) is the primary nerve 
of sight. Its nerve fibers are axons that come from the 
retina, converge on the optic disk, and exit from the 
eye on both sides. The right nerve joins the left to form 
the optic chiasma. In the optic chiasma, fibers from the 
nasal half of the eye cross the midline, and fibers from 
the temporal half continue to run ipsilaterally. Most of 
the fibers synapse with nerve cells in the lateral genic-
ulate body of the thalamus and then leave it, forming 
optic radiations. The optic radiations formed by these 
fibers terminate in the visual cortex and the visual asso-
ciation cortex.
Cranial nerve III is the oculomotor nerve, the 
nucleus of which is located at the level of the supe-
rior colliculus. Cranial nerve III has a somatomotor 
component that innervates the extraocular muscles 
to move the eyeball and a visceral component respon-
sible for pupil constriction. Dysfunction of the third 
cranial nerve causes ptosis (drooping) of the eyelid. 
The eye may also be in abduction and turned down. 
If the visceral component is impaired, the pupillary 
reflex is lost and the pupil is dilated. Figure 7-1, A, 
illustrates a complete paralysis of the left oculomotor 
nerve.
Cranial nerve IV is the trochlear nerve, the nucleus 
of which is at the level of the inferior colliculus. This 
nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle, which 
is primarily responsible for intorsion of the eyeball, 
helping to maintain its position toward the midline 
of the face. Confirmed lesions cause diplopia (double 
vision).
Cranial nerve VI, the abducens, has its nucleus on 
the floor of the fourth ventricle. Dysfunction prevents 
lateral movements of the eyeball. Figure 7-1, B, shows a 
complete paralysis of the left cranial nerve VI.
The remaining seven cranial nerves are vital for the 
production of normal speech and thus are given more 
attention, focusing on the pathway, structures inner-
vated, functional purpose, signs of dysfunction, and test-
ing procedure for each nerve. Learn them one by one. 
Test yourself on them until you are firmly acquainted 
with each nerve. Review Figure 3-2 for attachment sites 
of the cranial nerves to the brainstem.

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
143
Cranial Nerves for Speech and 
Hearing
CRANIAL NERVE V: TRIGEMINAL
Anatomy
Both the motor and sensory roots of the trigeminal nerve 
are attached to the lateral edges of the pons. The motor 
nuclei are restricted to the pons, but the sensory nuclei 
extend from the mesencephalon to the spinal cord.
Innervation
The motor part of the trigeminal nerve innervates the 
following muscles: masseter, temporalis, lateral and 
medial pterygoids, tensor tympani, tensor veli palatini, 
mylohyoid, and the anterior belly of the digastric mus-
cle. The sensory fibers have three main branches:
	1.	 The ophthalmic nerve, which is sensory to the fore-
head, eyes, and nose
	2.	 The maxillary nerve, which is sensory to the upper 
lip mucosa, maxilla, upper teeth, cheeks, palate, and 
maxillary sinus
	3.	 The mandibular nerve, which is sensory to the anterior 
two thirds of the tongue, mandible, lower teeth, lower 
lip, part of the cheek, and part of the external ear
Figure 7-2 shows a sensory map of the trigeminal 
nerve supply to the areas of the face and oral structures.
Function
Cranial nerve V is primarily responsible for mastication 
and for sensation to the face, teeth, gums, and anterior 
two thirds of the tongue. Innervating the tensor velar 
palatini, cranial nerve V is partially responsible for flat-
tening and tensing the soft palate and for opening the 
eustachian tube. Innervating an extrinsic laryngeal 
muscle (the anterior belly of the digastric), it also assists 
in the upward and anterior movement of the larynx. 
Innervating the mylohyoid and part of the digastric, 
this nerve contributes to retraction of the tongue. Also 
innervated by CN V, the tensor tympani in the middle 
ear works with the stapedius muscle to dampen oscilla-
tion of the eardrum in the presence of loud noise.
Testing
The jaw-closing and grinding lateral movements of 
chewing are the result of the function of the masseter 
and temporal, medial pterygoid, and lateral pterygoid 
muscles. The first three contribute to closure of the jaw, 
but only the masseter can be directly tested. To evalu-
ate the masseter, palpate the area of the muscle (2 cm 
above and in front of the angle of the mandible) as the 
patient bites down as hard as possible and then relaxes. 
As the patient bites, the bulk of the muscle can be felt. 
Try this to become familiar with the masseter. The 
muscle body should feel firm and bulky. The temporal 
muscle cannot be well palpated; however, if it is atro-
phied (shrunken) from a lower motor neuron lesion, 
the temple of the face will be sunken.
A
B
FIGURE 7-1
A, Complete left III (oculomotor) nerve paralysis with a fully abducted eye, which is also 
depressed. The pupil of the eye is nonreactive and fully dilated. The ptosis of the left eye 
requires the examiner to lift the lid to examine movement. B, Complete left VI (abdu-
cens) nerve paralysis showing a fully adducted eye resulting from the unopposed pull of 
the medial rectus. (Reprinted from FitzGerald, M. J. T., & Folan-Curran, J. [2002]. Clinical 
neuroanatomy and related neuroscience [4th ed.]. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier.)
Vertex
Angle of eye
Side of nose
Angle of mouth
Point of chin
Midpoint
Tragus
FIGURE 7-2
Trigeminal nerve sensory map. (Reprinted from FitzGerald, 
M. J. T., & Folan-Curran, J. [2002]. Clinical neuroanatomy 
and related neuroscience [4th ed.]. Philadelphia: Saunders/
Elsevier.)

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
144
The strength of jaw closure should also be evaluated. 
To do so, place your hand on the tip of the patient’s 
mandible as the jaw is held open. Place the other 
hand on the forehead to prevent neck extension. Ask 
the patient to bite down hard against the resistance of 
your hand. The patient should be able to close the jaw 
against a moderate resistance.
The lateral pterygoids enable the jaw to lateralize in 
chewing. To evaluate these muscles, ask the patient to 
open the jaw against resistance of your hand and note 
how the tip of the mandible lines up with the space 
between the upper medial incisors. Ask the patient to 
move the jaw from side to side and observe the facility 
of movement.
Finally, ask the patient to lateralize the jaw against 
resistance. Have him or her move the jaw to one side and 
hold it while you gently try to push it toward the center. 
Place your other hand against the opposite cheekbone 
so the patient cannot use the neck muscles to help.
The patient with a unilateral paralysis of cranial 
nerve V may show a deviation of the jaw to the side of 
the lesion and an inability to force the jaw to the side 
opposite the lesion. Atrophy may also be noted after a 
period. These problems result from lower motor neu-
ron lesions. Upper motor neuron lesions that are uni-
lateral do not affect cranial nerves as much because 
the nuclei receive so many axons from the other hemi-
sphere. Therefore the paresis is usually transitory or 
mild unless bilateral upper motor neuron lesions are 
present.
Bilateral upper motor neuron lesions result in an 
observable limitation of jaw movements. Opening and 
closing movements of the jaw, though possible, are 
restricted. Gross chewing movements are seen, but chew-
ing and biting may lack vigor and are performed slowly.
To evaluate the sensory component of the trigeminal 
nerve, sensation to the face may be tested. The patient 
is asked to close the eyes, and a cotton swab is used to 
stroke the face in the three different distribution areas 
of the nerve. The examiner should stay in the central 
part of the face because, as shown in Figure 7-2, consid-
erable overlap exists on the periphery. The ophthalmic 
division may therefore be tested by stroking above the 
eyebrows; the maxillary division by stroking the upper 
lip in an upward movement toward the cheekbone; and 
the mandibular division by stroking between the lower 
lip and the chin in an upward movement toward the 
cheekbone. Left and right sides should be done sepa-
rately and compared. Stroking should be done with 
firm pressure and kept consistent across all trials.
Sensation to the anterior two thirds of the tongue 
may also be tested during the examination, especially if 
chewing and swallowing are of concern. The two sides 
of the tongue may be compared for sensitivity to the 
touch of a cotton-tip swab on the anterior as well as 
medial portion of the tongue.
CRANIAL NERVE VII: FACIAL
Anatomy
The facial nerve is a complex nerve carrying two motor 
and two sensory components. It involves several dif-
ferent nuclei, all within the pons near the reticular 
formation.
The special sensory component of the facial nerve 
involves the taste fibers for the tongue and palate. 
These fibers have their primary sensory neurons in the 
geniculate ganglion. They enter the brainstem in the 
sensory root of the facial nerve, called the nervus inter-
medius. They run in a bundle, or fasciculus, called the 
tractus solitarius and are joined in that bundle by the 
taste fibers from cranial nerves IX and X.
The taste fibers split off from the facial nerve in the 
middle ear as the chorda tympani. This joins the lin-
gual branch of cranial nerve V. The taste fibers then 
terminate in the nucleus of the tractus solitarius. The 
fibers are distributed to the taste buds of the anterior 
two thirds of the tongue. Some fibers also terminate in 
the taste buds in the hard and soft palates. Ascending 
fibers from the nucleus solitarius run to the ventropos-
terior thalamus and then project to the cortical area for 
taste located at the lower end of the postcentral gyrus 
in the parietal lobe.
The general sensory component of VII is a small 
cutaneous component whose nerve cells are found in 
the geniculate ganglion in the temporal bone. Impulses 
travel in the nervus intermedius, descending in the spi-
nal tract of the trigeminal nerve and synapsing in the 
spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve located in the 
upper medulla. This sensory component may supple-
ment the mandibular portion of cranial nerve V, pro-
viding sensation from the wall of the acoustic meatus 
and the surface of the tympanic membrane.
The visceral motor component of cranial nerve VII 
is composed of cell bodies that are preganglionic auto-
nomic motor neurons. These cell bodies are collectively 
called the superior salivatory nucleus and the lacrimal 
nucleus. The fibers from the nucleus travel in the ner-
vus intermedius and divide in the facial canal, becom-
ing the greater petrosal nerve and the chorda tympani. 
The petrosal nerve fibers follow a complicated path and 
join fibers of the trigeminal to reach the lacrimal and 
mucosal glands of the nasal and oral cavities, where they 
stimulate secretion.
The branchial motor component of the facial nerve 
is of critical importance to the speech-language pathol-
ogist. The fibers of the motor nucleus extend to the 
floor of the ventricle, curve around the nucleus of the 

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
145
abducens (cranial nerve VI), and exit the brainstem 
near the inferior margin of the pons. These fibers then 
join those from the nucleus of the tractus solitarius and 
the autonomic or parasympathetic nuclei and enter 
the internal auditory meatus as they extend through 
the facial canal of the petrosal bone. They leave the 
skull through the stylomastoid foramen. While cours-
ing through the facial canal, the facial nerve travels 
through the tympanic cavity, innervating the stapedius 
muscle. The facial nerve can therefore be involved in 
pathologic conditions related to the ear as well as the 
oral musculature. Surgeons removing acoustic tumors 
must be mindful of the location of the facial nerve.
The dorsal motor nucleus of cranial nerve VII inner-
vates the lower part of the face and receives most of its 
corticonuclear fibers from the opposite hemisphere; 
thus innervation to these structures is primarily con-
tralateral. The ventral motor nucleus that supplies the 
upper part of the face receives fibers from both cere-
bral hemispheres (i.e., receives crossed and uncrossed 
fibers), and innervation is bilateral.
Innervation
The parasympathetic nuclei are also known as the supe-
rior salivatory and the lacrimal nuclei. The superior sali-
vatory nucleus receives afferent information from the 
hypothalamus and olfactory system as well as taste infor-
mation from the mouth cavity. It supplies the sublingual 
salivary glands and the nasal and palatine glands.
The lacrimal nucleus solitarius receives information 
from afferent fibers from the trigeminal sensory nuclei 
for reflex response to corneal irritation. The sensory 
nucleus receives information concerning taste from 
fibers from the anterior two thirds of the tongue, the 
floor of the mouth, and the soft and hard palates.
The motor nucleus gives the face expression by 
innervation of the various facial muscles (i.e., the orbi-
cularis oculi, zygomatic, buccinator, orbicularis oris, 
and labial muscles). Other muscles innervated are the 
platysma, stylohyoid, and stapedius and the posterior 
belly of the digastric.
Function
Most important to the SLP is that the facial nerve is 
responsible for all movements of facial expression. All 
facial apertures are guarded by muscles innervated by 
the facial nerve: the eyes, the nose, the mouth, and 
the external auditory canal. Cranial nerve VII enables 
the actions of wrinkling the forehead, closing the eyes 
tightly, closing the lips tightly, pulling back the corners 
of the lips, pulling down the corners of the lips and 
tensing the anterior neck muscles.
Beyond these important movements in speech and 
swallowing, the facial nerve also helps pull the larynx 
up and back (through the belly of the digastric muscle). 
It provides motor innervation to the sublingual and 
submaxillary salivary glands, and it guards the middle 
ear by innervating the stapedius muscle, which, with the 
tensor tympani muscle, dampens excessive movement 
of the ossicles in the presence of a loud noise. Finally, 
the facial nerve also is partially responsible for taste.
Testing
Tests of facial expression are the primary tests in the 
oral-motor examination for cranial nerve VII. Before 
any motor testing, however, the patient’s face at rest 
should be visually inspected, especially noting the sym-
metry. Then begin movement testing at the upper part 
of the face, focusing first on the forehead, then the eyes, 
and finally the mouth. Box 7-1 outlines what to observe 
and note before commencing with speech testing.
Forehead
Ask the patient to wrinkle the forehead and look up at 
the ceiling. Note the symmetry of the wrinkling on both 
sides. Keep in mind that this ability or inability is diag-
nostic for localization. Because the upper part of the 
face is innervated bilaterally, only a lower motor neuron 
lesion would cause complete paralysis of this function. 
An upper motor neuron lesion causes some weakness 
on the opposite side, but it will not be nearly as percep-
tible because of the ipsilateral fiber innervation.
Eyes
Ask the patient to close his or her eyes as tightly as 
possible. Note the contraction of the orbicularis oculi 
and the consequent wrinkling around the eyes. Bilat-
eral innervation is also present in this part of the face, 
although not to the degree that the forehead displays. 
The lower motor neuron-upper motor neuron differ-
ence holds true for dysfunction of this part of the face.
Mouth
Take a close look at mouth movements. First ask the 
patient to smile or pull back the corners of the lips. 
It helps to tell the patient to show his or her teeth 
when doing this, exaggerating the smile somewhat. 
Again, observe the symmetry of the two sides. Then 
ask the patient to pucker the lips; observe the symme-
try of constriction. Finally, ask him or her to pull down 
the corners of the lips (as in pouting) or try to wrinkle 
the skin of the neck. Inspect for symmetry. Also test 
for the strength of movement against resistance and 
compare the two sides of the mouth.
	
BOX 7-1   
Facial Assessment

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
146
The patient with a lower motor neuron lesion of cra-
nial nerve VII has involvement of the entire side of the 
face on the side of the lesion (ipsilateral). Figure 7-3 
is an example of unilateral facial paralysis. Although 
speech may be distorted, it is usually not significantly 
hindered by peripheral involvement of cranial nerve 
VII. The patient with an upper motor neuron lesion 
shows complete involvement of the contralateral lip 
and neck muscles, some degree of involvement of the 
area around the eyes, and little difficulty with the fore-
head or frontalis muscle. It should be noted that the 
paralysis occurs on voluntary movement. The patient 
may have almost normal movement for emotionally initi-
ated movements such as a true smile but be unable to 
lateralize the lips on the affected side when asked to do 
so voluntarily.
Because the facial nerve innervates the stapedius 
muscle, it may be paralyzed by a lesion. If this occurs, 
the patient may report that ordinary sounds seem 
uncomfortably loud.
The sensory component of the facial nerve may be 
assessed by testing the patient’s sense of taste on the 
anterior two thirds of the tongue. Sensitivity of the two 
sides of the tongue should be compared. The patient 
should be able to identify the four primary tastes (salty, 
sour, bitter, and sweet) if the sensory pathways are intact.
CRANIAL NERVE VIII: ACOUSTIC-
VESTIBULAR OR VESTIBULOCOCHLEAR
The following explanation assumes the reader has stud-
ied the anatomy of the ear and is well versed in the 
structure and function of the cochlea and semicircular 
canals. A good working knowledge of the anatomy of 
the ear is imperative; review of the information pro-
vided in Chapter 5 on the auditory system is suggested.
Anatomy
As can be ascertained from its name, the acoustic-vestib-
ular, or vestibulocochlear, nerve consists of two distinct 
parts: the vestibular nerve and the cochlear, or acoustic, 
nerve. Both take afferent information from the internal 
ear to the nervous system, but as their names imply, they 
carry different types of information.
The vestibular nerve consists of nerve cells and 
their fibers, which are located in Scarpa’s ganglion 
located in the internal acoustic meatus. The fibers 
enter the brainstem in a groove between the lower 
border of the pons and the upper medulla oblongata 
in a sulcus called the cerebellopontine angle. This 
location is the site of one of the most common brain 
tumors, a vestibular schwannoma, also known as an 
acoustic neuroma. A few of the axons terminate in 
the flocculonodular lobe of the cerebellum. Most 
axons enter the vestibular nuclear complex, which 
consists of a group of nuclei located in the floor of 
the fourth ventricle.
The cochlear nerve consists of nerve cells and fibers 
located in the spiral ganglion located around the 
modiolus of the cochlea. Nerve fibers wrap around 
each other in the modiolus, with a layering effect. 
Fibers from the apex, carrying low-frequency infor-
mation, are found on the innermost part of the core, 
whereas fibers from the basal part of the cochlea, car-
rying high-frequency information, are found on the 
outermost layers. The nerve fibers from these cell 
bodies enter the brainstem at the lower border of the 
pons on the lateral side of the facial nerve. They are 
separated from the facial nerve fibers by the vestibu-
lar nerve. Figure 7-4 illustrates the relation of cranial 
nerve VIII to the inner ear.
When the cochlear fibers enter the pons, they 
divide into two branches. One branch enters the dor-
sal cochlear nucleus (high frequencies), and the other 
enters the ventral cochlear nucleus (low frequencies). 
Both nuclei are situated adjacent to the inferior cere-
bral peduncle.
FIGURE 7-3
Patient with complete facial nerve paralysis on the right 
side. The patient was asked to show her teeth and look 
up at the ceiling. Note the inability to raise the eyebrow, 
drooping of the lower eyelid, inability to retract the mouth, 
and lack of webbing on the neck (effect on the platysma 
muscle). This patient also was unable to abduct the eye 
because of involvement of the abducens. The patient was 
found to have demyelination affecting the facial nerve and 
abducens nerve, resulting from multiple sclerosis. (From 
Parsons, M. [1986]. Diagnostic picture test in clinical neurol-
ogy. London: Wolfe Medical.)

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
147
From this point the axons take varied and complex 
paths. The system is largely contralateral. Most fibers 
decussate after the cochlear nuclei, although there are a 
few ipsilaterally projected fibers. The fibers form a tract 
called the lateral lemniscus as they ascend through the 
posterior portion of the pons and midbrain. All ascend-
ing fibers terminate in the medial geniculate body and 
from there project to the auditory cortex by way of the 
auditory radiations. Between the cochlear nuclei and 
the medial geniculate body, the fibers take one of sev-
eral pathways, including synapses at one or more of the 
following structures: the superior olives, the trapezoid 
body, the inferior colliculus, and the nucleus of the lat-
eral lemniscus.
Innervation
Both portions of the vestibulocochlear nerve are pri-
marily sensory in nature. The vestibular nerve receives 
afferent information from the utricle, saccule, and 
semicircular canal of the inner ear and from the cer-
ebellum. The vestibular nerve also sends out efferent 
fibers that pass to the cerebellum through the inferior 
cerebellar peduncles and also to the spinal cord, form-
ing the vestibulospinal tract. Efferent fibers are also 
sent to the nuclei of cranial nerves III (oculomotor), 
IV (trochlear), and VI (abducens) through the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus. As previously outlined, the 
cochlear nerve carries afferent fibers from the cochlea 
to the auditory cortex.
Function
Cranial nerve VIII takes afferent information from the 
internal ear to the nervous system. It is responsible for 
sound sensitivity and innervates the utricle and the 
saccule of the inner ear, which are sensitive to static 
changes in equilibrium. In addition, innervation of the 
semicircular canals takes place through this nerve, con-
trolling sensitivity to dynamic changes in equilibrium.
Testing
Although the speech-language pathologist may perform 
hearing threshold screening or testing that may provide 
information about the cochlear nerve, the audiologist 
usually is responsible for thorough assessment of hear-
ing and cochlear function. Neurologists often perform 
simple tuning fork tests for acuity and sound lateraliza-
tion, and some prefer to use whispered words.
Testing the vestibular function is also not in the 
purview of the SLP. Vestibular function usually is inves-
tigated with caloric tests that involve raising or lower-
ing the temperature of the internal auditory meatus, 
thereby inducing current in the semicircular canals 
Endolymphatic
         sac
   Anterior
semicircular
     canal
Direction of view
 Scarpa's
 ganglion
(superior)
 Scarpa's
 ganglion
 (inferior)
Vestibular
   nerve
Facial 
nerve
Cochlear
nerve
Cochlea
 (apical)
Cochlea
 (basal)
Saccule
Utricle
 Horizontal
semicircular
     canal
  Posterior
semicircular
    canal
FIGURE 7-4
Relation of the vestibular, cochlear, and facial nerve to the inner ear. (Reprinted from  
Nadeau, S. E., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. J., Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & 
Ritz, L. A. [2004]. Medical neuroscience. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier.)

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
148
and stimulating the vestibular nerve for testing. Neu-
rologists also use maneuvers of changing head position. 
Dynamic platform posturography is a technique devel-
oped in recent years to perform a functional assessment 
of how senses are used for balance.
The patient reporting reduced hearing acuity, tinni-
tus (ringing in the ears), or dizziness should always be 
seen by an otologist and receive an audiologic evalua-
tion. The dizzy patient may be referred to a neurologist 
or a neurotologist, who typically will also refer for exten-
sive audiologic and vestibular testing.
CRANIAL NERVE IX: GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL
Anatomy
The glossopharyngeal nerve carries two motor compo-
nents and three sensory components. It can be found 
emerging from the medulla between the olive and 
the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The main trunk of 
the nerve exits the skull through the jugular foramen. 
Three nuclei in the brainstem are concerned with the 
functions of the glossopharyngeal nerve: the nucleus 
ambiguus, the inferior salivatory nucleus, and the 
nucleus solitarius.
Innervation
The nucleus ambiguus receives corticonuclear fibers of 
cranial nerve IX from both hemispheres and supplies 
the efferent innervation to the stylopharyngeus muscle, 
which contributes to the elevation of the pharynx and 
larynx. The inferior salivatory nucleus receives afferent 
information concerning taste from the hypothalamus, 
olfactory system, and mouth cavity. Efferent fibers sup-
ply the otic ganglion of the ear and the parotid salivary 
gland. The nucleus solitarius receives fibers arising 
from the inferior ganglia. Peripherally these visceral 
afferent fibers of cranial nerve IX mediate general sen-
sation to the pharynx, soft palate, posterior third of the 
tongue, fauces, tonsils, ear canal, and tympanic cavity. 
The fibers decussate and travel upward to the opposite 
thalamic and some hypothalamic nuclei. From here the 
axons pass through the internal capsule and carry this 
sensory information to termination points in the lower 
postcentral gyrus.
Function
Cranial nerve IX is efferent to one muscle only—the 
stylopharyngeus. This muscle dilates the pharynx later-
ally and contributes to the elevation of the pharynx and 
larynx. It thereby serves to help clear the pharynx and 
larynx for swallowing. Secretomotor fibers are efferent 
fibers provided for the parotid gland’s production of 
saliva. Sensory fibers carry taste information from the 
posterior third of the tongue. The glossopharyngeal 
nerve mediates the sensory portion of the palatal and 
pharyngeal gag. Cranial nerve IX also carries sensory 
information to the faucial pillars and posterior section 
of the tongue. This sensory input is responsible for 
“triggering” the swallow response.
Testing
Most functions of cranial nerve IX cannot be tested 
separately from those of cranial nerve X because the 
vagus has predominant control over laryngeal and pha-
ryngeal sensory and motor function. However, testing 
the sensory portion of the pharyngeal gag does provide 
information about the integrity of cranial nerve IX. 
Testing the pharyngeal gag is not easily done in most 
people because getting so far back in the oral cavity 
without touching any other structure is difficult. To do 
the testing, the examiner should use a cotton-tipped 
applicator with a long wooden end (as used in medi-
cal clinics). The examiner carefully puts the cotton tip 
back against one side of the posterior pharyngeal wall, 
avoiding any contact with the base of the tongue or the 
velum. With a gentle poking of the wall, a gag should 
be elicited. Both sides of the pharynx should be tested.
If stimulation procedure (poking in correct spots) 
appears to be adequate but pharyngeal gag cannot be 
elicited, the examiner should ask whether the patient 
feels the pressure of the touch. If the stimulus is felt 
and no gag occurs, only the motor portion of the gag 
(mediated by the vagus) may be impaired. This situa-
tion is rare. Because sensation precedes motor activity, 
the absence of sensation and the gag implicates cranial 
nerve IX and gives the clinician information about the 
integrity of sensation to the upper pharynx, which can 
be important information in swallowing assessment.
CRANIAL NERVE X: VAGUS
Anatomy
Like the glossopharyngeal nerve, the vagus nerve also 
has three associated nuclei: the nucleus ambiguus, the 
dorsal nucleus, and the nucleus solitarius, also located 
in the medulla. Axons from vagal cell bodies in the 
nucleus ambiguus have two major branches: a pha-
ryngeal branch and a laryngeal branch. The laryngeal 
branch will branch again into the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve and the superior laryngeal nerve. The superior 
laryngeal nerve further splits into two branches, the 
internal laryngeal and the external laryngeal.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve does not divide again. 
It arises considerably below the larynx and ascends to 
terminate at the larynx. The right recurrent nerve runs 
in a loop behind the common carotid and subclavian 
arteries. The left recurrent nerve is longer, leaving the 
main laryngeal branch of the vagus at a lower level 

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
149
than does the right. The left recurrent loops under and 
behind the aortic arch. It then ascends to the larynx 
in a groove between the trachea and esophagus and 
enters through the cricothyroid membrane. Damage to 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve sometimes occurs during 
surgery, especially heart and thyroid surgery. Following 
the path of the branching, one can see how this nerve 
would be vulnerable because of the location within the 
neck and in the chest cavity.
Innervation
The nucleus ambiguus receives an approximately equal 
number of corticonuclear fibers of cranial nerve X 
from both hemispheres; these fibers are efferent to the 
constrictor muscles of the pharynx and the intrinsic 
muscles of the larynx. The efferent fibers of the dorsal 
or parasympathetic nucleus are associated with auto-
nomic functions and innervate the involuntary muscles 
of the bronchi, esophagus, heart, stomach, small intes-
tine, and a portion of the large intestine. The afferent 
fibers from the nucleus of the tractus solitarius follow 
much the same path as those of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve and terminate in the postcentral gyrus.
Function
Vagus means wanderer, an apt name considering the 
many functions of the vagus nerve. It is motor to the 
viscera (heart, respiratory system, and most of the diges-
tive system). It supplies primary efferent innervation 
to the palatal muscles (except for innervation of the 
tensor palatini by the trigeminal nerve). The vagus is 
also the primary efferent for the pharyngeal constric-
tors. On its own, the vagus innervates all of the intrinsic 
muscles of the larynx, primarily through the recurrent 
laryngeal branch. The cricothyroid, however, is inner-
vated by the external laryngeal branch of the superior 
laryngeal nerve. This can be an important difference to 
remember during clinical examinations for speech or 
swallowing.
The vagus has both a visceral and a general sensory 
component in its afferent pathways. The visceral com-
ponent carries visceral sensation that is not appreci-
ated at a conscious level. Sensory information from 
the mucous membranes of the epiglottis, base of the 
tongue, aryepiglottic folds, and the majority of the lar-
ynx is carried in the internal laryngeal branch of the 
superior laryngeal nerve. Visceral sensation from below 
the larynx is carried in the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
General sensation (pain, temperature, and touch) 
from the larynx, pharynx, skin of the external ear, and 
the external auditory canal is carried in the vagus as well. 
From the vocal folds and below the larynx, general sen-
sation is carried in the recurrent laryngeal nerve. From 
above the vocal folds, sensation travels in the internal 
laryngeal division of the superior laryngeal nerve. Dam-
age to one or both of these sensory components of these 
nerves could result in silent aspiration (aspiration with 
no reflexive cough) because of the decreased sensory 
input. The sensory information would normally cause 
the cough reflex to trigger or cause a tickle in the throat 
or airway, indicating that something foreign is on the 
membranes and needs to be coughed out.
Testing
Remember that evaluation of palatal function involves 
testing both cranial nerves IX and X. Palatal function is 
controlled primarily by cranial nerve X, with the tensor 
veli palatini innervated by V. Intrinsic laryngeal muscle 
function is covered solely by cranial nerve X.
Palatal function is tested by first observing the palate 
at rest as the patient opens the mouth to allow viewing. 
Look at the palatal arches and observe their symmetry. 
Note if one arch hangs lower than the other. Next ask 
the patient to phonate an “ah” and observe. The soft 
palate should elevate and move posteriorly and sym-
metrically. If the palate does not elevate, the palatal gag 
reflex, primarily innervated by cranial nerve IX, should 
be tested by touching the tongue blade against the pala-
tal arches or against the base of the tongue. The gag is 
a reflex activity, and it is preserved in an upper motor 
neuron lesion because the reflex arc is still intact. As in 
all reflexes, it may be lost acutely after an upper motor 
neuron lesion; then it may become hyperactive. If both 
volitional and reflex activities of the palate are dimin-
ished, a lower motor neuron lesion is evidenced. Bear 
in mind that palatal elevation is also reduced by a cleft 
palate, congenital oral malformations, and soft tissue 
palatal lesions. Do not overlook these vital facts in vig-
orously searching for an upper or lower motor neuron 
lesion.
Laryngeal function evaluation is adequately com-
pleted only by direct or indirect laryngoscopy in which 
the vocal cords can be seen. A finer analysis of vocal 
cord movement patterns can be done by using laryn-
geal stroboscopy. Damage to the vagus nerve may cause 
paralysis or paresis of the vocal cord. Innervation is 
bilateral to the larynx, with the crossed and uncrossed 
fibers being approximately equal. Therefore complete 
paralysis of a vocal cord from an upper motor neuron 
lesion is rare.
Preliminary assessment of laryngeal function is per-
formed by traditional clinical voice evaluation proce-
dures. The patient is asked to phonate and prolong a 
vowel such as /a/. Maximum phonation time varies for 
normal adults. If the patient can phonate for a 7- to 
8-second duration, laryngeal and respiratory control is 
presumed acceptable. Perceptual analysis of the voice is 
done by the clinician during this phonation and during 

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
150
conversation. The patient may be asked to demonstrate 
laryngeal function and control by raising and lower-
ing the pitch of a prolonged vowel or singing up and 
down the scale. Remember that the ability to change 
pitch depends on proper function of the cricothyroid 
muscle, which is innervated by the superior laryngeal 
nerve rather than the recurrent nerve. Estimate of the 
strength of laryngeal closure can be made perceptually 
by asking the patient to perform the glottal coup, which 
is essentially to make a short, sharp grunting sound. A 
voluntary (as opposed to reflexive) cough should also 
be requested. The clinician listens for the sound made 
at the larynx in these two maneuvers to be strong and 
sharp. Stress testing of the vocal mechanism is done by 
asking the patient to count to 300 or to keep talking for 
a prescribed length of time. More sophisticated analyses 
of the voice may be performed with instrumentation for 
acoustic analysis.
In spastic dysarthria cases from an upper motor neu-
ron lesion, a rough, harsh quality is heard on phonation. 
In bilateral upper motor neuron lesions (pseudobulbar 
palsy), a characteristic voice quality is heard, character-
ized by what Darley, Aronson, and Brown3 describe as 
strain-strangle. This voice is harsh, with a strained, tense 
quality as if the person is fighting to push the air flow 
through the larynx and supralaryngeal areas.
A lower motor neuron lesion causes complete 
paralysis of the ipsilateral vocal cord, resulting in a 
hoarse, breathy voice. In some lower motor neuron 
diseases the voice will initially be strong; however, 
after the patient talks for a while, the voice becomes 
progressively weaker and more breathy. Hoarseness 
sometimes results from direct damage to the recur-
rent laryngeal nerve during carotid artery or thyroid 
surgery. The hoarseness is transient unless the nerve 
was severed.
CRANIAL NERVE XI: SPINAL ACCESSORY
Anatomy
The spinal accessory nerve consists of a cranial and a 
spinal root. The nucleus of the cranial root is found in 
the nucleus ambiguus of the medulla. It receives cor-
ticonuclear fibers from both cerebral hemispheres. 
These fibers then join the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and 
spinal accessory nerves.
The spinal root’s nucleus is located in the spinal 
nucleus of the anterior gray column of the spinal cord. 
The fibers pass through the lateral white column and 
eventually form a nerve trunk, which joins the cranial 
root to pass through the foramen magnum. The spinal 
root then separates from the cranial root, however, to 
find its way to the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles.
Innervation
The cranial root joins the vagus to innervate the uvula 
and the levator palatini. As previously mentioned, the 
spinal root innervates the sternocleidomastoid and tra-
pezius muscles.
Function
The spinal accessory nerve’s primary function is as a 
motor to the muscles (including the sternocleidomas-
toid) that help turn, tilt, and thrust the head forward or 
raise the sternum and clavicle if the head is in a fixed 
position. It provides innervation also to the trapezius 
muscle, which is responsible for shrugging the shoulders.
Testing
When testing cranial nerve XI, the spinal part is evalu-
ated. The accessory part is accessory to the vagus and 
cannot be tested alone.
Initially, look at the size and symmetry of the ster-
nocleidomastoid muscles and palpate them. (Do this 
on yourself and others to become familiar with normal 
muscle size and firmness.) Ask the patient to turn the 
head to one side and hold it there while you try to push 
it back to the middle. Put one hand on the patient’s 
cheek and the other on the shoulder to brace the 
patient. Gently push against the cheek and observe and 
palpate the sternocleidomastoid on the opposite side 
of the neck.
Next have the patient try to thrust the head forward 
while you gently resist the movement with your hand 
against the forehead. Again, observe and palpate the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Finally, ask the patient to shrug his or her shoulders 
while you press down on the shoulders. You should feel 
the shoulders elevate against your gentle resistance.
CRANIAL NERVE XII: HYPOGLOSSAL
Anatomy
The hypoglossal nerve runs under the tongue and 
controls tongue movements. The nucleus, called the 
hypoglossal nucleus, is located in the medulla beneath 
the lower part of the fourth ventricle. It receives fibers 
from both cerebral hemispheres, with one exception. 
The cells serving the genioglossus muscle receive only 
contralateral fibers. The nerve fibers pass through the 
medulla and emerge in the groove between the pyra-
mid and the olive. Other apparent branches of the 
hypoglossal are not connected with the hypoglossal 
nuclei but rather are derived from the ansa cervicalis of 
cervical vertebrae C1, C2, and C3. Ansa means “loop,” 
and some branches of these spinal nerves form a loop 
and join the hypoglossal nerve to help innervate the 
sternothyroid, sternohyoid, and omohyoid muscles.

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
151
Innervation
The hypoglossal nerve innervates the intrinsic muscles 
of the tongue. It also innervates four extrinsic tongue 
muscles: the genioglossus, hyoglossus, chondroglossus, 
and styloglossus.
With the branches from the ansa cervicalis, cranial 
nerve XII contributes to the innervation of the sterno-
thyroid, sternohyoid, and omohyoid muscles, thus con-
tributing to the elevation and depression of the larynx.
Function
The hypoglossal nerve innervates the muscles respon-
sible for tongue movement. The four intrinsic muscles 
of the tongue control tongue shortening, concaving 
(turning the tip and lateral margins upward), narrow-
ing, elongating, and flattening. The extrinsic muscles 
innervated account for tongue protrusion (genioglos-
sus), drawing the tongue upward and backward (stylo-
glossus), and retraction and depression of the tongue 
(hyoglossus). The hyoglossus also acts with the chon-
droglossus to elevate the hyoid bone, thus participating 
in phonation.
Testing
Ask the patient to open the mouth and let you look at 
the tongue at rest. Inspect it for signs of atrophy. With 
a unilateral lower motor neuron lesion, one side of the 
tongue may look shrunken or atrophied. This atrophy 
occurs on the same side as the lower motor neuron 
lesion. A lower motor neuron lesion may cause fascic-
ulations, seen as tiny ripples under the surface of the 
tongue. Normal tongues may also show some ripples 
when they are not completely relaxed. Therefore, if fas-
ciculations seem present, ask the patient to move the 
tongue around and then relax it; again observe the sur-
face for fasciculations. Even in a normal tongue, how-
ever, ripples may still be present. Therefore, as DeMyer4 
points out, the clinician does better to rely on atrophy 
and weakness as signs of lower motor neuron damage. 
The tongue should also be observed for tremor or ran-
dom movements at rest.
Next ask the patient to protrude the tongue; evaluate 
the symmetry of this posture. The tongue tip should be 
at midline. If the patient has weak lip musculature on 
one side, that side may be lower, causing the tongue to 
look as if it deviates to that side. Therefore try to align 
the tip of the tongue with the midline of the jaw visu-
ally. That side of the lip can be pulled back so that it is 
symmetrical with the other side of the lip; then ask the 
patient to protrude the tongue. If the cranial nerve is 
dysfunctional, the genioglossus will not be able to push 
its side out; the stronger side will overcome the weaker, 
and the tongue will deviate to the weaker side (Fig. 7-5).
In lower motor neuron damage the weakness is on 
the same side as the lesion. In upper motor neuron dam-
age, because of the contralateral control, the tongue 
deviates to the side opposite the lesion. For example, 
in many stroke patients with left hemisphere damage 
to the area of the motor strip, the tongue shows a char-
acteristic deviation to the right on protrusion. This is 
usually less marked than in lower motor neuron tongue 
weakness.
The patient who has bilateral XII nerve damage has 
weakness on both sides and is unable to protrude the 
FIGURE 7-5
Unilateral paresis of the tongue. Left, The resting tongue shows a smaller weak side 
(atrophy) with a corrugated surface suggesting fasciculations and the effects of atrophy. 
These tongue signs suggest denervation. Right, The protruded tongue deviates to the 
weak side. In a lower motor neuron lesion, the deviated tongue points to the side of the 
lesion. (Modified from Darley, F., Aronson, A., & Brown, J. [1975]. Motor speech disorders. 
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.)

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
152
tongue beyond the lips. Strength of tongue protrusion 
may be tested by asking the patient to push against a 
tongue blade held directly in front of the lips.
Other movements of the tongue must be evaluated 
to document precisely the range, rate, and strength of 
the tongue for follow-up in treatment and for diagnos-
tic purposes. Ask the patient to lateralize the tongue 
(i.e., move it from one corner of the mouth to the 
other). The tongue should move the full range from 
corner to corner. Evaluate the strength of lateral move-
ment by asking the patient to push the tongue against 
the inside of the cheek (i.e., make a “ball” in the cheek) 
against your fingers placed for resistance on the outside 
of the cheek. A tongue blade can also be placed along 
the side of the tongue, with the patient pushing against 
a light resistance.
The ability to elevate the tongue can be evaluated 
by having the patient open the mouth to a moderate 
degree while you hold down the mandible with your 
finger on it. Ask the patient to try to touch the top 
lip and also the alveolar ridge with the tongue. This 
should be done with full range of movement and little 
effort.
Strength of elevation of the tip, blade, or back of 
the tongue is difficult to assess with tongue blade resis-
tance. A quick perceptual analysis may be a better infor-
mal assessment of strength of elevation. The tip of the 
tongue should be able to make firm contact to produce 
/t/, /d/, /t∫/ (as in chum), and /d3/ (as in judge) and 
to elevate fully for /l/ and /n/. The blade of the tongue 
should elevate well to produce a distinct /i/ (e as in  
eat) and /j/ (y as in young). Elevation of the back of the 
tongue is necessary for production of the velar conso-
nants /k/ and /g/. Careful examination of the produc-
tion of these consonants and vowels as well as others, in 
isolation and in context, may provide the most informa-
tion regarding tongue elevation and strength.
Instrumental Measurement of 
Strength
If your clinic or practice is fortunate enough, you may 
have access to instrumentation that could provide you 
with objective measures of lip and tongue strength. The 
Iowa Oral Pressure Indicator (IOPI) was introduced to 
our field through research on dysphagia in 1995 (Rob-
bins, 1995).9 The IOPI is a small handheld medical 
device designed to objectively measure lip and tongue 
strength as well as provide quantitative measurement 
of tongue fatigability. Since its introduction it has been 
made available not only to researchers but to practicing 
clinicians who utilize it for therapy. It has been widely 
used in research providing validation and normative 
data for these measures. Obviously, much more accu-
rate assessment and evidence-based treatment can be 
provided with instrumentation such as this if it is avail-
able to you.
Table 7-2 summarizes the five cranial nerves (V, VII, 
IX, X, and XII) involved in the oral musculature.
Cranial Nerve Cooperation: The Act 
of Swallowing
The act of swallowing is highly complex and must be 
studied independently in regard to its cranial nerve 
innervation. Logemann7 describes normal deglutition 
as consisting of four phases: the oral preparatory phase, 
the oral phase, the pharyngeal phase, and the esopha-
geal phase.
In the oral preparatory phase, the food or liquid 
stimulates sensory receptors (taste, touch, temperature 
and pressure). These receptors are activated by saliva. 
Mastication mixes the food with saliva and forms it 
into a cohesive bolus. Food and liquid are held by the 
TABLE 7-2
Summary of Cranial Nerve Function for the Oral Musculature
CRANIAL NERVE
MUSCLES  
INNERVATED
MOVEMENTS 
AND SENSATION 
INNERVATED
TEST PROCEDURE
SIGNS OF LOWER 
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
SIGNS OF UPPER  
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
V: trigeminal
Masseter, tensor  
tympani,  
tensor veli  
palatine,  
mylohyoid,  
digastric  
(anterior belly)
Jaw closing, 
lateral jaw 
movement, 
contribution 
to laryngeal 
elevation,  
sensation to 
face and  
anterior 
tongue
Palpation of  
masseter,  
closing and 
lateralization 
against  
resistance,  
sensation 
on face and 
tongue
Weakness, jaw  
deviation to 
lesion side, 
atrophy
Mild, transitory 
weakness

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
153
CRANIAL NERVE
MUSCLES  
INNERVATED
MOVEMENTS 
AND SENSATION 
INNERVATED
TEST PROCEDURE
SIGNS OF LOWER 
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
SIGNS OF UPPER  
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
VII: facial
Orbicularis oculi  
and oris,  
zygomatic,  
buccinator,  
platysma,  
stylohyoid,  
stapedius,  
portion of digastric 
(posterior belly)
Forehead wrin-
kling, closing 
eyes, closing 
mouth, smil-
ing, pulling 
down corner 
of mouth, 
tensing 
anterior neck 
muscles,  
moving 
stapedius 
to dampen 
ossicles; taste 
from anterior 
two thirds of 
tongue and 
hard and soft 
palates
Observation of 
facial sym-
metry at rest; 
have patient 
wrinkle fore-
head, close 
eyes tightly, 
smile, pucker, 
and pull down 
lip corners; 
identification 
of tastes
Involvement of 
entire side of 
face, weakness, 
limited range 
of movement, 
decreased taste 
sensation
Complete  
involvement of 
lips and neck 
muscles, less in-
volvement of eye 
area muscles, 
little difficulty 
with forehead  
muscles;  
weakness,  
limited range of 
movement of  
affected  
muscles;  
decreased taste 
sensation
IX: glossopha-
ryngeal
Stylopharyngeus, otic 
ganglion, parotid 
salivary gland, part 
of the middle  
pharyngeal  
constrictor
Elevation of 
pharynx 
and larynx, 
pharyn-
geal dilation, 
salivation; 
taste from 
posterior third 
of tongue; 
sensation 
from poste-
rior tongue 
and upper 
pharynx
Tested with  
cranial nerve 
X for motor; 
sensory test 
for pharyngeal 
gag
—
—
X: vagus
Inferior, middle,  
and superior  
pharyngeal  
constrictors;  
salpingopharyngeus,  
glossopalatine, 
pharyngopalatine, 
levator veli palatine, 
uvular, cricothyroid, 
thyroarytenoid,  
posterior and lateral  
cricoarytenoid,  
interarytenoid,  
and transverse  
and oblique  
interarytenoid 
muscles; various 
muscles of the 
viscera, esophagus, 
and trachea
Palatal elevation 
and depres-
sion, laryngeal 
movement, 
pharyngeal 
constriction, 
cricopharyn-
geal function; 
visceral and 
general sensa-
tion from base 
of tongue, 
epiglottis, 
larynx, and 
pharynx
Observation of 
palatal move-
ment, palatal 
gag reflex; 
laryngoscopic 
evaluation of 
vocal muscula-
ture; ability to 
change pitch; 
phonation 
time; assess-
ment of swal-
lowing
Absence of gag 
reflex, poor 
movement 
of palate or 
pharyngeal 
wall, absent or 
delayed swal-
low response, 
aspiration, 
breathy hoarse 
voice (may be 
improved by 
pushing effort)
Poor palatal or 
pharyngeal wall 
movement, 
harshness or 
strained- 
strangled  
voice quality,  
delayed or 
absent  
swallow reflex, 
aspiration
Summary of Cranial Nerve Function for the Oral Musculature—cont’d
TABLE 7-2
Continued

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
154
tongue against the hard palate prior to swallow initia-
tion though some will also collect in the valleculae and 
be held there at the base of the tongue. The oral prepa-
ratory stage is variable in duration depending on ease of 
mastication, oral motor efficiency, and individual pref-
erence in savoring taste. The sense of smell contributes 
greatly to the appreciation of taste with the smell car-
ried into the nasal cavity directly through the nares or 
through chewing action, which results in odors travel-
ing through the posterior nasopharynx.5 These actions 
during the oral preparatory stage would actively involve 
CNs I, V, VII, IX, and XII for smell, taste, salivation, gen-
eral sensation regarding where food is in the mouth, lip 
closure, chewing, and movement of the tongue.
The oral stage begins when the lips seal and the back 
of the tongue begins moving the bolus posteriorly. The 
tongue forms a central groove that acts as a ramp or 
chute for the food. This transitions quickly into the 
pharyngeal phase. At some point during the oral stage 
(although in much of the literature, it is categorized as 
the beginning of the pharyngeal stage), the pharyngeal 
swallow will be initiated (or “triggered”). The swallow 
may be initiated through sensory receptors on the fau-
cial pillars, tonsils, soft palate, base of the tongue, the 
posterior pharyngeal wall, and/or the epiglottis.
The sensory input from these receptors is carried 
mainly by CNs VII, IX, and X and is processed in the 
nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) in the medulla. There 
are several physiologic responses that occur during the 
swallow with most of them seeming involuntary but with 
obvious option for placement under voluntary control 
at times. Groher and Crary5 indicate that some of these 
physiologic changes begin during the oral stage with 
the more pharyngeal changes occurring in the pharyn-
geal stage. According to these authors, in the oral stage 
as the tongue begins to move posteriorly there is cessa-
tion of respiration, approximation of the arytenoid car-
tilages, medial approximation of the palatopharyngeal 
walls, and action of the levator velar palatini to begin 
elevation of the velum.
The afferent transmission to the NTS appears to be 
required to be in a specifically organized pattern to lead 
to initiation of swallowing. This stimulus pattern is con-
veyed to the reticular formation to make connections 
CRANIAL NERVE
MUSCLES  
INNERVATED
MOVEMENTS 
AND SENSATION 
INNERVATED
TEST PROCEDURE
SIGNS OF LOWER 
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
SIGNS OF UPPER  
MOTOR NEURON 
DAMAGE
XII: hypoglossal
Superior longitudinal, 
inferior longitudinal, 
transverse vertical,  
genioglossus,  
hyoglossus,  
and styloglossus
All tongue 
movements as 
well as some 
elevation of 
the hyoid 
bone
Observation for 
atrophy or  
fasciculations 
as well as 
symmetry on 
protrusion; 
assessment for 
lateralization, 
protrusion, 
elevation, 
retraction (to 
observe range 
of movement); 
assessment of  
movement 
against 
resistance for 
strength  
testing on  
lateral,  
protrusion, 
and elevation 
movement; 
articulation 
testing
Atrophy,  
fasciculations, 
weakness, 
reduced range 
of movement, 
deviation of 
tongue to side 
of lesion,  
decreased 
tone,  
consonant 
imprecision
Weakness,  
reduced range 
of movement, 
deviation of 
tongue to 
contralateral 
side, increased 
tone, consonant 
imprecision
Summary of Cranial Nerve Function for the Oral Musculature—cont’d
TABLE 7-2

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
155
with efferent nuclei of CNs V, VII, IX, X, and XII in 
the nucleus ambiguus (NA) of the medulla. The effer-
ent response that we call the swallow response or the 
pharyngeal swallow is an orderly configuration of sev-
eral physiologic actions occurring in the oropharynx 
simultaneously: velopharyngeal closure; laryngeal ele-
vation; inversion of the epiglottis; closure of all sphinc-
ters (aryepiglottic folds, false vocal folds, and true vocal 
folds); initiation of pharyngeal peristalsis (squeezing); 
and relaxation of the cricopharyngeal sphincter (or cri-
copharyngeus) to allow material to pass from pharynx 
to esophagus. If the swallow is not neutrally triggered, 
whether this be voluntarily or involuntarily, this physi-
ologic pattern of activity does not occur spontaneously. 
The bolus may be pushed into the pharynx and come 
to rest in the valleculae or pyriform sinuses and even-
tually will spill over into an unprotected airway (i.e., 
aspirated) unless it is expectorated before this happens. 
Some of the maneuvers that usually occur “reflexively” 
or as part of the central pattern of responses when 
the neural transmission takes place can be put under 
­voluntary control to help provide some protection if 
the neural triggering is slow or does not occur. This 
would be primarily the temporary cessation of breath-
ing and the closure of the vocal folds if they are func-
tional. Voluntary maneuvers can be learned that may 
assist in some of these muscle movements, including 
elevating the larynx, inverting the epiglottis and open-
ing of the cricopharyngeus, but these only assist and are 
difficult to pattern and to maintain without the neural 
swallow initiation.
Finally, in normal swallowing the esophageal phase 
occurs as the bolus enters the esophagus through the 
cricopharyngeus. A wave of contractions (peristalsis), 
innervated by cranial nerve X, is initiated in the esopha-
gus, and the bolus is passed through into the stomach 
through the lower esophageal sphincter. Normal esoph-
ageal transit time is 8 to 20 seconds. Box 7-2 outlines the 
four phases of deglutition, and Figure 7-6 illustrates the 
final three stages.
Efficient swallowing demands cooperation and coor-
dination of the cranial nerves also involved in speech 
production. Figure 7-7 is a simplified summary of the 
actions that occur in swallowing and the cranial nerves 
that are responsible. The trigeminal nerve (V) plays an 
important part because of the efferent control of the 
muscles of mastication and the afferent control for gen-
eral sensation to the anterior two thirds of the tongue. 
Cranial nerve VII, the facial nerve, controls taste for the 
anterior two thirds of the tongue and controls the lip 
sphincter and the buccal muscles, allowing food to be 
held inside the mouth.
The hypoglossal nerve (XII) controls the movement 
of the tongue. Through research using pharyngeal 
manometry, it has been found that the tongue is the 
major force generating the driving pressure that pushes 
the bolus through the pharynx.1 This action of the 
tongue has been compared with that of a plunger and 
is called the tongue driving force. Pharyngeal constric-
tion, controlled by the vagus nerve, has been found to 
be much less of a force than originally believed. In the 
same study, a descending pharyngeal contraction was 
shown to be applied only to the residual bolus tail.1 
This constriction clears the bolus from the laryngeal 
vestibule. It is therefore called the pharyngeal clearing 
force.
The vagus also mediates the action of the cricopha-
ryngeus, which relaxes to allow the bolus to pass from 
the hypopharynx to the esophagus. The movement of 
the intrinsic muscles of the larynx to close the entrance 
to the airway is also innervated by the vagus. The eleva-
tion and anterior movement of the larynx are signifi-
cant mechanical forces contributing to the opening of 
the cricopharyngeus. Therefore cranial nerves V, VII, 
IX, X, and XII, all with efferent innervation to one 
or more extrinsic muscles of the tongue and larynx, 
are important to this aspect of swallowing. The study 
also indicated that the opening of the cricopharyn-
geus creates a negative pressure; thus a suction pump 
effect significantly increases the rate of bolus flow and 
contributes to the elimination of the bolus before the 
larynx reopens.1
The hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal, and vagus ner­
ves are all major contributors to clearing the bolus 
through the pharynx. The tongue driving force and 
the pharyngeal clearing force, combined with the 
­hypopharyngeal suction pump, produce a rapid tran-
sit through the pharynx once the swallow response has 
been triggered.
	1.	Oral preparatory phase: Tongue forms the liquid 
or solid into a cohesive bolus after the solid has 
been chewed and mixed with saliva. Some of the 
solid bolus may fall into the valleculae during mas-
tication; the rest of the bolus is held as a cohesive 
unit against the hard palate.
	2.	Oral phase: Lips seal and tongue moves food to 
the back of the mouth.
	3.	Pharyngeal phase: Swallow response is triggered, 
causing several physiologic activities to occur  
simultaneously and pushing food from the  
pharynx into the esophagus.
	4.	Esophageal phase: Food passes, by peristaltic  
action, through the esophagus to the stomach.
	
BOX 7-2   
Four Phases of Deglutition

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
156
2
Hard
palate
Bolus
of food
Soft
palate
ORAL PHASE (voluntary)
PHARYNGEAL PHASE (involuntary)
ESOPHAGEAL PHASE
(involuntary)
Posterior
nares
Pharynx
Esophagus
Tongue
Vocal
cords
Larynx
1
1
2
Peristaltic wave
Bolus of food
in esophagus
C
B
A
Epiglottis
FIGURE 7-6
The initial phase of swallowing, the oral preparatory phase (A), involves mastication and 
mixture of the food with saliva. It is then followed by oral (B1), pharyngeal (B2 and C1), 
and esophageal (C2) phases. (Modified from Mahan, K.L., & Escott-Stump, S. [2008]. 
Krause’s Food & Nutrition Therapy [12th ed.]. St. Louis: Saunders.)
Mouth held shut
by VII nerve
action
Sensory input via V
relays position of
food bolus in mouth
Motor V controls
chewing movements
V (with VII and XII) pulls hyoid
up and forward, bringing the larynx
beneath the back of the tongue
IX is efferent to stylopharyngeus
muscle only. Assists in hyoid
elevation as well as dilation
of the pharynx.
X (in rapid sequence)
 (a) elevates palate to
 occlude nasopharynx
 (b) closes laryngeal
 vestibulates by approximation
 of vocal folds, ventricular
 folds and aryepiglottic folds
 (c) contracts middle and
 inferior pharyngeal
 constrictors to narrow
 pharynx and initiate
 peristalsis
 (d) relaxes cricopharyngeal
 sphincter to allow bolus to
 enter esophagus
 (e) initiates peristalsis in
 the esophagus
IX senses the
arrival of bolus
at the palate
XII pushes
the chewed
bolus up
and back
against the
soft palate
FIGURE 7-7
The neurology of swallowing. (From Patten, J. [1998]. Neurologic Differential Diagnosis 
[2nd ed.]. London: Springer, Ltd.)

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
157
The glossopharyngeal nerve is thought to be the pri-
mary afferent of the swallow response, and the vagus is 
thought to be the secondary afferent. As stated previously, 
the brainstem center of neural control for swallowing is 
located in the medulla in the nucleus solitarius (NTS) 
and in the nucleus ambiguus (NA). Afferent fibers con-
verge on the nucleus solitarius in the medulla. They com-
municate with neurons in the nucleus ambiguus by way 
of interneurons, thereby stimulating the motor response. 
The medullary swallowing center has been referred to 
as the central pattern generator7 rather than a reflex 
center for swallowing due to the observation of the tim-
ing and sequence of the muscle contractions that follow 
the onset of the pharyngeal swallow. This physiologic 
response to a sensory event is obviously more complex 
than a reflex. As Groher and Crary5 point out, regulation 
of swallowing by the nervous system is likely carried out 
not just by the innervation of CNs and patterns of muscle 
response but also by involvement of different levels of the 
central nervous system, including the cerebellum, limbic 
and other subcortical structures, and areas of the neocor-
tex. We can and do swallow differently for different tex-
tures and in different settings or situations. We can talk 
while eating; we can put swallowing under much greater 
(although not total) voluntary control in situations such 
as swallowing a pill; we can eat faster or slower; although 
rare (as very dangerous), some of us can even control 
the opening of the esophageal sphincters to “swallow” 
a sword! These variations in swallowing control support 
the input of supranuclear structures to swallowing.
If swallowing is inefficient and aspiration occurs, a 
reflexive cough should occur as one of the respiratory 
system’s defenses against foreign matter. The cough 
reflex is induced by irritation of the afferent fibers of 
the pharyngeal distribution of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve along with the sensory endings of the vagus nerve 
in the larynx, trachea, and larger bronchi.2
ASSESSMENT OF SWALLOWING
The cranial nerve examination is critical to the assess-
ment of swallowing. Careful evaluation of the sensory 
component of the cranial nerves is probably more 
important in the swallowing evaluation than when the 
examination is for a speech disorder alone.
Taste, carried by cranial nerves VII and IX, is not a 
typical part of the assessment of the sensorimotor con-
trol for speech or for swallowing. However, if the etiology 
and characteristics of a swallowing disorder are particu-
larly difficult to figure out or if treatment is not going as 
well as planned, taste should be tested with some of the 
primary tastes (salt, sweet, bitter, and sour). The testing 
must be done on both sides of the anterior two thirds 
of the tongue and on both sides of the posterior third 
of the tongue to include cranial nerves VII and IX. In 
these cases, smell should probably also be evaluated as 
the sense of smell is critical to normal taste perception. 
Smell is carried by CN I. It can be assessed by having 
the patient identify certain smells that are typically read-
ily identifiable in the patient’s culture (e.g., the smell  
of sulfur [“rotten eggs”], roses, vanilla, peppermint, 
etc., for Americans). This, of course, would not be rel-
evant for a patient who reports a poor premorbid sense 
of smell, a laryngectomy patient, or a patient who could 
not do the task because of cognitive deficits.
General sensation to the tongue, carried by cranial 
nerves V and IX (posterior third), should be tested with 
the two sides compared regarding sensitivity to touch. 
As previously mentioned, testing of the pharyngeal gag 
can be attempted.
The motor examination for swallowing should consist 
of the same maneuvers as for the speech examination 
with additional time for dedicated swallowing assess-
ment. In most settings, if the patient is not so compro-
mised as to be unable to cooperate or to be too at risk 
for injury, a cursory screening examination of swallow-
ing is performed (often called a “bedside” swallowing 
evaluation). For this screening, the clinician first does 
the oral-motor and cognitive testing and then observes 
the patient’s attempt at swallowing a liquid (preferably 
water), a semisolid (e.g., pudding), and a solid. This swal-
lowing should only be done if the clinician’s judgment 
is that it will be safe to try in the clinic setting. If patient 
safety is a concern or if the cranial nerve examination 
has pointed to a likely pharyngeal-stage swallowing dis-
order, a modified barium swallow or MBS (aka, a video-
fluoroscopy of swallowing or VFS), or perhaps a fiber 
optic endoscopic examination of swallowing (aka, FEES) 
should be requested. These examinations should be per-
formed only by an SLP or other professional with appro-
priate training and experience in their administration 
and interpretation. The purpose of the any instrumental 
examination should be to document problems and evalu-
ate therapeutic alternatives that may improve oral intake.
A VFS is, obviously, a radiographic study that exposes 
the patient (and clinician) to a small amount of radia-
tion; it does require that barium be mixed with the 
food consistencies or that a barium solution duplicat-
ing normal consistencies be used. The MBS is the gold 
standard for instrumental evaluation because of the 
complete view of all stages of the swallow. Figure 7-8 
presents a lateral view used during the study and labels 
the structures.
FEES is another instrumental procedure that may 
be helpful when a pharyngeal stage disorder is sus-
pected.5 For this study, a fiber optic endoscope is passed 
nasally to allow a view superior to the pyriform sinuses 
and the laryngeal folds. Once the scope is placed, the 

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
158
patient can be asked to swallow normal liquids, soft 
solids, or solids with the only addition being perhaps 
some food coloring. Problems with laryngeal closure 
in general can also be evaluated during the study with 
stroboscopy added to the procedure if such technol-
ogy is available and needed. The major drawback for 
the use of the FEES study is that the image is blocked 
at the peak of the swallow when the material being 
swallowed covers the tip of the scope and this is fol-
lowed by a brief period of “whiteout” as the vocal folds 
close and the larynx rises, blocking any image. It is at 
this point that aspiration may be missed. Figure 7-9  
presents the view during a FEES examination after the 
“whiteout” but showing residual aspirated material at 
the entrance to the airway. This residue at the entrance 
to the vocal folds does not always occur, and the possi-
bility of missing aspiration, especially silent aspiration, 
is a concern; however, if residue is not coated with 
barium, the MBS study may miss potential aspiration 
as well.8
Nasal cavity
Tongue
Velum
Base of
tongue
Posterior
  pharyngeal
    wall
Epiglottis
Piriform recess
PES
Trachea
Mandible
Hyoid
Laryngeal
entrance
True vocal folds
Arytenoid
cartilage
FIGURE 7-8
Lateral radiographic view of normal swallowing mechanism 
in an adult. PES, Pharyngoesophageal segment. (From Gro-
her, M. E., & Crary, M. A. [2016]. Dysphagia: Clinical man-
agement in adults and children [2nd ed.]. St. Louis: Mosby.)
FIGURE 7-9
FEES image of tracheal aspiration. (Modified from Leder, S. 
B., & Murray, J. T. [2008]. Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation 
of swallowing. Physical Medical & Rehabilitation Clinics of 
North America, 19, 787-801.)
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 The speech-language pathologist must be knowl-
edgeable regarding the function and assessment 
of the cranial nerves, which are vital for speech 
production and swallowing.
	•	 Twelve pairs of cranial nerves can be found exiting 
the brainstem; seven are concerned with commu-
nication and/or swallowing.
	•	 Cranial nerves I (olfactory), II (optic), III (oculomotor), 
IV (trochlear), and VI (abducens) are concerned with 
smell and vision as well as movement of the eyes.
	•	 Cranial nerve VIII (vestibuloacoustic) is the auditory 
nerve carrying the sensation of sound to Heschl’s 
gyrus. The vestibular portion of the nerve controls 
the sense of equilibrium.
	•	 Cranial nerve XI (spinal accessory) contributes to 
movement of the uvula and the levator palatini 
through its cranial root. Testing of the spinal part of 
the nerve is the only possible test of the nerve’s  
viability.
	•	 The five remaining cranial nerves (V, trigeminal; 
VII, facial; IX, glossopharyngeal; X, vagus; and XII, 
hypoglossal) are main motor and sensory nerves 
for oral-motor and sensory function, enabling 
speech production, oral feeding, and swallowing.
	•	 Table 7-2 summarizes pertinent clinical information 
for these five cranial nerves on anatomy, innerva-
tion, signs of damage, and testing procedures 
that can be done during an extended oral-motor 
examination.
	•	 Beyond a limited “bedside” swallow examination, 
a fiberoptic endoscopic examination of swallowing 
(FEES) and/or the modified barium swallow (MBS) 
would be necessary to adequately evaluate cranial 
nerve function during swallowing.

THE CRANIAL NERVES  CHAPTER SEVEN
159
REFERENCES
	1.	 Cerenko, D., McConnel, F. M. S., & Jackson, R. T. (1989). 
Quantitative assessment of pharyngeal bolus driving forc-
es. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 100, 57–63.
	2.	 Cherniack, R., Cherniack, L., & Naimark, A. (1972). Res-
piration in health and disease (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: W. B. 
Saunders.
	3.	 Darley, F., Aronson, A., & Brown, J. (1975). Motor speech dis-
orders. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
	4.	 DeMyer, W. (1980). Technique of the neurologic examination: A 
programmed text (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
	5.	 Groher, M. E., & Crary, M. A. (2010). Dysphagia: Clinical 
management in adults and children. Maryland Heights, MO: 
Mosby.
	6.	 Langmore, S., Schatz, K., & Olsen, N. (1988). Fiberoptic 
endoscopic examination of swallowing safety: A new proce-
dure. Dysphagia, 2, 216–219.
	7.	 Logemann, J. A. (1984). Evaluation and treatment of swallow-
ing disorders. San Diego: College Hill Press.
	8.	 Kelly, A. M., Leslie, P., Beale, T., Payten, C., & Drinnan, M. 
J. (2006). Fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing 
and videofluoroscopy: Does examination type influence 
perception of pharyngeal severity? Clinical Otolaryngology, 
31, 425–432.
	9.	 Robbins, J., Levine, R., Wood, J., Roecker, E. B., & Luschei, E.  
(1995). Age effects on lingual pressure generation as a risk 
factor for dysphagia. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 
50A, M257–M262.
 C A S E  S T U D Y
A 34-year-old female welder sought help from her phy-
sician for persistent ringing (medically known as tinni-
tus) and “wave crashing” sounds in her right ear. These 
symptoms were initially attributed to occupational noise 
exposure. However, a year later she continued to experi-
ence the same sounds but with additional symptoms that 
brought new concern. She now demonstrated a clumsy 
gait, had pain in her right ear, and reported dizziness. 
She also thought that her hearing in her right ear had 
decreased. Her symptoms worsened, and she went to 
the emergency department. She reported in the emer-
gency department that she had suddenly begun having 
difficulty seeing clearly out of her right eye, was having 
some difficulty with swallowing, and had some slurring 
of speech. Examination showed moderate facial weak-
ness and right-sided weakness of her mouth and tongue. 
Voice and speech production were notably weak. The 
physician diagnosed classic signs of a flaccid dysarthria.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	What, if any, cranial nerves are involved here?
	2.	Could this patient’s symptoms be explained as 
noise-induced hearing loss with cranial nerve dam-
age?
	3.	The final diagnosis for this patient was a vestibular 
schwannoma (or acoustic neuroma). What are some 
of the characteristics of this tumor? (The answer to 
this question will involve some research.)

160
8
K E Y  T E R M S
adduction
amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS; Lou 
Gehrig’s disease)
apraxia of speech
articulatory 
undershoot
ataxic dysarthria
athetosis
cerebrovascular 
accident (CVA)
childhood apraxia of 
speech
choreiform
cogwheel rigidity
diplegia
dystonia
essential tremor
excess and equal 
stress
explosive speech
fasciculations
flaccid dysarthria
Huntington’s chorea
hypernasality
hypokinetic dysarthria
l-dopa
monoloudness
myasthenia gravis
oral apraxia
palilalia
parkinsonism
pathologic tremor
pseudobulbar palsy
scanning speech
Shy-Drager syndrome
spasmodic dysphonia 
(SD)
spastic dysarthria
Sydenham’s chorea
tardive dyskinesia
unilateral upper 
motor neuron 
dysarthria
Clinical Speech 
Syndromes 
of the Motor 
Systems
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Dysarthrias
Upper Motor Neuron Lesions
Unilateral Upper Motor Neuron Dysarthria
Spastic Dysarthria
Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
Flaccid Dysarthria
Mixed Upper and Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Basal Ganglia Lesions: Dyskinetic Dysarthrias
Hypokinetic Dysarthria: Parkinsonism
Hyperkinetic Dysarthrias
Pathologic Tremor
Chorea
Dystonia and Athetosis
Tardive Dyskinesia
The Cerebellum and Cerebellar Pathway Lesions
Ataxic Dysarthria
Other Mixed Dysarthrias with Diverse Lesions
Multiple Sclerosis
Shy-Drager Syndrome
Apraxias
Oral Apraxia
Apraxia of Speech
Speech is deranged in a variety of ways by disease of the 
brain. The process of articulation is immediately affected by a 
mechanism of nerve nuclei situated in the pons and medulla, 
but these are excited to action by centers in the cerebral cortex. 
Thus there are higher and lower mechanisms; the former is 
cerebral, the latter is bulbar.
William R. Gowers, A Manual of Disease of the Nervous  
System, 1888

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
161
Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) must have an 
understanding of the function of the cranial nerves and 
the rest of the motor and sensory system for the treat-
ment of motor speech disorders. Data kept at the Mayo 
Clinic between 1987 and 1990 and from 1993 to 2001 
revealed that of the 10,444 people whose primary diag-
nosis was an acquired communication disorder, 58% 
were diagnosed with a motor speech disorder.11
Figure 8-1 shows the distribution of the different 
categories of the acquired communication disorders 
found on evaluation. These data indicate that SLPs 
whose practice is primarily with adult clients must be 
well versed in the anatomy and physiology of the motor 
speech system and familiar with the clinical signs and 
symptoms of diseases and conditions producing them. 
This knowledge will be important to the treatment of 
children with motor speech disorders as well, which is 
discussed in Chapter 12.
Dysarthrias
In the classic Mayo Clinic study, Darley, Aronson, and 
Brown8 defined dysarthria as the speech disorder result-
ing from paralysis, weakness, or incoordination of the 
speech musculature that is of neurologic origin. Their 
definition encompasses any symptoms of motor distur-
bance of respiration, phonation, resonance, articula-
tion, and prosody.
Damage to the motor system responsible for speech 
production may occur at any point along the pathway 
from the cerebrum to the muscle itself. In their clas-
sic studies of types of dysarthria resulting from certain 
sites of damage in the neural system, Darley et al.8,9 
identified six different dysarthrias based on neuroana-
tomic and acoustic-perceptual judgments of speech. 
This chapter describes the classic dysarthrias accord-
ing to neuroanatomic site of dysfunction; associated 
disease processes; and the effects of these diseases on 
articulation, ­resonance, phonation, prosody, and swal-
lowing. The following is not an exhaustive discussion 
of the ­diseases or of the types of dysarthrias resulting 
from neurologic disease. Keep in mind that any dis-
ease or trauma that affects the movement, coordina-
tion, and timing of the oral musculature may produce 
a dysarthria.
Upper Motor Neuron Lesions
Upper motor neuron damage may result in a ­spastic 
paralysis and hyperactive reflexes. The dysarthria 
­associated with unilateral upper motor neuron 
lesions is called unilateral upper motor neuron dysar-
thria. The dysarthria associated with bilateral upper 
motor neuron lesions is known as spastic dysarthria. 
An overview of upper motor neuron lesions is found 
in Box 8-1.
Apraxia of speech
8%
Dysarthria, type
undetermined 3%
Anarthria
2%
Mixed
27%
Unilateral upper motor neuron
8%
Hyperkinetic
18%
Hypokinetic
8%
Ataxic
10%
Spastic
8%
Flaccid
8%
FIGURE 8-1
Distribution of neurologic communication disorders, Speech pathology, Department of 
Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 1987–1990 and 1993–2001. (Reprinted from Duffy J. [2005]. 
Motor speech disorders: Substrates, differential diagnosis, and management [2nd ed.].  
St. Louis: Mosby.)

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
162
UNILATERAL UPPER MOTOR NEURON 
DYSARTHRIA
As discussed by Duffy,12 the dysarthria associated with 
unilateral upper motor neuron damage has been given 
scant attention in the literature, probably because the 
symptoms are usually mild and sometimes transitory. 
This section on upper motor neuron lesions is primar-
ily devoted to a discussion of spastic dysarthria for the 
same reasons. However, a brief review of unilateral 
upper motor neuron dysarthria, as termed by Duffy, is 
warranted because it is as frequently encountered as the 
other types discussed in this chapter.
Etiology
The primary etiology of unilateral upper motor ­neuron 
dysarthria is stroke. Many other etiologies of upper 
motor neuron damage cause more diffuse brain injury 
and result more often in bilateral damage to the 
­pyramidal pathways. Trauma and tumors can result in 
injury confined to a single hemisphere and can ­produce 
a unilateral upper motor neuron dysarthria. Unilateral 
upper motor neuron dysarthria can result from damage 
to either hemisphere.
Speech Characteristics
Only a small number of studies have looked at the 
speech characteristics of unilateral upper motor neu-
ron dysarthria.12,17 The collective findings of these 
studies indicate that the most prominent deviant char-
acteristic of speech is imprecise articulation. Slowed 
rate and irregular articulatory ­breakdown were also 
noted in a number of cases. Other ­characteristics pres-
ent in some cases were harshness, reduced loudness, 
and hypernasality. Most characteristics were described 
as mild to moderate in severity, although some patients 
had more severe dysarthria. Many patients demon-
strated significant recovery during the spontaneous 
recovery period, but some dysarthrias persisted and 
required speech therapy for the reduced intelligibility.
Swallowing
Robbins39 studied patients with left and right hemi-
sphere strokes and showed that the patients ­differed 
from healthy individuals in increased oral-stage 
durations for liquid and semisolid swallows and the 
­occurrence of laryngeal vestibule penetration. This 
­difficulty with oral-stage transit was particularly true 
for left hemisphere–damaged patients. On further 
analysis, Robbins also found that patients with ­right 
hemisphere cerebrovascular accident (CVA) dem-
onstrated ­laryngeal penetration and aspiration sig-
nificantly more often than patients with left-sided 
CVA. Silent aspiration (i.e., no coughing occurred 
reflexively) occurred with much greater frequency 
in patients with right-sided CVA. In addition, more 
aspiration occurred with anterior lesions than with 
posterior lesion sites.
Evatt et al.13 reported on a study of swallowing in 57 
acute unilateral stroke patients. They found that aspira-
tion in association with reduced pharyngeal clearance 
was present in 39% of the right hemisphere–damaged 
patients and 57% of the left hemisphere–damaged 
patients. The incidence of aspiration was significantly 
greater in left hemisphere–damaged patients than in 
right hemisphere–damaged patients when analysis was 
performed on individuals older than 65 years. A study 
by Alberts et al.1 that used magnetic resonance imaging 
concluded that stroke patients should be individually 
evaluated for swallowing dysfunction regardless of the 
location or site of the lesion because even small-vessel 
strokes were associated with aspiration in greater than 
20% of patients.
SPASTIC DYSARTHRIA
Etiology
Bilateral upper motor neuron damage may result from 
stroke, head trauma, tumor, infection, degenerative 
Unilateral Upper Motor Neuron Dysarthria
	•	 Primarily caused by stroke but can also result from 
trauma or tumors
	•	 Imprecise articulation; slow rate and irregular 
articulatory breakdown may also occur
	•	 Harshness, reduced loudness, and hypernasality 
common
	•	 Difficulty with oral stage transit
Spastic Dysarthria
	•	 May be caused by stroke, head trauma, tumor, 
infection, degenerative disease, or inflammatory or 
toxic-metabolic disease
	•	 Loss of skilled movement, hyporeflexia, positive 
Babinski sign, muscle weakness, loss of muscle 
tone
	•	 Usually severe impairment of range of rate of 
movement of oral musculature
	•	 Harsh voice with strained-strangled quality,  
low pitch, and monoloudness; often accompa-
nied by hypernasality and imprecise consonant 
production
	•	 Aspiration common, often with moderate to 
­severe dysphagia
	
BOX 8-1   
Upper Motor Neuron Lesions

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
163
disease, and inflammatory or toxic-metabolic diseases. 
In most instances of spastic dysarthria, bilateral dam-
age occurs to both the direct activation pathway (cor-
ticobulbar or corticospinal tract) and the indirect 
activation pathway (extrapyramidal pathways from cor-
tex to brainstem and spinal cord). This usually occurs 
because the pathways are in close proximity from cortex 
to the termination at the cranial nerve or spinal nerve. 
The resulting oral-motor disorder from bilateral upper 
motor neuron damage to both systems is sometimes 
called pseudobulbar palsy. This name is derived from 
the resemblance of the oral-motor and speech char-
acteristics to lower motor neuron damage and flaccid 
­dysarthria (bulbar palsy).
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Direct activation pathway damage results in the char-
acteristic loss of skilled movement, hyporeflexia, a 
positive Babinski sign, and muscle weakness and loss 
of tone.
Damage to the indirect activation pathway causes 
increased muscle tone (spasticity) and hyperactive 
stretch reflexes. This hypertonicity and hyperreflexia 
dominate if both systems are damaged, which is usually 
the case. Although tone is increased, the muscles are 
weak, range of movement is limited, and rate of move-
ment is slow because of the direct activation motor 
­system damage.
Oral Musculature
In pseudobulbar palsy, the oral musculature ­usually 
shows severe impairment of range and rate of ­movement. 
The tongue may extend only to the lips on ­protrusion. 
The lips move slowly, and excursion is ­limited. Palatal 
movement is severely reduced and sluggish on phona-
tion. The gag reflex may be absent in the acute stages 
but later returns and may be hyperactive. Chewing and 
swallowing are both frequently affected, and drooling is 
present in most cases.
Speech Characteristics
The patient usually demonstrates a classic spastic dysar-
thria. Speech characteristics are as follows.
Phonation
The voice of the patient with spastic dysarthria is 
described as harsh, and many have a characteristic 
strained-strangled quality. An effortful grunt is often 
heard at the end of vocalizations. Excessively low pitch is 
frequently found, with pitch breaks in some cases. ­Little 
variation in loudness (monoloudness) and reduced 
stress are also noted. Occasionally heard in spastic 
­dysarthria is excess and equal stress (i.e., inappropriate 
stress on monosyllabic words and the usually unstressed 
syllables of polysyllabic words).
Resonance
Hypernasality is a frequent component of spastic dysar-
thria. Nasal emission is uncommon, however.
Articulation
As in most dysarthrias, imprecision of consonant 
­production is a noticeable part of the speech disorder 
in spastic dysarthria. Vowel distortion has been noted in 
some cases. Zeigler and von Cramer’s acoustic study49 
of 10 patients with spastic dysarthria revealed a dis-
proportionate impairment of the back of the tongue 
compared with the blade of the tongue. Impaired accel-
eration of the moving articulators also accounted for 
part of the distortion and the increase in production 
time often noted in these speakers.
Swallowing
Horner et al.18 studied 70 patients with bilateral hemi-
spheric strokes. By using videofluoroscopy, they found 
that 49% of the patients aspirated. The following symp-
toms associated with dysphagia are often observed in 
patients with bilateral upper motor neuron damage: 
reduced labial, lingual, and mandibular strength and 
sensation; delayed swallow response; reduced pha-
ryngeal peristalsis; incomplete laryngeal elevation 
and ­closure; and cricopharyngeal dysfunction.6 The 
­dysphagia may be severe, and drooling may be noted. 
With mild dysphagia, the patient may unconsciously 
alter the eating pattern to eat more slowly and carefully, 
denying any difficulty.13
Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
FLACCID DYSARTHRIA
Damage to the lower motor neuron system affects the 
final common pathway for muscle contraction. The 
muscles become hypotonic or flaccid. Thus every type of 
movement is involved (voluntary, automatic, and reflex-
ive movement are all impaired), and flaccid ­dysarthria 
may be seen.
Etiology
Any disease that affects part of the motor unit—the 
cell body, its axon, the myoneural junction, or the mus-
cle fibers themselves—may yield lower motor ­neuron 
­symptoms. Thus viral infections, tumors, trauma to the 
nerve itself, or a brainstem stroke with involvement of 
the nerve fibers may be the cause of the ­dysarthria. Myas-
thenia gravis results from impairment of transmission 
across the myoneural junction or the synapse between 
the nerve and muscle. Bulbar palsy results from dam-
age to the motor units of the cranial nerves. Möbius syn-
drome (congenital facial diplegia) involves bilateral sixth 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
164
(abducens) and seventh (facial) nerve palsies of con-
genital origin rather than generalized ­bulbar palsy. Most 
patients with these palsies speak acceptably except for 
slurring. Direct muscle ­involvement is found in diseases 
such as muscular dystrophy, myotonia, and myositis.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Damage to the lower motor neuron system causes flaccid 
paralysis. Reflexes are reduced (i.e., hyporeflexia is pres-
ent). The affected muscles usually become shrunken or 
atrophied over time. Many times the involved muscles, 
especially the tongue muscles, show fasciculations—
tiny spontaneous muscle contractions of the motor unit 
or muscle fibers innervated by an axon. The fascicula-
tions appear as spontaneous dimpling of the tongue, 
which may look as though tiny worms are moving just 
beneath its surface.
Oral Musculature
Because the cranial nerve nuclei are dispersed through-
out the brainstem rather than being clustered together, 
the oral structures may be selectively impaired and 
should be carefully evaluated.
Muscle tone in lower motor neuron damage is flac-
cid or hypotonic. Muscles are weak. The affected side 
of the lips sags, and in some cases drooling may be 
present. In bilateral weakness the whole mouth may 
sag, and the lower lip may be so weak that habitual 
open-mouth posture results. The patient may have 
­difficulty puckering the lips or pulling up the corners 
of the lips to smile.
Weakness of the mandibular muscles may not be 
­readily evident in unilateral involvement. Careful obser-
vation reveals that the jaw deviates to the side of ­weakness. 
With bilateral damage the jaw obviously sags. With dam-
age to any component of the motor unit ­supplying the 
tongue, the muscles become atrophied and shrunken 
over time, and the tongue is atonic or flabby. This tends 
to affect protrusion, lateralization, and elevation, particu-
larly of the posterior portion of the tongue. Fasciculations 
are often observed after a period.
Palatal weakness or immobility may also be present, 
and the gag reflex is reduced or absent. Pharyngeal 
involvement may occur, causing swallowing difficulty 
and possibly nasal regurgitation of fluids.
Speech Characteristics
Speech-language pathologists are most likely to be 
­consulted concerning patients with a bulbar palsy result-
ing from vascular disease, head trauma, or diseases such 
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). These patients 
may exhibit a flaccid dysarthria and show some of the 
following characteristics on speech testing.
Phonation
Unilateral vocal fold paralysis is relatively unusual in 
disease processes affecting the brainstem nuclei. If 
unilateral damage is present, the quality of phonation 
depends on the position of the vocal fold. If it is para-
lyzed in an adducted position, the voice is harsh, and 
loudness is reduced. If it is in the abducted position, 
more breathiness is heard with reduced loudness.
More likely is bilateral vocal cord involvement. The 
characteristics of this are a breathy voice, inspiratory 
stridor (or audible inhalation), and abnormally short 
phrases. Monotony of pitch and loudness is distinctive 
in many patients as well.
Resonance
Hypernasality is noted as an outstanding characteristic 
of the patients with flaccid dysarthria whose disease or 
injury affected velopharyngeal function. Nasal emis-
sion of air is also found in a high percentage of those 
patients.
Articulation
Imprecise consonant production may be present to a 
mild to severe (unintelligible speech) degree. The con-
sonants requiring firm contact from tongue tip eleva-
tion are particularly vulnerable. Plosives such as /p/, 
/t/, and /k/ and fricatives such as /f/ and /s/ are fre-
quently distorted because of the lack of intraoral pres-
sure that results from palatal dysfunction.
Swallowing
A brainstem CVA can cause flaccid dysarthria with 
lesions affecting the motor nuclei. A study of over 500 
stroke patients admitted to a rehabilitation unit found 
that 15% were admitted with brainstem strokes.46 Rob-
bins et al39 studied 10 patients with brainstem CVAs and 
found that these patients aspirated more frequently than 
did the patients with left or right cortical CVAs. Aspi-
ration usually occurred during the swallow because of 
reduced airway protection or after the swallow because 
of large amounts of stasis in the pharyngeal recesses, 
particularly in the piriform sinuses. Incomplete as well 
as delayed relaxation of the cricopharyngeal sphincter 
was also noted in these patients.
Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis is a chronic autoimmune disease 
resulting from a reduction in available acetylcholine 
receptors at the neuromuscular junction due to the 
disease process, which produces acetylcholine (ACH) 
antibodies. It may be associated with other autoimmune 
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, and with a thy-
moma in the chest. Symptoms may include changes in 
the eyes such as drooping of the eyelid, known as pto-
sis (Fig. 8-2). Double vision may also occur. There are 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
165
patients who present with dysphonia as their primary 
and only symptom initially.30 The muscles may be weak, 
with the jaw sagging accompanied by weak chewing. 
Swallowing difficulty, or dysphagia, is not uncommon, 
and myasthenia especially should be considered with a 
history of difficulty with swallowing that worsens in use 
and improves with rest.23
Voice symptoms can exist without other signs of dys-
arthria. The flaccid dysphonia of myasthenia should 
be suspected when, despite normal laryngoscopic find-
ings, the voice nevertheless becomes progressively more 
breathy and reduced in intensity as the client speaks. 
Respiratory weakness, in addition to extremity weak-
ness, may be present, and myasthenia can occur with no 
oral motor involvement. Administration of an anticho-
linesterase agent, known as the Tensilon test, is a diagnos-
tic procedure used to confirm a diagnosis of myasthenia. 
Figure 8-2 shows improvement in eyelid elevation dur-
ing the Tensilon test. For speech, the client would be 
asked to continue to speak until the dysarthric symp-
toms are noted in articulation, resonance, or voice. The 
Tensilon would then be injected a little at a time, and if 
myasthenia is the correct diagnosis, dramatic improve-
ment in speech would result in a short period of time as 
the client continues to speak. Treatment includes drugs 
such as cholinesterase inhibitors, corticosteroids and 
immunosuppressants, plasma exchange, immunoglob-
ulin infusion (IVIg), and thymectomy.43 Box 8-2 sum-
marizes the lower motor lesions.
Mixed Upper and Lower Motor 
Neuron Lesions
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
A common finding in clinical practice is a lesion or dis-
ease process that has not confined itself to one motor 
system but instead has affected both upper and lower 
motor neuron systems. The most frequently encoun-
tered example of this damage is amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease).
Etiology
ALS causes progressive degeneration of the neurons of 
the upper and lower motor neuron systems and is of 
unknown etiology. Onset is typically in the fifth decade, 
although it may be earlier or later, and early symptoms 
depend on which motor neurons initially are affected. 
If brainstem nuclei are the first to be affected, the ini-
tial signs may be slurring of speech or difficulty swal-
lowing. Often only a slight change in voice quality is 
the first sign. The bulbar or brainstem symptoms are 
A
B
FIGURE 8-2
A, Ptosis of the left eyelid. B, Left eyelid elevates during the Tensilon test.
Flaccid Dysarthria
	•	 May be caused by any disease that affects part 
of the motor unit (viral infections, tumors, nerve 
trauma, brainstem stroke)
	•	 Selective impairment of a muscle or muscle group 
can occur, resulting in a flaccid paralysis, brain-
stem CVA, or bulbar palsy
	•	 Damage resulting in flaccid paralysis, hyporeflexia, 
and shrunken or atrophied muscle
	•	 Hypernasality and nasal emission common; selective 
consonants, plosives, and fricatives often affected
	•	 Frequent aspiration
	•	 Myasthenia gravis, a chronic autoimmune disease 
caused by reduced acetylcholine receptors at 
neuromuscular junctions, results in a unique symp-
tomatology
	
•	 Ptosis, double vision, muscle weakness, and 
dysphagia common
	
•	 Flaccid dysphonia, progressive breathiness, and 
reduced voice intensity common
	
BOX 8-2   
Lower Motor Neuron Lesions

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
166
particularly devastating, and verbal communication and 
oral feedings usually become impossible over time. The 
patient with this type of ALS has a variable life expec-
tancy but typically may survive only 1 to 3 years after 
onset. Pneumonia is frequently the cause of death. ALS 
has no known effective treatment or cure, although 
many palliative treatments are available, including phys-
ical therapy, drugs for reduction of muscle pain, and 
speech therapy in some cases. The primary involvement 
of the SLP is to help the patient understand the pos-
sible effect on speech and swallowing and to prepare 
for eventual need for safe swallowing strategies and for 
dependence on augmentative and alternative commu-
nication systems.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Signs may be present from damage to both upper 
and lower motor neuron systems. Muscles are weak 
but reflexes are hyperactive. Spasticity is usually pres-
ent unless the lower motor neuron damage is well 
advanced.
Oral Musculature
Oral peripheral examination yields indications of a 
pervasive weakness in lips, tongue, and palate. Range 
of movement is reduced, and sometimes one side is 
slightly more affected than the other. The tongue may 
show fasciculations and, in more advanced cases, atro-
phy. The patient may report and demonstrate difficulty 
swallowing, especially liquids, and, with progression, 
difficulty handling oral secretions.
Speech Characteristics
Signs of involvement of both upper and lower motor 
neuron systems are again present. It is unpredictable 
as to which signs will predominate in a given case and 
what changes may occur through the course of the dis-
ease. A Mayo Clinic study involved 30 patients with ALS. 
The characteristics of the speech of this group were as 
follows.11
Phonation
Some patients showed symptoms similar to those shown 
by patients with pseudobulbar palsy, with much harsh-
ness and a strain-strangle quality associated with low 
pitch. The harshness associated with ALS may often 
have a wet, gurgly quality. Other patients showed signs 
more like those of the bulbar group, with poor vocal 
fold adduction resulting in breathiness and short 
phrases. Audible inspiration was also noted. Monotony 
of pitch and loudness as well as reduction of stress was 
present in most patients.
Resonance
Hypernasality was frequent in these cases. Nasal emis-
sion, although noted, was not prominent.
Articulation
Imprecise consonant production was a principal char-
acteristic. Vowels were often distorted, as were conso-
nants. The slow rate and reduced range of movement 
of the articulators greatly affected sound production. 
Hypernasality also contributed to phoneme distortion, 
and precision of articulation was often so poor as to ren-
der speech unintelligible.
Swallowing
The degree of dysphagia in patients with ALS varies 
greatly depending on the extent of involvement of the 
oral musculature and the type of motor system involve-
ment predominating. Evidence of poor lingual control 
is frequently found, with lingual stasis and aspiration 
before the swallow. A delayed swallow response may 
also be present, causing aspiration before the swallow. 
Poor tongue propulsion, weak pharyngeal contrac-
tions, and/or cricopharyngeal dysfunction may also 
result in pharyngeal stasis and aspiration after the 
swallow. Airway protection may be significantly better 
in patients with predominantly spastic (upper motor 
neuron) symptoms than in those with primarily lower 
motor neuron symptoms. The amount of aspiration 
may thus be reduced in these patients despite a severe 
dysarthria.
Dysphagia usually parallels or follows the loss of 
speech. Managing secretions and maintaining appro-
priate amounts of fluid intake often are huge chal-
lenges for ALS patients.
Box 8-3 presents an overview of ALS, the most com-
mon example of mixed upper and motor neuron 
lesions.
	•	 Most common example of mixed upper and lower 
motor neuron lesions; also known as Lou Gehrig’s 
disease
	•	 Causes progressive motor neuron degeneration; 
usually appears in fifth decade; etiology un-
known
	•	 Weak muscles, hyperactive reflexes, and spasticity 
common
	•	 Weakness in lips, tongue, and palate with reduced 
range of movement and/or atrophy
	•	 Mixed upper and lower motor neuron symptoms, 
frequent hypernasality, and imprecise consonant 
production
	•	 Degree of dysphagia variable; usually follows or 
parallels degree of dysarthria
	
BOX 8-3   
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
167
Basal Ganglia Lesions: Dyskinetic 
Dysarthrias
The basal ganglia control circuit contributes to complex 
movements by integrating and controlling the com-
ponent parts of the movements and also helps inhibit 
unplanned movement. Lesions produce dyskinetic move-
ments and may yield two types of dysarthria, hypokinetic 
and hyperkinetic, as summarized in Box 8-4.
HYPOKINETIC DYSARTHRIA: 
PARKINSONISM
The most common disease associated with hypokinetic 
dysarthria is Parkinson’s disease. This disorder is char-
acterized by degenerative changes in the substantia 
nigra, which cause a deficiency in the chemical neu-
rotransmitter dopamine in the caudate nucleus and 
putamen.
Etiology
Parkinson’s disease (PD) usually is idiopathic (i.e., 
spontaneous, not caused by another disease), but par-
kinsonism (or Parkinson-like symptoms) can be caused 
by carbon monoxide poisoning, arteriosclerosis, man-
ganese poisoning, and some tranquilizing drugs (e.g., 
prochlorperazine [Compazine], trifluoperazine [Stela-
zine], and haloperidol [Haldol]).
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
The three cardinal features of parkinsonism are tremor, 
rigidity, and bradykinesia.20 A tremor may be present at 
rest that tends to subside on movement and is absent 
during sleep. It is often called a pill-rolling tremor 
because of the pattern of movement of the fingers, as if 
rolling a small pill between the thumb and the fingers. 
Rigidity is a common characteristic and is elicited by pas-
sive movement of the limb, which induces involuntary 
contractions in the muscle being stretched. The rigidity 
Hypokinetic Dysarthria: Parkinsonism
	•	 Parkinson’s disease: most common disease associ-
ated with hypokinetic dysarthria; usually  
idiopathic
	•	 Three cardinal features: tremor, rigidity, and 
­bradykinesia
	•	 Slow rate of movement of tongue, lips, and palate
	•	 Speech varies considerably with pathology, but 
hypophonia and accelerated speech rate are key 
features in most patients
	•	 Dysphagic symptoms in all four stages of  
swallow
Hyperkinetic Dysarthria
Essential Tremor
	•	 Encountered as organic voice tremor when larynx 
involved; may be pure with no other tremor present
	•	 Regular alteration of pitch and loudness noted in 
mild cases; in severe cases, voice stoppage
Chorea
	•	 Two major types: Sydenham’s chorea (childhood 
disease) and Huntington’s chorea (progressive and 
fatal genetic disease)
	•	 Huntington’s characterized by dementia and invol-
untary movements
	•	 Variable presence of hypotonia and involuntary 
movement
	•	 Harsh, strained-strangled voice quality common, 
along with transient breathiness, excessive loudness, 
and problems with pitch; often imprecise conso-
nants and distorted vowels
	•	 Dysphagia common in Huntington’s; oral swallow-
ing stages significantly affected
Dystonia and Athetosis
	•	 Classified as the slow hyperkinesias; no well-estab-
lished etiologies
	•	 Dystonic (with excessive tone) trunk, neck, and 
proximal limb parts; athetotic (writhing) move-
ments of arms, face, and trunk
	•	 Dystonia: harsh, strained-strangled voice, imprecise 
consonants, vowel distortion, hypernasality, and 
velar control
	•	 Athetosis: excessively loud or breathy; problems 
with jaw, tongue, and lip movement
	•	 Limited information on dysphagia
Tardive Dyskinesia
	•	 Caused by long-term use of phenothiazines and 
similar classes of drugs
	•	 Choreiform, myoclonic, peculiar rhythmic move-
ments and abnormal oral movement
	•	 Usually mild speech disorders
	•	 Possible poor coordination in any stage of swallow
	
BOX 8-4   
Basal Ganglia Lesions

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
168
may be smooth or intermittent (referred to as cogwheel 
rigidity). ­Bradykinesia is defined as reduced speed of 
movement of a muscle through its range. Hypokinesia, 
or reduced amplitude of movement, is a prime charac-
teristic as well. Figure 8-3 depicts characteristic postur-
ing and tremor of Parkinson’s disease.
Dementia is a correlate of Parkinson’s disease, 
with an incidence between 15% and 40%.4 Language 
characteristics of this dementia include impaired 
receptive vocabulary, difficulty in comprehending the 
meanings of ambiguous sentences, impaired ability to 
describe objects verbally, and impaired ability to iden-
tify a speaker’s intention. Discourse comprehension is 
certainly at risk.32
Other features of parkinsonism are referred to as 
minor, but at least one of these “minor” findings should 
be present for the diagnosis to be made. These fea-
tures include micrographia, which is the tendency for 
the height of the handwritten letters to get smaller as 
the person writes. Excessive salivation and a dysphonia, 
described later in this chapter, may be present. The par-
kinsonian facies is described as a masked facies, with 
little movement used in facial expression. The parkin-
sonian posture is stooped and leaning slightly forward. 
A characteristic gait, called a festinating gait, may also 
be present that involves short, slow, shuffling steps.
Treatment for parkinsonism usually involves prescrip-
tion of a dopamine agonist drug and may include speech 
therapy, physical therapy, and, in some cases, surgery.42 
Until recently, most drugs contained a chemical called 
l-dopa such as carbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet) or bro-
mocriptine (Parlodel). Other dopamine agonists and 
other drugs that potentiate the effect of levodopa are now 
available. A surgical procedure called deep brain stimula-
tion (DBS) has been used successfully to treat associated 
tremor, rigidity, slowness, and problems with walking in 
PD. It has also been used to treat symptoms of essential 
tremor and dystonia.35 In DBS a surgically implanted 
battery-operated medical device called an implantable 
pulse generator is placed in the brain. In Parkinson’s dis-
ease the target area is most often the subthalamic nucleus, 
although implantation in the GPi is not uncommon. 
The mechanism through which stimulation affects neu-
rotransmission in different brain regions has not been 
determined. It appears that the postsynaptic effect of the 
cortical stimulation results from activation of the efferent 
axons themselves rather than activation of the cell body 
and that abnormal signaling to the sensorimotor cortex is 
blocked.34,35 The best candidates for DBS are patients who 
show improvement on l-dopa or similar medications. DBS 
does not cure the disease and does not slow neurodegen-
eration, but it can provide substantial relief for some. Phys-
ical therapy and speech therapy are also often prescribed 
for persons with Parkinson’s disease, with techniques such 
as the methodology called Lee Silverman Voice Ther-
apy (LSVT) having shown much promise for improving 
speech and voice production in selected patients.38
Oral Musculature
Frequently the standard oral examination yields only 
slow rate of movement of the lips and tongue as the 
major finding, with some reduced range of movement. 
Palatal movement may be sluggish.
Diadochokinetic rate testing may yield the most 
interesting information. When a patient is asked to 
execute the syllable repetition for the diadochokinetic 
testing, reduction of range of movement becomes more 
evident. The patient also tends to show an accelerated 
Tremor
Masklike facies
Arms flexed
at elbows
and wrists
Tremor
Short,
shuffling
steps
Hips and
knees
slightly
flexed
Rigidity
Stooped
posture
FIGURE 8-3
Parkinson’s disease. (From Monahan, F. D., Drake, T., 
Neighbors, M. [1994]. Nursing Care of Adults. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders.)

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
169
or rapid rate of speaking. As repetition continues, con-
striction for consonant production may lessen, and syl-
lables may seem to run together. Some patients may use 
so little movement that, combined with a rapid rate, no 
differentiation can be made between syllables and more 
of a humming or whirring sound is heard.
Speech Characteristics
The speech of patients with Parkinson’s disease varies 
tremendously depending on the stage of the disease 
and the effectiveness of medication. A study of the vocal 
tract characteristics of 200 patients with Parkinson’s dis-
ease helped quantify and describe certain features of 
this disorder.26 Only 11%, or 22 of the patients, were 
found to have no vocal tract problems.
Phonation
Laryngeal disorders were found to be present in 89% of 
the patients in the study by Logemann et  al.26 Hoarse-
ness was the major perceived characteristic, occurring in 
45% of the patients. Roughness, breathiness, and tremu-
lousness also occurred. All patients, except one who had 
articulation problems, also showed laryngeal dysfunction.
Duffy11 notes that, even when not pervasive, a 
strained, whispered aphonia occasionally is noted in the 
midst of a breathy, harsh vocal quality; it occurs toward 
the end of a vowel-prolongation task and persists for 
several seconds. Dysphonia may, in fact, be the present-
ing and most debilitating speech feature in persons with 
hypokinetic dysarthria. Monopitch and monoloudness 
are also frequent characteristics of the vocal produc-
tion of these patients. Maintaining adequate intensity is 
quite difficult for most patients.
Articulation
A detailed analysis of the articulatory errors of the 200 
Parkinson’s patients in the study by Logemann et al.26 
showed that changes in the manner of articulation pre-
dominated over changes in the place of articulation.25 
Stop plosives, affricates, and fricatives were most affected, 
as well as the features of continuance and stridency. Inad-
equate narrowing or constricting of the vocal tract as a 
result of inadequate tongue elevation appeared to be the 
reason for these changes. Netsell et al.34 have called the 
result of this phenomena articulatory undershoot.
Resonance
Ten percent of the patients in the study by Logemann 
et  al.26 showed hypernasality. No regular pattern of 
hypernasality occurred with articulation or laryngeal 
disorders.
Prosody
Approximately 20% of the patients in the study by Loge-
mann et al.26 showed what the authors called a rate dis-
order. Furthermore, 10% of the patients were judged 
as using syllables that were too short, whereas 6% used 
syllables that were too long. Abnormally long pauses 
occurred in 2% of those tested. In other descriptions of 
rate and prosody, variable rate, short rushes of speech, 
and inappropriate silences have been noted as charac-
teristic. Patients with hypokinetic dysarthria are often 
described as showing prosodic insufficiency.
Compulsive repetition of phonemes and syllables, 
noted as dysfluency, has been frequently observed in 
patients with Parkinson’s disease. The presence of pali-
lalia has also been noted with Parkinson’s disease. Pali-
lalia is characterized by repetitions that usually involve 
words, phrases, or sentences and is usually associated 
with bilateral subcortical damage.
In summary, the typical patient with Parkinson’s is 
expected to have a phonatory disorder characterized by 
monopitch, monoloudness, and decreased intensity.
Speech rate is likely accelerated, especially during 
alternate motion rate testing and within segments of 
conversational speech. Repeated phonemes as well as 
inappropriate silences are noted.
Swallowing
Dysphagic symptoms have been identified in all four 
stages of the swallow in patients with Parkinson’s disease. 
The exact nature of the disorder is still not well under-
stood.24 The oral stage of the swallow may show a rocking 
pattern, with the anterior tongue repetitively moving the 
bolus upward and backward while the posterior tongue 
remains elevated against the palate, preventing the bolus 
from entering the pharynx and preventing initiation of 
the swallow response. Although this may last for several 
seconds and significantly lengthen the oral stages, many 
patients are unaware of the abnormality. Incoordina-
tion and tremulousness, with difficulty initiating tongue 
movement, are often a part of the oral stages in patients 
who do not demonstrate the rocking pattern.
Delay of the swallow response, causing aspiration 
before the swallow, often is noted in these patients. 
Other disorders include problems with soft palate func-
tion, poor laryngeal closure, and reduced pharyngeal 
peristalsis. Esophageal hypomotility or dysmotility may 
also be present.
Logemann24 notes that it is not unusual to find patients 
with Parkinson’s disease who have chronic aspiration, as 
demonstrated by videofluoroscopy study but few indica-
tions of aspiration in their history or other examinations. 
These patients tend to aspirate silently, without cough 
or other external signs, and self-report is often not con-
sistent with objective findings. Pneumonia is the most 
common cause of death in Parkinson’s disease, and in a 
large study of PD patients in nursing homes, the presence 
of aspiration pneumonia was found to present the high-
est mortality risk ratio of all the comorbidities.14 Much 
variability exists among individuals regarding onset and 
degree of dysphagia, but progression of the disease results 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
170
in a greater tendency toward development or worsen-
ing of dysphagic symptoms. Medication can have a posi-
tive effect, and consideration should be given to timing 
its administration with meals. Overmedication can cause 
increased problems, however. The effect of medication 
should be considered as a part of the diagnostic workup.40
HYPERKINETIC DYSARTHRIAS
Hypokinetic dysarthria and hypokinesia are related to 
reduction of movement from extrapyramidal system 
damage, but hyperkinetic dysarthria is related to increase 
in movement. The involuntary movement disorders of 
tremor, chorea, athetosis, and dystonia also result from 
extrapyramidal damage. The specific localization of the 
damage in these disorders is not well understood.
PATHOLOGIC TREMOR
Tremor can be classified as either normal or abnormal 
(i.e., pathologic) depending on whether it is associated 
with a disease state. Both normal and pathologic tremor 
may occur at rest, in static postures, or with movement.
Essential tremor (also called action, senile, or heredo-
familial tremor) is the tremor most often encountered 
in speech-language pathology practice. Essential tremor 
of the voice is known in speech pathology as organic 
voice tremor. In this condition the extrinsic and intrin-
sic muscles of the larynx may show tremor either inde-
pendently or along with tremor of other parts of the 
body, such as the hands, jaw, or head.
Speech Characteristics
In a pure organic voice tremor, articulatory and reso-
nance characteristics are normal and only phonation 
is affected. On prolongation of a vowel, the mildly 
affected patient’s voice has a regular tremor of alter-
ing pitch and loudness. With more severe disease the 
voice may simply stop, resembling the disorder known 
as spastic dysphonia. However, significant differences 
have been found between the two disorders in terms 
of regularity of voice arrest and accompanying char-
acteristics. Patients with organic voice tremor also 
demonstrate excessively low pitch and monopitch, 
intermittent or constant strained-strangled harshness, 
and pitch breaks.
CHOREA
Although there are other inherited or noninherited 
causes of chorea, there are two major diseases in the dis-
order group that are frequently cited. These are Syden-
ham’s chorea and Huntington’s chorea. Huntington’s 
chorea is autosomal dominantly inherited, and a child 
of an affected individual has a 50% chance of develop-
ing the disease. Onset is typically in the fifth decade, 
although a so-called juvenile variant and senile variant 
also occur. The cause is unknown, and the disease is 
progressive and fatal. Pathologic changes documented 
usually include loss of neurons from the caudate 
nucleus, pallidum, and cerebral cortex, with less-con-
stant changes in other areas.
Sydenham’s chorea (called “Saint Vitus’s dance” 
in ancient terminology) is a noninherited infection/
immune-related childhood disease that may follow such 
conditions as strep throat, rheumatic fever, or scarlet 
fever. The symptoms usually clear up within 6 months.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Huntington’s chorea or Huntington’s disease is charac-
terized by rapid, involuntary nonstereotypical, usually 
purposeless movements. They occur unpredictably and 
may involve any group of muscles but are more likely 
to involve distal rather than proximal muscles. Volun-
tary and automatic movements may be interrupted so 
that coordinated breathing and speech may be quite 
difficult. The limbs are hypotonic. Postures cannot be 
maintained. Cognitive changes accompany the progres-
sion of the disease eventually resulting in an associated 
dementia, and some psychiatric symptoms are also asso-
ciated, with depression being the most common.
Oral Musculature
The presence of hypotonia and involuntary move-
ment of the oral musculature is variable in chorea. A 
common characteristic of Huntington’s disease is the 
inability to keep the tongue protruded for more than a 
few seconds. Sydenham’s chorea often involves involun-
tary movements of the mouth and larynx. Even if little 
involuntary movement of oral musculature is present, 
speech will probably be affected by the movements of 
other parts of the body.
Speech Characteristics
In the Mayo Clinic study of 30 adults with chorea, the 
following problems were noted.11
Phonation
A harsh voice quality and/or a strained-strangled sound 
were found in many patients. Transient breathiness also 
occurred. Excess loudness variations were prominent 
as a result of the poor control of ancillary movement. 
Lower-than-average pitch levels, voice stoppages, and 
pitch breaks were other characteristics noted in various 
patients. Sudden forced inspiration or expiration was 
observed in some patients.
Resonance
Forty-three percent of the patients in the study by Darley 
et  al.10 demonstrated hypernasality. The interference 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
171
with resonance also contributed to articulatory prob-
lems, including imprecise consonants and short phrases.
Articulation
The difficulty of muscular adjustment yielded impre-
cise consonant production and, in 23 patients in the 
study by Darley et  al.,10 distorted vowels. Misdirec-
tion of movement resulted in a feature called irregu-
lar articulatory breakdown. Reduced stress and short 
phrases were also displayed by many of the chorea 
patients. Prolonged intervals and variable rates were 
quite prominent and contributed to the perception of 
prosodic deviations.
Swallowing
Dysphagia is noted to be a frequent symptom in Hun-
tington’s disease.21 Severity of dysphagia varies from 
patient to patient primarily because of the constantly 
changing postures and interpatient variability inherent 
in the clinical population. The oral stages of the swallow 
are significantly affected by the irregular and uncoor-
dinated tongue movements and changes in facial tone. 
Aspiration before the swallow may occur because these 
random movements prematurely push the bolus over 
the base of the tongue.
Irregular and uncoordinated movements of the 
vocal folds and the respiratory musculature as well as 
neck hyperextension may compromise airway protec-
tion. Pharyngeal peristalsis may be weak, and esopha-
geal dysmotility has been reported.
DYSTONIA AND ATHETOSIS
Dystonia and athetosis are movement disorders classified 
as the slow hyperkinesias. Movements are characteristically 
unstable and sustained, suggesting possible conflicts 
between flexion and extension of the muscles.
Etiology
Most of these disorders do not have well-established 
etiologies or focal lesion sites. Encephalitis, vascular 
lesions, birth trauma, and degenerative neuronal dis-
ease are often precipitating diseases. Most hyperkinesias 
show localized damage to the confines of the basal gan-
glia. Involuntary movement disorders are sometimes 
caused by the effects of drugs such as phenothiazines 
and related compounds, especially the more powerful 
tranquilizers.
Athetosis is a rare disorder usually seen as a form of 
congenital cerebral palsy. It is also seen as a rare pro-
gressive disease of adolescence, the cause of which is 
unknown, and as an accompanying residual deficit with 
hemiplegia after cerebral infarction. Localization of the 
lesion is difficult, but the putamen seems to be almost 
always involved.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Dystonia implies excess tone in selected parts of the 
body. Dystonia mainly affects the trunk, neck, and 
proximal parts of the limbs. The slow movements are 
usually sustained for a prolonged period. The move-
ments usually build up to a peak, are sustained, and 
then recede, although they occasionally begin with  
a jerk.
Athetotic movements are slow and writhing and are 
predominantly of the arms, face, and tongue. The move-
ments tend to be exaggerated by attempts at voluntary 
activity, which make voluntary movements clumsy and 
inaccurate.
Speech Characteristics
Phonation
The dystonic patient usually has a harsh or strained-
strangled voice quality. Some patients, although fewer 
in number, may demonstrate intermittent breathiness 
and audible inspiration. Monopitch and monoloud-
ness are also seen in these patients. Because of the 
involuntary movements, dystonic patients often have 
voice stoppages and periods of inappropriate silence. 
Excess loudness variations accompany the excessive 
movement. Voice tremor is also found among dystonic 
patients.
Phonation in athetosis is often significantly affected. 
The patient often has poor respiratory reserve and 
respiratory patterns. Both dilator and constrictor 
spasms have been noted in laryngeal functioning. Voic-
ing is often excessively loud or excessively breathy, and 
it is unpredictable and frequently poorly coordinated 
with articulation.
Spasmodic dysphonia (SD) is a chronic, task spe-
cific focal dystonia of unknown etiology.33 Aronson and 
Hartman2 discussed differential diagnoses for patients 
with essential tremor who had SD. The signs of SD also 
occur in cases that appear to be psychogenic or idio-
pathic. No single cause has been identified.
At one time this disorder was known in the literature 
as spastic dysphonia but has come to be more accurately 
referred to as spasmodic dysphonia in more current litera-
ture. This change helps clarify the fact that there are three 
forms of this disorder and that the physiologic basis for 
the disorders described here is not true spasticity. Thus 
the word spasmodic allows the perception that spasm or 
dystonia is involved but does not suggest only spasticity. 
The three forms of spasmodic dysphonia are adductor, 
abductor, and mixed. Adductor is the most common by 
far, but the other two forms are certainly seen, and dif-
ferential diagnosis is important to treatment.
Adductor SD is characterized by a strained voice 
quality with voice arrests caused by laryngeal adduc-
tor spasm. It is frequently associated with pain in the 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
172
laryngeal area. The interruptions to phonatory airflow 
are assumed to be caused by hyperadduction of the 
vocal folds, but indirect laryngoscopy usually reveals 
normal vocal fold movements.
Abductor SD is caused by laryngospasms during 
abduction of the vocal cords resulting in intermittent 
breathiness or aphonia. Both intermittent strained 
quality and breathy quality are perceived when there is 
a mixture of adductor and abductor spasms; the mixed 
form occurs in a smaller percentage of patients.
Rosenfield41 postulated years ago that voice produc-
tion in SD could be viewed as a primary problem result-
ing from abnormal movements in the speech motor 
system and could also be considered as resulting from 
an attempt to cope with the underlying movement dis-
turbance. The etiology of any type of SD is unknown at 
this point, but the studies of the pathogenesis of this 
disorder are supporting a neurologic basis and quan-
tifying the contribution of extrinsic and intrinsic fac-
tors. Childs and colleagues7 found evidence to suggest 
that extensive voice use under stress may be related to 
adductor SD. It is evident in the literature that further 
studies on the pathology and the psychological factors 
related to SD are needed.7,45
Treatment of SD is controversial, and although vari-
ous treatments have been shown to be successful, no 
single treatment has been discovered. The injection 
of the neurotoxin botulinum (BTX) into the affected 
muscle(s) of the vocal cord has been used successfully 
in the treatment of SD for more than 30 years now.29 
Initially the treatment was used only for adductor SD, 
but it has now also been used successfully in the treat-
ment of the abductor type.33
Selective adductor denervation surgery (SLAD-R)16 
involves removing some of the thin muscle fibers that 
make up the thyroarytenoid muscle of the vocal folds. 
This reduces the closing force and alleviates the tight 
spasm involved in adductor SD. It is not used frequently 
now but is considered a good option if BTX injections 
fail or wear off.33
Articulation
As might be predicted, the articulation of patients with 
these involuntary movement disorders is highly variable, 
with a range of severity from slight distortion to unintel-
ligible. The dystonic patients of the Mayo Clinic study 
demonstrated prominent articulation imprecision of 
consonant production.9 Results also showed vowel dis-
tortion and irregular breakdown of articulation. Short 
phrases were noted with prolonged intervals. Prolonga-
tion of phonemes and variability of rate were also fre-
quently observed. Reduction of stress was a relatively 
prominent characteristic of speech production.
Kent and Netsell19 and Platt et  al.36 have inves-
tigated the articulation of athetoid adults by using 
cinefluorographic and intelligibility measures. The stud-
ies found that athetoid speech is frequently reduced in 
intelligibility as a result of articulation problems. Kent 
and Netsell19 found large ranges of jaw movement, 
inappropriate tongue positioning, prolonged transition 
time, and retruding of the lower lip. Platt et al.36 found 
particular difficulty with accuracy of anterior tongue 
placement, reduced precision of fricatives and affrica-
tives, and inability to achieve extreme positions in vowel 
formation. They found place and voicing errors to be 
predominant, particularly in final consonants.
Resonance
Of the 30 dystonic patients studied by the Mayo Clinic, 
11 were found to show hypernasality.9 In the Kent and 
Netsell19 cinefluorographic study of athetoid adults, 
all subjects had trouble achieving velopharyngeal clo-
sure. The most severe problem, however, was velar 
control. Instability of velar position was frequently 
noted. The velum sometimes moved inappropriately, 
causing a loss of closure, or in some cases the velum 
showed repetitive movements that were not related to 
respiration.
Swallowing
Dysphagia in dystonic patients has been described on 
a limited basis in the literature. Bosma et al.3 describe 
difficulty with lip control and lingual coordination in a 
patient with drug-induced bulbar and cervical dystonia. 
The patient had difficulty holding food in the mouth 
and controlling it to prevent premature entrance into 
the pharynx. The pharyngeal stage was normal in this 
group’s patients.
Pharyngeal stage efficiency may depend on the pos-
turing of the head and neck. A pulling of the neck to 
the side or a hyperextension often occurs, which may 
cause stasis and perhaps aspiration if the airway cannot 
be protected during the prolonged posturing.
TARDIVE DYSKINESIA
Another movement disorder resulting from extrapyra-
midal damage is tardive dyskinesia, which is attribut-
able to the long-term use of phenothiazines and similar 
drugs. Symptoms include choreiform, myoclonic, and 
peculiar rhythmic movements, with a high incidence of 
abnormal movements in the oral region. Constant ran-
dom movements of the lips and tongue may be found, 
with a frequent “fly catcher’s” movement of the tongue 
in which the tongue involuntarily moves in and out 
of the mouth. Velar movement may also be involved. 
Intelligibility is variably affected, with some patients 
becoming unintelligible because of the random move-
ments. Most patients, however, have only a mild speech 
disorder.

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
173
The random movements may result in poor coordi-
nation in any of the four stages of swallowing. Pocket-
ing of food; pharyngeal stasis; and aspiration before, 
during, and after the swallow may be found on study 
of the dysphagia. Reflux of food may be a result of 
esophageal discoordination. Decreased sensation 
may also result in lack of reflexive cough or silent 
aspiration.
The Cerebellum and Cerebellar 
Pathway Lesions
ATAXIC DYSARTHRIA
As noted, the cerebellum serves as an important cen-
ter for the integration or coordination of sensory and 
motor activities. It receives fibers from the motor and 
sensory cortex either directly or through intervening 
nuclei. Damage to the cerebellum and/or its pathways 
causes a disorder called ataxia, and the motor speech 
symptoms yield an ataxic dysarthria.
Etiology
Ataxic dysarthria is caused by damage at some point 
in the cerebellar control circuit. Damage may occur 
localized to the cerebellum alone or may be part of 
more generalized damage affecting several systems. 
Causes include degenerative diseases (Friedreich’s 
ataxia, olivopontocerebellar atrophy, and multiple scle-
rosis), stroke, trauma, tumors, alcohol toxicity, drug-
induced neurotoxicity (from such drugs as phenytoin 
[Dilantin], carbamazepine [Tegretol], lithium, or diaz-
epam [Valium]), encephalitis, lung cancer, and severe 
hypothyroidism.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Ataxia is a disruption in the smooth coordination of 
movement with failure to coordinate sensory data with 
motor performance. The hand may overshoot its target 
when reaching for an object. If the outstretched arm 
is pushed aside, it swings past its former position and 
overcorrects. Abnormalities such as these are shown 
when the patient is asked to touch his or her nose or 
run the heel down the shin. Rapid alternating move-
ments may be affected. Equilibrium is affected and gait 
may be impaired. Because alcohol affects cerebellar 
function, law enforcement officers will often use tests 
of some of these skills in sobriety tests (e.g., walking 
on a narrow line, alternating hands touching finger to 
nose). With ataxia, movement is slow to be initiated and 
slow through the range. Repetitive movements may be 
irregular and poorly timed, a condition called dysdi-
adochokinesia. Muscle tone is hypotonic. Intention or 
kinetic tremor (tremor during purposeful movement) 
is also present.
Speech Characteristics
Dysarthria with localized damage to the cerebellum has 
the following characteristics.
Phonation
The voice may be approximately normal or occasionally 
may show excessive loudness variations. Harshness simi-
lar to a coarse voice tremor may also be noted.
Resonance
Velopharyngeal functioning is usually intact, with nor-
mal resonance characteristics. Hypernasal resonance 
occasionally is found. Nasal emission is less frequently 
demonstrated.
Articulation
Imprecise consonant production, vowel distortion, and 
irregular articulatory breakdown mark the speech of 
ataxic dysarthria. Rate is usually slow, although some 
patients use normal rate.
Prosody
Prosodic changes are usually readily observable in 
ataxic dysarthria. A speech prosody characteristic 
termed excess and equal stress by Darley et al.8 is a pre-
dominant feature, although it is not found in all speak-
ers with ataxic dysarthria. This description refers to the 
tendency to put excessive vocal emphasis on typically 
unstressed syllables and words using a slow, metered 
pattern. Duffy11 postulates that in some patients the 
irregular articulatory breakdown may predominate, 
giving the speech an intoxicated, irregular character 
that overrides the measured aspect of excess and equal 
stress patterns.
Also contributing to the prosodic changes is the 
prolongation of phonemes and normal intervals in 
speech. The term scanning speech often is used in 
connection with ataxic dysarthria. This term was origi-
nated by Charcot5 to describe the speech of a patient 
with multiple sclerosis. Charcot described the speech as 
being very slow, with a pause after each syllable as if the 
words were being measured or scanned. This seems to 
be almost equivalent to what Darley et al.8 describe as 
excess and equal stress. Others have used the term scan-
ning speech to describe a different set of characteristics; 
therefore the term has not been found useful and is not 
recommended.
The term explosive speech also has been used to 
describe ataxic production. The Mayo Clinic study 
noted excess loudness variations with excessive effort 
in 10 of 30 ataxic speakers.8 This forceful effort and 
increase in intensity, especially noted after pauses, give 
the impression of explosiveness.
Damage to the cerebellum resulting in ataxic dysar-
thria is summarized in Box 8-5.

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
174
Other Mixed Dysarthrias with 
Diverse Lesions
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
The National Institute of Neurological Diseases and 
Stroke (NINDS) characterizes multiple sclerosis (MS) 
as a neuroinflammatory disease that affects myelin; 
researchers have also found more recently that the dis-
ease process attacks the nerve cell body and the axons 
of cells in the brain, spinal cord, and optic nerve.,37 On 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), areas of scar tissue 
(sclerosis) of varying size are seen in the white matter 
of brains of persons diagnosed with MS. It is an autoim-
mune disease in which the immune cells that are nor-
mally actively surveying for infectious or unhealthy cells 
in our body suddenly attack healthy cells. In the case of 
MS, these healthy cells are cells that make up myelin in 
the central nervous system. MS usually begins between 
ages 20 and 40 and, as with most autoimmune diseases, 
it occurs more frequently in women.
Etiology
MS is a complex disease, and its etiology has not been 
discovered. The favored explanation has been that (for 
unknown reasons) the immune system mistakenly iden-
tifies normal nervous system cells as foreign, but there 
is some research suggesting that the immune system 
may be fighting an infectious agent, like a virus, that 
is guilty of “molecular mimicry,” mimicking brain cells 
and that the immune system may actually be attacking 
brain cells that are unhealthy. There is active research 
into this and other autoimmune disease processes but 
no answers at this time. The NINDS reports that there 
appears to be genetic vulnerability as well as environ-
mental factors involved in MS causing demyelination in 
various tracts of mainly white matter. Figure 8-4 shows 
a magnetic resonance image of a patient with MS. 
With MS, the lesions involve the entire central nervous 
system, but the peripheral nervous system is seldom 
involved.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
Early signs are often mild or unnoticed. They may 
include transient paresthesias of the extremities, tran-
sient diplopia or blurring of vision, mild weakness or 
clumsiness, and mild vertigo. More severe signs of MS 
include marked difficulty with gait, dysarthria, signifi-
cant weakness, visual disturbances, nystagmus, bladder 
disturbance, and personality change caused by fron-
tal lobe involvement. Van den Burg et al.47 also noted 
impairments in perceptual motor functioning and mild 
deficiencies in intelligence, specifically in memory, in a 
group of 40 mildly disabled MS patients.
MS may take different forms. Some patients have 
a relapsing-remitting type of MS in which they have 
attacks (or exacerbations) from which they recover 
completely, especially in the early stages of the dis-
ease. In the later stages these patients may accumu-
late disabilities with each new attack. Other patients 
may have the primary progressive form that follows 
a chronic progressive course, which usually involves 
progressive spinal cord dysfunction. This form may 
	•	 Caused by damage to the cerebellum and/or its 
pathways (e.g., degenerative diseases, stroke, 
trauma, tumors, alcohol toxicity, drug toxicity, 
encephalitis, lung cancer, hypothyroidism)
	•	 Failure to coordinate sensory data with motor per-
formance, hypotonic muscle, and kinetic tremor
	•	 Irregular articulatory breakdown, slow rate, and 
readily observable prosodic changes; harshness, 
excessive loudness, and voice tremor possible
	
BOX 8-5   
Ataxic Dysarthria
FIGURE 8-4
Multiple demyelinated plaques (arrows) are seen in this 
magnetic resonance image of a patient with MS. (Reprinted 
from Nadeau, S. E., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. 
J., Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. [2004]. Medical 
neuroscience. Philadelphia: Saunders.)

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
175
evolve from the relapsing form or be present from the 
onset of the disease.48
Speech Characteristics
Duffy11 cautions that a mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthria may 
be the most common type of dysarthria associated with 
MS but should not be considered the only type found in 
MS. Because of the variable sites of damage in the disease, 
many different dysarthrias are possible. Spastic, ataxic, or a 
mixture of these dysarthrias occurs more frequently.
In a Mayo Clinic study of 168 patients diagnosed with 
MS, 59% were judged as having normal overall speech 
performance.10 Twenty-eight percent showed minimal 
impairment, and 13% had more severe impairment. 
Darley et  al.10 labeled the dysarthria they most often 
found as a mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthria.
Phonation
The most frequently encountered deviation was impair-
ment of loudness control. Harsh voice quality also was fre-
quently seen. Breathiness was noted in 37 patients. Pitch 
control and inappropriate pitch levels were also found.
Articulation
Approximately half of the patients were judged to have 
defective articulation. Although the cerebellar system is 
frequently involved in MS, only 9% of patients showed 
the irregular articulatory breakdowns characteristic of 
ataxic dysarthria.
Resonance
One quarter of MS patients demonstrated some degree 
of hypernasality.
Prosody
A characteristic called impaired emphasis ranked high 
in the speech of these subjects. Impaired features 
included judgments of rate, appropriateness of phras-
ing, pitch and loudness variation for emphasis, and 
increased stress on typically unstressed words and syl-
lables. Only 14% of patients demonstrated the ataxic 
characteristic called excess and equal stress.
Swallowing
If corticobulbar tracts or lower brainstem nuclei are 
involved, dysphagia may result in patients with MS. 
Merson and Rolnick31 report that dysphagia is common 
in MS. Because the types, severity, and rate of deterio-
ration in MS are so variable, characterizing common 
symptoms is difficult. Careful examination is critical. 
Sensory changes, including abnormal taste, have been 
reported for some patients.6
SHY-DRAGER SYNDROME
Etiology
This syndrome was first described by Shy and Drager in 
1960.44 It usually appears after the fourth decade of life 
and affects men more often than women by a ratio of 
3:2. It is a degenerative disease of the autonomic ner-
vous system that may also affect several components of 
the central nervous system. Prognosis is usually poor, 
although progression is slow.
Associated Neurologic Characteristics
With this disease, involvement may include the pyrami-
dal, extrapyramidal, or cerebellar system or some com-
bination of the three systems. Early signs usually involve 
autonomic nervous system disorders, including bowel 
and bladder incontinence, impotence, reduction of 
perspiration, and difficulty maintaining blood pressure 
when standing (known as orthostatic hypotension). 
Later symptoms include a gait disturbance, weakness, 
tremor of the limbs, and dysphagia and dysarthria.
Speech Characteristics
A study by Ludlow and Bassich28 comparing acoustic 
and perceptual analyses of Parkinson’s disease and Shy-
Drager syndrome documented the following charac-
teristics for the speech of seven patients diagnosed as 
having Shy-Drager syndrome.
Phonation
Strained-strangled voice quality and breathiness were 
noted in the voice quality of these patients. A wet hoarse-
ness was also identified in many cases. The voice was often 
judged too soft and mean intensity level was below normal.
Resonance
Hypernasality may occur if the involvement of the 
pyramidal system produces elements of a spastic 
dysarthria.
Articulation
Imprecise consonants are a predominant part of this 
dysarthria. A variable rate was also ranked high in the 
deficiency ratings.
Prosody
Although patients with Shy-Drager syndrome were 
shown to have poorer-than-normal ability to change 
fundamental frequency, their ability was better than 
that of patients with Parkinson’s disease. Acoustic analy-
sis showed, however, that the patients with Shy-Drager 
use their retained ability to change pitch quite poorly. 
The results are acoustically perceived as monopitch and 
reduced stress.
The dysarthrias associated with MS and with Shy-
Drager are summarized in Box 8-6.
Apraxias
Praxis comes from the Greek word prassein meaning “to 
do.” Hence, praxis means performance of an action. 
Performing an action that is not reflexive or automatic 

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
176
requires planning, timing, and sequencing. Recall that 
the motor association cortex of the brain has areas 
devoted to performing the action of muscle movement 
to produce speech, and we called these motor planning 
or motor programming areas.
Apraxia (also called dyspraxia) is a disorder of 
learned movement in which the difficulty with move-
ment is not caused by paralysis, weakness, or incoor-
dination of the muscles and cannot be accounted for 
by sensory loss, comprehension deficits, or inattention 
to commands.15 It has also been defined as a disorder 
of motor planning. Apraxia is a high-level motor dis-
turbance of the integration of the motor components 
necessary to carry out a complex motor act. Review the 
section on motor planning in Chapter 6 while studying 
the description of the disorders of motor programming 
described here.
Apraxias are important to the speech-language 
pathologist because certain types of apraxia may 
directly affect the motor programs of the speech mus-
cles. Other forms of apraxia often accompany the apha-
sias and other cerebral language deficits associated with 
the cortical motor association areas and the association 
pathways of the brain. The major apraxias are defined 
in Table 8-1.
Hugo Liepmann (1863-1925) is credited with eluci-
dating the concept of apraxia around 1900, although 
John Hughlings Jackson described an apraxic distur-
bance of the tongue as early as 1866. Liepmann used 
early disconnection theory to explain apraxia and dem-
onstrated lesion sites to support the variety of apraxias 
described.22 Because this text is concerned with clini-
cal speech and language syndromes, the apraxias that 
affect movements of other parts of the body are not dis-
cussed. Remember, however, that a limb or an ideomo-
tor apraxia may also be present in patients with apraxia 
of speech. Features associated with oral apraxia and 
apraxia of speech are summarized in Box 8-7.
Oral Apraxia
Speech-language pathologists recognize a nonspeech 
disorder of the oral muscles called oral apraxia, the 
inability to perform nonspeech movements with the 
muscles of the larynx, pharynx, tongue, and cheeks, 
although automatic and sometimes imitative move-
ments of the same muscles may be preserved. This 
disorder is not the result of paralysis, weakness, or 
incoordination of the oral musculature, and it may 
be isolated or coexist with an apraxia of speech. 
Oral apraxia is usually called buccofacial apraxia by 
neurologists.
Oral praxic disturbance must be differentiated 
from disorders of the motor pathways involved in 
Multiple Sclerosis
	•	 Unknown etiology, although studies suggest a viral 
agent may be responsible
	•	 Early signs mild; severe signs include gait difficulty, 
dysarthria, visual disturbances, nystagmus, bladder 
disturbances, and personality changes
	•	 Mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthria most common; 
frequent problems with volume and pitch control
	•	 Possible dysphagia with corticobulbar or lower 
brainstem involvement
Shy-Drager Syndrome
	•	 Degenerative disease of the autonomic nervous 
system
	•	 Early signs: bowel and bladder incontinence, 
impotence, reduction of perspiration, difficulty 
maintaining blood pressure while standing
	•	 Later signs: gait disturbance, weakness, limb 
tremor, dysphagia, dysarthria
	•	 Strained-strangled voice quality, wet hoarseness, 
hypernasality, imprecise consonants, and a poor 
ability to change pitch all possible
	
BOX 8-6   
Other Mixed Dysarthrias with Diverse Lesions
TABLE 8-1
Apraxias
TYPE
DESCRIPTION
Apraxia
A disorder in performing 
voluntary learned motor acts 
caused by a lesion in motor 
association areas and as-
sociation pathways, in which 
similar automatic gestures 
are intact
Ideomotor apraxia
A disorder in which motor 
plans are intact, but indi-
vidual motor gestures are 
disturbed
Ideational apraxia
A disorder in performing the 
steps of complex motor plans
Apraxia of speech 
(AOS)
A disorder of motor program-
ming of speech
Oral apraxia  
(buccofacial 
apraxia)
A disorder of nonspeech 
movements of the oral 
muscles
Childhood apraxia of 
speech (CAS)
A disorder in which motor 
speech programming is 
disturbed in childhood

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
177
upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron sys-
tems. A careful cranial nerve examination usually indi-
cates whether the disturbance is on the higher level of 
motor planning of praxis as opposed to being a lower 
level motor deficit associated with either supranuclear 
lesions or cranial nerve lesions. In lower level motor 
deficits of the central and peripheral nervous systems, 
motor involvement generally affects both voluntary 
and reflexive oral acts. Voluntary oral motor acts are 
limited by paralysis, weakness, and incoordination, 
and the more reflexive acts of mastication and degluti-
tion are affected as well. Supranuclear lesions are asso-
ciated with typical tongue deviation, hypertonic oral 
muscles, palatal paresis, hyperactive gag reflex, and 
lower facial paresis. Lower motor neuron lesions are 
associated with tongue deviation and atrophy, hypo-
tonic oral muscles, palatal paresis, and a hyporeflexive 
gag reflex. Facial paresis is hypotonic. Extrapyramidal 
lesions produce involuntary movements of oral mus-
cles, and ataxic movements of oral muscles are found 
in cerebellar disorders. Disorders of praxis will present 
different signs on oral and speech examination than 
these.10
Oral apraxia testing is completed on a spontane-
ous level to verbal command and on an imitative level. 
Commands requiring oral-facial movements such as 
“lick your lips” or “clear your throat” may be used. 
Failure to perform appropriately on a number of simi-
lar commands suggests a diagnosis of oral apraxia in 
brain-injured adults. Love and Webb27 used a 20-item 
informal test for assessing oral apraxia. Published tests 
of apraxia of speech usually include tasks for assessing 
nonverbal oral apraxia.
Apraxia of Speech
Apraxia of speech is an impaired ability to execute 
voluntarily the appropriate movements for articula-
tion of speech in the absence of paralysis, weakness, 
or incoordination of the speech musculature. In 1900 
Liepmann22 discussed a form of apraxia that could be 
localized to the speech muscles; some 40 years earlier, 
Broca described elements of this disorder as part of 
aphemia. Aphemia, the defect in speech and language 
that Broca believed resulted from damage to the third 
left frontal convolution of the brain, has become known 
as Broca’s aphasia. The disorder is marked by effort-
ful groping for articulatory movements produced in 
an apparently trial-and-error manner. Articulation on 
repeated utterances is inconsistent. Speech is dyspro-
sodic, often characterized by great difficulty in initiat-
ing utterances. A developmental form of verbal apraxia 
is known as childhood apraxia of speech (see Chapter 
12). The current discussion concerns acquired apraxia 
of speech in adults.
Oral apraxia and speech apraxia may appear inde-
pendently or coexist. Oral apraxia may be the basis 
of a speech apraxia. Speech apraxia may appear in 
a pure form but is most often accompanied by a lan-
guage disorder, as seen in classic Broca’s aphasia. 
Some neurologists and speech-language pathologists 
deny that what is called apraxia of speech is a pure 
disorder of praxis. They view the apraxic elements in 
Broca’s aphasia as more of a linguistic problem than 
a motor problem. Evidence is not yet available to 
resolve the issue.
If the speech-language pathologist is presented with 
a case that appears to be a pure speech apraxia, it must 
be differentiated from dysarthria. In speech apraxia, 
articulation is impaired by inconsistent initiation, selec-
tion, and sequencing of articulatory movements; in dys-
arthria, articulatory movements are more consistent, 
with distortion errors predominating. Speech apraxias 
do not display consistent disturbances of phonation, 
respiration, and resonance, whereas persons with dys-
arthrias almost always display consistent phonatory, 
resonance, and respiratory disorders. With dysarthria 
there is impairment of nonspeech musculature, includ-
ing paralysis, weakness, involuntary movement, and/
or ataxia. Persons affected by apraxia of speech do not 
have these neurologic impairments of the oral muscula-
ture or if they are present, the apraxia is not the cause 
of these deficits.
Oral Apraxia
	•	 Inability to perform nonspeech movements with 
muscles of the larynx, pharynx, tongue, and cheeks
	•	 Paralysis, significant weakness, or incoordination of 
oral musculature not noted on examination
	•	 Affects voluntary and sometimes imitative move-
ments; reflexive preserved
Apraxia of Speech
	•	 Impaired ability to execute speech movements 
voluntarily in the absence of paralysis, weakness, 
or incoordination of speech musculature
	•	 May appear independent or in conjunction with 
oral apraxia
	•	 Most often associated with Broca’s aphasia
	•	 Speech impaired by inconsistent initiation, selec-
tion, and sequencing of articulatory movements; 
no consistent disturbances of phonation, respira-
tion, and resonance; no related neurologic impair-
ments of oral musculature
	
BOX 8-7   
Apraxias

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
178
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 Of the acquired neurogenic communication 
disorders seen in large speech-language pathol-
ogy practices, the majority are likely to be motor 
speech disorders.
	•	 Dysarthria and apraxia of speech are the two pri-
mary classifications of motor speech disorders.
	•	 Dysarthria implies true organically based paralysis, 
weakness, or incoordination of the oral muscu-
lature that results in distortion of speech and/or 
difficulty with feeding or swallowing.
	•	 Apraxia of speech is a sensorimotor disorder of 
motor programming of the speech musculature for 
the production of speech. The primary symptoms 
are not the result of weakness, paralysis, or incoor-
dination of the oral musculature.
	•	 The evaluation of a patient with suspected motor 
speech disorder should include assessment of hear-
ing and language (to rule out other causes of the 
communication problem or to define accompanying 
problems), an oral-motor examination, speech-
production tasks, and a screening or full assessment 
of feeding and swallowing.
	•	 The Mayo Clinic classification system categorized 
the dysarthrias into six major classes: spastic, flac-
cid, hypokinetic, hyperkinetic, ataxic, and mixed. 
Unilateral upper motor neuron dysarthria has been 
added more recently as a separate type. Each of 
these dysarthrias is associated with disorders or dis-
eases affecting certain parts of the motor system. 
Each has associated classic perceptual features that 
the student should learn.
	•	 Apraxia of speech also is associated with damage 
to the motor speech planning areas of the motor 
cortex and also has certain perceptual features that 
should be learned.
	•	 Other diseases and disorders produce dysarthrias but 
were not included in the discussion of the more com-
mon disorders. These can be found in Table 8-2.
TABLE 8-2
Other Neurologic Diseases Associated with Dysarthria
NAME
ETIOLOGY
SPEECH SYMPTOMS
Bell’s palsy
Inflammation or lesion of cranial 
nerve VII
Slurring caused by unilateral weakness of labial 
muscles
Polyneuritis
Follows infections or may be caused 
by diabetes or alcohol abuse
Flaccid dysarthria
Hemiballismus
Lesions of subthalamic nucleus
Hyperkinetic dysarthria
Palatopharyngolaryngeal 
myoclonus
Brainstem lesions producing rhythmic 
myoclonic movements of the  
palate, pharynx, and/or larynx
Hyperkinetic dysarthria, which is sometimes only 
noted on vowel prolongation
Gilles de la Tourette’s 
syndrome
No known etiology
Hyperkinetic dysarthria with spontaneous, uncon-
trolled vocalizations such as barking, grunting, throat 
clearing, snorting; echolalia and coprolalia (obscene 
language without provocation) may be present
Olivopontocerebellar 
atrophy
Degeneration of olivary, pontine, 
and cerebellar nuclei
Mixed dysarthria of hypokinetic, spastic, and  
ataxic types
Progressive supranuclear 
palsy
Neuronal atrophy in brainstem and 
cerebellar structures
Mixed dysarthria, which may include hypokinetic, 
spastic, and ataxic types

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
179
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Alberts, M. J., Horner, J., Gray, I., & Brazer, S. R. (1992). 
Aspiration after stroke: Lesion analysis by brain MRI. Dys-
phagia, 7, 170–173.
	 2.	 Aronson, A. E., & Hartman, D. E. (1981). Adductor spas-
tic dysphonia as a sign of essential (voice) tremor. Journal 
of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 46, 52–58.
	 3.	 Bosma, J., Geoffrey, V., Thach, B., Weiffenbach, J., Ka-
vanagh, I., & Orr, W. (1982). A pattern of medication 
induced persistent bulbar and cervical dystonia. Interna-
tional Journal of Orofacial Myology, 8, 5–19.
	 4.	 Brown, R. G., & Marsden, C. D. (1984). How common is 
dementia in Parkinson’s disease? Lancet, 2, 1261–1265.
	 5.	 Charcot, J. M. (1877). Lectures on the diseases of the nervous 
system. (Vol. 1). London: The New Sydenham Society.
	 6.	 Cherney, L. R. (1994). Clinical management of dysphagia in 
adults and children. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
	 7.	 Childs, L., & Rickert, S. (2011). Patient perceptions of fac-
tors leading to spasmodic dysphonia: A combined clinical 
experience of 350. Laryngoscope, 121, 2195–2198.
	 8.	 Darley, F., Aronson, A., & Brown, J. (1969). Differential di-
agnostic patterns of dysarthria. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Research, 12, 246–269.
	 9.	 Darley, F., Aronson, A., & Brown, J. (1969). Clusters of 
deviant speech dimensions in the dysarthrias. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Research, 12, 462–496.
	10.	 Darley, E., Aronson, A., & Brown, J. (1975). Motor speech 
disorders. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
	11.	 Duffy, J. R. (2005). Motor speech disorders: Substrates, differen-
tial diagnosis, and management (2nd ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
	12.	 Duffy, J. R., & Folger, W. N. (1986). Dysarthria in unilateral 
nervous system lesions. Detroit, MI: Presented at the annual 
convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association.
	13.	 Evatt, M. L., Reus, C. M., Brazer, S. R., Massey, E. W., & 
Horner, J. (1993). Dysphagia following unilateral ­ischemic 
stroke [Abstract]. Neurology, 43(Suppl), A159.
	14.	 Fernandez, H. H., & Lapane, K. L. (2002). Predictors of 
mortality among nursing home residents with a diagnosis 
of Parkinson’s disease. Medical Science Monitor, 8, CR241–6.
	15.	 Geschwind, N. (1975). The apraxias: Neural mechanisms 
of disorders of learned movements. American Scientist, 63, 
188–195.
	16.	 Green, D. C., & Berke, G. (1990). An in vivo canine model 
for testing treatment effects in laryngeal hyperadduction 
disorders. Laryngoscope, 100, 1229–1235.
	17.	 Hartman, D. E., & Abbs, J. H. (1992). Dysarthria associ-
ated with focal unilateral upper motor neuron lesions. 
European Journal of Disorders of Communication, 27, 187.
	18.	 Horner, J., Massey, E. W., & Brazer, S. R. (1993). Aspira-
tion in bilateral stroke patients: A validation study. Neurol-
ogy, 43, 430–433.
	19.	 Kent, R., & Netsell, R. (1978). Articulatory abnormalities 
in athetoid cerebral palsy. Journal of Speech and Hearing Dis-
orders, 43, 353–374.
	20.	 Kirshner, H. S. (2002). Behavioral neurology: Practical sci-
ence of mind and brain (2nd ed.). Boston: Butterworth-­
Heinemann.
	21.	 Leopold, N. A., & Kagel, M. C. (1985). Dysphagia in Hun-
tington’s disease. Archives of Neurology, 42, 57–60.
	22.	 Liepmann, H. (1900). Das Krankheitsbild der Apraxie (“mo-
torischen asymbolie”). Monatsschrift fur Psychiatrie und Neurol-
ogie, 8, 15–44, 102–132 182-197.
	23.	 Logemann, J. A. (1983). Evaluation and treatment of swal-
lowing disorders. San Diego: College Hill Press.
	24.	 Logemann, J. A. (1988). Dysphagia in movement disor-
ders. In J. Janokovic, & E. Tolosa (Eds.), Advances in neu-
rology: Vol. 49. Facial dyskinesias. New York: Raven Press.
	25.	 Logemann, J. A., & Fisher, H. B. (1981). Vocal tract control 
in Parkinson’s disease: Phonetic feature analysis of misartic-
ulations. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 46, 348–352.
	26.	 Logemann, J. A., Fisher, H. B., Boshes, B., & Blonsky, E. R.  
(1978). Frequency and co-occurrence of vocal tract dys-
function in the speech of a large sample of Parkinson pa-
tients. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 43, 47–57.
	27.	 Love, R. R., & Webb, W. G. (1977). The efficacy of cueing 
techniques in Broca’s aphasia. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Disorders, 42, 170–178.
	28.	 Ludlow, C., & Bassich, C. J. (1983). The results of acoustic 
and perceptual assessment of two types of dysarthria. In 
W. R. Berry (Ed.), Clinical dysarthria. San Diego: College 
Hill Press.
 C A S E  S T U D Y
A 48-year-old accountant reported excess stress in his 
life. He often made presentations to various companies 
looking to hire his accounting firm. For the past several 
months, he reported to his physician that he had been 
having difficulty speaking and swallowing. He described 
his speech as “sounding like I am speaking through my 
nose.” He also admitted to noticing mild tremors of his 
eyebrows and mouth. An oral peripheral mechanism 
examination revealed bilateral facial weakness, reduced 
tongue strength, and a hyperactive gag reflex, which 
was a new finding for him. After an extensive diagnostic 
workup, the physician diagnosed this patient with ALS.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	What type of dysarthria is usually present for pa-
tients with ALS?
	2.	What parts of the motor system are impaired with 
this type of dysarthria?

CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES OF THE MOTOR SYSTEMS  CHAPTER EIGHT
180
	29.	 Ludlow, C. L., Naunton, R. F., Fulita, M., & Sedory, S. E. 
(1990). Spasmodic dysphonia: Botulinum toxin injection 
after recurrent nerve surgery. Otolaryngology Head and 
Neck Surgery, 102, 122–131.
	30.	 Mao, V. H., & Abaza, M. (2001). Laryngeal myasthenia 
gravis: Report of 40 cases. Journal of Voice, 15, 122–130.
	31.	 Merson, R. M., & Rolnick, M. I. (1998). Speech-language 
pathology and dysphagia in multiple sclerosis. Physical Med-
icine & Rehabilitation Clinics of North America, 9, 631–641.
	32.	 Murray, L. L., & Stout, J. C. (1999). Discourse comprehen-
sion in Huntington’s and Parkinson’s diseases. American 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 8, 137–148.
	33.	 Murray, T. (2014). Spasmodic dysphonia: Let’s look at 
that again. Journal of Voice, 28, 694–699.
	34.	 Netsell, R., Daniel, G., & Celesia, G. G. (1975). Accelera-
tion and weakness in parkinsonian dysarthria. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 40, 467–480.
	35.	 Perlmutter, J. S., & Mink, J. W. (2006). Deep brain stimu-
lation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 29, 229–257.
	36.	 Platt, L. J., Andrews, G., & Howie, P. M. (1980). Dysarthria 
of adult cerebral palsy: II. Phonemic analysis of articulation 
errors. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 23, 41–55.
	37.	 National Institute of Neurologic Diseases and Stroke. 
(n.d.). Multiple sclerosis. Retrieved from http://www. 
ninds.nih.gov/disorders/multiple_sclerosis/detail.
	38.	 Ramig, L. O., & Dromey, C. (1996). Aerodynamic mech-
anisms underlying treatment-related changes in vocal 
intensity in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Research, 30, 798–807.
	39.	 Robbins, J. (1989). Swallowing and brain imagery in asymp-
tomatic normals and stroke patients. Evanston, IL: Presented 
at Swallowing and Swallowing Disorders: From Clinic to 
Laboratory, Northwestern University.
	40.	 Robbins, J., Webb, W. G., & Kirshner, H. S. (1984). Ef-
fects of Sinemet on speech and swallowing in parkinsonism. San 
Francisco, CA: Presented at American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association Convention.
	41.	 Rosenfield, D. B. (1988). Spasmodic dysphonia. In  
J. Jankovic, & E. Tolosa (Eds.), Advances in neurology: Vol. 
49. Facial dyskinesias. New York: Raven Press.
	42.	 Schultz, G. M., & Grant, M. K. (2000). Effects of speech 
therapy and pharmacologic and surgical treatments on 
voice and speech in Parkinson’s disease: A review of the 
literature. Journal of Communication Disorders, 33, 59–88.
	43.	 Schwendimann, R. N., Burton, E., & Minagar, A. (2005). 
Management of myasthenia gravis. American Journal of 
Therapeutics, 12, 262–268.
	44.	 Shy, G., & Drager, G. (1960). A neurological syndrome 
associated with orthostatic hypotension: A clinical patho-
logic study. Archives of Neurology, 2, 511–527.
	45.	 Tanner, K. (2012). Epidemiologic advances in spasmodic 
dysphonia. Perspectives on Voice and Voice Disorders, 22, 104–111.
	46.	 Teasell, R., Foley, N., & Doherty, T. (2002). Clinical char-
acteristics of patients with brainstem strokes admitted to a 
rehab unit. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
83, 1013–1016.
	47.	 van den Burg, W., van Zomeren, A. H., Minderhoud, J. M., 
Prange, A. J. A., & Meifer, N. S. A. (1987). Cognitive im-
pairment in patients with MS and mild physical disability. 
Archives of Neurology, 44, 494–501.
	48.	 Weiner, H. L., & Levitt, L. P. (1994). House officer series: 
Neurology (5th ed.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
	49.	 Zeigler, W., & von Cramon, D. (1986). Spastic dysarthria 
after acquired brain injury: An acoustic study. British Jour-
nal of Communication Disorders, 21, 173–187.

181
9
K E Y  T E R M S
cingulate cortex
cognition
constraint-induced 
therapy (CIT)
declarative memory
executive functions
graceful degradation
hippocampus
input fibers
intrinsic neurons 
(interneurons)
left fusiform area
long-term memory
metacognition
motor association 
areas
neocortex 
(archicortex)
neurogenesis
neuroplasticity
perisylvian cortex
phoneme
prefrontal cortex 
(PFC)
presynaptic inhibition
procedural memory
projection neurons
reasoning
reticular formation
selective engagement
short-term memory
spatial summation
summation
temporal summation
thalamic reticular 
nucleus
thalamocortical circuit
thalamus
transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS)
Central 
Language 
Mechanism  
and Learning
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Neocortex
Neural Networks
Brain Connectivity
Spatial Organization
Laminar Organization
Patterns of Synaptic Connection
Dendrites and Neurons
Basic Circuits
Brain Waves
Language
Neurologic Substrates of Language Processing and 
Production
Perisylvian Zone
Broca’s and Wernicke’s Areas
Arcuate Fasciculus
Angular Gyrus
Supramarginal Gyrus
New Understanding of the Structures Involved with 
Language
Subcortical Language Mechanisms
Thalamic Lesions
Nonthalamic Subcortical Lesions
Right Hemisphere
Role of Cognition in Communication
Changing the Brain
Neuroplasticity and Neurogenesis
Recovery in the Damaged Brain
Nothing defines the function of a neuron better than its 
­connections.
Marcel Mesulam, 2006

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
182
In the preceding chapters, a foundation has been laid for 
you to be able to identify where a brain structure is and its 
primary and associated function(s). Neuronal function as 
well as the primary motor and sensory systems have been 
introduced and discussed. If your instructor is following 
the textbook organization as written, we then began our 
journey into the clinical world of speech language pathol-
ogy, beginning with the motor system and speech and 
swallowing disorders in adults. We do the same for speech 
disorders in children in the pediatric section at the end 
of the text. We now take a simplified, but expanded, look 
at the cortical mechanisms underlying the extraordinary 
capacity of human beings to use and understand language 
and to learn and create new ideas. These abilities begin to 
form a foundation from birth and, barring injury or dis-
ease, continue throughout life. This chapter introduces 
current thinking regarding how neurons work together 
to accomplish this task. Also highlighted are the ana-
tomic structures involved in language processing, as well 
as some of the historically popular models of language 
underlying explanations of language disorders acquired 
from brain damage. The more common acquired adult 
language disorders and cognitive-linguistic disorders are 
discussed in Chapter 10. Language and learning disor-
ders of children are covered in Chapter 13.
Neocortex
The highest level of cortex in terms of cytoarchitecture is 
neocortex (or archicortex), covering approximately 90% 
of the brain. This vast brain structure is believed to give 
humans their unique cognitive abilities, including lan-
guage. The total area of cortex is approximately 2500 cm2, 
with a range of 2 to 4 mm in thickness; sensory cortex is 
thinner than motor and association areas. The thickness 
is determined by the aggregation of neuronal cell bodies. 
Until recently the commonly accepted estimated count 
of neurons was around 100 billion with an 8- to 10-fold 
greater number of neuroglial cells in the cortex. Using a 
method called isotropic fractionating, a group of Brazilian 
researchers4 found an estimated 86.1 billion (± 8.1 bil-
lion) neurons and 84.6 (± 9.1 billion) neural glial cells 
in the adult male brains studied, which called into ques-
tion the assumption of the massive number of nonneuron 
cells in the human cortex. This finding suggested that the 
ratio of neural to nonneural cells in the human brain is 
equivalent to that found in other primates. This chapter 
primarily is concerned with the work of the neurons.
NEURAL NETWORKS
Early neuroanatomists were acutely aware of and frus-
trated by the limitations of their knowledge of the 
brain, being unable to provide much detail about this 
exceedingly complex and fragile organ. Early advances 
were made using staining techniques that eventually 
allowed tracing of some fibers and the identification of 
association pathways. Clinicopathologic studies added 
to the knowledge by studying brain structure of patients 
with disorders and looking for relationships between 
the structures and pathways lesioned and the resulting 
behavioral changes. All investigation and theorizing in 
these very early days of neuroscience was constrained 
by the lack of knowledge about how neurons worked 
and how neural signals transmitted any information 
between them. Whole brain integration could not be 
understood without this knowledge though most neu-
roanatomists knew that there existed circuitry and 
neural networks that communicated in some fashion. 
Not until 1986 was any complete mapping of a cellular 
connection network done, this one on the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Still there was a lack of ability to 
record much about physiologic properties of the cells 
and their synapses. The cellular mapping breakthrough 
with C. elegans did not contribute much to the ongoing 
early efforts to map mammalian networks.
In the 1980s researchers began to create computa-
tional models based on both anatomy and knowledge 
of physiology, attempting to explain and potentially pre-
dict neural interactions. Also, in the late 1980s and early 
1990s, anatomic and physiologic studies of the visual 
cortex of the monkey produced early connectional 
matrices and promoted the idea that cortical areas were 
unique in terms of specific input and output fiber con-
nections and could be distinguished by these patterns.
In 1998, the concept of small world networks was intro-
duced in a letter in the publication Nature.59 The authors 
suggested a mathematical method in which dynamic 
systems or network models could be computationally 
“rewired” to explain the middle ground between net-
work connections organized in regular patterns and 
those seemingly organized in completely random con-
nections. They noted that the regular or random pat-
terns could not explain many biologic, technical, or 
social networks. They postulated that dynamic systems 
organized in a “small world” networks have the distinc-
tion of more local connections (or cliques) within the 
nodes of the network than a random network would 
and shorter path lengths between the nodes than a 
regular network would. This high clustering with short-
ened path connections was dubbed “small world” with 
an analogy to the “six degrees of separation” phenom-
ena.59 Examples were given of how this could explain 
or predict the operation, efficiency, and power of such 
varied systems as social networks, the spread of an infec-
tious disease, power grids, and the neural network of 
the C. elegans nematode. Since that time this concept 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
183
of small world networks as a critical component of neu-
ronal organization in the neocortex has been accepted 
as a viable model for neural connection, allowing for 
both specialized processing in local circuits as well as 
distributed or integrated processing over the entire 
network.1,50
A breakthrough in mapping large cortical networks 
came with the development of new techniques of dif-
fusion imaging. These noninvasive imaging techniques 
and associated computational methods were being con-
stantly refined, providing neuroanatomists opportuni-
ties for cortical mapping that had not been available 
before this development. A review article published in 
2005 introduced the term connectome and defined it as “a 
comprehensive structural description of the network of 
elements and connections forming the human brain.”50 
In 2010 the U.S. National Institutes of Health began 
The Human Connectome Project to map this network 
as accurately as possible. In this two-phase project, 36 
investigators from 11 institutions delineated methods 
for collection and analysis of data; the project then 
began collecting data on a pool of 1200 adults, primar-
ily from three of those institutions. The information 
collected is made freely available to the scientific com-
munity on a user-friendly informatics platform.39 The 
general public may see breathtaking images of some of 
the brain’s pathways in their website gallery.26
The study of brain connectivity involves looking at 
either the anatomic connectivity, statistical dependen-
cies (functional connectivity), or causal interactions 
(effective connectivity).48 Although these studies have 
generated much excitement and our knowledge is 
increasing almost daily, the study of connectivity is not 
without its limitations and challenges.24,49 At the rate 
of new discoveries in methodologies and computational 
models, these limitations eventually will be overcome. 
New imaging methods are constantly refined and new 
computational models are being used extensively by 
researchers in a number of fields (e.g., neuroanatomy, 
physiology, psychology, neurology, speech-language 
pathology). These efforts are aimed at contributing to 
the data on neural connectivity, understanding normal 
brain function, attempting to correlate it with behavior, 
and understanding what happens when there is abnor-
mal development or injury to the brain that changes 
behavior. The student should know, however, that 
these studies are complex and challenging. The limita-
tions of the methodology, the design, and the findings 
should always be acknowledged and discussed by the 
researcher.
BRAIN CONNECTIVITY
Cortical neurons, like all neurons, transmit and pro-
cess neural information through synapses and fiber 
pathways. Synaptic organization is concerned with the 
way neurons form connections, circuits, and units in 
the nervous system that mediate the function of differ-
ent regions of the brain.
What abilities do the neurons have in connection 
building? Obviously they are transmitters, sending mil-
lions of signals throughout the brain. They are also 
transducers, for example, converting sound waves into 
neuronal impulses. Neurons are switches, turning on 
and off or causing another neuron to switch on or off 
in response to a neurotransmitter release. They have 
the capability to encode information; they then express 
that code providing information about such things as 
spatial location, timing, or even higher level informa-
tion such as color. Neurons are thought to be minute 
storage vessels as well; connections at strong synapses 
are thought to temporarily store memory traces. And, 
finally, another important property of neurons is oscil-
lation. As a neural spike travels down the axon, neurons 
move back and forth, creating complex waveforms. This 
signaling can spread from one cellular array to another, 
resulting in areas or regions of the cortex that are busy 
sending and resending signals. These oscillations are 
the signals identified on electrophysiologic studies of 
the brain.
Connections between neurons result in pathways 
that run between them. Connections are made locally 
as well as outside the particular region, perhaps a rel-
atively long distance away. Essentially three types of 
neural elements make the connections possible. Input 
fibers synapse onto the cell body and/or dendrites or 
dendritic spines found on the dendrites. Projection 
neurons (also called principal or relay neurons) send 
out a long axon fiber that carries information signals 
to other regions. The third type is composed of cells 
concerned only with local processing within a certain 
region, the intrinsic neurons, or interneurons. Some-
times a projection neuron takes action locally and 
behaves as an interneuron; the distinction between 
the two is not rigid. Inhibitory interneurons have been 
shown to synchronize the firing of excitatory neurons, 
enhancing the probability of activation of the target 
neuron downstream. The relations among these three 
elements of synaptic organization vary in the different 
regions of the brain and determine the function of that 
region.
SPATIAL ORGANIZATION
Given the density of tissue in the cortex with the esti-
mated trillions of connections, as many as 1 billion 
synapses may be present per cubic millimeter of corti-
cal tissue.45 These connections form circuits, although 
they are not of a simple input and output nature. The 
nervous system is organized in a complex manner 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
184
from the molecular level to complex behavioral sys-
tems. This organization can be viewed in terms of 
levels of scale.48 At the microscale level, microcircuits 
are formed from small bunches of synapses between 
individual neurons. At the mesoscale level, networks 
or local circuits are formed in arrangements of col-
umns or mini-columns that connect those neuronal 
populations. Interregional fiber pathways that connect 
brain regions make up the macroscale level and result 
in systems of behavior. Figure 9-1 breaks this organiza-
tion down further. Microcircuits form dendritic con-
nections and subunits within the connections between 
dendrites of individual neurons. These neurons with 
their connections interact, forming local circuits 
(“small worlds”) and performing the operations of a 
particular region of the brain. These regions are orga-
nized with interregional pathways, columns, and lami-
nae. Neural impulses traveling by the interregional 
connections between these multiple local circuits pro-
vide for integration of this varying neural information 
resulting in behaviors.
LAMINAR ORGANIZATION
Not only is there columnar organization of the cor-
tex, there is also a horizontal laminar organization. 
You may remember from Chapter 2 that the fully 
developed neocortex is composed of six layers, with 
the sixth layer being the innermost. How the lami-
nae develop is discussed in Chapter 11. These cortical 
laminae are often broken down into subareas within 
the layer for the more finite study of their composi-
tion and physiology, but for our purposes we look only 
at their broad composition. Table 9-1 summarizes the 
name and some information about the composition of 
each layer.
PATTERNS OF SYNAPTIC CONNECTION
There is both specificity and variability of the anatomic 
connections at all three levels of scale.48 You find speci-
ficity in the connections between distinct neuronal types, 
in the branching pattern of the axon collaterals, and in 
the connections made over long distances between cer-
tain cell nuclei and particular brain regions. On the other 
hand, much variability exists in the shape of neurons and 
their processes, as well as in size, place, and connection 
pattern of different brain structures. Across species there 
is variability in the same brain structure. Across time in 
the same individual, variability will be found due to devel-
opment, plasticity, and, perhaps, repair. As Sporn48 notes, 
anatomic variability is most likely the main source of the 
functional variability we see in behavior.
The neural microcircuits are the most localized syn-
aptic patterns that can be studied. Chapter 4 presented 
two basic patterns of connectivity—divergence and 
convergence. These are important to remember when 
thinking about how information processing occurs 
within these circuits. Microcircuits are built of three 
types of elements: divergence, convergence, and a varia-
tion of convergence called presynaptic control.
To refresh your memory, synaptic divergence means 
that an action potential can trigger multiple excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials simultaneously, affecting many 
dendritic terminals at once. This amplifies the activity 
of a single axon. This kind of divergent synaptic action 
is found, for example, in the cerebellum, which demon-
strates great divergence, and in the sensory afferents of 
the thalamus. Another method of achieving divergence 
is also found in the nervous system. Axons branch into 
collaterals and give rise to multiple terminals, thus 
resulting in numerous synaptic contacts. This kind of 
divergence is common in the cortical cells.
Molecules
and
ions
Synapses
Neurons
Local circuits
Local
microcircuits
Dendrite trees
Interregional
pathways
Behavioral
systems
Dendrite
subunits
FIGURE 9-1
Levels of hierarchical organization in the nervous system. Arrows should be read as 
“­organize into.” Curved line connection indicates that local microcircuits are grouped to 
form dendritic subunits within the dendritic trees, which are part of the individual neurons.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
185
Synaptic convergence, on the other hand, occurs when 
multiple synapses occur on one postsynaptic dendrite. 
When this occurs, two kinds of summation, or additive 
effects, may take place. Temporal summation may occur 
in which the effect of the neurotransmitters may be 
enhanced, for example, if all synapses are excitatory. The 
convergence may also summate with the excitatory and 
inhibitory potentials canceling each other out, resulting 
in the resting potential being maintained. The integration 
of the excitatory and inhibitory synapses usually functions, 
however, to modulate the action; thus there is a change in 
potential, but it is not as strong as it would have been with-
out the convergence. Another kind of summation is spa-
tial summation, in which the varied sites of synapse along 
the dendritic surface of the neuron cause responses to rise 
in the different parts of the neuron. This may increase the 
possibility of more local mechanisms during activation 
from the site on one dendritic tree to another.
A third type of action that is similar to convergence 
is presynaptic inhibition, in which two sequential axonic 
synapses occur. One axon terminates on another with 
inhibitory action. When the second axon is then presyn-
aptic to a third axon, there is an inhibitory effect on the 
synapse that will occur on the postsynaptic membrane 
of the third axon. Box 9-1 summarizes the three kinds 
of connectivity patterns.
DENDRITES AND NEURONS
The complexity of neuronal processing is exemplified 
by the extensive variety of patterns of dendritic branch-
ing unique to different types of neurons. The different 
branching patterns are said to impose geometric con-
straints on activity. These patterns, combined with the 
different sites of input and the passive and active elec-
tronic properties of the membrane of the dendrites, 
account for the complex nature of the activity of den-
drites and consequently the neurons. This text does not 
go in depth into this complex organization of the den-
dritic input to the neuron. However, the fact that the 
dendritic tree is responsible for the variety of actions 
the neuron may undertake is important to understand.
Of note, the smallest functional unit within the 
dendritic tree is the dendritic spine, which is, as it 
sounds, a thornlike protuberance on the dendrite. 
Being quite numerous in the nervous system, they 
account for most postsynaptic sites in the brain, espe-
cially within the cerebellum, basal ganglia, and cor-
tex. Within the cortex most excitatory synapses are 
made onto spines, and an estimated one third of the 
inhibitory synapses occur there. Approximately 15% 
of all dendritic spines carry potential for both kinds.  
Aside from the obvious function of increasing the surface 
TABLE 9-1
Summary Description of the Laminar Organization of the Neocortex
LAYER NUMBER
LAYER NAME
DESCRIPTION
SPECIAL FEATURES
I
Molecular
Contains mostly horizontal axons and a few 
neuronal bodies
II
Outer granular
Contains a mixture of small neurons 
(granule cells) and slightly larger neurons 
(pyramidal cells); apical dendrites extend 
up to layer I and axons descend into and 
through deeper layers
III
Outer  
pyramidal
Contains primarily medium and large 
pyramidal cells; apical dendrites extend 
up to layer I and axons descend into and 
through deeper layers
IV
Inner  
granule
Contains stellate (starlike) neurons, smooth 
and spiny; no pyramidal cells
Primary target layer for ascending sen-
sory information from the thalamus
V
Inner  
pyramidal
Contains medium and large pyramidal cells; 
apical dendrites of medium size extend 
up one or two layers; large cells project 
to layer I
Large pyramidal = major source of 
cortical efferent fibers that send  
axons to corpus striatum, brain-
stem, and spinal cord; some corti-
cocortical connections
VI
Multiform
Contains an assortment of neuron types
Axons project to subcortical structures 
such as thalamus; also make corti-
cocortical connections

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
186
area available for connective integration, spines are theo-
rized to have significance for rapid signal processing.45 
The foundational study of neuronal functioning in Chap-
ter 4 discussed the basics of impulse initiation and synap-
tic connection, with the impulse being generated at the 
axon hillock and traveling down the axon to synapse with 
another neuron. Also discussed was the graded poten-
tial set up in the cell itself. To take this further, evidence 
exists that to various degrees electronic back-spread of 
this propagated current occurs back into the soma and 
the dendrites. This may be sufficient to activate dendrite-
to-dendrite (dendrodendritic) synapses, further facilitat-
ing or inhibiting action within that neuron’s local circuit.
Basic Circuits
The basic cortical neuron (usually a pyramidal cell type) 
is structured well for the integrative actions beginning 
to emerge. The typical cortical neuron has dendritic 
trees that are divided into apical and basal parts, with 
dendritic spines on both parts and different excitatory 
and inhibitory synapses occurring at different levels of 
the parts of the dendritic tree. It also, of course, has an 
axon that in most instances gives off collateral axons 
that synapse within the local circuit as well as at sites 
some distance from that region.
BRAIN WAVES
We have discussed mapping brain activity through func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), but there is 
another way of trying to “observe” brain activity, which 
is to map the oscillatory activity through an electroen-
cephalograph (EEG). Advanced computers have made 
it possible to separate and analyze the complex wave-
forms that make up the neural signals. The frequency 
bands are somewhat arbitrary but have come into com-
mon use and are now believed to represent distinct pro-
cesses coordinated by the brain.
Raw data from an EEG reflect activity of billions of 
neurons and are difficult to interpret when reading 
from the scalp even though waveforms can be identified. 
However, if the EEG signals are averaged over many tri-
als and locked to a specific point in time, the waveforms 
become more regularized and can yield much more 
information. This study is called event-related potentials 
(ERPs). Because it is noninvasive and the equipment is 
more accessible now, this technique is becoming more 
and more common in research in SLP (Fig. 9-2).
Learning
As you use your brain to study your brain, there are 
a tremendous number of neural events occurring 
Synaptic Divergence
	•	 Occurs when action potential triggers multiple 
excitatory postsynaptic potentials, affecting many 
dendrites; can also occur when axons branch into 
collaterals, creating multiple terminals and synap-
tic contacts
	•	 Acts to increase amplification of a single axon
	•	 Commonly found in the cerebellum, the sensory 
afferents of the thalamus, and in cortical cells
Synaptic Convergence
	•	 Occurs when multiple synapses fire on one post-
synaptic dendrite, adding activity from multiple 
axons to one dendrite
	•	 Two kinds of summation can occur at a synaptic 
convergence:
	•	 Temporal summation—effect of neurotransmitter 
may be enhanced if all synapses are excited or if 
resulting excitatory and inhibitory potentials cre-
ate a resting potential
	•	 Spatial summation—various sites along synapse 
cause responses in different parts of neuron
Presynaptic Inhibition
	•	 Occurs when two axonic synapses are in sequence 
and an inhibitory effect occurs on the postsynaptic 
membrane of the third of three axons
	
BOX 9-1   
Synaptic Connectivity Patterns
FIGURE 9-2
The use of event-related potentials (ERPs) is a popular non-
invasive technique to track brain activity in subjects of all 
ages. (From Haith, M.M., & Benson, J.B. [2008]. Encyclope-
dia of Infant and Early Childhood Development. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, Ltd.)

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
187
with new connections made and old connections 
enhanced or weakened. What is learning in terms 
of neural functioning? Learning is simply (well, it’s 
really not simple at all!) the brain increasing the 
efficiency of synaptic connections. Increasing the 
efficiency means enabling faster flow of neural sig-
nals from one neuron to another. Two of the ways 
our brains may accomplish this are by growing more 
synapses between the neurons or by enhancing the 
neurochemical supply of glutamate, the excitatory 
neurotransmitter, in the neural circuit to increase the 
speed of transmission.
When neurons begin to form connections in micro-
circuits and then in local areas and the connections 
are strengthened by repeated stimulation and neu-
ral firing, these connections and the pattern formed 
between them in a circuit become stronger. By stronger, 
we mean that they are more likely to fire when appro-
priate stimulation is present and they are more likely 
to fire together. In turn, when neurons fire together 
in synchrony, the connections between them are even 
further strengthened. What has come to be known as 
the Hebbian learning principle proposed by Donald 
Hebb in 194925 puts forth that assemblies of spiking 
cells learn an input pattern by strengthening the con-
nections between cells that fire at the same time. This 
resulted in the old saying, “Neurons that fire together, 
wire together.” Hebbian learning principle relies on the 
theory that synaptic connections are the physical foun-
dation for learning and memory. There is now much 
evidence gathered from modern techniques of neuro-
science that this principle is solid.
The synchronous firing in a neural circuit may result 
in a representation that we experience as a percept 
such as a word, a recognizable sound, a familiar shape 
or visual object, or a combination of facial features that 
we recognize as a certain person, for example. If the 
pattern of firing does result in a representation that is 
familiar or meaningful to you, it means that the particu-
lar neural input has been transformed across its input 
into an output pattern that the brain recognizes. A 
simple example is the transformation of auditory pho-
nologic representations into articulatory phonologic 
representations. This involves a number of systems (sen-
sory, cortical association, motor) with repeated neural 
signaling across those systems strengthening the con-
nection weights (or likelihood of firing together) in a 
particular pattern. All of the primary and association 
cortices in the brain are thought to be essentially collec-
tions of pattern associator networks, quite often work-
ing in parallel. This is where the term parallel distributed 
processing (PDP) came from that is used in explaining 
computing. It is a simple construct for describing the 
operation of the brain because the brain is thought to 
be much more advanced a system than any computer 
yet built. PDP has been seen as useful, however, in try-
ing to explain some of the aspects of neural networks.
What Parts of the Brain Participate Most 
Actively in Learning?
There are, as you know, different kinds of learning. 
Some learning appears to be undemanding and accom-
plished simply by making ourselves conscious of it—pay-
ing attention. Our brains are best at those tasks because 
we have evolved to interact with the things we come into 
contact with, problem solve in those situations, and, 
basically, survive. We can learn how to do things such as 
develop motor skills by repetitive practice of the proper 
movements with the proper timing and force until a 
motor memory is established. The type of learning that stu-
dents have to do, however, requiring recall of facts and 
consolidation of those facts into concepts and principles 
is different, and our brains have to work even harder! 
The parts of the brain that are involved may be the 
same, but they are taxed by the mental effort required to 
build the more diffuse synaptic circuits that will support 
consolidation and long-term retention of information.
We will take the task you are attempting to do now, 
to learn parts of the brain active in learning and use it 
to figure out the answer. First of all, to commit anything 
to memory (learning is a process of acquiring lasting 
brain representations that we call memories), we must 
attend to whatever it is, obviously requiring that you be 
conscious and awake. Thus that deep core of the brain-
stem, the reticular formation, must be actively channel-
ing sensory information through the thalamocortical 
circuit resulting in a state of awakeness. In learning, we 
are concerned with voluntary attention, not automatic 
attention (e.g., directing attention to the sound of a 
siren). Voluntary attention implies selecting stimuli and 
responses depending on the goals set; it is a “top-down” 
process.11 With the exception of the neurons out in 
the sensory periphery, selective attention involves activ-
ity of neural circuitry at all levels of the sensory system 
involved. Learning often involves visual, auditory, and 
tactile senses, and it is usually considered optimal to 
involve more than one sensory system. Once the sen-
sory information is relayed through the thalamus and 
on to the targeted primary sensory area, executive con-
trol systems in subcortical and cortical areas, particu-
larly the cingulate cortex, the parietal cortex, and the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) enable the brain to selectively 
attend to the stimulus. It has been suggested in some 
models that dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the mid-
brain may act to provide gating signals that instruct the 
PFC to maintain that neural activity, supporting the abil-
ity to sustain attention once the object of attention has 
been selected.51

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
188
Once attentional control has been established, the 
features of the thing to be learned must be analyzed, 
and a percept must be established with which a memory 
can be associated. When learning through reading, an 
accomplished reader already has the established input-
output circuitry in the neocortex to make sense of the 
shapes the visual cortex forwarded. The brain of a skill-
ful reader has automatized the steps necessary to read 
with understanding: recognition of the letters, the let-
ter combinations into words, the associations between 
the words and their meaning, and the association of 
meaning with the particular combination of words in 
each sentence. In neural terms, strong neural circuits 
have been established that will easily carry out the read-
ing task without that reader having to switch to controlled 
processing unless the reader happens upon an unfamil-
iar word.
For example, before this class, unless you had another 
class in which it was introduced, you likely had no asso-
ciation for the word dysarthria. You may try to sound 
out the word using phonologic representations stored 
in the temporal lobe and transformed into articulatory 
movements in the motor association areas of the frontal 
cortex. Even if you pronounce it correctly (and if you 
have no experience with the word, you are not sure), 
you find that there are no memory traces stored for that 
word. In that case, you may choose to read on, hoping 
there will be a definition provided in the context or you 
may go to the glossary or a dictionary. Those strategies 
are due to cognitive processes we call executive func-
tions—ruled by your prefrontal cortex. Your brain has 
learned over time what options are available to you to 
solve this problem and you employ metacognition, an 
executive function, to discern what usually works best 
for you as a learner.
Once you find how to pronounce this word and what 
it means, your brain can begin to learn it—that is, estab-
lish a memory trace associated with both the visual form 
of the word, the phonologic representation of the word, 
and the meaning(s) associated with it. Recent research 
on new word learning indicates that the brain may store 
written words as “pictures” in an orthographic lexicon 
in the left fusiform area, which the researchers referred 
to as the visual word form area.20 This research indi-
cates that the neural firing associated with recognition 
of the written word is to the word form as a whole, not 
to the individual phonemes and letters.
The associations that you learn for a word and com-
mit in the brain as memory traces form what SLPs call a 
semantic field around it. For dysarthria maybe such things 
as motor system, movement, speech disorder, a particu-
lar disease, a particular patient, or a particular teacher 
are associated. Episodic memories associated with the 
meaning, for example, in whose class you first heard the 
term, are likely consolidated in the hippocampus in the 
medial temporal lobe. The semantic associations, the 
word and the meaning itself are likely consolidated in 
the temporal lobe and the neocortex. Many things that we 
learn have both episodic and semantic memories associ-
ated with them. Over time as you have more experience 
with the word and concept of “dysarthria,” associated 
memories will be stored over a wide area of different 
brain regions as part of cortical network circuits. The 
larger the number and type of associations, the more 
likely you are to remember the meaning.
This system of memory storage in the brain in which 
the associated information is distributed across many 
cortical connections helps explain why a breakdown in 
processing rarely results in a total loss of a percept or 
concept. The loss of one component of this distributed 
processing network results in a reduced level of per-
formance, but not a complete inability to process. For 
example, in word retrieval failures, patients often know 
something about the word. They have not completely lost 
all information about it. This reduction in performance 
of the system is called graceful degradation in engineer-
ing terms and has been a useful concept in neural pro-
cessing. SLPs often use it to great advantage in treatment.
As you read and process the information, you are 
establishing concepts you wish to commit to memory. 
The sentences have been encoded in the temporal lobe 
and neocortex. In memory consolidation, meaning is 
begun to be established through association with previ-
ous learning, previous experience, and recent learning. 
This may involve sensory memories as well as episodic 
and semantic memories. The medial temporal lobe and 
the temporal lobe will begin to resonate with the neo-
cortex to begin establishing the memory. This involves 
synaptic changes. You may read the text again, you may 
take notes, you may read aloud to yourself; again, your 
metacognitive skills are put to work figuring out what 
typically works best for you. Your professor may go over 
the same material in class. All of these will help con-
solidate the meaning of what you have read because the 
synaptic changes that take place in the MTL, temporal 
lobe, and neocortex will be strengthened by the repeti-
tive firing in that circuit. The connections also may be 
adapted and enhanced by new connections to the cir-
cuit as you learn more about it or it makes more sense 
to you. Repetition and an increased number of asso-
ciations may eventually result in learning—establishing 
the concept in long-term memory. This requires pro-
tein synthesis. For more permanent memories or rep-
resentations of knowledge to be established there must 
be changes at the synapses such as growth of dendritic 
spikes and increased excitatory (and perhaps inhibi-
tory) connections that need to become efficient and 
more permanent.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
189
The consolidation of memories and learning takes 
place most efficiently while we are sleeping. A period 
of non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep called 
slow-wave sleep or delta sleep may be the most important 
period for consolidating explicit or declarative memo-
ries. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep may be the 
more important period for consolidating procedural 
memories. However, some studies on humans suggest 
that both periods are important as a two-step process in 
consolidation of memory for learning.51
The Power of Connection
The brain is the ultimate information processor. No 
computer built to date can process information, learn 
new information, and create from imagination with the 
efficiency and productivity of the human brain. Because 
of (1) the properties of the neurons and their links 
across association cortices; (2) the input from sensory 
mechanisms, limbic structures, basal ganglia, cerebel-
lum, and so forth; and (3) output back to some of these 
areas, processing in this supreme network is a two-way 
function. Processing is both from the bottom up and 
from the top down. From peripheral sensory input 
comes a forward press of converging neural informa-
tion, traveling through the intermediate subcortical 
pathways to early sensory association cortical processing 
areas (unimodal and polymodal association cortex) to 
higher and higher cortical association areas (supramo-
dal or heteromodal cortex). At each local circuit station 
are also back-projections occurring at the synapses onto 
the neuron, with this output from the circuits occurring 
in a mostly divergent rather than convergent manner.
This convergent/divergent action within neuronal 
circuits enhances or changes the strength of connections 
within the circuit and thus output to other regions. This 
allows changes in behavior. These neuronal operations 
allow translation of what is thought into what is said, writ-
ten, or signed—in other words, to communicate thoughts.
LANGUAGE
The contribution of French neurologist Pierre Paul Bro-
ca’s study of the brain of two patients with language loss 
was acknowledged earlier in this text. We credit Broca 
as well as a German neurologist, Carl Wernicke, with the 
first descriptions of the acquired language disorder we 
call aphasia. The discovery of specific speech-language 
areas in the left hemisphere of the brain had dramatic 
consequences for neurology. It prompted European 
neurologists to formulate numerous hypothetical mod-
els of the central language mechanism. Several of these 
models were highly speculative and based on limited 
evidence of the correlation between behavioral deficits 
and brain lesions. Even today the central mechanism 
for language is not completely understood, and it 
remains risky to attempt to formulate a model for nor-
mal and abnormal communication. However a model 
formulated by Carl Wernicke is generally conceded to 
be a powerful and still clinically relevant model of the 
central language mechanism. The model was later elab-
orated by Dr. Norman Geschwind (1926-1984)18 and 
Geschwind and his colleagues in Boston did numerous 
research studies on patients with acquired language dis-
orders finding this model to help explain some of the 
clinical findings. The Geschwind model is a connection-
ist conception of the higher mental functions of speech 
and language and as such it gives importance to the clas-
sic language and speech centers and highlights the sig-
nificance of the interconnection of the association fibers 
between major centers. Figure 9-3 highlights the impor-
tant perisylvian areas for language function from the 
Broca/Wernicke/Geschwind research. The model has 
been of significant use to clinical neurologists because it 
allows a high degree of predictability of symptoms asso-
ciated with specific lesion sites. In addition, the model 
also predicted possible aphasic syndromes that were 
not yet described by postulating possible lesion sites 
for those syndromes. In general the model has been 
confirmed by clinical studies. The classic language cen-
ters postulated by Wernicke and Broca continue to be 
confirmed as critical to language and comprehension 
through computerized tomography and other current 
objective neurodiagnostic procedures.
Geschwind,18 however, pointed out that some condi-
tions exist under which the model has not always fulfilled 
its promise. First, the model does not readily explain cer-
tain features of aphasic syndromes. Second, aphasic cases 
occasionally occur whose existence is not predicted by 
the model. Third, in a few cases the expected symptoms 
do not appear when an adequate lesion exists. As we will 
see, research has continued the work of Geschwind with 
advanced tools that have begun to help clarify the lan-
guage processing areas of the brain.
Research in acquired communication disorders 
began to feel the influence of the field of cognitive neu-
ropsychology as experimental psychologists developed 
information-processing models of cognition and lan-
guage in individuals with brain damage. Much of the 
initial work was done in the United Kingdom, mainly 
with investigations of reading (Colheart, Patterson, 
and Marshall, 1980).10 These models were testimony to 
the belief in cognitive neuropsychology that investiga-
tions of individual patients from a particular theoreti-
cal stance are preferable to comparisons of groups of 
patients categorized by the classic syndrome models.9
These information-processing models required that 
a task be fractionated into its different components. 
Individuals were then studied in such a manner as 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
190
to identify where during the process the breakdown 
may occur, resulting in inaccurate or inefficient per-
formance. The models usually represented the brain 
as a specialized computer that has domain-specific 
modules associated with defined neural structures, 
with input and output routes mapped as the model 
becomes more specific to function. The modules were 
usually represented as boxes with the input and output 
routes as arrows. These models appealed to clinicians 
because techniques for assessment and treatment can 
be adapted from them. As the use of advanced imaging 
techniques and electrophysiologic studies have begun 
to proliferate in literature relevant to speech language 
pathology, these models are also appealing because of 
potential relevance to neural circuitry and connectivity.
As imaging and electrophysiologic studies become 
more common and innovative, we are closer to com-
bining the information gained from them and com-
putational modeling for information processing. For 
example, see Figure 9-4, which is from a 2002 study 
on auditory sentence processing.
Neurologic Substrates of Language 
Processing and Production
PERISYLVIAN ZONE
The major neurologic components of language are situ-
ated in the area of the dominant hemisphere known 
as the perisylvian cortex. Table 9-2 summarizes the 
components of the language model as hypothesized by 
Geschwind and colleagues from the initial work of Wer-
nicke. This zone contains Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area, 
the supramarginal gyrus, and the angular gyrus as well as 
the major long association tracts that connect the many 
language centers. These areas are composed of primarily 
supramodal association cortex. We begin by briefly dis-
cussing the areas considered as “classic” in any model of 
language. We then take a look at some recent research 
that is expanding the notion of what brain structures may 
be involved in language and how they are involved. They 
do not detract from this original work by Geschwind and 
colleagues, but they certainly enhance our understand-
ing of brain function, although confirming the complex-
ity of this skill we humans have and, most often, take for 
granted.
Before describing these classic areas, describing the 
basics of language processing within them may be help-
ful. Nadeau et al.36 provide a simplified description of 
the processing in these areas. As previously mentioned, 
the smallest unit of language is the phoneme, many of 
which can be written as letters and all of which a speech-
language pathologist can write in phonetic symbols. It is 
thought that the cortex of the perisylvian area contains 
a distributed representation of phonemes and that this 
representation is in all the various forms in which they 
are used. There are motor, auditory, visual, and tactile 
representations. Depending on the communication 
system (e.g., verbal vs. signing), the representation of 
one type may be stronger than others because of the 
strengthening of the connections through use. These 
representations are supported by their links or connec-
tions with appropriate cortical processing areas within 
the perisylvian cortex. These links allow abstract rep-
resentations of phonemes to be translated into reality. 
The translation allows a sound to be spoken, a letter 
representation to be written or signed, and a spoken 
Arcuate fasciculus
Primary motor cortex
Primary somatosensory cortex
Primary
visual
cortex
Primary auditory cortex
Broca's area
Wernicke's area
FIGURE 9-3
Important perisylvian cortical regions of the central language mechanism. (From Brook-
shire, R. [2007]. Introduction to neurogenic communication disorders [7th ed.]. St. Louis: 
Mosby.)

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
191
representation of that phoneme to be correctly under-
stood as that particular phoneme as opposed to other 
ones. Another functional aspect of the perisylvian cor-
tex is to sequence these individual phonemes into com-
binations found in a particular language, the phoneme 
blends, syllables, and words that make up a language. 
This is the first step, but without a consequent linking to 
a particular neural pattern that corresponds to mean-
ing, these combinations would have no value. Research 
is supporting the notion that “meaning corresponds 
to the particular pattern of neural activity distributed 
across association cortices throughout the brain that 
actually represents a particular concept” (p. 544).36 
This is the fundamental concept underlying the neural 
association and function of the areas now discussed.
BROCA’S AND WERNICKE’S AREAS
The location and limits of Broca’s area in the frontal 
lobe are well defined by research from several sources 
(see Chapter 2). Research with transcranial magnetic 
stimulation suggested a functional division in this area.21 
Identification
of lemma and
morphologic
information
MTG
(anterior region)
Phase 1
ELAN
(150-200 ms)
Memory of
syntactic
structure
BA 44
(superior-anterior and
inferior portion)
Syntactic
structure
building
BA 44
(inferior portion)
ELAN
STG
(anterior region)
ELAN
Identification
of word
category
STG
(posterior region)
Identification
of word form
Phase 2
LAN/N400
(300-500 ms)
Memory of
semantic
features
BA 45/47
(semantic)
BA 44/45 (morpho-
syntax)
Semantic
relations
Left frontal
LAN
MTL
N400
Integration of
semantic and
morpho-
syntactic
information
Thematic
structure
Thematic
role
assignment
Phase 3
P600(600 ms)
General
memory
resource
IFG
Syntactic
integration
Fronto-central
P600
Centro-parietal
P346/P600
Processes of
reanalysis
and repair
Phase 0
N100 (100 ms)
Phonologic
memory
BA 44
(superior-posterior
region)
Phonologic
segmentation
and
sequencing
BA 44
(superior-posterior
portion)
BA 42
Identification
of phonemes
Auditory cortex
Primary
acoustic
analysis
ERP
components
Working Memory
Online Processes
Frontal
Space
Temporal
1000 ms
Time
0
FIGURE 9-4
Neurocognitive model of auditory sentence processing. The boxes represent the func-
tional processes, and the ellipses represent the underlying neural correlate identified by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), positron emission tomography (PET), or 
event-related potentials. The neuroanatomic specification (indicated by text in parenthe-
ses) is based on either fMRI or PET data. (From Friederici, A. D. [2002]. Towards a neural 
basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends Cogn Sci 6(2): 78-84.)

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
192
These experiments found that the anterior (pars trian-
gularis) and ventral (pars orbitalis) parts seemed to be 
involved in semantic processing, whereas the posterior 
portion (pars opercularis) was engaged with syntactic 
and phonologic processing as well as motor control of 
speech.
Wernicke’s area, found in the temporal lobe, rivals 
Broca’s area as a major component in a model of neuro-
logic language functioning. The function of the center 
is well agreed on, although its borders are sometimes 
disputed. In contrast to Broca’s area, which serves 
the expressive aspects of motor speech, Wernicke’s 
area is devoted to another major aspect of language—­
reception of speech. Neural structures in Wernicke’s 
area are assumed to allow for comprehension of oral 
language and underlie the formulation of internal lin-
guistic concepts.
ARCUATE FASCICULUS
Wernicke60 must be given credit for developing a lan-
guage model that highlights the connective association 
pathways between the frontal and temporal speech-
language areas. The major fiber connection between 
Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area is now generally 
agreed on to be the arcuate fasciculus (AF). The fibers, 
as described in Chapter 2, leave the auditory associa-
tion area in the temporal lobe, arch around and under 
the supramarginal gyrus, and pass through the parietal 
operculum. They travel forward as part of the long asso-
ciation tract known as the superior longitudinal fascicu-
lus (SLF), finally ending in Broca’s area.
ANGULAR GYRUS
Included as a significant component of the language 
model is the angular gyrus (AG) in the left parietal 
lobe. Joseph J. Dejerine (1849-1917) suggested that this 
area was one of two sites associated with the reading dis-
order alexia.
SUPRAMARGINAL GYRUS
Anterior to the angular gyrus is the supramarginal gyrus 
(SMG), curving around the posterior end of the sylvian 
fissure. Together with the AG, it is known as the infe-
rior parietal lobule. Sensory information is analyzed 
and integrated in this area, which is thought to play 
an important role in perception. Lesions of the SMG 
in the dominant hemisphere have been associated with 
agraphia, or writing disorders.
NEW UNDERSTANDING OF THE 
STRUCTURES INVOLVED WITH 
LANGUAGE
We know from fMRI studies that mature brains are 
organized into functional networks that work together 
to support cognitive and linguistic functions. Fair16 and 
colleagues studied the functional network organiza-
tion in subjects across an age span of 7 to 31 years of 
age. They found that like mature brains, the develop-
ing brain in children is also organized into this kind 
of network but that the “small world” network in the 
younger brains was organized primarily by anatomic 
proximity. As the brain matures, the proximal networks 
become less segregated and become more integrated 
into regional connections. That is, we develop from 
more locally organized neural networks to the more 
distributed networks discussed earlier.
When we look at the neural circuitry for language 
in the mature brain, we are quite aware of the regional 
connections forming the perisylvian zone. Friederici 
and Gierhan17 provide an excellent summary of the 
macrocircuits for language that have been suggested 
by fMRI studies. These circuits include the structures 
highlighted by Geschwind’s model but also include 
other regional connections not discussed in earlier 
literature as supporting language. Figure 9-5 shows 
the regions for distributed networks supporting 
language.
This model provides substantiation for Wernicke’s 
model from more than 100 years ago, which asserted 
that neural circuitry supporting language must connect 
brain regions in the inferior frontal cortex with regions 
in the superior temporal cortex. The studies reviewed 
by Friederici and Gierhan summate to support the 
TABLE 9-2
Major Components of the Central 
Language Mechanism Model
STRUCTURE
FUNCTION
Broca’s area
Motor programming for articulation
Motor strip
Activation of muscles for articulation
Arcuate  
fasciculus
Transmission of linguistic information 
to anterior areas from posterior 
areas
Wernicke’s area
Comprehension of oral language
Angular gyrus
Integrates visual, auditory, and tactile 
information and carries out sym-
bolic integration for reading
Supramarginal 
gyrus
Symbolic integration for writing
Corpus 
­callosum
Transmission of information between 
hemispheres

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
193
existence of two dorsal and two ventral pathways each 
serving different functions in language.
Dorsal Pathways
These two fiber pathways identified have been discussed 
by Geschwind: the arcuate fasciculus (AF) and part of 
the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). They are not 
easily distinguished and sometimes are placed together 
in discussion. The AF connects the posterior portion 
of Broca’s area, the pars opercularis (Brodmann’s area 
44), with the posterior and middle superior temporal 
gyrus (STG). Functional imaging studies using the area 
44 as a region of interest (ROI) for processing of complex 
syntactic sequences found direct fiber connections to 
the STG via the AF. This higher order function of pro-
cessing syntax was found for the AF in both artificial 
grammar paradigms and natural language and is sup-
ported by lesion studies as well.
The SLF was not mentioned as a critical structure 
in Geschwind’s model of language and the perisylvian 
zone. In the traditional model, the AF was an important 
structure and was considered critical for auditory to 
motor connection for sentence repetition. More recent 
literature has begun to contradict this and to discuss the 
SLF’s role in sentence repetition. The bundle of fibers 
we call the SLF has been found in macaque monkeys 
as actually consisting of three separate parallel com-
ponents, called SLF I, II, and III. This has been pro-
posed as true for humans as well,55 documenting fiber 
bundles deemed SLF-tp, SLF-II, and SLF-III. The SLF-
tp connects the temporal cortex to the inferior parietal 
cortex. The SLF-II connects the angular gyrus with the 
frontal cortex and, the SLF-III connects the supramar-
ginal gyrus to the inferior frontal cortex. Studies of 
white matter damage in humans support the involve-
ment of these fiber pathways when deficits in sentence 
repetition are present.
Ventral Pathways
According to the fMRI data reviewed by Friederici 
and Gierhan, there are at least two ventral fiber con-
nection pathways between the frontal cortex and the 
Inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)
Superior temporal gyrus (STG)
Middle temporal gyrus (MTG)
Dorsal pathways
dPMC to pMTG/STG
BA 44 to pSTG
Ventral pathways
FC to TC, PC, OC
alFC to aTC
Premotor cortex (PMC)
Parietal cortex (PC)
BA 44, pars opercularis
BA 45, pars triangularis
Frontal operculum (FOP)
45
44
6
47
38
41
42
22
21
37
FIGURE 9-5
Language-relevant brain regions and fiber tracts (schematic and condensed view of the left 
hemisphere). The dorsal pathway connecting dorsal premotor (dPMC) with posterior tem-
poral cortex (pMTG/STG) involves the SLF III and/or the SLF II and the SLF-tp (discussed in 
detail later); the dorsal pathway connecting Brodmann’s area (BA) 44 with the posterior 
STG involves the AF. The ventral pathway connecting the frontal cortex (FC), that is, BA 45 
and others, with the temporal (TC), the parietal (PC), and the occipital (OC) cortices, in-
volves the inferior-frontal-occipital fasciculus (also called the extreme capsule fiber system); 
the ventral pathway connecting the anterior inferior FC (aIFC), that is, BA 47 and others, 
and the FOP, with the anterior TC (aTC), involves the UF. (Modified from Friederici, A. D., 
& Gierhan, S. M. E. [2013]. The language network. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23, 
250-254.)

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
194
temporal cortex. These two pathways are the unci-
nated fasciculus (UF) and the inferior-frontal-occipital 
fasciculus (IFOF). The IFOF is sometimes referred to 
as the extreme capsule fiber system (ECFS). The UF 
connects the anterior frontal cortex with the anterior 
temporal cortex. The IFOF provides the connection 
between the frontal cortex and the three posterior cor-
tical areas, the temporal, parietal, and occipital corti-
ces. With these pathways, areas in the anterior frontal 
cortex that are activated during semantic and syntactic 
processes such as semantic judgment, categorization, 
lexical-semantic access, and sentence plausibility are 
linked with the posterior areas in the temporal, pari-
etal, and occipital cortices involved with lexical or sen-
tence semantic processing. In addition to participating 
in semantic processing, the UF connections between 
the frontal operculum and the temporal cortex have 
been found to support syntactic processing for local 
phrase structure and for sentences that are syntactically 
simple. The connections of the ventral pathway also 
support the framework proposed by Hargoort,23 which 
included the left inferior frontal gyrus as an important 
area for language.
SUBCORTICAL LANGUAGE MECHANISMS
The strictly cortical model of language mechanisms 
has been questioned numerous times because patients 
with what appeared to be only subcortical lesions were 
found to have language problems. Wilder G. Penfield 
and Lamar Roberts were among the first investigators to 
present evidence for possible subcortical mechanisms 
for language and speech.41 They suggested that the 
pulvinar and ventrolateral nuclei of the thalamus serve 
as relay stations between Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. 
They demonstrated massive fiber tracts to and from the 
thalamus and the major cortical speech and language 
areas. In addition, direct electrical stimulation of the 
left pulvinar and ventrolateral nuclei has produced 
naming problems.
Subcortical aphasias have been reported since the 
nineteenth century, but their existence has remained 
controversial. Although the language disturbance 
observed after thalamic infarct or damage to other sub-
cortical mechanisms (caudate, globus pallidus, internal 
capsule) was originally believed to be a direct result of 
damage to a structure that must be somehow respon-
sible for language, better imaging capability has shown 
that to be incorrect. New explanations have recently 
been put forth that describe the complicated nature of 
subcortical-cortical connections and their influence on 
language processing and production when those con-
nections are interrupted by damage to certain subcorti-
cal structures.
THALAMIC LESIONS
Wallesch and Papagno58 suggested that subcortical 
structures involved in a cortical-subcortical loop serve 
to monitor and select lexical input, which is then sent 
forward to the anterior language cortex in a modular 
fashion. The lexical alternatives from which the loop 
selects information originate in the posterior language 
cortex of the left hemisphere. In 1992 Crosson12 pro-
posed that cortical-striatal-pallidal-thalamic-cortical 
loops are involved in language. He suggested that 
the loop triggers the release of language segments at 
the appropriate time after semantic monitoring, thus 
serving more of a regulatory than an information-
processing function. Crosson also theorized that the 
thalamus arouses the anterior language cortex and 
transmits semantic segments from the anterior to the 
posterior cortex for monitoring. These theories were 
early indictments of the assumption that the language 
deficits found in patients with thalamic stroke or hem-
orrhage were directly related to the damage to the thal-
amus itself. This premise of language disorder being 
caused directly by dysfunction of the thalamus alone 
has been shown to be essentially incorrect. Rather, the 
language disorder (aphasia) appears to result from the 
disruption of cortical function caused by the thalamic 
damage. It is an indirect cause resulting in a neural 
system disruption. Nadeau and Crosson35 present an 
extensive analysis and discussion of the mechanisms 
summarized here.
Chapters 2 and 5 discuss the primary relay functions 
of the thalamic nuclei. A vast number of relays are syn-
apsing in the thalamus, going from peripheral sensory 
nerve organs to the cortex. Also mentioned are exten-
sive relays from the cortex to the thalamus. Most of the 
connections of thalamic nuclei and cortical areas are 
two-way, with numerous projections back to the thala-
mus from the cortex, as well as the more typically dis-
cussed projections from the thalamus to the cortex. In 
relation to language function, the two most interest-
ing thalamocortical loops relay from the dorsomedial 
nucleus and the pulvinar-lateral posterior nucleus of 
the thalamus. The dorsomedial nucleus relays informa-
tion originating from prefrontal cortex areas involved 
in executive functioning as well as some subcortical 
areas. This neural information originates from these 
areas and is relayed back to them after processing in 
the thalamus. For the pulvinar-lateral posterior nucleus, 
projections are from the frontal, temporal, and parietal 
cortices and back.
The specific function of the thalamus in language 
and cognition is now thought to be not a simple relay 
mechanism in the neural pathway but a regulated 
or gated relay mechanism. A cogent and lengthy 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
195
discussion of these mechanisms, their purported 
function, and relevance to treatment can be found 
in Nadeau and Rothi.37 To summarize their points, 
deeper discussion of the structure of the thalamus is 
required. PDP, as discussed earlier in this chapter, also 
plays an important role.
Most of the thalamus has a layer of cells enveloping it 
that forms what is called the thalamic reticular nucleus. 
These cells do not send their axons out but rather send 
them back into the thalamus and synapse on either 
relay neurons or on inhibitory interneurons. The retic-
ular neurons themselves employ gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) and are inhibitory. Thus the action of 
these neurons can be to facilitate transmission to the 
cortex (through inhibition of the inhibitory action of 
the interneurons) or to block transmission to the cortex 
(by inhibiting the relay neurons).
These reticular neurons are under the control of 
(or regulated by) a number of brain systems, with two 
important ones being the reticular formation of the 
midbrain and projections from the cerebral cortex. 
Global and nonselective are said to describe the effect 
of the midbrain on thalamic transmission. With high 
levels of arousal comes a strong excitation of the tha-
lamic cells, causing inhibition of the interneurons and 
consequently allowing ready transmission through the 
thalamus in an unregulated fashion. During low arousal 
(with sleep and coma being the most common exam-
ples), little can quell the action of the inhibitory inter-
neurons, and most transmission through the thalamus 
is blocked. Compared with the global and nonselec-
tive effect of the midbrain is the effect of the cortical-
thalamic-cortical projections, which are thought to be 
local and selective. Thalamic transmissions from spe-
cific nuclei are believed to be selectively gated to the 
cortex. Nadeau and Rothi,37 acknowledging that errors 
do occur in localization of stroke damage, indicate that 
lesion data support that patients found to have apha-
sia after thalamic lesions show primary involvement of 
structures related to this gating mechanism of the thala-
mus. Thus it is proposed that rather than damage to the 
thalamus per se causing the dysfunction, the deleteri-
ous effect on cortical language mechanisms upstream 
results in the symptoms seen in these patients with tha-
lamic lesions.
In the proposal developed by Nadeau and Rothi,37 the 
thalamus is involved in normal language functioning by 
regulating the engagement of certain neural networks 
in different association cortices to participate in lexical 
semantic access. They theorize that the cortical-thalamic 
disruption that occurs in the presence of damage to cer-
tain parts of the thalamus impairs the cortical network 
that supports declarative memory (knowledge of facts 
and events). The language function most dependent on 
declarative knowledge and memory is naming, which 
is, in neurolinguistic terms, lexical-semantic access. The 
patients with subcortical damage affecting the thalamus 
show the most difficulty with naming, whereas most of 
the other aspects (grammar, comprehension, articula-
tion, and repetition) are maintained.
NONTHALAMIC SUBCORTICAL LESIONS
In addition to thalamic lesions causing aphasia, lesions 
in the internal capsule, striatum, and globus pallidus 
also have been documented as seeming to give rise to 
language disturbances. These descriptions are discussed 
in Chapter 10. Again, the language disturbance docu-
mented in these patients is most likely caused by cortical 
dysfunction that is an indirect result of the subcortical 
damage. Metter et al. (1988)31 found that a subcortical 
lesion is accompanied by remote hypometabolism, indi-
rectly affecting the left perisylvian area. This was found 
to be related to language functioning in the patients 
studied. In their study of patients with striatocapsular 
lesions (head of the caudate nucleus, anterior half of 
the putamen, and anterior limb of the internal capsule 
in these cases), Nadeau and Crosson35 found that the 
infarct was caused by the spread of the thrombus or 
the movement of the embolus into the portion of the 
middle cerebral artery that serves the lenticulostriate 
arteries, which perfuse these structures, naturally result-
ing in their cellular death. However, beyond this effect, 
a reduced flow of blood to the middle cerebral artery 
branches serving the overlying cortex was also discov-
ered. If the collateral circulation mechanisms through 
the anterior cerebral and posterior cerebral arteries are 
viable, the cortex will be minimally affected in function. 
With poor collateral structure and operation, however, 
a much larger stroke will occur. Despite this, the dam-
age to the cortical region that takes place through the 
secondary mechanism of infarct initially is not visible on 
imaging studies, though cortical atrophy can be imaged 
later.58 Because the mechanism of damage to cortical 
areas is much the same as in direct cortical damage, the 
resulting language disorders will predictably be of many 
types depending on the site of cortical hypoperfusion.
RIGHT HEMISPHERE
The role of the right hemisphere in communication 
had been trivialized until relatively recently. It had been 
referred to as the silent, or minor, hemisphere, while 
much of the research on the central language mecha-
nism in the left hemisphere was being done through 
studies of aphasia. The right hemisphere was acknowl-
edged as having a major role in visual perception and 
as having a special (perhaps minor) role in visuospatial 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
196
processing. In the 1960s the technique of commissur-
otomy (disconnecting the two hemispheres by severing 
part of the corpus callosum) was found to be successful 
in controlling seizures if the corpus callosum was almost 
completely severed and the two hemispheres almost 
completely disconnected. This resulted in the research 
on split-brain patients (see Chapter 2) and heralded 
a new interest in right brain function. Evidence from 
hemispherectomies and callosal sections suggests that 
the right hemisphere can assume some language func-
tion, although the extent of recovery may be limited. In 
adult patients with hemispherectomy with no cortical 
tissue remaining, language behavior is similar to that in 
a person with extensive infarction of the perisylvian area 
and a global aphasia. What language remains appears 
to be completely the product of the right hemisphere.
Research began later on right hemisphere function 
in non–brain-damaged patients. These studies have 
indicated that the right hemisphere differs from the left 
in discrete functions and in its role in communication 
and cognition. Myers34 reports that research began to 
show that the right hemisphere was important in visual 
processing as well as holistic, nonlinear, and parallel 
processing. Important to information synthesis, the 
right hemisphere seemed to be superior in seeing the 
“big picture” or the gestalt and in incorporating and 
dealing with novel stimuli. The current concept of right 
hemisphere functions shows it to be superior for the 
following:
	•	 Visuospatial processing and visual perception
	•	 Integration of different types of incoming stimuli
	•	 Comprehending and producing emotion in the face 
and voice
	•	 Maintaining a normal state of arousal and alertness
	•	 Attending to the left side of space
	•	 Attention in general, selecting what to attend to and 
maintaining attention or shifting attention
At approximately the same time that this interest in 
right hemisphere processes was burgeoning, the con-
cept of communication began to change and expand 
beyond the traditional informational processing input-
output model. Communication style, nonverbal aspects 
of communication, as well as language use or the 
pragmatic aspects of language, were now of interest to 
clinicians and researchers. SLPs, linguists, and neuropsy-
chologists began to look at discourse versus just words, 
phrases, and sentences and to put much more emphasis 
on meaning (both literal and implied). As in research 
with patients with left hemisphere damage, the com-
munication abilities of patients with right hemisphere 
damage were studied and analyzed. As Myers discusses 
throughout her book, when studying patients with right 
hemisphere damage who have trouble communicating 
normally (not all patients have difficulty), the problems 
clearly are not language-based in the traditional sense; 
the patients have problems with communication in the 
broader context. The problems may be complex and 
are just beginning to be understood. Communication 
problems of the patient with right hemisphere damage 
are discussed in Chapter 10.
The right hemisphere is known to become more 
active in language processing after left hemisphere 
damage to language areas. Some treatment methods, 
such as melodic intonation therapy, have tried to capi-
talize on this neural effort by homologous areas in the 
nondominant hemisphere. Some evidence from tran-
scranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies shows that 
this activity in the right hemisphere can be actually 
interfering with language recovery in the left hemi-
sphere.38 Improvement in naming in a person with 
chronic, global aphasia was noted and maintained 
over time after TMS treatment was targeted to inhibit 
function of the pars triangularis area in the right hemi-
sphere. A negative effect occurred, however, when the 
inhibitory stimulation was applied to the posterior por-
tion (pars opercularis) of the homologous Broca’s area 
in the right hemisphere. Stimulation to other areas in 
the right hemisphere did not improve speech or lan-
guage performance. TMS was hypothesized to suppress 
overactivity in the right hemisphere area of the pars 
triangularis and consequently improved interhemi-
spheric modulation of semantic processing for nam-
ing pictures. Much interesting research remains to be 
done on the role of the right hemisphere in normal 
communication and recovery of language after brain 
insult.
ROLE OF COGNITION IN 
COMMUNICATION
As Chapey8 notes in her discussion of cognitive inter-
vention in aphasia, the definition of cognition varies 
greatly across the speech-language literature as well as 
that of other professions. An acceptable generic defini-
tion often used is that cognition is the act or process 
of knowing, perceiving, or remembering.32 Examin-
ing cognition at work is examining “functional mental 
events” that take place during behavior. These events 
are such things as perception, recognition, reasoning, 
judgment, concept formation, and problem solving. 
In laying the groundwork for cognitive communica-
tive evaluation and intervention with traumatic brain-
injured patients, Gillis19 discusses four key aspects of 
cognition as critical for the clinician to understand: (1) 
attention and information processing, (2) memory, (3) 
reasoning and problem solving, and (4) metacognition 
and executive functions. The following sections briefly 
describe these functions and their neurologic bases.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
197
Attention and Information Processing
The word attention has many definitions. This text 
accepts attention as being the capacity to focus on par-
ticular stimuli over time and to manipulate flexibly the 
information.47 This definition implies that an active 
response occurs rather than simply reflexive behavior. 
For attention to occur as a process, the organism must 
be in a general physiologic state of readiness, called 
arousal. Arousal, or as some have termed it, alertness, is 
the initial stage of attention. Arousal is mediated by the 
reticular activating system and is subject to internal and 
external influences. For attention to take place, percep-
tion must also occur. Perception is the recognition of 
sensory input. Gillis points out that it is often difficult to 
separate and distinguish perception from other aspects 
of cognition.
When studying attention, the organism’s attentional 
capacity or information processing capacity and the 
capability for attentional control must be considered. 
Attentional capacity is the amount of information that 
can be attended to at any one time. Attentional control 
is the process of guiding or directing this attentional 
capacity where it is needed. This control may be auto-
matic in process, such as when overlearned tasks are 
performed, or it may be controlled processing, which 
is used for novel or complex stimuli. The latter is con-
scious processing.
Some simply characterize attention as either inten-
tional or reactive. However, some researchers and cli-
nicians divide attention into different subcomponents 
because attentional mechanisms are seemingly not dam-
aged in an all-or-none manner in brain injury. Solberg 
and Mateer break attention down into five component 
areas: focused attention, sustained attention, selective 
attention, alternating attention, and divided attention.
Nadeau et  al.36 present attention as a part of the 
more general neural process they call selective engage-
ment. They describe this process in engineering terms 
as bringing certain neural networks (depending on 
the task) “online” while taking others “offline” because 
they are not needed for that task. This is part of the 
self-organizing system of the brain. Two systems are 
said to be critical for many of the higher level tasks that 
require selective engagement. These are corticocortical 
systems and corticothalamocortical systems. The latter 
was previously discussed in the section on subcortical 
language mechanisms. This gated relay function of the 
thalamus is thought to be part of the mechanism that 
allows the cortex to engage one neural network selec-
tively over another.
The corticocortical system actively participating in 
selective engagement (a large part of which is manifest 
in attention) is thought to reside in the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex. This part of the cortex is the supramodal 
cortex involved in planning and other executive func-
tions. It also is critical to the orienting response, allow-
ing movement of the eyes, head, and perhaps whole 
body to attend to something. The neural basis of atten-
tion is strongly related to the neural basis of the orient-
ing response. This area of the cortex seems to process 
the significance of neural activity communicated from 
posterior association areas. Studies of lesioned monkeys 
also indicate that this prefrontal area allows the engage-
ment to be maintained neurally and thus process infor-
mation in working memory. The next chapter discusses 
the attention and memory problems of patients with 
closed-head injury. These patients have frequently had 
damage impairing function of the prefrontal cortex.
Memory
Dudai13 defines learning as an experience-dependent 
(including changes related to maturation, injury, and 
fatigue) generation of enduring internal representa-
tions or modification in these representations. Memory 
is the retention of these experience-dependent changes 
over time. Separating memory from attention or from 
the other aspects of cognition is difficult. Memory is 
not a unitary construct. Varying temporal domains 
exist, such as short-term and long-term memory, and 
different stages of information processing are necessary 
before a memory is constructed. The first step in infor-
mation processing leading to memory is a sensory store, 
with visual and auditory information storage being the 
most familiar. Some refer to the sensory storage as a sen-
sory register because it is extremely brief in duration. 
Some perceptual analysis may take place at this stage, 
or it may simply be a brief holding tank for information 
that will need attention.
Sensory registration or storage initially occurs in 
the process of encoding or information processing 
for memory. Some level of meaning is extracted dur-
ing encoding. A person’s associations, experiences, 
and perceptions influence this extraction. These are 
unique to each individual, although everyone shares 
some associations. During encoding, the information is 
organized, and the level of analysis and organization is 
important to its storage and later retrieval. Two main 
types of storage exist in many theories of memory pro-
cessing: short-term memory and long-term memory. 
Short-term memory is temporary in nature, and the 
brain has limited capacity for this storage. Informa-
tion in short-term memory must be continually acted 
on (rehearsed, imaged, etc.) or the memory will decay 
in a brief time. The decay time posed by the research 
literature varies from 30 seconds to a few minutes.19 
Short-term memory and working memory are con-
sidered synonymous terms by some; others consider 
short-term memory as the storage site and working 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
198
memory as the active processing to hold the informa-
tion. Long-term memory is the permanent storage of 
information with unlimited capacity. The two primary 
types of knowledge store in memory are referred to as 
procedural memory (also known as implicit memory) 
and declarative memory (also known as explicit mem-
ory or propositional memory). Information thought to 
be stored in procedural memory is an integral part of 
rule-based skills and behaviors, and this type of memory 
can be accessed only through performance of learned 
behaviors. This primarily involves motor behaviors, but 
acquisition of some mental behaviors is also included. 
Nadeau and Rothi37 proposed the concept that gram-
matical function depends on procedural rather than 
declarative memory and therefore may require a dif-
ferent approach in treatment than other deficits, such 
as semantic access problems. Declarative memory, 
both semantic and episodic types, is directly accessible 
through recognition and recall tasks. These memories 
may be brought to mind verbally or visually.
Rahmann and Rahmann42 point out that informa-
tion processing and storage are immensely complex 
processes and that many factors still stand in the way of 
research aimed at localizing memory. Some of the fac-
tors listed are (1) the exceedingly complex organization 
of the brain with its several hundred trillion synapses, 
(2) the total length of all neuronal fibers in the brain 
(similar in length to the distance from the earth to the 
moon and back), and (3) the enormous number of neu-
rons activated during each memory event. According to 
these authors, “memory is ultimately stored in the form 
of molecular changes in the synapses of the neuronal 
structures involved in perception, analysis, and fur-
ther processing of acquired (learned) information” (p. 
264). This storage is in the brain and spinal cord, not 
in the sensory or neuronal pathways. Research on the 
visual system has suggested that memory storage events 
may occur through reciprocal feedback mechanisms 
between neuronal representations in the cortex and 
neuronal assemblies in subcortical regions. The forma-
tion of a memory is likely caused by an alteration in the 
strength of neural connection. The connections are 
enhanced when the neurons are simultaneously active.
The two subcortical regions that participate in mem-
ory formation are thought to be the hippocampus and 
the amygdala. A system in the basal forebrain depends 
on acetylcholine transmission (a cholinergic system) to 
assign a certain value to the pattern of neural activity 
being accessed. This is a crucial task of the limbic system 
and the hippocampus in particular. The limbic system 
“judges” the neural activity regarding import and com-
municates this to the rostral cholinergic system that, in 
turn, supplies cholinergic input to the targeted cortical 
area. The message to the cortical area from the limbic 
system is that this information is important and worth 
learning. Chemical changes can then be facilitated in 
the targeted cortical area and the hippocampus that 
produce permanent changes in neural connectivity and 
establish that representation in memory. The amygdala 
may partially be responsible for feelings or emotions 
that accompany the processing of certain sensory input 
or certain memories.
Reasoning and Problem Solving
Reasoning is the process of evaluating information to 
come to a conclusion.19 Two types of reasoning are dis-
cussed and evaluated clinically. In deductive reasoning, a 
number of premises, facts, and opinions are considered, 
and a conclusion is made about one thing (person, fact, 
circumstance, etc.). In inductive reasoning generaliza-
tion from one fact or instance is turned into a broad 
interpretation. In most cases problem solving and rea-
soning are simultaneous mental activities performed 
while trying to reach a conclusion needed to solve a 
problem. Guilford and Hoepfner22 think of problem 
solving as having five steps: preparation, analysis, pro-
duction, verification, and reapplication. These steps 
obviously point to problem solving (and reasoning) as 
being a multifaceted process. Impairments in problem 
solving and reasoning are often associated with lesions 
in prefrontal regions of the brain, although subcorti-
cal damage also can cause difficulties.56 A study using 
rats with lesioned orbitofrontal cortex demonstrated 
that this area appears to be important for decision 
making.44 When faced with a problem to solve when a 
previously learned strategy did not work and a new way 
was needed, the neural firing rate in the orbitofrontal 
cortex of the lesioned animals was slow and sluggish. 
Consequently, they were not able to change behavior 
efficiently to accomplish a task under new demands. 
The researchers hypothesized that the orbitofrontal 
cortex seems to process visual and other informational 
cues that help make decisions in the presence of new 
information. Damage to this area of the brain may 
cause persons to have difficulty adapting their behav-
ior to new situations despite being able to learn new 
information in a fairly normal way. A recent study of 
social problem-solving skills of a large group of persons 
with focal brain damage suggested that social prob-
lem solving, psychometric intelligence, and emotional 
intelligence are supported by a shared network of fron-
tal, temporal, and parietal regions with white matter 
tracts that connected and bound them into this shared 
network.5
Metacognition and Executive Functions
Metacognition and executive functioning were not 
routinely discussed by SLPs until recently, when work 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
199
with patients with cognitive communicative disorders 
became more widespread. Metacognition is knowledge 
about all cognitive processes and involves the monitor-
ing of these processes.19 Metacognition, then, refers to 
the seemingly subconscious ability to know how and 
when to attend, remember, and organize information 
and recognize and solve certain problems with certain 
strategies.
Executive functions refer to the skills human beings 
use to carry out nonroutine processes. Executive func-
tions are thought to be mediated by the prefrontal 
cortex in the frontal lobes. These functions include 
anticipation, goal direction, planning, monitoring of 
internal and external events, and interpretation and 
use of feedback. The fact that most nonroutine pro-
cesses are carried out in a deliberate, coordinated man-
ner and that human beings are typically self-regulating 
and able to inhibit inappropriate behaviors are testa-
ment to the executive system of the frontal lobes. The 
prefrontal cortex of the frontal lobes is composed of 
a heteromodal cortex that integrates information from 
both unimodal and other heteromodal areas. The 
frontal lobes have multiple direct and indirect connec-
tions to all other areas of the brain. They are well posi-
tioned and equipped to perform this important central 
executive officer job. Box 9-2 summarizes the four key 
concepts that the clinician should consider when per-
forming a cognitive assessment.
Changing the Brain
Any neurology text that is written is behind in its 
acknowledgment and explanations of new discoveries 
and research the day it is surrendered for publication. In 
the past two decades the research findings and the tech-
nology enabling this science to proceed has exploded. 
Although still slow, the transmission of these findings 
to others is much more rapid than was once possible. 
Many more journals are being published, some online, 
Attention and Information Processing
	•	 Attention requires a certain level of arousal (alert-
ness) as well as perception of sensory input
	•	 Attentional capacity refers to the amount of infor-
mation one can hold; it is directed by attentional 
control mechanisms
	•	 Concept of attention can be considered as reac-
tive in nature or as part of general neural processes 
described as selective engagement
	•	 Thought to reside in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 
which also is involved in planning and other execu-
tive functions, the orienting response, and additional 
executive functioning
Memory
	•	 Retention and recall of internal representations of 
experience-dependent changes over time
	•	 Visual and auditory sensory storage that can be bro-
ken into two types of information processing:
	
•	 Short-term memory—temporary storage that 
begins to decay in 30 seconds to a few minutes
	
•	 Long-term memory—permanent storage of un-
limited capacity
	•	 Two kinds of information stored in memory:
	
•	 Procedural (implicit) memory—recalled from per-
formance of repetitive, learned motor behaviors 
over time
	
•	 Declarative (explicit) memory—recalled through 
verbal or visual sensory recognition and recall 
cues
Reasoning and Problem Solving
	•	 Two types of reasoning:
	
•	 Deductive reasoning—evaluation based on a 
number of facts to create a conclusion about one 
thing (person, fact, event, etc.)
	
•	 Inductive reasoning—evaluation based on gener-
alization of one fact to create a broad interpreta-
tion and conclusion
	•	 Problem solving involves evaluation based on reason-
ing and application to produce a conclusion
	•	 Lesions to the prefrontal and subcortical areas have 
been shown to impair both reasoning and problem-
solving processes
Metacognition and Executive Functioning
	•	 Metacognition refers to the ability to recognize how 
and when to use reasoning and problem-solving 
skills to solve specific problems with the most effec-
tive cognitive strategies
	•	 Executive functions include anticipation, goal direc-
tion, planning, monitoring of internal and external 
events, and feedback interpretation
	•	 Frontal lobes carry out metacognitive and executive 
functioning processes
	
BOX 9-2   
Cognitive Factors in Communication

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
200
and many more conferences and other interactions are 
taking place. This engages other scientists and advances 
even more discovery.
A text such as this, with the task of teaching students 
the names, locations, and primary purpose and physi-
ologic mechanisms of parts of the brain most important 
to a certain function (in this case, communication), 
is of necessity simplistic in nature. It tends to present 
the brain as developing over time into an essentially 
hardwired structure. This is not the impression that stu-
dents should take away. The mature brain is actually a 
somewhat flexible organ, capable of more change and 
development than previously accepted by scientists and 
medical practitioners.
NEUROPLASTICITY AND NEUROGENESIS
Neuroplasticity
Just how much neuroplasticity the brain is capable of 
demonstrating has been surprising. Studies of congeni-
tally blind persons who use Braille have demonstrated 
that the visual cortex, along with the somatosensory cor-
tex, is activated when Braille is being read.43 An early 
study40 showed the same kind of reorganization in the 
brains of adults deaf since birth or early childhood when 
evoked potentials were measured in response to a flash 
of light. The response of persons who were deaf to the 
flash was stronger than that of normal-hearing subjects 
and was registered from the auditory cortex rather than 
the visual cortex. This indicated that the brain’s auditory 
region, denied of its normal input, had somehow begun 
picking up signals from the retinas. Visual cortex activ-
ity has been found in blind adult subjects when verbal 
processing tasks are studied.3 When the visual cortex was 
inhibited in these subjects, performance deteriorated, 
confirming the primary participation of the visual cor-
tex.2 This may help explain why blind children are often 
found to be delayed in language development.
Many studies wait to be done based on the belief and 
increasingly documented evidence that brain devel-
opment can be enhanced through structured expe-
riences. Ways to be more effective in the educational 
system, train new skills in adults, and maintain optimal 
cognitive function into advanced age must be found. 
Further research in neuroscience will pave the way for 
this progress.
Neurogenesis
Through studies duplicating earlier findings in animals, 
scientists now accept that there is neurogenesis (birth of 
new neurons) in some parts of the adult brain7,45,57. In 
most mammals there is well-­documented neurogenesis 
for neurons in the olfactory bulb. However, humans are 
unique in this aspect because there are few if any new 
neurons in the olfactory area in the postnatal period. 
The evolutionary decrease in dependence on smell and 
increased dependence on cognitive and social brain 
areas for human survival is likely related to the find-
ing of no neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb of human 
brains.
Neurogenesis has been documented for two areas of 
the adult human brain: the hippocampus14 and the stri-
atum.15 The neurons are able to generate because the 
brain has a reserve of neural stem cells that can differen-
tiate themselves into neurons or other cells of the ner-
vous system. In humans these stem cells or neuroblasts 
are born in the hippocampus for neurogenesis there. 
For striatal neurons, they appear to be derived from the 
subventricular zone (see Chapter 11) and migrate to 
the striatum. These new neurons can make new connec-
tions and establish themselves into functional circuits 
that already exist, enhancing the structure as well as the 
function. Thus even the adult brain is now believed to 
demonstrate neuroplasticity, although certainly not to 
as great an extent as that of a young child.
Neurogenesis in the hippocampus appears to be a 
continuous process7 with the newborn neurons having 
specialized electrophysiologic properties for about a 
month. After this period of time, they cannot be distin-
guished from older neurons.33 Bergmann and Frisén7 
discuss that these new neurons participate in a process 
called pattern separation. The neural process of pattern 
separation allows the brain to discriminate similar 
experiences and organize them for storage as distinct 
memories. They use the example of humans being able 
not only to remember parking a car in a parking lot 
but remembering where it was parked this time. This 
process, as you can see from that example, is critical 
for human adaptation to our increasingly complex 
environment.
To date, the functional purpose of neurogenesis in 
the striatum of the mature brain has not been estab-
lished.15 The striatum plays an important role in plan-
ning and modulating movement, in cognitive flexibility, 
and in reward/motivation cycles.15 The adult neuro-
genesis may help account for individual functionality 
in these areas with neural integration of these cells. 
The rate of neurogenesis in the striatum is low under 
homeostatic conditions for the body and brain. How-
ever, the rate increases in response to pathologic condi-
tions, adding small numbers of neurons to the striatum 
over a long period of time. Investigation of how these 
new striatal neurons could be used to promote renewal 
of function in diseases that attack striatal neurons such 
as Huntington’s chorea or in disorders such as schizo-
phrenia or addiction, which alter striatal response to 
reward could be important to finding treatment modal-
ities for these illnesses.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
201
RECOVERY IN THE DAMAGED BRAIN
Although not discussed in this chapter, there is evi-
dence for generation of new cells in the mature brain 
outside of neurons: new neuroglial cells. Oligodendro-
cytes account for most of the new glial cells produced 
in the adult brain. The normal function of many nerve 
fibers depends on myelination of those fibers, as you will 
remember. As new connections and new fibers appear 
in the brain, new oligodendrocytes are necessary for 
new production of myelin to wrap around these fibers 
enhancing signal transmission. Myelin can be regener-
ated by these cells to restore some neurologic function. 
Disease processes may cause incomplete regeneration, 
resulting in the death of these fibers that have lost 
myelin. You see this process in action in such diseases as 
advanced multiple sclerosis.
Astrocytes are another type of glial cell for which 
there is evidence for limited new generation in the 
mature nervous system.7 However, after local injury 
there is commonly a large increase of astrocytes gener-
ated by neural stem cells or by duplication of existing 
astrocytes. This generation of astrocytes in the damaged 
brain may not be a positive factor, however. The cells 
will combine with connective tissue cells and form scar 
tissue. This scar tissue may then prevent the regrowth of 
axons, for example, after stroke.46
SLPs must believe that the brain can change and 
reorganize. If they did not, no one would show up to 
work every day to treat clients attempting to improve 
their communication skills. Research in neuroscience 
supports the belief that a permanent change in behav-
ior does involve a change in brain organization. This 
does not mean change only in the strength of connec-
tions in the neural networks involved in the behavior, 
as takes place when memories are formed. It also may 
mean a change in where in the brain these connec-
tions are made or in which pathways are used—a type 
of “rezoning” or reassignment of the duties of cells in 
a certain part of the brain. With better technology and 
more elegant research design, perhaps we will one day 
be able to know exactly what changes are taking place 
in the brain during successful (or, in some cases, unsuc-
cessful) treatment for a communication disorder.
One new treatment method that has resulted from 
the curiosity of a neuroscientist about brain reorgani-
zation and its usefulness in rehabilitation is constraint-
induced therapy (CIT), introduced by Taub et al.53 for 
improving the use of the paralyzed arm after a stroke. 
In CIT the functional arm is restrained in a sling, with 
the hand covered to prevent use. In the initial study, the 
patients who were 1 year or more poststroke received 
intensive treatment for 10 days and performed all tasks 
for most of their waking hours with the paralyzed limb as 
best they could. At the end of the 10-day period, clients 
had regained considerable functional use of the for-
merly paralyzed limb, whereas control subjects who did 
not receive treatment showed no change. Taub hypoth-
esized a “use-dependent cortical reorganization.” Inves-
tigation using TMS to map the cortical activity before 
and after CIT proved Taub’s hypothesis.27 Treatment 
resulted in improved motor functioning and caused 
the area of the motor cortex controlling the hand to 
enlarge with recruitment of more neurons in the motor 
cortex, particularly those adjacent to the area that origi-
nally controlled the arm. With more extensive damage 
to the motor cortex, neurons in the premotor cortex 
or even in the opposite hemisphere are hypothesized 
to participate in the network supporting the improved 
function.
The strong evidence for success with CIT for para-
lyzed limbs of stroke patients54 led to interest in CIT for 
improvement of communication in persons with apha-
sia. Several studies were initially performed in Europe, 
showing that constraint-induced aphasia therapy involv-
ing the principles of prevention of compensatory com-
munication and massed practice produced significant 
and stable improvement. Changes in performance on 
standardized testing as well as in communication as 
measured by patient and family report and communi-
cative effectiveness ratings were all significantly greater 
than for patients who participated in the same amount 
of therapy with more traditional treatment methods 
allowing compensatory communication use.30 A pilot 
study from the Houston Veterans Administration Hospi-
tal also demonstrated more consistent improvement of 
patients receiving constraint-induced language therapy 
compared with more traditional treatment, although 
both groups had positive outcomes.29 Since that time 
several studies have been published with varying meth-
odology and outcomes. A controlled randomized trial 
of CILT versus no therapy on a group of 24 patients 
with chronic aphasia was reported in 2014 with the 
CILT being provided over 10 daily 4-hour sessions.52 
With this intensity and length of therapy, no significant 
differences on various language measures were found 
between the groups at the end of the study.
Students interested in more in-depth study of the 
brain’s capacity for change are encouraged to begin by 
reading a notable published book by the science colum-
nist for the Wall Street Journal, Sharon Begley.6 At first 
glance, the book’s title, Train Your Mind, Change Your 
Brain, seems to suggest that this is one of the pseudo-
science self-help texts that are stacked high in book-
stores. However, the book documents the collaboration 
between leading scientists, many of whom are refer-
enced in this text, and the Dali Lama, which resulted 
in a landmark study at the University of Wisconsin on 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
202
brain reorganization and differences in monks who 
are highly advanced in meditation.28 It also provides 
a highly readable summary of the history of neurosci-
entific study of brain–behavior relations and how the 
brain is transformed by the environment, experience, 
and thought.
This chapter ends on a positive note for the clini-
cian because of the work of neuroscientists to prove 
that the brain can be changed by chemical and surgical 
intervention as well as by behavioral treatments that 
replace or supplement other treatments. Chapter 10 
describes some of the acquired disorders of communi-
cation that adults may experience when damage occurs 
to language processing areas of the brain. It is hoped 
that clinicians will not only learn from the literature of 
neuroscience but will continue to contribute findings 
that support enhancement of brain function even after 
the brain has been damaged.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 Six layers comprise the neocortex, consisting 
primarily of pyramidal cells with axons and den-
drites ascending and descending from one layer to 
another.
	•	 Studies using isotropic fractionating have suggest-
ed that the ratio of neurons to nonneurons in the 
brain may be more equal in number than originally 
thought.
	•	 Synaptic organization is concerned with the way 
input neurons, projection neurons, and interneu-
rons organize themselves and connect through 
synapses, becoming neural circuits.
	•	 Dendritic connections and subunits within micro-
circuits form local circuits in regions of the brain. 
The connections between these regions and their 
circuits account for behaviors.
	•	 These connections form “small world communi-
ties” at the microlevel. At the macrolevel, the 
neuronal processes expand out for long-range 
­connections.
	•	 The brain’s vast circuitry is made possible by 
convergence and divergence of synapses in the 
nervous system.
	•	 Most postsynaptic sites in the cerebellum, ­basal 
ganglia, and cortex are on dendritic spines, 
increasing the surface area and probably ena-
bling rapid signal processing and long-term 
­potentiation.
	•	 A pattern-associator network allows the input pat-
terns to be transformed into output patterns (e.g., 
sequences of letters transformed into spoken words 
read aloud).
	•	 All the primary association areas are thought to be 
collections of pattern-associator networks in which 
neural representations (percepts, concepts, etc.) 
are formed.
	•	 The first mapping of cellular connection was done 
on a nematode in 1986.
	•	 Human brain connectivity is being traced through 
advanced diffusion tensor imaging methods 
through a U.S. government–funded multicenter 
study called the Human Connectome.
	•	 The pattern of neural connections strengthened 
into a representation is difficult to lose completely. 
Rather, some components of the representation 
may be activated, although others are not, degrad-
ing the representation. This is called graceful degra-
dation. This often allows people to deal successfully 
with ambiguous or partial information.
	•	 Learning is the brain increasing the efficiency of 
synaptic connections.
	•	 Synaptic connections within networks are strength-
ened by synchronous firing.
	•	 Synaptic connections in neural networks are the 
physical foundation of learning and memory and 
account for Hebbian learning.
	•	 Learning requires active participation by multi-
ple brain areas, including the reticular network, 
sensory and/or motor association areas, thalamo-
cortical circuitry, fusiform area, hippocampus and 
other medial temporal lobe structures, lateral and 
superior temporal lobe, cerebellar and striatum 
circuitry, and diffuse areas of the neocortex.
	•	 Geschwind’s model of language, based in large 
part on the work of Wernicke, is a traditional 
localization or connectionism model but has held 
up over time and is not negated by neural network 
theory or by evidence from neuroimaging.
	•	 Geschwind’s model emphasizes Broca’s area, 
Wernicke’s area, the arcuate fasciculus, and parietal 
areas of the angular and supramarginal gyrus. These 
areas comprise the perisylvian language zone. Recent 
research has identified other connections laid out in a 
ventral and dorsal stream within the perisylvian zone.
	•	 Language disorders may appear to result from dam-
age to subcortical structures, especially the thalamus 

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
203
and parts of the basal ganglia. However, research 
into the etiology of the language difficulty has dem-
onstrated that the language disorders result from 
the indirect effects on cortical language areas.
	•	 Hypoperfusion of the cortex follows basal ganglia 
and capsular damage because of reduced flow 
through the lenticulostriate arteries. The language 
symptoms depend on what area of the perisylvian 
zone is affected.
	•	 The right hemisphere is dominant for visuospatial 
processing, integration of different kinds of stimuli, 
attention, intention, and holistic processing. Right 
hemisphere damage affects communication in a 
broader sense with discourse and communication 
style as well as processing of more intangible input 
(e.g., humor, sarcasm).
	•	 Cognition is the process of knowing, perceiving 
or remembering. It is the examination of mental 
events, such as perception, reasoning, problem 
solving, and concept formation.
	•	 Four key aspects of cognition important to the 
treatment of patients with cognitive-linguistic 
disorders are (1) attention and information pro-
cessing, (2) memory, (3) reasoning and problem 
solving, and (4) metacognition and executive 
functioning. The study of these cognitive func-
tions involves the dorsolateral cortex, the hip-
pocampus and amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, 
and the greater association area in the frontal 
lobes.
	•	 New neuroimaging techniques and interest in 
neurogenesis (the birth of new neurons) and 
neuroplasticity of the brain have spawned exciting 
research into enhanced learning and recovery after 
brain damage.
 C A S E  S T U D Y
A 64-year-old former van driver experienced sudden onset 
of confusion, slurred speech, and left-sided paralysis of the 
arm and leg. He was admitted to the hospital stroke unit 
and begun on blood thinners after computed tomogra-
phy ruled out hemorrhage. He was admitted to the acute 
rehabilitation unit in 2 days. Testing showed mild unilateral 
upper motor neuron dysarthria with fair intelligibility, poor 
pragmatics (poor eye contact, inattention to speaker if on 
his left, poor topic maintenance, apathy during commu-
nication), mild to moderate neglect of left side of space, 
mild anomia on confrontation naming and questioning, 
and constructional deficits in drawing and copying. After a 
3-week stay, he was ambulatory with a leg brace, had little 
functional use of his left upper extremity, had improved 
intelligibility, and was learning to compensate for his left 
side neglect.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	What part(s) of the brain was (were) affected by this 
stroke?
	2.	Why is neglect more prominent with this location of 
damage to the brain?
	3.	What could be the cause of the perception of apathy 
in the patient’s communication interactions?
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Achard, S. S., Salvador, R., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., 
& Bullmore, E. (2006). A resilient, small-world human 
brain functional network with highly connected associa-
tion cortical hubs. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 63–72.
	 2.	 Amedi, A., Floel, A., Knecht, S., Zohary, E., & Cohen, 
L. G. (2004). Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the 
occipital pole interferes with verbal processing in blind 
subjects. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 1266–1270.
	 3.	 Amedi, A., Raz, N., Pianka, R., Malach, R., & Zohary, E. 
(2003). Early visual cortex activation correlates with su-
perior verbal memory performance in the blind. Nature 
Neuroscience, 6, 758–766.
	 4.	 Azevedo, F. A., Carvalho, L. R., Grinberg, L. T., ­Farfel, 
J. M., Ferretti, R. E., Leite, R. E., et al. (2009). Equal 
numbers of neuronal and non-neuronal cells make 
the human brain an isometrically scaled-up pri-
mate brain. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 513, 
532–541.
	 5.	 Barbey, A. K., Colom, R., Paul, E. J., Chau, A., Solomon, 
J., & Grafman, J. H. (2014). Lesion mapping of social 
problem solving. Brain, 137, 2823–2833.
	 6.	 Begley, S. (2007). Train your mind, change your brain. New 
York: Ballantine Books.
	 7.	 Bergmann, O. A., & Frisén, J. (2013). Why adults need 
new brain cells. Science, 340, 695–696.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
204
	 8.	 Chapey, R. (2001). Cognitive intervention: Stimulation 
of cognition, memory, convergent thinking, divergent 
thinking and evaluative thinking. In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
Language intervention strategies in adult aphasia (4th ed.). 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
	 9.	 Code, C. (Ed.). (1990). The characteristics of aphasia 
(Brain, Behaviour and Cognition series). New York: Taylor 
and Francis.
	 10.	 Coltheart, M., Patterson, K., & Marshall, J. C. (Eds.). 
(1980). Deep dyslexia. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
	 11.	 Corbetta, M. K., Kincade, J. M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). 
Neural systems for visual orienting and their relation-
ships to spatial working memory. Journal of Cognitive Neu-
roscience, 14, 508–523.
	 12.	 Crosson, B. (1992). Subcortical functions in language and 
memory. New York: Guilford Press.
	 13.	 Dudai, Y. (1989). The neurobiology of memory: Concepts, find-
ings, trends. New York: Oxford University Press.
	 14.	 Eriksson, P. S., Perfilieva, E., Björk-Eriksson, T., Alborn, 
A. M., Nordborg, C., Peterson, D. A., & Gage, F. H. 
(1998). Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. 
Nature Medicine, 4, 1313–1317.
	 15.	 Ernst, A., & Frisén, J. (2015). Adult neurogenesis in hu-
mans—common and unique traits in mammals. PLoS Bi-
ology, 13(1), 1–12.
	 16.	 Fair, D. C., Cohen, A. L., Power, J. D., Dosenback, N. U., 
Church, J. A., Miezin, F. M., et  al. (2009). Functional 
brain networks develop from a “local to distributed” or-
ganization. PLoS Computational Biology, 5, 1–14.
	 17.	 Friederici, A. D., & Gierhan, S. M. (2013). The language 
network. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23, 250–254.
	 18.	 Geschwind, N. (1969). Problems in the anatomical un-
derstanding of aphasia. In A. L. Benton (Ed.), Contribu-
tions to clinical neuropsychology. Chicago: Aldine.
	 19.	 Gillis, R. J. (1996). Traumatic brain injury: Rehabilitation 
for speech-language pathologists. Boston: Butterworth-
Heinemann.
	 20.	 Glezer, L. K. (2015). Adding words to the brain’s visual 
dictionary: Novel word learning selectively sharpens or-
thographic representations. The Journal of Neuroscience, 
35, 4965–4972.
	 21.	 Gough, P. M., Nobre, A. C., & Devlin, J. T. (2005). Dis-
sociating linguistic processes in the left inferior frontal 
cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 25, 8010–8016.
	 22.	 Guilford, J. P., & Hoepfner, R. V. (1971). The analysis of 
intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill.
	 23.	 Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain and binding:  
A new framework. Trends in Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 
416–423.
	 24.	 Harris, K. A., & Shepherd, G. M. (2015). The neocor-
tical circuit: Themes and variations. Nature Neuroscience, 
18, 170–181.
	 25.	 Hebb, D. (1949). The organization of behavior. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons.
	 26.	 Laboratory of Neuro Imaging and Martinos Center for 
Biomedical Imaging at Massachusetts General Hospital. 
(n.d.). Human Connectome Project Gallery. Retrieved from 
Human Connectome Project: http://www.humanconne
ctomeproject.org/gallery.
	 27.	 Liepert, J., Bauder, H., Wolfgang, H. R., Miltner, W. H., 
Taub, E., & Weiller, C. (2000). Treatment-induced cor-
tical reorganization after stroke in humans. Stroke, 6, 
1210–1216.
	 28.	 Lutz, A., Greischar, L. L., Rawlings, N. B., Richard, M., & 
Davidson, R. J. (2004). Long-term meditators self-­induce 
high-amplitude gamma synchrony during mental prac-
tice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101 
16369–16373.
	 29.	 Maher, L. M., Kendall, D., Swearengin, J. A., Rodriguez, 
A., Leon, S. A., Pingel, K., et al. (2006). A pilot study 
of use-dependent learning in the context of constraint-
induced language therapy. Journal of the International Neu-
ropsychological Society, 12, 843–852.
	 30.	 Meinzer, M., Djundja, D., Barthel, G., Elbert, T., & 
Rockstroh, B. (2005). Long-term stability of improved 
language functions in chronic aphasia after constraint-
induced aphasia therapy. Stroke, 36, 1462–1466.
	 31.	 Metter, E. I., Riege, W. H., Hanson, W. R., Jackson, C. 
A., Kempler, D., & van Lancker, D. (1988). Subcorti-
cal structures in aphasia: an analysis based on (F-18)-­
fluorodeoxyglucose, positron emission tomography, 
and computed tomography. Archives of Neurology, 45, 
1229–1234.
	 32.	 Miller-Keane encyclopedia and dictionary of medicine, nursing, 
and allied health (7th ed.) (2003). St. Louis: Saunders.
	 33.	 Ming, G. L., & Song, H. (2011). Adult neurogenesis in 
the mammalian brain: Significant answers and signifi-
cant questions. Neuron, 70, 687–702.
	 34.	 Myers, P. S. (1994). Communication disorders associ-
ated with right-hemisphere brain damage. In R. Chapey 
(Ed.), Language intervention strategies in adult aphasia (3rd 
ed.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
	 35.	 Nadeau, S. E., & Crosson, B. (1997). Subcortical aphasia. 
Brain and Language, 58, 355–402 436–458.
	 36.	 Nadeau, S. E., Ferguson, T. S., Valenstein, E., Vierck, C. 
J., Petruska, J. C., Streit, W. J., & Ritz, L. A. (2004). Medi-
cal neuroscience. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier.
	 37.	 Nadeau, S., & Rothi, L. G. (2001). Rehabilitation of sub-
cortical aphasia. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language interven-
tion strategies in adult aphasia (4th ed.). Baltimore: Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
	 38.	 Naeser, M. E., Martin, P. I., Nichols, M., Baker, E. 
H., Seekins, H., Helm-Estabrooks, N., et  al. (2005).  
Improved naming after TMS treatments in a chronic, 
global aphasia patient—case report. Neurocase, 11, 
182–193.
	 39.	 National Institutes of Health. (2015, July 24). Human 
Connectome Project Retrieved from NIH Blueprint: The 
Human Connectome Project: . http://www.humanconn
ectome.org/about/project.

CENTRAL LANGUAGE MECHANISM AND LEARNING  CHAPTER NINE
205
	 40.	 Neville, H. J., Schmidt, A., & Kutas, M. (1983). Altered 
visual-evoked potentials in congenitally deaf adults. 
Brain Research, 266, 127–132.
	 41.	 Penfield, W. G., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain 
mechanisms. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
	 42.	 Rahmann, H., & Rahmann, M. (1992). The neurobiological 
basis of memory and behavior. New York: Springer-Verlag.
	 43.	 Sadato, N., Pascual-Leone, A., Grafman, J., Ibañez, V., 
Deiber, M. P., Dold, G., & Hallett, M. (1996). Activation 
of the primary visual cortex by Braille reading in blind 
subjects. Nature, 380, 526–528.
	 44.	 Saddoris, M. P., Gallagher, M., & Schoenbaum, G. 
(2005). Rapid associative encoding in basolateral amyg-
dala depends on connections with orbitofrontal cortex. 
Neuron, 46, 321–331.
	 45.	 Santarelli, I., Saxe, M., Gross, A., Surget, A., Battaglia, 
F., Dulawa, S., & Weisstaub, N. (2003). Requirement for 
hippocampal neurogenesis for behavioral effects of anti-
depressants. Science, 301, 805–809.
	 46.	 Shepherd, G. M., & Koch, C. (1998). Introduction to 
synaptic circuits. In G. M. Shepherd (Ed.), The synaptic 
organization of the brain (4th ed.). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
	 47.	 Silver, J., & Miller, J. H. (2004, February). Regeneration 
beyond the glial scar. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 146–
156.
	 48.	 Solberg, M. M., & Mateer, C. A. (1987). Effectiveness of 
an attention-training program. Journal of Clinical and Ex-
perimental Neuropsychology, 9, 117–130.
	 49.	 Sporns, O. (2007). Brain connectivity. Scholarpedia, 2(10) 
Retrieved from http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/ 
Brain_connectivity.
	 50.	 Sporns, O. (2013). The human connectome: Origins 
and challenges. Neuroimage, 80, 53–61.
	 51.	 Sporns, O. T., Tononi, G., & Kötter, R. (2005). The hu-
man connectome: A structural description of the human 
brain. PLoS Computational Biology, 1, 245–251.
	 52.	 Squire, L. B., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., du Lac, S., Ghosh, 
A., & Spitzer, N. C. (2013). Fundamental neuroscience (4th 
ed.). Waltham, MA: Academic Press/Elsevier.
	 53.	 Szaflarski, J. A., Allendorfer, J., Ball, A., Banks, C., Dietz, 
A., Hart, K., et al. (2014, April). Randomized controlled 
trial of constraint-induced aphasia therapy in patients 
with chronic stroke. Neurology, 82(Suppl. S21.001).
	 54.	 Taub, E., Miller, N. E., Novack, T. A., Cook, E. W., III, 
Fleming, W. C., Nepomuceno, J. S., & Crago, J. E. 
(1993). Technique to improve chronic motor deficit af-
ter stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
74, 347–354.
	 55.	 Taub, E., Uswatte, G., King, D. K., Morris, D., Crago, J. E.,  
& Chatterjee, A. (2006). A placebo-controlled trial of 
constraint-induced movement therapy for upper ex-
tremity after stroke. Stroke, 37, 1045–1049.
	 56.	 Thiebaut de Schotten, M., Dell’Acqua, F., Valabregue, 
R., & Catani, M. (2012). Monkey to human comparative 
anatomy of the frontal lobe association tracts. Cortex, 48, 
82–96.
	 57.	 Tompkins, C. A. (1995). Right hemisphere communication 
disorders: Theory and management. San Diego: Singular 
Publishing Group.
	 58.	 Van Praag, H., Christie, B. R., Sejnowski, T. J., & Gage, 
F. H. (2002). Functional neurogenesis in the adult hip-
pocampus. Nature, 415, 1030–1034.
	 59.	 Wallesch, C. W., & Papagno, C. (1988). Subcortical apha-
sia. In F. C. Rose, R. Whurr, & M. A. Wyke (Eds.), Apha-
sia. London: Whurr.
	 60.	 Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics 
of “small world” networks. Nature, 393, 440–442.
	 61.	 Wernicke, K. (1874). Der aphasische symptomkomplex.  
Breslau: Kohn and Neigert.

206
10
Adult Disorders 
of Language
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Aphasia
Etiology and Neuropathology of Aphasia
Aphasia Classification
Testing and Intervention for Aphasia
Role of the Speech-Language Pathologist
Pharmacology in Aphasia
Primary Progressive Aphasia
Associated Central Disturbances
Alexia
Psycholinguistic Classifications
Agraphia
Cognitive-Communicative Disorders
Communication Disorders Related to Right  
Hemisphere Damage
Dementia
Acute Confusional States
Traumatic Brain Injury
Mild Traumatic Brain Injury
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy
The Role of the SLP
K E Y  T E R M S
acceleration-
deceleration injury
agraphia
alexia
alexia with agraphia
alexia without 
agraphia
Alzheimer’s disease
amyloid plaques
aneurysm
anomic aphasia
aphasia
aphasic alexia
aprosodia
arteriosclerosis
arteriovenous 
malformation  
(AVM)
atherosclerosis
border zone
Broca’s aphasia
capsular
central (parietal-
temporal) alexia
cerebrovascular 
accident (CVA)
circumlocution
cognitive-
communicative 
(cognitive-linguistic) 
disorders
conduction aphasia
confabulation
chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy 
(CTE)
deep dyslexia
dementia
dementia of the 
Alzheimer’s type 
(DAT)
denial
diffuse axonal injury 
(DAI)
dyslexias
dysprosody
encephalopathy
extinction
focal lesions
frontotemporal 
dementias (FTD)
glioma
global aphasia
infarction
ischemia
molecular commotion
neoplasm
neurofibrillary tangles
paraphasia
phonologic alexia
posterior (occipital) 
alexia
primary progressive 
aphasia (PPA)
prosopagnosia
subcortical aphasia
surface dyslexia
thromboembolic
thrombus
transcortical aphasias
transient ischemic 
attack (TIA)
traumatic brain injury 
(TBI)
unilateral inattention
Wernicke’s aphasia
Let the young know they will never find a more interesting, 
more instructive book than the patient himself.
Giorgio Baglivi

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
207
The speech-language pathologist (SLP) who chooses a 
career path working with adults quite often works with 
patients with acquired neurogenic language disorders. 
This chapter discusses language disorders that have 
focal brain damage as the etiology—aphasia, alexia, 
and agraphia—as well as disorders of communication 
referred to as cognitive-communicative (or cognitive-
linguistic) disorders. Although communication dis-
orders of patients with right hemisphere lesions and 
dementia are not treated as intensively by the SLP as are 
the aphasias and the problems resulting from traumatic 
brain injury, the SLP should understand the underlying 
pathology, the communication deficits, and the contri-
bution the SLP can make to the quality of life for these 
patients.
Aphasia
Persons with brain damage that is focal in nature and 
affects the functioning of the cortical and/or subcor-
tical language mechanisms of the dominant hemi-
sphere (i.e., in most people, the left hemisphere) may 
experience some form of aphasia. Aphasia is defined 
by Rosenbek et al.52 as “an impairment, due to brain 
damage, of the ability to comprehend and formulate 
language. Aphasia may affect function in one or more 
modalities of language: auditory comprehension, 
reading, oral-expressive language, and/or writing. 
The language impairment may be worsened by physi-
ologic inefficiency or impaired cognition, but it can-
not be explained by dementia, sensory loss or motor 
dysfunction.”
ETIOLOGY AND NEUROPATHOLOGY  
OF APHASIA
As stated previously, aphasia results from focal dam-
age to areas of the brain primarily responsible for 
the understanding and production of language. A 
focal lesion is different from diffuse damage to sev-
eral parts of the brain. Focal lesions are caused by 
interruption in the blood flow to the area of the brain 
supplied by the particular arterial distribution. The 
blood supply to the brain is discussed in Chapter 3 
and should be reviewed to understand the discussion 
of etiology of aphasia. Figure 10-1 elaborates slightly 
on what is presented in Chapter 3, showing the 
branches of the middle cerebral artery, also known as 
the artery of aphasia. It clearly demonstrates that the 
Callosomarginal
artery
Pericallosal
artery
Anterior choroidal
artery
Angular
artery
Frontopolar artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior
parietal
artery
Ascending
frontoparietal
artery
Posterior
temporal
artery
Ophthalmic
artery
Internal
carotid
artery
Posterior
communicating
artery
FIGURE 10-1
Lateral view of the cerebral arteries detailing the branches of the anterior and middle  
cerebral arteries. (From Swaiman, K., Ashwal, K., Ferriero, D., et al. [2012] Swaiman’s  
Pediatric Neurology [5th ed.]. Philadelphia: Saunders.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
208
middle cerebral artery perfuses most of the perisyl-
vian language areas.
Reduction of blood flow to an area is called ischemia. 
Blood carries oxygen to the brain, which is the biggest 
user of oxygen, consuming approximately 20% of the 
body’s supply at any given time. Without an ongoing 
flow of oxygenated blood, the brain cannot function 
for long. If the brain is deprived of blood for approxi-
mately 10 to 12 seconds, the average person will lose 
consciousness; after 3 to 5 minutes irreparable brain 
damage or death may result. Exceptions exist, such as 
interruption to blood flow in the presence of hypo-
thermia. The reduction in body temperature seems 
to have a protective effect on the brain, reducing the 
consequences of reduction of flow. When an area of 
the brain is damaged because of a lack of blood, cell 
death or infarction has occurred. If an area of the brain 
is infarcted, necrotic tissue then remains in that area. 
Eventually the infarcted area softens and liquefies, with 
this waste removed, probably by astroglial action (glio-
sis). This usually leaves a cavity that has the appearance 
of a crater in the brain with a rim of scar tissue around 
it formed by the astrocytes.
Several medical conditions may interrupt the vital 
oxygenated blood supply to the brain. These include 
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), traumatic brain injury 
(TBI), brain infections leading to focal abscess, vascu-
litis (or arteritis), and neoplasm. Trauma is discussed 
later in this chapter. Throughout these discussions, 
keep the fact in mind that TBI can result in both focal 
and diffuse brain damage. The following discussion of 
common causes of interruption to blood flow concen-
trates on CVA and neoplasms.
Cerebrovascular Accident
The most frequent cause of interrupted blood flow is 
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), also known as stroke 
(or “a brain attack”). Stroke, although decreasing in 
incidence in the United States, is the third leading cause 
of death in persons older than 55 years, but it is increas-
ing in younger adults and children. American Heart 
Association43 statistics show that each year approxi-
mately 795,000 people in the United States experience 
new or recurrent strokes (ischemic or hemorrhagic in 
origin). On average, every 40 seconds someone in the 
United States has a stroke, and there is a stroke-related 
death every 4 minutes. CVA can result from two mecha-
nisms of interruption: occlusion or hemorrhage.
Occlusive Mechanisms
In a stroke of occlusive origin, the opening of an arte-
rial vessel has been occluded, reducing or stopping the 
flow of blood through that artery. The most common 
cause of arterial occlusion is a disease process known as 
arteriosclerosis, which is characterized by a thickening 
or hardening of the arterial wall with consequent reduc-
tion of elasticity of the vessel. The diagnosis of athero-
sclerosis is frequently made before or after CVA and 
indicates a form of arteriosclerosis in which blood vessel 
walls thicken. This thickening is caused by a prolifera-
tion of cells, particularly blood platelets, along the wall. 
Also found are abnormal fatty deposits in the artery 
with deterioration of the inner coating of the wall, 
again resulting in loss of elasticity, or fibrosis, of the ves-
sel wall. The thickening plaques on the wall continue to 
enlarge and hinder diffusion of nutrients from blood 
to deeper tissue of the wall. This results in fraying and 
ulceration of the wall. Eventually a protrusion into the 
vessel begins to build up. If this accumulation is formed 
exclusively of blood platelets, it is known as a throm-
bus. As the deterioration of the wall begins to build in 
the vessel, the wall increases in rigidity, leading to a rise 
in hypertension (high blood pressure), which puts the 
person at an even higher risk for CVA.
Current thinking is that most CVAs are embolic in 
origin, meaning that this extraneous material in the 
vessel has occluded a cerebral vessel distal to its point 
of origin. This embolus has broken away from the 
vessel wall, traveled through the vessel and become 
lodged in some part of the brain, stopping or dis-
rupting the flow through that vessel’s distribution 
(Fig. 10-2). If a thrombus has built up on a vessel wall 
and completely occluded the vessel at that point, the 
CVA would be considered thrombotic in origin, but 
that diagnostic precision is often not possible and the 
diagnosis may be thromboembolic stroke. It may take 
Hepatic artery
Gastroduodenal
artery
Aneurysm
Superior pancreatico-
duodenal artery
Right gastro-
epiploic artery
Direction of
blood flow
Splenic
artery
Left gastric
artery
Coeliac axis
FIGURE 10-2
Illustration of an aneurysm (of the gastroduodenal artery). 
(From Kessel, D., Robertson, I. [2011]. Interven­tional Ra-
diology [3rd ed.]. A Survival Guide: Churchill Livingstone: 
Edinburgh.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
209
minutes or weeks to clog an artery fully. The resulting 
dysfunction may seem to arise suddenly and increase 
in severity over minutes, hours, or even days. When 
the symptoms seem to increase, it is referred to as 
“stroke in evolution” and it may proceed in a stepwise 
fashion. The maximal deficit is referred to as a com-
pleted stroke.
The most common source of emboli is the heart. 
Other extraneous material building up in the vessel 
may be tumor cells, a clump of bacteria, air, or plaque 
from the fatty deterioration. Emboli may also be a sec-
ondary effect of trauma. With an embolus that sud-
denly reaches a point at which it cannot continue 
flowing with the blood through the artery, often at a 
branching point in the artery, the time for occlusion 
is quicker or more abrupt than in the case of a throm-
bus and the time to maximal deficit may be seconds or 
minutes.
Another term heard when working with patients  
with compromised vascular systems is transient is­chemic 
attack (TIA). A TIA is often referred to by the lay­
person as a “mini stroke,” which is acceptable because 
the symptoms often mimic the effects of a completed 
stroke. However, with a TIA the disruption of blood flow 
is temporary and the neurologic signs are transient, 
usually lasting less than 1 hour and completed within  
24 hours. The occurrence of a TIA usually indicates that 
platelet formation is underway, generally in the internal 
carotid artery distribution. There is a 20% chance of 
suffering a stroke during the first year after the TIA and 
a 30% to 60% chance within 5 years. A TIA is a warn-
ing and should be taken seriously. Research on persons 
who experienced either a TIA or a nondisabling stroke 
suggested that the use of a CT scan to identify acute 
ischemia (newly damaged tissue as a result of the oxy-
gen deprivation) and other indicators of cerebrovascu-
lar disease can be most useful for stroke prevention.62 
The researchers found that the patients who showed 
acute ischemia on the CT were 2.6 times more likely to 
have another stroke. If the scan showed acute ischemia 
plus small vessel damage (microangiopathy), the likeli-
hood increased to 4.6; with acute plus chronic ischemia 
found, it increased to 5.3; and with all three factors seen 
on CT, the likelihood increased to 8.4 times more likely. 
Thus a relatively inexpensive and common procedure 
could help determine how critical the need for more 
intensive intervention to decrease the risk of a debilitat-
ing CVA.
Hemorrhage
The rupture of a vessel in the brain causes a cerebral 
hemorrhage. Trauma to the brain often results in hem-
orrhage into the subarachnoid area and can cause 
hemorrhaging into other areas. The two most com-
mon causes of hemorrhage of a cerebral artery without 
trauma occurring are rupture of an aneurysm and arte-
riovenous malformation.
Cerebral Aneurysm.  An aneurysm is a dilated blood 
vessel, usually an artery, that involves a stretching of 
all layers of the wall, weakening the vessel. Often the 
weak part of the wall can be seen extending from the 
vessel surface (see Fig. 10-2). Approximately 85% 
of ­aneurysms are found on branches of the internal 
­carotid artery system, with 10% to 15% in the vertebro-
basilar distribution.30
Points at which cerebral vessels branch off or make 
a sharp turn are the most vulnerable for aneurysm 
development. Many of the aneurysms are congenital 
in nature. Hemorrhage into the subarachnoid space 
is referred to as a subarachnoid hemorrhage and in 
the brain proper as an intracerebral hemorrhage. 
Small aneurysms may never rupture and remain silent 
throughout life. Large aneurysms may cause symptoms 
before rupture because they compress adjacent struc-
tures, such as cranial nerve roots.
Arteriovenous Malformation.  Arteriovenous malfor-
mation (AVM) occurs when the capillary network be-
tween arteries and veins is absent and vessels are twisted 
and tangled (see Fig. 10-2). This is presumably a con-
genital condition and may not be detected until a sei-
zure or a hemorrhage occurs. An aneurysm can grow 
and change in configuration and may damage adjacent 
structures. With deterioration of the walls in these ab-
normal vessels, a hemorrhage can occur into the sub-
arachnoid space, brain tissue, ventricles, or brainstem, 
depending on where the AVM is located.
Neoplasms in the Brain
A neoplasm is an abnormal mass of tissue, better 
known as a tumor. Benign tumors do not spread and 
are not recurrent. Malignant tumors expand and are 
resistant to treatment, though new treatments are 
being developed daily. As a brain tumor spreads, it 
presses on adjacent structures and may invade and 
destroy the tissue, obstructing circulation. If the 
damage is directly to the language areas or indirectly 
affects normal function of the language mechanisms, 
an aphasia may result. With a slow-growing tumor, the 
surrounding tissue may accommodate it for a time 
with few symptoms noted.
Tumors are classified according to their origin, with 
the most common source in the brain being the neuro-
glia; the term glioma is the general name for a tumor 
arising from these supportive tissues of the brain. Of 
the gliomas, astrocytomas, ependymomas, oligodendro-
gliomas, and tumors with mixtures of two or more cell 
types (fibrillary astrocytomas) are the most common 
primary brain tumors in adults. In the medical workup 
the tumor is graded, indicating its tendency to spread. 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
210
Tumors with distinct borders are classified as grade I 
because they usually are benign, do not grow, or grow 
slowly. Grade IV indicates a fast-growing, destructive 
tumor.
As previously stated, any condition or disease pro-
cess that can damage a blood vessel carrying blood to 
the brain, and thus oxygen, can result in a focal lesion 
affecting function of the language areas of the brain.
APHASIA CLASSIFICATION
The aphasia literature is characterized by a prolifera-
tion of clinical classification schemes. The history of 
aphasia is peopled by students of the disorder who 
either communicated poorly to each other about 
the disorder or were in clear disagreement about 
the nature of the syndromes. Syndromes were often 
named or classified in terms of personal bias. This 
situation has resulted in a number of confusing clas-
sification systems. Similar names in two classification 
systems may be used to describe radically different 
language syndromes, each with strikingly different 
lesion sites.
SLPs who have devised classification systems have 
generally disregarded the site of the lesion in their sys-
tems, basing their classifications on patterns of perfor-
mance on standardized language tests. Tests that use 
classification systems based on performance alone, 
rather than extensive neurologic data, are Schuell’s 
Minnesota Test for Differential Diagnosis of Apha-
sia54 and the Porch Index of Communicative Ability.48 
The approach to classification based on language per-
formance alone has further complicated the issue of 
classification.
Dichotomous Classification
Patients commonly are broadly classified into one of 
two categories on the basis of the general locus of the 
presumed lesion before specific syndromes are identi-
fied. The dichotomous classification of receptive and 
expressive aphasia, introduced in 1935 by the neurolo-
gist Theodore Weisenburg and the psychologist Kath-
erine McBride, has been one of the most widely used 
modern divisions. Expressive aphasia generally is asso-
ciated with anterior lesions and receptive aphasia with 
posterior lesions.
The motor and sensory division of aphasia intro-
duced by Wernicke has been widely used. Motor apha-
sia usually implies an anterior cortical pathology, usually 
located in the frontal lobe. Sensory aphasia implies a 
posterior lesion in the temporal lobe. Some experts 
have done away with the classic terms motor and sensory 
and directly classify the aphasias as anterior and poste-
rior, referring to lesion site.
A widely used dichotomy for spontaneous language 
in aphasia is fluent versus nonfluent. All persons 
with aphasia show some degree of expressive involve-
ment in conversational language, and, for most, their 
expressive language can be appropriately described 
as fluent or nonfluent. In general, the person with a 
fluent aphasia has expressive output that is perceived 
by the listener (even a listener unfamiliar with the 
language) as smooth and effortless, although some 
speakers show a hyperfluency in which the output is 
constant and fairly unrelenting. A person with a non-
fluent aphasia, on the other hand, is perceived by the 
listener as having difficulty with getting words out, with 
notable hesitancies, revisions, inappropriate silences, 
and perhaps even visible struggle. This dichotomy is 
often considered to be better than classification as 
expressive versus receptive because it recognizes that 
practically all persons with aphasia demonstrate some 
expressive difficulty.
Much of the supposed confusion in classification is 
artificial. In general, more agreement exists on the criti-
cal features that distinguish various aphasia syndromes 
than on the names applied to them. The syndromes 
of the language area, or perisylvian zone, are the 
most widely accepted of the aphasic syndromes. These 
include Broca’s, Wernicke’s, and global aphasia, gener-
ally considered the most common aphasic syndromes. 
Conduction aphasia is a less common perisylvian syn-
drome. The transcortical aphasias and various alexic or 
agraphic syndromes have their lesion sites outside the 
perisylvian zone, and they are even less common. These 
syndromes became popular as the primary classification 
system for aphasias that could be grouped by pattern 
of performance. The research and development sup-
porting two assessment instruments still in use today, 
the Western Aphasia Battery33 and the Boston Diagnostic 
Aphasia Exam,26 resulted in the widespread use of this 
classification system known as the Boston Classification 
System.
Classifications under the Boston System
Broca’s Aphasia.  Broca’s aphasia is marked by non-
fluent conversation, decreased verbal output, increased 
effort in speaking, shortened sentence length, dys-
prosody, and agrammatism (reduction of syntactic 
filler words with retention of nouns, verbs, and adjec-
tives). Motor speech disorders often are present, such 
as apraxia of speech and dysarthria. Some neurologists 
believe that what are referred to as speech apraxic 
symptoms by SLPs are merely a form of transient non-
fluent aphasia. Lesions limited to Broca’s area alone 
produce speech apraxia or this form of transient apha-
sia. More widespread lesions produce a chronic and 
classic clinical picture.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
211
Comprehension of spoken language is always quali-
tatively better in Broca’s aphasia than is production of 
language. Language production varies widely from near  
normal to clearly abnormal. Persons with Broca’s apha-
sia often have difficulty in understanding syntactic rela-
tions and show deficits in comprehending syntactic 
items they have difficulty expressing. Repetition is always 
abnormal, and confrontation naming (naming objects 
and pictures) is poor. Oral reading and reading com-
prehension usually are poor, although some patients do 
relatively well. Writing is poor, marked by misspellings 
and letter omission. In addition, the patient usually has 
a right hemiparesis and uses the left hand for writing. 
Some patients cannot write at all because of paresis. 
Figure 10-3 shows a computed tomographic scan of a 
patient with a left hemisphere CVA resulting in Broca’s 
aphasia.
Wernicke’s Aphasia.  Wernicke’s aphasia is a fluent 
aphasia characterized by difficulty in understanding 
language as well as difficulty in repetition of language. 
The speech is fluent but paraphasic. Paraphasia in-
cludes the omission of parts of words, incorrect use of 
correct words, use of neologisms (“new words”), and 
substitution of incorrect phonemes for correct ones. 
Verbal or semantic paraphasia is the incorrect use of 
words; literal paraphasia is the substitution of incorrect 
phonemes for correct phonemes.
The fluent verbal output may be excessive, a condi-
tion called logorrhea. Phrase length is normal, and in 
most cases syntactic structure is acceptable. Articulation 
and prosody are usually not abnormal. The speech often 
lacks meaningful and substantive words and clinically is 
described as empty speech. Use of jargon is common. 
Sometimes neologistic jargon is documented, implying 
that meaning is incomprehensible because output pri-
marily consists of excessive jargon and neologistic terms 
(neologistic jargon aphasia).
With Wernicke’s aphasia, comprehension of lan-
guage is poor, especially early after onset, and some 
patients appear to understand no spoken language 
at all. Others understand only some words, and cer-
tain patients have distinct problems in discriminating 
phonemes. Patients with Wernicke’s aphasia charac-
teristically demonstrate poor awareness of their com-
prehension or expression difficulty. Repetition of 
spoken language is poor, and failure and paraphasic 
FIGURE 10-3
Computed tomography scans of four horizontal slices from a patient with Broca’s aphasia 
and a right hemiparesis. Note the darkened area in the left hemisphere, which defines the 
infarction. (Courtesy of Howard S. Kirshner, MD, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
212
errors characterize confrontation naming tasks. Read-
ing is generally disturbed, often paralleling the distur-
bance in comprehension of spoken language.
The damage in Wernicke’s aphasia is to the posterior 
portion of the superior temporal gyrus of the dominant 
hemisphere, the auditory association area, or to Wer-
nicke’s area in the sylvian fissure.16 Extension into the 
area of the supramarginal gyrus and angular gyrus has 
also been found to be present in patients with persisting 
Wernicke’s aphasia.34 Because the damage is to poste-
rior portions of the brain, the motor areas in the frontal 
lobe and those pathways usually are spared. Therefore 
the patient with Wernicke’s aphasia will only infre-
quently show any motor weakness in the limbs or the 
face. A visual field deficit should be ruled out because 
of this posterior lesion site.
Conduction Aphasia.  One form of fluent aphasia is 
characterized by intact comprehension and fluent, 
melodic speech. Despite the good comprehension, 
repetition is poor in contrast to the fluency in spon-
taneous speech. Phoneme substitutions are frequent 
because of the inability to match acoustic informa-
tion with motor plans for the output of phonemes; 
word retrieval deficits are present. Wernicke postu-
lated a disconnection theory, proposing the cause 
to be a lesion in the arcuate fasciculus, the connec-
tion between Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. Conduc-
tion aphasia is less well accepted as a diagnosis than 
Broca’s or Wernicke’s aphasia because of questions 
about the site of the lesion. The lesion is not always 
in the arcuate fasciculus as Wernicke postulated, and 
conduction aphasia is almost never seen in diseases 
that interrupt white matter tracts and may involve the 
arcuate fasciculus (such as multiple sclerosis). How-
ever, the language syndrome has been repeatedly de-
scribed and can be diagnosed from symptoms alone 
without neuropathologic evidence. Two distinct loca-
tions of pathology have been demonstrated in con-
duction aphasia. One involves the arcuate fasciculus 
in the dominant hemisphere, usually deep in the 
supramarginal gyrus. Some experts argue that the 
supramarginal cortex or the inferior parietal cortex 
rather than deep white matter is the critical site. The 
other major site is said to be in the left temporal lobe 
in the auditory ­association area.
Conversational speech is fluent and often parapha-
sic, but generally the speech quantity is reduced com-
pared with that of Wernicke’s aphasia. Reactive pauses 
and hesitations from awareness of incidents of word-
finding difficulties are common, so the melodic line 
may be interrupted; however, the fluency is much bet-
ter than in Broca’s or global aphasia. Literal paraphasia 
is often present. Articulation is good. Comprehension 
of spoken language is also adequate in most cases. If 
comprehension is disturbed, the diagnosis of conduc-
tion aphasia should be questioned.
Repetition of language presents a serious problem to 
the person with conduction aphasia, and the dramatic 
difference between comprehension and repetition is 
a clue to correct diagnosis. Repetition is much poorer 
than the ability to produce words in conversational 
speech, and paraphasic substitutions of words often are 
present in repetition attempts. Errors also are present in 
confrontation naming. Reading comprehension usually 
is intact, but reading aloud often results in increased 
paraphasia. Writing disturbance or dysgraphia is pres-
ent. Spelling is poor, with omissions, reversals, and sub-
stitutions of letters. Words in sentences may be reversed, 
omitted, or misplaced.
Associated characteristics vary. Some patients show 
a right hemiparesis and/or hemisensory loss. Patients 
may also show a visual field deficit. Some patients may 
also demonstrate an ideomotor apraxia.
Global Aphasia.  Global aphasia is marked by severe 
impairment of both understanding and expression of 
language. The person usually is mute or uses repeti-
tive vocalization. This aphasia is usually associated with 
a large lesion in the perisylvian area. The lesion does 
not serve as a localizing one for the neurologist except 
when in the left perisylvian area.
Expressive language always is limited, although true 
mutism rarely appears other than initially. The patient 
can often use inflected phonation and sometimes sim-
ple words, such as expletives, repetitively. Comprehen-
sion is often reported to be better than production with 
global aphasia; patients may also become adept at inter-
preting nonverbal communication through gestures 
and facial and body language. This nonverbal compre-
hension may be mistaken for comprehension of the 
spoken word.
The person with global aphasia does not repeat. If 
a patient who appears to have global aphasia repeats 
adequately, the SLP and neurologist should suspect 
that one of the transcortical aphasic syndromes, 
described later in the chapter, is present instead 
of a true global aphasia. Confrontation naming is 
severely or completely impaired, and reading and 
writing are also severely or totally impaired. Many 
of the language dysfunctions are not reversible with 
treatment.
Transcortical Aphasias.  These language disturbances 
are a set of aphasic syndromes whose lesions fall out-
side the perisylvian area. They have been given various 
names, but Lichtheim36 identified them as transcorti-
cal aphasias, and they are probably identified most 
­commonly by this name. Benson6 called them border 
zone aphasic syndromes because the lesions usually are 
found in the association cortex in a vascular border 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
213
zone (also known as a watershed area) between the field 
of the middle cerebral artery and the area supplied by 
the anterior or posterior cerebral arteries. A hallmark of 
the transcortical aphasias is the retention of the ability 
to repeat with good accuracy. In contrast, the aphasias 
of the perisylvian area all present a repetition defect.
Three transcortical aphasias are generally recog-
nized: transcortical motor aphasia, transcortical sen-
sory aphasia, and mixed transcortical aphasia. This last 
type also has been called a syndrome of isolation of the 
speech area.
Transcortical motor aphasia is a nonfluent aphasia 
marked by more dysfluency and effort in conversation 
than usually is seen in Broca’s aphasia. Serial speech, 
repetition, and comprehension appear surprisingly 
adequate. The lesion is anterior or superior to Broca’s 
area in the dominant hemisphere.
Transcortical sensory aphasia is fluent and marked 
by paraphasia with semantic and neologistic substitu-
tions. Comprehension is poor, in sharp contrast to repe-
tition, which is surprisingly good. Reading, writing, and 
naming are poor. The site of the lesion is controversial. 
It is usually found deep to and posterior to Wernicke’s 
area in either the temporal or the parietal border zone, 
or it may be located in both of these sites.
Mixed transcortical aphasia is rare. The most striking 
feature is severely disordered language except in one 
area—repetition. Patients do not speak unless they are 
spoken to and answer only in repetition. The most strik-
ing feature is echolalia, the repetition of heard phrases.
Examples of echolalia may be incorporated into the 
patient’s speech. The articulation of phonemes is good, 
but the expressive language as a whole is nonfluent. 
Comprehension is defective, with little or no demon-
strable understanding of spoken language. Visual field 
defects and other neurologic signs are common. The 
pathology is mixed but generally appears to involve the 
vascular border zones of the left hemisphere.
Anomic Aphasia.  Word-finding difficulty, known as 
anomia, is common in many types of aphasia as well as 
in nonaphasic medical conditions. In fact, many neu-
rologists believe a diagnosis of aphasia should not be 
considered without evidence of some anomia. Further, 
anomia occurs in most types of dementia and is a clear 
diagnostic feature of Alzheimer’s syndrome, a major 
dementia. Anomia often is the only major language re-
sidual after recovery from aphasia of any clinical type 
and may remain a long-lasting problem in the recov-
ered aphasic.
Clearly anomia is not a good localizing symptom for 
the neurologist. Rather, it is a common symptom in 
what is called nonfocal brain disease. In those neuro-
logic conditions in which the whole brain is generally 
affected, anomia is a common language symptom. It 
occurs in many brain conditions, including encephalitis, 
increased intracranial pressure, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage, concussion, and toxic-metabolic encephalopathy.
When anomia is the most prominent symptom in the 
aphasic syndrome, the condition is known as anomic 
aphasia. The clinical picture generally includes only 
limited receptive or expressive difficulty, but on occa-
sion a disorder of confrontation naming may take an 
extreme form in these patients, and given patients may 
be unable to produce virtually any appropriate names. 
Spontaneous speech usually is fluent but interrupted 
by word-finding difficulties. Nonspecific words may be 
substituted for precise lexical items. These verbal para 
phasias are usually semantic rather than phonemic 
errors. Usually the patient exhibits good expressive syn-
tax except for pauses for word recall. Circumlocution, 
the utterance of circuitous and wordy descriptions for 
unrecalled words, is common in anomic aphasia. Com-
prehension is normal or near normal and repetition 
generally is intact. Reading and writing are more vari-
able, and word-finding difficulties are obvious in written 
language.
Anomic aphasia may appear as an isolated syndrome 
or be the final stage of recovery from other syndromes, 
such as Wernicke’s, conduction, and transcortical apha-
sias. Some controversy exists regarding whether a recov-
ered aphasic who becomes anomic at the end point of 
recovery should be classified as an anomic aphasic or 
according to the primary syndrome at the onset of the 
aphasia.
The site of the lesion causing anomic aphasia varies as 
does the presence of associated neurologic defects. How-
ever, anomic symptoms, in and of themselves, are less vari-
able than in other classic aphasic syndromes. In severe 
and isolated anomia, a possible focal lesion may be found 
in the left hemisphere. A prominent site for a lesion is in 
the left angular gyrus. Anomia is a common early sign in 
the syndrome called primary progressive aphasia.
Subcortical Aphasia.  With the continued advance-
ment of imaging technology, a new category of aphasia 
based on lesion site emerged and is known as subcortical 
aphasia. Although many aphasia experts have hypoth-
esized the existence of subcortical speech and language 
disturbance over the years, not until the lesions were 
documented did the brain-behavior relation became an 
interest of study. The reports of several investigators sug-
gested that basal ganglia and thalamic ­lesions are pri-
marily responsible for subcortical ­aphasia. ­Subcortical 
aphasia associated with thalamic hemorrhage without 
involvement of the cerebral cortex established the dis-
order, and then the availability of better imaging tech-
niques used in cases of ischemic infarction of the thala-
mus allowed more precise localization than had been 
attempted earlier. Bogousslavsky et  al.7 looked at the 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
214
presence of aphasia with infarction of four separate vas-
cular territories. They found aphasia characterized by 
hypophonia, verbal paraphasia, impaired comprehen-
sion, and intact repetition to be present after infarction 
affecting the vascular supply to the anterior thalamus, 
including the ventral anterior and part of the ventral 
lateral nuclei.
Radanovic and Scaff49 studied patients with left and 
right thalamic lesions. Their findings showed primar-
ily deficits in naming and some difficulty in individual 
patients with auditory comprehension. These problems 
were thought to be possibly related to verbal memory 
and attention deficits rather than true language defi-
cit. The aphasias reported after thalamic lesions do not 
match any of the classic cortical aphasia syndromes, 
and research indicates primary difficulty with naming 
in these patients, although some difficulty with com-
prehension is noted in the worst cases. As discussed in 
Chapter 9, the etiology of the lexical-semantic access 
deficits is most likely related to the indirect effect on 
cortical function that results from the thalamic gating 
mechanism damage. Nadeau and Rothi45 propose that 
treatment be directed to remediation of the declarative 
memory deficits.
Subcortical aphasias associated with basal ganglia 
lesions have sometimes been classified by anatomic 
sites. Each site is said to be associated with a differ-
ent cluster of speech and language symptoms. Several 
speech and language syndromes affecting the basal 
ganglia have been described. The syndromes vary 
widely, and no general clinical descriptions are associ-
ated with basal ganglia lesions. Kirshner34 identified 
the head of the caudate nucleus, anterior limb of the 
internal capsule, and anterior putamen as the most 
commonly reported lesion sites causing an aphasia 
(Fig. 10-4). These lesions result in the anterior sub-
cortical aphasia syndrome, which is characterized by 
dysarthria and decreased fluency but with a longer 
phrase length than in Broca’s aphasia. Paraphasia is 
also noted.
Alexander and Naeser2 suggested that four distinct 
syndromes affecting language and/or speech exist. 
Each is associated with a different subcortical anatomic 
site or combination of sites. These sites include (1) 
striatal lesions (basal ganglia alone), (2) internal cap-
sule lesions, (3) striatal and internal capsular lesions, 
and (4) insular and capsule lesions. Figure 10-5 lists the 
signs and symptoms of each of the subcortical speech 
or language disorders that they identified. Other find-
ings have been described in the literature as well. For 
example, disproportionate impairment of writing has 
been reported with subcortical lesions.60
FIGURE 10-4
Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing a lesion in the head of the caudate, anterior 
putamen, and anterior limb of the internal capsule (black arrowhead) resulting in a mild 
subcortical aphasia characterized by hesitant speech and anomia. The patient showed 
good recovery after a period of speech therapy. (Courtesy of Howard S. Kirshner, MD, 
Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
215
A simplified localization scheme based on current 
knowledge for all major aphasia syndromes is provided 
in Box 10-1. As described in Chapter 9, the aphasic defi-
cits seen with subcortical lesions are most likely related 
to the indirect effect on perfusion of cortical language 
and speech areas from the blockage of flow through 
lenticulostriate areas and poor collateral filling. These 
deficits probably should be treated as a cortical aphasia 
of the same nature.45
TESTING AND INTERVENTION FOR 
APHASIA
Aphasia testing has had a long history in neurology and 
speech-language pathology. Broca reportedly tested his 
patients with conversational questions in addition to 
testing tongue movements, writing, and arithmetic. He 
also described their gestures. In 1926 the British neu-
rologist Henry Head (1861-1940) published the first 
systematic aphasia examination in English. The test was 
not standardized and contained some items that were 
even difficult for healthy people to perform. Today 
clinical neurologists usually assess language and apha-
sia disturbances as part of the mental status examina-
tion of higher cerebral functions, which is part of the 
traditional neurologic examination. The mental status 
examination assesses major functions of the total ner-
vous system and lateralizes and localizes dysfunction 
when it is present.
The language functions tested by the neurologist are 
found in Table 10-1. An example of a bedside examina-
tion of speech and language designed for the clinical 
neurologist is found in Appendix C.
SLPs and psychologists have been more concerned 
about developing aphasia tests that precisely measure 
language behavior under standardized conditions than 
about providing tests that predict and confirm possible 
lesions or verify the validity of classic models of neuro-
logic language mechanisms. Testing is performed to 
assist in discharge and treatment planning. Direct inter-
vention for the language deficits may be provided on an 
individual or group basis, and literature is growing on 
treatment techniques.
ROLE OF THE SPEECH-LANGUAGE 
PATHOLOGIST
The SLP is perhaps the most critical member of the reha-
bilitation team for the person with a significantly limit-
ing aphasia. Numerous books, articles, websites, and 
treatment programs are devoted to language therapy 
with patients with aphasia. An attempt to describe treat-
ment methods would not do justice to this vast amount 
of literature and is not the purpose of this text. Research 
on innovative treatments involving constraint-induced 
aphasia therapy,3,12 transcranial magnetic stimulation4 
or transcranial direct current stimulation,22 and group 
communication therapy56 is helping clinicians combine 
or replace more traditional evidence-based treatment 
methods with these newer methodologies to enhance 
recovery of language skills. The SLP should be well 
Subcortical Aphasia
Striatal Lesions
No aphasia
Dysarthria possible
Hypophonia
Internal Capsule Lesions
No aphasia
Left dysarthria possible
Right affective dysprosody
Striatal and Internal
Capsule Lesions
No definite aphasia
Dysarthria possible
Insular and External
Capsule lesions
Fluent aphasia
Anomia
Paraphasias in
   repetition
   oral reading
   spontaneous speech
No dysarthria
FIGURE 10-5
The signs and symptoms of language and speech disorders 
associated with subcortical lesions. (Modified from Alex-
ander, M. P., & Naeser, M. A. [1988]. Cortical-subcortical 
differences in aphasia. In F. Plum [Ed.], Language, communi-
cation and the brain. New York: Raven Press.)
Aphasias of the Perisylvian Zone
Broca’s aphasia
Wernicke’s aphasia
Global aphasia
Conduction aphasia
Transcortical Aphasias of the Border Zone
Transcortical motor aphasia
Transcortical sensory aphasia
Mixed transcortical aphasia
Aphasias of the Subcortical Areas
Thalamic aphasia
Striatal disorders
Internal capsule disorders
Striatal or capsular disorders
Insular or capsular disorders
	
BOX 10-1   
Localization of the Aphasias in the Central  
Language Mechanism
(Data from Alexander, M. P., & Naeser, M. A. [1988]. Cortical-subcortical dif-
ferences in aphasia. In F. Plum [Ed.], Language, communication and the brain. 
New York: Raven Press.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
216
versed and dedicated to evidence-based medical and 
behavioral treatments and, as a member of the reha-
bilitation team, know something about pharmacologic 
intervention as well.
PHARMACOLOGY IN APHASIA
The use of medication to aid the language-impaired 
patient has been attempted for many years. The inter-
nationally known Russian neurologist Alexander Luria 
was one of the first to use a powerful anticholinester-
ase agent, galantamine, to improve speech and gnostic 
and praxic functions in brain-injured individuals.37 In 
recent years intensive study of the actions of neurotrans-
mitter systems has increased the use of drugs in aphasia 
rehabilitation, though the number of studies reported 
in the literature remains limited. de Boissezon et al.19 
reviewed the PubMed database for studies on the use of 
drugs to improve communication in persons with apha-
sia. This review found 24 studies published between 
1970 and 2005. These included trials of bromocriptine 
(a dopaminergic agent), amphetamines, cholinergics, 
GABAergics, and serotoninergic agents. The review 
and summary indicated that two pharmacologic agents, 
piracetam (a gamma-aminobutyric acid derivative “cog-
nitive enhancer”) and amphetamines, showed limited 
efficiency in enhancing and maintaining the commu-
nication of persons with the type of aphasia studied for 
those reports. All studies the authors reviewed reported 
that drug therapy was more efficacious if it was com-
bined with language therapy.
In brief, biochemical intervention appears to be 
a useful adjunct to the more traditional methods of 
behavioral therapy used with persons with aphasia. 
Drug therapy certainly will not supersede traditional 
methods of therapy, but the future appears brighter 
for more effective drug therapies combined with other 
approaches for the rehabilitation of aphasia.19
PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA
Historically, the diagnosis of the presence of aphasia 
implied that the language disorder was static, at least 
after the evolution of the stroke or the damage to 
the brain from an injury, and only improvement was 
expected after this period (given no other insult). The 
identification of a slowly progressive aphasia without 
generalized dementia changed that, and a new classi-
fication was born. This syndrome, now called primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA), is defined as an adult-onset, 
degenerative language disorder syndrome that selec-
tively affects the language areas of the dominant hemi-
sphere, with preservation of other mental functions as 
well as the ability to perform normal activities of daily 
living for at least 2 years. PPA was first described in con-
temporary neurology and then further elaborated by 
Mesulam.40,41 Anomia is often an early sign, but poor  
auditory comprehension, stuttering, deteriorating 
verbal memory, and reading and spelling difficulties 
have been reported. As stated in the definition, other 
intellectual functions remain intact for at least 2 years 
with psychometric testing revealing overall intelligence 
quotients within the normal range. It is difficult during 
the first 2 years particularly to classify it under demen-
tia, and this is why it is placed here in our discussion. 
It is often the case, however, that symptoms of cogni-
tive impairments outside of the language modality 
will begin to appear at some point though there cer-
tainly are patients in whom the deficit remained only 
in speech and language. Other neurologic conditions 
TABLE 10-1
Language Functions of Major Classic Aphasias
SPONTANEOUS SPEECH
COMPREHENSION
REPETITION
READING
WRITING
Broca’s
Nonfluent
+
–
±
–
Wernicke’s
Fluent
–
–
–
Paragraphic
Conduction
Fluent
+
–
+
–
Global
Mute
–
–
–
–
Anomic
Disorder of word recall
+
+
+
+
Transcortical motor
Nonfluent
+
+
+
–
Transcortical sensory
Fluent
–
+
+
–
Mixed transcortical  
(isolation of speech area)
Nonfluent
–
+
–
Paragraphic
+, Relatively intact; –, impaired; ±, variable.
Developed by Howard S. Kirshner, MD, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
217
as well as behavioral or social problems may develop 
over time. The patient may become mute and unable 
to understand written or spoken language. A diagnosis 
of PPA should always be made carefully and with full 
disclosure to the patient of probable progression of the 
language disorder and possible progression into other 
impairments.
As more cases of PPA began to be identified and dis-
cussed in the literature, observations of subtypes of the 
disorder were documented.28 A study of 31 patients 
with PPA with detailed speech and language evaluations 
identified three clinical variants: nonfluent progressive 
aphasia (NFPA), semantic dementia (SD), and logope-
nic progressive aphasia (LPA). Although early magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) studies classified all patients 
as having focal degeneration in the left frontal or ante-
rior temporal lobe, further investigation found distinctive  
patterns. Figure 10-6 depicts a coronal MRI scan of a 
patient who was diagnosed with PPA, with the finding of 
atrophy in the left temporal lobe and the description of 
nonfluent speech and anomia.
Because of the difficulty of clinical classification and 
the variety of classification descriptions of patients with 
PPA found in the literature, an international group of 
researchers and clinicians met for a conference in 2011 to 
discuss the clinical and imaging findings that could lead to 
a consensus regarding criteria for classification of patients 
into one of the three variants of PPA. This led to the pub-
lication of the results of that consensus conference.27 
The clinical findings that were agreed upon for each of 
the variants are listed in Table 10-2. Because it is not the 
task of the SLP to correlate the language symptoms with 
the MRI or other medical findings, the consensus recom-
mendations concerning the findings on imaging are not 
included. Most SLPs will be greatly interested and want to 
try to do such correlation, and thus the original article and 
follow-up articles should be read (as well as, of course, any 
research done since the time of this writing). Given with 
the clinical markers in the article are imaging findings that 
suggest pathology that are used as imaged-supported diag-
nosis for each variant. Medical finding of either “Histo-
logic evidence of a specific neurodegenerative pathology” 
FIGURE 10-6
Coronal magnetic resonance imaging scan of a patient with progressive, nonfluent apha-
sia. Note the marked atrophy of the left temporal lobe, which is easiest to see in a coronal 
projection. The temporal lobe atrophy and his symptoms of slow speech and anomia, 
which were progressive in nature, are consistent with the descriptions of the logopenic 
variant of primary progressive aphasia. (Reprinted from Bradley W. G., Daroff, R. B., Fen-
ichel, G. M., & Marsden, C. D. [Eds.]. [2000]. Neurology in clinical practice [Vol. I, 3rd ed.]. 
Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
218
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease or frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration) or “Presence of a known pathogenic mutation” 
plus a clinical diagnosis of one the variants was listed as 
definitive for classification in all three variants.28
Despite, or perhaps because of, the detailed descrip-
tion of features that needed to be present for the three 
variants, diagnosticians continued to be challenged in 
classifying some patients. In 2014 Wicklund and col-
leagues63 reported on this difficulty finding that only 
69% of the 84 patients studied with PPA could be clas-
sified using the clinical criteria. Responding to this, 
Mesulam and Weintraub42 made suggested revisions to 
the criteria. These suggested revisions are also listed in 
Table 10-2. Perhaps by the time this text is published, 
these or other criteria will be adopted or other classifi-
cations emerge.
At this time there is no evidence-based treatment pro-
tocol for PPA. There are likely drug trials ongoing and 
the clinical literature contains some small case studies. 
The use of transcranial direct current stimulation in one 
study of eight patients found some positive and lasting 
(12 weeks) changes on measurements of sentence pro-
ductivity, grammatical comprehension, and naming.25
Associated Central Disturbances
While testing the language system, the SLP or the neu-
rologist often finds or suspects that other disturbances 
are present that are not a part of the aphasia but accom-
pany the true aphasia. The examiner may also find one 
of these disturbances with no true aphasia present. 
TABLE 10-2
Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for Variants of Primary Progressive Aphasia
VARIANT
CORE FEATURES
OTHER FEATURES
SUGGESTED REVISIONS
Agrammatic
At least one of these must be 
present:
Agrammatism in lan-
guage production
Effortful, halting speech 
with inconsistent er-
rors and distortions 
(apraxia of speech)
At least two of these must be present:
Impaired comprehension of syntac-
tically complex sentences
Spared single word comprehension
Spared object knowledge
Semantic
Both of these must be  
present:
Impaired confrontation 
naming
Impaired single word  
comprehension
At least three of these must be present:
Impaired object knowledge,  
especially low-frequency or low 
familiarity items
Surface dyslexia or dysgraphia
Spared repetition
Spared speech production (gram-
mar and motor speech)
Logopenic
Both of these must be 
­present:
Impaired single word re-
trieval in spontaneous 
speech and in naming
Impaired repetition of  
sentences and phrases
At least three of these must be 
­present:
Phonologic errors in spontaneous 
speech and in naming
Spared single word comprehension 
and object knowledge
Spared motor speech
Absence of frank agrammatism
Make absence of definite 
grammar and compre-
hension impairment a 
core criterion
Reclassify impaired repeti-
tion as an Other rather 
than Core impairment
Unclassifiable by 
the 2011 criteria
Consider a fourth ­variant 
to include patients 
with a combination 
of agrammatism and 
semantic impairment, 
often referred to as 
“mixed PPA”
From 2011 Consensus Conference29 with Suggested Revisions31 to Enhance Classification Inclusiveness.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
219
These disorders are referred to as associated central 
disturbances because the site of the lesion is within the 
areas described under central language mechanism, but 
these are not properly classified as aphasic disturbances 
in most cases. Accompanying central disturbances may 
be agnosia, apraxia, alexia, and agraphia. Apraxia is dis-
cussed in Chapter 6 because it is a motor speech dis-
order; agnosia is discussed in Chapter 5 as part of the 
discussion on the various sensory systems. Alexia and 
agraphia are briefly reviewed here.
ALEXIA
Alexia is an inability to comprehend the written or 
printed word as the result of a cerebral lesion. Terms 
relating to alexia and agraphia (the inability to produce 
written language normally) are found in Table 10-3. In 
current usage, alexia is an acquired reading disorder, in 
contrast to dyslexia, an innate or constitutional inability 
to learn to read. The childhood disorder is often called 
developmental dyslexia. Although this distinction in 
terms is not universal, it is becoming popular. The classic 
term word blindness is rarely used in neurology or speech 
pathology. When used, it implies difficulty in reading 
words although letter recognition is more intact. Literal 
alexia means the inability to recognize letters; verbal 
alexia indicates that letters are recognized but words 
are not. Pure alexia is a reading disorder without a writ-
ing disorder (agraphia). A variety of terms and types 
of alexia have been reported, but a limited number 
of alexic syndromes are widely accepted. The modern 
understanding of alexia is attributed to Joseph Dejer-
ine (1849-1917), who in 1891 and 1892 described two 
classic syndromes, alexia without agraphia and alexia  
with agraphia.
Alexia without Agraphia
Alexia without agraphia is also known as posterior alexia 
or occipital alexia. The cardinal feature of this uncom-
mon syndrome is loss of the ability to read printed mate-
rial but retained ability to write both to dictation and 
spontaneously. Other language functions generally are 
intact. This alexia occurs suddenly as the result of a left 
posterior cerebral artery occlusion in a right-handed 
person. A striking clinical feature is the patient’s ability 
to write lengthy meaningful messages, with a contrast-
ing inability to read his or her own writing and, gener-
ally, to understand words spelled aloud. Initially patients 
with pure alexia may show difficulty with letters and 
words, but letters are easier. Patients usually are able to 
regain some reading ability, but reading usually remains 
quite an effort. The writing seen in the syndrome is not 
entirely normal, but retained writing capacity is impres-
sive compared with the minimal reading ability. Often 
the patient writes better to dictation or spontaneously 
than when copying. Right homonymous hemianopsia 
usually is present.
Dejerine20 found a cerebral infarct in the left occipi-
tal lobe and involvement in the splenium of the cor-
pus callosum in a patient with alexia without agraphia. 
Because the left visual cortex was damaged, all visual 
information entered the right hemisphere. The right 
visual cortex perceived the written material but could 
not transfer it to the left hemisphere because of the cal-
losal lesion. The inferior parietal lobe in the dominant 
hemisphere, known as the angular gyrus, combined 
the visual and auditory information necessary in both 
reading and writing; however, the inferior parietal lob-
ule was disconnected from all visual input. Because the 
lobule and its connections with the language area were 
intact, the patient was able to write normally.
Alexia with Agraphia
Also known as central alexia or parietal-temporal 
alexia, alexia with agraphia was classically described as 
TABLE 10-3
Alexia and Agraphia
ASSOCIATED 
CENTRAL 
DISTURBANCE
DESCRIPTION OF  
DISTURBANCE
Agraphia
A disorder of writing caused by 
cerebral injury; lesion in the left 
frontal or parietal lobe or in the 
complex pathways necessary for 
writing
Alexia
A disorder of reading caused by 
cerebral injury
TYPES OF ALEXIA
LOCALIZATION
Alexia with 
agraphia
Lesion usually in the dominant 
parietal lobe in the angular 
gyrus area
Alexia without 
agraphia
Lesion site is controversial; often 
two lesions, one in the domi-
nant occipital lobe and the 
other in the splenium of the 
corpus callosum (according  
to Dejerine)
Frontal alexia
Lesion in the dominant frontal 
lobe in Broca’s area and adja-
cent deep structures; associated 
with a nonfluent aphasia
Aphasic alexia
Lesions are the same as in the 
major aphasias

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
220
an almost total reading disorder, with limited writing 
ability, only minimal aphasia, and acalculia (acquired 
difficulty with calculations). In clinical practice the lan-
guage symptoms vary more widely than in alexia without 
agraphia. Some authors separate alexia with agraphia 
into two types: the classic syndrome described and the 
reading and writing disorder discussed in this chapter 
as aphasic alexia. Most accounts of the syndrome relate 
some aphasia, which is always a fluent aphasia. Gerst-
mann syndrome is sometimes present. This syndrome 
is defined when agnosia for the fingers, acalculia, right-
left disorientation, agraphia, and alexia are all present. 
A right homonymous visual field defect frequently is 
reported but not consistently present.
Writing disturbance varies in severity but is not severe 
enough to preclude writing of letters. Patients often 
cannot copy letters, unlike patients with alexia without 
agraphia, who copy laboriously and slowly. Also unlike 
in pure alexia, these patients do not comprehend words 
spelled aloud.
Dejerine localized the neuropathology in alexia with 
agraphia to the angular gyrus of the dominant parietal 
lobe, and this localization has been universally con-
firmed since 1891. Dejerine surmised that the angular 
gyrus in the inferior parietal lobule was essential for the 
recall of written letters and that its destruction results in 
disturbances in reading and writing in adults.25
Aphasic Alexia
The most common type of alexia is the reading dis-
turbance that accompanies the major clinical types 
of aphasia. In aphasic alexia, significant aphasic 
symptoms produce so much disturbance of language 
that reading is secondarily involved. In aphasiology 
alexic symptoms in aphasia generally are recognized 
as belonging in a classification of aphasia, not in an 
outline of alexia. Reading disturbances in each of 
the major aphasic syndromes have been previously 
described.
PSYCHOLINGUISTIC CLASSIFICATIONS
In the 1970s British psychologists became interested 
in reading disorders; literature began to include refer-
ences to new classifications of reading disorders. The 
British refer to these disorders as dyslexias, even though 
they are acquired, not developmental, disorders.13,38 
Three types of reading disorder classifications have 
resulted from psycholinguistic models of patient per-
formance on tasks primarily requiring reading aloud of 
single words. These disorders are known as deep dys-
lexia, surface dyslexia, and phonologic alexia. These 
classifications have become fairly well accepted and the 
symptoms often are identified in patients.
Deep dyslexia is identified by the presence of seman-
tic errors in reading aloud. Reading errors, such as 
saying “child” for “girl” or “quiet” for “listen” are com-
mon. Derivational errors such as reading “invitation” 
for “inviting” are present, as are visual confusions. Deep 
dyslexia implies that the dyslexic reader goes directly to 
the semantic value of a word from its printed form with-
out appreciating the sound of the word. Deep dyslexia 
has also been called phonemic, syntactic, or semantic 
dyslexia.
Surface dyslexia is distinguished by poor ability to 
use grapheme-to-phoneme conversion rules, although 
the reader relies heavily on these rules. The errors are 
phonologically similar to the target, and great sensitivity 
is paid to spelling regularity. Therefore, although many 
nonsense words can be pronounced, irregularly spelled 
words (e.g., yacht) are impossible for the patient to pro-
nounce correctly. There is little sensitivity to meaning; 
the patient may not recognize that the word does not fit 
with the context.
Phonologic alexia is characterized by an inability to 
read nonsense words, with some difficulty noted with 
low-frequency words.5 Errors often are visual errors. 
These patients are assumed to be impaired in the ability 
to use letter-to-sound conversion rules of the language.
AGRAPHIA
Writing is a complex learned motor act that involves a con-
version of oral language symbols into written symbols. The 
language symbols to be written are assumed to originate in 
the posterior language areas in the dominant hemisphere 
of the brain. These oral symbols are translated into visual 
symbols in the inferior parietal lobe. The linguistic mes-
sage is then sent forward to the frontal lobe for motor 
processing. Lesions in any of these language areas or path-
ways may produce the writing disorder called agraphia. 
The most common type of agraphia is secondary to apha-
sia and known as aphasic agraphia. Agraphia also may be 
seen in the absence of aphasia.
Cognitive-Communicative Disorders
The information presented in Chapter 9 regarding cog-
nition was brief and simplistic in nature. It was intended 
to give the student an introduction to the topic and to 
the relatively little we know about the neurologic basis 
of cognition as well as an appreciation for the rapid 
expansion of knowledge that occurred at the end of 
the last century. After digesting this information, com-
pare it with Wernicke’s model of the central language 
mechanism. This should highlight how brain injuries or 
diseases that involve the right hemisphere or that are 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
221
more diffuse and involve bilateral cortical and subcorti-
cal areas or neural networks could produce a different 
type of language disorder than that seen with focal left 
hemisphere damage.
This understanding became critical when SLPs began 
to be employed more widely in various medical settings, 
eventually resulting in involvement with a more diverse 
population of neurologically based communication dis-
orders. This included patients with right hemisphere 
lesions, traumatic brain injury, and dementia. As previ-
ously noted in the discussion of right hemisphere func-
tion, the communication disorders that these patients 
experienced were not truly language based. Rather, 
all these disorders may lead to neurobehavioral con-
sequences that result in cognitive and communicative 
problems. This sometimes affects the aspects of lan-
guage on which aphasia focuses—semantics, syntax, 
morphology, and phonology—but to a much lesser 
extent. These disorders more often result in commu-
nication problems that affect the accuracy, efficiency, 
and effectiveness of communication in ways that differ 
greatly from focal, left hemisphere damage. These are 
referred to as cognitive-communicative disorders or 
cognitive-linguistic disorders. All or some of the four 
key aspects of cognition tend to be affected by these 
disorders, and the resulting communication disorder 
is clinically quite different from the aphasias previously 
described. They each have a different neuroanatomic 
basis and require different approaches to assessment 
and intervention.
COMMUNICATION DISORDERS RELATED  
TO RIGHT HEMISPHERE DAMAGE
At the beginning of this chapter, under the section on 
aphasia, the etiology of brain damage resulting in focal 
lesions in the language area of the dominant hemi-
sphere was discussed. While learning about deficits seen 
in patients with right hemisphere (typically nondomi-
nant) damage, remember that the right hemisphere is 
equally vulnerable to these causative factors of reduced 
blood flow. Thus the same conditions—CVA, focal 
trauma, neoplasms—are the common causes of focal 
damage to parts of the right hemisphere.
With right hemisphere lesions in patients who are 
left hemisphere dominant, a broad spectrum of defi-
cits are seen. These depend on the site of damage and 
the expanse of the lesion. The most dramatic deficits 
are neglect, inattention, denial, visual and spatial per-
ceptual disorders, and constructional disturbances. 
These may be thought of as nonlinguistic deficits, but 
as Myers44 and Tompkins61 point out, they often have 
notable influence on communication and result in 
what Myers terms extralinguistic deficits. These fall in 
the category of cognitive-communicative deficits rather 
than aphasia.
If the clinician tests patients with nondominant right 
hemisphere damage, mild linguistic deficits may be 
found. Problems that may be noted are difficulty with 
confrontation naming, word fluency, body part naming, 
oral sentence reading, writing (especially letter substi-
tutions and omissions), and deficits in auditory com-
prehension when the input is complex. Although these 
problems may appropriately be classified as linguistic in 
nature, a strong argument exists that most of the com-
munication deficits are in reality caused by the non-
linguistic and extralinguistic problems resulting from 
the brain damage. Attentional problems seem to have 
a major effect on communication function in patients 
with damaged right hemispheres.
Box 10-2 lists some of those nonlinguistic and extra-
linguistic deficits that may be discovered in a careful 
diagnostic examination of a patient with a right hemi-
sphere lesion, and they are briefly discussed next. As 
you review these deficits, keep in mind that great vari-
ability exists in the incidence and severity of all these 
symptoms in the population of persons with right hemi-
sphere damage.
Neglect, Inattention, and Denial
Neglect is a syndrome in which a patient fails to recog-
nize one side of the body and the environmental space 
Nonlinguistic Deficits
Difficulty in recognizing and using significant 
contextual cues
Difficulty integrating these significant cues into an 
overall pattern
Extralinguistic Deficits
Distinguishing significant from irrelevant 
­information
Integration and interpretation of contextual 
­information
Inhibiting impulsive responses
Grasping figurative and implied meaning
Topic maintenance and efficiency of expression
Appreciation of the communicative situation and 
listener needs
Recognizing and/or producing emotional 
­responses
	
BOX 10-2   
Signs and Symptoms of Nonlinguistic and  
Extralinguistic Deficits
(Modified from Myers, P. S. [1999]. Right hemisphere damage. San Diego: 
Singular Publishing Group.)

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
222
surrounding that side. Patients may use only half of 
their bodies, even using only one sleeve in their shirts, 
even though the neglected side of the body is free of 
paralysis. Neglect of half of the environmental space is 
not the result of a visual field defect.
The exact neurologic locus of the neglect syndrome 
with right hemisphere lesions is not exactly known. 
Chronic parietal lobe damage shows a high correla-
tion with the syndrome. Unilateral inattention may be 
considered a subtle form of the neglect syndrome. Neu-
rologists test for unilateral inattention through a proce-
dure called double simultaneous stimulation, in which 
all sensory modalities, tactile, auditory, and visual, are 
tested. Visual testing involves having the patient fix-
ate on a point on the neurologic examiner’s face. The 
examiner moves his or her fingers into both the right 
and left peripheral visual fields, and the patient reports 
where the fingers are seen. Extinction is present when 
the patient suppresses stimuli from one side. Extinc-
tion may occur in all modalities or in a single modality. 
When extinction is elicited, the degree of inattention 
can be assessed by increasing the strength of the stimu-
lus on the inattentive side.
Many patients develop a dramatic denial of their neu-
rologic illness; the denial may range from mild to severe 
and is usually associated with signs neglect as well. An 
example of severe denial is the patient’s lack of recogni-
tion of a hemiplegia. The condition was documented by 
the Russian neurologist Joseph Babinski (1857-1932), 
who had a patient with a left-sided hemiplegia and left-
sided sensory loss who appeared completely unaware of 
his neurologic deficit. If the patient’s hemiplegic arm 
was placed on the bed along his left side and the neurol-
ogist placed his own arm across the patient’s waist, the 
patient would lift the physician’s arm aloft. If he were 
asked to grasp his left arm with his nonparalyzed right 
arm, he would grasp the physician’s arm. Asked to move 
his paralyzed arm even though his arm was completely 
hemiplegic, the patient would emphatically say that he 
could move his arm. Babinski used the term anosognosia 
to describe this unawareness. Anosognosia is sometimes 
used to describe symptoms of denial other than the ones 
described here, but it probably is best to limit it to the 
specific denial impairment Babinski described. Denial 
is common in right-hemispheric lesions but much less 
common in left-hemispheric lesions. Anosognosia does 
not appear to be based on a psychological mechanism 
but, rather, a more fundamental neurologic mechanism 
of gnostic loss.
Prosopagnosia
Prosopagnosia refers to the inability to recognize famil-
iar faces and their expressions. The patient recognizes 
individuals by voice rather than visual perception. 
Bilateral lesions usually are found in the occipital-
temporal areas in this disorder. The lesion in the right 
hemisphere is usually in the right temporal-occipital 
region. A specific type of color agnosia often accom-
panies prosopagnosia. The lesions that cause the facial 
recognition deficit also cause the color agnosia.
Visual-Perceptual Deficits
Right hemisphere lesions are associated with deficits in 
meaningful interpretation and recall of complex visual 
structures. Deficits in the perception and recall of let-
ters, words, and numbers may produce problems in 
reading.
Spatial Organizational Deficits
As previously noted, constructional disturbances are 
present with right or left parietal lobe lesions. In most 
instances right hemisphere lesions tend to cause more 
frequent and severe constructional deficits, but construc-
tional deficits can also indicate a left hemisphere lesion.
Prosodic Deficits
A common defect in the right hemisphere syndrome is 
known as aprosodia. Prosody, among other things, con-
veys appropriate emotional affect. Prosody also carries 
pragmatic information, allowing a listener to discrimi-
nate among questions, statements, and explanations. 
When normal stress or emphasis is disturbed in a sen-
tence, conveying new information becomes difficult.
Ross53 has reported widely on patients with deficits of 
both prosodic production and comprehension. Patients 
often are unable to provide variations in their voices and 
have a flat emotional tone. Comprehension defects are 
called affective aprosodia and may include several distinct 
components. However, these individuals report being 
able to feel emotions and hear emotions in the voices 
of others. Ross has developed a set of eight aprosodias  
and proposed that motor aprosodia is associated with 
right frontal damage. He has also suggested that sensory 
aprosodia is associated with right posterior damage. A 
motor aprosodia on the right is analogous to a motor 
aphasia in Broca’s area, and a sensory aprosodia on the 
right is analogous to a Wernicke’s aphasia on the left.
Many other neurologists have confirmed the pres-
ence of prosodic defects in comprehension and 
expression, but lesion localization for these and other 
symptoms in Ross’s scheme have not been consistently 
found in the literature. Various lesion sites of left and 
right hemisphere aprosodia have been associated with 
lesions in the basal ganglia of the right or left hemi-
spheres and in the anterior temporal lobe.
Careful and thoughtful consideration of the list of 
nonlinguistic and extralinguistic deficits in Box 10-2 
in the context of discourse and other complex tasks 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
223
of even routine communication reveals why some 
patients may have communication disorders that are 
subtle in nature but devastating to effective, efficient 
communication interaction. Joanette et al.32 suggest 
that these deficits may make it difficult for the per-
son to understand fully the context in which commu-
nication is taking place; the person thus appears to 
demonstrate a change in attitude when facing a com-
munication situation and is often ineffective because 
of these factors.
DEMENTIA
Cummings and Benson15 adopted the following opera-
tional definition of dementia: “an acquired persistent 
impairment of intellectual function with compromise 
in at least three of the following spheres of mental 
activity: language, memory, visuospatial skills, emotion 
or personality, and cognition (abstraction, judgment, 
executive function, and so forth)” (pp. 1-2). The defini-
tion emphasizes that dementia is acquired, is persistent, 
and does not affect all aspects of intelligence equally. 
The neurologist and SLP specializing in neurogenic 
communication disorders should recognize the early 
features of this syndrome so that the patient and fam-
ily, if they want, can be proactive to prevent the seri-
ous social, economic, and vocational consequences of 
unrecognized intellectual deterioration.
The incidence and prevalence of dementia are dif-
ficult to determine because studies differ vastly depend-
ing on how dementia is defined and what particular 
population is studied. All agree that the incidence of 
dementia is rising rapidly, with an increasing percent-
age of the population being affected. This is especially 
true because most forms of dementia are found in per-
sons older than 65 years, and the number of elderly peo-
ple in the population is greater than ever before and is 
expected to rise. The frequency of dementia diagnosis 
is estimated to be approximately 2% in persons aged 
65 to 69 years, 5% in persons aged 75 to 79 years, and 
20% for persons between the ages of 85 and 89 years. 
After age 90, the frequency increases to approximately 
30%. The cost of caring for patients with dementia in 
the United States has been estimated to exceed $30 bil-
lion annually.
The causes of dementia are many, and determina-
tion of the cause is critical because some dementias 
can be reversed. Before a diagnosis of dementia of the 
Alzheimer’s type or Pick’s disease can be supported, 
other diseases or disorders that could result in cognitive 
decline must be ruled out. These are conditions such 
as ischemic episodes resulting in multiple infarctions, 
extrapyramidal syndromes (including Huntington’s 
and Parkinson’s disease), hydrocephalus, metabolic 
disorders, toxic disorders, trauma, neoplasms, central 
nervous system infections, and demyelinating diseases. 
Even depression can result in cognitive decline and 
memory loss that mimic the beginning of a dementia 
such as Alzheimer’s. These diseases or conditions, how-
ever, have other signs and symptoms of a disease process 
or a disorder, whereas in the diseases discussed in this 
section, such as Alzheimer’s disease, the dementia is the 
primary symptom.
Classification of Dementias
Cummings and Benson15 classify the dementias into 
two basic patterns of neuropsychologic impairment 
with identified neuroanatomic correlates: cortical and 
subcortical dementia. A third category of mixed is also 
noted.
Cortical Dementias
Dementia of the Alzheimer’s Type.  Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, or dementia of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT), afflicts 
a high percentage of patients with cortical dementia. 
Cummings and Benson15 report that the clinical course 
of DAT can be divided into three stages, the characteris-
tics of which are fairly agreed on by most experts. These 
stages and their characteristics are summarized in 
Table 10-4.
Focal Cortical Dementias.  In 1892 Dr. Arnold Pick de-
scribed atrophy of the frontal lobe with an accompany-
ing dementia in which the patients first presented with 
psychiatric symptoms and then later developed memory 
loss, fluent aphasia, and finally a dementia that contin-
ued to progress. This syndrome eventually was named 
after him and is known as Pick’s disease. It is quite rare 
when strict diagnostic criteria are enforced in identifica-
tion. It has, however, been designated by the National In-
stitute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke as a part of a 
syndrome complex known as frontotemporal dementias 
(FTD). The hallmark of FTD is a gradual progressive de-
cline in behavior and/or language. Onset is at a relatively 
young age (average age of onset is 55-60 years). The clear 
difference between FTD and DAT is that these patients 
with FTD retain important features of memory, keep 
track of day-to-day events, and are fairly well ­oriented 
in time and space, unlike patients with DAT. Grouped 
with Pick’s disease under the designation of focal corti-
cal dementias is a complex of disorders of which the SLP 
should be aware. These disorders are categorized under 
primary progressive aphasia.
Neuropathology of the Cortical Dementias.  The neu-
ropathology of Alzheimer’s disease shows the presence 
of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques in the 
cytoplasm of nerve cells. These plaques, which begin 
in the walls of small blood vessels, are thought to result 
from defective enzymes that cause abnormal produc-
tion of beta-amyloid protein. The tangles are ­associated 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
224
with an abnormal tau protein production and are 
made up of clumps of these microtubules. These tan-
gles are pronounced in certain granular layers of the 
inferior temporal lobe, which has connections with  
the hippocampus.18 Tangles also tend to accumulate  
in the amygdala and in the posterior association regions 
of the cortex. In an individual the two hemispheres may 
show differences in the density of the tangles. Eventu-
ally the tangles are replaced by amyloid. Cortical de-
mentia shows extensive loss of pyramidal neurons in all 
parts of the brain and a loss of up to 50% of cholinergic 
neurons from the production areas in the basal nucleus 
of Meynert and from the septal area. Microscopic ex-
amination of the brain tissue of persons with DAT also 
shows neuritic plaques, which are remains of degener-
ated nerve fibers.
Subcortical and Mixed Dementias
Subcortical dementias may accompany extrapyra-
midal syndromes (as in Parkinson’s disease and 
Huntington’s chorea), depression, some white matter 
diseases (such as multiple sclerosis and AIDS-related 
encephalopathy), and some vascular diseases causing 
lacunar states. With subcortical dementias, cognition 
slowly and progressively deteriorates. Forgetfulness 
and alterations of affect are noted. Retrieval in mem-
ory is often aided by cues and structure. In mood, 
the person may appear depressed or apathetic with 
decreased motivation. The cognitive impairment has 
been described as one of dilapidation. Patients seem 
to be unable to synthesize and manipulate informa-
tion to produce sequential steps to solve a complex 
problem, although they may correctly perform indi-
vidual steps. The neurologic examination of these 
patients is abnormal, with motor, posture, tone, and 
speech problems noted.
The mixed cortical-subcortical dementias result 
from such entities as multiple infarcts, toxic and meta-
bolic encephalopathy, trauma, neoplasms, and anoxia. 
The mixture of characteristics depends on the parts of 
the brain affected by the disease, trauma, or dementing 
process.
Role of the Speech-Language Pathologist  
in Dementia
The SLP usually is called on to help identify subtle 
language disorders that may signal intellectual dete-
rioration because language is highly sensitive to even 
mild changes in brain function. The purpose of the 
assessment by the SLP may be to assist in making the 
differential diagnosis by trying to determine whether 
true aphasia, apraxia, or amnesia is present without 
language involvement. In Alzheimer’s disease, the cli-
nician may be asked to assess the effect of the intellec-
tual deterioration on functional communication and 
suggest ways that family and other caregivers might 
improve communication with the patient. In some 
cases, the SLP may provide a short period of treatment 
oriented toward training family and other caregivers 
on how to facilitate and maintain communication with 
the individual with dementia for as long as possible. In 
cases of PPA, especially before evidence of much cog-
nitive decline, the SLP works closely with the patient 
and the family to give them strategies to cope with the 
changing ability to communicate. Specific treatment 
targeted at providing alternative communication 
methods to patients with PPA has been found to show 
promise if the patients do not have concomitant cogni-
tive deficits.47
ACUTE CONFUSIONAL STATES
Several conditions produce confusion, which is charac-
terized by rapid onset over a period of hours or days. 
TABLE 10-4
Clinical Features of the Stages of 
Dementia of the Alzheimer’s Type
STAGE
CHARACTERISTICS
Stage I: Mild
Memory for new learning is defective, 
and remote recall is mildly impaired. 
Language shows word retrieval prob-
lems and some difficulty understand-
ing humor, analogies, and complex 
implications. The patient may be 
vague and may not initiate conversa-
tion when appropriate. The patient 
may also show indifference, anxiety, 
and irritability.
Stage II: 
Middle
Memory for recent and remote events 
is more severely affected, and 
language shows vocabulary dimin-
ishment. The patient repeats ideas, 
forgets topics, has difficulty thinking 
of words in a category, loses sensitiv-
ity to conversational partners, and 
rarely corrects mistakes. Comprehen-
sion is reduced, and language may 
rely on jargon and paraphasias. The 
patient becomes increasingly indiffer-
ent, irritable, and restless.
Stage III: Late
Memory is severely impaired, as are all 
intellectual functions. Language is 
rarely used meaningfully, and some 
patients are mute or echolalic. Motor 
function is compromised by limb 
rigidity and flexion posture.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
225
The causes of confusion include metabolic imbalance, 
adverse drug reactions, and alcohol and drug withdrawal 
reactions. Patients generally are inattentive, incoher-
ent, and irrelevant; they demonstrate fluctuating levels 
of consciousness. Agitation and hallucinations, usually 
visual, often are present. Acute confusional states gener-
ally respond to primary medical treatment. Confusional 
states usually are not the result of focal brain lesions; 
widespread cortical and subcortical neuronal dysfunc-
tion generally is present. Confusional symptoms also 
are seen during the period of posttraumatic amnesia in 
traumatic head injury.
Symptomatic language impairment is seen in con-
fusional states. The language disturbance may be 
viewed as a secondary symptom of the confusional 
state. Halpern et al.31 reported on the language symp-
toms of patients with confused language in contrast 
to other language impairments of cerebral involve-
ment. Lesions in these patients were either bilateral 
or multifocal. Vocabulary and syntax generally were 
normal. The most striking feature of the language 
of these confused patients was its irrelevancy and 
confabulatory nature. Other investigators also have 
found irrelevant language response and confabula-
tion in dementia, so it is not a pathognomic feature 
of confused states.
Confabulation is the verbal or written expression 
of fictitious experiences, generally filling a gap in 
memory. It is less marked in the presence of aphasia 
because it is a response in which the language areas 
must be relatively intact. Confabulation is more often 
associated with generalized cerebral deficit or dys-
function rather than focal lesions. Some instances in 
which focal lesions are associated with confabulation 
are in the Wernicke-Korsakoff amnestic syndrome 
and in ruptured aneurysms of the anterior commu-
nicating artery.
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is defined by the Brain 
Injury Association as “an alteration in brain func-
tion, or other evidence of brain pathology, caused 
by an external force.”8 The total combined rate of 
TBI-related emergency department visits, hospital-
izations, and deaths sharply rose between 2008 and 
2010 with the rate in 2010 being 823.7 per 100,000.11 
This increase was driven largely by an increase in the 
number of TBI-related ED visits; the rate of hospital-
ization remained relatively stable (91.7 per 100,000 
in 2010) while the death rate decreased slightly (17.1 
per 100,000 in 2010).11 The primary causes of TBI for 
nonmilitary situations are falls, motor vehicle acci-
dents or related incidents, and assaults. For military 
personnel in war zones, blasts are the leading cause 
of TBI. Risk is higher for men than for women and 
for persons between the ages of 0 to 4 years and 15 to 
19 years.35 The direct medical costs and the indirect 
costs in loss of productivity are estimated to be in the 
billions.
Knowledge about the deficits resulting from TBI 
has greatly increased over the past 10 years, as have 
the number of rehabilitation programs and treatment 
methods devoted to TBI. Patients usually display the 
language of confusion but often present a more seri-
ous and pervasive language deficit, now termed a 
­cognitive-communicative disorder or a cognitive-­linguistic 
disorder.
Neuropathology of Injury
The predominant type of injury, outside of a combat sit-
uation, is an acceleration-deceleration injury, in which 
the head accelerates and then suddenly stops, such as 
in a motor vehicle accident. Because of the laws of phys-
ics, the hard object (the skull) will move faster than the 
softer object (the brain tissue encased within). With 
the speed differentiation, the brain will still be mov-
ing as the skull stops abruptly upon hitting the wind-
shield or the ground. The brain tissue then will hit the 
skull. Discrete focal lesions may result from this direct 
impact force (known as coup damage). Contusions may 
be found at the point of direct impact, and evidence of 
brain damage may be present at the site opposite the 
point of direct impact. Damage sustained at the site 
opposite the point of impact is called contrecoup dam-
age. When there is focal damage, frontal (frontopolar 
and orbitofrontal) and temporal (anterior temporal, 
but not necessarily medial temporal) lobes are the most 
likely sites.1
Pioneering research in 194121 showed that a blow to 
a moving head produced devastating damage while a 
blow to a rigidly fixed head produced very little brain 
damage. Although not always the case, there is com-
monly an expectation, when considering the cause of 
the trauma, that a person who, for example, was hit 
with a baseball bat in an assault would sustain less total 
damage to the brain than the person who sustained a 
head injury in a motorcycle accident. Frequently with 
acceleration-deceleration injuries, no evidence exists 
of focal lesions, but diffuse brain injury is present as a 
result of several factors, one of those being molecular 
commotion. The molecular structure of the brain is 
disrupted as the impact force causes acceleration, rota-
tion, compression, and expansion of the brain within 
the skull. Another factor causing devastating diffuse 
injury occurs as the brain tissues are compressed, torn 
apart, and sheared on the bony prominences of the 
skull, resulting in diffuse axonal injury (DAI). These 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
226
forces placed on the axon trigger processes within the 
tissue such as breakage of the microtubules and desta-
bilization of the cytoskeleton; this damage impairs 
rapid axonal transport. Fluid may collect in the axon 
at the various points of disruption causing swelling at 
those points, giving it a beaded appearance.59 Suffi-
cient localized swelling may, over time, cause the axon 
to rupture, a process called secondary axotomy.59 DAI 
can result in permanent microscopic alterations of 
white and gray matter.
DAI, even severe DAI, may occur without skull frac-
ture or cortical contusion. This accounts for the fact 
that CT scans in the emergency department may show 
no abnormality. In nonhuman primate models, DAI has 
been produced just on rapid acceleration of the head 
with no impact as well as in cases of mild brain injury 
in which the nonhuman primate had only transitory 
alterations in the level of consciousness (e.g., in sports 
such as football and in blast-related TBI).
DAI and focal lesions are primary mechanisms of 
injury in traumatic brain insult. Secondary mechanisms 
that occur as a result of the initial direct forces also 
cause further brain damage. These secondary mecha-
nisms of injury include ischemia, hypoxia, edema, hem-
orrhage, brain shift, and raised intracranial pressure 
(ICP). They all may produce further deleterious effects 
on brain function, and medical/surgical efforts in the 
emergency department are often targeted at treating or 
preventing secondary injury to improve the prognosis. 
Such procedures may include a blood transfusion, plac-
ing the patient in a drug-induced coma, performing a 
craniotomy or removing a part of the skull, or adminis-
tering hormone therapy.
Neurobehavioral Effects
The neurobehavioral sequelae of moderate to severe 
TBI are usually divided into two classes: focal deficits 
and diffuse deficits. Focal deficits may be manifested 
as a specific language deficit (aphasia, alexia, agraphia, 
etc.) or as a paralysis of specific muscles or muscle 
groups. Disorders such as mutism, dysarthria, palilalia, 
voice disorder, hearing loss, and visual or auditory per-
ceptual dysfunction may be considered focal deficits. If 
present they are complicating factors in rehabilitation 
efforts and their specific treatment may be enormously 
complicated by the presence of diffuse deficits.
Diffuse deficits are more common and are most 
often manifested as cognitive disorganization. Ylvisa-
ker and Szekeres64 note that the cognitive processes of 
attention, perception, memory, learning, organization, 
reasoning, problem solving, and judgment are affected. 
These aspects of cognition and the possible effects of 
their disruption on behavior and language are outlined 
in Table 10-5.
Assessment and Treatment
Although standard aphasia batteries are used in assess-
ing the language impairment in TBI, testing must 
extend beyond these batteries in most cases. As exami-
nation of Table 10-5 reveals, the cognitive and com-
municative deficits of TBI can be quite different from 
the aphasia of a patient with a vascular lesion. The SLP 
must attempt to determine which, and to what degree, 
cognitive processes underlying language performance 
are disrupted and must also determine whether the lan-
guage impairment has a true aphasic component. Infor-
mal or formal testing and observation with assessment 
scales such as the Rancho Los Amigos Levels of Cogni-
tive Recovery29 can help the team members identify the 
patient’s best level of cognitive functioning throughout 
the course of rehabilitation. Parrish and colleagues46 
established a protocol they were testing to help identify 
the cognitive communication problems of returning 
combat veterans with mild TBI. This protocol consisted 
of a rating scale, selected portions of the Woodcock-
Johnson III, the Functional Assessment of Verbal Rea-
soning and Executive Strategies (FAVRES), and the 
Attention Process Training Test as well as informal mea-
sures of conversation collected while the patients were 
in a group situation.
MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Earlier we noted that the number of TBI-related emer-
gency department visits has increased sharply in the 
past several years. Of those persons receiving urgent 
care, approximately 80% were probably treated for 
a mild TBI based on symptoms at the time they were 
injured. These symptoms are typically described as 
feeling dazed or confused, “seeing stars,” or as experi-
encing a brief loss of consciousness or a brief amnesia 
period.59 The following is a definition of mild traumatic 
brain injury (mTBI) established in 2004 through col-
laboration of the World Health Organization and the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):10 
“MTBI is an acute brain injury resulting from mechani-
cal energy to the head from external physical forces. 
Operational criteria for clinical identification include: 
(1) one or more of the following: confusion or disori-
entation, loss of consciousness for 30 min or less, post-
traumatic amnesia for less than 24 h, and/or other 
transient neurologic abnormalities such as focal signs, 
seizure, and intracranial lesion not requiring surgery; 
and (2) Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13–15 after 30 
min postinjury or later upon presentation for health-
care. (3) These manifestations of MTBI must not be 
due to drugs, alcohol, medications, caused by other 
injuries or treatment for other injuries (e.g., systemic 
injuries, facial injuries or intubation), caused by other 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
227
TABLE 10-5
Cognitive Impairment after Traumatic Brain Injury: Effect on Behavior and 
Language
ASPECT OF COGNITION
EFFECT ON BEHAVIOR
EFFECT ON LANGUAGE
Attention
Holding objects, events, words, or 
thoughts in consciousness
Short attention span; distractible, 
weak concentration
Decreased auditory comprehension, 
confused or inappropriate language, 
poor reading comprehension, poor 
topic maintenance
Perception
Recognizing features and relations 
among features
Weak perception of relevant features; 
possible specific deficits (includ-
ing field neglect); poor judgment 
based on visual or auditory cues; 
stimulus bound (i.e., focus on part 
of the whole); spatial disorganization
Difficulty in reading and writing, poor 
comprehension of facial and intona-
tion cues
Memory and Learning
Encoding: recognizing, interpreting, 
and formulating information, includ-
ing language, into an internal code 
(knowledge base, personal interests, 
and goals affect what is coded)
Storage: retaining information over 
time
Retrieval: transferring information from 
long-term memory to consciousness
Memory problems, inability or  
inefficiency in learning new  
material
Difficulty following multistep directions, 
word-finding problems, difficulty 
with reading comprehension and 
spelling, poor integration of new 
and old information; language may 
be fragmented, lacking logic, order, 
specificity, and precision; difficulty 
with math also seen
Organizing Processes
Analyzing, classifying, integrating, 
sequencing, and identifying relevant 
features of objects and events; com-
paring for similarities or differences; 
integrating into organized descrip-
tions, higher level categories, and 
sequenced events
Poor organization of tasks and time; 
difficulty setting and maintain-
ing goals; poor problem solving, 
self-direction, self-confidence, and 
social judgment
Disorganized language (verbal and writ-
ten), difficulty discerning main ideas 
and integrating them into broader 
themes, poor conversational skills 
(may get lost in details), difficulty 
outlining material for study, difficulty 
with math
Reasoning
Considering evidence and drawing 
inferences or conclusions; involves 
flexible exploration of possibilities 
(divergent thinking) and use of past 
experience
Concrete, impulsive, and reactionary; 
may be easily swayed; vulnerable 
to propaganda; difficulty discern-
ing cause and effect and conse-
quences of behavior; poor social 
judgment
Difficulty understanding and expressing 
abstract concepts; socially inappro-
priate, lack of tact; difficulty using 
language to persuade, understand 
humor, learn academic subjects, and 
follow complex conversations
Problem Solving and Judgment
Problem solving: ideally involves iden-
tifying goals, considering relevant 
information, exploring possible 
solutions, and selecting the best 
solutions
Judgment: deciding to act or not to 
act based on consideration of rel-
evant factors, including prediction of 
consequences
Impulsive, uses trial-and-error 
approach, difficulty predicting 
consequences of behavior, shallow 
reasoning; poor safety and social 
judgment, inflexible thinking, poor 
self-direction, poor use of compen-
satory strategies
Difficulty understanding and express-
ing steps in problem solving to get a 
particular outcome; difficulty in math 
and higher academic tasks, socially 
inappropriate behavior, lack of tact, 
difficulty in understanding  
explanations for behavior
Modified from Szekeres, S. F., Ylvisaker, M., & Holland, A. L. (1985). Cognitive rehabilitation therapy: A framework for intervention. In M. Ylvisaker (Ed.), Traumatic 
brain injury rehabilitation: Children and adolescents. ed. 2, Boston, 1998, Butterworth-Heinemann.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
228
problems (e.g., psychological trauma, language barrier 
or coexisting medical conditions) or caused by pene-
trating craniocerebral injury ” (p. 115).
The terms mild TBI and concussion are mostly used 
interchangeably, although some believe that concus-
sion is a subtype of mTBI. In the TBI literature, a type of 
injury called subconcussive may be diagnosed. This refers 
to a traumatic impact to the head that does not result 
in any immediately appreciable clinical symptoms. It is 
believed that many people who experience a mild TBI, 
even with some symptoms experienced, do not seek 
medical care; because of this, the estimate by the CDC is 
that the true incidence of mTBI may be close to 3.8 mil-
lion annually. Although prognosis is fairly good, given 
appropriate rest and education about mTBI, studies on 
civilian populations are suggesting that between 10%  
and 30% of persons with a mTBI may develop some 
long-term residual deficits postinjury. Particularly in 
older persons (55 and up), a TBI may place that person 
at higher risk for the development of Alzheimer’s or Par-
kinson’s disease.24
In the twenty-first century the incidence of identi-
fied mTBI has risen greatly due to the recognition of 
the possibility and probability of neurobehavioral defi-
cits after what was once referred to as a “mild concus-
sion.” This occurred in many sports, especially football, 
although other sports certainly put the athlete at risk 
for concussion or brain injury due to a single or repeti-
tive blows to the head.
The other persons at extreme risk are military per-
sonnel who are in combat areas in which the use of 
explosives (bombs, grenades, land mines, mortar/
artillery shells) is commonplace. In fact, brain injury 
has become known as the signature wound of the wars 
in the Middle East. The use of improvised explosive 
devices (IEDs) increased exponentially in the wars in 
Afghanistan and Iraq. With this, a new etiology of brain 
injury, blast injury, began to be studied as it was realized 
that the mechanism of injury was different from other 
blows to the head and that the symptoms described by 
the soldiers were somewhat the same and somewhat dif-
ferent from other types of trauma. Military medical per-
sonnel also realized with further study that the frequent 
accompanying disorder called posttraumatic stress disor-
der, or PTSD, was complicating the deficits experienced 
due to the blast injury itself.
The brain injury that results from a blast can be 
more complex than that caused by a motor vehicle 
accident or a sports injury. The injury results from 
the complex pressure wave generated by the blast. 
This pressure results from an instant rise in the 
atmospheric pressure around the body that is much 
higher than tolerated by humans. It is called a blast 
overpressurization wave. This is followed rapidly by 
blast-underpressurization, which creates a relative vac-
uum effect. These extreme pressure differences result 
in both stress and shear wave forces as the waves hit the 
body of anyone near the blast.9
There are four basic mechanisms of injury to the per-
sons around the blast9:
	•	 Primary blast injury—the explosion itself resulting 
in the overpressurization wave. It dissipates quick-
ly, causing the most injury to those closest to the 
­explosion.
	•	 Secondary blast injury—the injury caused by ener-
gized fragments, perhaps resulting in penetrating 
brain injuries.
	•	 Tertiary blast injury—the injury resulting from being 
thrown from the area of the blast.
	•	 Quatermary blast injury—results from significant 
blood loss or from inhalation of toxic gases.
Even though the rate of TBI related to blast expo-
sure is high given our recent military conflicts, the 
research to definitively differentiate effects on the 
brain of blast injury from the types of TBI experienced 
by the civilian population has been difficult to do. The 
frequency of injury from only the primary blast is low, 
so there are confounding etiologies. The modeling, 
for obvious reasons, must be based on animal models 
and, thus, is confounded by the difference in size and 
shape of the human head versus those of the research 
animals. There has been little consensus among 
researchers as to which computational or physical 
model is best to use to scale the differences.50 There 
have been differences found in measures of white mat-
ter integrity57,58 and neural activation during response 
inhibition using magnetic resonance imaging.23 One 
study comparing victims of primary blast injury with 
a group injured through blunt force trauma found 
blast injury resulted in greater hypometabolism in the 
right superior parietal region. These patients showed 
significantly greater difficulty on measures of atten-
tional control, possibly indicating involvement of the 
parietal-frontal attentional network.39
CHRONIC TRAUMATIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
A neuropathologic condition known as chronic trau-
matic encephalopathy (CTE) has been linked to 
repetitive instances of mild TBI. Historically, late-life 
behavioral changes in boxers were described and the 
term punch drunk was the given descriptor; later, in 
1937, the term dementia pugilistica was used to desig-
nate the symptoms of cognitive, motor, and behavioral 
changes seen in boxers.51 Upon further study of brain 
injury, particularly related to sports injuries, it became 
apparent that the disease was not limited to only the 
sport of boxing. Case studies also began to be reported 

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
229
of nonathletes who experienced repetitive brain injury 
from different causes (e.g., domestic abuse, head-bang-
ing behavior, injury during seizure activity) and later 
began to exhibit the described symptoms. The term 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy was introduced in 
the middle of the twentieth century.
Descriptions of symptoms of CTE include a wide 
spectrum of changes in behavior, cognition, and 
motor skill. Problems with attention, memory, and 
executive function are noted in most cases. In 2008 
an organization called the Sports Legacy Institute 
formally affiliated with the Boston University School 
of Medicine in a multidisciplinary research initiative 
to study all aspects of CTE.51 The clinical criteria for 
diagnosis in a living patient are not yet agreed on. 
The pathology of CTE, however, has begun to be 
described through autopsy studies. CTE is reported 
to be characterized by a distinctive pattern of progres-
sive brain atrophy with accumulation of tau neuro-
fibrillary and glial tangles, microvascular pathology, 
neuroinflammation, and degeneration of white mat-
ter, among other pathologic changes.17,14 The Boston 
University research found that the location and distri-
bution of the tau deposits help distinguish CTE from 
some of the other well-known neurodegenerative dis-
orders such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s 
disease.61 In CTE the tau tangles tended to form in 
an irregular distribution pattern in the frontal and 
temporal areas of the cortex, clustered in dense 
patches in the depths of the sulci and in the more 
superficial layers of the cortex. Also important was 
the finding that beta-amyloid deposits, which are a 
hallmark sign of Alzheimer’s, were observed in fewer 
than half of the brains of persons with CTE. Thus at 
the time of this writing, the confirmation of CTE can 
only be done postmortem.
THE ROLE OF THE SLP
In any patient with any degree of cognitive-communi-
cative deficit after a TBI, the SLP is a critical part of 
a rehabilitation team. Although the involvement with 
the patients with mild TBI may be brief (but impor-
tant), the most successful rehabilitation of patients 
with moderate to severe TBI is known to be intensive 
and long term in nature. Much of what is done to 
overcome the resulting deficits in attention, memory, 
reasoning, and problem solving, which are the basis 
of the difficulty in communication, involves training 
the individual to self-monitor the use of strategies that 
enable adaptation of his or her external and internal 
environment to compensate for weaknesses. Follow-up 
with patients who have had success in vocational and 
social life after TBI has shown that the ability to incor-
porate these strategies and adapt them to new chal-
lenges seems to be key.55
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 Aphasia is an acquired disorder of language caused 
by focal brain damage that can affect any of the four 
modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
	•	 The most common etiology of aphasia is CVA, or 
stroke, which occurs when the arterial distribution to 
a part or all of the perisylvian language cortex is inter-
rupted. This interruption by a stroke is caused by oc-
clusion of an artery or by hemorrhage resulting from 
arteriovenous malformation, aneurysm, or trauma.
	•	 Aphasia may also be found after focal lesion caused 
by trauma, abscess from brain infection, or brain 
tumor.
	•	 Brain tumors, which primarily arise from neuroglia, 
are classified according to their origin. Tumors are 
also graded from I to IV according to the tumor’s 
tendency to spread.
	•	 The most popular aphasia classification system is 
the Boston classification, which includes Broca’s, 
Wernicke’s, conduction, global, anomic, transcorti-
cal motor, transcortical sensory, and mixed trans-
cortical aphasias. Each type has a characteristic 
profile relative to comprehension, fluency, repeti-
tion, reading, and writing.
	•	 The aphasias classified well by the Boston system 
are also relatively consistent with the site of the 
lesion, although many questions still exist con-
cerning the traditional localization, especially in 
conduction aphasia. Anomic aphasia does not 
localize damage well because storage and retrieval 
of words seem to be widely diffused in the brain.
	•	 Subcortical damage to parts of the basal ganglia, 
thalamus, and internal capsule has been found to 
result in particular patterns of communication dif-
ficulty consistent with aphasia.
	•	 The SLP is a critical member of the rehabilitation 
team for persons with aphasia, providing the most 
complete evaluation and setting treatment goals 
and plans.
	•	 Some advances have been made in the use of 
pharmacologic treatment in aphasia, but the drugs 
Continued

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
230
 C A S E  S T U D Y
A 61-year-old man noticed a “stutter” and difficulty 
expressing himself soon after a stressful situation. His 
dysfluency became more obvious over the next 2 years, 
and his wife began to notice that he had difficulty with 
auditory comprehension as well. Audiometric testing 
revealed only a mild bilateral high-frequency hear-
ing loss. Evaluation at this 2-year mark found normal 
performance on “bedside” neurologic examination of 
memory, calculations, general information, and copy-
ing of geometric figures. Speech was described as hesi-
tant with occasional literal and verbal paraphasic errors 
and a marked tendency to add extra syllables to words 
(palilalia). Comprehension testing found him needing 
extra repetitions to perform even one-step commands 
presented verbally, but he could readily follow complex 
written commands. On the Boston Diagnostic Apha-
sia examination (Fig. 10-7) he did have some difficulty 
with reading but only at the complex paragraph level. 
Writing was hesitant and contained numerous spell-
ing errors (Fig. 10-8, A). Repeat evaluations were done 
over the next 2 years, showing a pattern of progressive 
deterioration of auditory comprehension, speech intelli-
gibility, and writing. Reading comprehension was slower 
to deteriorate, but by 4 years after onset, he could com-
prehend only some single words written to try to aid 
communication. His wife reported mild forgetfulness 
at home, and he showed impaired visual memory and 
learning on neuropsychologic testing. He remained well 
groomed and socially appropriate with recognition of 
examiners who worked with him.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	This patient is an example of what condition dis-
cussed in this chapter?
	2.	Computed tomographic scans of this patient 
showed generalized cortical atrophy and ventricular 
enlargement. If more definitive imaging such as MRI 
had been available, what would it likely have shown 
as the focus of the atrophy?
	3.	The long-term retention of the ability to copy geo-
metric figures and draw a clock would speak to the 
intactness of which part of the brain?
studied have always been found to be most effec-
tive when combined with behavioral treatment 
provided by speech pathology.
	•	 Central disturbances associated with aphasia are 
agnosia, apraxia, alexia, and agraphia. Alexia is a 
disorder of reading imposed on literate individu-
als after brain damage. The classic aphasias have 
associated reading deficits. Two other classifica-
tions exist: alexia without agraphia and alexia with 
agraphia. Psycholinguistic classifications of read-
ing deficits also have been made: deep dyslexia, 
surface dyslexia, and phonologic alexia.
	•	 Agraphia is a deficit in producing written language.
	•	 Cognitive-communicative disorders are com-
munication disorders related to damage to the 
nondominant hemisphere or diffuse brain dam-
age. Communication deficits associated with right 
hemisphere damage, dementia, and TBI are classi-
fied as cognitive-communicative disorders.
	•	 The communication deficit associated with right 
hemisphere damage is primarily related to extralin-
guistic deficits rather than the true linguistic defi-
cits such as problems with word retrieval, syntax, 
comprehension, reading, and writing. Attention 
has a major effect on the communicative effective-
ness of these patients.
	•	 Patients with right hemisphere damage have 
difficulty with distinguishing relevancy, integrat-
ing and interpreting context cues, inhibiting 
impulsive responses, maintaining topic mainte-
nance and efficient expression, grasping figura-
tive language, and producing and responding to 
emotional responses.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
231
FIGURE 10-7
Connected-speech elicitation picture (commonly referred 
to as the cookie theft picture) from the Boston Diagnostic 
Aphasia Examination. (Reprinted from Goodglass, H., Ka-
plan, E., & Barresi, B. [2001]. The assessment of aphasia and 
related disorders [3rd ed.]. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams 
& Wilkins.)
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 10-8
Writing samples from four administrations of the paragraph 
writing subtest of the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Exam 
describing the cookie theft picture (see Fig. 10-7 above). 
Samples A and B were done 2 months apart, approximately 
2 years after the first symptoms of difficulty with speech 
were first noted by the patient. Sample C was done 1 year 
after B and sample D 1 year after C.
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Adamovich, B. L. B., & Henderson, J. A. (1990). Traumatic 
brain injury. In L. L. LaPointe (Ed.), Aphasia and related 
neurogenic language disorders. New York: Thieme.
	 2.	 Alexander, M. P., & Naeser, M. A. (1988). Cortical-subcor-
tical differences in aphasia. In F. Plum (Ed.), Language, 
communication and the brain. New York: Raven Press.
	 3.	 Ball, A. L., Griffith, N., & Al-Fwaress, F. (2006). Constraint-
induced aphasia treatment in patients with chronic lan-
guage impairment after stroke. Neurology, 66(Suppl. 2), 
A324–A325.
	 4.	 Barwood, C. B. (2012). Improved receptive and expres-
sive language abilities in nonfluent aphasic stroke pa-
tients after application of rTMS: An open protocol case 
series. Brain Stimulation, 5, 274–286.
	 5.	 Beauvois, M. F., & Dérouesné, J. (1979). Phonological alexia:  
Three dissociations. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and 
Psychiatry, 42, 1115–1124.
	 6.	 Benson, D. F. (1979). Aphasia, alexia, and agraphia. New 
York: Churchill Livingstone.
	 7.	 Bogousslavsky, J., Regli, F., & Uske, A. (1988). Thalamic 
infarcts: Clinical syndromes, etiology, and prognosis. Neu-
rology, 38, 837–848.
	 8.	 Brain Injury Association of America. (2011). Retrieved from. 
http://www.biausa.org/about-brain-injury.htm#definitions, 
February 3, 2016.
	 9.	 BrainLine. (2012). Blast injuries and the brain. Retrieved 
from Brainlinemilitary http://www.brainlinemilitary.org/ 
content/2010/12/blast-injuries-and-the-brain.html.
	10.	 Carroll, L. C. (2014). Methodological issues and research rec-
ommendations for mild traumatic brain injury: The WHO  
Collaborating Centre Task Force on Mild Traumatic Brain 
Injury. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 36(43), 113–125.
	11.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). In-
jury prevention and control: traumatic brain injury. Re-
trieved from http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/
data/rates.html.
	12.	 Cherney, L. R., Patterson, J. P., Raymer, A., Frymark, T., & 
Schooling, T. (2008, October). Evidence-based systematic 
review: Effects of intensity of treatment and constraint-
induced language therapy on individuals with stroke-
induced aphasia. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing 
Research, 51, 1282–1299.
	13.	 Coltheart, M., Patterson, K., & Marshall, J. C. (Eds.). 
(1980). Deep dyslexia. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
	14.	 Coughlin, J. W. (2015, February). Neuroinflammation and 
brain atrophy in former NFL players: An invivo multimod-
al imagining pilot study. Neurobiological Disorders, 74, 58–65.
	15.	 Cummings, J. L., & Benson, D. F. (1992). Dementia: A clini-
cal approach (2nd ed.). Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
	16.	 Damasio, H. (1981). Cerebral localization of the aphasias. 
In M. T. Sarno (Ed.), Acquired aphasia (pp. 27–50). New 
York: Academic Press.
	17.	 Daneshvar, D. G., Goldstein, L. E., Kiernan, P. T., Stein, T. 
D., & McKee, A. C. (2015). Post-traumatic neurodegen-
eration and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Molecular 
and Cellular Neurosciences, 66(Part B), 81–90.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
232
	18.	 Davis, A. (1993). A survey of adult aphasia and related disor-
ders. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
	19.	 de Boissezon, X., Peron, P., de Boysson, C., & Demonet, J. 
F. (2006). Pharmacology of aphasia: Myth or reality? Brain 
and Language, 102, 114–125.
	20.	 Dejerine, J. (1891). Sur un cas de cecite verbal avec 
agraphie, suivi d’autopsie. Mémoires de la Société de Biologie, 
3, 197–201.
	21.	 Denny-Brown, D., & Ritchie Russel, W. (1941). Experi-
mental cerebral concussion. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of Medicine, 34, 691–692.
	22.	 Elsner, B. K. (2013). Transcranial direct current stimula-
tion (tDCS) for improving aphasia in patients after stroke 
[Review]. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 6, 1–45.
	23.	 Fischer, B. L., Parsons, M., Durgerian, S., Reece, C., Mou-
rany, L., Lowe, M. J., et al. (2014). Neural activation dur-
ing response inhibition differentiates blast from mechani-
cal causes of mild to moderate traumatic brain injury. 
Journal of Neurotrauma, 31, 169–179.
	24.	 Gardner, R. C., & Yaffe, K. (2015). Epidemiology of mild 
traumatic brain injury and neurodegenerative disease. 
Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, 66, 75–80.
	25.	 Gervits, F., Ash, S., Diloyan, M., Morgan, B., Coslett, H., 
Grossman, M., & Hamilton, R. (2015). Transcranial direct 
current stimulation for primary progressive aphasia. Neu-
rology, 84(Suppl. P1.212).
	26.	 Goodglass, H., & Kaplan, E. (1983). The assessment of aphasia 
and related disorders (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: Lea & ­Febiger.
	27.	 Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Hillis, A. E., Weintraub, S., Kertesz, 
A., Mendez, M., Cappa, S. F., et al. (2011). Classification 
of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology, 
76, 1006–1014.
	28.	 Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Dronkers, N. F., Rankin, K. P., 
Ogar, J. M., Phengrasamy, L., Rosen, H. J., et al. (2004). 
Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary pro-
gressive aphasia. Annals of Neurology, 55, 335–346.
	29.	 Hagen, C., Malkmus, D., & Durham, P. (1979). Levels of 
cognitive functioning. In Rehabilitation of the head-injured 
adult: Comprehensive physical management. Downey, CA: 
Professional Staff Association of Rancho Los Amigos 
­Hospital.
	30.	 Haines, D. (2006). Fundamental neuroscience for basic and 
clinical applications (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Churchill 
­Livingstone.
	31.	 Halpern, H., Darley, F. L., & Brown, J. R. (1973). Differ-
ential language and neurologic characteristics in cerebral 
involvement. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 32, 
162–173.
	32.	 Joanette, Y., Goulet, P., & Hannequin, D. (1990). Right 
hemisphere and verbal communication. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
	33.	 Kertesz, A. (2006). Western Aphasia Battery-Revised 
(WAB-R). Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Pearson Canada As-
sessment, Inc.
	34.	 Kertesz, A., Lau, W. K., & Polk, M. (1993). The structural 
determinants of recovery in Wernicke’s aphasia. Brain 
and Language, 44, 153–164.
	35.	 Kirshner, H. S. (1995). Handbook of neurological speech and 
language disorders. New York: Marcel Dekker.
	36.	 Langlois, J. A., Rutland-Brown, W., & Thomas, K. E. 
(2005). The incidence of traumatic brain injury among 
children in the United States: differences by race. Journal 
of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 20(3), 229–238.
	37.	 Lichtheim, L. (1895). On aphasia. Brain, 7, 433–484.
	38.	 Luria, A. R., Naydin, V. L., Tsvetkova, L. S., & Vinars-
kaya, E. N. (1969). Restoration of higher cortical func-
tions following local brain damage. In P. J. Vinken, & 
G. W. Bruyn (Eds.), Handbook of clinical neurology. Disor-
ders of higher nervous activity: Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North  
Holland.
	39.	 Marshall, I., & Newcombe, F. (1973). Patterns of paralexia: 
A psycholinguistic approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Re-
search, 2, 175–199.
	40.	 Mendez, M. F., Owens, E. M., Reza Berenji, G., Peppers, 
D. C., Liang, L. J., & Licht, E. A. (2013). Mild traumatic 
brain injury from primary blast vs blunt forces: Post con-
cussion consequences and functional neuroimaging. Neu-
rorehabilitation, 32, 397–407.
	41.	 Mesalum, M. M. (2003). Primary progressive aphasia—a 
language-based dementia. New England Journal of Medicine, 
349, 1535–1543.
	42.	 Mesulam, M. M. (1982). Slowly progressive aphasia 
without generalized dementia. Annals of Neurology, 11, 
592–598.
	43.	 Mesulam, M. M., & Weintraub, S. (2014). Is it time to re-
visit the classification guidelines for primary progressive 
aphasia? Neurology, 82, 1108–1109.
	44.	 Mozaffarian, D., Benjamin, E. J., Go, A. S., Arnett, D. K., 
Blaha, M. J., Cushman, M., et al. (2015). Heart disease and 
stroke statistics: 2015 update. A report from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation, 131, e29–e322.
	45.	 Myers, P. S. (1999). Right hemisphere damage. San Diego: 
Singular Publishing Group.
	46.	 Nadeau, S. F., & Rothi, L. G. (2001). Rehabilitation of sub-
cortical aphasia. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention 
strategies in aphasia and related neurogenic communication 
disorders (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins.
	47.	 Parrish, C. R., Roth, C., Roberts, B., & Davie, G. (2009). 
Assessment of cognitive-communicative disorders of mild 
traumatic brain injury sustained in combat. SIG 2 Per-
spectives on Neurophysiology and Neurogenic Speech and Lan-
guage Disorders, 19, 47–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
nnsld19.2.47.
	48.	 Pattee, C., Von Berg, S., & Ghezzi, P. (2006). Effects of 
alternative communication on the communicative ef-
fectiveness of an individual with a progressive language 
disorder. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 29, 
151–153.
	49.	 Porch, B. E. (1971). Porch Index of Communicative Abil-
ity. Administration, scoring and interpretation (rev. ed.) (Vol. 
II). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
	50.	 Radanovic, M., & Scaff, M. (2003). Speech and language 
disturbances due to subcortical lesions. Brain and Lan-
guage, 84, 337–352.
	51.	 Reid, M. W., & Velez, C. S. (2015). Discriminating military 
and civilian traumatic brain injuries. Molecular and Cellular 
Neuroscience, 66, 123–128.

ADULT DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER TEN
233
	52.	 Riley, D. R., Robbins, C. A., Cantu, R. C., & Stern, R. A. 
(2015). Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: Contribu-
tions from the Boston University Center for the study of 
traumatic encephalopathy. Brain Injury, 29(2), 154–163.
	53.	 Rosenbek, J. C., LaPointe, L. L., & Wertz, R. T. (1989). 
Aphasia: A clinical approach. Boston: College Hill Press.
	54.	 Ross, E. (1981). Aprosodia: Functional-anatomic organi-
zation of the affective components of language in the 
right hemisphere. Archives of Neurology, 38, 561–569.
	55.	 Schuell, H. M. (1965). Minnesota Test for Differential Diagno-
sis of Aphasia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
	56.	 Schutz, L. E. (2007). Models of exceptional adaptation in 
recovery after traumatic brain injury: A case series. Journal 
of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 22, 48–55.
	57.	 Simmons-Mackie, N. S. (2014). Conversation therapy for 
aphasia: A qualitative review of the literature. International 
Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 49, 511–526.
	58.	 Taber, K. H., & Hurley, R. A. (2013, Winter). Update on 
mild traumatic brain injury: Neuropathology and struc-
tural imaging. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuro-
science, 25(1), 1–5 .
	59.	 Taber, K. H., Hurley, R. A., Haswell, C. C., Rowland, J. A., 
Hurt, S. D., Lamar, C. D., & Morey, R. A. (2014). White mat-
ter compromise in veterans exposed to primary blast forces. 
Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 30(1), E15–E25.
	60.	 Taber, K. W. (2006). Blast-related traumatic brain injury: 
What is known? Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neu-
rosciences, 18, 141–145.
	61.	 Tanridag, O., & Kirshner, H. S. (1985). Aphasia and 
agraphia in lesions of the posterior internal capsule and 
putamen. Neurology, 35, 1797–1801.
	62.	 Tompkins, C. A. (1995). Right hemisphere communication 
disorders: Theory and management. San Diego: Singular Pub-
lishing Group.
	63.	 Wasserman, J. K., Perry, J. J., Sivilotti, M. L., Sutherland, 
J., Worster, A., Emond, M., et  al. (2015). CT identifies 
patients at high-risk for stroke after TIA/non-disabling 
stroke: A prospective, multi-center cohort study. Stroke, 46, 
114–119.
	64.	 Wicklund, M. R., Duffy, J. R., Strand, E. A., Machulda, M. 
M., Whitwell, J. L., & Josephs, K. A. (2014). Quantitative 
application of the primary progressive aphasia criteria. 
Neurology, 82, 1119–1126.
	65.	 Ylvisaker, M., & Szekeres, S. F. (1994). Communication 
disorders associated with closed head injury. In R. Chapey 
(Ed.), Language intervention and strategies in adult aphasia 
(3rd ed.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

234
11
K E Y  T E R M S
allocortex
apoptosis
asymmetrical tonic 
neck reflex (ATNR)
bite reflex
cortex
ectoderm
embryo
fetal period
forebrain 
(prosencephalon)
gag reflex
Galant reflex
growth cone
hindbrain 
(rhombencephalon)
induction
mesocortex
mesoderm
midbrain 
(mesencephalon)
mitosis
moro reflex
neocortex
neural plate
neural tube
neuroprogenitor
neuroprogenitor cells
notochord
obligatory
positive support reflex
primary neurulation
prone
rooting reflex
secondary neurulation
segmental rolling 
reflex
spina bifida
suckling reflex
supine
swallowing reflex
symmetrical tonic 
neck reflex
synaptic stabilization
teratology
tongue reflex
tonic labyrinthine 
reflex (TLR)
vesicles
Pediatrics: The 
Developing Brain
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Introduction
Development of the Nervous System
Early Development
Embryology of the Peripheral Nervous System
Spinal Cord
Development of the Meninges
Development of the Ventricles
Embryology of Cortical and Subcortical Structures
Neuronal Migration in the Cerebral Cortex
Making Connections
Critical Periods
Diagnosis of Neurologic Disorder with Primitive 
Reflex
Asymmetrical Tonic Neck Reflex
Symmetrical Tonic Neck Reflex
Positive Support Reflex
Tonic Labyrinthine Reflex
Segmental Rolling Reflex
Galant Reflex
Moro Reflex
Oral and Pharyngeal Reflexes
Rooting Reflex
Suckling Reflex
Swallowing Reflex
Tongue Reflex
Bite Reflex
Gag Reflex
An examination of infant behavior is an examination of the 
central nervous system.
Arnold Gesell and Catherine S. Amatruda,  
Developmental Diagnosis, 1947

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
235
Introduction
This text is unlike many in neuroanatomy in that it 
starts the student studying the anatomy of the brain by 
learning the brain structure, function, and disorders 
using adult models. This approach was used initially 
and continues into the 6th edition for two reasons. 
First, many students come into the study of speech-
language pathology or audiology knowing little about 
the brain and sometimes little about the anatomy of 
the rest of the body as well. As you can certainly agree 
by now, the number of terms that must be mastered 
in neuroanatomy is intimidating, and then one must 
try to understand how all those parts work together to 
produce movement, sensation, emotion, and thought. 
The study of embryology throws one immediately into 
learning how a structure was formed but not necessarily 
what it does and how it is related to the other ­structures 
developing simultaneously. This text is organized so 
that the student with little knowledge can learn the 
structures and their location and function and relation-
ship to others first and then learn how they evolved 
after conception.
The second reason this approach was used is that stu-
dents assigned to study this depth of material are adults 
or at least 18 years of age. As adults, we are much more 
familiar with the movement patterns and ­cognitive 
processes of a more mature nervous system than we 
are of the system we have just or several years ago left 
behind—that of the young child. Thus it may be much 
easier to identify with the examples of various functions 
and, perhaps, effects of injury on function.
Your particular instructor may choose to have you 
do this part of the text first rather than following the 
­organization of the text; this, of course, is also fine and 
is in fact fairly typical. At whatever point you are when 
you are studying the next part of the text, may you find 
the miracle of the development of this complex ­nervous 
system of ours fascinating!
Development of the Nervous System
The embryologic development of the nervous system is 
an intriguing sequence of events occurring over a brief 
period. The spinal cord and brain (with the exception 
of the cerebellum) reach development of their full 
number of neurons by the 25th week of gestation. This 
includes the billions of cells of the cerebral cortex, both 
the neurons and the neuroglial cells.
Dendrites of the neuronal cells begin to develop a 
few months before birth but are quite primitive in the 
newborn. In the first year of life dendritic ­processes 
develop on each cortical neuron to establish the 
startling number of connections each nerve cell makes 
with other neurons. The average number of connec-
tions that a single cell will make is within a range of 
1000 to 10,000.
EARLY DEVELOPMENT
During the second week after conception, the blasto-
cyst that has been formed from mitosis of the zygote is 
embedded in the uterus. As this process takes place, the 
inner cell mass changes and produces a thick, two-lay-
ered plate called the embryonic disk. At the beginning of 
the third week, this mass is referred to as the embryo with 
the embryonic period lasting through the eighth week.11 
Many embryologists divide the embryonic period into 
23 stages called the Carnegie stages,13 but this depth of 
detail is beyond the scope of this chapter. The ninth week 
after fertilization until term (or 38 weeks after the last 
normal menstrual period) is known as the fetal period.
During the embryonic period, three primary germ 
layers that give rise to the tissues and organs begin to 
form at the beginning of the third week. These are 
the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The meso-
derm gives rise to muscle, connective tissues, cartilage, 
bone, and blood vessels, whereas the endoderm forms 
the linings of the digestive and respiratory tracts. The 
embryonic ectoderm gives rise to the epidermis and 
the nervous system. From these few dozen cells of the 
ectoderm of an almost infinitesimal weight comes the 
approximately 800-gram brain of the child at birth. 
Most, although not all, of the neuron cells will complete 
their cell division before birth.9
Also during the third week a cellular rod called the 
notochord develops. The notochord defines the primi-
tive axis of the embryo and gives it some rigidity. The ver-
tebral column segments will form from the mesoderm 
around the notochord. Important to embryonic develop-
ment is a function known as induction, essentially mean-
ing that the proper development of one structure of the 
nervous system is dependent on the proper development 
of its neighbors. The notochord is important in induc-
tion as it directs the overlying ectoderm to thicken and 
form the neural plate. The neural plate eventually gives 
rise to the central nervous system (CNS).
On the eighteenth day of development the neural 
plate begins folding in along its axis to form a neural 
groove with neural folds along each side. These folds 
move together and begin to fuse, with fusion occurring 
first in the middle and then progressing cranially and 
caudally. Closure at the cranial end is more rapid than 
at the caudal end. This fusing of the neural folds forms 
what is called the neural tube (Fig. 11-1), which then 
separates from the surface ectoderm. The closure of the 
neural tube is complete by the end of the fourth week.

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
236
When the neural tube is formed, three layers that 
consist of four “zones” appear for a brief period. These 
zones give rise eventually to important adult derivatives. 
The zones and eventual derivatives are as follows9:
	•	 Ventricular zone (VZ): first to appear; contains rapid-
ly dividing neuroprogenitor cells. At least three classes 
of these cells have been found in the human VZ:2
	
•	 Radial glial cells, expressing only glial markers
	
•	 Multipotent precursor cells coexpressing glial and 
neuronal markers
	
•	 Committed neuronal precursor cells
	•	 Marginal zone: contains few cell bodies; mostly con-
sists of processes of the cells making up the ventricular 
zone and eventually invaded by axons from the inter-
mediate zone. Becomes layer 1 of the adult cortex
	•	 Intermediate zone: latest to appear and formed be-
tween the ventricular and marginal zones; contains 
immature postmitotic cells migrated from the ven-
tricular zone. Some of their processes will find their 
way to the marginal zone.
	•	 Subventricular zone: forms between the ventricular 
and intermediate zones and contains progenitor 
cells that do not migrate further. They eventually 
become the macroglial cells of the CNS and some 
specialized cells of the brainstem and forebrain.
As the neural tube is rising from the ectoderm, the 
mesodermal layer of the embryo is forming longitudinal 
columns that soon divide into paired cubelike structures 
called somites (see Fig. 11-1). Eventually 42 to 44 pairs 
of somites develop. They form distinct surface elevations 
A
B
C
Neural
plate
Neural
groove
Neural
tube
Neural
crest
A
A
AA
Ectoderm
FIGURE 11-1
Early development of the human nervous system. Drawings on the left are external views; 
cross-sections are shown on the right. (A) Neural cells develop from ectoderm (skin-to-be) 
cells to form the neural plate. (B) The plate folds in to form the neural groove. (C) Further 
folding inwards forms the neural tube. (From Stokes, M. [2012]. Physical Management in 
­Neurological Rehabilitation [3rd ed.]. Edinburgh: Mosby Ltd.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
237
on the embryo. These somites differentiate into muscle, 
bone, and connective tissues (i.e., nonneural tissue).
A cross section of the developing embryo (see Fig. 
11-1) shows another activity occurring as the neural folds 
fuse during the fourth week of development. Some of 
the neuroectodermal cells that lie along the crest of the 
neural folds break away from the other cells and migrate 
to the sides of the neural tube. These cells form the neu-
ral crest. The neural crest soon separates into two parts 
that migrate to the right and left dorsolateral aspects of 
the tube, where they will give rise to various important 
structures in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and to 
the ganglia of the autonomic nervous system. The dorsal 
root ganglia of the spinal nerves are derived from the 
neural crest, as are parts of the ganglia of cranial nerves 
V, VII, IX, and X. In addition to these ganglion cells, the 
neural crest also is responsible for Schwann cells and 
cells forming the meninges of the brain and spinal cord.
At the beginning of the fourth week, the embryo is 
almost straight, and temporary openings called neuro-
pores appear at the cranial and caudal ends of the tube 
(see Fig. 11-1). These openings close by the end of the 
fourth week, and a longitudinal folding at the head 
(midbrain flexure) and the tail (cervical flexure) areas 
occurs, giving the embryo a characteristic C-shaped 
curve. Also during this time, four brachial or pharyngeal 
arches develop in the head area. Primary derivatives of 
the first arch are the bones of the jaw, as well as the mus-
cles of mastication. The second, third, and fourth arches 
primarily give rise to the muscles and cartilages of the 
face, larynx, and pharynx. Figure 11-2 shows a 5-week-old 
embryo depicting some of these structures.
As the cranial and caudal ends of the neural tube begin 
to become more differentiated, cells from the neuroec-
toderm called neuroprogenitor cells begin to flourish. 
They migrate and differentiate to form specific areas of 
the brain. By the end of the fourth week of development, 
the neural tube is closed. After closure, an enlarged ros-
tral region develops containing three subdivisions of 
the brain. The portion of the neural tube cranial to the 
fourth pair of somites develops into the brain. A narrow 
region caudal to the fourth pair of somites develops into 
the primitive spinal cord (Fig. 11-3).
How the neural tube matures into the mature central 
nervous system is regulated by a process called neuru-
lation. Haines9 described two types of neurulation. Pri-
mary neurulation is the process that forms the brain and 
the spinal cord through the lumbar vertebrae. Second-
ary neurulation is the process by which the caudal neu-
ral tube (and eventually the caudal neural plate) gives 
rise to the sacral and coccygeal vertebrae. Problems with 
neural development during the primary or secondary 
neurulation process lead to dysraphic defects (defects 
of fusion). A condition called anencephaly can result 
from a defect of primary neurulation. With this there is 
a failure of the anterior neural tube closure. This results 
in an unformed brain with the skull perhaps not present, 
and facial deformities. A birth defect related to a defect 
of secondary neurulation may occur in spinal cord 
embryologic development and is known as spina bifida 
(Fig. 11-4). In this condition the posterior neural tube 
fails to completely close, resulting in a cleft of the lower 
spinal cord. Although not typically fatal, spina bifida may 
CN III
Brachial arches
CN IV
CN V
CN VI
CN VII
CN IX
CN X
CN XI
CN XII
FIGURE 11-2
Schematic drawing of a 5-week-old embryo shows distribu-
tion of most of the cranial nerves, especially those supplying 
the pharyngeal arches. (From Moore, K. L., Persaud, T. V. N.,  
& Torchia, M. G. [2016]. The Developing Human: Clinically 
Oriented Embryology [10th ed.]. Philadelphia: Elsevier.)
Forebrain
Optic cup
Hindbrain
Midbrain
FIGURE 11-3
External view of the brain at the end of the fifth week. Primi-
tive spinal cord can be seen inferior to the hindbrain. (From 
Moore, K. L., Persaud, T. V. N., & Torchia, M. G. [2016]. The 
Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology [10th ed.].  
Philadelphia: Elsevier.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
238
be accompanied by other CNS defects, especially hydro-
cephalus. Environmental factors as well as the presence 
of other CNS insults can result in neurocognitive deficits 
in addition to the motor impairment in these children.5
Embryology of the Peripheral 
Nervous System
The PNS develops mostly from neural cells and is summa-
rized below:
Neural Elements
Neurons of:
	•	 Posterior root ganglia
	•	 Paravertebral (sympathetic chain) ganglia
	•	 Prevertebral (preaortic) ganglia
	•	 Enteric ganglia
	•	 Parasympathetic ganglia of cranial nerves VII, IX, 
and X
	•	 Sensory ganglia of cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, IX, and X
Nonneural Elements
	•	 Schwann cells
	•	 Melanocytes
	•	 Odontoblasts
	•	 Satellite cells of peripheral ganglia
	•	 Cartilage of the pharyngeal arches
	•	 Ciliary and papillary muscles
	•	 Chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla
	•	 Pia and arachnoid of the meninges
	•	 Some of the sensory cells in these ganglia arise from 
placodes.
Embryologic development of the neural tube forms the 
cells that arise from the lateral edge of the neural plate, 
detach, and move laterally to the neural tube. This neural 
crest gives rise to most of the PNS, as well as to a number 
of other structures. This early development of the nervous 
system is illustrated in Figure 11-1.
The PNS also arises from specialized epidermal 
cells called placodes that are found in the developing 
head region of the embryo. These cells join neural 
crest cells, and together placodes and neural crest cells 
form the ganglia of cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, IX, and 
X (Fig. 11-5).
Spinal Cord
The spinal cord develops from caudal portions of the 
neural tube (see Fig. 11-1). The neural canal of this 
region becomes the central canal of the spinal cord. 
Neuroblasts that give rise to the spinal cord neurons 
are produced between the fourth and twentieth week of 
development by a proliferation in the ventricular layer 
lining the neural canal. These cells migrate peripher-
ally to form four longitudinal plates. These plates will 
become the gray matter of the spinal cord. Within this 
gray matter development a pair of anteriorly located 
cell masses, which constitute the basal plate and a pair 
No herniation
of spinal cord
or meninges
Vertebral arches
between L5 and S1
fail to fuse
Saclike protrusion
containing meninges
and cerebrospinal
fluid
Saclike protrusion
is filled with 
cerebrospinal
fluid, meninges, 
nerve roots, and 
spinal cord
Spina bifida occulta
Spina bifida cystica:
meningocele
Spina bifida cystica:
myelomeningocele   
Hair tuft
FIGURE 11-4
Three forms of spina bifida. (From James, S., & Ashwill, J. [2013]. Nursing Care of Children 
[4th ed.]. St. Louis: Saunders.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
239
of posteriorly located masses, which constitute the alar 
plate, will be formed. The basal plate develops into the 
anterior, or ventral, horn of the spinal cord, and the 
alar plate becomes the posterior, or dorsal, horn of the 
spinal cord (Fig. 11-6).
The lateral walls of the developing spinal cord thicken 
differentially into zones. The marginal zone gradually 
becomes the white matter of the cord as axons grow into 
it. A shallow groove, called the sulcus limitans, develops 
on the lateral walls of the developing cord. This groove 
B
Site of 
midbrain
1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 
4th pharyngeal
arches
Left atrial
prominence
of heart
Upper limb
bud
Somites
(28-day embryo) = 5.0 mm
Mesonephric
ridge
Site of 
lens placode
Umbilical cord
Caudal
eminence
Lower limb bud
Site of 
nasal placode
Left ventricular
prominence of heart
A
FIGURE 11-5
A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 13, approximately 28 days. The rostral 
and caudal neuropores are closed. B, Drawing indicating the structures shown in A. The 
embryo has a characteristic C-shaped curvature, four pharyngeal arches, and upper and 
lower limb buds. (A, From Nishimura, H., Semba, R., Tanimura, T., & Tanaka, O. [1977]. 
Prenatal development of the human with special reference to craniofacial structures: An atlas. 
Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health.)
Neural tube
Neural canal
Primordium of
spinal ganglion
Marginal zone
Roof plate
Afferent neuroblasts
in spinal ganglion
Dorsal gray horn
Dorsal median septum
Central canal
Ventral 
gray 
horn
Motor
neuron
Trunk of
spinal nerve
Ventral motor root
Ventral 
median
fissure
White
matter
Alar plate
Floor plate
Basal plate
Motor neuroblast
Sulcus
limitans
A
B
C
FIGURE 11-6
Development of the spinal cord. A, Transverse section of the neural tube of an embryo 
of approximately 23 days. B and C, Similar sections at 6 and 9 weeks, respectively. (From 
Moore, K. L., Persaud. T. V. N., & Torchia, M. G. [2016]. The Developing Human: Clinically 
Oriented Embryology [10th ed.]. Philadelphia: Elsevier.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
240
divides the dorsal lamina, or alar plate, from the ven-
tral lamina, or basal plate. The alar plate or dorsal part 
of the spinal cord is later associated with afferent (sen-
sory) functions and the basal plate or ventral part of the 
spinal cord with efferent (motor) functions.
Until the third month of development, the spinal cord 
extends the entire length of the developing vertebral 
column. At this time the dorsal (sensory) and ventral 
(motor) roots of the spinal cord extend laterally from 
the spinal cord and unite in the intervertebral foramina 
to form the spinal nerves. The vertebral column elon-
gates at a more rapid rate than the spinal cord, thus mak-
ing the spinal cord shorter than the vertebral column. At 
birth the end of the cord, called the conus medullaris, is 
located at the level of the third lumbar vertebra. In the 
adult it is located approximately between the first and 
second lumbar vertebrae. As the differential growth of 
the two structures takes place, the nerve roots located 
between the conus medullaris and the intervertebral 
foramina elongate. The lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal 
nerve roots are directed downward at an angle to reach 
their targeted exit point at the associated vertebral foram-
ina. This elongated bundle of nerve fibers is known as 
the cauda equinus (horse’s tail).
Development of the Meninges
Embryologically, the meninges develop from the neural 
crest and the mesoderm, which eventually develop into 
the CNS. Both the neural crest and the mesoderm form 
the primitive meninges.
Development of the Ventricles
The development of the ventricle system illustrates 
brain growth from the neural crest and neural tube. By 
about the third week of development, the nervous sys-
tem consists of a tube that is closed at both ends and 
is somewhat hook shaped. The cavity of this tube, the 
neural canal (see Fig. 11-1), eventually gives rise to the 
ventricles of the adult brain and the central canal of the 
spinal cord.
Embryology of Cortical and 
Subcortical Structures
During the fourth week of gestation the neural folds 
expand and fuse to form three primary brain vesicles. 
These are the hindbrain, or rhombencephalon; mid-
brain, or mesencephalon; and forebrain, or prosenceph-
alon. The central canal of the neural tube dilates into 
a rudimentary ventricular system, and in the thin roof 
of the ventricles the choroid plexus develops to produce 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). By about the sixth week of 
development these divisions have further divided, and 
significant brain development can be noted. The rhomb-
encephalon divides into the myelencephalon, which 
later becomes the medulla oblongata, and the met-
encephalon, which is the future pons and cerebellum. 
The midbrain or mesencephalon does not divide. The 
prosencephalon divides into the diencephalon and the 
telencephalon. The diencephalon later becomes the tha-
lamic complex and the third ventricle (Fig. 11-7). The 
optic cup, which eventually becomes the optic nerve and 
retina, also rises from the diencephalon division.
At approximately the third month of development 
the telencephalon divides into three parts. All the struc-
tures of the brain are present, though in quite immature 
versions, by the end of the third trimester of gestation 
(Fig. 11-8). The rhinencephalon will contain the olfac-
tory lobes. The second division, the striatal area, is the 
site of the groups of neuronal cell bodies known as 
the basal ganglia or basal nuclei. Only in higher ver-
tebrate and human development does the third divi-
sion of the telencephalon takes place. This division is 
the ­suprastriatal structure called the neopallium. This 
is what is seen as the cerebral hemispheres and what 
is called the cortex. Figure 11-9 outlines the primary 
brain vesicles and the ensuing derivational pattern.
The smooth surface of the hemispheres begins to 
convolute at approximately 20 weeks of gestation, 
and by week 24 gyri and sulci gradually appear. The 
first sulcus to appear is the lateral sulcus with its floor, 
the insula, gradually covered by further development 
and enfolding. This folding in of the cortical tissue 
allows this outer layer of neurons to increase greatly, 
eventually reaching an approximate dimension of 
2300 cm2 without the brain becoming too large for 
the skull.
We have discussed previously the fact that the cere-
bral cortex and some subcortical areas are stratified 
into layers. The cortex begins to stratify into layers and 
at approximately 6 months of gestation the demarca-
tion of the cortex into layers or lamina is present. The 
allocortex, or archicortex, which is found primarily in 
the limbic system cortex, is composed for the most part 
of three layers. The mesocortex is found as transition 
cortex between the archicortex and the neocortex. The 
mesocortex contains three to six layers and is found in 
regions such as the insula and the cingulate gyrus. The 
neocortex, or isocortex, of the cerebral hemispheres is 
composed of six layers. All six layers can be microscopi-
cally differentiated early in development, but the final 
differentiation of the outer three layers is not complete 
until middle childhood.

Neural tube
Neural crest
Melanocyte
Ganglion of sympathetic trunk
Spinal cord
Dorsal gray
horn
Dorsal 
root
Spinal ganglion
Unipolar neuron
(spinal ganglion cell)
Satellite cell
Schwann cell
Multipolar neuron
(sympathetic ganglion cell)
Suprarenal medulla
(chromaffin cells)
Ventral root
Spinal nerve
Suprarenal gland
White communicating ramus
Celiac 
ganglion
Renal
ganglion
Plexus in 
intestinal tract
Site of
lateral gray 
horn
Ventral
gray 
horn
Neural crest cells
Neural crest cells
FIGURE 11-7
Diagrammatic sketches of the brain vesicles indicate the adult derivatives of their walls 
and cavities. The rostral part of the third ventricle forms from the cavity of the telencepha-
lon. Most of this ventricle is derived from the cavity of the diencephalon. (From Moore,  
K. L., Persaud T. V. N., & Torchia, M. G. [2016]. The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented  
Embryology [10th ed.]. Philadelphia: Elsevier.)
Choroid plexus of  lateral
and third ventricles
Hypothalamus
Plane of subsequent fusion
Thalamus
Caudate nucleus
Projection fibers of
internal capsule
Lentiform nucleus
Cerebral cortex
FIGURE 11-8
At 11 to 12 weeks of gestation, rudimentary structure of nearly all the parts of the brain 
are present. (From Moore, K. L., Persaud T. V. N., & Torchia, M. G. [2016]. The Developing 
Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology [10th ed.]. Philadelphia: Elsevier.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
242
Neuronal Migration in the Cerebral 
Cortex
As all cells in the developing embryo do, neurons 
migrate from their place of “birth” to where they will 
eventually function as part of a system. During the for-
mation of the neural tube, neuroprogenitor cells or 
neuroblasts have begun DNA replication and mitosis, 
arising in the ventricular zone at the surface of the lat-
eral ventricles. As cells divide and multiply, they cluster 
at the ventricular surface, thickening the walls of the 
tube. As they undergo their last division, they start to 
migrate away from the ventricular surface. At least two 
types of progenitor cells are active: (1) neuroblasts, 
which will become neurons; and (2) glioblasts, which 
will generate astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and radial 
glial cells. The embryo will typically produce almost 
twice as many neurons as will eventually be found in 
the mature brain. This genetically programmed cell 
death, or apoptosis, is an active cell process and occurs 
naturally in many areas of the brain through protein 
synthesis.9
Neurons in complex vertebrate nervous systems 
migrate somewhat differently than in simpler nervous 
systems. The specific mechanisms of this neural migra-
tion are not yet totally understood, and the complex 
details of the processes that are understood are beyond 
the scope of this text. The primary modes of migration 
as presented by Nadarajah and colleagues12 is briefly 
summarized here. The student who wishes to explore 
this further is directed to this article and to the work of 
Cooper.1
The development of the stratification of the cortex 
is an “inside-out” pattern of development. Neurons that 
start migrating first go the shortest distance and the 
later ones migrate through the earlier ones. We previ-
ously mentioned zones created in the neural tube. In 
corticogenesis with the migration of neurons, there are 
also created what are called plates with the preplate, 
subplate, and, finally, the cortical plate most often 
mentioned.
Nadarajah and colleagues12 employed time-lapsed 
photography to study the movement of neurons as they 
position themselves in the developing neocortex. They 
affirmed two distinct modes of migration for pyrami-
dal neurons, which are excitatory projection neurons:
	•	 Somal translocation: All of the immature neurons are 
bipolar with a leading process radially oriented to-
ward the pial surface while the other process remains 
attached initially to the ventricular zone surface. In so-
mal (or perikaryal) translocation, the neuroblasts de-
tach from the VZ. Through a process called nucleoki-
nesis the soma (cell body which contains the nucleus) 
is transported from the ventricular surface to the pial 
surface. Nucleokinesis involves a caging of the nucleus 
by microtubules and the centrosome of the cell. The 
alternating elongation and contraction of the micro-
tubules move the nucleus and the cell outward to the 
pial surface. This appears to be the prevalent migra-
tory method of early born cortical neurons.8
	•	 Glia-guided locomotion: Figure 11-10 shows the em-
bryologic development of the layers of the cortex as 
they are formed by glia-guided locomotion. In the 
very early stages, as outlined earlier, the cerebral new 
growth is relatively thin, and this kind of guidance 
is not typical.12 However, as the cerebral vesicles be-
gin to thicken, neurons migrate primarily by trave-
ling along processes of radial glia that seem to form 
a scaffolding for them to be guided along. The for-
mation of the cortex of the cerebellum is formed in 
similar manner. Figure 11-11 is a frame from a movie 
made at Hatten Laboratories using high-contrast 
optics.6 This frame pictures a granule neuron of the 
cerebellar cortex migrating through ­glia-guidance. 
(The website link to the moving images is found in 
the reference list.10) In glia-guided migration, the 
nucleus will remain in the posterior part of the cell. 
An adhesion junction forms beneath the nucleus and 
Hindbrain
(rhombencephalon)
Midbrain
(mesencephalon)
Forebrain
(prosencephalon)
myencephalon
metencephalon
diencephalon
telencephalon
medulla
pons
cerebellum
rhinencephalon
basal ganglia
cerebral
hemispheres
FIGURE 11-9
Derivatives of the three primary brain vesicles.

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
243
a leading process of the cell radiates out toward the 
direction of migration. The neuron moves by release 
and reformation of the adhesion junction, moving it 
along the glia scaffolding it is traveling along.
There are two essential proteins identified as criti-
cal to normal formation of the cerebral and cerebellar 
cortices as well as the hippocampus. The first identified 
was an extracellular protein called Reelin expressed 
by the RELN gene on chromosome 7q22. This was 
discovered through histochemical studies of what was 
called the reeler mouse mutant, a phenotype that had 
been used in research since the 1950s.4 Research on 
Reelin led to the discovery of an intracellular adap-
tor protein called the Dab1 protein.3 Dab1 is critical 
to the signal transduction of Reelin during neuronal 
migration. Research has also identified Reelin as a 
multifunctional protein and critical to neuron growth, 
maturation, and synaptic activity in adult brains.3 
The chemical and genetic signaling that directs the 
E11
PP
E13
E14–E18
Adult
PS
PS
1
2
3
4
5
6
MZ
CP
SP
IZ
VZ
FIGURE 11-10
Key developmental stages of development of the neocortex of the radial component of the 
formation of the neocortex of a mouse brain. The mouse brain is used extensively in research 
on brain development as its embryology is similar to human development. This embryologic 
time period here represents around 6-18 weeks in human gestation. Migration along radial 
glia is shown as vertical bars. E = Embryologic day. At E11 the preplate (PP) is established by 
a postmitotic wave of neurons that has migrated from the ventricular zone (VZ) to the pial 
surface (PS). By E13 a second postmitotic neuronal wave has migrated through the intermedi-
ate zone and split the PP into the marginal zone (MZ) and subplate (SP), creating the cortical 
plate (CP). During E14-E18 subsequent waves of neurons expand the CP in an inside-out 
fashion, as each wave of neurons passes its predecessors to settle underneath the MZ. In 
adulthood, the SP degenerates, leaving behind the six-layered neocortex. (From Gupta, A., 
Tsai, L-H., & Wynshaw-Boris, A. [2002]. Life is a journey: A genetic look at neocortical develop 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 3, 342–355.)
FIGURE 11-11
A granular neuron cell of the cerebellar cortex migrating 
and guided along a radial glial process. (From Gasser, U. E.,  
& Hatten, M. E. [1990]. Central nervous system neurons 
migrate on astroglial fibers from heterotypic brain regions  
in vitro, Proc Natl Acad Sci 87: 4543–4537.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
244
migration of neurons and determines where they are 
to go is, again, much beyond the scope of this text, but 
these two proteins can be remembered as critical to 
the process. The reeler mouse is a mouse with muta-
tions of Reelin expression and has frequently been 
used as a model to continue advancing research on 
disorders of neural migration.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
After making their way to the targeted region of the neo-
cortex, the young neurons must establish connections 
with other neurons and become integrated into neural 
networks. To do this they develop an axon and also den-
drites. The dendrites will eventually form dense arbors 
of connections near the vicinity of the cell body.14 Den-
dritic spines develop and become the site of many of 
the synaptic contacts onto dendrites. These spines form 
at different rates in different parts of the brain with the 
maximal rate occurring at about 6 months after birth.9
The axon of each neuron cell contains on its tip a 
structure called a growth cone. It is from the site of 
the growth cone that the axon elongates and extends 
out into the surrounding neural tissue, guided by 
tropic factors or molecules that send it toward a par-
ticular target. Also influencing the axon are trophic 
factors, which help maintain its metabolism.9 The 
axon may branch, and each branch will also con-
tain a growth cone. Some branches established will 
not ever become innervating connections. On those 
that do, the growth cone becomes a presynaptic ter-
minal and the target neuron membrane begins to 
express the necessary postsynaptic mechanism, such 
as neurotransmitter receptors and second messenger 
molecules. Although many synapse connections will 
be made during this period of development, many 
are later lost or they are replaced by other connec-
tions. According to Haines,9 for synaptic stabilization 
to take place there must be: (1) signal generation 
by a presynaptic cell, possibly the neurotransmitter 
required by the adult synapse; (2) a means for the 
postsynaptic cell to respond to the signal; and (3) a 
retrograde signal from the postsynaptic cell to the pre-
synaptic cell to tell it which contacts should remain 
in maturity. There is competition for synaptic space 
and the advantage in the developing brain especially 
is given to the contact used most frequently.
CRITICAL PERIODS
The study of abnormal embryonic development 
is called teratology. Teratogens are defined as any 
environmental factor that can produce a permanent 
abnormality in structure or function, restriction of 
growth, or death of the embryo or fetus.7 Commonly 
the causes of congenital abnormalities are divided 
into two categories: (1) genetic factors, such as chro-
mosomal abnormalities, and (2) environmental fac-
tors, such as medications, drugs, maternal conditions, 
and chemicals. There are several factors on which the 
effect an environmental agent will have on a devel-
oping embryo depend. A fundamental concept of 
teratology is that certain stages of embryologic devel-
opment are more vulnerable to teratogens than are 
other stages. The most critical period for the growth 
of a particular organ is the period of most rapid cell 
division for that particular tissue or organ. Thus the 
critical period varies depending on the organ of con-
cern. For brain development, the most critical period 
is from 3 to 16 weeks.11 Major anomalies occur during 
the third and fourth week as the neural tube and the 
neural crest form. The fetal period is also quite suscep-
tible to teratogens, such as alcohol, and future cogni-
tive development may be affected, resulting in some 
degree of intellectual disability. When labeling an 
agent or condition as a teratogen, other factors have 
to also be taken into consideration, such as the route, 
length, and dose of exposure. Table 11-1 lists some 
environmental teratogenic agents or conditions that 
are known to cause CNS deficits given the appropriate 
timing and condition of exposure or occurrence dur-
ing brain development.
Primitive Reflexes of the Newborn
The speech-language pathologist, especially those in 
public schools or centers primarily working with a 
young child population, must understand the primi-
tive reflex profile to discern whether dysarthria, prim-
itive reflexes, or other speech, language, or cognitive 
problems exist in a child. An understanding of the 
Moro reflex and the symmetrical and asymmetrical 
reflexes (Figures 11-12, 11-13, and 11-14) as well as 
the other primitive reflex patterns of infants helps the 
speech-language pathologist understand the develop-
ment of these reflexes into more permanent move-
ment patterns. Furthermore, the speech-language 
pathologist also learns how primitive communication 
patterns such as cooing (as related to the emergence 
of reflex patterns and then more advanced movement 
patterns) and random sound productions of the new-
born infant lead to speech sound development.
Diagnosis of Neurologic Disorder 
with Primitive Reflex
The neurologic examination of the newborn with 
suspected cerebral damage has in recent years relied 
heavily on the concept of a primitive reflex profile. 
Primitive and postural reflexes follow an orderly 

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
245
TABLE 11-1
Agents or Conditions That Can Be 
Teratogenic to CNS Development
AGENT OR CONDITION
ADDITIONAL 
CONSIDERATION
Radiation
Infectious Agents
Chickenpox (varicella)
During first 20 weeks
Rubella
Toxoplasmosis
Thermodisruptions
Hyperthermia
Body temperature of ≥102° F
Hypothermia
Body temperature of ≤95° F
Exposure to Toxic Metals
Lead
>20 μg/dL
Mercury
>3 μg/dL
Lithium
Avoid during first ­trimester. 
No breast feeding if 
­taking Lithium
Chemical Exposure
PCBs
Exposure to airborne level 
of >0.0001 mg/m3
Toluene
Exposure to >375 mg/m3 
more than 8 hours/day
Maternal Conditions
Diabetes
Iodine deficiency
Maternal phenylketonuria 
(PKU)
Folic acid deficiency
Maternal Habits/Intake
Alcohol abuse
Best practice is to abstain 
throughout pregnancy
Tobacco (nicotine)
Marijuana
Cocaine
LSD
Thalidomide
Warfarin
Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors
Statins
Isotretinoin (Accutane, 
Retin A)
Data from Gilbert-Barness, E. (2010). Teratogenic causes of malformation. 
Annals of Clinical and Laboratory Science, 40, 99-114.
FIGURE 11-12
The Moro reflex is elicited by dropping the head. The reflex 
is pathologic in the presence of a persistent symmetrical 
abduction and upward movement of the arms with fingers 
splayed, followed by flexion of the arms in clasp manner as 
the child’s back arches.
FIGURE 11-13
Symmetrical tonic reflex. The symmetrical tonic neck reflex 
is elicited by passively extending and flexing the neck five 
times. The reflex is pathologic in the presence of obligatory 
arm extension or leg flexion with neck extension for more 
than 60 seconds. (Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. 
I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. [1978]. Primitive reflex 
profile. Baltimore: University Park Press.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
246
sequence of appearance and disappearance, begin-
ning in the fetal period and extending through the 
first years of life. The reflexes are mediated at a 
subcortical level. First described by Rudolph Mag-
nus (1873-1927), who received a Nobel Prize for his 
efforts, these reflexes can help determine degrees of 
prematurity or suggest neurologic dysfunction. If a 
normal reflex pattern does not appear on schedule, 
or if a reflex pattern persists beyond the age at which 
it normally disappears, the newborn or infant is con-
sidered at risk for cerebral injury or other neurologic 
involvement. Some pediatric neurologists assert that 
neurologic abnormalities at birth predict a diagnosis 
of minimal cerebral dysfunction at later ages, but oth-
ers have found a limited association between neonatal 
abnormalities and neurologic signs, particularly at 1 
year and beyond.
Despite questions about the reliability of prediction 
for a diagnosis of minimal neurologic abnormality, the 
careful evaluation of early primitive reflexes and later-
evolving postural reflexes provides a basis for diagnosis 
and therapy of disturbed motor function. Examina-
tion can usually provide a locomotor prognosis, indi-
cating when and how a child with cerebral palsy will 
walk. Table 11-2 summarizes the primitive and postural 
FIGURE 11-14
The asymmetrical tonic neck reflex (ATNR) is elicited by turning the head to each side 
for 5 seconds. This movement is repeated five times to each side. The reflex is pathologic 
in the presence of obligatory extension and flexion of limbs for more than 60 seconds. 
(Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. [1978]. 
Primitive reflex profile. Baltimore: University Park Press.)
TABLE 11-2
Primitive and Postural Infantile 
Reflexes of the First Year
REFLEX
RESPONSE
Asymmetrical 
tonic neck 
reflex
Infant extends limbs on chin and 
flexes on occiput side when turn-
ing head
Symmetrical tonic  
neck reflex
Infant extends arms and flexes legs 
with head extension
Positive support 
reflex
Infant bears weight when balls of 
feet are stimulated
Tonic  
labyrinthine 
reflex
Infant may retract shoulder and extend 
neck and trunk with neck flexion; 
tongue thrust reflex may occur
Segmental  
rolling reflex
Infant may roll trunk and pelvis 
segmentally with rotation of head 
or legs
Galant reflex
Infant arches body when skin of back 
is stimulated near vertebral column
Moro reflex
Infant may adduce arm and move it 
upward, followed by arm flexion 
and leg extension and flexion

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
247
reflexes of the first year. Although the speech-language 
pathologist may be more interested in the neurologic 
status of oral and pharyngeal reflexes, an understand-
ing of the primitive and postural reflexes is essential in 
the assessment of the neurologic maturity of a child sus-
pected of cerebral injury.
A notable lack of consensus exists on the defini-
tion of the stimulus and response in the widely tested 
primitive reflexes. In addition, no agreement has been 
reached on how the responses change with time and 
growth. Seven reflexes are reviewed in this chapter. 
They are commonly assessed by neurologists and pedia-
tricians and are typical of the first year of life, with the 
peak development at approximately 6 months. Test-
ing during this peak time avoids assessing the transi-
tory neurologic signs of the newborn but is sufficiently 
early to allow a neurologic diagnosis before 1 year of 
age. These seven reflexes also appear to be predictive 
of later motor function in the child. Of the many infan-
tile reflexes described by neurologists in the literature, 
these are the most studied.
ASYMMETRICAL TONIC NECK REFLEX
The asymmetrical tonic neck reflex (ATNR) probably 
is the most widely known of the early body reflexes. 
The reflex was shown to be universally present in 
the healthy infant by the outstanding child develop-
ment specialist Arnold Gesell (1880-1961). When the 
healthy child is supine, he or she may lie with the 
head turned to one side. The extremities on that side 
(the chin side) are extended, with a corresponding 
flexion of the contralateral extremities on the oppo-
site (occiput) side. This position is described as the 
fencer’s position.
To test for the presence of the reflex, the child is 
placed in a supine position. Observations are made of 
active head turning and subsequent movement of the 
extremities. The head is then passively turned through 
an arc of 180 degrees to each side for 5 seconds. This 
maneuver is repeated five times on each side. Consis-
tent changes in muscle tone in the extremities gener-
ally define the presence of the reflex. A clearly positive 
response is visible extension of extremities on the 
chin side and flexion on the occiput side when the 
head is passively turned. If extension of the extremi-
ties on the chin side and flexion on the occiput side 
last more than 30 seconds, the response may be called 
obligatory.
If the response is found beyond the eighth or ninth 
month, it is indicative of possible cerebral damage and 
poor motor development and suggests that the corti-
cal control of upper motor neurons is not on schedule 
and that motor behavior is still controlled at subcortical 
levels. Obligatory tonic neck reflexes persisting into the 
second year and beyond usually are incompatible with 
independent standing and walking; they may disappear 
later, however, and the child may learn to walk alone. 
The ATNR may be seen in various types of cerebral 
palsy, predicting brain injury, but it is not useful for dis-
tinguishing between spastic and dyskinetic types. This 
reflex suggests brain injury only and is in no way com-
pletely diagnostic for cerebral palsy or its subtypes. The 
ATNR can reemerge after a catastrophe such as cardiac 
arrest and also may be present in progressive disease. It 
has little or no effect on the development of speech and 
shows little relation to the oral and pharyngeal reflexes. 
Elicitation procedures for the ATNR are illustrated in 
Figure 11-14.
SYMMETRICAL TONIC NECK REFLEX
The symmetrical tonic neck reflex is analogous to the 
ATNR, but the head is manipulated in flexion and 
extension in midline rather than turned laterally. The 
resulting responses are differences between upper and 
lower extremities rather than right-left differences in 
extremities. The normal reflex is an extension of the 
arms and flexion of the legs if the head is extended in 
midline. Flexion of the head has the opposite effect; the 
arms flex and the legs extend.
The technique of eliciting the reflex is to first get 
the child to flex and extend his or her neck. The 
neck is then passively extended and flexed. This is 
repeated five times each for extension and flexion. 
If the reflex sign is absent at 5 to 6 months or per-
sists into the second year, it is a symptom of motor 
abnormality. The symmetrical tonic neck reflex does 
not appear to elicit any associated oral or pharyngeal 
reflexes (see Fig. 11-13).
POSITIVE SUPPORT REFLEX
Magnus saw the positive support reflex as necessary 
for support of erect posture. When the balls of the 
feet are stimulated, opposing muscle groups contract 
to fix the joints of the lower extremities so that they 
bear weight. To test the reflex, the infant is suspended 
around the trunk, below the armpits, with the head in 
midline and slightly flexed. The child is bounced on 
the balls of the feet five times. The feet are then placed 
in contact with the floor, and the degree to which the 
infant can support his or her weight is assessed. The 
positive support reflex is seen in fetal life and is con-
sidered abnormal if it persists beyond 4 months. A per-
sistent strong response has been associated with spastic 

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
248
quadriparesis. The positive support reflex does not 
appear to elicit associated oral or pharyngeal reflexes 
(Fig. 11-15).
TONIC LABYRINTHINE REFLEX
The tonic labyrinthine reflex (TLR) is associated with 
the changes in tone related to different postures. The 
position of the extremities changes with respect to the 
position of the head in space because of the orientation 
of the labyrinth of the inner ear. The TLR is tested in 
both supine and prone positions.
To test in the prone position, the child is held in prone 
suspension. The head is extended approximately 45 
degrees below the horizontal plane. Changes of posture 
and tone in the extremities are evaluated, with special 
attention to the shoulder area. When the head is flexed, a 
normal response involves protraction of the shoulders or 
flexion of the lower extremities. Consistent tone changes 
should be present in at least one upper and lower extrem-
ity for the reflex to be considered present (Fig. 11-16).
In testing the TLR in the supine position, sup-
port is placed between the shoulders so that the 
head is extended at 45 degrees. Position and tone of 
the shoulders are assessed. Active neck flexion and 
grasp in midline are elicited. If the flexion and grasp 
responses are not noted, the head is flexed with the 
back supported and the midline grasp is sought again 
(see Fig. 11-16).
The normal response is shoulder retraction if the 
head is in extension. Trunk and leg extension accompa-
nies shoulder retraction. Neck flexion results in shoul-
der protraction in 5 seconds and the disappearance of 
an extension posture.
An abnormal TLR may be accompanied by extensor 
hypertonia, and a persistent abnormal response may 
prevent the infant from rolling over normally. A patho-
logic response may make the legs so rigid that when the 
child is pulled to a sitting position, he or she will stand 
instead. The TLR is sometimes present in healthy chil-
dren, but it is more common in children with patho-
logic conditions. Of the reflexes reviewed, it is the only 
one that may be routinely associated with oral reflexes. 
With the head extended 45 degrees, a reflex or tongue 
thrust may occur in the child with cerebral palsy.
SEGMENTAL ROLLING REFLEX
The healthy newborn shows a log-rolling response reflex 
associated with the activity of turning over. It is primarily 
a neck-righting reflex action. This early rolling response 
develops into a segmental rolling reflex in which turn-
ing of the head produces a reaction in which the infant 
attempts to undo the applied rotation by twisting the 
body at the waist, allowing one segment of the body to 
turn at a time. This corkscrew reaction allows the infant 
to roll over with a minimum of effort because only 
one segment of the body moves at a time. Abnormal 
FIGURE 11-15
The positive support reflex is elicited by suspending the child so that the balls of the feet 
can be bounced on a flat surface. The reflex is pathologic if the child remains on his or her 
toes and cannot move out of the position for 60 seconds or more. (Modified from Capute, 
A. J., Accardo, P. I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. [1978]. Primitive reflex profile. Balti-
more: University Park Press.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
249
responses are indicated by perseveration of a simple log-
rolling response in which head rotation produces the 
simultaneous turning of the upper and lower extremi-
ties with no segmental control. The response is seen in 
motor-handicapped children with cerebral palsy.
To test the segmental rolling response, the child is 
placed in the supine position. The response is tested 
in two maneuvers. First, the child is rotated from the 
head; second, the child is rotated from the legs. For 
head rotation, the child’s head is first flexed to approxi-
mately 45 degrees and then slowly rotated so that the 
shoulders are turned. The rotation is observed. The 
child’s head is usually rotated with one hand on the 
side of the face near the chin and the other hand on 
the occiput of the head. When the child is rolled to the 
right, the examiner’s left hand is the face hand and the 
right is the occiput hand. When the child is rolled to 
the left, the position of the examiner’s hands is reversed 
(Fig. 11-17).
To test the leg response, one leg of the child is flexed 
at the hip and knee. The examiner holds the flexed leg 
below the knee, and the child is rotated to turn the pel-
vis toward midline. Rotation patterns are then observed 
(Fig. 11-18). Rotation responses have not been associ-
ated with oral or pharyngeal reflexes.
GALANT REFLEX
The Galant reflex is an arching of the infant’s body 
when the skin of the back near the vertebral column 
is stroked. The arching is usually forward, toward the 
stimulation. Arching in the other direction indicates 
the child is attempting to evade the stimulus. The 
responses may vary from total absence of response to 
an exaggerated hip flexion. In the majority of new-
borns the response is present bilaterally; unilateral 
responses have been reported in athetoid cerebral 
palsy. The response normally disappears by 2 months 
of age but persists in athetosis beyond that time. The 
Galant reflex is thought to be associated with delay of 
trunk stabilization and head control in athetoid cere-
bral palsy. Persistence of the response beyond 6 months 
is assumed to interfere with sitting balance. No associa-
tion with oral or pharyngeal reflexes has been reported 
(Fig. 11-19).
MORO REFLEX
The Moro reflex, along with the ATNR, is one of the 
best-known and best-studied reflexes of child neurol-
ogy. It is present in almost all newborns except for small 
premature babies. With sudden head lowering, a rapid 
and symmetrical abduction and upward movement of 
the arms occurs. The hands open, and gradual adduc-
tion and flexion of the arms occur. The lower limbs also 
show extension and then flexion.
Some debate has taken place about whether the 
Moro response and the startle response are continu-
ous patterns. Both responses appear in the newborn, so 
they are thought to be discontinuous. The Moro usually 
reaches a peak at 2 months and diminishes by 4 months. 
A persistent reflex has been associated with cerebral 
palsy and intellectual disability.
A
B
FIGURE 11-16
A, The tonic labyrinthine reflex (TLR) is elicited by placing 
support between the shoulders to extend the head 45 de-
grees. The head is flexed 45 degrees. The reflex is patholog-
ic if severe extensor thrust or opisthotonos occurs. B, Exten-
sion and flexion. (Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. 
I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. [1978]. Primitive reflex 
profile. Baltimore: University Park Press.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
250
FIGURE 11-17
The segmental rolling reflex (with rotation of the head) is elicited by rotating the head to 
turn the shoulders and by rotating the legs (see Fig. 11-18) to turn the pelvis. The reflex 
is pathologic if the child is obliged to roll in a log-rolling manner and cannot inhibit the 
reflex. (Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. 
[1978]. Primitive reflex profile. Baltimore: University Park Press.)
FIGURE 11-18
Segmental rolling reflex: rotation of the legs. (Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. 
I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. E. [1978]. Primitive reflex profile. Baltimore: University 
Park Press.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
251
To test for the Moro reflex, the child is held in the 
examiner’s arms, well supported at the head, trunk, 
and legs. The examiner suddenly lowers the child’s 
head and body in a dropping motion (see Fig. 11-12).
The most significant aspect of the stimulus is the 
quality of suddenness. Primitive and postural reflexes 
sometimes reinforce more circumscribed reflexes, but 
no evidence exists that the primitive Moro reflex tends 
to reinforce oral and pharyngeal reflexes in children 
with cerebral palsy. The persisting Moro reflex is much 
less valuable to the neurologist as a sign of cerebral 
injury than is the ATNR.
In summary, persisting infantile primitive and pos-
tural reflexes have been a classic sign of CNS dysfunc-
tion. In particular, they have been extremely useful in 
the early diagnosis of cerebral palsy. Infantile reflex 
behavior also has been incorporated in motor treat-
ment programs for children with cerebral palsy. An 
important fact for the speech-language pathologist is 
that the primitive and postural body reflexes, with some 
exceptions, appear to have limited influence on oral 
and pharyngeal reflexes. Although these neonatal and 
early reflexes are important in assessing delayed devel-
opment of motor function before age 12 to 18 months, 
they are of only limited use in the pediatric neurologic 
examination for the older child. The more conventional 
neurologic signs of altered muscle tone and abnormal 
muscle stretch and superficial reflexes, as well as the 
results of objective neurodiagnostic tests, are of equal 
value in making a diagnosis for the examining pediatric 
neurologist.
Oral and Pharyngeal Reflexes
Over the past half century, study of the normal infant 
reflexes and their relation to brain disease has pro-
moted speech-language pathologists and others 
interested in the management of cerebral palsy to 
consider another set of reflexes—the oral and pharyn-
geal reflexes. Table 11-3 summarizes the major oral 
reflexes. Some speech specialists have assumed that 
abnormal oral and pharyngeal reflexes play a signifi-
cant role in the speech development of the child with 
cerebral palsy who is dysarthric or is likely to develop 
dysarthria with the onset of speech. Absent or persist-
ing reflexes, they argue, are predictive of dysarthria. 
Neurologists are more likely to argue that when the 
oral and pharyngeal reflexes are integrated into a 
spontaneous feeding pattern, they become more diag-
nostically and prognostically significant in neurologic 
disease. Similarly, speech-language pathologists are 
beginning to question whether the isolated artificially 
elicited reflexes of the first few months of life have as 
much diagnostic and prognostic importance in speech 
performance as do the dysphagic symptoms commonly 
seen in many children with cerebral palsy.
The type, number, and reliability of abnormal oral 
and pharyngeal reflexes found in those with cerebral 
palsy vary from study to study. Research strongly sug-
gests that little or no correlation exists between the 
presence and number of abnormal oral and pharyngeal 
reflexes and the severity of dysarthria in cerebral palsy, 
as defined by a measure of articulation proficiency.10 In 
FIGURE 11-19
The Galant reflex is elicited by stroking the back in the lumbar region with a blunt object. 
The reflex is pathologic in the presence of persistent curvature of the back and elevation 
of the hips. (Modified from Capute, A. J., Accardo, P. I., Vining, E. P. G., & Rubenstein, J. 
E. [1978]. Primitive reflex profile. Baltimore: University Park Press.)

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
252
fact, the dysphagic symptoms—disordered biting, suck-
ing, swallowing, and chewing—are slightly better pre-
dictors of articulation proficiency than is an elicited set 
of neonatal oral and pharyngeal automatisms. The cor-
relation, however, between speech impairment and dys-
phagic symptoms is not particularly strong. This limited 
relation between speech and dysphagia strongly implies 
that motor control for speech and the feeding reflexes 
may be mediated at different levels in the nervous sys-
tem. Evidence indicates that the feeding reflexes are 
mediated at the brainstem level and that voluntary 
speech is controlled at the cortical, subcortical, and 
cerebellar levels, with the prime voluntary pathways for 
speech being the corticobulbar fibers. Brainstem reflex 
pathways apparently subserve only vegetative and reflex 
functions and are inactive during the execution of nor-
mal speech. Therefore early motor speech gestures are 
probably not directly related to the development of 
motor reactions in feeding during infancy and child-
hood, even though some of the motor coordinations 
and refinements in speech acquisition are analogous to 
some of the biting and chewing gestures in feeding.
Even though early oral motor behavior in feeding may 
only have a limited resemblance to actual motor patterns 
for speech, management programs to improve muscle 
function and coordination in eating have been initiated 
as a possible prophylactic measure for future dysarthria. 
The assumption of these programs is that any improve-
ment in motor activity of the oral musculature gained 
through feeding therapy might conceivably result in 
improvement in speech performance because the paral-
lel activities of speech and feeding have muscles in com-
mon. At the very least, feeding therapy is likely to make 
eating faster and easier. This, of course, is an important 
consideration in the total management of the child with 
cerebral palsy, one that should not be overlooked by 
speech-language pathologists and neurologists. In fact, 
dysphagia may be just as disturbing as dysarthria in the 
young person with cerebral palsy. Direct motor train-
ing of the muscles during speech, rather than feeding 
training, appears to be the most effective method for 
improving the dysarthria because cortically mediated 
speech activities drive the muscles at a more rapid and 
coordinated rate than do brainstem-mediated feeding 
activities.
Despite the controversy about oral reflexes and 
speech in diagnosis, management, and prognosis, a 
description of six commonly tested oral pharyngeal 
reflexes is offered for the speech-language patholo-
gist who wants to consider this aspect of disturbed 
oral motor functions in the cerebrally injured infant 
or child. In the typical infantile oral motor evaluation, 
eliciting each of these infantile automatisms artificially 
one by one is best to determine whether they are absent 
or abnormally persisting. Next, the spontaneous func-
tions of mastication and deglutition in the feeding act 
should be assessed to determine how these neonatal 
reflex behaviors have become integrated into a more 
complex and voluntary oral-pharyngeal pattern of 
feeding. Infantile mastication and deglutition use the 
six cranial nerves (V, VII, IX, X, XI, XII) important for 
future speech, so evaluation of early feeding allows cra-
nial nerve assessment for the child who is too immature 
to cooperate in standard cranial nerve testing.
ROOTING REFLEX
If the perioral facial region is touched, two responses 
in combination make up the rooting reflex. The side-
to-side head-turning reflex usually is elicited by gently 
tapping on the corners of the mouth or cheek. The 
response is the head alternately turning toward and 
away from the stimulus, ending with the lips brushing 
the stimulus. Occasionally the response occurs without 
the stimulus when the infant is hungry.
This activity usually precedes any actual suckling. 
The side-to-side head-turning response is present in 
the term baby and premature infant. The reflex usually 
disappears by 1 month of age and is replaced by the 
direct head-turning response, a simple movement of 
TABLE 11-3
Infantile Oral Reflexes
REFLEX
STIMULUS
AGE OF APPEARANCE
AGE OF DISAPPEARANCE
Rooting
Perioral face region is touched
Birth
3-6 months
Suckling
Nipple in mouth
Birth
6-12 months
Swallowing
Bolus of food in pharynx
Birth
Persists
Tongue
Tongue or lips being touched
Birth
12-18 months
Bite
Pressure on gums
Birth
9-12 months
Gag
Tongue or pharynx being touched
Birth
Persists

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
253
the head toward the source of stimulation. The source 
is grasped with the lips and sucked. In the direct head-
turning response, if the stimulus is applied to the cor-
ners of the mouth, the bottom lip usually lowers and 
the head and tongue orient toward the stimulus. The 
direct head-turning response is established at 1 month 
and disappears by the end of the sixth month of life. 
Persistence beyond a year may suggest cerebral injury, 
and asymmetry of response indicates damage to one 
side of the brain or facial injury. The cranial nerves 
involved in the reflex are V, VII, XI, and XII. The reflex 
is mediated by the pons, medulla, and cervical spinal 
cord (Fig. 11-20).
SUCKLING REFLEX
If a finger or nipple is placed in the infant’s mouth, 
bursts of suckling behavior occur interspersed with 
periods of rest. The suckling reflex is integrated at 
birth, but within 2 or 3 months the action develops 
more purpose, and jaw activity is incorporated into the 
pattern. Involuntary suckling may disappear between 
6 months and 1 year. Persistent suckling beyond 1 
year suggests brain injury. The reverse, the inability to 
suckle, may also be an early sign of cerebral injury. The 
cranial nerves involved in suckling are V, VII, IX, and 
XII. The reflex is mediated at the pons and medulla 
(Fig. 11-21).
SWALLOWING REFLEX
The swallowing reflex develops after the suckling 
reflex is integrated into a total feeding pattern. Suck-
ling activities produce saliva, which accumulates in 
the reflexogenic area of the pharynx. The swallowing 
reflex is triggered, and swallowing may be observed 
by visible upward movement of the hyoid bone and 
thyroid cartilage of the larynx. The upward move-
ment of the thyroid cartilage of the larynx may also 
be palpated during the swallow. Separating suckling 
and swallowing is sometimes difficult because a swal-
low may precede a suck or follow a first or second 
swallow. The act of deglutition involves muscles of 
the mouth, tongue, palate, and pharynx and depends 
on a highly coordinated movement pattern. Cranial 
nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XII are involved in the act of 
swallowing. An immature swallow with tongue thrust-
ing is sometimes seen until approximately 18 months 
of age. A mature swallow is present afterward. The 
reflex is mediated at the level of the brainstem in 
the medullary reticular formation. Disturbances in 
swallowing are frequent manifestations of neurologic 
FIGURE 11-20
The rooting reflex is elicited by stimulating the cheek lateral to the mouth. From birth, 
the infant normally turns the head toward the stimulus and then grasps the stimulus in 
the mouth. The reflex is pathologic if it is absent in infants from any cause or if it persists 
beyond the fourth month.
FIGURE 11-21
The suckling reflex is elicited by putting the index finger 
3 to 4 cm into the mouth of the infant. From birth, the 
infant normally engages in rhythmic sucking of the finger. 
The reflex is pathologic if it is absent or exaggerated or if it 
persists beyond the fourth month.

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
254
deficits in the infant and child, and they comprise the 
most important sign of neurologic disorder among 
the feeding reflexes.
TONGUE REFLEX
This reflex may be considered part of a suckle-swal-
low reaction in which the tongue thrusts between the 
lips. If lips or tongue are touched, cranial nerve XII 
predominates. Excessive thrusts beyond 18 months 
are abnormal. The tongue reflex is mediated at the 
medulla.
BITE REFLEX
Moderate pressure on the gums elicits jaw closure and 
a bite response. The bite reflex is present at birth; in 
the normal infant it disappears by 9 to 12 months, 
when it is replaced by a more mature chewing pattern. 
The reflex may be exaggerated in the brain-injured 
child and may interfere with feeding and dental care. 
Its persistence inhibits the lateral jaw movements of 
chewing seen in the spontaneous mastication pattern. 
A weak response is seen with brainstem lesions, and 
corticobulbar lesions exaggerate the response. Cranial 
nerve V innervates the reflex, which is mediated at the 
low midbrain and pons.
GAG REFLEX
A stimulus applied to the posterior half of the infant 
tongue or on the posterior wall of the pharynx causes 
rapid velopharyngeal closure. This primary action is 
accompanied by mouth opening, head extension, and 
depression of the floor of the mouth with elevation of 
the larynx and diaphragm. This gag reflex is present 
at birth and continues throughout life. The gag serves 
as a protective mechanism for the esophagus. Brain-
damaged children often show a hyperactive gag. In 
the severely motor-involved child, the gag may be dif-
ficult to elicit. In the ataxic child, the gag is sometimes 
hypoactive. Cranial nerves IX and X innervate the gag, 
and the reflex is mediated at the level of the pons and 
medulla (Fig. 11-22).
FIGURE 11-22
The gag reflex is elicited by stimulating the posterior half of 
the infant’s tongue with a tongue blade or stimulating the 
posterior pharyngeal wall. The reflex is present from birth 
and is pathologic when absent or exaggerated.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 During the second week after conception, the 
embryonic disk embeds in the uterus; it is referred 
to as the embryo from the third to the eighth week 
and beginning at the ninth week is called the fetus.
	•	 During embryologic development of the brain, 
the ectoderm becomes the epidermis and nervous 
system.
	•	 During embryologic development of the brain, the 
mesoderm becomes the muscles, connective tis-
sues, cartilage, bone, and blood vessels.
	•	 During embryologic development of the brain, the 
endoderm becomes the linings of digestive and 
respiratory tracts.
	•	 The ectoderm thickens and forms a neural plate 
that gives rise to the CNS.
	•	 Neural folds fuse to form the neural tube, which 
separates from the ectoderm.
	•	 Four zones are briefly formed within the lining of 
the neural tube. Important adult derivatives will 
develop from these zones.
	•	 The neural tube closes by the fourth week, regu-
lated by a process called neurulation.
	•	 The neural crest is formed from the sides of the 
neural tube to eventually form parts of the PNS 
and autonomic nervous system, including spinal 
nerves, cranial nerves, Schwann cells, and cells that 
form the meninges of the brain and spinal cord.
	•	 The neural folds expand and fuse to form the three 
primary vesicles: rhombencephalon, mesencepha-
lon, and prosencephalon. Further divisions take 
place with the exception of the mesencephalon.
	•	 At 20 weeks’ gestation, the brain begins to convo-
lute from a smooth surface.
	•	 At 24 weeks’ gestation, the gyri and sulci are formed.
Continued

PEDIATRICS: THE DEVELOPING BRAIN  CHAPTER ELEVEN
255
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Cooper, J. (2013). Cell biology in neuroscience: Mecha-
nisms of cell migration in the nervous system. Journal of 
Cell Biology, 202, 725–734.
	 2.	 Corbin, J. G., Gaiano, N., Juliano, S. L., Poluch, S., Stan-
cik, E., & Haydar, T. F. (2008). Regulation of neural pro-
genitory cell development in the nervous system. Journal 
of Neurochemistry, 106, 2272–2287.
	 3.	 D’Arcangelo, G. (2014). Reelin in the years: Controlling 
neuronal migration and maturation in the mammalian 
brain. Advances in Neuroscience, 2014. article ID 597395. 
Retrieved from http://www.hindawi.com/journals/an
eu/2014/597395/.
	 4.	 D’Arcangelo, G., Miao, G. G., Chen, S. C., Soares, H. D., 
Morgan, J. I., & Curran, T. (1995). A protein related to ex-
tracellular matrix proteins deleted in the mouse mutant 
reeler. Nature, 374, 719–723.
	 5.	 Dennis, M. L., Landry, S. H., Barnes, M., & Fletcher, J. M. 
(2006). Critical review: A model of neurocognitive func-
tion in spina bifida over the life span. Journal of the Interna-
tional Neuropsychological Society, 12, 285–296.
	 6.	 Edmondson, J. A., & Hatten, M. E. (1987). Glial-guided 
neuron migration in  vitro: A high-resolution time-lapse 
video microscopic study. The Journal of Neuroscience, 7, 
1928–1934.
	 7.	 Gilbert-Barness, E. (2010). Teratogenic causes of mal-
formation. Annals of Clinical and Laboratory Science, 40,  
99–114.
	 8.	 Gupta, A., Tsai, L-H., & Wynshaw-Boris, A. (2002, May). 
Life is a journey: A genetic look at neocortical develop-
ment. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3, 342–355.
	 9.	 Haines, D. E. (2006). Fundamental neuroscience for basic and 
clinical applications (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Elsevier.
	10.	 Love, R. J., Hagerman, E. L., & Tiami, E. G. (1980). 
Speech performance, dysphagia, and oral reflexes in 
cerebral palsy. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 45, 
59–75.
	11.	 Moore, K. L., & Persaud, T. V. N. (1993). Before we are born: 
Essentials of embryology and birth defects (4th ed.). Philadel-
phia: W. B. Saunders.
	12.	 Nadarajah, B. A., Alifragis, P., Wong, R. O., & Parnavelas, 
J. G. (2003, June). Neural migration in the developing 
cerebral cortex: Observations based on real-time imaging. 
Cerebral Cortex, 13, 607–611.
	13.	 O’Rahilly, R., & Müller, F. (2001). Human tetralogy and em-
bryology (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley Liss.
	14.	 Stiles, J. A., & Jernigan, T. L. (2010). The basics of brain 
development. Neuropsychological Review, 20, 327–348.
	•	 The neural crest and mesoderm are primitive me-
ninges.
	•	 Cortical neuroprogenitor cells replicate their DNA 
and divide in the ventricles and migrate in an 
inside-out pattern to various parts of the pial sur-
face of the neocortex; this migration results in the 
stratification of the cortex.
	•	 The two primary means of neural migration are 
somal translocation and guidance along the pro-
cesses of radial glia.
	•	 Reelin and Dab1 have been found to be critical 
for normal formation of the neocortex, cerebellar 
cortex, and hippocampus.
	•	 Young neurons send out an axon with a growth 
cone on the tip. Dendritic processes also extend 
from the neurons. The axon’s growth cones are 
guided by tropic molecules to particular targets, 
synapsing on spines of dendrites, establishing early 
cortical networks.
	•	 Teratology is the study of abnormal embryonic 
development.
	•	 Teratogens are environmental agents or conditions 
that may induce developmental interruptions after 
exposure to the mother.
	•	 Genetic factors affecting development include 
­chromosomal abnormalities.
	•	 Environmental teratogens may include drugs, 
­infections, medications, and chemicals.
	•	 The most critical period for growth of a particular 
organ is the period of most rapid cell division; criti-
cal periods vary depending on the organ.
	•	 The critical period for brain development is from 3 
to 16 weeks’ gestation.
	•	 Major problems may occur during the third or fourth 
week as the neural tube and neural crest form.
	•	 Major infantile reflexes in the developing child are 
the asymmetrical tonic neck reflex, symmetrical 
tonic neck reflex, positive support reflex, TLR, seg-
mental rolling reflex, Galant reflex, and the Moro 
reflex.
	•	 Oral reflexes in the developing child that appear 
at birth include rooting, suckling, swallowing, 
tongue, bite, and gag; the gag reflex persists 
throughout life, but the others usually disappear by 
6 to 18 months of age.
	•	 Swallowing is controlled by the integration of 
functions of central nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XII; it 
requires coordination but not in a form as intri-
cate as speech.
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d

256
12
Pediatric 
Clinical Speech 
Syndromes
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Relation of Reflexes, Brain Development,  
and Speech Development
Assessing Mastication and Deglutition
Developmental Motor Speech Disorders
Cerebral Palsy
Childhood Suprabulbar Paresis
Muscular Dystrophy
Childhood Apraxia of Speech
Pathophysiology
Assessment and Treatment
Other Disorders of Speech Production
Disorders of Fluency
K E Y  T E R M S
anoxia
ataxic cerebral palsy
athetoid cerebral 
palsy
cerebral palsy
congenital childhood 
suprabulbar palsy
deglutition
developmental 
anarthria
developmental 
apraxia of speech
developmental 
dysarthria
developmental 
motor speech 
disorders
Duchenne dystrophy
mastication
modified feeding
monoplegia
muscular dystrophy
prematurity
pseudohypertrophic
spastic cerebral palsy
topologic 
involvement
triplegia
When I was born I was so surprised, I didn’t talk for a year 
and a half.
Gracie Allen

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
257
Relation of Reflexes, Brain 
Development, and Speech 
Development
The development and progression of the reflexes 
presented in the preceding chapter help the speech-
language pathologist (SLP) understand the way early 
speech and language development occurs in progres-
sion after reflexes are in place and as they mature. 
Once many of the reflexes are extinguished as the 
child’s brain develops, pleasure sounds, cooing, bab-
bling, and eventually phonemic development occurs, as 
previously discussed. Neurolinguistic theory postulates 
that the developing brain ontogenetically allows the 
child to form the eventual sounds that comprise that 
individual’s phonemic system. This is attributable to 
brainstem development and other relevant neurologic 
systems (central nervous system and peripheral nervous 
system).
Reflexes develop first, and a delayed or persistent 
reflex should trigger a red flag to the SLP that the 
­development of phonemes may be interrupted and 
subsequently the morphemic and perhaps pragmatic 
systems for that child.
ASSESSING MASTICATION AND 
DEGLUTITION
In the infant or child at risk for neurologic injury, the 
clinical evaluation of neural control of the oral and 
pharyngeal activities involved in chewing and swallow-
ing allows the SLP to estimate the motor potential of 
those muscles, which ultimately fall under the control 
of higher nervous centers devoted to the production of 
speech. The fact that speech and feeding are mediated 
at different levels within the nervous system implies that 
evaluation of chewing and swallowing predicts future 
muscle activity in speech in only a limited manner. Only 
gross estimates of muscle potential for speech can likely 
be derived from any nonspeech examination because 
of the semiautonomous control of the muscles for the 
dual function.
In addition to gross estimation of muscle function 
in mastication and deglutition, however, the infan-
tile oral motor examination of the cranial nerves for 
speech permits the SLP and neurologist to observe 
signs of possible neurologic disorder that may not be 
readily apparent in other motor behaviors. Mastication 
and deglutition, as relatively complex motor behaviors 
in the repertoire of infant motor activity, are highly sen-
sitive to neurologic dysfunction. Dysphagia may be an 
early and even sometimes isolated sign of brain injury. 
This kind of examination, being somewhat enjoyable to 
an infant or child (with the exception of those hyper-
sensitive to oral touch), may be a way to begin to assess 
the child’s motor control for speech if the child is unco-
operative for more traditional speech evaluation tech-
niques. SLPs are also becoming highly valued for their 
expertise in helping evaluate the child whose feeding/
swallowing ability is questioned. We often can help rule 
out a neurologic disorder in a child who has sensitivity 
or behavioral issues manifested in problems with oral 
intake.
Modified Feeding
Examination of chewing and swallowing is best accom-
plished through the technique of modified feeding. 
In the preverbal child, this technique can replace the 
more traditional procedures of the adult speech cra-
nial nerve test, which requires a level of maturity not 
yet developed in the infant and very young child. By 
selectively placing small morsels of solid food in differ-
ent locations in the oral cavity of the child, an examiner 
can judge the integrity of the bulbar muscles and the 
brainstem neural pathways innervating these muscles. 
Healthy children from birth to 36 months respond well 
to the technique, which may also be used with motor-
handicapped children with oral motor involvement well 
beyond 3 years of age. In the healthy child, spontaneous 
feeding emerges from the neonatal oral and pharyn-
geal reflexes and reaches its full maturity at approxi-
mately age 3 years. Experiences with solid foods provide 
a gradual refinement and integration of movements of 
the lips, tongue, palate, and pharynx for chewing and 
swallowing.
When testing the infant or motor-handicapped child 
without sitting balance, the child should be placed in 
a chair in which the body and head can be well sup-
ported (e.g., a tumble-form chair) or in the primary 
caregiver’s or clinician’s lap in a well-supported posi-
tion. In the child with some sitting balance, placement 
in a relaxed sitting position with adequate head support 
is preferred. See Chapter 7 for a summary of the cranial 
nerves.
Cranial Nerve VII
Placement of a small food bolus on the lower lip in mid-
line and observation of the child’s oral reaction to it 
provide evidence of the ability to use the muscles of the 
lip and lower face purposefully. Pursing the lips during 
rooting and sucking indicates intact facial movement. 
Lack of a smiling response may suggest severe bilateral 
facial muscle involvement. The healthy baby smiles to a 
human face at 2 to 4 months of age. A sober expression 
and sluggish grin must be carefully evaluated as possi-
ble neurologic signs of a bilateral corticobulbar system 
involvement ultimately affecting the paired nerves of 
cranial nerve VII. An asymmetric smile with a unilateral 

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
258
flattening of the nasal fold on one side of the face may 
be associated with unilateral paresis. This sign is not 
as obvious in the infant and young child as it is in the 
adult. Lack of lip tonicity may be present, and lip seal 
may not be maintained. In the brain-damaged child, 
drooling may result from the poor lip seal.
Cranial Nerve XII
The child with cerebral injury often is unable to shape, 
point, and protrude the tongue in retrieving food from 
the lower lip by licking. The lack of tongue protru-
sion is common in both spastic and athetoid children. 
In the brain-injured infant, the tongue often will not 
cup, even during crying. Neither will the tongue thin, 
nor will the tip elevate with precision. This inability to 
produce any fine tongue movements suggests motor 
involvement of both the intrinsic and the extrinsic 
tongue musculature.
Unilateral or bilateral atrophy of the tongue may be 
seen in young children, and this loss of muscle bulk sug-
gests lower motor neuron disease. However, fascicula-
tions are rarely seen in the tongue muscles of infants.
Excessive tongue thrust, sometimes called the tongue 
reflex, is common in children with severe brain dam-
age. It is particularly common in athetosis, and it may 
be associated with orthodontic problems and excessive 
drooling. In addition, occasional wavelike involuntary 
movements are seen in the body of the tongue, mimick-
ing the involuntary movements of the limbs and trunk 
in extrapyramidal athetosis.
Cranial Nerve V
When confronted with a small food bolus on the lips or 
tongue, the young child begins the total act of deglu-
tition by initiating voluntary mastication. The aim of 
the evaluation at this point is to determine whether 
the bolus of food can be pulverized and whether the 
particles of food can be selectively manipulated to be 
transported to the back of the oral cavity. With a large 
food bolus, the tongue is usually elevated, so the bolus 
is placed between the tongue surface and the anterior 
hard palate and crushed. Smaller boluses of food are 
crushed between the hard palate and tongue, and the 
tongue directly begins a wavelike, peristaltic movement, 
carrying the food to the pharynx. If the food bolus is 
large, the tongue often acts in a whiplike fashion to pro-
pel the food laterally between the molars for grinding 
and pulverization. Observation of the vigorous tongue 
actions confirms the integrity of the neural control of 
the tongue. Disorders involving neurologic integrity of 
the tongue and jaw innervation often limit cerebrally 
damaged children to eating only diced or liquefied 
food.
Adequate biting and vigorous anterior-posterior 
movements of the mandible plus lateral grinding 
action of the jaws assure the SLP that cranial nerve V 
innervation is intact and that muscles innervated from 
the pons are functional. On the other hand, an exag-
gerated and too-powerful bite may be a manifestation 
of an abnormal jaw reflex, suggesting an upper motor 
neuron lesion above the level of the pons. In older chil-
dren with brain damage, a firm tap on the lower jaw 
may elicit a clonus, suggesting a hyperactive jaw reflex. 
If the lower jaw deviates to one side on opening or dur-
ing mastication, pterygoid muscle weakness may be 
present on the side of deviation. In athetosis the jaw 
may become a major articulator, producing the motor 
power for elevating a poorly controlled tongue in 
achieving tongue tip–alveolar ridge contact and other 
tongue-elevation gestures.
Integration of Cranial Nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XII
When the food bolus is well masticated, the final invol-
untary stage of deglutition is initiated. The nasophar-
ynx is closed by the muscles of the soft palate and the 
pharyngeal constrictors. Cranial nerves IX and X pro-
duce this closure. Saliva or the food bolus is pushed 
through the palatal fauces, into the pharynx, and onto 
the esophagus in a peristaltic wave. Muscles of the soft 
palate, the pharyngeal constrictors, and muscles of the 
tongue and larynx work in intricate coordination to 
propel the food bolus to the esophagus. In one sense, 
swallowing becomes the ultimate integration of the ner-
vous mechanisms to be used later in motor expression 
of speech.
Speech, however, requires more intricate coordina-
tion of muscles than do chewing and swallowing. This 
fine coordination is accomplished through increas-
ing cortical and cerebellar control of the pontine and 
bulbar muscles. Certain other complex motor adjust-
ments are seen in speech but are not seen in chewing 
or swallowing. As an example, the grooved fricative /s/ 
requires finer motor control than is seen in mastication. 
To produce an adequate /s/, a central groove in the 
tip and blade of the tongue must be formed, with the 
sides of the tongue firmly anchored between the lateral 
dentition. This specific tongue configuration, common 
to speech, is not seen in brainstem-mediated functions. 
Intricate coordination of intrinsic and extrinsic tongue 
muscles is needed for the grooved fricatives. These fine 
motor configurations are not present in feeding. Thus 
assessment of mastication and deglutition in a prever-
bal child suspected of neurologic impairment is most 
appropriate, but when speech emerges, the evaluation 
should be based on the motor control for phonemes, 
syllables, words, and sentences assessed in the tradi-
tional articulation test format and on the results of a 
standard oral examination that includes assessment of 
the speech cranial nerves (see Chapter 7).
The actions of the cranial nerves for speech and the 
corticobulbar system, which activate the cranial nerve 

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
259
nuclei, can be assessed in infancy through observation 
of chewing and swallowing. All the nervous action of 
the bulbar muscles is integrated into the single act of 
feeding in infancy.
Developmental Motor Speech 
Disorders
Early cerebral injury to speech mechanisms of the 
developing brain results in conditions classified as 
developmental motor speech disorders. Included in 
a classification of the motor speech disorders are the 
developmental dysarthrias, developmental anarthrias, 
and developmental apraxias of speech. Developmen-
tal dysarthria is a speech disorder resulting from dam-
age to the immature nervous system; it is characterized 
by weakness, paralysis, and/or incoordination of the 
speech musculature. Developmental anarthria refers to 
a complete lack of speech as a result of profound paral-
ysis, weakness, and/or incoordination of the speech 
musculature. The diagnosis usually implies that use-
ful speech will not develop because of the severity of 
the oral motor involvement. Developmental apraxia of 
speech is an impaired ability to execute the appropri-
ate movements of speech voluntarily in the absence of 
paralysis, weakness, and incoordination of the speech 
muscles.
The term childhood dysarthria implies a neurologic 
or neurogenic speech deficit caused by a dysfunction 
of the motor control centers of the developing cen-
tral and/or peripheral nervous systems. Disturbances 
are in the areas of strength, speed, steadiness, coor-
dination, precision, tone, and range of motion or 
movement in the speech muscles. Apraxia is consid-
ered a motor planning disorder of speech, whereas 
dysarthria is associated with a partial disturbance 
of the speech mechanism involving motor move-
ments. Anarthria usually is associated with a total 
lack of speech as a result of severe to profound motor 
disturbances.20
Certain types of developmental dysarthria have been 
well studied; other types have received less attention in 
the speech pathology literature. The developmental 
dysarthrias found in the various forms of cerebral palsy, 
for instance, have been extensively studied for many 
years, whereas research on the dysarthrias of childhood 
muscular dystrophy is much less common. The speech 
signs commonly observed in the developmental dysar-
thrias are seen in Table 12-1.
Table 12-2 shows the major differences between 
dysarthria and apraxia from the point of muscle move-
ments and range of motion as seen in many childhood 
motor disturbances such as cerebral palsy.
TABLE 12-1
Major Developmental Motor Speech 
Disorders
DISORDER
SPEECH SIGNS
Developmental 
apraxia of 
speech
Disorder in selection and sequenc-
ing of articulatory movements, 
with oral apraxia sometimes 
present; comprehension intact; 
expression poor; occasional non-
focal neurologic signs
Developmental Dysarthrias of Cerebral Palsy
Spastic  
dysarthria
Bilateral corticobulbar involvement; 
dysphagia; articulation disor-
der; hypernasality; slowed rate; 
­loudness, pitch, and vocal ­quality 
disturbances; slow, stiff, and 
abrupt movements; increased 
muscle tone; muscle rigidity
Dyskinetic  
dysarthria
Athetosis (usually); dysphagia; 
hypernasality; articulation disor-
ders; prevocalizations; loudness, 
pitch, and vocal quality distur-
bances; involuntary and often 
uncontrolled movements; often 
slow and writhing movements
Ataxic  
dysarthria
Articulation and prosodic disorders; 
unequal stress, loudness, and 
pitch; speech has an explosive, 
scanning quality
Mixed  
dysarthria
Often a combination of spastic and 
dyskinetic dysarthrias
TABLE 12-2
Differences between Apraxia and 
Dysarthria
APRAXIA
DYSARTHRIA
Sound substitutions not 
on the target sound
Sound distortions usually 
related to the target sound
Inconsistent errors;  
motor planning
Inconsistent speech sound 
substitutions from  
coordination problems
Often vocal or nonvocal 
groping behaviors
Groping for sound produc-
tion precision is not noted 
verbally or nonverbally
Motor planning and 
execution difficulties
Motor disturbances causing 
distortions and not  
planning difficulties

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
260
CEREBRAL PALSY
Developmental dysarthria is most commonly seen in 
children diagnosed as having cerebral palsy. Cerebral 
palsy is a neurologic condition caused by injury to the 
immature brain; it is characterized by a nonprogres-
sive disturbance of the motor system. Many associated 
problems often are seen, such as intellectual disability, 
hearing and visual impairments, and perceptual prob-
lems produced by the infantile cerebral injury. Cerebral 
palsy is considered a major developmental disability.
Cerebral palsy has been variously classified, but most 
experts currently accept three major categories of clini-
cal motor disorders: spasticity, dyskinesia, and ataxia. By 
far the most common type of dyskinesia is athetosis.
Table 12-3 presents a classification of the forms of 
cerebral palsy. As in adult disorders, spasticity implies 
a lesion in the pyramidal system, dyskinesia implies a 
lesion in the basal ganglia, and ataxia denotes a lesion 
in the cerebellar system. However, syndromes are often 
not as clear-cut in the child as they are in the adult. 
Many children with cerebral palsy show a mixed picture. 
For instance, a child whose clinical picture is primarily 
athetoid, with typical slow, writhing movements of the 
limbs, grimaces of the face, and involuntary movements 
of the tongue and muscles of respiration, may also dis-
play hypertonic muscles and the upturning toe of the 
classic Babinski sign. The structural closeness of the 
neural pathways in the relatively small infant brain no 
doubt produces such mixed clinical pictures.
Children with cerebral palsy may also be classified 
according to topologic involvement. Common topo-
logic pictures are hemiplegia, diplegia, and quadriplegia 
(see Table 12-3). Monoplegia, triplegia, and paraplegia 
occasionally are seen. Children may also be classified by 
etiology. Common causes are prematurity, anoxia, ker-
nicterus, birth trauma, and infection. Approximately 1 
to 2 out of every 1000 schoolchildren have some form of 
TABLE 12-3
Classification of Cerebral Palsy
TYPE/
LESION AREA
FUNCTION
SUBDIVISIONS
CLINICAL SIGNS
LIMB INVOLVEMENT
Spastic
Pyramidal tract
Skilled movements of limbs 
and digits
Innervation of motor  
neurons for flexor  
movements of the  
limbs
Corticospinal 
tract
Corticobulbar 
tract
Interrupts motor  
information of the 
brainstem and spinal 
cord
Weakness or paralysis of 
various muscles
Paraplegia (lower  
extremities versus 
upper extremities), 
diplegia (lower  
extremities more than 
upper extremities)
Upper motor neuron 
lesions
Quadriplegia (lower and 
upper extremities); 
hemiparesis (left or 
right side of body) 
or monoplegia (only 
one lower extremity)
Dyskinetic
Basal ganglia
Refer to Table 2-1 for the 
basal ganglia system
Related to motor speech 
functioning
Automatic execution of 
learned motor movements
Preferred term is 
basal ganglia– 
related 
pathways and 
subcortical 
nuclei
Either akinesia or lack of 
movements or dyski-
nesia or involuntary 
excessive movements; 
breathiness, rough-
ness, hoarseness, 
tremor; exaggerated 
jaw movements; lip 
retrusion
Dyskinetic dysarthria 
(athetosis);  
choreoathetosis; 
dystonia; tremor, 
rigidity; upper 
extremity, lower 
extremity, neck, and 
trunk involvement
Ataxic
Cerebellum
Coordination of movements 
of the upper and lower 
extremities as well as at all 
stages of speech produc-
tion; sensory input from 
larynx and articulators 
and speech processing
Inferior peduncle
Middle peduncle
Superior  
peduncle
Ataxia
Sometimes diplegia
Upper extremities
Lower extremities
Trunk

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
261
cerebral palsy. Of the three major types, spasticity is the 
most prevalent, athetosis is next, and ataxia is the least 
common. Box 12-1 displays a summation of the major 
causes of cerebral palsy in children.
Developmental dysarthria is a major problem in 
the population with cerebral palsy, with 75% to 85% 
of the children showing obvious speech problems. 
Dysarthria may be complicated in some children by 
intellectual disability, hearing loss, and perceptual 
disorders. Despite complicating factors, the two major 
dysarthrias—spastic dysarthria and dyskinetic dysar-
thria of athetosis—in cerebral palsy can be differen-
tiated. Spasticity and athetosis cannot be identified 
by articulatory errors alone; however, when vocal and 
prosodic features are incorporated into perceptual 
judgments of speech, the two clinical types become 
distinct, just as spastic and hyperkinetic types are dis-
tinct among adult dysarthrias.22,33
Spastic Cerebral Palsy
Spastic cerebral palsy is characterized by hypertonic 
reflexes. With this type of reflex, when a muscle con-
tracts, the opposing muscle stretches abnormally, thus 
excessively increasing muscle tone.24 That muscle group 
becomes rigid; movement therefore becomes extremely 
difficult. According to Owens et  al.,24 these muscle 
movements can be described as laborious, jerky, and 
unusually slow. These children often exhibit infantile 
patterns of the rooting reflex that involve the tongue, 
lips, and mandible. The movement is toward the site of 
the stimulation. These reflexes usually become absent 
after the child reaches the age of 2 to 4 months.
Spastic Hemiplegia
According to Love, children born with upper and lower 
extremity involvement on one side (hemi) exhibit signs 
of clasp-knife spastic paresis.20 Spastic hemiplegia usu-
ally is caused by damage to the corticospinal tract, with 
the possibility of corticobulbar involvement. Cranial 
nerve XII, the hypoglossal nerve, usually is also involved, 
with the tongue showing contralateral deviation from 
the affected side on protrusion. Both dysarthric speech 
and dysphagia typically resolve after a brief period.
Phonologic development often is delayed in these 
children and is accompanied by a language delay and 
cognitive disturbances. Love indicated that children 
with right hemiplegia display a shift of language cen-
ters from the left to the right hemisphere.20 Therefore 
visual spatial development, usually from the right hemi-
sphere, is often expected to be compromised.
Spastic Paraplegia and Diplegia
Spastic paraplegia, which affects the lower extremi-
ties without involvement of the upper extremities, is 
uncommon in children. When it does occur, speech 
production usually is within normal limits without sig-
nificant cognitive impairments.
Spastic diplegia usually involves all four extremities 
but the lower extremities display more involvement 
than the upper extremities, differentiating it from 
quadriplegia. Children with diplegia often display mild 
dysarthria with articulatory involvement only, but oth-
ers with more severe dysarthric signs often display respi-
ratory, laryngeal, palatal, and pharyngeal impairments 
in addition to articulation problems. Some dysphagia 
and drooling may also be present. Not all children with 
this diagnosis have cognitive difficulties.
Love stated that flexion and adduction of the hips 
in diplegia also include “scissoring or crossing of the 
legs during walking, producing a ‘scissors gait,’ a widely 
known clinical sign of child spasticity” (p. 45).20 These 
children sometimes also display toe walking because of 
hamstring and Achilles tendon involvement.
Spastic Quadriplegia
Spastic quadriplegia usually displays equal involvement 
of both upper and lower extremities with severe involve-
ment of the legs and arms and floppiness of the neck. In 
this condition both the corticospinal and corticobulbar 
tracts are affected. These children also display major 
Prenatal brain damage may result from:
	•	 Impaired migration of new brain cells with the  
following risk factors:
	
•	 Maternal infection, e.g., cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), HIV, meningitis, toxoplasmosis, rubella
	
•	 Toxins
	
•	 Drugs
	
•	 Radiation exposure
	•	 Prematurity and low birth weight with the follow-
ing risk factors:
	
•	 Low-grade infection of mother’s urinary-genital 
tract
	
•	 Alcohol and drug abuse, cigarette smoking
	
•	 Poor maternal nutrition
	
•	 Multiple fetuses
	•	 Trauma to mother
Perinatal brain damage may result from:
	•	 Increased pressure on brain during delivery
	•	 Impaired circulation to the fetal brain
	•	 Poor respiration
	•	 Low birth weight
Postnatal brain damage may result from:
	•	 Physical trauma
	•	 Infection
	•	 Respiratory distress
	•	 Cerebrovascular disorders
	
BOX 12-1   
Causes of Cerebral Palsy

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
262
problems with respiration, articulation, and laryngeal 
movements as well as compromised palatal and pharyn-
geal musculature. This type of spastic cerebral palsy usu-
ally has the highest incidence of intellectual disability or 
developmental delay.
Table 12-4 summarizes the speech performance 
parameters found in children with spastic and athetoid 
cerebral palsy.
Most of the research trials and literature on treat-
ment of spastic cerebral palsy concerns the relief of 
limb spasticity. The National Institute of Neurologi-
cal Disorders and Stroke4 lists various types of treat-
ment modalities used for spasticity in cerebral palsy 
including surgical procedures such as muscle/tendon 
lengthening or release and selective dorsal rhizotomy 
(SDR), which is a more complex surgical procedure 
in which selected overactive nerves are severed at the 
base of the spinal column. SDR is used only when more 
conservative treatments have not worked to relieve 
severe spasticity and associated pain. Drug treatments 
are also used, including the drug baclofen, which is 
a muscle relaxant; it is delivered via an implantable 
pump to the area surrounding the spinal cord; this 
procedure is more likely to be used on children over 
age 4 years who have severe spasticity. Local injection 
of botulinum toxin (Botox or Neuronox)17 combined 
with splinting and physical therapy for stretching is 
also effective for children who have some movement 
control. The effectiveness of the injection wanes over 
time, usually around 3 months. Research into stem 
cell therapy for cerebral palsy is also being initiated 
through the National Institutes of Health but is in the 
early stages of research, and no large-scale clinical tri-
als have been done to date.
Athetoid Cerebral Palsy
The most common of the dyskinetic syndromes of 
cerebral palsy is athetoid cerebral palsy. It is much less 
common than spastic cerebral palsy. Love reported 
that only approximately 5% of the total cerebral palsy 
population of children would be considered “pure” 
athetoid, whereas 10% would be diagnosed as dystonic 
athetosis.20
Slower motor development and hypotonia are the 
first signs of motor difficulties in athetoid children. Sit-
ting balance is either delayed or not developed at all. 
One of the most prevalent signs is the absence of the 
Moro and the tonic neck reflexes.
TABLE 12-4
Speech Performance in Spastic and Athetoid Cerebral Palsy
RESPIRATION
PHONATION
RESONANCE
ARTICULATION
PROSODY
Rapid rate
Poor pitch control
Hypernasality
Spastic slightly superior to 
athetoid
Reduced variations in 
intensity, frequency, 
and timing
Abdominal  
breathing
Poor loudness 
control
Nasal emission
Articulation development 
systematic but delayed
Voice commonly 
monotone through 
utterance
Reverse or paradoxi­
cal breathing in 
athetoid cerebral 
palsy
Monotone
Poor intraoral 
breath pressure
Motor complex sounds more 
difficult
Slowed rate
Limited upper 
thorax  
expansion
Breathiness
Varying types of 
velopharyngeal 
inadequacy
Athetoid cerebral palsy 
incorporates wide range of 
movement of articulators
No formal studies of 
prosody
Flared lower ribs
Poor adduction/ 
abduction of  
vocal folds
Inconsistency of 
velopharyngeal 
closure
Also uses jaw as major  
articulator
Poor tidal air  
control
Varying tension of 
vocal folds
Incoordination of 
velar musculature
Adults show oral motion rates 
50% slower than normal
Increased  
subglottal  
pressure
Generalized laryngeal 
immobility; poor 
timing of voice 
and respiration
Athetoid cerebral palsy 
shows some out-of-class 
substitution; spastic cere-
bral palsy does not
Reprinted from Love, R. G. (1999). Childhood motor speech disability (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
263
In certain cases hypertonic athetosis progresses 
to a mixed type, usually spastic athetoid. In general, 
all four limbs are involved; a different presentation is 
rare. Speech problems usually are present along with 
swallowing difficulties and drooling. Severely affected 
motor movements of the upper and lower extremities 
usually correlate to the severity of the speech disorder 
present (see Table 12-4).
Ataxic Cerebral Palsy
Love reported that ataxic cerebral palsy is the most 
uncommon of the palsy syndromes.20 Dyssynergia that 
translates into incoordination of the upper and lower 
extremities typically is present. The most identifying 
sign is, as Fenichel12 stated, a staggering, somewhat 
lurching, wide gait pattern. Disturbed balance usually 
is another sign of ataxic cerebral palsy. The child with 
ataxic cerebral palsy is often looked on as clumsy and 
awkward. Muscles are hypotonic and gait does not seem 
to have directional control. Ataxic cerebral palsy usu-
ally involves damage to the cerebellum. The cerebel-
lum controls and monitors balance and proprioceptive 
information from muscles, including rate of move-
ment, force of movement, and directional control of 
movement. With ataxia, feedback from the cerebellar 
peduncles is lacking, thereby causing incoordination, 
and hence difficulty in walking.
Table 12-5 summarizes the major differences among 
spastic, athetoid, and ataxic cerebral palsy, including 
characteristics and areas of damage to the brain.
CHILDHOOD SUPRABULBAR PARESIS
An isolated paresis or weakness of the oral muscu-
lature is sometimes seen in children without major 
motor signs in the trunk or extremities. This condi-
tion results in a form of developmental dysarthria and 
associated problems. Described by the neurologist 
Worster-Drought,34 this condition usually affects the 
corticobulbar fibers that innervate cranial nerves X 
(vagus) and XII (hypoglossus). The etiology has been 
attributed to agenesis or hypogenesis of the corticobul-
bar fibers, but this theory has not been verified. The 
muscles of the lips, pharynx, palate, and tongue are 
involved to varying degrees. The dysarthria is marked 
by misarticulations and hypernasality. The individual 
may have a history of dysphagia and occasional laryn-
geal involvement and drooling.
This condition is called congenital childhood supra-
bulbar palsy because involvement generally is con-
fined to the muscles innervated by the corticobulbar 
fibers. Paresis of the trunk and limbs is not present as 
in the child with obvious cerebral palsy. The condition 
is brought to the attention of the SLP or neurologist 
because of an isolated dysphagia or dysarthria. Muscles 
of the oral mechanism are involved, but no other obvi-
ous neurologic signs are present in the motor system. 
Box 12-2 lists neurologic signs seen in the dysarthric 
syndromes of congenital and acquired suprabulbar 
paresis of childhood.
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
Next to cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy is the child-
hood neurologic disorder most likely to present a 
TABLE 12-5
Differences among Spastic, Athetoid, 
and Ataxic Cerebral Palsy
TYPE
CHARACTERISTICS
DAMAGE 
AREA(S)
Spastic
Spasticity: hypertonic
Rigidity
Stretch reflex
Slow movements; laborious
Presence of infantile reflexes
Pyramidal 
tract
Athetoid
Involuntary writhing  
movements
Extrapyramidal 
tract
Uncoordinated volitional 
movements
Basal ganglia 
tracts
Ataxic
Poor balance
Cerebellum
Poor direction control in gait
Rate dysfunction in gait
Adapted from Owens, R. E., Metz, D. E., & Haas, A. (2003). Introduction to 
communication disorders: A lifespan perspective (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon.
Congenital Signs
Articulation disorder
Hypernasality
Lip, tongue, palate, and pharynx paresis
Isolated paresis (in some cases)
Possible agenesis of corticobulbar fibers
Drooling
Acquired Signs
Articulation disorder
Hypernasality
Lip, tongue, palate, and pharynx paresis
Some facial rigidity
	
BOX 12-2   
Dysarthria in Suprabulbar Paresis Syndrome of 
Childhood

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
264
developmental dysarthria. The most common type of 
muscular dystrophy is the pseudohypertrophic type, 
also called Duchenne dystrophy. Duchenne dystrophy 
is associated with a sex-linked recessive gene, occurs pri-
marily in males, and usually is manifest by the third year 
of life. During early development, motor milestones 
are often delayed and a retrospective study using par-
ent report found that language milestones were also 
frequently delayed.10 These early delays in language 
milestones were found to be associated with later cogni-
tive impairments. Duchenne MD is marked by a charac-
teristic progression of muscle weakness starting in the 
pelvis and trunk and eventually involving all the striated 
muscles, including those of the speech mechanism. 
The visceral muscles usually are spared. Enlargement of 
the calf muscles and occasionally other muscle groups 
accounts for the term pseudohypertrophic. Infiltration 
of fat and connective tissue produces the pseudohyper-
trophic effect.
In the later stages of the disease a flaccid dysarthria may 
appear, marked by articulation disorder and voice quality 
disturbances. Often the articulation disorder is mild, with 
only one or two phonemes in error. Dystrophic patients 
show reduced oral breath pressure and vocal intensity. 
They do not sustain phonation as well as healthy children 
do, and they show serious involvement of the muscles of 
speech. Rate of tongue movement and strength of the 
tongue are poor. Retracting and pursing the lips as well 
as pointing and narrowing the tongue are noticeably dis-
ordered actions, and phonemes requiring tongue and lip 
elevation often are in error. A broadening and flattening 
of the tongue is sometimes seen in advanced cases. Respi-
ratory and laryngeal muscles are also weakened, affecting 
respiratory and phonatory performance. Despite weak-
ness, labial phonemes generally are produced more accu-
rately than are tongue-tip consonants. Box 12-3 presents 
the speech and physical signs in the developmental dysar-
thria of pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy. Several 
uncommon childhood dysarthrias associated with lower 
motor neuron disorders are surveyed by Love.20
Childhood Apraxia of Speech
The following definition of childhood apraxia of speech 
(CAS) was adopted by the American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association (ASHA) in 2007:8
CAS is a neurologic childhood (pediatric) speech sound  
disorder in which the precision and consistency of movements 
underlying speech are impaired in the absence of neuromus-
cular deficits (e.g., abnormal reflexes, abnormal tone). CAS 
may occur as a result of known neurologic impairment, in as-
sociation with complex neurobehavioral disorders of known 
or unknown origin, or as an idiopathic neurogenic speech 
sound disorder. The core impairment in planning and/or pro-
gramming spatiotemporal parameters of movement sequences  
results in errors in speech sound production and prosody.
It has been difficult to establish incidence and preva-
lence of CAS because we do not as yet have clear diag-
nostic criteria nor do we have adequate standardized 
test procedures for establishing its presence.21 In 1997 
Shriberg et al.27 estimated that CAS occurs in 1 to 2 per 
1000 children in the population. A study using data 
gleaned from reports of children referred for speech 
disorders estimated 3.4% to 4.3% of the children 
referred were given a diagnosis of CAS.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
This motor speech disorder can be congenital or 
acquired; it occurs in children with known neurologic 
etiologies such as intrauterine stroke, infections, or 
trauma and may also occur as part of a complex neu-
robehavioral disorder such as those caused by genetic 
or metabolic disorders. Because CAS without comor-
bidities is rare, it is often difficult to separate from the 
other disorders present. Idiopathic cases in which no 
associated neurologic disorder or injury could be iden-
tified have been reported, however.
A genetic basis for CAS has been investigated with 
particular emphasis on the study of the KE family in 
London. Research on 30 members of four generations 
of this family found that almost half the members of the 
family had a significant communication impairment.14 
The disorder was first presented as a grammar-specific 
Speech Signs (Flaccid Dysarthria)
Articulation disorder
Reduced vocal intensity
Respiratory weakness
Articulator weakness
Broad, flattened tongue
Physical Signs
Onset: 3 to 4 years
Proximal weakness
Pseudohypertrophic calf muscles
Proximal atrophy
Hyporeflexia, except ankles
Intellectual disability (one third of cases)
	
BOX 12-3   
Developmental Dysarthria in Pseudohypertrophic  
Muscular Dystrophy

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
265
disorder, but more in-depth research later revealed a 
severe articulatory deficit (thought to be apraxia of 
speech) as well as deficits in other linguistic areas and, 
in some members, intellect.31 Orofacial apraxia was also 
found in some members. Genetic studies of this family 
pointed to mutations in the FOXP2 gene on chromo-
some 7. There are other studies of children and fam-
ily members with a speech sound disorder diagnosed 
in some members as CAS in which a syndrome was also 
present in which a gene mutation on another chromo-
some was identified. Research on children with galac-
tosemia, a metabolic disorder affecting the body’s 
processing of sugar, found an incidence of CAS in 63% 
of the 24 cases studied.32
Neither the etiology nor the neurophysiology of 
CAS has been identified. However, the advent of better 
access to safe neuroimaging studies as well as the use of 
event-related potentials has provided some interesting 
insight into neurophysiology. Liégeois and colleagues18 
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
to study the affected and unaffected members of the 
KE family. Tasks used were repetition and covert and 
overt verb generation. Imaging found more posterior 
and extensively bilateral activation in all generation 
tasks. In trying to ascertain differences in brain struc-
ture related specifically to CAS, however, the studies of 
the KE family members were confounded by the pres-
ence of linguistic and cognitive deficits in many of the 
affected members.
Kadis and colleagues16 analyzed cortical thickness 
from MRI for seven regions of interest in 14 chil-
dren identified with idiopathic CAS who were receiv-
ing speech therapy for the disorder and age-matched 
control subjects. The only consistent difference in 
gray matter volume was found in the left supramar-
ginal gyrus. No significant differences were found for 
the typical motor-speech programming areas nor for 
the superior temporal gyrus, which is an area found 
to show differences in gray matter volume bilaterally 
in children with speech sound disorders not related 
to CAS.25 Earlier computational neural modeling 
had postulated that children with CAS would experi-
ence poor feedforward control, perhaps the result of 
reduced somatosensory information and increased 
neural noise.30 This would increase the child’s depen-
dence on auditory feedback control.
Yet another neurophysiologic approach was taken 
by a group at Haskins Laboratory.26 This study involved 
children with CAS and a matched control group per-
forming a picture-naming task. The pictures were var-
ied by complexity of structure with monosyllabic and 
multisyllabic words used. Evoked-related potentials 
(ERPs) were recorded while the children performed 
these naming tasks. Group differences were found that 
the authors hypothesize supported both prespeech 
phonologic processing and motor planning. The sub-
jects with CAS showed reduced amplitude over the 
right hemisphere before speaking multisyllabic words 
compared with monosyllabic words. The time window 
of this reduction was thought to be consistent with pho-
nologic encoding. The group with CAS also was found 
to show a later time onset of movement both in the stim-
ulus locked and response locked conditions, regard-
less of the complexity of the stimulus. This suggested 
differences in phonetic processing (motor planning/
programming). As the authors point out, this study is 
primarily descriptive. It does lend support to what cli-
nicians have always suspected—that neurobiologic dif-
ferences do exist in children with CAS; clinically they 
appear to physiologically require a longer time to pre-
pare for speech production.
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
The disordered movements of the articulators in CAS 
frequently result in a serious phonologic problem in 
the school-age child. If an apraxic disorder of the oral 
muscles is present in the preschool years, it may well 
delay the development of speech and language, and 
the language developmental milestones of one-word 
utterances, two-word combinations, and three-word 
sentences may be disrupted. Although a clear-cut syn-
drome has not yet emerged despite considerable clini-
cal research on the topic, it is now a fairly well-accepted 
clinical diagnosis though accurate assessment method-
ology with secure sensitivity and specificity has not yet 
been established.
The differential diagnosis of CAS has and continues 
to challenge the SLP. The treatment methods that may 
progress the child with CAS may differ significantly 
from the treatment methodology used with children 
with articulation disorders or phonologic disorders. It is 
important to try to diagnose a true case of CAS as early 
as possible so that targeted treatment methods can be 
begun. A number of studies have tried to identify char-
acteristics that would differentiate speech apraxia from 
other speech production disorders. Checklists have also 
been formulated to help identify characteristics associ-
ated with CAS, and these have been used by many clini-
cians with varying success. The 2007 technical report 
by ASHA on CAS8 reviewed the literature on behavioral 
markers for CAS available to that time, finding con-
siderable variability in subjects used and overlap with 
markers often present in children with speech disorders 
but no oral-motor involvement. The two measures that 
appeared to show the most sensitivity were maximal 
performance for multisyllabic word production and 
prosody.

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
266
Strand and colleagues29 targeted the even more dif-
ficult problem of identifying motor speech impairment 
in younger children or in children with little verbal abil-
ity. The DEMSS (Dynamic Evaluation of Motor Speech 
Skill) was supported as a reliable and valid test for this 
purpose with the probability of correct classification 
based only on the DEMSS total score being greater than 
90%. The dynamic aspect of the test requires assessment 
of the child’s ability to directly imitate simple phonetic 
content and syllable structure while cuing is provided. 
Vowel accuracy, total accuracy, prosody, and consistency 
are the measures taken for the total.
A recent Australian study on diagnostic differentiation 
recruited 4- to 12-year-old children who were suspected 
by community SLPs to have CAS but were otherwise nor-
mally developing.30 Two sets of diagnostic criteria from 
the literature were used to identify CAS with 28 of the 
72 children meeting those criteria without comorbidity. 
A discriminant function analysis found that syllable seg-
regation, lexical stress matches, percentage phonemes 
correct in a polysyllabic picture naming task, and articu-
latory accuracy on repetition of /pətəkə/ reached 91% 
diagnostic accuracy compared with expert diagnosis. 
They concluded that polysyllabic production accuracy 
combined with a thorough oral motor examination that 
included diadochokinesis may prove to be sufficient to 
reliably identify CAS and rule out structural abnormality 
and dysarthria, but testing on a larger unselected subject 
population would be a next step.
Although new research has come forth regarding 
signs and symptoms of CAS, a review of the current 
literature continues to suggest that the differentiating 
features listed in Box 12-4 continue to be the ones that 
have gained the most consensus.
Treatment of CAS is beyond the scope of this text. 
New treatment methodologies are being studied and 
presented in the clinical literature of our profession 
on an accelerated basis. The astute clinician will care-
fully research this literature for evidence-based practice 
methods and will perhaps contribute to the literature 
from her or his clinical research and practice.
In summary, childhood apraxia of speech is still con-
troversial. Many researchers do not agree on symptom-
atology, causes, assessment, or treatment procedures. 
Our evidence base is increasing but further study into 
this disorder is needed before agreement is reached on 
how best to treat it.
Other Disorders of Speech 
Production
As children mature and develop from the basic oral 
reflex stage to more sound or articulatory develop-
ment, some simply become delayed in phonologic 
and/or articulatory development without a neurologic 
motor speech component. Articulation disorders have 
their roots in the phonetic (sound) development that 
children progress through as their oral motor skills 
mature. These children currently are referred to as hav-
ing phonologic processing disorders. Phonologic dis-
orders have their basis in the study of phonology from 
a linguistic point of view. These children, now served 
in clinics, do not necessarily have a motor speech com-
ponent that must be addressed either linguistically or 
neurolinguistically.
Salient differences exist between children with an 
articulation disorder and those with a phonologic dis-
order. Much is distinguished by phonetic versus phone-
mic errors. Phonetically, this child struggles with speech 
sound form and development, but phonemically the 
child displays problems with language-based functions 
of phonemes.1 This becomes a matter of sound forma-
tion (articulation disorder) versus phonemic function 
(phonologic disorder). Because motor speech delay 
or impairment is not present, children with articula-
tion disorders display disturbances in the neurologic 
processes of sound development, and children with 
phonologic disorders represent an impairment of the 
phonemic system within the language. Articulation dis-
orders are phonetic in nature, whereas phonologic dis-
orders are phonemic.1
Locke, of the University of Sheffield in England, offers 
a theory of neurolinguistic development to explain 
how an infant develops from simply recognizing faces 
and voices to learning his or her parent or caregiver’s 
voice characteristics. Locke explains that “the first phase 
is indexical and affective” (p. 266), in which the infant 
is strongly oriented to a person’s face and voice. The 
infant’s second phase is “primarily affective and social . . .  
	•	 Inconsistent errors on consonants and vowels in 
repeated productions of syllables and wordsa
	•	 Lengthened and disrupted coarticulatory transi-
tions between sounds and syllablesa
	•	 Inappropriate prosody, especially at the word and 
phrase levela
	•	 Poor accuracy of movementsb
	•	 Poor accuracy of vowel productionb
	•	 Slow diadochokinetic ratec
	
BOX 12-4   
Features of Speech Behavior That May Help  
Differentiate CAS from Other Disorders
aAmerican Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2007).8
bStrand et al. (2013).28
cMurray et al. (2015).23

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
267
whereby its function is to collect utterances for social pur-
poses” (p. 266) regulated by the right hemisphere. The 
third phase facilitates discovery and is ultimately respon-
sible for the child’s development of speech and language 
rule usage. The fourth and last phase is integrative in 
nature. This underlies Locke’s idea that “children who 
are delayed in the second phase have too little stored 
utterance material to activate their analytic mechanism 
at the optimum (neurolinguistic) moment and when 
sufficient words are learned, the capability has already 
begun to decline” (p. 266). This could explain, from 
a neurolinguistic viewpoint, the delay in speech devel-
opment in infants and young children. Finally, Locke 
suggested that “the resulting neurolinguistic resources, 
not being specialized for phonological operations, are 
minimally adequate but not optimal for development of 
spoken language” (p. 266). Table 12-6 outlines Locke’s 
system including the neurolinguistic components of 
speech development and language capacity.19
A delay in neurolinguistic development can lead 
to speech delays and phonologic disorders. Children 
develop through periodic phases, as described in 
Table 12-6, and if an interruption (e.g., cerebral palsy, 
muscular dystrophy, etc.) or delay (e.g., intellectual 
disability, autism, etc.) occurs, speech development 
would either be absent or significantly altered.
DISORDERS OF FLUENCY
The World Health Organization defines stuttering as 
“speech that is characterized by the frequent repetitions 
or prolongations of sounds, syllables or words, or by fre-
quent hesitations or pauses that disrupt the rhythmic 
flow of speech.”11 Many people who stutter also exhibit 
what we refer to as “secondary” symptoms such as facial 
grimaces, extremity movements, or eye blinks. Flu-
ency disorders or stuttering has a prevalence of about 
5% during early childhood. Many children, however, 
recover spontaneously, leaving a prevalence across the 
general population of around 1%.36
The various theories about what causes disorders of 
fluency and how best to treat them in children who do 
not naturally develop fluent speech will be taught to you 
as you progress through your curriculum. Stuttering has 
been researched extensively by SLPs; there have always 
been questions about possible neurologic differences 
that could account for some or all of the symptomology, 
which, of course, can vary greatly between individuals. It is 
only recently that our field has had access to imaging and 
other techniques that can begin to try to answer that ques-
tion. Neuroimaging studies are rapidly adding knowledge 
about brain structure and function in adults and children 
with fluency disorders. They suggest that subtle functional 
brain differences do exist, perhaps leading to the eventual 
discovery of a neurologic basis for stuttering.7
Findings from Neuroimaging Studies
Table 12-7 lists a few of the more recent neuroimaging 
studies and briefly summarizes the findings. All of these 
studies have been done on adults who stutter. As you will 
see, the findings vary. A limitation of most studies on 
adult stutterers is that it is difficult to ascertain whether 
the brain activity or connections discovered are related 
to the etiology of the disorder or are related to compen-
satory mechanisms that the person has developed to 
deal with the disfluencies. Few studies have been done 
on children, and there is a critical need for this type of 
research to pinpoint the etiology of developmental stut-
tering and, perhaps one day, successfully treat it early 
enough to prevent persistence into adulthood.
As you will learn in your later study of treatment of 
stuttering, external timing aids (such as pacing tech-
niques, metronome, etc.) often induce fluency in per-
sons who stutter. Because of this, there has been interest 
in the neuroanatomic support for the brain’s internal 
timing mechanisms as well as what parts of the brain 
TABLE 12-6
Phases and Processing Systems and Neurolinguistic Correlates
AGE OF ONSET
DEVELOPMENTAL PHASES 
AND SYSTEMS
NEUROLINGUISTIC AND 
NEUROCOGNITIVE MECHANISMS
LINGUISTIC DOMAIN
0-3 months
Vocal learning
Specializing in social understanding
Prosody and sound segment  
development
5-7 months
Utterance acquisition
Specializing in social understanding
Stereotypic utterances
20-37 months
Analysis and computational
Grammatical analysis skills
Phonology, morphology, and syntax
3+ years
Integration and elaboration
Social understanding and  
grammatical analysis
Automatic operations and expanded 
lexicon and sound development
Modified from Locke, J. (1997). A theory of neurolinguistic development. Brain and Language, 58, 265-326.

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
268
may be most responsive to external timing cues. Etch-
ell’s research on a group of adult stutterers suggested 
that internal timing differences account for disfluent 
speech and that the basal ganglia and supplementary 
motor connections are involved in this deficient tim-
ing.11 There have recently been a few studies on school-
age children and adolescents that do support anatomic 
differences in basal ganglia structures, the putamen,2 
and the caudate nucleus.13 Chang and Zhu5 also found 
poor functional connectivity of the basal ganglia and 
the SMA in children who stutter. The involvement of 
the cerebellum and the right inferior frontal gyrus 
as well as the left premotor cortex was proposed by 
Ethchell and colleagues11 as possible primary neural 
structures that use external timing cues to provide com-
pensation when there are internal timing deficits in 
the controlling neural network. Finally, in the largest 
pediatric neuroimaging study of stuttering to that date, 
Chang and colleagues7 used fractional anisotropy (FA) 
to look at differences in white matter development in 3- 
to 10-year-old children (47 children who stutter [CWS] 
and 42 children with no stuttering [CWNS]). Lower FA 
values indicate poor organization of the white matter 
tracts in these areas with more crossing of bundles of 
fibers rather than coherent tracts to and from the con-
necting areas. It could also imply poor myelination of 
the fibers or poor integrity of the membranes of the 
cells. Studies of FA during the developmental periods 
of childhood and adolescence typically show increases 
related to development as well as to skill acquisition and 
training.
In this study using FA to look at stuttering, significant 
decreases in FA were found in CWS with the lowest val-
ues found in the left hemisphere white matter under-
lying large parts of the sensorimotor cortical regions 
(inferior frontal gyrus, premotor cortex, motor cortex, 
middle and superior temporal gyri, and inferior pari-
etal areas). These areas are along the superior longitu-
dinal fasciculus. Decreased FA in CWS was also noted 
in the left cerebellum and brainstem and the entire 
length of the corpus callosum. Though smaller than 
those in the left hemisphere, right-sided decreases were 
found in part of the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44), the 
middle and superior temporal gyri, and the supramar-
ginal gyrus. The authors posit that these lower FA values 
indicating white matter structural differences in CWS 
suggest “deficits in long-range connectivity that sup-
port efficient sensorimotor and interhemispheric inte-
gration and cortical-subcortical interaction for skilled 
movement control” (p. 704) and “underlie precise tim-
ing of movement” (p. 708).
Many ways of seeing into the windows of the brain of 
adults and now children have been made available with 
the advances in neuroimaging techniques making them 
less and less invasive. It is now up to the researchers 
and clinicians to design studies that will help us learn 
more about which brain structures are responsible for 
promoting fluent speech and when and why they are 
most vulnerable to disruption. We may then be able to 
prevent developmental stuttering from occurring or at 
least treat it so that the disorder of fluency does not fol-
low the child into adulthood.
TABLE 12-7
Selected Neuroimaging Studies on 
Adults Who Stutter
AUTHOR (YEAR)
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FROM 
NEUROIMAGING
Sommer et al. 
(2002)28
Decreased white matter  
connectivity
Brown et al. 
(2005)3
Meta-analysis using Activation 
Likelihood Estimation method 
(ALE): overactivation in right 
frontal operculum and anterior 
insula; absence of activation 
bilaterally in auditory areas; 
overactivation in cerebellar 
vermis
Chang et al. 
(2009)6
Reduced activation during speech 
perception and planning in frontal 
and temporoparietal areas; 
increased activation during speech 
production in right superior 
temporal gyrus, bilateral Heschl’s 
gyrus, insula, bilateral precentral, 
supplemental motor area, and 
the putamen
Xuan et al. 
(2012)35
Study of brain activity during 
resting state: altered brain 
activity compared with controls 
in areas involved in motor, lan-
guage, auditory and cognitive 
processing; altered functional 
connections between the areas 
as well
Ingham et al. 
(2012)15
Stuttering frequency across two 
tasks correlated with cortical-
striatal-thalamic circuit activity. 
Primarily highlights the variabil-
ity found in functional imaging 
studies
Connally et al. 
(2013)9
Study of white matter tracts: re-
duced integrity in the 3 cerebel-
lar peduncles as well as the left 
angular gyrus; greater connec-
tivity in the corticobulbar tract

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
269
Synopsis of Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 Oral reflexes in the developing child that appear 
at birth include rooting, suckling, swallowing, 
tongue, bite, and gag; the gag reflex persists 
throughout life, but the others usually disappear  
by 6 to 18 months of age.
	•	 Swallowing is controlled by the integration of func-
tions of central nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XII; it requires 
coordination but not in a form as intricate as speech.
	•	 Early cerebral injury of the speech mechanisms in 
the infant brain results in motor speech and/or 
swallowing disorders.
	•	 The speech production disorders associated with 
brain injury include developmental dysarthria, 
anarthria, and apraxia of speech.
	•	 Developmental dysarthria is characterized by  
weakness, paralysis, and incoordination of the 
speech musculature.
	•	 Developmental anarthria is characterized by a lack 
of speech as a result of profound paralysis, weak-
ness, or incoordination of the speech muscles.
	•	 Dysarthria is characterized by a disturbance in the 
motor control centers of the developing brain.
	•	 Disturbances include strength, speech, steadiness, 
coordination, precision, tone, and range of motion.
	•	 Dysarthrias can be categorized as spastic, dyski-
netic, ataxic, or mixed.
	•	 Spastic dysarthria is characterized by bilateral 
corticobulbar involvement, increased muscle tone, 
slowed rate, and loudness.
	•	 Dyskinetic dysarthria is characterized by athetosis, 
dysphagia, hypernasality, articulation disorder, and 
vocal quality disturbance.
	•	 Ataxic dysarthria is characterized by unequal stress, 
articulation and prosodic disorder, disturbance of 
balance, and an awkward gait.
	•	 Cerebral palsy can be subdivided into three major 
categories: spasticity, dyskinesia, and ataxia.
	•	 Approximately 75% to 85% of children with  
cerebral palsy have dysarthria to some extent.
	•	 Other complications of cerebral palsy include  
intellectual disability and hearing loss.
	•	 Spastic cerebral palsy is characterized by hemiple-
gia, paraplegia, diplegia, and quadriplegia of  
upper and lower extremities.
	•	 Athetoid cerebral palsy is the most common of the 
dyskinesias of cerebral palsy and is characterized by 
hypotonia and the absence of the Moro and tonic 
neck reflexes.
	•	 Ataxic cerebral palsy is the most uncommon of all 
cerebral palsy syndromes and is characterized by 
disturbed balance, lurching gait, hypotonic mus-
cles, and damage to the cerebellum.
	•	 Next to cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy is the 
most likely condition to display dysarthria. Flac-
cid dysarthria may appear with an articulation 
problem, reduced vocal intensity, respiratory 
weakness, and a broad and flattened tongue; 
one third of the cases include intellectual  
disability.
	•	 Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a disorder 
affecting the precision and consistency of move-
ments underlying speech production.
	•	 CAS can be related to a neurologic or neurobehav-
ioral disorder but also may be idiopathic.
	•	 Mutation of the FOXP2 gene on chromosome 7 is 
thought to be associated with speech impairment 
similar to CAS. Other genetic mutations have been 
found to be a possible source as well.
	•	 Neuroanatomic differences in children with idio-
pathic CAS are suspected and have been identified 
in a few studies. No consistent etiology has been 
identified. Poor feedforward control and differ-
ences in phonetic processing have been supported 
by research.
	•	 Neurolinguistics is concerned with the under-
lying process of communication, including 
­phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and 
pragmatics in regard to various aspects of brain 
function.
	•	 Locke offers an explanation of the neurolinguistic 
components underlying speech and language 
development.
	•	 Stuttering or disorder of fluency has a prevalence 
of about 5% in early childhood and around 1% in 
the general population.
	•	 Neuroimaging studies have become more preva-
lent in the past few years in the study of adults and 
children with developmental stuttering. Studies 
suggest disorganized white matter connections un-
derlying sensorimotor areas in the left hemisphere 
and less so in the right hemisphere. Differences 
in basal ganglia and supplementary motor area 
and cerebellum structures have been found, with 
deficits in internal timing mechanisms proposed.

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
270
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Bauman-Waengler, J. (2004). Articulatory and phonological 
impairments: A clinical focus. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
	 2.	 Beal, D. S. (2013). A voxel-based morphometry (VBM) 
analysis of regional grey and white matter volume abnor-
malities within the speech production network of chil-
dren who stutter. Cortex, 49, 2151–2161.
	 3.	 Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, A. R., & 
Fox, P. T. (2005). Stuttered and fluent speech production: 
an ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. 
Human Brain Mapping, 25, 105–117.
	 4.	 National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke. 
(n.d.). Cerebral palsy: Hope through research. Retrieved from 
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/cerebral_palsy/ 
detail_cerebral_palsy.htm.
	 5.	 Chang, S. E., & Zhu, D. C. (2013). Neural network con-
nectivity differences in children who stutter. Brain, 136, 
3709–3726.
	 6.	 Chang, S. E., Kenney, M. K., Loucks, T. M. J., & Ludlow, C. 
L. (2009). Brain activation abnormalities during speech 
and non-speech in stuttering speakers. Neuroimage, 46, 
201–212.
	 7.	 Chang, S. E., Zhu, D. C., Choo, A. L., & Angstadt, M. 
(2015, January). White matter neuroanatomical differ-
ences in young children who stutter. Brain, 138, 694–711.
	 8.	 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2007). 
Childhood apraxia of speech. Retrieved from http://www.
asha.org/policy/TR2007-00278.htm#sec1.1.2.
	 9.	 Connally, E. L., Ward, D., Howell, P., & Watkins, K. E. 
(2013). Disrupted white matter in language and motor 
tracts in developmental stuttering. Brain, 131, 1–11.
	10.	 Cyrulnik, S. E., Fee, R. J., De Vivo, D. C., Goldstein, E., 
& Hinton, V. J. (2007). Delayed developmental language 
milestones in children with Duchenne’s muscular dystro-
phy. Journal of Pediatrics, 53, 474–479.
	11.	 Etchell, E. C. (2014). Behavioral and multimodal neuro-
imaging evidence for a deficit in brain timing networks 
in stuttering: A hypothesis and theory. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 9, 1–10.
	12.	 Fenichel, G. M. (1997). Clinical pediatric neurology: A signs 
and symptoms approach (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: W. B. 
­Saunders.
	13.	 Foundas, A. L., Mock, J. R., Cindass, R., & Corey, D. M. 
(2013). Atypical caudate anatomy in children who stutter. 
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 116, 528–543.
	14.	 Gopnik, M., & Crago, M. B. (1991). Familial aggregation 
of a developmental language disorder. Cognition, 39, 1–50.
	15.	 Ingham, R. J., Grafton, S. T., Bothe, A. K., & Ingham,  
J. C. (2012). Brain activity in adults who stutter: Similari-
ties across speaking tasks and correlations with stuttering 
frequency and speaking rate. Brain and Language, 122, 
11–24.
 C A S E  S T U D Y
H. T., a 10-year-old boy, was brought to the emer-
gency department by his parents. H. T. was home 
alone with his younger sister after his parents went 
out with friends. After putting his sister to bed, H. T. 
found liquor bottles in the wet bar of the family room 
and some beer in the refrigerator. He consumed a fifth 
of vodka and two bottles of beer within 5 hours. His 
parents came home and found him passed out on the 
kitchen floor. They called 911, and H. T. was rushed to 
the hospital. His blood alcohol level was four times the 
legal limit set for an adult. The medical team revived 
him, and he was admitted to the hospital. A few hours 
later H. T. began to have several severe grand mal 
­seizures. Seizure activity was intermittent for almost 
6 hours. Magnetic resonance imaging was completed 
at this time. Several areas of diffuse damage appeared 
on the image, but the radiologist could not deter-
mine whether any particular parts of the central ner-
vous system were affected. Imaging was ordered to 
be repeated. On wakening in the morning, the house 
neurologist on call and physical and speech therapists 
were summoned for an evaluation. H. T. was disori-
ented ×3 and had to be prompted to answer ques-
tions. Speech was slurred, with intermittent loudness 
and softness in voice output, reminding the staff of the 
drunken state he was in when brought to the emer-
gency department. Physical therapy provided minimal 
assistance to have H. T. walk across the room. Gait was 
wide and unsteady. Both fine and gross motor skills 
were tremulous and unbalanced. Alternating motion 
rates were slow and deliberate, and H. T. often stopped 
and started again several times. Many phonemic errors 
were noted. Social Services was consulted, and history 
indicated that this has happened several times before 
but this was the first time that H. T. passed out and 
had seizures, according to the parents.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	The speech symptoms, gait, and other behaviors ap-
pear to be reminiscent of which type of dysarthria?
Flaccid
Ataxic
Spastic
Mixed
	2.	What primary area of the central nervous system do 
you think was affected in this child?
	3.	Will this damage resolve as in the past, or will it be 
more permanent this time?

PEDIATRIC CLINICAL SPEECH SYNDROMES  CHAPTER TWELVE
271
	16.	 Kadis, D. S., Goshulak, D., Namasivayam, A., Pulonen,  
M., Kroll, R., Luc, F., et al. (2014). Cortical thickness in 
children receiving intensive therapy for idiopathic apraxia  
of speech. Brain Topography, 27, 240–247.
	17.	 Kim, K., Shin, J., Kwon, B., Kim, S., Jung, I., & Bang, M. 
(2011). Neuronox versus BOTOX for spastic equinus gait 
in children with cerebral palsy: A randomized, double-
blinded, controlled multicenter clinical trial. Developmen-
tal Medicine and Child Neurology, 53, 239–244.
	18.	 Liégeois, F., Baldeweg, T., Connelly, A., Gadian, D. G., 
Mishkin, M., & Vargha-Khadem, F. (2003). Language 
fMRI abnormalities associated with FOXP2 gene muta-
tion. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 1230–1237.
	19.	 Locke, J. (1997). A theory of neurolinguistic develop-
ment. Brain and Language, 58, 265–326.
	20.	 Love, R. J. (2000). Childhood motor speech disability (2nd 
ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
	21.	 McCauley, R. J., & Strand, E. A. (2008). A review of stan­
dardized tests of nonverbal and oral speech motor per-
formance in children. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 17, 81–91.
	22.	 Meyer, L. A. (1982). A study of vocal, prosodic and articulatory 
parameters of the speech of spastic and athetotic cerebral palsied 
individuals. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Nashville, 
TN: Vanderbilt University.
	23.	 Murray, E., McCabe, P., Heard, R., & Ballard, K. J. (2015). 
Differential diagnosis of children with suspected child-
hood apraxia of speech. Journal of Speech, Language, and 
Hearing Research, 58, 43–60.
	24.	 Owens, R. E., Metz, D. E., & Haas, A. (2003). Introduction 
to communication disorders: A lifespan perspective (2nd ed.). 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
	25.	 Preston, J. L., Molfese, P. J., Mencl, W. E., Frost, S. J., 
­Hoeft, F., Fulbright, R. K., et al. (2014). Structural brain 
differences in school-age children with residual speech 
sound errors. Brain and Language, 128, 25–33.
	26.	 Preston, J. L., Molfese, P. J., Gumkowski, N., Sorcinelle, 
A., Harwood, V., Irwin, J. R., & Landi, N. (2014). Neuro-
physiology of speech differences in childhood apraxia of 
speech. Developmental Neuropsychology, 39, 385–403.
	27.	 Shriberg, L. D., Aram, D. M., & Kwiatkowski, J. (1997). 
Developmental apraxia of speech: I. Descriptive perspec-
tives. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 
273–285.
	28.	 Sommer, M., Koch, M. A., Paulus, W., Weiller, C., &  
Buchel, C. (2002). Disconnection of speech-relevant 
brain areas in persistent developmental stuttering. Lancet, 
360, 380–383.
	29.	 Strand, E. A., McCauley, R. J., Weigand, S. D., Stoeckel, 
R. E., & Baas, B. S. (2013). A motor speech assessment 
for children with severe speech disorders: Reliability and 
validity evidence. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research, 56, 505–520.
	30.	 Terband, H., Maassen, B., Guenther, F. H., & Brumberg, J. 
(2009). Speech motor development in childhood apraxia 
of speech: Generating testable hypotheses by neurocom-
putational modeling. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 62, 
134–142.
	31.	 Vargha-Khadem, F., Watkins, K., Alcock, K., Fletcher, P., 
& Passingham, R. (1995). Praxic and nonverbal cognitive 
deficits in a large family with a genetically transmitted 
speech and language disorder. Proceedings of the ­National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 92, 
930–933.
	32.	 Webb, A. L., Singh, R. H., Kennedy, M. J., & Elsas, L. J. 
(2003). Verbal dyspraxia and galactosemia. Pediatric 
­Research, 53, 396–402.
	33.	 Workinger, M. S., & Kent, R. D. (1991). Perceptual analysis 
of the dysarthrias in children with athetoid and spastic cer-
ebral palsy. In C. A. Moore, K. M. Yorkston, & D. R. Beukel-
man (Eds.), Dysarthria and apraxia of speech: Perspectives on 
management (pp. 109–126). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
	34.	 Worster-Drought, C. (1974). Suprabulbar paresis. Develop-
mental Medicine and Child Neurology, 16(Suppl. 30), 1–30.
	35.	 Xuan, Y., Meng, C., Yang, Y., Zhu, C., Wang, L., Yan, Q., 
et al. (2012). Resting state brain activity in adults who stut-
ter. PLoS One, 7(1), e30570.
	36.	 Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2013). Epidemiology of stutter-
ing: 21st century advances. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 
66–87.

272
13
K E Y  T E R M S
autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD)
bilingual
cerebral plasticity
childhood 
disintegrative 
disorder (CDD)
code switching
corpus callosum
dichotic listening
DSM-IV
DSM-5
ear advantage
intellectual disability
Landau-Kleffner 
syndrome (LKS)
language dominance
language impairment
language 
lateralization
myelination
myelogenesis
pervasive 
developmental 
disorder (PDD)
Rett syndrome
specific language 
impairment (SLI)
Pediatric 
Disorders of 
Language
C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E
Brain Growth
Brain Weight
Differential Brain Growth
Differential Brain Growth Anomaly: Agenesis  
of the Corpus Callosum
Myelination for Language
Cerebral Plasticity
Development of Language Dominance
Bilingualism
Language Difference or Language Disorder?
Childhood Language Disorders
Language Impairment
Neural Basis of Language Impairment
Language Impairment in Children with Epilepsy
Language Impairment in Children with Intellectual 
Disability
Language Impairment in Neglected and Abused 
Children
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Pediatric Traumatic Brain Injury
Pathophysiology
Research on Outcome
What Else?
There is in every child at every stage a new miracle of  
vigorous unfolding.
Erik Erikson

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
273
Brain Growth
Acquisition of speech and language is clearly tied to phys-
ical development and maturation in the infant and child, 
yet the exact nature of the interaction of growth and 
development with emerging speech is unknown. What 
is known, however, is that the course of speech and lan-
guage development is a correlate of cerebral maturation 
and specialization. But a critical question still remains: 
What indexes of cerebral maturation are of significance 
to language acquisition? Clearly critical periods occur in 
the maturation of the brain as well as growth gradients 
in different brain structures. Can these critical periods 
be equally applied to the stages of language acquisition?
BRAIN WEIGHT
One obvious index of neurologic development is the 
change in gross brain weight with age. The most rapid 
period of brain growth is during the first 2 years of 
life. The brain more than triples its weight in the first  
24 months. At birth, the brain is approximately 25% of 
its adult weight, and at 6 months it has reached 50%  
of its full weight. At 1 year, the average age at which the 
first word appears, the brain is 60% of its adult weight. 
Thus the brain makes its most rapid growth in the first 
year of life. By 2.5 years, the brain has reached approxi-
mately 75% of its full growth, and at 5 years it is within 
90% of its complete maturation. Table 13-1 illustrates 
this increase in brain weight. It is not until 10 years of 
age that the brain achieves approximately 95% of its 
ultimate weight. By approximately 12 years, or puberty, 
full brain weight is reached.
The late neurolinguist Eric Lenneberg (1921-1975) 
argued that the accelerated curve of brain growth in 
the first years of life matched the course of rapid early 
acquisition of language of the child.24 He further 
claimed that primary linguistic skills were achieved by 
the age of 4 or 5 years and that the ability to acquire 
language diminished sharply after puberty, when accel-
erating brain growth reached a plateau.
DIFFERENTIAL BRAIN GROWTH
Just as the total brain grows at different rates at differ-
ent ages, so do its different parts, and various brain 
structures reach their peak growth rates at different 
times. For instance, brainstem divisions, such as the 
midbrain, pons, and medulla, grow rapidly prenatally 
and less rapidly postnatally. The cerebellum develops 
rapidly from before birth to the age of 1 year. The cere-
bral hemispheres, important in language development, 
grow rapidly early, contributing approximately 85% to 
total brain volume by the sixth fetal month.
The differential growth of the cortex of the cere-
bral hemispheres is of vital importance for speech 
and language function because the majority of neural 
structures for communication are integrated there. 
Most cortical neurons are in place at birth, but brain 
growth may be measured through the development of 
synaptic connections and myelination. One method 
of establishing a schedule of cortical growth gradi-
ents in cerebral maturity is to determine what cortical 
areas are most developed in myelination at birth. The 
motor area of the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe 
is the first cortical area developed at birth. It is soon 
followed by the somatosensory area of the postcen-
tral gyrus of the parietal lobe. Next, quite soon after 
birth, the primary visual receptor area of the occipital 
cortex matures. The primary auditory area, Heschl’s 
gyrus in the temporal lobe, matures last. The medial 
surface of the hemispheres shows the final develop-
ment of the brain.
The cortical association areas lag behind the devel-
opment of the cortical receptor areas that are present 
and active at birth. In fact, the major association areas 
devoted to speech and language mature well into the 
preschool years and even beyond. The progressive 
development of Broca’s area and the development of 
Wernicke’s area are related to progressive stabilization 
of the phonologic system. As the phonemic motor plan-
ning system matures, the auditory association system 
increases its ability to process longer and more com-
plex sequences of connected phonemes. The arcuate 
TABLE 13-1
Language and Brain Growth from 
Birth to 12 Years
AGE
LANGUAGE MILESTONES
BRAIN 
WEIGHT (G)
Birth
Crying
335
3 months
Cooing and crying
516
6 months
Babbling
660
9 months
Voicing intoned jargon
750
12 months
Approximating first  
words
925
18 months
Early naming
1024
24 months
Making two-word  
combinations
1064
5 years
Kindergarten age,  
sentences
1180
12 years
Fully matured brain  
weight
1320

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
274
fasciculus connecting Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas 
apparently begins myelination in the first year and con-
tinues for some time afterward.
At 1 year the normal child has a vocabulary of one or 
more word approximations, usually names for objects 
that have been seen and sometimes touched. This stage 
of language development requires the ability to mix 
neural information from the auditory, somesthetic, 
and visual association areas. The association area of the 
inferior parietal lobe is where information from the 
temporal auditory association areas, the occipital visual 
association area, and the parietal association area com-
bines to provide the neural bases for the feat of naming 
that the 1-year-old child displays. The rapid growth of 
vocabulary in the second and third years of life there-
fore may well be a correlate of the maturation of this 
significant posterior association area in the parietal 
lobe, which combines information from surrounding 
association areas. It no doubt is a master association 
area, rightly named by Geschwind as the “association 
area of association areas.”17
The left hemisphere is destined to serve as the primary 
neurologic site for speech and language mechanisms in 
most infants, children, and adults. The left hemisphere 
shows early structural differences that support later lan-
guage dominance. The sylvian fissure is longer on the 
left in fetal brains, and the planum temporale on the 
left is larger in the majority of fetal and newborn brains. 
Although the temporal lobe appears well differentiated 
from early life, Broca’s area is not differentiated until 
18 months, and the corpus callosum is not completely 
myelinated until age 10 years. The inferior parietal lobe, 
the master association area, is not fully myelinated until 
adulthood, often well into the fourth decade.
DIFFERENTIAL BRAIN GROWTH 
ANOMALY: AGENESIS OF THE  
CORPUS CALLOSUM
The corpus callosum is defined under the category 
of commissural fibers; that is, it interconnects corre­
sponding structures in the left hemisphere with the 
right hemisphere. The largest bundle of these fibers is 
called the corpus callosum (Fig. 13-1, A). Consisting of 
a rostrum, genu, body, and splenium, it is formed by 
over 190 million axons, primarily excitatory in nature, 
traversing from one hemisphere to the other.39 These 
fibers emerge and are sculpted in developmental stages 
during embryonic, fetal, and postnatal periods.
Agenesis of the corpus callosum (Fig. 13-1, B) is a 
condition present at birth in which there is partial or 
complete absence of the corpus callosum (CC). In the  
general population the prevalence is 0.02% to 0.5% 
with 2% to 3% of patients with intellectual disability 
affected.21 As would be expected, abnormal pathways 
have been shown on imaging studies to develop in the 
brain. Despite the presence of abnormal organization, 
there has always been found a great variability in func-
tion and cognition of acallosal patients.
Until recently, this was assumed to be the result of com-
pensatory strategies developed through mechanisms of 
neural plasticity. A recent study using in utero diffusion 
tensor imaging provided evidence that this may not be 
the primary cause of the variability. Using the DTI and 
streamlined tractography, white matter pathway devel-
opment was studied in 20 fetuses with isolated agenesis 
of the CC and compared with that of 20 gestation-age 
matched fetuses with normally developing brains.21 
After the imaging, the researchers constructed macro-
scopic connectomes of the pathways in different regions. 
The authors wanted to try to characterize white matter 
architecture before occurrence of the natural rorgani-
zation that would take place early postnatally through 
axon refinement and pruning and then later as a result 
of experience-driven changes. They found that the acal-
losal fetal brains showed a globally altered connectivity 
network already present compared with the normally 
developing brains. Gradually increasing connectiv-
ity strength was found in aberrant pathways running 
anterior-posteriorly. Less network centrality was found 
in dense areas of connectivity like the thalamus and 
cingulate cortex. These findings indicated that callosal 
agenesis manifests itself not only in aberrant pathways 
that run adjacent to the medial part of the hemispheres  
but also in excessive structural connectivity that inten­
sifies during gestation. This provides support for the 
likelihood that abnormal fiber development in children 
with callosal agenesis is more likely governed by geneti-
cally determined prenatal events than by compensatory 
mechanisms in later life.
The frequent observation of variability of function 
of these children combined with the results of the study 
outlined earlier demands that clinicians carefully assess 
each child with a diagnosis of agenesis of the CC, being 
careful to remember that there is not a “typical” devel-
opmental pattern for speech and language. There have 
been case studies and reports of treatments of those 
patients that will be helpful but each child will serve as 
his or her own control.
MYELINATION FOR LANGUAGE
Myelination has been considered one of the more 
significant indexes of brain maturation and is often a 
prime correlate of speech and language. Myelination 
allows more rapid transmission of neural information 
along neural fibers and is particularly critical in a cere-
bral nervous system dependent on several long axon 

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
275
connections between hemispheres, lobes, and cortical 
and subcortical structures. Lack of maturation of myelin 
in language association fibers and language centers has 
frequently been suggested as a cause for developmen-
tal delays in language. Immaturity of myelogenesis has 
not been definitely proved as a demonstrable cause in 
speech-language delay, but the available data suggest it 
as a likely factor.
Myelogenesis is a cyclic process in which certain 
neural regions and systems appear to begin the pro-
cess early and others much later. In some instances 
the myelogenetic cycle is short and in other cases 
much longer. Clear differences in rate of myelogen-
esis exist between different pathways. Myelination of 
the cortical end of the auditory projections extends 
beyond the first year, whereas myelination of the cor-
tical end of the visual projections is complete soon 
after birth. A similar discrepancy exists between 
myelination of the auditory geniculotemporal radia-
tions and visual geniculocalcarine radiations. These 
myelogenetic cycles appear to underlie the early visual 
maturity and slowly developing auditory maturity of 
the infant. Myelination cycles can be roughly cor-
related with the milestones of speech and language 
development, but because no behavioral way exists of 
assessing myelogenetic maturation in the living brain  
of the child with language delay, the concepts have 
little or no clinical utility for the speech-language 
pathologist (SLP).
Cerebral Plasticity
Children who have begun to develop language normally 
and then sustain cerebral injury, particularly to the left 
hemisphere, often show a loss of language skills and a 
A
C
D
E
B
FIGURE 13-1
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images from normal and acallosal-defect subjects. (a) Sagittal image of a normal 
mature corpus callosum from a 15-year-old subject. R, rostrum; G, genu; B, body; S, the splenium. (b) Coronal image 
of a normal corpus callosum (black arrows). (c) Sagittal image showing agenesis of the corpus callosum with the medial 
hemispheric sulci radiating into the third ventricle (white arrow). (d) Coronal image of true agenesis of the corpus cal-
losum with Probst bundle formation (black arrows). (e) Sagittal image showing a patient with Chiari II malformation and 
partial agenesis of the corpus callosum. The rostrum and splenium are absent (black arrows). (Adapted from Kamnasaran, D. 
[2005]. Agenesis of the corpus callosum: Lessons from humans and mice. Clinical and Investigative Medicine 28: 267–282.)

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
276
significant effect on further language development, at 
least initially. The younger the child, however, the more 
quickly the language disturbance appears to resolve 
itself and the child appears to become grossly normal 
or near normal in language function. This fact is in 
relatively sharp contrast to the adult who sustains left 
cerebral injury. In adult brains, resolution of language 
difficulty after focal injury to the (typically) dominant 
left hemisphere rarely reaches the level of normality of 
functioning that is possible in the child.
One explanation given for this phenomenon is that 
the child’s brain demonstrates considerable plasticity of 
function in that undamaged areas are capable of assum-
ing language function. In terms of language function, 
cerebral plasticity is defined as a state or stage in which 
specific cortical areas are not well established because 
of the brain’s immaturity. The brain is more plastic dur-
ing the most rapid periods of brain growth, and dam-
age to the left hemisphere before the end of the first 
year of life is often associated with a shift of language 
function to the right hemisphere. By contrast, injury 
to the left hemisphere after this critical period is less 
likely to be associated with a functional reorganization 
of the brain. Studies from various neurosurgical centers 
show that approximately one third of patients with left 
hemisphere damage before age 1 year continue to have 
language mediated exclusively by the left hemisphere.33 
In patients in whom left hemisphere dominance for 
language continues even in the face of damage, it is 
dependent primarily on the integrity of the frontal 
and temporal-parietal language areas. This explana-
tion of cerebral plasticity of language mechanisms rests 
on the concept of a transfer of functional areas from 
the left hemisphere to uncommitted areas in the right 
hemisphere.
The period of time in which plasticity changes occur 
is called the critical period. Each area of the cortex has 
its own critical period; therefore a child’s recovery 
from an injury depends on two factors: where the 
lesion occurred and the exact critical period for that 
part of the brain.20 This critical period has many impli-
cations for language functioning in a developing child. 
Axonal and synaptic developments are especially vul-
nerable to perinatal hypoxia, malnutrition, and even 
environmental toxins such as air pollution, paint, and 
fumes.20 When axonal and synaptic development are 
affected, this vulnerability has adverse consequences 
on cognitive and language development. Sensory and 
social deprivation studies have also shown that envi-
ronmental stimuli can have a significant effect on 
development during the critical period. To this end, 
a longitudinal study done by investigators from the 
Family Life Project in North Carolina involved study-
ing parental and household variables of 1112 families 
in relation to language development findings at age  
36 months.40 Language was measured by only the 
receptive language measure of the Wechsler Preschool 
and Primary Scale of Intelligence and the expressive 
tests of the Preschool Language Scale, fourth edition. 
Thirteen covariant variables were included, typical to 
study of environmental factors in child development. 
These included parental variables (such as parental age 
at first birth, income, education, employment, depres-
sion, etc.) and child variables (prenatal exposure to 
alcohol or drugs, number of different child-care set-
tings, geographic isolation). The research targeted 
interest area beyond these variables was termed house-
hold chaos. This included factors associated with insta-
bility and disorganization. Household disorganization 
(rated with five factors: household density, number of 
hours of TV watching, household preparation before 
the five scheduled visits, cleanliness of the household, 
and neighborhood noise level around the home). The 
findings of the study found the chaos factor termed 
disorganization to be the most significant predictor of 
delayed language development, as measured in the 
study, during the first 3 years of life. This was over and 
beyond factors of socioeconomic status and parenting 
frequently cited. Although development of other skills 
was not studied nor was more rigorous measure of 
language development undertaken, this study contin-
ues to reinforce what neurodevelopmental literature 
emphasizes about a child’s experiences and interactions 
with his or her sensory and cognitive “environment.” 
According to Castro et al.11 environmental enrichment 
programs are considered to be the most effective in 
overcoming cognitive problems, including the delays 
in speech and language development. The structure, 
focus, and attention to the child’s needs provided by 
these preschool and early intervention programs are 
supported by many studies, including this one, as 
critical to enhancing language and other neurodevel-
opmental areas, especially for children from chaotic 
households.
DEVELOPMENT OF LANGUAGE 
DOMINANCE
An overriding fact of brain functioning is that the cere-
bral hemispheres demonstrate asymmetry and that 
language is dominant in one of them. Cerebral domi-
nance appears to be a developing function because, 
although anatomic differences favor the temporal lobe 
in the left hemisphere, strong evidence suggests that 
language is less fixed in the immature brain. Lenne-
berg24 advanced the theory that the course of language 
lateralization follows the course of cerebral matura-
tion. He argued that lateralization is completed by 

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
277
puberty, based on the assumption that at birth the two 
hemispheres have equal potential for the development 
of language mechanisms and that gradual lateraliza-
tion is associated with the period of major growth.
Current anatomic evidence suggests that the hemi-
spheres may not have equal potentiality for language 
and that the left hemisphere is organized differently 
from the right, with speech mechanisms for language 
in the left.18 The planum temporale is larger in adults, 
newborns, and fetuses (Fig. 13-2).41
Research comparing macroscopic aspects (width, 
height, length, and total volume of the area) of post-
mortem brains with structural patterns (neuronal den-
sity, axonal density, etc.) concluded that the asymmetry 
could not be explained by neuronal density or glial 
cell volume.5 However, the findings pointed to axonal 
myelination as a possible explanation. Further support 
was provided by Galuske et  al.,16 who demonstrated a 
strong relation of asymmetry of the planum temporale 
to the organization of the clusters of neurons that char-
acterize the area and the spacing of those clusters. These 
factors can be referred to as the intrinsic microcircuitry of 
the area, and area 22 of the temporal lobe is indicative 
of greater complexity of connections. The authors of this 
study concluded that this higher level of organizational 
complexity (increasing the area volume) could be par-
tially attributable to use-dependent modifications that 
occur during development with increasing exposure to 
human language. As Habib and Robichon18 point out, 
however, this conclusion of exposure-dependent increase 
in volume is incompatible with the fact that the asymme-
try is present in the neonate and even the fetus. More 
likely, they conclude, a genetically predetermined pat-
tern of asymmetry exists that is further reinforced under 
the influence of specific environmental influences.
Cerebral dominance for language has been long 
associated with laterality of other functions. As long ago 
as 1865, Jean Bouillaud (1796-1881) suggested that lan-
guage dominance and handedness were related in some 
way. For many years the preferred hand was believed to 
be contralateral to the cerebral hemisphere dominant 
for language. This meant that the left cerebral hemi-
sphere was dominant for language in right-handers 
and the right hemisphere in left-handers. Primarily 
through the cortical-stimulation studies of Penfield and 
Roberts32 current thinking is that the left hemisphere 
is almost always language dominant in right-handers, 
with approximately 95% of this group left-brained for 
language. In left-handers, approximately 50% to 70% 
also show language dominance in the left hemisphere.
Hand preference is a relevant but not totally reliable 
index in predicting language dominance. Right-handed-
ness is a relatively universal trait and is usually associated 
with other preferences in laterality. Human beings also 
Temporal pole
Occipital pole
Left
Right
Planum
temporale
Planum
temporale
FIGURE 13-2
Cerebral asymmetry in the planum temporale. Geschwind and Levitsky demonstrated a larger 
left planum temporale in 65 adult subjects, a larger right planum temporale in 11 subjects, 
and equal plana temporale in 24 subjects. The drawing shows an exposed upper surface of 
the temporal lobe with a cut made at the plane of the sylvian fissure. Note a large left planum 
lying behind the transverse gyrus of Heschl. On the right are two transverse gyri and a small 
planum. (Modified from Geschwind, N., & Levitsky, W. [1968]. Left-right asymmetries in  
temporal speech region, Science, 161, 186-187. In C. Ludlow & M. Doran-Quine [Eds.], 
[1979]. The neurologic bases of language disorders in children: Methods and directions for research 
[NIH Publication 79-440]. Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health Publication.)

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
278
tend to prefer one foot, eye, and ear consistently. Degrees 
of laterality vary. Some people are more strongly right-
handed than others, but true ambidexters, those who use 
either hand equally well, are quite rare.
Most right-handed people demonstrate ear prefer-
ence, which is considered consistent with a contralateral  
hemisphere laterality for language in the brain. This 
preference can be demonstrated through dichotic lis-
tening tasks in which simultaneous auditory stimuli are 
presented to both ears at once. Listeners generally show 
a consistent lateral preference in recognition of stim-
uli in one ear over the other ear. This is called an ear 
advantage. Only 80% of right-handers show a distinct 
right ear advantage, so the relation to cerebral domi-
nance for language is not always clear.
Bilingualism
Processing of language for an individual who speaks 
more than one language is unique. Bilingual individu-
als are capable of code switching. This is the ability of a 
bilingual speaker to shift from one language to another 
within a sentence or within an entire conversation. This 
usually occurs when both languages are used in the per-
son’s home, school, or work environment on a regular 
basis. According to Owens31 this behavior is neither ran-
dom nor a deficit. Sprott and Kemper36 and others indi-
cated that code switching is a phenomenon governed 
by rules and influenced by the context of the interac-
tion. Code switching is often used as a processing tool to 
enhance meaning, alert a listener of a change in topic, 
or express humor attitudes or cultural solidarity.
Ahlsén discussed neurolinguistic distinction among 
three types of bilingualism: compound bilingualism, 
coordinated bilingualism, and subordinated bilingualism 
(Table 13-2).1 Further research has indicated that most 
bilingual children do not know each language at exactly 
the same skill level. Many times, as evidenced by the SLP’s 
experiences in the public schools, the two languages com-
plement each other, with each language used primarily in 
one setting or another, such as school, work, or play.
Anecdotally, most monolingual adults who have 
attempted to learn another language will tell you that it 
is challenging and, for some, impossible to become flu-
ent. This is yet another testament to the decreasing plas-
ticity of the brain for language development as a person 
matures. Weber-Fox and Neville undertook a study using 
event-related potentials to look at brain maturation and 
performance on measures of accuracy in identifying 
semantic and syntactic errors in the second language.42 
They studied Chinese adults who had learned English at 
different maturational points (age 1-3, 4-6, 7-10, 11-13, 
and after age 16). Performance on tests of semantic and 
phrase structure judgments were compared with per-
formance by monolingual adults on the same measures. 
Only the bilingual speakers who learned English after 
age 16 were found to be significantly poorer on this 
task than the monolingual speakers. The performance 
on phrase structure (grammar/syntax), however, was 
found to be sensitive to the age of acquisition of the 
second language; performance of those exposed before 
the age of 4 was similar to the monolinguals, and there 
was a trend for those exposed between ages 4 and 6 to 
perform less well. However, those who began learning 
English after age 6 performed significantly poorer than 
the monolingual subjects. Analysis of the data gathered 
from the associated event-related potentials (ERPs) was 
consistent with these findings. All groups displayed a 
significant N400 effect in response to semantic viola-
tions but the peak latencies in bilinguals exposed after 
age 16 occurred later, suggesting a slight slowing in  
processing. For the syntactic processing, altered ERPs 
were observed even with the shortest delay in exposure 
(1-3 years). With increased delays in exposure to the 
second language, the ERP data suggested reduced asym-
metry in sentence type effects, indicating reduced left 
hemisphere specialization and, perhaps, increased right 
hemisphere involvement in the processing of syntax for  
the second language and, in this study, less accuracy.
Neurolinguists often are interested in the recovery 
patterns and abilities of bilingual individuals who have 
a neurologic infarct such as stroke or traumatic brain 
injury. Parallel recovery of the languages is the most 
common pattern experienced by these individuals.1 
Ahlsén postulated that the language used that has the 
TABLE 13-2
Types of Bilingualism Distinguished 
Neurolinguistically
TYPE
DESCRIPTION
Compound 
bilingualism
The first and second languages are 
learned concurrently before age  
6 years; languages are often spoken 
by one parent.
Coordinated 
bilingualism
The second language is learned  
before puberty either in the home or 
another environment (e.g., school).
Subordinated 
bilingualism
The first language is dominant, and the 
second language is used as transla-
tion; child thinks in the first language 
and then translates it to the second 
language for speaking purposes.
Modified from Ahlsén, E. (2006). Introduction to neurolinguistics. Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins.

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
279
most emotional ties to it is less impaired after infarct 
and also recovers first. Another hypothesis is that the 
right hemisphere is more involved in second language 
(L2) processing than it is with the first language (L1). 
This may be supported by the ERP study just discussed 
for those learning another language after age 3.
LANGUAGE DIFFERENCE OR  
LANGUAGE DISORDER?
An understanding of the difference between a language 
disorder and a language difference helps the student 
studying neurologic speech and language disorders in 
children. The previous discussion on bilingualism should 
trigger some thoughts for the student studying speech-
language pathology or audiology. Is the child whose first 
language is not English considered disordered in English, 
delayed in language development in English, or just a 
child with a difference in his or her language systems 
and structures? The American Speech-Language-Hearing  
Association (ASHA)4 and Silverman and Miller35 describe 
these differences. A language disorder is defined as 
impairment in the comprehension and/or production 
of the language content, form, and/or usage; however, a 
language difference is “a variation of a symbol system . . . 
that reflects and is determined by shared regional, social, 
or cultural-ethnic factors” (p. 78).35
Owens stated that “a dialect within a language as well as 
a developing bilingualism that is affected by the influence 
of the first language on learning the second language is 
not to be considered a disorder but rather a language dif-
ference” (p. 98).31 School systems continue to struggle 
with teaching children who have English as a second lan-
guage (ESL) or limited proficiency in En­glish. It is critical, 
however, for the SLP to try to fairly assess children who 
are suspected as having true language disorders in their 
first language. This is a difficult assignment because there 
are few language assessments published for the speaker of 
languages other than En­glish that are available to mono-
lingual SLPs or even to the bilingual SLP in the United 
States, although more are now available in Spanish.
Developing cultural sensitivity and competence 
would help the SLP and audiology student develop a 
keen awareness of cultures in general and be more pre-
pared to deal with either language differences or dis-
orders. The members of ASHA’s Multicultural Issues 
Board during 2004 introduced readers to the concepts 
of cultural sensitivity and cultural competence.27
Childhood Language Disorders
To truly understand the origin of language disorders 
and why a child exhibits disordered linguistic behavior, 
students should review the neurologic language process-
ing structures in the central nervous system. Likewise, 
a review of the structures responsible for expressive 
language and transmitting a processed message from 
Wernicke’s area to Broca’s area through the arcuate 
fasciculus will help the student understand how a mes-
sage is verbalized through an intricate programming of 
motor speech structures that allow an individual to ver-
balize an idea.
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT
In this next section of this chapter we will briefly discuss 
language impairment in children. By far the most prev-
alent childhood language abnormalities are those that 
are developmental rather than acquired. The term lan-
guage impairment is adopted here, rather than specific 
language impairment (SLI), which is a term that came 
to the forefront in the 1980s and is still in wide use in 
our professional literature, as well as that of education 
and medicine. In 2012 ASHA was asked to respond to 
the proposal to include the diagnosis of SLI in the new 
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-5). Although the decision was not with-
out controversy, ASHA recommended that the diagno-
sis not be included, citing debate over the robustness 
and validity of diagnostic criteria. ASHA maintained 
that the term SLI was primarily used in research rather 
than widely used in clinical settings. Therefore SLI is 
not in the DSM-5. Language disorder is listed under com-
munication disorders with the criteria described as “per-
sistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language 
across modalities (i.e., spoken, written, sign language, 
or other) due to deficits in comprehension or produc-
tion,” and “language abilities that are ‘substantially and 
quantifiably’ below age expectations.”3 Historically, SLI 
had been defined as a language disorder that delays the 
mastery of language skills in children who have no hear-
ing loss or other developmental delays.30
Other definitions also may have included “no evi-
dence of lack of opportunity” as a criterion. In 2014 child 
language researchers and clinicians from the United 
States, Australia, and Great Britain made a compelling 
argument for the use of language impairment rather than 
SLI or language disorder. They argued that SLI has 
always been a diagnosis of exclusion, thereby perhaps 
leaving out the possibility of finding comorbidity of the 
language impairment and other disorders (that is, find-
ing a language impairment, the symptoms and signs 
of which are outside what would be expected given 
the other factors). Citing other problems with defin-
ing language impairment by excluding children with 
lower nonverbal IQ, autism spectrum disorder, social 
disadvantage, and hearing loss, they recommended that 

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
280
professionals work to reach a consensus as to inclusion-
ary criteria for the diagnosis of language impairment so 
that discrete language impairment could be identified 
even in children with these disorders.
Because this development of inclusionary criteria 
has not been established for clinical or research use at 
the time of this writing, the research cited here is pri-
marily on children who were diagnosed with SLI. Terms 
found in the literature that may refer to the same dis-
order are language delay, developmental language disorder, 
or developmental dysphasia (particularly in Australia and 
Great Britain). According to the National Institute on 
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, the dis-
order affects 7% to 8% of kindergarten children and its 
effects can persist into adulthood. This research on SLI 
is helpful in trying to understand the neurodevelop-
mental causes of difficulty with language development 
but may only apply to a small subset of children who are 
language impaired yet did not meet the strict criteria 
for inclusion as a child with SLI.
The familial nature of developmental language 
impairments has been documented, although with 
much variation in study design and criteria for disorder. 
Increased frequency of language impairment in per-
sons with first-degree relatives affected has been found 
in these studies.37,38 This finding has been strength-
ened by twin studies showing increased concordance 
in monozygotic twins compared with dizygotic twins, 
strongly suggesting genetic influence. Genetic variabil-
ity related to both ASD and language impairment was 
one of the principle interests of a large study published 
in 2014.8 The study identified two novel chromosome 
locations: 15q23-26 and 16p12. Further study found 15q 
to be specific to oral language impairment. Certainly 
the research in genetic basis for language impairment 
will continue, perhaps one day helping us identify those 
most at risk for language delay or impairment so that 
intervention could be initiated early in that child’s life.
NEURAL BASIS OF LANGUAGE 
IMPAIRMENT
A search of the literature regarding any neurologic basis 
for language disorders that appear to be developmental 
or not strongly related to an identifiable accompanying 
disorder reveals few studies. This is perhaps because 
of the complexity of language development itself, with 
the importance of genetic and environmental factors 
acknowledged and well accepted. With the advent of 
neuroimaging techniques safe for use with children, 
there have been studies of brain function attempted 
in the past few years but little consistency has been 
found.25 Liégeois and colleagues summarized selected 
studies in a 2014 review.25 For this study, the authors 
reviewed more than 2000 abstracts and articles pub-
lished between 2008 and 2013. Criteria excluded dupli-
cate studies, studies with children with brain injury, 
studies with no imaging, and studies in which magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) data included no quantitative 
analysis. The level of evidence for the five studies used 
was classified as Level III-2 (a concurrent study with 
comparative controls) by the Australian classification 
criteria.29 Their report noted the variability of inclu-
sion criteria and diagnoses in these studies with one 
study using adults identified with language impairment 
as children and continuing to score low on language 
assessments. Structural imaging studies were included 
in four of the five cases. Three of these four focused 
on children. Even in such a small number of subjects, 
there was great variability with studies of gray matter 
finding increase in some temporal lobe areas in some 
subjects while another found decrease. Study of sub-
cortical structures such as the caudate nucleus found 
similar contrary results. Studies of white matter using 
fractional anisotropy (FA) also found contradictory 
results in different subjects. Two functional imaging 
studies with language impairment were reviewed with 
both finding hypoactivation of the posterior superior 
temporal gyrus. In the summary of findings the authors 
caution that given the heterogeneity of the studies, any 
consistency found must be considered speculative but 
there was converging evidence suggesting possible neu-
ral correlates for language impairment. These were:
	•	 Morphologic reductions in the superior temporal 
gyrus and sulcus in either hemisphere, suggesting a 
role for intact auditory processing during typical lan-
guage development
	•	 Reduced activity in the left posterior superior  
temporal gyrus, consistent with the morphologic  
reductions, again suggesting abnormal auditory pro-
cessing as a factor in poor language development
	•	 Reduction in FA in the superior longitudinal fasciculus
The primary summary of the findings of this review 
study stated that cortical and subcortical anomalies had 
been found in a wide network supporting language 
function with little consistency across studies except in 
the superior temporal gyri. At this point in research, 
there is much variability in neuroimaging approach and 
too much heterogeneity in participant groups to assist 
the research clinician in devising novel interventions 
targeted at the underlying pathology.
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT IN CHILDREN 
WITH EPILEPSY
Epilepsy is a neurologic disorder in which the activity of 
the nerve cells is disrupted causing seizures which result 
in abnormal behaviors. A seizure is defined as abnormal 

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
281
electrical activity in the brain with the two main types 
being either generalized (involving both sides of the 
brain) or partial (focal) beginning in one part of the 
brain (and perhaps spreading to generalize). The two 
main types of generalized seizures are grand mal and 
petit mal. Recurrent seizures indicate a seizure disorder 
or epilepsy. Epilepsy can be idiopathic and there does 
appear to be some genetic influence. It also is often 
associated with neurologic disorders of childhood like 
cerebral palsy, abnormal cortical development, or hip-
pocampal sclerosis. Brain injury often will result in the 
development of a seizure disorder, and infections that 
affect the brain can also cause the onset of epilepsy.
The abnormal surges in electrical activity that occur 
during seizures may disrupt neuronal connections and 
interfere with the development of new connections. 
Obviously a seizure disorder could delay or impair lan-
guage development in a child. Children with epilepsy 
are often diagnosed with language impairment, learn-
ing disability, and, sometimes, intellectual disability. 
About 40% of children with epilepsy have accompany-
ing deficits in attention and may have attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Language outcome is dependent 
on the presence of comorbidities, the age of onset, the 
success of seizure control (usually with drugs), and the 
type and severity of the disorder.
A recent study on children with a focal seizure dis-
order in the left hemisphere demonstrated language 
difficulty and may also have contributed to helping us 
understand normal language development. A group 
of children, aged 4 to 12 years, who had focal seizures 
of the left hemisphere were compared with a matched 
group of healthy children on an auditory decision 
task and studied with functional MRI (fMRI).12 The 
researchers identified eight regions of interest in the 
perisylvian area and performed component analyses 
on these. In the healthy children the analysis suggested 
the existence of two functional networks that could be 
activated and synchronized to accomplish the language 
task. The ventral network or stream (implying white matter 
connectivity) was described as consisting primarily of 
Brodmann areas 45 and 47 in the frontal lobe as well as 
anterior and middle temporal lobe areas nodes; these 
areas were found to be tightly synchronized during lan-
guage tasks in healthy subjects. A dorsal network or stream 
consisted primarily of Brodmann area 44, the angular 
gyrus, and a middle temporal node. For the dorsal acti-
vations there was also found a tight network synchrony 
between inferior parietal areas in general, and inferior 
frontal and temporal areas (mirroring the connections 
of the arcuate fasciculus).
This study thus supported the functional separation 
of language systems in the typically developing child. 
In these children both networks were recruited during 
the experimental task. The children with focal epilepsy, 
however, overall showed failure to recruit the ventral 
network, particularly in the younger children, and this 
was associated with poorer language performance. The 
study did not find, as predicted, less functional con-
nectivity in the children with epilepsy compared with 
the healthy control subjects but did find poor activa-
tion of the ventral language network or stream. This 
ventral network is implicated in semantic processing 
of sentences and semantic decision making and thus 
is critical for auditory processing and comprehension. 
At least for this study, the poor language performance 
on testing highlights the importance of the ventral net-
work for normal language development and the effect 
of childhood epilepsy on its continued maturation.
Landau-Kleffner Syndrome
An important but rare cause of acquired language 
impairment is Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS), 
which is usually associated with sudden onset of diffi-
culty with language development in children for whom 
the etiology initially may not be clear. The clinical pic-
ture in this group is extremely varied. The age of onset 
of the disorder is generally between 3 and 7 years.15 
The onset of the language disturbance lasts from a few 
hours or days to more than 6 months. The presence 
of clinical seizures is reported in only 75% to 80% of 
the children with the syndrome. It is important in diag-
nosis to have the electroencephalogram (EEG) done 
while the child is sleeping because the seizure activity 
most often occurs during slow-wave sleep and may be 
missed with a routine EEG done on an awake child.15 
The presence of sudden regression or slowing of lan-
guage development with no known etiology should be 
a red flag for the presence of subclinical seizure activ-
ity, and this testing should be pursued to rule it out. 
LKS usually affects understanding of spoken language 
more than expressive, although both expressive and 
receptive deficits may be present. Recovery is also var-
ied; one study followed eight children for 10 to 28 years 
and found full recovery in four, mild residual language 
impairment in one, and moderate language impair-
ment in four.28 Adults who appear to have recovered 
well may still report some difficulty with auditory pro-
cessing. A brief article by Alpern2 in The ASHA Leader 
provides discussion of LKS as well as a link to a video 
case study for those interested in further exploration 
of LKS.
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT IN CHILDREN 
WITH INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Cognitive deficits limit language development, and the 
linguistic skills of the developmentally delayed child are 

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
282
generally poorer than those of the cognitively normal 
child of equivalent chronologic age. Language devel-
opment in the majority of developmentally delayed 
children proceeds on a slower but normal course until 
early adolescence, when development reaches a pla-
teau. Some have argued that, as in other children, their 
language development is paced by cerebral maturation. 
The lack of development of adequate speech and lan-
guage in intellectual disability often serves as one of the 
earliest and most sensitive signs of an abnormality in 
development of the nervous system for the pediatric 
neurologist and SLP. Table 13-3 outlines the major lan-
guage characteristics of children with developmental 
delay.
Language delay and generalized intellectual dis-
ability have various causes. Neurologic factors delay 
or arrest myelinization (maturation), which would 
inevitably cause brain tissue to remain undeveloped. 
Certain biologic factors, such as genetic or chro-
mosomal abnormalities, maternal infections in the 
first trimester of pregnancy, chemical or lead toxic-
ity, metabolic malfunctions, and complications from 
pregnancy or delivery may also cause intellectual dis-
ability and a delay of speech and language develop-
ment. Table 13-4 illustrates causes and consequent 
syndromes that lead to arrested cognitive and lan-
guage development.
The practicing SLP or the student of speech-lan-
guage pathology should keep uppermost in her/his 
mind that a child with developmental delay should 
always be assessed for language impairment. There 
is an expectation that language development will 
mirror cognitive development. The child whose 
language or speech development significantly lags 
behind their cognitive development, given no other 
TABLE 13-3
Language Characteristics of 
Developmentally Delayed Children
LANGUAGE 
PARAMETER
CHARACTERISTICS
Phonology
Primitive forms
Similar to preschoolers no matter the 
age of the child
Morphology
Preschool developmental characteristics
Often uses the incorrect form of a free 
or bound morpheme
Syntax
Short sentence lengths
Simple sentences lacking complexity
Lack of clauses and compound sentence 
structures
Semantics
Concrete thinking; little abstract  
language comprehension or  
expression
Lack of understanding of inferences
Simple meanings of words noted
Pragmatics
Misunderstands gestures
Lack of the use of gestures for getting a 
point across
Poor turn taking
Lack of asking for clarification increases 
miscommunications
Usually does not initiate topics
Receptive 
language
Poor comprehension
Heavily relies on context to understand 
information presented
Modified from Owens, R. E., Jr. (2004). Language disorders: A functional 
approach to assessment and intervention (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon.
TABLE 13-4
Causal Factors of Intellectual 
Disability/Developmental Delay and 
the Accompanying Syndromes
CAUSAL FACTORS
SYNDROME OUTCOMES
Chromosomal/genetic
Fragile X
Down syndrome
Complications of 
pregnancy/maternal 
infections
Rubella/German measles
Syphilis
Gonorrhea
AIDS
Chemical/lead toxicity
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Lead poisoning (eating lead-
based paint chips is a  
common cause)
Crack cocaine
Metabolic malfunc-
tions
Phenylketonuria
Poor maternal diet lacking 
vitamins and minerals
Complications of 
pregnancy and 
delivery
Skull malformation/immaturity 
of development
Premature birth
Lack of prenatal care
Data from Owens, R. E., Jr., Metz, D. E., & Haas, A. (2003). Introduction 
to communication disorders: A lifespan perspective (2nd ed.; pp. 165-166). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
283
medical conditions that would affect language devel-
opment specifically, should be diagnosed as having a 
language impairment with treatment provided by a 
speech-­language professional.
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT IN NEGLECTED 
AND ABUSED CHILDREN
A 2012 report on maltreatment of children stated that the 
total number of reported cases of maltreatment of chil-
dren (abuse and/or neglect) was 678,610 in the 50 states 
and Puerto Rico in 2012.10 Parental interactions with the 
child are often a key factor in the child’s overall develop-
ment of language as well as other behaviors such as social 
skills, reading, personality development, and interactive 
skills with peers. This has been documented in many 
studies in the literature of psychology, speech-language 
pathology, and education. Clinicians should be able to 
recognize some of the signs and salient symptoms of child 
abuse or neglect. Understanding the causes of abuse and 
neglect and learning about the person who is the abuser 
will help the SLP work with these children.
Because of physical, emotional, or other trauma, 
these children are at risk for delays in language, com-
munication, and social skills as well as psychologi-
cal and emotional harm. According to Lubinski and 
Hudson,26 salient signs of physical, sexual, or emo-
tional abuse exist, and the SLP should be aware and 
alert for indicators of possible abuse. These signs of 
include extreme behavior outbursts, self-destructive 
behaviors, poor academic performance, and language 
delays. Environmental factors also play a part in the 
cycle of abuse or neglect. These factors may include 
lack of social support, poverty, and homelessness or 
poor-quality housing.26 The behaviors associated with 
abuse or neglect and their consequences often lead 
to developmental milestone delays in young children 
which, of course, include speech and language.
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Until the DSM-5 was released in 2013,3 the disorder 
called autistic disorder was just one of five disorders 
listed under the classification pervasive developmental 
disorders (PDD). This terminology had been introduced 
in 1980, and by the time of publication of the DSM-IV it 
had come to include (1) childhood disintegrative disor-
der (CDD), (2) Rett syndrome, (3) Asperger’s syndrome, 
(4) PDD, not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), and (5) 
autism. In the DSM-5, the classification PDD had been 
replaced with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), subsum-
ing under this category autism, Asperger’s syndrome, 
and PDD-NOS, collapsing them into a single diagnosis: 
ASD. Rett syndrome and CDD were eliminated from this 
classification. Rett syndrome was eliminated because 
many symptoms of autism found in a child diagnosed 
with Rett could be diagnosed with ASD, using a speci-
fier of “with known genetic or medical condition.” CDD 
was taken out because of the differences between it and 
the other spectrum disorders, especially the severity and 
acuity of it as well as accompanying symptoms in other 
systems. It is a rare but devastating disorder from which 
recovery is typically minimal.
Asperger’s syndrome was subsumed under ASD 
because there is little research evidence to separate a per-
son diagnosed with Asperger’s from one diagnosed with 
high-functioning ASD. In regard to PDD-NOS, the com-
mittee found that the symptoms identified were primarily 
subthreshold symptoms for the diagnosis of autism and 
were so vague as to be used in various ways in diagnosis.
Whereas in the DSM-IV there were three subdomains 
with communication and social interaction being sepa-
rate domains, the DSM-5 collapsed these two into one. 
Table 13-5 describes the two domains for ASD and the 
criteria under each that are recognized for the diagno-
sis of ASD in the DSM-5.
The next Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring (ADDM) report is expected to be published 
in 2016. This report will be based on the DSM-5 criteria. 
The new monitoring will be expanded to produce esti-
mates of ASD diagnosis and services among 4-year-old 
children rather than 8-year-olds with the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) noting that autism 
can now be reliably diagnosed by age 2.
The etiology of ASD is controversial and basically 
unknown. We do know that it has a strong genetic com-
ponent. In recent years, fMRI has been found to be a 
useful tool to study neurobiologic function of people 
with ASD. Dichter13 provided a comprehensive review 
of fMRI findings in ASD through 2011. He found that 
despite the heterogeneity of persons with ASD, several 
common themes emerged in the studies in regard to 
brain function. Task-based studies have been per-
formed addressing social perception and cognition 
with tasks designed around such things as face process-
ing, theory of mind (ability to infer feeling states and/
or intentions), cognitive control (go/no-go tasks, task 
switching, etc.), communication, and reward process-
ing. Dichter reported that fMRI findings during these 
types of tasks highlighted:
	•	 Hypoactivation during social processing tasks in 
regions Dichter defines as “nodes” in the “social brain,” 
including the prefrontal cortex, posterior superior 
temporal sulcus, amygdala, and the fusiform gyrus.
	•	 Aberrant frontostriatal activation during cognitive 
control tasks, including the dorsal prefrontal cortex 
and the basal ganglia.

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
284
	•	 Anomalous mesolimbic responses to reward.
	•	 For language tasks, findings included decreased lat-
eralization differential, decreased synchrony in brain 
regions processing language, decreased automaticity 
of language processing, and recruitment of regions 
not typically demonstrated to process language.
	•	 Functional connectivity studies tend to show decreased 
connectivity between frontal and posterior–temporal 
regions known to participate actively in processing 
social-affective information. Some recent studies 
found both local overconnectivity and distant under-
connectivity of social processing regions.
Also briefly reported on by Dichter were structural MRI 
studies in ASD. He found reports of accelerated brain 
growth during early development in children with ASD 
and reports of large head circumference and brain vol-
ume. One longitudinal study reported a transient period 
of postnatal overgrowth of the brain in 70% of children 
with ASD before age 2; this overgrowth was not present 
in adolescence or adulthood. Some studies have found a 
link between increased white matter in the frontal lobe 
of children with ASD and reduced white matter later in 
adolescence and adulthood. This is consistent with the 
FA studies, which have found increased FA in brain areas 
associated with social processing in young children but 
reduced FA in adolescents and adults with ASD.
The Dichter review reported that studies of func-
tional connectivity done during a resting state (rather 
than task-based study) in subjects with ASD found quite 
contradictory results, with some highlighting reduced 
connectivity between areas and others finding over-
connectivity in similar areas. A 2015 study of subjects 
with high-functioning ASD sought to try to explain this 
inconsistency.19 Resting-state functional connectivity 
studies were performed for both inter- and intrahemi-
spheric connectivity. Adults with high-functioning ASD 
were compared with matched control subjects. No 
consistent pattern of connectivity was found in any of 
the ASD groups compared with control groups. Both 
increased and decreased connectivity was found. For 
interhemispheric connectivity, the magnitude of the dis-
tortion pattern correlated significantly with behavioral 
symptoms of ASD. The authors concluded that a neural 
characteristic of ASD may actually be idiosyncratic con-
nectivity; they hypothesized that this diversity may result 
from the behavioral disconnection of the person with 
ASD from the social and environmental factors typically 
experienced by humans known to shape and regularize 
typical neural organization.
According to the 2010 ADDM report, the estimated 
prevalence of autism has increased 129% since 2002.7 
Although the data are not representative of the entire 
United States, the ADDM survey of 14 communities’ 
health and special education records of 8-year-old chil-
dren estimated that 1 in 68 children or 14.1 per 1000 
8-year-old children has been identified with ASD (as 
TABLE 13-5
Domains and Domain Criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder from the DSM-5
	A.	 Persistent deficits in social communication and social 
interaction across multiple contexts as manifest by at 
least two of the following:
	B.	 Restrictive, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or 
activities as manifest by at least two of the following,  
currently or historically:
	
1.	 Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, which may 
range, for example, from abnormal social approach 
and failure of normal back and forth conversation, 
to reduced sharing of interests, emotions, or affect, 
to failure to initiate or respond
	
1.	 Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of  
objects or speech (such as simple motor stereotypies, 
lining up toys or flipping plates, echolalia, idiosyncratic 
phrases)
	
2.	 Deficits in communicative behaviors used for so-
cial interaction, ranging, for example, from poorly 
integra­ted verbal and nonverbal communication, to 
abnormalities in eye contact and body language or 
deficits in understanding and use of gestures, to a 
total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal com-
munication
	
2.	 Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to 
routines or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal 
behavior (such as extreme distress at small changes, 
difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, 
greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat same 
food every day
	
3.	 Deficits in developing, maintaining, and under-
standing relationships, ranging, for example, from 
difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social 
contexts, difficulties in sharing imaginative play or 
in making friends, to absence of interest in peers
	
3.	 Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal 
in intensity or focus (such as strong attachment to 
or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively 
circumscribed or perseverative interests)
Modified from Kaufman, W. E. (2012). DSM-5: The new diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorders. Retrieved from http://www.autismconsortium.org/symposi
um-files/WalterKaufmannAC2012Symposium.pdf.

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
285
defined by the DSM-IV because the DSM-5 criteria had 
not been published at that time). The CDC states that 
the critical period for developing autism occurs before, 
during, or immediately after birth. It is not known what 
causes autism, but research studies have identified some 
possible risk factors (Box 13-1).
Although we have not identified a cause or a cure, 
treatment for the associated behavior, communication, 
and learning deficits has improved greatly in the past few 
years as more programs and funding for clinical research 
have become available. We do not know whether the true 
incidence of autism has increased or whether medical and 
allied health professionals are just better at accurately iden-
tifying the disorder (or if it is diagnosed inappropriately 
in a number of cases). It is becoming clear that we must 
continue to search for the cause(s) and identify preventa-
tive measures if possible. Because we do not know how to 
prevent it, early identification and effective treatment are 
critical to improve quality of life for those affected.
Pediatric Traumatic Brain Injury
According to the Brain Injury Association of America, 
the leading cause of death and disability in children and 
adolescents in the United States is traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). The CDC finds that the two groups most at risk at 
the 0- to 4-year and 15- to 19-year age groups. According 
to the 2004 statistics, an average of 62,000 children, aged 
0 to 19 are hospitalized with TBI in the United States, 
with motor vehicle accidents (MVAs), falls, sports inju-
ries, physical abuse, and other types of causes cited. An 
average of 564,000 are seen in the emergency depart-
ment with TBI and released each year. In the 0- to 4-year 
age group, falls were listed as the primary cause of injury. 
In the 15- to 19-year age group, MVAs are the most com-
mon cause of injury, with mild TBI from sports injuries 
also becoming more recognized. The 2004 report cited 
also listed the alarming statistic that approximately 1300 
children in the United States suffer severe or fatal brain 
injury each year as a result of physical abuse.
The mechanism of TBI was discussed in Chapter 10 with 
the concepts of coup-contrecoup, molecular commotion, 
and diffuse axonal injury introduced. The same mecha-
nisms are at work when TBI occurs to the immature brain. 
Examination of early literature on pediatric TBI reveals 
that physicians and rehabilitation professionals knew little 
about the actual short- or long-term effects of injury to 
children of different ages. Until the advent of safe imaging 
methods that could be used on young children, there was 
a dearth of research. Although the numbers of children 
injured each year is large, it is difficult to find large groups 
of children on which behavioral studies can be designed 
without a well-coordinated multicenter study. Because of 
the nature of the mechanism of injury, there is also great 
heterogeneity among the potential subject groups. Never-
theless, progress has been made in research on children 
with TBI, altering the way brain injury is treated by medi-
cal and rehabilitation professionals.
It is true that the young brain has potential for recov-
ery after injury that is much greater than the adult 
brain, and better recovery has always been expected 
from all but the most severe injuries. It had been com-
monly accepted that the earlier the injury, the better 
the recovery and that little residual deficit occurred. 
Studies in the 1980s and 1990s began to show that chil-
dren with early TBI did appear to do well when lan-
guage development and behavior were studied in their 
preschool years. However, when studies began to look 
at the learning profiles of children with early TBI once 
they reached the age when reading and other language-
based learning skills were critical, the literature began 
to suggest that perhaps there were brain differences in 
these children that did not become evident or even sus-
pected until higher level cognitive-linguistic processing 
and attentional skills were essential to learning.
Since 1999 there have been a number of studies look-
ing at the effect of TBI on behavior and cognitive-linguistic 
processing, and a few are cited here. The student using this 
text will likely be able to find other studies that add knowl-
edge to what may be happening to the young brain after 
TBI. It is vital that the SLP, whether serving children in 
medical centers, school systems, or private practice, under-
stand the possible implications of TBI and advocate for 
appropriate services for these children and adolescents.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
An important advance in the study of the effects of 
TBI has been provided by research detailing the patho-
physiology of injury to the immature brain. Different 
studies supported findings showing that the effect of 
	•	 Genetic factors14
	•	 A sibling with ASD14
	•	 Certain genetic or chromosomal conditions such 
as fragile X or tuberous sclerosis14
	•	 Prescription drugs valproic acid or thalidomide 
taken during pregnancy14
	•	 Age of parent: Mother younger than 20 or older 
than 40; father older than 50; relative risk also 
increases with increase in age difference between 
mother and father34
	
BOX 13-1   
Risk Factors Associated with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
286
injury was different in some respects in the developing 
brain than in the mature brain. A review and discussion 
of some of these differences9 found discrepancies in 
biomechanical properties, aspects of homeostasis and 
structural and functional responses to injury when TBI 
to the developing brain was compared with that of the 
mature brain. A summary of these differences is found 
in Box 13-2.
Although neurodegenerative changes after TBI have 
been well documented in adults, there has not been 
much study of changes in the pediatric population. A 
2014 review of original research attempting to document 
changes in children and youth after TBI included 16 
studies that fit the authors’ criteria.23 These studies, con-
sisting of both cross-sectional and longitudinal designs, 
did find evidence for long-term changes. Volume loss 
was found in selected brain regions. These included 
the hippocampus, amygdala, globus pallidus, thalamus, 
periventricular white matter, cerebellum, and brainstem. 
A decrease in overall brain volume was found in some 
studies with increased cerebrospinal fluid and ventricu-
lar space. Decreased integrity in the cellular structure 
of the corpus callosum was noted on diffusion tensor 
imaging studies. The review of these studies continues to 
strengthen evidence that children’s brains are more vul-
nerable to long-term effects of injury than once believed.
Although one study included children with repeti-
tive mild TBI, the authors note critical need for this 
type of research on children with mild TBI or repetitive 
concussions.
RESEARCH ON OUTCOME
Given these differences, it is not surprising that 
research targeting acute intervention, long-term out-
come, and treatment method is increasing. Research-
ers in Australia have been particularly active in research 
on cognitive recovery in pediatric TBI, asking whether 
the developmental period when the injury occurred 
may significantly affect recovery and whether there is a 
relationship between that period and the severity of the 
injury in regard to residual deficits. In a longitudinal 
study of 149 children admitted to the Royal Children’s 
Hospital in Melbourne with brain injury, researchers 
were able to follow the cognitive development through 
IQ testing (with the revised Wechsler Intelligence Scale 
for Children or, for the younger children, the Bayley 
Scales of Infant Development) for 10 years postinjury in 
children injured after age 3 and for 30 months for those 
injured before age 3.6,22 Groups were divided by age at 
onset of injury: infant (before age 3; n = 27); young 
(3; 0-7;11; n = 53), and old (8;0-12;11; n = 69). These  
groups were then divided by a categorization of sever-
ity of injury: (1) Mild defined as Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS) score at admission of 13 to 15, no abnormality 
on computed tomography (CT) or MRI, and no neu-
rologic deficits; (2) Moderate: GCS score of 9 to 12 and 
mass lesion or evidence of specific injury on CT or MRI; 
and (3) Severe: GCS score of 3 to 8 and mass lesion or 
evidence of pathologic condition on CT or MRI.
Severe Injury Groups
For the young and old groups, the study found a defi-
nite relationship between age of injury and severity of 
injury in the case of severe TBI. Overall, low average IQ 
(full scale of 82-89) was found for children with TBI after 
3 years of age, with performance related to the age of 
injury as age increased. Better outcomes were found for 
older children after severe injury. Severe TBI in children 
injured between ages 8 and 12 found significant incre-
ments (similar to adults) in performance in the first 
12 months postinjury but then less improvement after a 
year postinjury. In contrast, flat recovery curves for acute 
period to 30 months postinjury were found for children 
In Infancy
	•	 Markedly diminished shear resistance due to the 
following characteristics of the developing brain:
	
•	 Increased water content of the brain tissue
	
•	 Capillary density
	
•	 Cerebral blood volume
	
•	 Reduced extent of myelination
	•	 Reduced brain protection by the immature skull 
sutures and reduced calcification of the skull, 
increasing skull elasticity
	
•	 Mechanical load more easily transferred to the 
brain tissue
	
•	 Causes more cranial distortion and more diffuse 
pattern of injury
Postinjury Differences Noted in Most Immature 
Brains versus Adult Brains
	•	 Increased incidence of diffuse brain swelling
	•	 Greater compromise in vasodilation (which would 
result in vasoconstriction and reduced cerebral 
blood flow)
	•	 Increased susceptibility to excitotoxicity
	
•	 In developing brain, blockage of N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptors induces more rapid apopto-
sis (programmed cell death)
	•	 Increased dopaminergic activity, altering sensitivity 
of neurons to excitatory input (in animal models)
	
BOX 13-2   
Structural and Functional Differences of the  
Immature Brain That Affect Recovery after  
Traumatic Brain Injury

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
287
injured between ages 3 and 7 with minimal recovery 
found in any domain (as measured by IQ testing).
Mild to Moderate Injury Groups
In the young and old groups, the IQ testing showed simi-
lar postinjury improvement for both mild and moderate 
severity. With mild TBI after age 3, mean IQs were in the 
average range (102-104), suggesting minimal effect on this 
aspect of recovery. Mean IQ findings for the young and 
old age groups with moderate severity of injury were lower 
but still within the average range (94-98). All showed gains 
above those expected in normal development during the 
immediate months postinjury, but then the trajectory 
slowed and stabilized from 12 to 30 months postinjury.
Injury in Children Younger Than Age 3
The children injured before age 3 made up a smaller 
cohort, and cognitive development was measured with a 
different instrument. Thus interpretation of the results 
had to be taken within a different context. They were 
followed for 30 months. A different, less positive pattern 
of recovery was suggested. Although children who sus-
tained mild injury before age 3 continued to improve 
and did relatively well on the measures, children with 
moderate or severe brain injury during this early period 
of life continued to show significant decreases in global 
intellectual ability at all assessments (acute, 12 months 
postinjury, and 30 months postinjury).
Although these results need replication, the data cer-
tainly suggest that severity of injury and developmental 
stage when injured should be two of the factors consid-
ered significant when making decisions about follow-up 
for these children. Further study may elucidate whether 
injury during certain periods of cognitive development 
slows advancement and stabilization of certain skills or 
actually prevents growth of those skills over the long term. 
For those with both risk factors—moderate or severe 
trauma and young age—long-term clinical follow-up and 
monitoring, at the least, appear warranted. It is likely that 
these children, especially those with severe TBI, will need 
intervention by skilled rehabilitation professionals over a 
long time to promote the best outcome possible.
What Else?
There could be many more disorders of childhood that 
are associated with language delay/disorder or that 
place a child at risk for these. Some of those for which 
language characteristics could be discussed but will 
be left to your individual research or your professor’s 
assignment are:
	•	 Prematurity
	•	 Hearing loss
	•	 Speech impairment
	•	 Fragile X
	•	 Fetal alcohol syndrome
	•	 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
	•	 Dyslexia
All of these and other conditions you may encounter 
in your clinical work are likely to have been found or 
will be found to show differences in brain development, 
structure, or function. SLPs should be the profession-
als assessing the language skills of these children and 
designing treatment programs. This requires the knowl-
edge you are obtaining now in your reading and course-
work as well as ongoing study of the research in the 
speech-language pathology literature; however, it may 
also require study of the literature in neurology, other 
medical professions, imaging, psychology, rehabilita-
tion, and education. The foundation for evidence-based 
assessment and treatment is widening tremendously.
Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist
	•	 Acquisition of speech and language is clearly tied 
to physical development and maturation.
	•	 The course of speech and language development is 
a correlate of cerebral maturation and specialization.
	•	 An index of neurologic development is the change 
in gross brain weight with age.
	•	 Brain weight triples in the first 24 months of life.
	•	 At 10 years old, the brain achieves 95% of its ulti-
mate weight.
	•	 Children born with agenesis of the corpus callosum 
show great variability in functional and cognitive  
development, which may be genetically determined. 
All should be individually assessed for speech and 
language because prediction is difficult.
	•	 During critical periods for language development, 
illness and injury may affect development, but 
social and environmental factors may also be sig-
nificant factors in normal development. Household 
organization and other social areas may warrant 
consideration.
	•	 Bilingualism involves code switching.
	•	 Age of exposure to a second language may be 
most critical for achieving adequate grammar and 
syntax for the new language. Delayed exposure 
appears to decrease left hemisphere specialization 
to support the new learning.
	•	 The diagnosis of specific language impairment is 
not in the DSM-5 at ASHA’s recommendation. In 
Continued

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
288
 Case Study
B.W., a 5-year-old girl, began her kindergarten year at 
the local elementary school. Her teacher noted that B.W. 
was quite hyperactive and could not keep up with the 
children in her classroom during the simplest of activi-
ties. She would often sit alone because the other children 
were sometimes afraid of her outbursts and tantrums. 
The teacher noted that B.W.’s appearance seemed to 
be unusual, with widespread eyes and an almost blank, 
expressionless face most of the time. B.W. was easily dis-
tracted by noises or a new person coming into the room. 
She appeared to have attention difficulties and did not 
understand the simplest of abstract expressions. She 
often took things quite literally. The teacher referred her 
to the school psychologist. Results of testing revealed an 
IQ score of 72. Speech therapy evaluation further revealed 
poor sentence structures, often using only two- to 
three-word phrases; difficulty with phonics; distractibility; 
difficulty sharing; and throwing tantrums when she was 
not permitted to do what she wanted. An individual edu-
cation plan was written, and B.W. was placed in the self-
contained special needs classroom with 2 hours a week in 
speech and language therapy and 2 hours a week in the 
elementary learning disability classroom.
Questions for Consideration
	1.	On the basis of this child’s IQ, would she be classi-
fied as a developmentally delayed slow learner or as 
having mild to moderate intellectual disability?
	2.	Other than this classification, what are possible  
additional diagnoses that could be applied to this 
child? Would you suggest referral for any other 
assessments?
diagnostics, ASHA recommends that the diagno-
sis of language impairment be used in order not 
to exclude children with accompanying disor-
ders that cannot account for the poor language 
development.
	•	 Studies of children with focal left hemisphere sei-
zures suggest tight network connectivity of a ven-
tral stream and a dorsal stream supporting normal 
language development with the seizure activity 
interrupting activation of the ventral stream, result-
ing in language impairment.
	•	 The sudden onset of language disturbance or  
regression without obvious etiology should be a 
red flag for subclinical seizure activity, possibly 
identifying a rare disorder called Landau-Kleffner 
syndrome. EEG studies should be done during 
sleep to best identify the seizure activity.
	•	 Lack of or delay in speech or language develop-
ment is one of the most sensitive early indicators of 
intellectual disability.
	•	 SLPs need to be knowledgeable about the signs of 
neglect and abuse in children because these chil-
dren often experience language and other devel-
opmental delays as a consequence.
	•	 The DSM-5 lists autism spectrum disorder as a cat-
egory that includes autism, Asperger’s syndrome, 
and pervasive developmental disorder, not other-
wise specified. Domains for communication and 
social interaction have been collapsed into one, 
and it has been determined that autism can be reli-
ably diagnosed as early as age 2.
	•	 Autism appears to have a strong genetic com-
ponent. Imaging and other types of studies find 
much heterogeneity in this population with con-
tinued research critical to finding the cause or 
causes. Individualized assessment and treatment 
is key.
	•	 Traumatic brain injury occurs most often in the  
0- to 4-year and 15- to 19-year age groups, with 
falls and MVAs the most frequent causes of injury.
	•	 Differences in biomechanical, structural, and func-
tional aspects of the developing brain compared 
with the adult brain make prediction of outcome 
more difficult. One large longitudinal study in Aus-
tralia found a definite relationship between severity 
of injury and age of onset, with younger children 
more vulnerable to both moderate and severe 
levels of injury.
	•	 There is a need for further research on the effects 
of TBI in children with a critical need for study of 
the effect, especially on learning, of repetitive mild 
brain injury or concussion.
	•	 There are many childhood conditions that likely 
alter brain development and cause language delay or 
impairment. The SLP should be aware of these and of 
advances in research that may suggest best practice 
for assessment and treatment of clients with these 
conditions.
Clinical Information and Applications for the Speech-Language Pathologist—cont’d

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
289
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Ahlsén, E. (2006). Introduction to neurolinguistics. Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins.
	 2.	 Alpern, C. (2010). Identification and treatment of Landau- 
Kleffner syndrome. The ASHA Leader, 15, 34–35.
	 3.	 American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.). Washing-
ton, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
	 4.	 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2004). 
Communication differences vs. language disorder. Retrieved from 
http://www.asha.org/policy/RP1993-00208/.
	 5.	 Anderson, B., Southern, B., & Powers, R. E. (1999). Ana-
tomic asymmetries of the posterior superior temporal 
lobes: A postmortem study. Neuropsychiatry. Neuropsychol-
ogy and Behavioral Neurology, 12, 247–254.
	 6.	 Anderson, V., Catroppa, C., Morse, S., Haritou, F., & 
Rosenfeld, J. (2015). Functional plasticity or vulnerability 
after early brain injury? Pediatrics, 116, 1374–1382.
	 7.	 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Net-
work Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators, Centers  
for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Prevalence of 
autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years—
Autism and developmental disabilities monitoring net-
work, 11 sites, United States, 2010. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report Surveillance Summary, 63(2), 1–21.
	 8.	 Bartlett, C. W., Hou, L., Flax, J. F., Hare, A., Cheong, S. Y., 
Fermano, Z., Zimmerman-Bier, B., Cartwright, C., Azaro, M. 
A., Buyske, S., & Brzustowicz, L. M. (2014). A genome scan 
for loci shared by autism spectrum disorder and language 
impairment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171(1), 72–81.
	 9.	 Bauer, R. A., & Fritz, H. (2004). Pathophysiology of trau-
matic injury in the developing brain: An introduction 
and short update. Experimental and Toxicologic Pathology, 56,  
65–73.
	10.	 Brain Injury Association of America. (2015). Brain injury 
in children. Retrieved from http://www.biausa.org/brain-
injury-children.htm.
	11.	 Castro, A. J., Merchut, M. P., Neafsey, E. J., & Wurster, 
R. D. (2002). Neuroscience: An outline approach. St. Louis: 
Mosby.
	12.	 Croft, L. B. (2014). Vulnerability of the ventral language 
network in children with focal epilepsy. Brain: A Journal of 
Neurology, 137, 2245–2257.
	13.	 Dichter, G. S. (2012). Functional magnetic resonance  
imaging of autism spectrum disorders. Dialogues in Clinical 
Neuroscience, 14, 319–352.
	14.	 Division of Birth Defects, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention. (2015, February 24). Facts about ASD. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/facts 
.html#ref.
	15.	 Foundation, Epilepsy (2013, September). Landau-Kleffner 
syndrome. Retrieved from http://www.epilepsy.com/learn/ 
types-epilepsy-syndromes/landau-kleffner-syndrome.
	16.	 Galuske, R. A., Schlote, W., Bratzke, H., & Singer, W. (2000). 
Interhemispheric asymmetries of the modular structure in 
human temporal cortex. Science, 289, 1946–1949.
	17.	 Geschwind, N. (1979). Anatomical foundations of lan-
guage and dominance. In C. L. Ludlow, & M. E. Doran-
Quine (Eds.), The neurological basis of language in children: 
Methods and directions for research (pp. 145–157). Bethesda, 
MD: National Institutes of Health.
	18.	 Habib, M., & Robichon, F. (2003). Structural correlates 
of brain asymmetry: Studies in left-handed and dyslexic 
individuals. In K. Hugdahl, & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The 
asymmetrical brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
	19.	 Hahamy, A. B., Behrmann, M., & Malach, R. (2015). The 
idiosyncratic brain: Distortion of spontaneous connectiv-
ity patterns in autism spectrum disorder. Nature Neurosci-
ence, 18, 302–309.
	20.	 Haines, D. E. (2006). Fundamental neuroscience for basic and 
clinical applications (3rd ed.). St. Louis: Elsevier.
	21.	 Jakab, A. K. (2015). Disrupted developmental organiza-
tion of the structural connectome in fetuses with corpus 
callosum agenesis. Neuroimage, 111, 277–288.
	22.	 Jonsson, C. A., Catroppa, C., Godfrey, C., Smedler, A. C., & 
Anderson, V. (2013). Cognitive recovery and development 
after traumatic brain injury in childhood: A person-oriented,  
longitudinal study. Journal of Neurotrauma, 30, 76–83.
	23.	 Keightley, M. S., Sinopoli, K. J., Davis, K. D., Mikulis, D. 
J., Wennberg, R., Tartaglia, M. C., et al. (2014). Further  
evidence for neurodengenerative change following trau-
matic brain injury in children and youth? A scoping review.  
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 1–6.
	24.	 Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. 
New York: Wiley.
	25.	 Liégeois, F. M., Mayes, A., & Morgan, A. (2014). Neural 
correlates of developmental speech and language disor-
ders: evidence from neuroimaging. Current Developmental 
Disorders Report, 1, 215–227.
	26.	 Lubinski, R., & Hudson, M. W. (2013). Professional issues 
in speech-language pathology and audiology (4th ed.). Inde-
pendence, KY: Cengage Learning.
	27.	 Mahendra, N. J., Ribera, R., Sevcik, R., Adler, R., Cheng, 
L., Davis-McFarland, E., et al. (2004). Why is yogurt good for 
you? Because it has live cultures. Rockville, MD: American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
	28.	 Mantovani, J. F. (1980). Acquired aphasia with convulsive 
disorder: Course and prognosis. Neurology, 30, 524–529.
	29.	 National Health and Medical Research Council (Austral-
ia). (2009). NHMRC additional levels of evidence and grades 
for recommendations for developers of guidelines. Retrieved  
https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/file/guidelines/ 
developers/nhmrc_levels_grades_evidence_120423.pdf.
	30.	 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders. (2011). Specific language impairment. Retrieved  
from http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/voice/pages/ 
specific-language-impairment.aspx.
	31.	 Owens, R. E., Jr. (2005). Language development: An introduc-
tion (6th ed.). Needham, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
	32.	 Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain mecha-
nisms. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
	33.	 Rasmussen, T., & Milner, B. (1977). The role of early 
left-brain injury in determining lateralization of cerebral 
speech functions. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
299, 355–369.

PEDIATRIC DISORDERS OF LANGUAGE  CHAPTER THIRTEEN
290
	34.	 Sandin, S. S., Stoltenberg, C., & Reichenberg, A. (2015, 
June 9). Autism risk associated with parental age and with 
increasing difference in age between the parents. Molecular 
Physiology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1038/mp.2015.70.
	35.	 Silverman, F. H., & Miller, L. (2006). Introduction to com-
munication sciences and disorders. Eau Claire, WI: Thinking.
	36.	 Sprott, R. A., & Kemper, S. (1987). The development of 
children’s code-switching: A study of six bilingual chil-
dren across two situations. In E. F. Pemberton, M. A. Sell, 
& G. B. Simpson (Eds.), Working papers in language develop-
ment (pp. 116–134). Lawrence: Child Language Program, 
University of Kansas.
	37.	 Stromswold, K. (1998). Genetics of spoken language dis-
orders. Human Biology, 70, 297–324.
	38.	 Tallal, P. R. (1989). Familial aggregation in specific lan-
guage impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 
54, 167–173.
	39.	 Tomasch, J. (1954). Size, distribution and number of fi-
bres in the human corpus callosum. Anatomy Record, 119, 
119–135.
	40.	 Vernon-Feagans, L., Garrett-Peters, P., Willoughby, M., & 
Mills-Koonce, R. (2012). Chaos, poverty, and parenting: 
Predictors of early language development. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly, 27, 339–351.
	41.	 Wada, J. A., Clark, R., & Hamm, A. (1975). Cerebral hemi-
spheric asymmetry in humans. Archives of Neurology, 32, 
239–246.
	42.	 Weber-Fox, C., & Neville, H. J. (1996). Maturational con-
straints on functional specialization for language process-
ing: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 8, 231–256.

291
Appendix A
Medical Conditions Related to 
Communication Disorders
	
I.	 Congenital Disorders
	
A.	Cerebral palsy: Defect of motor power and co-
ordination related to damage of the immature 
brain
	
B.	Congenital hydrocephalus: Condition marked 
by excessive accumulation of fluid, dilating 
the cerebral ventricles, thinning the brain, 
and causing a separation of cranial bones; 
caused by a developmental defect of the 
brain
	
C.	Craniostenosis: Contraction of the cranial capac-
ity or narrowing of the sutures by bony over-
growth
	
D.	Down syndrome: Syndrome of intellectual disa-
bility associated with many and variable abnor-
malities, caused by representation of at least a 
critical portion of chromosome 21 three times 
instead of twice in some or all cells
	
E.	Idiopathic intellectual disability: Intellectual dis-
ability of unknown cause
	
F.	Minimal cerebral dysfunction: Syndrome of neu-
rologic dysfunction in children usually marked 
by impairment of fine coordination, clumsi-
ness, and choreiform or athetoid movements; 
learning disorders often associated with this 
diagnosis
	
G.	Neurofibromatosis: Condition in which small, dis-
crete, pigmented skin lesions develop in infan-
cy or early childhood, followed by the develop-
ment of multiple subcutaneous neurofibromas 
that may slowly increase in number and size 
over many years
	 II.	 Vascular Disorders
	
A.	Cerebral embolism: Obstruction or occlusion of a 
vessel in the cerebrum by a transported clot or 
vegetation, a mass of bacteria, or other foreign 
material
	
B.	Cerebral hemorrhage: Bleeding in the brain; a 
flow of blood, especially if profuse, into the 
substance of the cerebrum, usually in the re-
gion of the internal capsule; caused by rupture 
of the lenticulostriate artery
	
C.	Cerebral thrombosis: Obstruction or occlusion of 
a vessel in the cerebrum by a fixed clot devel-
oping on the arterial wall
	
D.	Pseudobulbar palsy: Muscular paralysis from bilat-
eral upper motor neuron lesions of the cranial 
nerves; often accompanied by signs of dysarthria, 
dysphagia, and emotional lability with outbursts 
of uncontrolled crying and laughing
	
E.	Recurrent cerebral ischemia or transient ischemic at-
tacks: Temporary disruptions of the blood supply  
that produce specific neurologic signs; experi-
enced as sudden, transient blurring of vision, 
weakness, numbness of one side, speech diffi-
culty, vertigo or diplopia, or any combination
	
F.	Subdural hemorrhage: Extravascularization of 
blood between the dural and arachnoid mem-
branes
	 III.	 Infections
	
A.	Acute anterior poliomyelitis: Inflammation of 
the anterior cornu of the spinal cord due to 
an acute infectious disease marked by fever, 
pains, and gastroenteric disturbances; followed 
by flaccid paralysis of one or more muscular 
groups and later by atrophy
	
B.	Cerebral abscess: Intracranial abscess or abscess 
of the brain, specifically of the cerebrum; a col-
lection of pus in a localized area
	
C.	Encephalitis: Inflammation of the brain
	
D.	Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): A virus 
spread through contact with certain body flu-
ids, attacking the body’s T cells which are spe-
cialized cells that help the immune system fight 
infection. Untreated, the number of T cells is re-
duced to the point that opportunistic infections 
and diseases can occur, signaling the onset of ac-
quired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
	
E.	Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease: Spastic pseudosclero-
sis with corticostriatospinal degeneration and 
subacute presenile dementia; characterized 
by slowly progressive dementia, myoclonic fas-
ciculations, ataxia, and somnolence with grad-
ual onset; usually fatal within a few months to 
years
	
F.	Meningitis: Inflammation of the membranes of 
the brain or spinal cord
	
G.	Neurosyphilis: Syphilis, an infectious venereal 
disease caused by a microorganism affecting 
the nervous system

MEDICAL CONDITIONS RELATED TO COMMUNICATION DISORDERS  APPENDIX A
292
	
H.	Sydenham’s chorea: Acute toxic or infective dis-
order of the nervous system, usually associated 
with acute rheumatism, occurring in young 
persons and characterized by involuntary semi-
purposeful but ineffective movements; move-
ments involve the facial muscles and muscles 
of the neck and limbs and are intensified by 
voluntary effort but disappear in sleep
	 IV.	 Trauma
	
A.	Penetrating head injury: Open head injury, which 
causes altered consciousness and can produce 
fairly definitive and chronic aphasias
	
B.	Closed-head injury: Injury to the head with no 
injury to the skull or injury limited to an undis-
placed fracture; also known as nonpenetrating 
head injury; can produce loss of consciousness 
and often produces diffuse effects
	
V.	 Tumors
	
A.	Astrocytomas (grades 1 and 2) and oligodendroglio-
mas: Less-common glial cell tumors, with a bet-
ter prognosis than glioblastoma multiforme; 
slow growing; usually treated with surgery and 
radiation therapy, with an average survival rate 
of 5 to 6 years after surgery
	
B.	Glioblastoma multiforme: Also known as malig-
nant glioma or astrocytoma (grades 3 and 
4), the most common primary brain tumor 
in adults; most frequent sites are frontal and 
temporal lobes, although tumors may occur 
anywhere in the brain; infiltrative and rapidly 
growing, with an average survival rate of ap-
proximately 1 year
	
C.	Meningioma: Benign tumor arising from the 
arachnoid cells of the brain; slow growing and 
usually occurring at the lateral areas and base 
of the brain; generally does not invade the cer-
ebral cortex; favorable prognosis
	 VI.	 Degenerative Diseases
	
A.	Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type: Progressive men-
tal deterioration with loss of memory, especial-
ly for recent events
	
B.	Parkinson’s disease: Degenerative disease result-
ing from damage to the dopamine-producing 
nerve cells of the striatum and the substantia 
nigra; characterized by rest tremor, rigidity 
of muscles, paucity of movement, slowness of 
movement, limited range, limited force of con-
traction, and failure of gestural expression
	
C.	Wilson’s disease: Genetic metabolic disorder 
caused by inadequate processing of dietary 
intake of copper and characterized by motor 
symptoms, with a significant dysarthria
	
D.	Huntington’s chorea: Chronic progressive he-
reditary disease characterized by irregular, 
­spasmodic, involuntary movements of the 
limbs or facial muscles; sometimes accompa-
nied by dementia and dysarthria
	
E.	Friedreich’s ataxia: Hereditary disease character-
ized by degeneration principally of the cerebel-
lum and dorsal half of the spinal cord; ataxic 
dysarthria often an accompanying sign
	
F.	Dystonia musculorum deformans: Hereditary dis-
ease occurring especially in children; charac-
terized by muscular contractions producing 
peculiar distentions of the spine and hip and 
bizarre postures
	
G.	Multiple sclerosis: Inflammatory disease mainly 
involving the white matter of the central ner­
vous system; characterized by scattered areas 
of demyelination causing impairment of trans-
mission of nerve impulses; may cause a variety 
of symptoms, including paralysis, nystagmus, 
and dysarthria depending on the lesion sites
	VII.	 Metabolic and Toxic Disorders
	
A.	Reye’s syndrome: Sudden loss of consciousness in 
children following the initial stage of an infec-
tion, usually resulting in death with cerebral 
edema (swelling) and marked fatty change 
in the liver and renal system; surviving chil-
dren often have motor, cognitive, and speech  
problems
	VIII.	 Neuromuscular Disorders
	
A.	Progressive muscular atrophies
	
1.	True bulbar palsy: Disorder caused by involve-
ment of nuclei of the last four or five cranial 
nerves and characterized by twitching and 
atrophy of the tongue, palate, and larynx, 
drooling, dysarthria, dysphagia, and finally 
respiratory paralysis; usually a manifestation 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
	
2.	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Disease of the mo-
tor tracts of the lateral columns of the spinal 
cord causing progressive muscular atrophy, 
increased reflexes, fibrillary twitching, and 
spastic irritability of muscles
	
B.	Muscular dystrophy
	
1.	Pseudohypertrophic (Duchenne) type: Type of 
muscular dystrophy characterized by bulky 
calf and forearm muscles and progressive 
atrophy and weakness of the thigh, hip, and 
back muscles and shoulder girdle; occurs in 
the first 3 years of life, usually in boys and 
rarely in girls
	
2.	Facioscapulohumeral type: Type of muscu-
lar dystrophy causing atrophy of the mus-
cles of the face, shoulder, girdle, and up-
per arms; occurs in either sex, with onset 
at any age from childhood to late adult 

MEDICAL CONDITIONS RELATED TO COMMUNICATION DISORDERS  APPENDIX A
293
life; ­characterized by prolonged periods of 
­apparent arrest
	
3.	Ocular myopathy: Type of muscular dystrophy 
affecting external ocular muscles, causing 
ptosis, diplopia, and occasional total exter-
nal ophthalmoplegia; sometimes associated 
with upper facial muscle weakness, dyspha-
gia, and atrophy and weakness of neck, 
trunk, and limb muscles
	
C.	Myasthenia gravis: Disorder characterized by 
marked weakness and fatigue of muscles, espe-
cially those muscles innervated by bulbar nu-
clei
	
D.	Congenital neuromuscular disorders
	
1.	Möbius syndrome: Congenital disorder charac-
terized by paresis or paralysis of both ­lateral 
rectus muscles and all face muscles; some-
times associated with other musculoskeletal 
anomalies
	 IX.	 Other
	
A.	Epilepsy: Chronic disorder characterized by par-
oxysmal attacks of brain dysfunction (seizures) 
usually associated with some alteration of con-
sciousness; seizures may remain confined to el-
ementary or complex impairment of behavior 
or may progress to a generalized convulsion
	
B.	Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome: Cerebral disorder 
characterized by confusion and severe impair-
ment of memory, especially for recent events; 
patient compensates for memory loss by con-
fabulation; often seen in chronic alcoholics and 
associated with severe nutritional deficiency

294
Appendix B
Bedside Neurologic Examination
	1.	 Mental Status
	
A.	Orientation: person, place, time
	
B.	Memory and information
	
1.	Three objects at 5 minutes
	
2.	Presidents back to Kennedy
	
C.	Language
	
1.	Spontaneous speech characterization
	
2.	Confrontation naming
	
3.	Auditory comprehension (commands, yes/no 
questions)
	
4.	Repetition (words, phrases)
	
5.	Reading (printed commands)
	
6.	Writing (signature, words, and sentences to 
dictation)
	
D.	Calculations
	
1.	Serial 7s (count by 7s to 100)
	
2.	Subtract $0.43 from $1.00
	
E.	Visuospatial ability
	
1.	Clock drawing
	
2.	Copying of figures
	
F.	Insight, judgment
	2.	 Cranial Nerves
	
A.	I: Smell
	
B.	II: Visual fields, pupillary reactions, optic fundi
	
C.	III to IV: Extraocular movements
	
D.	V: Facial sensation
	
E.	VII: Facial symmetry
	
F.	VIII: Hearing
	
G.	IX and X: Articulation, palatal movement, gag 
­reflex
	
H.	XI: Sternomastoid and trapezius strength
	
I.	XII: Tongue movement
	3.	 Motor Examination
	
A.	Bulk
	
B.	Spontaneous movements (fasciculations, tremor, 
movement disorders)
	
C.	Strength
	
1.	Evaluation of strength on right and left
	
a.	Deltoid
	
b.	Biceps
	
c.	Triceps
	
d.	Hip flexion
	
e.	Knee flexion
	
f.	Ankle dorsiflexion
	
g.	Ankle plantar flexion
	
D.	Reflexes
	
1.	Evaluation of reflexes on right and left
	
a.	Biceps
	
b.	Triceps
	
c.	Brachioradialis
	
d.	Ankle
	
e.	Plantar
	
f.	Jaw
	
E.	Stance and Romberg
	
F.	Gait
	
1.	Spontaneous gait
	
2.	Tandem gait
	
3.	Tiptoe gait
	
4.	Heel gait
	
G.	Sensory Examination
	
1.	Pinprick
	
2.	Touch
	
3.	Vibration
	
4.	Position
	
5.	Stereognosis, graphesthesia (“cortical” sensory 
modalities)
	
H.	Cerebellar
	
1.	Finger-nose-finger
	
2.	Rapid alternating hand movements
	
3.	Fine finger movements
	
4.	Heel-knee-shin
Courtesy Howard Kirshner, MD, Department of Neurology, Vander-
bilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.

295
Appendix C
Screening Neurologic Examination  
for Speech-Language Pathology
	 I.	 Mental Status
	
A.	 General behavior and appearance: Is the patient 
normal, hyperactive, agitated, quiet, immobile? 
Neat, slovenly? Is he dressed in accordance with 
peers, background, and sex?
	
B.	 Stream of talk: Does the patient respond to conver-
sation normally? Is her speech rapid, incessant, 
under great pressure? Is she very slow and diffi-
cult to draw into spontaneous talk? Is she discur-
sive, unable to reach the conversational goal?
	
C.	 Mood and affective responses: Is the patient eu-
phoric, agitated, inappropriately cheerful, gig-
gling? Or is he silent, weeping, angry? Does his 
mood swing in a direction appropriate to the 
subject matter of the conversation? Is he emo-
tionally labile?
	
D.	 Content of thought: Does the patient have illusions, 
hallucinations, delusions, or misinterpretations? 
Is she preoccupied with bodily complaints, fears 
of cancer or disease, or other phobias? Does she 
believe that society is maliciously organized to 
cause her difficulty?
	
E.	 Intellectual capacity: Is the patient bright, aver-
age, slow, intellectually disabled, obviously  
demented?
	
F.	 Sensorium
	
1.	 Consciousness: Note whether the patient is 
alert, drowsy, or stuporous.
	
2.	 Attention span: Note response in cerebral 
function test.
	
3.	 Orientation: Note whether the patient can 
answer questions about his person, location, 
and time.
	
4.	 Memory: Note recent and remote memory 
deficits disclosed during history taking.
	
5.	 Fund of information: Note in history taking.
	
6.	 Insight, judgment, and planning: Note in his-
tory taking.
	
7.	 Calculation: Note performance on cerebral 
function test.
	II.	 Speech, Language, and Voice
	
A.	 Dysphonia: Neuromotor difficulty in producing 
voice (cranial nerve X)
	
B.	 Dysarthria: Neuromotor disorder of articulation 
and voice
	
1.	 Labials (cranial nerve VII)
	
2.	 Velars and velopharyngeal closure (IX and X)
	
3.	 Linguals (XII)
	
C.	 Dysphasia: Cerebral disorder of understanding 
and expressing language (give aphasia-screening 
test)
	
1.	 Fluent (give screening aphasia test)
	
2.	 Nonfluent (give screening aphasia test)
	
D.	 Dyspraxia: Cerebral disorder of articulation and 
prosody and/or disorder of oral movement
	
1.	 Dyspraxia of speech
	
2.	 Oral dyspraxia
	
E.	 Dementia: Cerebral disorder of language or intel-
lectual deficit
	
1.	 Presenile
	
2.	 Senile
	
F.	 Disorganized language: Cerebral disorder of lan-
guage or confusion
	
G.	 Dysphagia: Neuromotor disorder of swallowing 
(V, VII, IX, X, and XII)
	III.	 Cranial Nerves for Speech and Hearing
	
A.	 Speech (V, VII, IX, X, XII, and XI)
	
1.	 V: Inspect masseter and temporalis mus-
cle bulk; palpate masseter when the patient 
bites.
	
2.	 VII: Evaluate forehead wrinkling, eyelid clo-
sure, mouth retraction, whistling or puffed 
out cheeks, wrinkled skin over neck (pla­
tysma), and labial articulation.
	
3.	 IX and X: Evaluate phonation, hypernasality, 
swallowing, gag reflex, and palatal elevation.
	
4.	 XII: Evaluate lingual articulation and mid-
line and lateral tongue protrusion; inspect 
for atrophy and fasciculations.
	
5.	 XI: Inspect sternocleidomastoid and trape-
zius contours; test strength of head move-
ments and shoulder shrugging.
	
6.	 Test for pathologic fatigability by requesting 
100 repetitive movements (e.g., eye blinks) if 
the history suggests myopathic or myoneural 
disorder.

SCREENING NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION FOR SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY  APPENDIX C
296
	
B.	 Hearing (VIII)
	
1.	 Evaluate for threshold and acuity, includ-
ing adequacy of hearing for conversational 
speech.
	
2.	 If history or preceding observation suggests 
a deficit, perform air-bone conduction au-
diometric screening.
	IV.	 Motor System
	
A.	 Inspection
	
1.	 Take history, including initial appraisal of 
the motor system; inspect the patient for pos-
tures, general activity level, tremors, and in-
voluntary movements.
	
2.	 Observe the size and contour of the muscles, 
looking for atrophy, hypertrophy, body asym-
metry, joint misalignments, fasciculations, 
tremors, and involuntary movements.
	
3.	 Evaluate gait, including free walking, tandem 
walking, and deep knee bend.
	
B.	 Palpation: Palpate muscles if they seem atrophic 
or hypertrophic or if the history suggests they 
may be tender or in spasm.
	
C.	 Strength
	
1.	 Upper extremities: Test biceps.
	
2.	 Lower extremities: Test knee flexors and foot 
dorsiflexors if necessary and feasible.
	
3.	 Pattern: Discern whether any weakness  
follows a distributional pattern, such as  
proximal-distal, right-left, or upper extremity–
lower extremity.
	
D.	 Muscle tone: Move the patient’s joints to test for 
spasticity, clonus, or rigidity.
	
E.	 Muscle stretch (deep) reflexes: Test jaw jerk (cranial 
nerve V afferent and efferent) as well as other 
muscle stretch reflexes if necessary and feasible.
	
F.	 Cerebellar system (gait tested previously)
	
1.	 Evaluate finger-to-nose, rebound, and alter-
nating motion rates.
	
2.	 Carry out heel-to-knee testing.
	 V.	 Sensory Examination
	
A.	 Test superficial sensation by light touch with cot-
ton wisp and pinprick on face.
	
B.	 Ask if the face feels numb.
	
C.	 Test superficial sensation on the tongue surface 
with swab stick unilaterally and bilaterally, ante-
riorly and posteriorly.
	VI.	 Cerebral Function
	
A.	 When the history or antecedent examination 
suggests a cerebral lesion, test for finger agnosia 
and right-left disorientation.
	
B.	 Have the patient perform the cognitive, con-
structional, and performance tasks from stan­
dard aphasia or neuropsychological tests.
Data from DeMeyer, W. (1980). Technique or the neurologic examination. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.

297
Glossary
abducens cranial nerve VI, which supplies motor im-
pulses to abduct the eye.
abduction movement of a body part away from the mid-
line.
absolute refractory period the short period of mem-
brane unresponsiveness during the passage of an 
action potential; another action potential cannot be 
generated during this time.
acceleration-deceleration injury type of injury in which 
the head is accelerated and then suddenly stopped 
(e.g., motor vehicle accident).
acquired childhood aphasia language disorder in which 
cerebral insult halts or disturbs normal language de-
velopment in a child.
action potential (AP) buildup of electrical current in 
the neuron.
action tremor rhythmic, oscillatory, involuntary move-
ment affecting the outstretched upper limbs as well 
as other parts of the body and the voice. Also known 
as essential tremor, heredofamilial tremor.
adduction movement of a body part toward midline.
adequate stimulus a mechanical, thermal, electrical, or 
chemical stimulus strong enough to change the cell 
membrane’s potential.
adiadochokinesia inability to perform rapid, alternat-
ing muscle movements; see dysdiadochokinesia.
afferent traveling toward a center.
afferent fibers nerve fibers that carry information to-
ward the cell body; often used to denote sensory fibers.
agnosia lack of sensory recognition as the result of a 
lesion in the sensory association areas or association 
pathways of the brain.
agraphia acquired disorder of writing caused by brain 
injury.
akinesia absence or lack of movements.
alexia acquired disturbance of reading caused by brain 
injury.
alexia with agraphia classic neurologic syndrome of 
reading disorder in which damage has occurred to 
the angular gyrus and the surrounding areas.
alexia without agraphia classic neurologic syndrome of 
reading disorder, usually caused by a left posterior 
cerebral artery occlusion in a right-handed person; 
the resulting infarct produces lesions in the spleni-
um of the corpus callosum and the left occipital lobe.
allocortex the older, original part of the cerebral cortex.
alpha motor neurons neurons allowing contraction of 
extrafusal fibers and that have their final common 
path in cranial and spinal nerves.
Alzheimer’s disease the most common type of demen-
tia. Its most striking feature is progressive deteriora-
tion of cognitive functions; language disturbance is a 
major symptom.
amyloid plaques axonal endings associated with patholog-
ic deposits of extracellular beta-amyloid. Found in the 
brain of patients with dementia of the Alzheimer’s type.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) a progressive, fatal 
motor neuron disease usually involving both the up-
per and lower motor neuron pathways. Also known 
as Lou Gehrig’s disease.
analgesia loss of the sensation of pain.
anastomosis a connection between two vessels; an opening 
created by surgery, trauma, or pathologic condition be-
tween two spaces or organs that are normally separate.
anencephaly absence of the cranial vault at birth with the 
cerebral hemispheres completely absent or reduced 
to small masses attached to the base of the skull.
anesthesia loss of feeling or sensation.
aneurysm a sac formed by the dilation of the wall of an 
artery, a vein, or the heart.
angular gyrus convolution in the left parietal lobe that 
is critical for language processing.
anion an ion carrying a negative charge as a result of a 
surplus of electrons.
anistrophy the property of being directionally depend-
ent as opposed to isotrophy which means identical 
properties in all directions
anomia loss of the power to name objects or recognize 
and recall their names.
anomic aphasia an acquired disorder of language 
caused by brain damage in which the primary diffi-
culty is with word retrieval.
anoxia condition marked by the absence of oxygen sup-
ply to organs or tissue.
anterior for anatomic structures, denoting before, in 
front of, or the front part of.
anterior horn cell cell in the ventral portion in an H-
shaped body of gray matter in the spinal cord associ-
ated with efferent pathways.
anterior spinothalamic tract the uncrossed fibers of the 
spinothalamic tract, which carry sensations of light 
or crude touch.
anterograde transport of axons from the cell body to-
ward the axon terminal.
aphasia acquired disorder of language caused by brain 
damage; may affect comprehension or expression of 
language in any modality (spoken, written, or ges-
tural language).

GLOSSARY
298
aphasic alexia a disorder of reading caused by brain 
damage; the reading disorder is part of the overall 
aphasia syndrome (for example, the reading disor-
der associated with Wernicke’s aphasia).
aphemia an obsolete term for loss of the power of 
speech.
apraxia a disorder of learned movement distinct from 
paralysis, weakness, and incoordination; results in a 
disturbance of motor planning.
apraxia of speech (AOS) disorder of programming the 
muscles of articulation in the absence of paralysis, 
weakness, and incoordination.
aprosodia abnormal prosody (stress and intonation pat-
tern in speech), usually resulting from damage to the 
nondominant hemisphere.
aqueduct of Sylvius small tube or outlet in the midbrain 
connecting the third and fourth ventricles.
arachnoid mater a thin membranous covering (menin-
ges) of the brain and spinal cord that lies between 
the dura mater and the pia mater.
arcuate fasciculus long subcortical association tract 
connecting posterior and anterior speech-language 
areas in the cerebrum.
areflexia lacking normal reflexive response to an ad-
equate stimulus.
arteriosclerosis a chronic disease characterized by ab-
normal thickening and hardening of the arterial 
walls, with resulting loss of elasticity.
arteriovenous malformation (AVM) congenital mor-
phologic defect resulting in an abnormal cluster of 
arteries directly connecting to veins; often enlarges 
over time and is at risk of rupture.
articulatory undershoot speech production error in 
which the active articulatory structure (often the 
tongue) does not reach its target completely. Often 
a feature of the articulation of persons with hypoki-
netic dysarthria.
Asperger’s syndrome a developmental disorder char-
acterized by impaired social and occupational skills; 
normal language (excluding pragmatics) and cog-
nitive development; and restricted, repetitive, and  
stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activi-
ties; often found to show above-average performance 
in a narrow field against a general background of de-
ficient functioning. This disorder is no longer in the 
DSM as it has been incorporated under Autism Spec-
trum Disorders.
association fiber tracts the fiber bundles that form con-
nections between and within the association areas of 
the brain.
astereognosis loss of the ability to recognize objects 
through touch alone; caused by brain damage.
astrocyte a type of glial cell with numerous sheetlike 
processes extending from its body that are thought 
to provide nutrients for neurons and may have some 
information storage function.
asymmetrical tonic neck reflex (ATNR) a reflex, normal 
in the newborn, that consists of extension of the arm 
and sometimes of the leg on the side to which the 
head is forcibly turned, with flexion of the contralat-
eral limbs. Considered abnormal if found beyond 
the eighth or ninth month of age in a term infant.
asymmetry disproportion or inequality between two 
corresponding parts around the center of an axis.
asynergia lack of coordination in agonistic and antag-
onistic muscles that manifests as a deterioration of 
smooth, complex movements.
asynergy lack of coordination of agonistic and antago-
nistic muscles, particularly associated with cerebellar 
disorders.
ataxia defect of posture and gait associated with a dis-
order of the nervous system; sensory ataxia, associ-
ated with dorsal column dysfunction, is distinguished 
from cerebellar or cerebellar pathway ataxia.
ataxic cerebral palsy a relatively uncommon type of cer-
ebral palsy resulting from damage to the cerebellum; 
characterized by hypotonic muscles and an ataxic 
gait pattern.
ataxic dysarthria the motor speech disorder associated 
with damage to the cerebellum and/or its pathways; 
characterized by irregular articulatory breakdown, 
prosodic changes, and often a slow rate.
athetoid cerebral palsy the most common dyskinetic 
type of cerebral palsy characterized by delayed motor 
development and involuntary, uncontrolled writhing 
movements.
athetosis a neurologic disorder marked by continual, 
slow movements, especially of the extremities.
atopognosis loss of the power to locate touch sensation 
correctly; usually caused by damage to the parietal 
lobe.
atrophy decrease in size or wasting of a body part or 
tissue.
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder a condition that 
usually becomes identifiable in children in the pre-
school to early childhood years (and may persist into 
adulthood) in which three types of behavior or pri-
mary symptoms may be identified: inattentiveness; 
impulsiveness with hyperactivity; or a combination of 
these with inattentiveness, impulsiveness, and hyper-
activity prominent.
audition hearing.
auditory agnosia inability to recognize the significance 
of sounds.
auditory brainstem response (ABR) a type of electro-
physiologic audiometry in which electrical activity is 
evoked by brief click stimuli from the eighth cranial 
nerve and the brainstem; allows inference of hearing 

GLOSSARY
299
and identification of the site of lesion as the cochlea, 
cranial nerve VIII, or the brainstem.
autism major developmental disability marked by dis-
turbed stereotyped behavior and language patterns; 
echolalic verbal behavior is often present, as are neu-
rologic signs.
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) a neurodevelopmen-
tal disorder affecting social communication and 
pattern of behavior. In 2013, the diagnostic criteria 
for ASD were changed to: (1) Demonstration in the 
past or the present of deficits in social emotional 
reciprocity, deficits in nonverbal communication 
for social interaction, and deficits in developing, 
maintaining and understanding relationships and 
(2) Presence of at least two types of repetitive pat-
terns of behavior including but not limited to ste-
reotyped or repetitive motor movements, highly 
restricted fixed interests, inflexible requirement for 
routines, or hyper or hyper reactivity to sensory in-
put. Severity is rated based on the level of support 
the individual requires. Eliminated in the 2013, 
changes were the previously used subcategories 
such as Asperger’s and PDD-NOS.
autoassociator network network used in simulations of 
behavior in which every unit in the network is con-
nected to every other unit, with associations stored 
within a layer of neurons.
autonomic nervous system a part of the vertebrate ner­
vous system that innervates smooth and cardiac mus-
cle and glandular tissues and governs involuntary 
actions (e.g., secretion, vasoconstriction, or peristal-
sis); includes the sympathetic nervous system and the 
parasympathetic nervous system.
axon a straight, relatively unbranched process of a 
nerve cell; literally defined as “the axis.”
axonal regeneration regrowth of damaged axons.
axoplasm the protoplasm of an axon.
Babinski sign a reflex movement; when the sole of the 
foot is tickled, the great toe turns upward instead of 
downward; normal in infancy but indicates damage 
to the central nervous system (as in the pyramidal 
tracts) when occurring later in life. Also known as 
Babinski, Babinski reflex.
basal ganglia subcortical structures, part of the extrapy-
ramidal system, associated with motor control of 
tone and posture.
behavioral neurology a specialty in neurology emphasiz-
ing clinical and research skills in neurodegenerative 
diseases and neurobehavioral syndromes.
bilateral related to or having two sides.
bilateral innervation supply of nerves from both sides 
of the body.
bilateral symmetry movements on one side of the body 
that mirror movements on the opposite side.
bilingual the ability to understand and converse in more 
than one language.
bipolar cell first-order nerve cell of the retina, synaps-
ing with the ganglion cells.
bite reflex rapid closure of the jaw and a bite response 
on moderate pressure to the gums; normal in infants 
up to 9 to 12 months of age.
border zone the limit of the cerebral area served by either 
the anterior, middle, or posterior cerebral arteries.
bouton a synaptic knob; from French, meaning “button.”
brain scan a neurodiagnostic tool using a radioisotope 
to detect damaged brain tissue.
brainstem the part of the brain connecting the spinal 
cord to the forebrain and cerebrum; contains the 
medulla oblongata, pons, and mesencephalon (mid-
brain).
branchial of or relating to gills or to parts of the body 
derived from the embryonic branchial arches and 
clefts.
Broca’s aphasia acquired adult language disorder char-
acterized by nonfluent speech and language; usually 
accompanied by hemiplegia and an anterior lesion 
of the brain.
Broca’s area major speech-language center in the 
dominant frontal lobe; important for expression of 
­language.
callosal dysgenesis defective development of the corpus 
callosum.
capsular referring to the internal capsule.
Carl Wernicke scientific pioneer (1848-1905) who iden-
tified an auditory speech center in the temporal lobe 
associated with comprehension of speech.
cation a positively charged ion.
caudal situated in or directly toward the hind part of 
the body.
central (parietal-temporal) alexia an acquired disorder 
of reading and writing caused by brain damage and 
usually accompanied by some degree of aphasia; also 
known as alexia with agraphia.
central nervous system (CNS) the brain and the spinal 
cord structures.
central pattern generator a term given to a cluster of 
neurons (afferent, interneurons, and efferent) 
that, when stimulated, trigger a sequenced series 
of physical responses. In swallowing, the medullary 
­swallowing center, with the nucleus solitarius and the 
nucleus ambiguus, is thought to function as a central 
pattern generator.
cephalic of or relating to the head; directed toward or 
situated on, in, or near the head.
cerebellar hemispheres the two spherical structures 
comprising the cerebellum.
cerebellum cauliflower-shaped brain structure located 
just above the brainstem at the base of the skull.

GLOSSARY
300
cerebral palsy a disability resulting from damage to the 
brain before, during, or shortly after birth and out-
wardly manifested by muscular incoordination and 
often speech disturbances.
cerebral plasticity the ability of the brain to reorganize 
neural pathways on the basis of new learning and 
­experiences.
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) clear, colorless bodily fluid 
produced by the choroid plexuses and contained 
within the subarachnoid space circulating around 
the brain and spinal cord before being absorbed by 
the arachnoid villi; cushions the central nervous sys-
tem and provides nutrients.
cerebrovascular accident (CVA) interruption of the 
blood flow to the brain as a result of occlusive (throm-
botic or embolic) or hemorrhagic mechanisms; also 
known as stroke.
cerebrum the major portion of the brain, consisting of 
two hemispheres, that contains the cortex and its un-
derlying white matter as well as the basal ganglia and 
other basal structures.
childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) a developmental 
sensorimotor speech disorder characterized by im-
pairment of the ability to program the positioning of 
the articulators and the sequencing of muscle move-
ments for volitional speech production; also known 
as developmental apraxia of speech.
childhood disintegrative disorder a rare, pervasive de-
velopmental disorder on the autism spectrum in 
which communication and social skills develop nor-
mally until at least age 2 years (onset usually is be-
tween 3 and 4 years) followed by pronounced loss in 
motor, communication, and social skills.
chorea disorder characterized by irregular, spasmod-
ic, involuntary movements of the limbs or facial  
muscles.
choreiform resembling chorea.
choroid plexus structures located in certain parts of the 
ventricle that are composed of fused ependymal and 
pia mater cells and associated capillaries; makes and 
secretes cerebrospinal fluid for circulation.
cingulate gyrus the ridge on the surface of the cere-
brum located between the cingulated sulcus and the 
sulcus of the corpus callosum.
circle of Willis circle of arteries located at the base of 
the brain; serves as a vascular mechanism for collat-
eral circulation.
circumlocution wordy and circuitous description of un-
recalled terms.
clinical neurology medical discipline involving diagno-
sis and treatment of diseases of the nervous ­system.
clonus form of movement marked by contractions and 
relaxations of a muscle occurring in rapid succes-
sion.
cochlear duct the middle chamber of the cochlea that 
contains the sensory end organ of hearing, the organ 
of Corti; also known as the scala media.
code switching in linguistics, alternating between two 
or more languages, dialects, or language registers in 
a single conversation.
cognition the mental process of knowing, which in-
cludes aspects such as awareness, perception, reason-
ing, memory, and judgment.
cognitive-communicative disorders communication dis-
orders resulting from the neurobehavioral sequelae 
of diffuse (as opposed to focal) brain damage, in-
cluding deficits in information processing, attention, 
reasoning, and problem solving and memory.
cogwheel rigidity increased tone, equalized between 
agonist and antagonist muscles, with a superimposed 
cogwheel, ratchetlike resistance; often found in pa-
tients with Parkinson’s disease.
colliculi little “hills” or mounds within the brain; the 
superior and inferior colliculi are found in the mid-
brain.
computed tomography (CT) x-ray imaging technique 
in which the brain is viewed at different depths; the 
various views are correlated by computer to show 
structural lesions of the brain.
concentration gradient ratio of solute and water across 
a membrane.
conduction aphasia an adult language disorder in 
which auditory comprehension is good but exact 
repetition is poor; the site of the lesion producing 
the syndrome is in debate, but it may interrupt the 
arcuate fasciculus.
confabulation verbal or written expression of fictitious 
experiences.
confusional state acute symptoms of mental disor-
ganization and agitation that may accompany head 
­trauma or other medical conditions; the language is 
often marked by irrelevancy and confabulation.
congenital childhood suprabulbar palsy a disorder char-
acterized by isolated paralysis or weakness of the oral 
musculature without major weakness in the trunk or 
extremities.
constraint-induced therapy (CIT) a treatment method 
in rehabilitation in which the patient is forced to 
use the damaged modality to accomplish tasks nor-
mally performed with that modality. For example, 
constraining the nonparalyzed left arm and requir-
ing activities of daily living and therapy tasks to be 
done with the hemiparetic right arm and hand or, 
in constraint-induced aphasia therapy, requiring the 
patient to communicate verbally rather than allowing 
alternative communication methods or facilitation.
constructional disturbance the inability to form a con-
struction in space because of a cerebral deficit.

GLOSSARY
301
contingent negative variation (CNV) a small negative 
potential recorded on an electroencephalogram 
over the front central scalp of some subjects who per-
form tasks requiring close attention or who have just 
received a warning stimulus; also known as E wave or 
expectancy wave.
contralateral related to the opposite side.
contralateral innervation the supply of nerve impulses 
from the opposite side of the body.
convergence the exciting of a single sensory neuron by 
incoming impulses from multiple other neurons.
corpus callosum the largest transversal commissure be-
tween the hemispheres; it is approximately 4 inches 
long.
corpus striatum subcortical mass of white and gray mat-
ter in front of and lateral to the thalamus in each cer-
ebral hemisphere; is used to refer to the putamen, 
globus pallidus, and caudate nucleus collectively.
cortex the outer surface layer of the brain (or other  
organs).
corticonuclear fibers the fiber bundle pathway in 
each hemisphere from the motor cortex to the nu-
clei of the brainstem; depending on the particular 
nerve, some of the fibers decussate and others travel 
­ipsilaterally.
corticospinal tract part of the pyramidal system that de-
scends from the cerebral cortex to different levels of 
the spinal cord; facilitates motor control.
cranial nerve one of 12 pairs of nerves (fiber bundles 
surrounded by connective tissue) that exit the brain 
and pass through the skull to reach the sense organs 
or muscles of the head and neck with which they are 
associated.
declarative memory memory for facts and events.
decussation crossing over or intersection of parts.
deep dyslexia an acquired reading disorder resulting 
from left-hemisphere brain damage and character-
ized by semantic errors in reading single words.
deglutition the act of swallowing.
dementia an organic mental disorder with progressive 
general intellectual deterioration affecting memory, 
judgment, and abstract thinking as well as personal-
ity changes.
dementia of the Alzheimer’s type see Alzheimer’s 
­disease.
dendrite the short branching processes of a nerve cell; 
literally means “treelike.”
denervation a cutting of the nerve supply by excision, 
incision, or blocking.
depolarization loss of the difference in charge be-
tween the inside and outside of the plasma mem-
brane of a muscle or nerve cell caused by a change 
in permeability and migration of sodium ions to 
the interior.
dermatome the lateral wall of a somite from which the 
dermis is produced.
developmental anarthria diagnosis involving complete 
lack of speech as a result of profound paralysis, weak-
ness, and/or incoordination of the musculature of 
speech.
developmental apraxia of speech a developmental dis-
order characterized by impaired ability to execute 
the appropriate movements of speech voluntarily in 
the absence of paralysis, weakness, or incoordination 
of the musculature of speech; also known as child-
hood apraxia of speech.
developmental dysarthria speech disorder resulting 
from damage to the immature nervous system; char-
acterized by weakness, paralysis, and/or incoordina-
tion of the speech musculature.
developmental dyslexia see dyslexia.
developmental language disability congenital diffi-
culty with the production and/or comprehension 
of language, ranging from mild delay to severe 
disorder.
developmental motor speech disorders a group of 
disorders of speech production resulting from con-
genital weakness, paralysis, or incoordination of the 
speech musculature or a congenital disorder of pro-
gramming the speech musculature. See developmental 
dysarthria and childhood apraxia of speech.
diaphragma sella a ring-shaped fold of dura mater cov-
ering the sella turcica, in which the pituitary gland 
sits.
dichotic listening test situation in which simultaneous 
auditory stimuli are presented to both ears at the 
same time; ear preference (right or left) is judged by 
which ear first recognizes the auditory stimulus.
diencephalon the part of the forebrain between the cer-
ebral hemispheres and the midbrain; includes the 
thalamus, hypothalamus, the third ventricle, and the 
epithalamus.
diffuse axonal injury (DAI) extensive tearing of axons 
as a result of traumatic shearing forces that occur 
when the head is rapidly accelerated or decelerated, 
resulting in twisting or rotational force.
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) an MRI technique that 
can measure axonal organization in nervous system 
tissue, describing the magnitude, anistrophy and ori-
entation of any anistrophy.
diplegia paralysis of corresponding parts on both sides 
of the body, with legs more impaired.
diplopia double vision.
distal away from the center of the body.
divergence dissemination of the effect of activity of a 
single nerve cell through multiple synaptic connec-
tions.
dorsal pertaining to the back; posterior.

GLOSSARY
302
dorsal column pathway major sensory pathway mediat-
ing proprioception.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy a chronic, progressive 
disease beginning in early childhood that affects the 
shoulder and pelvic girdles, causing increasing weak-
ness and pseudohypertrophy of the muscles followed 
by atrophy and the establishment of a peculiar sway-
ing gait.
dura mater the outermost meningeal layer covering the 
brain.
dysarthrias a group of speech production disorders 
caused by oral-motor weakness, paralysis, or incoor-
dination. May be congenital or acquired.
dysdiadochokinesia the inability to perform and sus-
tain rapid alternating movements; speech-language 
pathologists in particular apply this term to a motor 
deficit in the oral muscles; associated with cerebellar 
disorder syndromes; also called alternate motion rate.
dysfluency speech marked by hesitations, prolonga-
tions, and/or repetitions that interrupt the natural 
prosodic flow; also refers to stuttering.
dyskinesia disorder of movement usually associated 
with a lesion of the extrapyramidal system.
dyslexia inability to read despite the ability to see 
and recognize letters and a history of appropriate 
­instruction.
dysmetria the inability to gauge the distance, speed, 
and power of a movement.
dysphagia difficulty swallowing.
dysprosody disturbance of stress, timing, and melody of 
speech.
dystonia disorder in which the limbs assume distorted 
static postures as a result of excess tone in selected 
parts of the body.
ear advantage demonstrated ear “preference” for cer-
tain stimuli. Dichotic listening studies have shown 
that verbal stimuli are more accurately reported 
when presented to the right ear than the left ear in 
persons who are left dominant for language. This is 
called the “right ear advantage.”
ectoderm the outermost of the three primary germ lay-
ers of an embryo.
efferent conducting (fluid or nerve impulses) outward 
from a given organ or part.
efferent fibers fibers conducting a neural impulse away 
from a given neuron; often refers to a motor fiber, 
although technically it does not necessarily refer to 
motor impulses.
electroencephalography (EEG) procedure producing a 
graphic record of electrical activity of the brain as 
recorded by an electroencephalograph.
embryo the developing human individual from the 
time of implantation to the end of the eighth week 
after conception.
encephalitis inflammation of the brain.
encephalon the brain.
encephalopathy pathology of the brain.
endoderm the innermost of the three primary germ lay-
ers of an embryo that is the source of the epithelium 
of the digestive tract and its derivatives and of the 
lower respiratory tract.
endolymph the watery fluid in the membranous laby-
rinth of the ear.
enteric relating to or affecting the intestines.
enteric nervous system a division of the autonomic 
nervous system formed by neuronal plexuses in the 
gastrointestinal tract and directly affecting degluti-
tion and digestion during swallowing.
ependymal cells glial cells that compose the lining of the 
ventricles (the ependyma) and the choroid plexuses. 
The cells function to help make cerebrospinal fluid.
epithalamus small region of the diencephalon of the 
brain consisting of the pineal gland, habenular nu-
clei, and stria medullaris thalami.
equilibrium the state of being balanced.
essential tremor organic tremor not associated with any 
pathologic process.
esthesiometer instrument used to assess two-point dis-
crimination for tactile sensation.
event related potentials (ERPs) very small brain volt-
ages generated in brain structures in response to 
specific sensory, motor or cognitive events or stimuli, 
analyzed as time-locked activity during electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) studies
excess and equal stress a feature noted in the speech 
of some persons with dysarthria, especially in ataxic 
dysarthria, in which normally unstressed words or syl-
lables are stressed equally with other words with the 
resulting prosody sounding “robotic.”
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) an electrical 
change (depolarization) in the membrane of a post-
synaptic neuron caused by the binding of an excita-
tory neurotransmitter from a presynaptic cell to a 
postsynaptic receptor, increasing the likelihood of an 
action potential being generated in the postsynaptic 
neuron.
executive functions capacities, under primary control 
of the prefrontal cortex, that guide complex behav-
ior over time through planning, decision making, 
and response control. Common executive abilities 
include judgment, problem solving, decision mak-
ing, planning, and pragmatics and depend on cogni-
tive abilities such as attention, perception, memory, 
and language.
explosive speech loud, sudden speech attributable to 
damage to the nervous system.
extensor a muscle, the contraction of which tends to 
shorten a limb; antagonist to flexors.

GLOSSARY
303
exteroceptors sense receptors (as of touch, tempera-
ture, smell, vision, or hearing) excited by stimuli out-
side the organism.
extinction progressive reduction in strength of a con-
ditioned response on withdrawal of the reinforcing 
stimulus.
extraocular adjacent to but outside the eyeball.
extrapyramidal system the basal ganglia and its inter-
connections.
facilitation process of making the nerve impulses easier 
by repeated use of certain axons.
falx cerebri the larger of the two folds of dura mater 
separating the hemispheres of the brain that lies 
between the cerebral hemispheres and contains the 
sagittal sinuses.
fasciculation involuntary contractions or twitches in a 
group of muscle fibers.
fasciculus a nerve fiber bundle forming a connection 
between groups of neurons in the central nervous 
system; also known as a tract.
feedback in control theory, a process in which some 
portion of the output signal of a system is passed (fed 
back) to the input; often used to control the dynamic 
behavior of the system.
feedforward system that reacts to changes in its envi-
ronment, usually to maintain some desired state; 
­exhibits response to a measured disturbance in a 
predefined way but does not handle novel stimuli.
fetal period the ninth week after conception until birth.
fissure a groove on the surface of the brain or spinal cord.
flaccid flabby, without tone.
flaccid dysarthria a classification of motor speech dis-
orders associated with damage to the lower motor 
neuron or some part of the motor unit; marked by 
certain features depending on the part of the motor 
unit that is damaged.
flocculus small, irregular lobe on the undersurface of 
each hemisphere of the cerebellum that is linked 
with the corresponding side of the nodulus by a 
­peduncle.
fluency disorders speech disorders that affect the natu-
ral prosody and flow of speech.
fluent/nonfluent a dichotomous classification of apha-
sic language on the basis of the type of conversation-
al speech.
focal lesion an identifiable, circumscribed area of dam-
age or injury.
foramen an aperture or perforation through a bone or 
a membranous structure.
forebrain the anterior of the three primary divisions of 
the developing vertebrate brain or the correspond-
ing part of the adult brain that especially includes 
the cerebral hemispheres, the thalamus, and the hy-
pothalamus; in higher vertebrates, is the main con-
trol center for sensory and associative information 
processing, visceral functions, and voluntary motor 
functions; also called prosencephalon.
fractional anistrophy a scale value measuring the de-
gree of anistrophy in a diffusion process, often used 
in diffusion tensor imaging of white matter
fricatives a consonant sound produced by directing 
and continuing the restricted breath stream against 
one or more of the oral surfaces (hard palate, alveo-
lar ridge, teeth, and/or lips); may be voiced or un-
voiced. Examples include /f/, /v/, /s/, and /z/.
frontal alexia reading disorder known as the third alex-
ia; associated with a lesion in the left frontal lobe; 
often accompanies a Broca’s aphasia.
frontal lobe the anterior division of each cerebral 
hemisphere having its lower part in the anterior 
fossa of the skull and bordered behind by the cen-
tral sulcus.
frontotemporal dementias (FTD) a syndrome complex, 
designated by the National Institute of Neurologi-
cal Diseases and Stroke, marked by progressive de-
terioration in behavior and/or language with reten-
tion of important features of memory, unlike other 
­dementias.
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) the 
use of magnetic resonance imaging to measure the 
hemodynamic response related to neural activity in 
the brain or spinal cord.
funiculi aggregates of fiber bundles (or tracts) in the 
nervous system as seen in the spinal cord; also called 
columns.
gag reflex reflex contraction of the muscles of the 
throat especially caused by stimulation (as by touch) 
of the pharynx.
Galant reflex a newborn reflex elicited by holding the 
child face down and stroking along one side of  
the spine; normal reaction is lateral flexion toward 
the stimulated side; should disappear by 9 months of 
age or before.
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) an inhibitory neuro-
transmitter.
gamma motor neuron neurons innervating the muscle 
spindle; allow contraction of intrafusal fibers and in-
creased sensitivity of the fibers to the muscle stretch 
reflex.
ganglia nerve cells with common form, function, and 
connections that are grouped outside the central 
nervous system.
gasserian ganglion the large, flattened, sensory root 
ganglion of the trigeminal nerve that lies within the 
skull and behind the orbit; also called trigeminal 
ganglion, semilunar ganglion.
genioglossus a fan-shaped muscle that arises from the 
superior mental spine; inserts on the hyoid bone and 
into the tongue; and advances, retracts, and depress-
es the tongue.

GLOSSARY
304
genu any structure of angular shape resembling a flexed 
knee.
Gerstmann syndrome a cluster of left parietal lobe le-
sion signs, including finger agnosia, left-right diso-
rientation, acalculia, and agraphia; a developmental 
form of the syndrome has been described.
glial cells cellular elements, of which there are several 
types, that support and expedite the activity of the 
neurons; glial cells outnumber the neurons 10 to 1; 
also called neuroglial cells.
glioma general name for a tumor arising from the sup-
portive tissues of the brain
global aphasia an acquired disorder of language caused 
by brain damage and characterized by severe impair-
ment of all language modalities, comprehension, 
verbal and gestural expression, reading, and writing.
globus pallidus (GPi) a nucleus of the basal ganglia that 
receives input from the caudate and the putamen 
and is the main output nucleus.
glottal coup a rapid, forceful closing and opening of the 
true vocal folds accompanied by a short, sharp vo-
calization; used in oral-motor examinations to assess 
vocal fold movement and strength informally.
Golgi tendon organs a collection of afferent fibers lo-
cated in tendons or their processes that respond to 
tension during muscle contraction.
graceful degradation an engineering concept adopted 
in explanations of neural processing in which the 
loss of one component of a distributed processing 
network results in a reduced level, but not failure, of 
performance.
graded potential short-lived depolarizations or hyper-
polarizations of an area of membrane. These changes 
cause local flows of current (movement of ions) that 
decrease with distance. When this occurs in a recep-
tor cell, it is called a receptor potential.
gray matter the grayish substance of brain and spinal 
cord composed of neuronal and glial cell bodies, un-
myelinated nerve fibers, and synapses.
gyrus an elevation or ridge on the surface of the cer-
ebrum.
helicotrema the minute opening by which the scala tym-
pani and scala vestibuli communicate at the top of 
the cochlea of the ear.
hemianopsia a visual field defect of one half of the eye 
field.
hemiparalysis total or partial paralysis of one side of the 
body that results from disease of or injury to the mo-
tor centers of the brain; also called hemiplegia.
hemiplegia see hemiparalysis.
hemorrhage bleeding; a profuse flow of blood.
Heschl’s gyrus convolution of the temporal lobe that is 
the cortical center for hearing; runs obliquely out-
ward and forward from the posterior part of the lat-
eral sulcus.
hindbrain the posterior division of the three primary di-
visions of the developing vertebrate brain or the cor-
responding part of the adult brain that includes the 
cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata and that 
controls the autonomic functions and equilibrium; 
also called the rhombencephalon.
homeostasis the physiologic process by which the body’s 
internal systems are maintained at equilibrium de-
spite changes in external conditions.
homunculus caricature mapping the connections be-
tween the area of the motor or sensory cortex and 
the innervated body part; literally means “little 
man.”
Huntington’s chorea a progressive chorea inherited as 
an autosomal dominant trait characterized by chorei-
form movements and mental deterioration leading 
to dementia; accompanied by atrophy of the caudate 
nucleus and the loss of certain brain cells with a de-
crease in the level of several neurotransmitters; usu-
ally begins in middle age; also called Huntington’s 
disease.
hyoglossus extrinsic tongue muscle involved in the re-
traction and depression of the tongue.
hyperalgesia increased sensitivity to pain or enhanced 
intensity of pain sensation.
hyperesthesia unusual or pathologic sensitivity of the 
skin or of a particular sense to stimulation.
hyperkinesia an abnormal, involuntary increase in mus-
cle activity.
hypernasality the perception of nasal resonance during 
the production of voiced sounds, particularly vowels.
hyperpolarization increased production in potential 
difference across a biologic membrane.
hyperreflexia a condition in which the deep tendon re-
flexes are exaggerated.
hypertonia extreme tension of the muscles.
hypoalgesia decreased sensitivity to pain.
hypoesthesia impaired or decreased tactile sensibility; 
also called hypesthesia.
hypokinesia diminished muscle movement capacity.
hypokinetic dysarthria dysarthria caused by basal gan-
glia disease; most commonly associated with Parkin-
son’s disease.
hyporeflexia diminished or absent reflexes.
hypothalamus portion of the brain that composes part 
of the third ventricle; critical to autonomic and en-
docrine function, including rage and aggression, 
regulation of body temperature, and nutrient intake; 
also exerts neural control over pituitary gland.
hypotonia muscle flaccidity; a decrease in normal mus-
cle tone when passive movement is performed.
ideational apraxia disorder of motor planning in which 
complex motor plans cannot be executed, although 
individual motor components of the plan can be 
­performed.

GLOSSARY
305
ideomotor apraxia a motor disturbance characterized 
by the inability to carry out motor acts on command, 
but some evidence is present that these motor acts 
can be carried out imitatively or automatically.
inferior situated below and closer to the feet than an-
other part and especially another similar part of an 
upright body of a human being.
innervate to supply with efferent nerve impulses.
input fibers neural elements that make synaptic connec-
tions by synapsing onto the cell body and/or onto 
dendrites or dendritic spines found on the dendrites.
intellectual disability a developmental delay character-
ized by impaired learning, social adjustment, and 
maturational problems in all areas.
intention tremor a slow tremor of the extremities that 
increases on attempted voluntary movement and is 
observed in certain diseases of the nervous system 
(e.g., multiple sclerosis).
internal carotid arteries the inner branches, right and 
left, of the carotid artery that supply the brain, eyes, 
and other internal structures of the head; also called 
internal carotid.
internuncial functionally imposed between two or more 
neurons.
interoceptor a specialized nerve receptor that receives 
and responds to stimuli originating from within the 
body.
interstitial fluid extracellular fluid.
intervertebral foramina the openings between the verte-
brae of the spinal cord through which the motor and 
sensory roots exit and unite to form the spinal nerves.
intrinsic neurons (interneurons) nerve cells within the 
central nervous system that act as a link between sen-
sory and motor neurons.
ipsilateral on the same side.
irritability the capacity to respond to stimuli.
ischemia insufficient blood flow to brain tissue, often 
leading to cell death in that area.
island of Reil part of the cerebral cortex forming the 
floor of the lateral fissure; also known as insula.
kernicterus a form of infantile jaundice in which a yel-
low pigment and degenerative lesions are found in 
areas of the intracranial gray matter.
lacrimal related to the tears, their secretions, and the 
organs concerned with them.
Landau-Kleffner syndrome a pediatric disorder—first 
described in 1957 by Drs. William M. Landau and 
Frank R. Kleffner, who identified six children with 
the disorder—characterized by a gradual or sudden 
loss of the ability to understand and use spoken lan-
guage. Abnormal electrical brain waves, document-
ed by an electroencephalogram, are common, as 
are epileptic seizures; affected children often have 
hyperactivity; also called acquired epileptic aphasia.
language lateralization concept that language is not ex-
actly alike between the two hemispheres of the brain.
language dominant the hemisphere that is the site for 
the major language areas and connections.
lateral a position farthest from the medial plane or mid-
line of a body; related to a side.
lateral spinothalamic tract ascending nerve fibers origi-
nating in the spinal cord and terminating in the 
thalamus.
l-dopa l-3,4-hydroxyphenylalanine; synthetic dopamine 
that crosses the blood-brain barrier; often given to 
Parkinson’s patients.
lesion an area of damage in the body.
ligand-sensitive channel proteins protein channels in 
the cell membrane that open and close in response 
to the presence of certain chemicals or neurotrans-
mitters.
limb apraxia failure to perform a learned movement; 
may be ipsilateral or bilateral; also known as ideomo-
tor apraxia.
limbic system interconnected nuclei in the telen-
cephalon and diencephalon; functions include self-­
preservation and activities and behaviors, includ-
ing emotions, sexual behaviors, memory, olfaction  
sensory processing; composed of the olfactory bulb, 
hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, insular cor-
tex, and cingulate gyrus.
localization of function a particular structure in the 
nervous system assigned to a specific function (e.g., 
Broca’s area is the localized area for language ex-
pression).
long-term memory the part of memory where knowl-
edge is stored permanently and is activated when 
needed (usually through cues); theoretically unlim-
ited in capacity.
Lou Gehrig’s disease see amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
lower motor neurons peripheral motor neurons within 
the spinal cord whose axons terminate in a skeletal 
muscle; efferent neurons that transmit motor impulses.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) neuroimaging pro-
cedure in which hydrogen proteins of tissues are 
aligned with the magnetic field; emits a signal that is 
recorded in each slice (image).
magnetoencephalography (MEG) magnetic radiography 
depicting the intracranial fluid spaces after cerebral 
spinal fluid is extracted and replaced by air or gas.
magnum foramen opening in the base of the skull 
through which the spinal cord is continuous with the 
brain.
masking the drowning of a weak sound by a louder one.
mastication the chewing of food.
mechanicoreceptors Sensory receptor sensitive to me-
chanical stimulation such as muscles and tendons, 
sinuses, and hair cells of the inner ear.

GLOSSARY
306
medial toward the midline.
medulla oblongata also known as the myelencephalon; 
caudal segment of the brainstem, rostral from the fo-
ramen magnum to the pons.
meninges Membranous coverings of the central ner­
vous system developing from the neural crest and the 
mesoderm layer.
mesoderm the second germ layer apparent during the 
third week of development of the nervous system; 
forms the skin (dermis), skeleton, muscles, blood, 
and blood vessels.
mesencephalon midbrain.
metacognition educational process that incorporates 
knowledge of one’s abilities, the demands of the task 
at hand, and the effective learning strategies needed 
to achieve success; may be regulated by the individ-
ual involved.
microglia type of glial cell with a primarily scavenger 
function.
microtubules part of an axon; help carry out the pro-
cess of axon transport.
midbrain the most superior of the three structures mak-
ing up the brainstem; associated structures found at 
the midbrain level are the tectum, inferior and su-
perior colliculi, the cerebral peduncles, and the sub-
stantia nigra.
minimal cerebral dysfunction a syndrome of neurologic 
dysfunction in children usually marked by impair-
ments of fine coordination, clumsiness, and chorei-
form or athetoid movements; often associated with 
learning disorders.
mitosis a type of cell division in which a single cell 
produces two genetically identical daughter cells; 
new body cells for growth and repair are produced 
through mitosis.
mixed dominance inconsistency in laterality of speech 
and related motor functions such as hand, foot, and 
eye dominance in some individuals; sometimes asso-
ciated with language and learning disorders.
modified feeding altered intake of food and nutrition; 
may include tube feedings, specialized diet plans 
and food consistencies, and solid and liquid restric-
tions.
monoloudness no variation in the loudness or volume 
level; static volume usually attributable to dysarthria 
caused by phonatory and respiratory weakness.
monoplegia paralysis of one limb.
Moro reflex infantile reflex that involves postural re-
sponses; rapid lowering of a flexed, supine head of 
an infant causes abduction and extension followed 
by flexion, of the arms.
motor association areas cortical association areas, num-
bered 44 to 47 in the Brodmann system, that sur-
round the foot of the motor and premotor cortices.
motor endplate special structural enlargements of the 
muscle fibers at the synaptic junction.
motor fibers efferent fibers that go to the muscle and 
force them to contract.
motor unit a motor neuron that includes the muscle 
fibers it innervates.
multiple sclerosis (MS) degenerative disease of the 
central nervous system with no known cause; some 
research has linked this disease with a malfunction 
of the immune system; myelin degenerates but the 
axon remains intact; the intact axon is probably the 
reason for periods of remission.
multipolar cell any cell that contains more than one 
process (usually contains two).
muscle spindle specialized organ within a muscle; gives 
muscle length feedback.
muscle tone the resistance to passive movement or 
change of muscle length.
muscular dystrophy genetic, progressive myopathy that 
includes Duchenne muscular dystrophy and myoto-
nia.
myasthenia gravis autoimmune disorder in which post-
synaptic acetylcholine receptors are blocked, causing 
muscle weakness and fatigue.
myelin the fatty substance surrounding some axons that 
speeds neural transmission; the myelin-covered areas 
are the white matter of the brain.
myelination the process of segmental wrapping of my-
elin around axons; continuous myelin is interrupted 
by narrow gaps (nodes of Ranvier).
myelogenesis the cyclic process of laying down of my-
elin on certain fiber tracts.
myoclonus rapid, asynchronous movements of the limbs.
necrose to die.
necrosis cell death caused by local injury, such as loss 
of blood supply or disease; nonphysiologic processes; 
usually occurs in severe trauma.
neocerebellum the newer parts of the cerebellum phy-
logenetically provided by the corticopontocerebellar 
fibers.
neocortex theoretically, a phylogenetic division of the 
cerebral cortex; distinguished from the allocortex in 
lower animals; also called the isocortex.
neologistic jargon aphasia a temporal lobe syndrome 
marked by newly coined words and unintelligible 
­utterances.
neoplasm tumor.
neural integration complete and harmonious combin-
ing of components of the nervous system.
neural tube embryologically, a hollow structure that 
gives rise to the central nervous system as the cells 
mature.
neurofibrillary tangles tangles of neurofibers common 
in Alzheimer’s disease.

GLOSSARY
307
neurofilaments the fine filaments seen in neurons 
through an electron microscope.
neurogenesis the development of neurons from stem 
cell precursors.
neuroglial cells see glial cells.
neurolinguistics the study of the relation of communi-
cation and language regarding brain function; the 
manner in which the brain helps produce language 
and, in turn, communication.
neurology a branch of science that deals with the normal 
as well as the diseased or disordered nervous ­system.
neuron nerve cell.
neuroplasticity the capacity of neurons to adapt to a 
changed environment; in some cases, neuronal areas 
take over function(s) of damaged neurons.
neurotransmitter the substance released from an axonal 
terminal of a presynaptic neuron once the neuron is 
excited; travels across the synaptic cleft to excite or 
inhibit the targeted cell; examples are norepineph-
rine, acetylcholine, or dopamine.
Noam Chomsky twentieth-century linguist who postu-
lated the theory of language controversy as innate 
versus learned.
nociceptor a receptor for pain that is stimulated by tis-
sue damage.
Norman Geschwind early-twentieth-century pioneer in 
behavioral neurology.
notochord a cylindrical group of cells on the dorsal as-
pect of an embryo; the center of the development of 
the axial skeleton.
nystagmus rhythmical horizontal, rotary, or vertical os-
cillation of the eyeballs.
obligatory without an alternative path.
occipital lobe the posterior portion of each hemi-
sphere that forms the posterior-lateral surface of 
the brain; location of visual cortex; area involved 
with vision.
olfaction the sense of smell.
oligodendrocyte type of glial cell that produces myelin 
for neurons in the central nervous system.
optic chiasm the structure located on the floor of the 
third ventricle composed of crossing optic nerve 
fibers from the medial (nasal) half of each retina.
optic disk the head of the optic nerve.
oral apraxia buccofacial apraxia; inability to program 
nonspeech oral movements.
organ of Corti lies against the basilar membrane in the 
cochlea; contains special sensory receptors for hear-
ing consisting of hair cells and other support cells.
orthograde transneuronal atrophy process involving the 
large-scale death of neurons in the central nervous 
system in response to injury to white matter.
osmotic force the energy needed to maintain adequate 
body fluids and set and maintain the proper balance 
between the volumes of extracellular and intracellu-
lar fluids.
palilalia repeating a word or phrase with increasing ra-
pidity as a result of neurologic damage.
palpate to examine by feeling and pressing with the 
palms of the hands and fingers.
parahippocampal gyrus between the collateral sulcus 
and the hippocampal sulcus on the inferior surface 
of each hemisphere; above the cingulated gyrus and 
below the lingual gyrus.
paralimbic areas associative areas of the cortex contain-
ing structures that form an uninterrupted girdle 
around the medial and basal aspects of the cerebral 
hemispheres; areas include the caudal orbitofron-
tal cortex, insula, temporal pole, parahippocampal 
gyrus (proper), and cingulate complex.
paralysis loss of voluntary muscular function.
paraphasia the substitution of words or sounds in words 
in such a way as to decrease intelligibility or obscure 
meaning.
paraplegia paralysis of both lower extremities and, gen-
erally, the lower trunk.
parasympathetic division pertaining to that division of 
the autonomic nervous system concerned with the 
maintenance of the body; its fibers arise from the 
brain and the sacral part of the spinal cord.
parasympathetic nuclei part of the autonomic nervous 
system; preganglionic fibers leave the central nerv-
ous system with cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X and 
the first three sacral nerves; postganglionic fibers are 
in the heart, smooth muscles, and glands of the neck 
and head and the viscera in the thorax, abdomen, 
and pelvis regions; most of the fibers are in the vagus 
nerve tract.
paresis partial paralysis; weakness.
paresthesia abnormal sensation of burning, tingling, or 
numbness.
parietal lobe upper and central portion of each hemi-
sphere between the frontal and occipital lobes and 
above the temporal lobe.
parkinsonism a disorder that manifests the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinson’s disease a slow, progressive disease charac-
terized by the degeneration of the substantia nigra 
within the basal ganglia, causing a gradual decrease 
of the neurotransmitter dopamine; characterized by 
resting tremor of the hands and feet, hypokinetic 
dysarthria, and a masklike facial expression.
pathologic tremor a tremor caused by the structural 
and functional manifestations of a disease.
pattern-associator network network used in simulations 
of behavior that allows transformation of a pattern of 
activity across its input units into a pattern of activity 
across its output units.

GLOSSARY
308
peduncles very large mass (like a stalk) of nerve fibers 
connecting two structures in the nervous system.
perikaryon the cytoplasmic matrix surrounding a cell 
body in a neuron.
perilymph fluid contained in the bony labyrinth of the 
inner ear.
peripheral nervous system (PNS) Cranial and spinal 
nerves and their branches.
peristriate cortex part of the occipital lobe that receives 
fibers from the optic radiation; the primary receiving 
area for vision.
perisylvian cortex an area on the lateral wall of the 
dominant hemisphere for language that includes the 
major centers and pathways for language reception 
and production; see perisylvian zone.
perisylvian zone the cortex surrounding the sylvian fis-
sure in the dominant temporal lobe; site where the 
major neurologic components for understanding and 
producing language are found (e.g., Broca’s area, 
Wernicke’s area, the supramarginal and angular gyri).
pervasive developmental disorder a disorder on the 
autism spectrum characterized by an impairment 
in the development of social interaction and social 
pragmatic skills as well as verbal or nonverbal com-
munication skills and the possibility of stereotyped 
behaviors and interests.
phasic tone rapid contraction to a high-intensity stretch 
(or change in muscle length) assessed by testing ten-
don reflexes.
phoneme smallest meaningful unit of sound.
phonologic alexia the inability to read nonsense words, 
especially low-frequency words; errors are usually 
visual errors.
photoreceptors nerve end organs stimulated by light, as 
in the rods and cones of the retina.
phrenic nerves nerves arising from the cervical spinal 
cord that supply the diaphragm.
pia mater the innermost layer of the meninges that is 
vascular in nature.
Pick’s disease a rare and progressive and degenerative 
form of dementia characterized by cortical atrophy 
in the frontal and temporal lobes.
Pierre Paul Broca French physician (1824-1880); local-
ized language areas from two patients who had sus-
tained language and motor speech losses; postulated 
for the first time that the left hemisphere contained 
the language center.
plantar relating to the sole of the foot.
plasticity the concept that in the immature brain some 
functional areas are not established and that un-
established areas may assume any one of a variety of 
functions.
plosives a class of consonant speech sounds that 
­require a complete closure of the vocal tract fol-
lowed by a quick release of air and/or acoustic 
sound energy; they are /p/, /b/, /t/, /d/, /k/, 
and /g/.
pons the part of the brainstem that lies between the me-
dulla and the midbrain.
positive support reflex reflex that is necessary for erect 
posture; when the balls of the feet (bounced on a flat 
surface) are stimulated, a contraction of opposing 
muscle groups fixes the joints of the lower extremi-
ties to bear weight.
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging tech-
nique that visualizes the functioning brain by showing 
its activity through blood flow and glucose metabo-
lism.
posterior directed to or situated in the back; opposite is 
anterior; also referred to as dorsal.
posterior alexia see alexia without agraphia.
postganglionic pertaining to nerve fibers in the auto-
nomic nervous system that exit the ganglion.
postsynaptic terminal what is distal to or beyond a 
­synapse.
postural tone the resistance striated muscles and ten-
dons offer when stretched by a sustained, low-inten-
sity force by a person or gravity; the recoil capability 
of the striated muscles and the tendons once they are 
fully extended by a sustained force.
potential a relative amount of voltage in an electrical field.
pragmatic communication disorder see social (pragmatic) 
communication disorder
praxis the normal performance of a motor act.
preganglionic pertaining to nerve fibers in the auto-
nomic nervous system whose cell body is within the 
CNS (brainstem or spinal cord) with its axon extend-
ing peripherally to synapse on postganglionic neu-
rons in the autonomic ganglia.
prematurity a state of being born after fewer than  
37 weeks of gestation (birth weight is no longer 
considered a critical criterion).
premotor area area in the frontal lobe in front of the 
premotor cortex and inferior to the prefrontal cor-
tex; responsible for sensory guidance of movement 
and control of proximal and trunk muscles.
presynaptic inhibition inhibitory control of afferent 
muscle spindles before the synapse occurs.
presynaptic terminal what is anterior to or before a 
­synapse.
primary auditory receptor cortex found in the temporal 
lobe; also known as Heschl’s gyrus (areas 41 and 42).
primary motor projection cortex composed mostly of 
precentral gyrus; voluntary control of skeletal mus-
cles on the contralateral side of the body contained 
in the frontal lobe; also called the motor strip.
primary neurulation a process in which the neural tube 
forms from the neural plate.

GLOSSARY
309
primary olfactory receptor cortex areas responsible for 
smell, consisting of anterior olfactory nucleus, olfac-
tory tubercle, piriform cortex, and cortical amyg-
daloid nucleus; only sensory fibers that do not pass 
through the thalamus.
primary progressive aphasia (PPA) associated with left 
hemisphere pathology not necessarily from acute 
neurologic infarct such as a stroke; may have prob-
lems in comprehension, reading, writing, naming; 
does not improve over time as does aphasia from 
stroke; deficits continue to be progressive; may be a 
continuous decline in language abilities over time.
primary somatosensory cortex areas 1, 2, and 3 on the 
postcentral gyrus; a primary receptor of general bod-
ily sensation; thalamic radiations carry sensory data 
from the skin, muscles, tendons, and joints.
primary visual receptor cortex area 17 in the occipital 
lobe along the calcarine fissure; receives fibers from 
the optic tract; also known as the striate area.
procedural memory stores information from rule-based 
skills and is accessed through learned behaviors; also 
known as implicit memory.
projection neurons the axons that originate outside 
the telencephalon (thalamocortical fibers) project-
ing to the cerebral cortex and those that arise from 
cerebral cortex cells (corticospinal, corticopontine, 
and corticothalamic) and project to other downward 
targeted areas.
prone lying face down.
proprioception perception mediated by proprioceptors.
proprioceptors sensory nerve endings that send in-
formation regarding body movement and body  
positioning.
prosencephalon see forebrain.
prosopagnosia a visual agnosia characterized by the 
inability to recognize the faces of other people or 
one’s own face in a mirror; associated with agnosia 
for color, objects, and place.
proximal toward the midline or center of the body.
pseudobulbar palsy muscular paralysis from bilateral up-
per motor neuron lesions of the cranial nerves often 
accompanied by dysarthria, dysphagia, and emotional 
lability, such as outbursts of laughing or crying.
pseudohypertrophy increase in the size of an organ 
or part not caused by an increase in size or num-
ber of the specific functional elements; rather, is 
caused by an increase in some other fatty or fibrous  
tissue.
pseudounipolar cell sensory neurons in the peripheral 
nervous system that contain a longer dendrite and a 
smaller axon that connects to the spinal cord.
ptosis drooping of the eyelid as a result of neurologic 
damage (paralysis).
putamen a part of the lenticular nucleus; a structure of 
the basal ganglia.
pyramidal system controls voluntary movement of the 
muscles for speech and all other voluntary muscles; 
consists of the corticospinal tract, corticobulbar 
tract, and the corticopontine tract.
quadriplegia paralysis of all four limbs.
radiograph see x-ray.
reasoning the process of evaluating information to 
come to a conclusion.
reflex arc a pathway leading from the receptor of a sen-
sory stimulus to the motor response; the response is 
known as an automatic reflex action.
reflexes subconscious automatic stimulus response 
mechanisms; in human beings, reflexes are basic de-
fense mechanisms to sensory stimulation.
relative refractory period momentary state of reduced 
irritation after a neural response.
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) a neuroimaging 
technique to study somatosensory pathways.
Reissner’s membrane a thin anterior wall of the coch-
lear duct that separates it from the scala vestibuli.
resting potential the difference in potential across the 
membrane of a cell at rest.
resting tremor a tremor that occurs when the limb is 
relaxed and supported, as in Parkinson’s disease.
reticulospinal tract nerve fibers that extend from the 
reticular formation in the brainstem to the spinal 
cord, contributing to functional contralateral mus-
cle tone; helps with extensor and flexor muscle 
movements.
retrograde moving against the direction of flow.
retrograde transneuronal degeneration pathologic chang-
es that occur across the axon and cell body of neurons 
as a result of an axonal lesion.
Rett syndrome a pervasive developmental disorder that 
affects cerebral gray matter; occurs in females and 
presents at birth; characterized by autistic behaviors, 
ataxic movements, and seizures.
rhombencephalon see hindbrain.
Romberg test a test in which the patient stands with feet 
together while the examiner notes the amount of 
body sway with the patient’s eyes open and closed; 
also known as the body sway test.
rooting reflex a newborn reflex in which a touch to the 
infant’s cheek or upper or lower lip causes the infant 
to turn toward that stimulus.
rostral toward the nasal or oral regions; superior in re-
lation to the spinal cord and anterior in relation to 
the brain.
rubrospinal tracts fibers from the red nucleus to the spi-
nal cord.
saltatory transmission the type of neuronal transmis-
sion in myelinated fibers compared with the slow 
transmission in unmyelinated fibers.
scalae fluid-filled columns that surround the modiolus, 
the hollow core of the cochlea.

GLOSSARY
310
scanning speech related to ataxic dysarthria; quite slow, 
with syllable-by-syllable pausing.
Schwann cells form and maintain myelin in the periph-
eral nervous system.
secondary association areas sites in which elaboration 
of sensation occurs; considered as extensions of the 
primary sensory receptor areas; also known as sen-
sory association areas or unimodal association areas.
secondary neurulation process in which the caudal neural 
tube give rise to the sacral and coccygeal levels of the 
spinal cord; begins at approximately 3 weeks’ gestation.
secretomotor stimulating secretion.
segmental rolling reflex the reflex noted when an infant 
rolls the trunk and pelvis segmentally with rotation 
of the head or legs.
selective engagement neural process in which certain 
neural networks are utilized for optimizing a task while 
others are limited in participation; primarily manifest-
ed in attention with principal cortical area involved 
thought to be the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
sensory fibers also known as afferent fibers; carry in-
formation to the central nervous system about sensa-
tions of touch, pain, temperature, and vibrations.
servomechanism control system a control device for 
maintaining the operation of another system.
short-term memory temporary and limited in capacity; 
related to working memory (the active processing to 
hold the information); must be continuously acted 
on through rehearsal or imaging or information 
stored here will be lost over time.
Shy-Drager syndrome condition of unknown etiology 
characterized by hypotension, constipation, urinary 
urgency, parkinsonian symptoms, cerebellar incoor-
dination, muscle fasciculations, and leg tremors.
single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) imaging 
modality that uses the mechanism of the computed 
tomography scan but instead of detecting x-rays, it 
detects single photons emitted from an external trac-
er; radioactive compounds that emit gamma rays are 
injected into the subject; can scan metabolism and 
blood flow in the brain.
social (pragmatic) communication disorder as of 2013, 
a new diagnostic category in the DSM (Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) applied to per-
sons with deficits in social use of language who do 
not demonstrate restricted interests or repetitive be-
haviors associated with ASD.
sodium-potassium pump related to the physiology of 
neurons; an ion pump that removes intracellular so-
dium and concentrates intracellular potassium.
soma a neuronal cell body; also called the perikaryon.
somatic pertaining to the structure of the body wall 
(muscles, skin, and mucous membranes).
somesthetic pertaining to the senses of pain, tempera-
ture, taction, vibration, and position.
somites mesodermal tissue that develops into the axial 
skeleton, dermis, and skeletal muscles.
spastic cerebral palsy congenital condition with hyper-
tonia, hyperreflexia, and clasp-knife reflex, increased 
tone, and bilateral central nervous system damage.
spastic dysarthria strain-strangle, harsh voice quality; 
imprecise articulation, and hypernasality caused by 
upper motor neuron bilateral pathology; affects pho-
nation, articulation, respiration, and resonance.
spastic dysphonia (SD) chronic phonation disorder of 
unknown etiology characterized by a strained voice 
quality with voice arrests caused by laryngeal adduc-
tor spasm; symptoms may occur in some movement 
disorders; also known as spasmodic dysphonia.
spasticity syndrome of hypertonus with exaggeration of 
stretch reflexes as a result of certain neural lesions.
spatial summation achieving an action potential involv-
ing input from multiple cells of different areas of in-
put, usually from the dendrite.
specific language impairment (SLI) a subset condition 
of children with developmental receptive/expressive 
language disorders; possible organic involvement; 
language disorder must not be attributable to a more 
generalized condition such as hearing loss, autism, 
or acquired neurologic damage.
speech-language pathology the study of the diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention of communication disorders, 
including articulation, phonology, voice, fluency, ex-
pressive and receptive language, and related disorders.
speech pathology see speech-language pathology.
spina bifida congenital defect of the spinal cord or the 
vertebral column.
spinal peripheral nerves mixed nerves (both sensory 
and motor) connected to the spinal cord.
spinocerebellar pathway consists of the dorsal and ven-
tral tracts; arise from the posterior and medial gray 
matter of the spinal cord; dorsal ascends ipsilater-
ally but the ventral crosses in the cord; both termi-
nate in the cerebellum and allow proprioceptive 
impulses from all parts of the body to be integrated 
in the cerebellum.
splenium the thickened posterior part of the corpus  
callosum.
split brain a condition in which the corpus callosum has 
been surgically divided so no information transfers 
between hemispheres.
stereocilia hair cell processes bent by movement.
stereognosis recognition of objects through nonvisual 
and tactile stimulation.
striate cortex primary visual cortex.
styloglossus the smallest of the styloid muscles arising 
from the anterior and lateral surfaces of the styloid 
process; aids in tongue retraction and swallowing.
subarachnoid space a space between the dura and pia 
mater layers filled with cerebrospinal fluid.

GLOSSARY
311
subcortical aphasia aphasia associated with either tha-
lamic or basal ganglia lesions (subcortical structures).
subdural space region below the dura mater.
sublingual region below or under the tongue.
substantia nigra a mass of gray matter extending from 
the upper border of the pons into the subthalamus.
subthalamus region composed of subcortical structures 
of the basal ganglia located below the thalamus.
suckling reflex infant reflex that occurs when a finger 
is placed in the infant’s mouth and bouts of sucking 
behavior occur; integrated at birth and develops into 
jaw movements after 2 to 3 months.
sulcus groove on the surface of the brain or spinal cord; 
also known as fissures.
summation the product of the neural impulses acting 
on a given synapse.
superior upper; opposite of inferior or lower.
supine lying on the back.
supplementary (secondary) motor area (SMA) motor 
area discovered by Wilder G. Penfield located on the 
ventral surface of the precentral and postcentral gyri; 
primary function is controlling sequential movements.
supramarginal gyrus convolution in the inferior pari-
etal lobe surrounding the posterior end of the syl-
vian fissure.
surface dyslexia type of dyslexia distinguished by poor 
ability to use grapheme-to-phoneme conversion rules.
swallowing reflex developed after the sucking reflex is 
integrated into feeding; sucking produces saliva that 
accumulates in the pharynx, triggering the reflex; 
may be observed by visible upward movement of the 
hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage of the larynx.
Sydenham’s chorea involuntary movement disorder 
following infection; usually occurs in children and 
­adolescents.
symmetrical tonic neck reflex analogous to the asym-
metrical tonic reflex but the head is manipulated in 
flexion and extension in midline rather than turned 
laterally; the normal execution of this reflex is an 
extension of the arms and flexion of the legs if the 
head is extended in midline.
sympathetic division that division of the autonomic 
nervous system concerned with preparing the body 
for fight or flight; its neurons arise in the thoracic 
and upper lumbar segments of the spinal cord.
synapse a juncture or connection; the functional con-
tact of one neuron with another.
synaptic cleft the intervening space before and after a 
synapse.
synergy the cooperative action of muscles.
tardive dyskinesia uncontrolled involuntary movements 
of the face and tongue; often caused by excessive or 
long-term treatment with neuroleptic medications.
tectal pathway projects to the superior colliculi in the 
brainstem and the thalamus and out to many regions 
of the cortex; substantially involved in the ability to 
orient toward and follow a visual stimuli.
tectorial membrane gelatinous covering of the organ of 
Corti in the auditory system.
tectum roof of the midbrain; location of the superior 
and inferior colliculi.
temporal lobe bounded superiorly by the lateral fissure 
and posteriorly by the occipital lobe; the center for 
auditory processing in the brain.
temporal summation the additive effect of successive 
stimuli on one nerve, which collectively can gener-
ate a response when the individual stimuli could not.
temporal visual cortex part of the visual association cor-
tex located within the middle and inferior temporal 
areas.
tentorium cerebelli one of two dural folds in the dura 
mater that help stabilize the brain.
teratology the study of abnormal embryology.
thalamic reticular nucleus a layer of cells enveloping the 
ventral thalamus whose axons are sent back into the 
thalamus rather than to the cortex; either facilitates 
or inhibits transmission of other impulses to the 
cortex.
thalamus two oval nodes located at the base of the cer-
ebrum; serves as a relay station for all sensory stimu-
lation; consists of gray matter.
thrombus A stationary blood clot along the wall of a 
blood vessel.
tinnitus ringing or buzzing sound heard in the ear.
tongue reflex typically a part of the suckle-swallow reac-
tion in which the tongue thrusts between the lips; 
mediated at the medulla; usually disappears by 12 to 
18 months of age.
tonic labyrinthine reflex (TLR) associated with chang-
es in tone as a result of changes in head position 
affecting the orientation of the labyrinths of the 
inner ear.
tonotopic pertaining to the spatial arrangement in the 
auditory system determining where different sound 
frequencies are perceived, transmitted, or received.
topologic involvement relation of an anatomic struc-
ture to a specific body part or area.
transcortical aphasia several types of language distur-
bances whose causes are lesions outside the perisyl-
vian area; repetition is always preserved.
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) a noninvasive 
method of exciting neurons in the brain; uses weak 
electric current induced in the brain tissue by rapidly 
changing magnetic fields.
transient ischemic attack (TIA) a reversible neurologic 
defect (focal) lasting up to 24 hours; may indicate a 
risk for a stroke; may be caused by an embolism or 
obstruction of an artery.
transitory related to or marked by a transition; not 
­permanent.

GLOSSARY
312
traumatic brain injury (TBI) diffuse brain damage that 
may be caused by an external force (e.g., closed-head 
injury from a car accident) or a penetrating force 
(e.g., open-head injury from a bullet wound).
tremor a purposeless involuntary movement that is os-
cillatory and rhythmic.
trigeminal ganglia on the sensory root of cranial nerve 
V in a cleft within the dura mater; gives off ophthal-
mic and maxillary nerves and is part of the mandibu-
lar nerve branch.
triplegia paralysis of an upper and a lower extremity 
and of the face or of both extremities on one side 
and one on the other.
uncus the hooked extremity of the hippocampal gyrus.
unilateral initiated from or affecting structures on only 
one side of the body.
unilateral inattention a subtle form of neglect syndrome 
characterized by the failure to recognize a side of the 
body and the space around it.
unilateral innervation indicating that the nerve supply 
to a particular structure comes from only one side of 
the body (may be ipsilateral or contralateral), as op-
posed to bilateral innervation, in which nerve fibers 
are distributed from both sides of the body.
unilateral upper motor neuron dysarthria A motor 
speech disorder primarily caused by unilateral 
damage to the upper motor neurons that carry 
impulses to the cranial nerves that innervate the 
speech musculature; the most affected speech pa-
rameter is ­articulation.
upper motor neurons Nerves connecting cortical mo-
tor areas with cranial and spinal nerves; composed of 
the direct activation pathway (DAP) and the indirect 
activation pathway (IAP), the DAP functions for di-
rect voluntary and skilled movements, whereas the 
IAP functions to control posture, tone, and move-
ments that support voluntary movements.
ventral toward the belly or abdomen; opposite of dorsal.
ventricular system cavities that contain cerebrospinal 
fluid produced by the choroid plexus located in each 
ventricle; the system consists of lateral ventricles and 
a third and fourth ventricle; connected by foramen 
and the aqueduct of Sylvius; found in the deepest ar-
eas of the brain.
vertebral artery supplies the brainstem and cerebellum; 
from the anterior and posterior spinal arteries to the 
spinal cord and a branch called the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery.
vesicle a blister or bladder; the intracellular bladder is 
believed to be filled with neurotransmitter substances.
vestibulospinal tracts nerve fiber tracts that mediate 
cerebellar and vestibular influences on the spinal 
cord; facilitate reflexes and control muscle tone.
visual agnosia the inability to recognize objects by sight, 
usually caused by damage to the visual association 
area of the central nervous system.
volitional voluntary.
Wernicke’s aphasia an acquired adult language disorder 
characterized by impaired comprehension, and flu-
ent, paraphasic language; the patient is free of hemi-
plegia, and the lesion usually is in the temporal lobe.
Wernicke’s area a major speech-language center in the 
dominant temporal lobe; important for comprehen-
sion of language.
white matter substance of the brain and spinal cord con-
sisting of myelinated fibers and containing no neu-
ronal cell bodies or synapses; in a freshly sectioned 
brain it glistens white because of the high content of 
lipid-rich myelin; also called the fimbria.
x-ray radiograph; film produced by radiographic imaging.

313
Index
A
Abducens, 142
Abduction, cranial nerves and, 142, 143f
Absolute refractory period, 83
Abuse, language impairment and, 283
Acalculia, 24
Acceleration-deceleration injury, 225
Acetylcholine, 83–85, 125, 164–165
Acoustic neuroma, 146
Acoustic-vestibular nerve (cranial nerve VIII), 
146–148
Action potential, 82–83, 82f, 84f
Action tremor, 129–130, 131b
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 16
Adequate stimulus, 81
Adiadochokinesia, 134
Afferent fibers, 46, 49–50
Afferent pathways, of central auditory system, 
98f
Agnosias, 24
auditory, 95t, 99
defined, 94
Gerstmann syndrome, 95t
parietal lobe and, 62
Sigmund Freud and, 5
tactile, 95t, 103
types of, 95t
visual, 95t, 108–109
Agraphia, 219t, 220
Akathisia, 131, 131b
Akinesia, 129
Alar plate, 238–239
Albert, Martin L., 4
Alcohol, 276
Alexia, 219–220, 219t
with agraphia, 24
Allocortex, 31, 240. see also Neocortex
Alpha motor neuron (AMN), 123–125
Alzheimer’s disease, 223, 224t
American Sign Language, 14
American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association (ASHA), 2, 279
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 2
Amygdala, 33, 50
Amyloid plaques, 223–224
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 165–166, 166b
Analgesia, 103
Anarthria, developmental, 259
Anastomosis, 75
Anesthesia, 29, 103
Aneurysm, 208f, 209
Angular gyrus, 24, 192, 192t
Anion, 80–81
Anisotropic, defined, 67–68
Annulospiral endings, 125
Anomia, 24, 213
Anomic aphasia, 213
Anosognosia, 222
Ansa cervicalis, 150
Anterior, defined, 7
Anterior (ventral) horn cells, 45–46
Anterior lobe, 131–132, 132f
Anterior spinothalamic tract, 100–101, 101f
Anterograde degeneration, 90
Anterograde transport, 17–18, 75, 76f
Aphasias, 207–218. see also specific aphasias
Broca’s, 22
cerebrovascular accident and, 208–209
classification of, 210–215
Boston system, 210–215
dichotomous, 210
Aphasias (Continued)
conduction, 26
diagnostic testing for, 7
etiology of, 207–210, 207f
intervention for, 215
language functions of, 216t
localization of, 215b
neoplasms and, 209–210
neuropathology of, 207–210, 207f
pharmacology in, 216
primary progressive, 216–218, 217f, 218t
speech-language pathologist and, 215–216
subcortical, 194
testing for, 215
Wernicke’s, 24
Aphasic agraphia, 220
Aphasic alexia, 219t, 220
Aphemia, 177
Apoptosis, 242
Apraxia of speech (AOS), 176t, 177–179
childhood, 264–266
defined, 137b–138b
developmental, 259
Apraxias, 113, 175–176, 176t, 177b. see also 
specific apraxias
dysarthria vs., 259t
Hugo Liepmann and, 5
Aprosodia, 222
Aqueduct of Sylvius, 52
Arachnoid granulations, 51
Arachnoid mater, 51, 54f
Arachnoid villus, 55f
Archicortex, 31, 240. see also Allocortex; 
Neocortex
Arcuate fasciculus, 26, 27f, 28t, 192, 192t
Areflexia, 122
Arterial spin labeling (ASL), 70b
Arteriosclerosis, 208
Arteriovenous malformation (AVM), 208f, 209
Articulation, 163
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 166
and ataxic dysarthria, 173
and chorea, 171
and dystonia and athetosis, 172
and flaccid dysarthria, 164
and multiple sclerosis, 175
and parkinsonism, 169
and Shy-Drager syndrome, 175
and spastic dysarthria, 163
Articulatory undershoot, 169
ASD. see Autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Asomatognosia, 62
Asperger’s syndrome, 283
Association cortices, 30–31
categories of, 30–31, 31b
sensory, 94
Association fiber tracts, 5
Association fibers, 25–26, 26f, 28t
Astereognosis, 103
Astrocytes, 18, 19b
Asymmetric tonic neck reflex (ATNR), 246f, 247
Asymmetry, 4–5
Asynergia, 132
Asynergy, 132
Ataxia, 134, 134t
Ataxic cerebral palsy, 263, 263t
Ataxic dysarthria, 37, 134, 173, 174b
Atherosclerosis, 208
Athetoid cerebral palsy, 262–263, 262t–263t
Athetosis, 130, 131b, 167b, 171–172
Atopognosis, 103
Atrophy, 121–122
Attention, 197, 199b
traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 287
Audition, 95
Auditory agnosia, 95t, 99
Auditory association cortices, 94
Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs), 69, 99
Auditory nerve (cranial nerve VIII), 95, 97–98
Auditory sentence processing, neurocognitive 
model of, 191f
Autism, 283
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 283–285, 
284t, 285b
Autonomic nervous system, 19–20, 48–50
Axon, 16, 75, 76f
Axon hillock, 16, 75
Axon terminals (boutons), 17, 75
Axonal regeneration, 90
Axonal transport, 75, 76f
Axoplasm, 17–18, 75
Axoplasmic transport, 17–18
B
Babinski, Joseph, 222
Babinski sign, 121
Basal ganglia (basal nuclei), 19, 34–35, 
127–131, 128b
nomenclature of, 128t
structures of, 35f–36f
Basal ganglia lesions, 167–173, 167b
chorea, 170–171
dystonia and athetosis, 171–172
hyperkinetic dysarthria, 170
parkinsonism, 167–170
pathologic tremor, 170
tardive dyskinesia, 172–173
Basal plate, 238–239
Basilar artery, 58
Basilar membrane, 96
Basis, 37
Begley, Sharon, 201–202
Behavioral neurology, 3
Bell’s palsy, 178t
Bilateral innervation, 118
Bilateral speech motor control, 59–60
Bilateral symmetry, 118–119
Bilateral tactile aphasia, 103
Bilingualism, 278–279, 278t
Bilipid membrane, 16
Bipolar cells, 75, 76f
Bite reflex, 254
Blood supply, of brain, 56–58, 57f
Blood-brain barrier, 18
Body sway test, 103–104
Border zone, transcortical aphasia of, 212–213, 
215b
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Exam, 210
Boston system, aphasia classification, 210–215
Bouillaud, Jean, 277
Boutons (axon terminals), 17, 75
Brachium conjunctivum, 133
Brachium pontis, 133
Bradykinesia, 167–168
Brain
axes of, 10f
blood supply of, 56–58, 57f
cerebrospinal fluid and, 53–56
changing of, 199–203
connectivity, 183
damaged, recovery in, 201–203
Note: Page numbers followed by “b,” “t,” and “f ” refer to boxes, tables, and figures respectively.

INDEX
314
Brain (Continued)
development of, 234–255, 254b–255b
critical periods of, 244, 245t
dynamic or functional imaging of, 66–67
growth of pediatric, 273–275, 273t
differential, 273–274
meninges and, 50–52
myelination and, 274–275
neoplasms of, aphasia and, 209–210
neurogenesis and, 200
neuroplasticity and, 200
normal versus hydrocephalic, 56f
protection and nourishment of, 50–58
reflexes, speech development and, 257–259
static imaging of, 63–66
structure of, 55f
traumatic injury to, 225–226
tumors of, 18
ventricle development and, 240
ventricular system of, 52
waves, 186–189, 186f
weight, 273, 273t
Brain science, 4–7
Brainstem, 20, 37–38, 37f
auditory system and, 98
centers for tone and posture, 115–116
cranial nerves and, 49f
differential growth and, 273
interior view of, 46f
internal anatomy of, 37–38, 38f
Brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER), 
69
Branchial cranial nerves, 141, 144–145
Broca, Pierre Paul, 4–5, 5b, 20, 32, 189
Broca’s aphasia, 210–211
causes of, 61, 61f
computed tomography scans of, 211f
Broca’s area, 14, 60f, 113
in central language mechanism model,  
192t
language and, 191–192
location and function of, 22
as motor association area, 30
perisylvian cortical regions in, 190f
Brodmann, Korbinian, 20
Brodmann’s area, 112
C
Calcarine sulcus, 25
Calcium ions, 80–81
Carbidopa, 87, 168
Cations, 80–81
Cauda equinus, 240
Caudal orbitofrontal cortex, 33
Caudate nucleus (CN), 127
CDD. see Childhood disintegrative disorder 
(CDD).
Cell body (soma), 75
Cell respiration, 16
Cellular potential, 81–83
Central alexia, 219–220
Central nervous system, 14–15, 20–42. see also 
Brain; Spinal cord
cerebral connections of, 25–29, 26f
cortical divisions of, 20–25, 21f
location of, 45f
other structures of, 33
regeneration of, 91–92
specific cortical areas of, 29
structure of, 20f
Central pattern generator, 157
Central sulcus, 21, 61
Cephalic (superior), 7
Cerebellar artery, superior, 58
Cerebellar system, 131–135
Cerebellopontine angle, 97–98
Cerebellum, 37, 37f
anatomy of, 131–133, 132f
ataxic dysarthria and, 173, 174b
clinical signs of dysfunction of, 133–135
differential growth of, 273
dysfunction signs and tests of, 134t
longitudinal zones and deep nuclei of, 132
major pathways of, 133f
peduncles and pathways and, 132–133
role in speech, 133
Cerebral aneurysm, 208f, 209
Cerebral angiography, 69
Cerebral aqueduct, 52
Cerebral arterial circle. see Circle of Willis.
Cerebral arteries, 57, 57f
anterior, 58
branches of, 207f
middle, 58, 58f
Cerebral asymmetry, 277f
Cerebral cortex, neuronal migration in, 
242–244
Cerebral hemispheres, 20–21, 58f, 61f, 240
Cerebral lobes, 20–25
frontal lobe, 21–24, 23f
occipital lobe, 25
parietal lobe, 24
temporal lobe, 24–25
Cerebral palsy, 260–263
ataxic, 263, 263t
athetoid, 262–263, 263t
causes of, 261b
children with, 260–261
classification of, 260t
spastic, 261–262, 263t
Cerebral peduncles, 38
Cerebral plasticity, 6, 275–278
Cerebrospinal fluid, 53–56, 55f
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
aphasia and, 208–209
hemorrhage and, 209
myoclonus and, 130
neuronal loss and, 90
occlusive mechanisms of, 208–209
Cerebrum, 20, 37f
Certification standards, of ASHA, 2
Channel proteins, 78b, 79f
Charcot, Jean, 6
Chemical messengers, in central nervous 
system, 88b
Chemical synaptic transmission, 83–85
Chemical transmission, in motor system, 87–88
Chemical-gated channels, 79
Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), 176t, 
264–266
assessment and treatment of, 265–266, 266b
pathophysiology of, 264–265
Childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD), 283
Childhood dysarthria, 259
Childhood language disorders, 279–283
Childhood suprabulbar palsy, congenital, 263
Childhood suprabulbar paresis, 263, 263b
Chimpanzees, oral speech and, 14
Chloride ions, 80–81
Chomsky, Noam, 3, 3b
Chorda tympani, 144
Chorea, 130, 131b, 167b, 170–171
Choreiform, 172
Choroid plexus, 18, 52, 55f
Chromatolysis, 90
Chromosomes, 15
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), 
228–229
Cingulate gyrus, 33
Cingulum bundle, 28t
Circle of Willis, 57–58, 57f
Circuits, 186–190
Circumlocution, 213
“Clasp knife” reaction, 120
Clinical neurology, 5
Clinical speech syndromes, pediatric, 256–271
case study on, 270b
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 269b
Clonus, 121
Closed control system, 135–138
Cochlea, 95, 96f
Cochlear duct, 96, 97f
Cochlear nerve, 146, 147f
Code switching, 278
Cognition, 196–199, 199b
Cognitive-communicative disorders, 220–231
acute confusional states and, 224–225
chronic traumatic encephalopathy and, 
228–229
dementia and, 223–224, 224t
right hemisphere damage and, 221–223, 221b
speech-language pathologist (SLP) in, 
229–231, 229b–230b
traumatic brain injury and, 225–226, 227t
mild, 226–228
Cognitive-linguistic disorders. see Cognitive-
communicative disorders.
Cogwheel rigidity, 167–168
Collateral branches, 16
Collicular pathway, 106
Colliculi, 37
Color agnosia, 108
Commissural fibers, 26–27, 26f. see also Corpus 
callosum
Commissurotomy, 27–28
Communicating artery, 57
Communication, cognition in, 196–199
Complex receptive fields, 106
Compound bilingualism, 278, 278t
Computed tomography (CT), 5, 63, 64f
Concentration gradient, 78
ionic, 78–80, 79f
Conduction aphasia, 26, 212
Cones, 104–105
Confabulation, 225
Confusional states, acute, 224–225
Congenital abnormalities, 244
Congenital childhood suprabulbar palsy, 263
Congenital facial diplegia, 163–164
Connection, power of, 189
Connectome, 183
Constraint-induced therapy (CIT), 201
Constructional disturbances, 62
Contralateral innervation, 118–119
Contralateral motor control, 59, 59f, 115
Contralateral neglect, 62
Contrecoup damage, 225
Convergence. see Synaptic convergence.
Coordinated bilingualism, 278, 278t
Corona radiata, 115
Coronal (frontal) sections, 9b
Corpus callosum, 20, 26–27, 27f, 274, 275f
agenesis of, 274
of central language mechanism model, 192t
Corpus quadrigemina, 37
Corpus striatum, 34, 127
Cortex
development of, 240, 242f
differential growth of, 273
organization of, 61–63, 61f–62f, 235
Cortical deafness, 24
Cortical dementias, 223–224
Cortical localization maps, 20, 21f–22f
Cortical motor speech association areas, 30
Cortical neuron, 186
Cortical structures, embryology of, 240, 
241f–242f

INDEX
315
Cortical-like tissue, 31–32
Corticobulbar fibers, 25
Corticonuclear fibers, 116
Corticonuclear tract, 116, 117f
cranial nerves and, 119t, 142
Corticopontine fibers, 25
Corticopontine tract, 115
Corticospinal tract, 114–116, 114f, 117f
Babinski sign and, 121
spastic dysarthria and, 162–163
Cough reflex, 157
Cranial (superior), 7
Cranial nerves, 48, 140–159, 141t
auditory system and, 97–98
brain development and, 237f
brainstem and, 46f
case study for, 159b
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 158b
corticonuclear fibers and, 116
instrumental measurement of strength of, 
152
integration of V, VII, IX, X, and XII, 258–259
location of, 49f
as lower motor neurons, 117
myelin and, 83
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
oral sensation and, 104t
origin of, 141–142
embryologic, 141–142
names and numbers of, 141
smell, vision and, 142
speech and hearing and, 143–152
summary of function for oral musculature, 
152t–154t
and swallowing, 152–159
tongue and, 104f
Cricopharyngeus, 154–155
Critical period, 276
Crus cerebri, 38
CT perfusion (CTP), 70b
Cytoarchitecture of brain, 19
Cytoplasm, 15–16
Cytoskeleton, 16
D
Decade of the Brain, 2
Declarative memory, 197–198
Decomposition of movement, 134
Decussation, 115
Deductive reasoning, 198
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), for 
parkinsonism, 168
Deep dyslexia, 220
Degeneration, 90
Deglutition. see also Swallowing
assessing, 257–259
Dejerine, Joseph, 5, 192, 219
Dementia, 168, 170, 223–224
Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT), 223, 
224t
Demyelinating diseases, 83
Dendrites, 16, 75
of neocortex, 185–186
Dendritic spine, 16
Denervation, 121
Denial, 221–222
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 15, 15f
Depolarization, 81
Dermatomes, 47–48, 47f, 103
Developmental delay
causal factors of, and accompanying 
syndromes, 282t
in children, language characteristics of, 282t
Developmental language impairments, familial 
nature of, 280
Developmental motor speech disorders, 
259–264, 259t. see also Cerebral palsy
Diaphragma sella, 51
Dichotic listening tasks, 278
Dichotomous classification, of aphasia, 210
Diencephalon, structure of, 33, 34f
Diffuse axonal injury (DAI), 225–226
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 67–68
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), 66, 67f
Digestion, 49
Diplegia, spastic, 261
Diplopia, 142
Direct activation pathway, 116–117
Directions, anatomic, 7, 8f–10f, 9b
Discrimination, two-point, 101t, 103
Disorders, differences vs., 279
“Disseminated sclerosis,” 6
DIVA (Directions into Velocities of Articulators) 
model, 136f
Divergence. see Synaptic divergence.
Dopamine, 168
Dopaminergic neurons, 87
Dorsal, defined, 7
Dorsal column pathway, 101
Dorsal columns, 101–102, 102f
Dorsal nucleus, 148
Dorsal pathways, of language, 193
Dorsal root ganglion, 101–102
Duchenne dystrophy, 263–264
Dura mater, 50, 54f
Dynamic brain imaging, 66–67
Dynamic Evaluation of Motor Speech Skill 
(DEMSS), 266
Dysarthrias, 6–7, 161
apraxia vs., 259t
cerebellar dysfunction and, 134, 134t
developmental, 259
distribution of, 161f
neurologic diseases associated with, 178t
Dysdiadochokinesia, 134
Dysfluency, 169
Dyskinesia, 129, 131b
Dyskinetic dysarthrias, 167–173
Dyslexias, 220, 287
Dysmetria, 134
Dysphagia
and chorea, 171
and spastic dysarthria, 163
Dyssynergia, 132
Dystonia, 130, 131b, 167b, 171–172
Dystonia musculorum deformans, 130
E
Ear, three divisions of, 95f
Ear advantage, 278
Eardrum, 95
Echolalia, 213
Ectoderm, 235
Edrophonium, 88
Efferent fibers, 45–46, 49–50
Eisenson, Jon, 6
Electrical cortical stimulation, 6
Electrical forces, 80–81
Electrical synapses, 88–89
Electroencephalography (EEG), 68
Emboli, 208f, 209
Embryo, 235
Encephalon, 20. see also Brain
Encephalopathy, traumatic, chronic, 228–229
Endocrine system, 50
Endoderm, 235
Endolymph, 96
Endoplasmic reticulum, 15–16
Enteric nervous system, 49
Entorhinal area, 33
Ependyma, 52
Ependymal cells, 18, 19b
Epilepsy, children with, language impairment 
in, 280–281
Epithalamus, 34, 34f
Equilibrium, 94
Essential tremor, 170
Event-related potentials (ERPs), 68
Evoked potentials, 68–69
Excess and equal stress, 173, 175
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 77, 85
Executive functions, 198–199, 199b
Explicit memory, 197–198
Explosive speech, 173
Expressive aphasia, 5, 61
Extensor plantar sign, 121
Exteroceptors, 94
Extinction, 222
Extrafusal fibers, 123–125
Extralinguistic deficits, 221b
Extrapyramidal system
corticospinal tract and, 115
hyperkinetic dysarthria and, 170
indirect activation pathway of, 123
spastic dysarthria and, 162–163
tardive dyskinesia and, 172
Eyes, 145b
F
Face, 104, 104t
Facial (tardive) dyskinesia, 130–131, 131b
Facial nerve (cranial nerve VII)
anatomy of, 144–145
facial paralysis and, 119f, 146, 146f
function of, 145
and inner ear, 147f
innervation, 145
mastication and, 257–258
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
overview of, 144–146
peripheral nervous system and, 45
taste and, 152–154
testing of, 145–146
Falx cerebelli, 51
Falx cerebri, 51, 53f
Fasciculations, 164
Fasciculus, 25–26, 27f, 101–102
Fast twitch fibers, 125
Feedback, 135
Feedforward, 136
Feeding, modified, 257–259
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 287
Fetal period, 235
Fiber-optic endoscopic examination for 
swallowing (FEES), 157–158, 158f
Fight-or-flight system. see Sympathetic nervous 
system.
Fimbria, 32
Fissure, 20. see also Sulcus
Flaccid dysarthria, 163–165, 165b
Flaccid paralysis, 121
Flaccidity, 134
Flocculi, 132
Flocculonodular lobe, 132, 132f
“Flower spray” endings, 125
Fluency, disorders of, 267–270
Focal cortical dementias, 223
Focal lesions, 207–208
Foramen magnum, 50
Foramen of Magendie, 52, 55f
Foramen of Munro, 52
Foramina, 48
Foramina of Luschka, 52, 55f
Forebrain, 240
Forehead, 145b
Form perception, 101t
Fornix, 32, 32f

INDEX
316
Fovea centralis, 105
Fractional anisotropy (FA), 67–68
Fragile X, 287
Fragmentary (focal) dystonias, 130
Freud, Sigmund, 94
Fricatives, 164
Friedreich’s ataxia, 173
Frog-leg position, 122f
Frontal alexia, 219t
Frontal lobe, 21–24, 23f
Frontal operculum, 30
Frontal (coronal) sections, 9b
Fronto-occipital fasciculus (FOF), 26, 27f, 28t
Frontotemporal dementias (FTD), 223
Functional brain imaging, 66–67
Functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), 66
G
Gag reflex, 149, 254–255, 254f
Galant reflex, 249, 251f
Galanthamine, 216
Gamma motor neurons (GMNs), 126
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 85–86, 128
Ganglia, defined, 14–15
Gap junctions, 88–89
Gated channels, 79
General senses, 94
Generator potentials, 81–82
Genioglossus, 150
Genome, human, 15
Gerstmann syndrome, 95t
Geschwind, Norman
model of, 189
studies of, 3, 3b
Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome, 178t
Glia-guided locomotion, 242–243, 243f
Glial cells, 18
Glial scar, 91
Glioma, 209–210
Gliosis, 208
Global aphasia, 212
Globus pallidus (GP), 127, 286
Glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX)
anatomy of, 148
function of, 148
innervation of, 148
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
oral sensation and, 104, 104t
overview of, 148
peripheral nervous system and, 45
and swallowing, 157
testing of, 148
Glottal coup, 149–150
Glutamatergic neurons, 87
Golgi apparatus, 15–16
Golgi tendon organs, 126–127
Goodglass, Harold, 4
Gowers, William, 6
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), 86
Graceful degradation, 188
Graded potentials, 77, 81–82
Gradient, concentration, 78
Gray matter, 19
Growth cone, 244
Gyri, 20, 240. see also specific gyri
Gyrus cinguli, 33
H
Habenular nuclei, 34
Handedness, 60, 277
Head, Henry, 5, 215
Hearing
loss of, 287
sense of, 95–99
Helicotrema, 96
Helm-Estabrooks, Nancy, 4
Hemianopsia, 108
Hemiballismus, 131, 131b, 178t
Hemiparalysis, 120
Hemiplegia, 120
spastic, 261
Hemisphere competition theory of stuttering, 6
Hemorrhage, 209
Heschl’s gyrus, 24, 29, 98
differential growth of, 273
pure word deafness and, 99
Hesitations, 267
Hillock, 75
Hippocampal gyrus, 32, 32f
Hippocampus, 286
Homeostasis, 50
Homunculus, 21–22, 23f
Horizontal plane, 9b
Human communication nervous system, 14–20, 
69–70
foundations of, 14–19
organization of, 19–20, 20f
Human Connectome Project, 67–68
Human genome, 15
Huntington’s chorea, 130, 170
Hydrocephalus, 54, 56f
Hyoglossus, 151
Hyperalgesia, 103
Hyperesthesia, 103
Hyperkinesia, 129
Hyperkinetic dysarthria, 167b, 170
Hypernasality, 162, 164, 166, 170–172
Hyperpolarization, 82
Hyperreflexia, 120–121
Hypertonia, 120
Hypoalgesia, 103
Hypoesthesia, 103
Hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII), 150–152
anatomy of, 150
function of, 151
innervation of, 151
mastication and, 258
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
and swallowing, 155
testing of, 151–152
Hypoglossal nucleus, 150
Hypokinesia, 129
Hypokinetic dysarthria, 167–170, 167b
etiology of, 167
neurologic characteristics of, 167–168, 168f
and oral musculature, 168–169
speech characteristics of, 169
and swallowing, 169–170
Hyporeflexia, 122
Hypothalamus, 34, 34f, 50
Hypotonia, 121, 122f, 134, 134t
Hypoxia, 130
I
Ideational apraxia, 176t
Ideomotor apraxia, 176t
Imaging planes, relation to brain, 65f
Implicit memory, 197–198
Inattention, 221–222
Indirect activation pathway, 115, 116t, 123
Individual Disability Education Act (IDEA), 2
Induction, 235
Inductive reasoning, 198
Infantile oral reflexes, 252t
Infarction, 208
Inferior, defined, 7
Inferior cerebellar peduncle, 133
Inferior longitudinal fasciculus, 26, 27f, 28t
Information processing, 197, 199b
models of, 189–190
Inhibition, presynaptic, 185, 186b
Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), 77, 
85–86
Innateness, Noam Chomsky and, 3
Inner ear, 95f, 147f
Innervation, 14–15, 118
Input fibers, 183
Insula, 25, 50, 113–114
Integration, visual, 107, 107f
Intellectual disability
causal factors of, and accompanying 
syndromes, 282t
language impairment in children with, 
281–283
Intention tremor, 130, 131b
Internal capsule, 35, 59f, 241f
Internal carotid arteries, 57–58
Internuncial neurons, 142
Interoceptors, 94
Interstitial fluid, 78
Intervertebral foramina, 46
Intrafusal fibers, 125
Intraventricular foramen, 52
Intrinsic microcircuitry, 277
Intrinsic neurons (interneurons), 183
Ions, 80–81. see also Concentration gradient
Ipsilateral motor control, 59, 60f
Irritability, defined, 81
Ischemia, 208
Island of Reil, 25
Isocortex, 31. see also Neocortex
Isotropic, defined, 67–68
Isthmus, 33
J
Jackson, Hughlings, 112
Jaws, 143
Judgment, traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Jugular ganglia, 45
K
Kaplan, Edith, 4
L
Labyrinthine artery, 58
Lacrimal nucleus, 144
Laminar organization, 184, 185t
Landau-Kleffner syndrome, 281
Language, 189–190
adult disorders of, 206–233, 229b–230b, 231f
angular gyrus and, 192
arcuate fasciculus and, 192
Broca’s area and, 191–192
central language mechanism
learning and, 181–205, 202b–203b
model of, major components of, 192t
cerebral dominance and, 276–278
cerebral plasticity and, 275–276
childhood disorders, 279–283
cognition and, 196–199
cortical organization and, 61f
disorder, 279
pediatric, 272–290, 287b–288b
early models of, 5–6
impairment, 279–280
in children with epilepsy, 280–281
in children with intellectual disability, 
281–283
in neglected and abused children, 283
neural basis of, 280
left hemisphere injuries and, 60
mechanisms of, subcortical, 194
myelination for, 274–275
neurologic substrates of, 190–199
Noam Chomsky and, 3, 3b
non-thalamic subcortical lesions and, 195
parietal lobe and, 24

INDEX
317
Language (Continued)
perisylvian zone and, 190–191
right hemisphere and, 195–196
structures involved with, 192–194, 193f
supramarginal gyrus and, 192
thalamic lesions and, 194–195
Wernicke’s area and, 191–192
Language dominance, 274
Larynx, 104t, 145, 148–149, 176
Lateral corticospinal tract, 115
Lateral spinothalamic tract, 100, 101f
Lateral sulcus, 21
Lateralization, language, 276–277
l-dopa, 87, 168
Learning, 186–187
traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Lee Silverman Voice Therapy (LSVT), 168
Lemniscus, 100
Lenneberg, Eric, 4, 6, 273
Lenticular nucleus, 34
Lentiform, 34
Lesion, 46–47
Levodopa, 168
Liepmann, Hugo, 176
Ligand-sensitive channels, 79
Light touch, 103
Limb position, 103
Limbic lobe, 32
Limbic system, 31, 32f
limbic and paralimbic structures in, 32–33, 32f
Lissauer’s tract, 100
Lobes, 20. see also specific lobes
Local potentials, 81–82
Localization of function, concept of, 5
Logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA), 217
Long-term memory, 197–198
Lou Gehrig’s disease (amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis), 165, 166b
Lower motor neuron lesions, 163–165, 165b
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 165–166
and flaccid dysarthria, 163–165
and myasthenia gravis, 164–165, 165f
Lower motor neuron pathway, damage to, 117f
Lower motor neurons, 117–118
signs of disorders of, 120t
Luria, Alexander, 216
Lysosomes, 15–16
M
Macula, 105
Magnetic resonance angiography, 69
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 63–66, 
65f–66f
Magnetic resonance microscopy, 70b
Magnetic resonance perfusion (MRP), 70b
Magnetization transfer imaging, 70b
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 69
Magnum foramen, 39
Magnus, Rudolph, 244–246
Malnutrition, 276
Mammillary bodies, 34
Mandibular nerve, 143
Masseter, 143
Mastication, 143
assessing, 257–259
Maxillary nerve, 143
McBride, Katherine, 210
Mean diffusivity (MD), 67–68
Mechanicoreceptors, 104
Median plane, 9b
Medulla oblongata, 38, 39f
Meige syndrome, 130
Memory, 197–198, 199b
traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Meninges, 50–52, 51f–52f
development of, 240
Mesencephalon, 37
Mesocortex, 240
Mesoderm, 235
Messaging, neural, 81
Metabolic energy, 81
Metacognition, 198–199, 199b
Meyer’s loop, 106
Meynert, Theodore, 5
Microglia, 18, 19b
Microtubules, 16, 75
Midbrain, 37–38
Middle cerebellar peduncle, 133
Middle ear, 95f
Mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI), 226–228
Mitochondria, 16
Mitochondrial DNA, 16
Mitosis, 235
Mixed dementias, 224
Möbius syndrome, 163–164
Modified feeding, 257–259
Modiolus, 96
Monoloudness, 163
Moro reflex, 245f, 249–251
Morphology, 282t
Motor aphasia, 5, 210
transcortical, 213
Motor association areas, 30
Motor control, speech system and, 135
Motor endplate, 87–88
Motor fibers, 45–46
Motor planning, 112–114
Motor speech disorders, developmental, 
259–264, 259t
Motor strip, 21, 29, 60. see also Primary motor 
projection cortex
of central language mechanism model,  
192t
Motor systems, clinical speech syndromes of, 
160–180
case study on, 179b
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 178b
Motor unit, 117–118
Mouth, 145b
Multiple sclerosis, 6, 83, 174–175, 176b
associated neurologic characteristics with, 
174–175
etiology of, 174, 174f
speech characteristics of, 175
and swallowing, 175
Multipolar cells, 75, 76f
Muscle spindles, 124f, 125
Muscle stretch reflexes, 134
Muscle tone, 115–116
Muscular dystrophy, 122, 263–264
pseudohypertrophic, developmental 
dysarthria in, 264b
Myasthenia gravis, 88, 122, 164–165, 165f
Myelin, 16–17, 83
disorders of, 83
multiple sclerosis and, 174, 174f
neuron and, 85f
Myelin sheath
anterograde degeneration and, 90
axon structure and, 16–17, 18f, 85f
visual system and, 104–105
Myelination, pediatric brain, language and, 
274–275
Myelogenesis, 275
Myoclonus, 130, 131b
Myotomes, 47–48, 48b
Myotrophic factors, 125
N
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), 68
Necrose, 91
Neglect
language development and, 283
right hemisphere damage and, 221–222
Neocerebellum, 132
Neocortex, 31, 182–186
brain connectivity and, 183
dendrites and neurons of, 185
development of, 240
laminar organization of, 184, 185t
neural networks and, 182–183
spatial organization of, 183–184, 184f
synaptic connection of, 184–185, 186b
Neologisms, 211
Neoplasms, in brain, 209–210
Neostigmine, 88
Neostriatum, 35
Nerve cells, chemical makeup of, 15–16
Nerve growth factors, 17–18
Nervous system. see also Autonomic nervous 
system; Central nervous system; Peripheral 
nervous system
abnormal embryonic development of, 244
connections, 244
development of, 235–238
critical periods of, 244, 245t
early, 235–238, 236f
hierarchical organization in, 184f
neuronal function in, 74–92
neuronal migration in cerebral cortex, 
242–244
oral and pharyngeal reflexes and, 251–255
organization of, 13–73
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 41b–42b
spinal cord development and, 238–240, 239f
synopsis of clinical information for, 70b–71b
Neural activity, measures of timing of, 68–69
Neural canal, 238–239
Neural connectivity, measures of, 67–68
Neural crest, 237
Neural messaging, 81
Neural networks, 182–183
Neural plate, 235
Neural transmission, process of, 77
Neural tube, 235, 236f
Neuraxis, 14–15
Neurodiagnostic studies, in speech and 
language, 63–70
Neurofibrillary tangles, 223–224
Neurofilaments, 16–17, 75
Neurogenesis, 200
Neuroglia, 18–19, 19b
Neuroimaging
studies, findings from, 267–270, 268t
summary of, 69
technologies for, 70b
Neurolinguistics, 267t, 269b
Neurologic organization, 59–63
Neurology, speech-language, 1–12
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 11b
directions and planes, 7, 8f–10f, 9b
early language models and, 5–6
modern times and, 6–7
reasons for studying, 2–3
recommendations for study of, 8–11
speech-language pathology as brain science 
and, 4–7
study of neurologic communication 
disorders and, 3–4
World War I and, 6
Neuromodulators, 77
Neuromuscular control, 123–127
Neuromuscular transmission, 87–88
Neuronal migration, in cerebral cortex, 
242–244

INDEX
318
Neurons, 15
action potential and, 82–83
cellular potential and, 81–83
chemical and electrical properties of, 77–78
degeneration and regeneration of, 90–92
electrical forces and, 80–81
function of, in nervous system, 74–92
graded potentials and, 81–82
hyperpolarization and, 82
ionic concentration gradients and, 78–80
myelin and, 83
of neocortex, 185–186
neural messaging and, 81
physiology of, 75–81
principles of operation of, 89–92
structure and function of, 16–18, 17f
synapse and, 83–89
synopsis of clinical information for, 91b–92b
types of, 76f
visual system and, 104–105
Neuropathology
of cortical dementias, 223–224
of traumatic brain injury, 225–226
Neuroplasticity, 200
Neuropores, 237
Neuroprogenitor cells, 236
Neurosensory organization, 93–109
case study on, 109b
classification of, 94
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 108b
Neurotransmitters, 16, 86f, 87, 87t
Newborn, primitive reflexes of, 244
Nociceptors, 94
Nodes of Ranvier, 85f
Nodose ganglia, 45
Nonfluent progressive aphasia (NFPA), 217
Nongated channels, 79, 79f
Nonlinguistic deficits, 221b
Non-thalamic subcortical lesions, 195
Notochord, 235
Nucleolus, 15
Nucleotide, 15
Nucleus, 15
Nucleus accumbens, 34–35, 127
Nucleus ambiguous, 148, 157
Nucleus solitarius, 50, 145, 148, 157
Nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), 154
Nystagmus, 134, 134t
O
Obligatory response, 247
Occipital alexia, 219
Occipital lobe, 25, 61–62
Occlusive mechanisms, of cerebrovascular 
accident, 208–209
Ogle, William, 5
Oligodendrocytes, 18, 19b, 83
Olivopontocerebellar atrophy, 178t
Open control system, 135–138
Opercular gyri, 30
Ophthalmic artery, 58
Optic chiasma, 105, 142
Optic disk, 105
Optic nerve, 105–106, 105f, 142
Oral apraxia, 176t, 177b
Oral musculature
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and, 166
chorea and, 170
cranial nerves and, 152t–154t
flaccid dysarthria and, 164
hypokinetic dysarthria and, 168–169
parkinsonism and, 168–169
spastic dysarthria and, 163
Oral reflexes, 251–255
infantile, 252t
Oral sensation, 104, 104t
Oral sensory receptors, 104, 104f
Organ of Corti, 96, 98–99
Organelles, 15
Organizing processes, traumatic brain injury 
and, 227t
Orthograde transneuronal atrophy, 91
Orton, Samuel Terry, 6
Osmotic force, 78
Ossicular chain, 95
Outer ear, 95f
P
Pain and temperature, 103
Palate, 104t, 130, 149
Palatopharyngolaryngeal myoclonus, 178t
Paleocerebellum, 131–132
Paleocortex, 31
Palilalia, 169
Parahippocampal gyrus, 25, 30, 32–33, 32f
Paralimbic areas, 33
Parallel distributed processing (PDP), 187
Paralysis, 120
facial nerves and, 119f, 146, 146f
flaccid, 121
trigeminal nerve and, 144
upper versus lower motor neuron damage 
indicators and, 120
Paraphasia, 211
Paraplegia, spastic, 261
Parasympathetic nervous system, 49
Parasympathetic nuclei, 145
Paresis, 120
Paresthesia, 29
Parietal association cortex, 62f
Parietal lobe, 24, 62, 103
Parietal-temporal alexia, 219–220
Parkinsonism, 167–170, 167b
etiology of, 167
neurologic characteristics of, 167–168, 168f
and oral musculature, 168–169
speech characteristics of, 169
and swallowing, 169–170
Parkinson’s disease, 167
basal ganglia and, 129
death of dopaminergic cells and, 87
Golgi tendon organs and, 126
rest tremor and, 129
Pars compacta, 36
Pars opercularis, 191–192
Pars orbitalis, 61f, 191–192
Pars triangularis, 61f, 191–192
Pathologic myoclonus, 130
Pathologic tremor, 170
Peduncles, 132–133
cerebral, 38
Penfield, Wilder G., 6, 29
Perception, traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Periaqueductal gray matter, 50
Perikaryon, 16, 75
Perilymph, 96
Perinatal hypoxia, 276
Peripheral nervous system, 14–15, 45–48, 47f, 
83
embryology of, 238, 239f
Peristalsis, 49
Peristriate cortex, 106, 107b
Perisylvian zone, 22, 25, 25f
aphasias of, 215b
language and, 190–191, 190f
Pervasive developmental disorders (PDD), 283
Pharyngeal arches, 237
Pharyngeal reflexes, 251–255
Pharynx, 104t
Phasic tone, 115–116
Phenothiazines, 130
Phonation
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 166
and ataxic dysarthria, 173
and chorea, 170
and dystonia and athetosis, 171–172
and flaccid dysarthria, 164
and multiple sclerosis, 175
and parkinsonism, 169
and Shy-Drager syndrome, 175
and spastic dysarthria, 163
Phonemes, 190–191, 257
Phonologic alexia, 220
Phonologic processing disorders, 266
Phonology, 282t
Photoreceptors, 104–105
Phrenic nerves, 48
Physiologic (action) tremors, 129–130, 131b
Pia mater, 52, 54f
Pick’s disease, 223
Pinker, Steven, 4
Placodes, 45
Planes, anatomic, 7, 8f–10f, 9b
Planum temporale, 277, 277f
Plasticity. see Cerebral plasticity; Neuroplasticity.
Plates, 242
Plegia, 120
Plosives, 164
Polymodal association areas, 30
Polymodal association cortex, 31b
Polyneuritis, 178t
Pons, 38, 132–133
Pontine arteries, 58
Positive support reflex, 247–248, 248f
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans, 
66–67
Postcentral gyrus, 24
Posterior, defined, 7
Posterior alexia, 219
Posterior lobe, 132, 132f
Posterior root ganglion, 46
Postganglionic neuron, 49–50
Postsynaptic terminal, 83
Postural tone, 115–116
Posture, 115–116
Potassium ions, 79–80, 80f
Potential, cellular, 81–83
Pragmatics, 282t
Precentral gyrus, 21, 113
Preganglionic neuron, 49–50
Prematurity, 287
Premotor area, 29, 112–113
Presynaptic inhibition, 185, 186b
Presynaptic terminal, 83
Pretectal nuclei pathway, 106
Primary auditory receptor cortex, 29
Primary motor projection cortex, 29
Primary neurulation, 237–238
Primary olfactory cortex, 142
Primary olfactory receptor cortex, 29–36
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA), 216–218, 
217f, 218t
Primary sensory reception, 29
Primary somatosensory cortex, 29
Primary visual cortex, 106
Primary visual receptor cortex, 29
Primitive reflexes
diagnosis of neurologic disorder with, 
244–251
of newborn, 244, 246t
Primitive spinal cord, 237f
Principle eigenvector (PE), 67–68
Problem solving, 198, 199b
traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Procedural memory, 197–198
Processing, of language, 278
Progressive supranuclear palsy, 178t

INDEX
319
Projection fibers, 25, 26f
Projection neurons, 183
Propositional memory, 197–198
Proprioception
deficits of, 102
dorsal columns and, 101–102
flowchart of, 102f
human, 101t
pathways of, 101–102, 101t
Proprioceptors, 94
Prosodic deficits, 222–223
Prosody
and ataxic dysarthria, 173
and multiple sclerosis, 175
and parkinsonism, 169
and Shy-Drager syndrome, 175
Prosopagnosia, 108, 222
Protein pumps, 78b, 79f
Proteins, 15
Pseudobulbar palsy, 162–163
Pseudohypertrophy, 263–264
Pseudounipolar cell bodies, 45
Pseudounipolar cells, 75, 76f
Psycholinguistic classifications, 220
Pterygoids, 144
Ptosis, 142, 143f, 164–165, 165f
Pure word deafness, 99
Putamen, 127
Pyramidal cells, 19
Pyramidal tract, 21
bilateral symmetry and, 118
corticonuclear fibers and, 116
corticospinal tract and, 114
upper versus lower motor neuron and, 119
Q
Quadriplegia, spastic, 261–262
R
Rate disorder, 169
Readiness potential, 68
Reasoning, 198, 199b
traumatic brain injury and, 227t
Rebound, 134, 134t
Reception of speech, 192
Receptive aphasia, 5, 61
Receptive language, 282t
Receptor membrane, 83
Recovery from Aphasia, 6
Recurrent nerve, 148–149
Reeling gait, 134
Reflex arc, 40–41, 41f, 122
Reflexes, 40–42. see also Primitive reflexes. 
see also specific reflexes
brain and speech development and, 257–259
Refractory period, 83
Regeneration, 90–91
Reissner’s membrane, 96
Relative refractory period, 83
Repetitive myoclonus, 130
Resonance
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 166
and ataxic dysarthria, 173
and chorea, 170–171
and dystonia and athetosis, 172
and flaccid dysarthria, 164
and multiple sclerosis, 175
and parkinsonism, 169
and Shy-Drager syndrome, 175
and spastic dysarthria, 163
Rest tremors, 129, 131b
Restiform body, 133
Resting potential, 81
Resting tremor, 168f
Restless leg syndrome, 131
Reticulospinal tracts, 115
Retina, 104–105
Retinal fibers, 105
Retrograde degeneration, 90
Retrograde transneuronal degeneration, 91
Retrograde transport, 17–18, 75, 76f
Rett syndrome, 283
Rhinencephalon, 32
Ribosomes, 15–16
Right hemisphere, 195–196
damage of, communication disorders and, 
221–223, 221b
Rigidity, 167–168
Roberts, Lamar, 6
Rods, 104–105
Rolandic fissure, 21
Romberg test, 103–104
Rooting reflexes, 252–253, 253f
Rostral, defined, 7
Rubrospinal tracts, 115
S
Sagittal plane, 9b
“Saint Vitus’s dance,” 170
Salivary glands, sublingual, 145
Saltatory transmission, 83
Sarno, Martha Taylor, 7
Satellite cells, 18–19, 19b
Scalae, 96
Scanning, 6
Scanning speech, 6, 173
Scarpa’s ganglion, 146
Schwann cells, 18, 83, 90
“Scissors gait,” 261
Secondary association areas, 30
Secondary neurulation, 237–238
Secretomotor fibers, 148
Segmental rolling reflex, 248–249, 250f
Selective adductor denervation surgery 
(SLAD-R), 172
Selective engagement, 197
Semantic dementia (SD), 217
Semantic paraphasia, 211
Semantics, 282t
Sensation, somatic, 100–102, 100t
Sensory aphasia, 5, 210
transcortical, 213
Sensory association areas, 30
Sensory examination, 102–104
Sensory fibers, 46
Sensory language area. see Wernicke’s area.
Sensory set, 141
Sensory strip, 24
Septa, 50
Servomechanism control systems, 135
Servomechanism theory, 135–138
Sherrington, Charles, 45–46, 89, 94
Sherrington’s scheme, 94
Short-term memory, 197–198
Shy-Drager syndrome, 175, 176b
Simple receptive field cells, 106
Single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT), 67
Sinuses, 55f
Slow twitch (type I) fibers, 125
Smell, 94
cranial nerves and, 142
“Smell brain,” 32
Sodium ions, 78, 80f
Sodium-potassium pump, 79, 80f
Soma, 16, 75, 76f
Somal translocation, 242
Somatic, defined, 14–15
Somatic sensation, 100–102, 100t
Somatomotor set, 141
Somatosensory cortex, 24
Somesthetic sensations, 24
Somites, 47–48, 236–237, 236f
Somitic set, 141
Sound, impulse for, 24
Spasmodic dysphonia, 130, 171
Spastic cerebral palsy, 261–262, 263t
Spastic diplegia, 261
Spastic dysarthria, 60, 162–163, 162b
Spastic dysphonia, 171
Spastic hemiplegia, 261
Spastic paraplegia, 261
Spastic quadriplegia, 261–262
Spasticity, 120–121
Spatial organization, 183–184
Spatial organizational deficits, 222
Spatial summation, 77, 89, 185
Special senses, defined, 94
Specific language impairment (SLI), 279
Speech, neuromotor control of, 110–139
case study on, 138b
clinical information and applications, 
synopsis of, 137b–138b
Speech and Brain Mechanisms, 6
Speech development, 257–259
disorders of, 266–270, 267t
Speech impairment, 287
Speech mechanism, 104t
Speech motor control system, 135
Speech ontogeny, motor system in, 111–112
Speech production, versus limb and trunk 
movement, 111–112, 111b
Speech-language pathologist (SLP), 2, 207
in aphasia, 215–216
clinical information and applications for, 
229b–230b
in cognitive-communicative disorders, 229–231
in dementia, 224
Speech-language pathology
as brain science, 4–7
cerebral connections and, 25
cerebral lobes and, 20–21
CNS structures and, 33–34
limbic system and, 31
Spina bifida, 237–238, 238f
Spinal accessory nerve (cranial nerve XI), 150
Spinal cord
CNS structure and, 19, 20f
development of, 238–240, 239f
primitive, 237f
structure of, 39–42, 40f, 55f
Spinal nerves, 45–48, 47f, 115
Spinocerebellar pathways, 101
Spinocerebellar tract, 101
Spinothalamic tract, 100, 101f
Spiral ganglion, 96
Splenium, 108
Split-brain research, 27–29
Sprouting, 90
Staggering gait, 134
Static brain imaging, 63–66
Stereocilia, 97
Stereognosis, 103
Strain-strangle, 150
Stria medullaris, 34
Striate cortex, 106
Striated muscles, 125
Striatum, 35, 127
Stroke, and unilateral upper motor neuron 
dysarthria, 162
Stuttering, 6
Styloglossus, 151
Subarachnoid space, 51, 55f
Subcortical aphasia, 194, 213–215, 214f, 215b
Subcortical dementias, 224
Subcortical language mechanisms, 194
Subcortical lesions, 215f
non-thalamic, 195

INDEX
320
Subcortical nuclei, 19
Subcortical structures, embryology of, 240, 
241f–242f
Sublingual salivary glands, 145
Subordinated bilingualism, 278, 278t
Substantia nigra, 35, 127–128
Subthalamic nucleus, 35–36, 127–128
Subthalamus, 34, 34f
Suckling reflex, 253, 253f
Sulcus, 20, 240
Sulcus limitans, 239–240
Summation, 185
Superior, defined, 7
Superior cerebellar peduncle, 133
Superior colliculus, 106
Superior longitudinal fasciculus, 26, 27f, 28t
Supine, 247
Supplementary motor area, 22, 29, 112–113
Supramarginal gyrus, 24, 192, 192t
Supramodal association cortex, 31b
Surface dyslexia, 220
Swallowing
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 166
assessment of, 157–159, 158f
and chorea, 171
cranial nerves and, 152–159, 156f
dystonia and athetosis, 172
and flaccid dysarthria, 164
and multiple sclerosis, 175
and parkinsonism, 169–170
phases of, 152, 155b, 156f
and spastic dysarthria, 163
and unilateral upper motor neuron 
dysarthria, 162
Swallowing reflex, 253–254
Sydenham’s chorea, 167b, 170
Sylvian fissure, 21, 274
Symmetric tonic neck reflex, 245f, 247
Sympathetic nervous system, 49
Synapse, 75, 83–89
anterior horn cells and, 45–46
defined, 17
Synaptic cleft, 77, 83
Synaptic connection, patterns of, 184–185, 186b
Synaptic convergence, 89, 90b, 185, 186b
Synaptic divergence, 89, 90b, 184, 186b
Synaptic stabilization, 244
Synaptic vesicles, 85
Synergy, 132
Syntactic Structures, 3
Syntax, 282t
T
Tactile agnosia, 103
Tactile syndrome, 95t
Tangles, 223–224
Tardive dyskinesia, 130–131, 131b, 167b, 
172–173
Taste, 157
Taste buds, 144
Taste fibers, 144
Tectal pathway, 106
Tectorial membrane, 97
Tectum, 37
Tegmentum, 38
Telencephalon, 240
Temporal artery, 58f
Temporal lobe, 24–25, 62
Temporal loop, 106
Temporal sequencing, 99
Temporal summation, 77, 89, 185
Temporal visual cortex, 106, 107b
Tensilon test, 165, 165f
Tentorium cerebelli, 51, 53f
Teratology, 244
Terminal button, 75
Thalamic lesions, 194–195
Thalamic radiations, 29
Thalamic reticular nucleus, 195
Thalamocortical circuit, 129
Thalamus
blood supply to, 58
gray matter and, 19
primary sensory reception and, 29
structure of, 33–34, 34f
The Language Instinct, 7
Thromboembolic stroke, 208–209
Thrombus, 208
Tinnitus, 148
Tongue, 150
cranial nerves and, 144
ipsilateral motor control and, 59
oral sensation and, 104
paralysis of, 60f
sensory innervation of, 104, 104f, 104t
spastic dysarthria and, 163
unilateral paresis of, 151f
Tongue reflex, 254
Tonic labyrinthine reflex (TLR), 248, 249f
Tonotopic organization, 98–99
Topagnosia, 103
Tourette’s syndrome, 178t
Transcortical aphasia, 212–213
Transcranial Doppler, 69
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 196
Transient ischemic attack (TIA), 209
Transverse cut, 9b
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 225–226
assessment and treatment of, 226
cognitive impairment after, 227t
mild, 226–228
neurobehavioral effects of, 224t, 226
neuropathology of, 225–226
pediatric, 285–287
pathophysiology of, 285–286, 286b
research on outcome of, 286–287
Travis, Lee Edward, 6
Tremors, 129–130, 131b
cerebellar dysfunction and, 134
hyperkinetic dysarthria and, 167–168, 167b, 
168f
Trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V)
anatomy of, 143
function of, 143
innervation of, 143
mastication and, 258
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
oral sensation and, 104, 104t
overview of, 143–144
peripheral nervous system and, 45
sensory map of, 143f
swallowing and, 155
testing of, 143–144
Trophic factors, 91
Trophic support, 17–18
Two-point discrimination, 101t, 103
U
Uncinate fasciculus, 26, 27f, 28t
Uncus, 29–30, 33
Unilateral inattention, 222
Unilateral innervation, 118–119
Unilateral language mechanisms, 60, 60f
Unilateral paresis, of tongue, 151f
Unilateral upper motor neuron dysarthria, 162, 
162b
Unimodal association areas, 30
Unimodal association cortex, 31b
Unmyelinated fibers, 83
Upper motor neuron, 116–117
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and, 165–166
lesions of, 161–163, 162b
Upper motor neuron (Continued)
signs and symptoms of, 120–121
signs of disorders of, 120t
spastic dysarthria and, 162–163
unilateral upper motor neuron dysarthria 
and, 162
V
Vagus nerve (cranial nerve X), 45, 148–150
anatomy of, 148–149
function of, 149
innervation of, 149
oral musculature and, 152t–154t
and swallowing, 155
testing of, 149–150
Vascular imaging, 69
Venous sinuses, 50
Ventral, defined, 7
Ventral horn cells, 45–46
Ventral pathways, of language, 193–194
Ventricles, development of, 240
Ventricular system, 52, 55f
Verbal alexia, 219
Verbal paraphasia, 211
Vertebral artery, 58
Vesicles, 15–16
Vestibular membrane, 96
Vestibular nerve, and inner ear, 147f
Vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII), 
45, 146–148
Vestibulospinal tracts, 115
Vibratory sensation, 101t
Vibratory sensibility test, 103
Videofluoroscopy (VFS), 157
Vision, cranial nerves and, 142, 143f
Visual agnosia, 95t, 108–109
Visual association cortex, 106
Visual cortex, primary, 106
Visual integration, 107
Visual system, 104–105
defects of, 105f
Visual-perceptual deficits, 222
Visuospatial defects, 62
Volitional movements, 133–134
Voltage-gated channels, 79
Voltage-gated ligand-sensitive channels, 79
Voxel-based morphometry (VBM), 66
W
Wallerian degeneration, 90
Watershed area, 212–213
Weisenburg, Theodore, 210
Wepman, Joseph, 6
Wernicke, Carl, 5, 189
Wernicke’s aphasia, 61, 211–212
Wernicke’s area, 24
in central language mechanism model, 192t
language and, 191–192
location of, 60f
perisylvian cortical regions in, 191–192
West, Robert, 6
Western Aphasia Battery, 210
Westlake, Harold, 6
“What” visual system, 107
“Where” visual system, 107
White matter, 19, 32, 239–240
association pathways, location and function, 
28t
Word blindness, 219
Word deafness, 99
Word-finding difficulty (anomia), 24, 213
World War I, 6
World War II, 6
Z
Zona incerta, 34

