DOI:10.1111/nbfr.12686
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s
Meta-Theology
Oliver James Keenan OP
Abstract
Thomism is a contested category that exhibits considerable plasticity in
its application. An examination of the role played by such invocations
of proper names in contemporary theological discourse indicates the
importance of textual accessibility and engagement. The role played
by texts is examined in terms of an often-elided distinction between
‘intelligibility’ and ‘readability’, with the former aligned with proposi-
tional contents and the latter a more expansive attentiveness to the text’s
performative operations. The historical remoteness of Aquinas coupled
with the importation into theology of secularised reading strategies is
seen to have alienated the full readability of Aquinas’s texts. Acting
against Cartesian modes of reading, Cornelius Ernst’s re-performance
of Thomistic pedagogy as ‘engaged contemplation’ is concerned to en-
act a horizon of meaning within which Aquinas’s texts retain endur-
ing readability. This article develops Ernst’s Thomistic meta-theology
into an account of Thomism as ‘meta-reading’. On this account, au-
thentic Thomism involves the intentional cultivation of a total human
culture, within which the inherently theological discipline of textual
engagement exercises a quasi-liturgical function.
Keywords
Thomism, Cornelius Ernst, textuality, reading, fundamental theology
Proper names and their adjectival derivatives play an important constel-
lating role in contemporary theological discourse.1 By self-identifying
as a ‘Thomist’2— one committed to theologising ad mentem Thomae
Aquinatis—a theologian simultaneously indicates their belonging to a
1 Richard Rorty suggested that proceeding in terms of proper names rather than propo-
sitions differentiates ‘continental’ philosophy from analytic approaches, see: Contingency,
Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 81 fn 3.
2 On the complexities of Thomist self-identification, see: Robert E. Lauder, “On Being or
Not Being a Thomist,” The Thomist 55, no. 2 (1991): 301-19.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers

796
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
particular community of scholarship, their likely commitment to vari-
ous theological axioms, and the types of questions that they are likely
to accredit as dogmatically significant. Nonetheless, the parameters of
‘Thomism’ are historically conditioned and contingent upon the con-
texts in which they are invoked. The designation ‘Thomist’ embraces
diverse speculative and historical approaches, some Platonising and
others thoroughly Aristotelian,3 and is broad enough to cover (with-
out much controversy) thinkers as divergent as Garrigou-Lagrange, de
Lubac, Milbank and Rahner. The plasticity of ‘Thomism’ as a category
is indicated by its easy conjunction with other proper names or quali-
fiers (‘Wittgensteinian-Thomism’ being but one apposite example). In-
deed, the extent to which ‘Thomism’ implies commitment to partic-
ular dogmatic propositions is debated: for some, ‘Thomism’ implies
commitment to certain doctrinal principles that secure the integrity of
a theological worldview; for others, ‘Thomism’ is essentially a formal
principle, designating a habit of mind that balances the integrity of both
faith and reason. Yet this methodological commitment to the relation-
ship of faith and reason is one aspect of a broader account of grace as
perfecting nature. Consequently, form and content cannot be so easily
dissociated: content implies form, and vice versa.
In a discipline marked by increasing fragmentation and inescapable
politicisation, the use of such designations derived from proper
names—with their promise of a sense of theological kinship—risks
collapsing questions of truth into those of identity.4 In contrast to some
rather narrow understandings of Thomism, the intellectual tradition of
the English Dominican province has tended to emphasise the impor-
tance of Aquinas’s texts as providing a common theological grammar,
but the ‘Thomists’ that it has produced are far from a homogenous
group concerned to propagate a single definitive interpretation of the
Angelic Doctor’s thought. A common commitment to ‘Thomism’ has
fostered ongoing conversation and facilitated generative disagreement.
This article offers a reading of Cornelius Ernst’s proposed on-
tology of meaning as a contribution to an intellectual culture that
safeguards such an orientation to Aquinas’s texts. After arguing that
name-invocation within theological discourse ought to depend upon the
accessibility of a canon of texts, I propose a distinction between textual
intelligibility and readability. On this analysis, ‘readability’ concerns
the full performative efficacy of a text (understood in cultural-linguistic
and psycho-spiritual terms), whereas ‘intelligibility’ concerns the re-
construction and translation of its cognitive-propositional contents.
Cornelius Ernst’s proposed ontology of meaning is then read as an
attempt to secure the readability of Aquinas’s texts, through strategies
3 Giovanni Ventimiglia, Aquinas after Frege (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2020), 1-32.
4 Cf., Carl E Braaten and Robert W. Jenson, In One Body Through the Cross: The Prince-
ton Proposal for Christian Unity (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2003), 41-42.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
797
of reading that he describes as ‘engaged contemplation’ and ‘meta-
theology’. So, for Ernst, who had a notable suspicion of ‘Thomism’ as
a theological school,5 the true meaning of ‘Thomism’ can only be ren-
dered adverbially, as the convivial cultivation of a total human culture
within which Aquinas’s texts are rendered authentically readable.
Proper Names and the Readability of Texts
The tendency to invoke ‘Thomism’ is embedded within a much
broader strategy of name-invocation within contemporary theological
discourse, which is not unrelated to the popularity of genealogy as a
hermeneutical strategy.6 At least three factors contribute to the utility of
proper names. Firstly, contemporary theological curricula lack a com-
mon textual framework (as might once have been provided by Lom-
bard’s Sentences or even by Aquinas’s Summa Theologiae). Secondly
(and not entirely unrelatedly), there is a marked lack of consensus con-
cerning what constitutes a theological question (or, indeed, how the
truth of such questions ought to be judged). As a discipline, theology
is consequently marked by a methodological self-consciousness that
is not reducible to a function of the interrogation of its epistemologi-
cal foundations. Thirdly, within the contemporary academy, emerging
scholars face a pragmatic need to demonstrate the impact of their work
relative to identifiable and ongoing intellectual conversations.
A novice theologian is thus faced with an almost bewildering array
of competing texts and interpretative communities. The impossibility
of mastering such an enormous body of literature can be managed by
learning a series of basic theological moves or impulses that are as-
sociated with the great architects of the theological tradition. In this
way, a theologian can situate herself by invoking proper names as fixed
points against which their own dogmatic movements can be triangu-
lated through a kind of intellectual trigonometry. In such a conceptual
topography, ‘Thomistic’ might indicate a particular view of the nature-
grace relation, the negotiation of a course between fideism and ratio-
nalism, or a commitment to intellectualism; ‘Scotist’ might indicate
voluntarism, a particular account of the divine infinity, an acceptance
of the formal distinction, or a stance on the motives of the incarnation;
‘Barthian’ is suggestive of a Christocentric concentration and a critique
of natural theology governed by the rejection of the analogia entis; and
‘Schleiermacherian’ understood as locating an Archimedean point for
theology within a universal Gefühl, thereby attempting a completion of
5 Cornelius Ernst, Multiple Echo: Explorations in Theology, ed. Timothy Radcliffe and
Fergus Kerr (London: Darton, Longman Todd, 1979), 11. Hereafter cited as ‘ME’.
6 Conor Cunningham, Genealogy of nihilism : philosophies of nothing and the difference
of theology, Radical orthodoxy series Y (London: London : Routledge, 2002).
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

798
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
Kant’s third critique. The names by which a theologian orientates her-
self are largely contingent upon the particular communities to which
she belongs and within which she was formed.
Positively, this constellating use of proper names potentially facili-
tates the advance of theological conversation: proper names function
as a professional shorthand, derived from an engagement with an
identifiable canon of texts. In this sense, the invocation of a proper
name obviates the need to re-think the entire nexus mysteriorum from
first principles in every conversation. Negatively, name-invocation
easily collapses into exclusionary jargon and needless obfuscation, and
quickly becomes detached from the detailed engagement with texts
that it gestures towards. Indeed, as will be clear from the thumbnail
sketches above, the constellating use of names depends upon a neces-
sary lack of granularity, which is unavoidably reductive, homogenizing
a huge degree of complexity within the polyvalence of the texts and
the history of their reception.
Consequently, name-invocation risks collapsing into the use of
names as a placeholder or remainder concept that substitutes for
thought. The invocation of a proper name within a theological argu-
ment risks the endless generation of further discourse that is oblique
to the task at hand. With the invocation of a name, the theologian im-
mediately renders herself liable to the suggestion that she has misrep-
resented the ‘contents’ signified by that name. Problematically, such
an objection can be entertained within a general agnosticism about the
truth or falsehood of the position, considered apart from the question
of interpretative fidelity. Conversely, the argument can usually pro-
ceed without accrediting the invocation as a faithful interpretation, but
merely as a meaningful gesture towards a larger corpus of interpreta-
tive literature. Consequently, the ‘invocation’ comes to dominate the
‘name’, which is hollowed out (not unlike a beetle in a Wittgensteinian
box)7 so as to signify simply a communally negotiated consensus.
The integrity of the names within this gestural economy can only
be secured relative to a canon of publicly accessible texts, through
which theologians communally parse the data of revelation and ori-
entate themselves relative to a broader nexus of texts, authors and
interpreters. The good operation of name-invocation, then, depends
upon the accessibility of these texts. However, the mediation of French
post-structuralism to anglophone philosophy has drawn attention to an
often-elided distinction between the readability of a text and the in-
telligibility of its contents.8 Antecedent to the discussion of Derrida’s
(or Lacan’s) intelligibility (not infrequently questioned)9 is the prior
question of whether their texts can be adequately accessed in trans-
7 PI. §293
8 Judith Butler, “Introduction,” in Of Grammatology, ed. Jacques Derrida (2016), vii-xxiv.
9 Roger Scruton, Fools, Frauds and Firebrands (London: Bloomsbury, 2015).
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
799
lation. The explanatory framework needed to convey the dense allu-
sions between différence and différance, with the polyvalent invocation
of both differing and deferring, ultimately undermines the performa-
tive gesture of Derrida’s subversion of a logocentric prioritisation of
the spoken over the written. Likewise, that Lacan’s nom-du-père is ho-
mophonic with the unspoken non-du-père always already invokes the
intimate connection between the paternal prohibition and the ‘name’
that effects the symbolic castration.10 The necessity of an explanatory
framework forecloses the immediacy of the qualitative experience of
an original textual disclosure.
Questions of translation and its limits are, of course, nothing
new.11 As a metaphysically undergirded ‘Catholicity of concepts’ is
a necessary precondition for dogmatic definition, Catholic theology’s
commitment to the transcultural accessibility of certain texts will en-
gender a more optimistic stance towards the possibilities of translation
than would the deconstructive impulses of poststructuralism. Nonethe-
less, fresh attentiveness to the diverse ways in which texts function
performatively (beyond simple information-communication) raises
hermeneutically significant questions about the extent to which those
texts are authentically readable. Resisting the collapse of ‘reading’
into ‘understanding’ demands a thicker description of texts, and an
attentiveness to the different modes by which a text is engaged, both
individually and communally. The question of what constitutes textual
readability is, however, not unrelated to the contents of the text and its
intelligibility: ‘reading’ here slips between both verbal and nominal
significance (not unlike ‘faith’ invoking both fides qua and fides quae).
Similarly, the concept of ‘authenticity’ can operate both adverbially
and adjectivally, as designating fidelity to either form or content (or
both): a ‘Thomism’ can be said to be authentic if it rearticulates the
contents of Aquinas’s text and/or if it re-performs the operations of the
text.
The intelligibility of Aquinas’s texts, which are marked by an inten-
tional clarity of expression and a highly controlled poverty of style,
can be established with comparatively little historical reconstruction.12
Intelligibility does not, however, imply full readability, in the ex-
tended sense outlined above. Just as the contents of a highly corrupted
manuscript might be adequately reconstructed under conditions of only
partial legibility, so only a partial accessibility of a text is necessary to
secure its intelligibility. The question of a text’s readability, then, is
10 Dylan Evans, An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis (London: Rout-
ledge, 1996), 119.
11 Walter Benjamin, ‘The Task of the Translator’, in Illuminations: Essays and Reflec-
tions, ed. Hannah Arendt (Boston: Mariner, 1968), 11-25.
12 See, for instance, Marie-Dominique Chenu, Toward Understanding St Thomas, trans.
A.-M. Landry (Chicago: Regnery, 1964).
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

800
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
both antecedent to and posterior to the question of its intelligibility:
whereas intelligibility presupposes a degree of readability, significant
knowledge of the text’s cognitive content drives reflection on the ex-
tent of its readability, as the case of Derrida and Lacan demonstrates.
Whereas the question of Derrida’s readability tends to precede that
of intelligibility, the opposite direction of questioning obtains in the
case of Aquinas, where questions of readability are largely posterior to
those of intelligibility. It is in its capacity to raise this posterior ques-
tion of readability and to propose an ontological framework for the
performative readability of Aquinas’s texts—the adverbial authentic-
ity of ‘Thomism’—that Cornelius Ernst’s meta-theology makes a de-
cisive contribution to the intellectual culture of the English Dominican
province.
Cornelius Ernst and the Readability of Aquinas
Cornelius Ernst’s use of Wittgensteinian ‘philosophical therapy’ to
overcome the ‘congenital Cartesianism’ of his students, and his pro-
posal of a new ontology of meaning to overcome latent extrinsicism, is
well documented.13 Ernst’s constructive proposal, however, is explic-
itly concerned with an orientation to the texts of Aquinas. The readabil-
ity of Aquinas’s texts is compromised by their historical remoteness.14
Although the analytic style of Thomistic argumentation takes ‘a little
getting used to’, its dependence on ‘a web of concepts that haven’t been
acquired in any purely logical way’15 points to a much more basic di-
vergence of worlds. The recovery of a semantic horizon in which ‘the
fundamental categories of thought and speech are the fundamental cat-
egories of the disclosed world’16 can only be achieved through a vision
that has been disciplined through serious philosophical therapy (an ‘ex-
ercise in historical sympathy’)17 rather than by any ‘sort of infantile re-
gression’.18 The beginning of this therapy lies in ‘undergoing acute dis-
continuity between [Aquinas’s] world and ours’,19 recognising—and
13 Louis Roy, ‘Cornelius Ernst’s Theological Seeds’, New Blackfriars 85, no. 998 (2004):
459-70; Fergus Kerr, ‘Ansombe, Ernst and McCabe: Wittgenstein and Catholic Theology’,
Josephinum 15, no. 1 (2008): 128-48; Rowan Williams, The Edge of Words: God and the
Habits of Language (London: Continuum, 2014), Ch. 1; Oliver James Keenan, ‘Sacrament of
the Dynamic Transcendence of Christianity: Cornelius Ernst on the Church’, New Blackfriars
94, no. 1052 (2013): 396-414.
14 ME, 7.
15 ME, 9.
16 ME, 10.
17 ME, 11.
18 ME, 12.
19 ME, 11.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
801
enduring—our alienation from Aquinas in the ‘trauma’ of his unread-
ability.
Consequently, Ernst’s interest in the theological use of Wittgenstein
and Heidegger is not purely speculative, but ab initio pedagogical, con-
cerned to induct a particular group of students into a horizon of mean-
ing in which ‘the world effortlessly shows itself to be what it is’,20
thereby cultivating strategies that render Aquinas at least partially read-
able. This philosophical propaedeutic not only demonstrates the falsity
of Cartesian intuitions, but aims to unmask the extent to which we are
‘held captive’ by what Wittgenstein called a ‘picture’21 and Heideg-
ger termed ‘inauthenticity’.22 A straightforward disavowal of Carte-
sian anthropology is inadequate to the task of liberating the ‘modern
mind’ from the nonsense generated by the metaphors into which we
have been habituated by culturally-mediated linguistic prejudices. The
value of the philosophy of Wittgenstein and Heidegger to Ernst’s pro-
posal resides not only in their common interest in meaning, but in their
shared attentiveness to our existential self-bafflement.23 The modern
mind’s predicament is not only one of intuitive philosophical error, but
also one of auto-anaesthesia—a seemingly innate tendency to lose our-
selves in the midst of our language—which both Sein und Zeit and
the Philosophical Investigations seek to expose in their own distinctive
ways.
These themes are alluded to in Ernst’s characterisation of Aquinas’s
quinque viæ as demonstrations of ‘how we can go on speaking about
God in the ordinary world’.24 Ernst here attends to the integrity of
language, community and forms of life, together with the classi-
cal Wittgensteinian-Heideggerian emphasis on the ‘every day’ or the
‘worldliness’ of language.25 In short, our capacity for theological read-
ing interacts with the constantly evolving dynamics of our given cir-
cumstances (a fact that gives rise to Aquinas’s alienated readability in
the first place). The point, here, is not only to reflect on the givenness
of the Christian tradition (reflected in Ernst’s talk of the Church as the
ontological a priori of faith),26 but on the embeddedness of the theolo-
gian within this givenness of world and Church. To invoke McDowell,
20 ME, 11.
21 David Egan, ‘Pictures in Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy’, Philosophical Investiga-
tions 34, no. 1 (2011): 55-76.
22 Jon Mills, ‘The False Dasein’, Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 28, no. 1
(1997): 42-65.
23 David Egan, The Pursuit of an Authentic Philosophy: Wittgenstein, Heidegger and the
Everyday (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019).
24 ME, 74.
25 ME, 142.
26 ME, 139.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

802
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
there is no view over this givenness from ‘sideways on’:27 the idea that
the theologian can attain a synoptic and disinterested overview of theo-
logical language ab extra, strategizing about the possibility of God-talk
as if the world were not already marked by such talk, is simply an il-
lusion. This emphasises not only the inescapable finitude of language
(and thus its inevitable eschatological provisionality), but rather the il-
lusory artificiality of any picture of an outside from which to survey
language. There is no place outside of our reading from which to de-
termine our reading.
The prescription of an aggiornamento of Aquinas’s strategy in the
five ways by way of an ‘exploration of the genesis of meaning, un-
derstood as the manifestation of the real’28 cuts to the heart of Ernst’s
constructive programme. The givenness of the world into which we
are embedded is one that gives itself historically in meaning: reality
simply is that which gives itself in an indeterminate number of fu-
ture semantic manifestations. Consequently, meaning is not the men-
tal event of representation, judgment or apprehension but the ‘process
and praxis through which the world to which man belongs becomes
the world that belongs to man’.29 As Ernst puts it in an undeveloped
footnote, ‘personal being is intrinsically communication’:30 there is no
standpoint outside of the dynamism of communication, because be-
ing itself is communicative.31 Consequently, not only is the idea of
surveying our theological language ‘sideways on’ a nonsense manu-
factured on Cartesian stoves, but so is the noetic ideal of a ‘sideways’
vantage point over the world. Ernst’s proposal of new horizon for the-
ology indicates a comprehensive metaphysical vision of the world in
which there is no inert matter—no neutral ‘stuff’—that is not always
already semiotically soaked (if not totally saturated) with the divine
self-communication. ‘Reading’ then emerges as a mode of human in-
dwelling of the world, marking a participative role in shaping the dy-
namic processes and praxes of communication that constitute worldli-
ness, and thus a distinctively human way of belonging meaningfully to
a meaningful world.
Although Ernst’s acknowledgment of the difficulty of ‘continuing’
speaks to the felt sense of disciplinary precarity that haunts theology
27 John McDowell, ‘Non-Cognitivism and Rule Following’, in Wittgenstein: To Follow a
Rule, ed. Stephen Holtzman and Christopher M. Leich (London: Routledge, 1981), 141-72.
28 ME: 74.
29 Cornelius Ernst, The Theology of Grace (South Bend: University of Notre Dame Press,
1974), 68.
30 ME, 106.
31 For similar examinations of the intrinsically diffusive and communicative character
of being, see: Klaus Hemmerle, Theses Towards a Trinitarian Ontology, trans. Stephen
Churchyard (Brooklyn: Angelico Press, 2020); Ferdinand Ulrich, Homo Abyssus, trans. D.
C. Schindler (Washington DC: Humanum Press, 2018).
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
803
within the secular university,32 it is equally indicative of a defect within
dogmatics itself. The readability of Aquinas has been alienated through
the adoption of secularised strategies of reading that prioritise only that
which can be captured in the literal sense without remainder. Wittgen-
stein’s suggestion that understanding is knowing how to perform the
next move in a sequence, or to carry on with a task,33 indicates that
the perceived crisis of theology under the conditions of late moder-
nity points not only to hostile circumstances, but to a crisis of theo-
logical understanding. The displacement of hostile philosophical con-
ditions is consequently coterminous with the renewal of theology qua
theology, through a discipline-specific pedagogy, marked by its own
distinctive strategies of reading.34 The question, for Ernst, was not to
establish the basis upon which theological reading can get going, but
rather to perform the continuance of ‘speaking about God in the or-
dinary world’.35 Rather than evading responsibility to the world by a
quasi-mystical escapism, the reading proper to the theological task is
a sapiential discipline that looks at the world (albeit with lamentation)
and sees more than can be narrated by a literal description.36 The ontol-
ogy of meaning—the proposal that the world be unified by the category
of meaning—specifies the readability of the world, and the contribu-
tion that theology makes to the world by reading its unification in the
divine logos.
Ernst’s diagnosis of theology’s philosophical malady indicates the
determinative feature of theologically disordered strategies of reading:
they collapse symbols into images.37 To put the distinction somewhat
crudely, whereas a symbol participates in the reality that it communi-
cates, images point beyond themselves to the realities that they mirror
by remote resemblance, without sharing in their reality.38 Symbols are,
notwithstanding their imperfect provisionality, performative embodi-
ments of the meanings that they communicate. Adopting a strategy
of reading that prioritises the imagistic over the symbolic essentially
posits that ‘sideways’ vantage over meaning that Ernst’s proposed se-
mantic ontology problematises. In textual terms, collapsing the ques-
tion of readability into that of intelligibility performs precisely such
a reduction, by identifying the meaning of a text with the sense of
its ‘contents’ alone. Indeed, the easy divisibility of form and content
that the identification of meaning with ‘content’ performs is an implicit
32 ME: 8.
33 PI, §151-155.
34 Cf John Bainbridge Webster, ‘Theological Theology’, in Confessing God: Essays in
Christian Dogmatics (London: T&T Clark, 2005), 11-32.
35 ME, 74. The logic of the ‘ordinary world’ is explored at ME, 142.
36 ME, 26.
37 See ME, 63-65.
38 ME, 64.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

804
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
rendering of textuality in imagistic rather than symbolic terms. While
both symbols and images exhibit semantic dependence upon another
(from whence their meaning is received), the symbol’s meaning is also
partially intrinsic to its participatory constitution. A symbolic text thus
exhibits within the structures of its own integrity an excessive surplus
of meaning. Ernst’s proposed ontology of meaning renders the world
as a fundamentally symbolic reality,39 in that it is an embodiment of
meaning by way of participation in ultimate meaning. Reading the
world imagistically, then, denies the transcendent excess of the world’s
intrinsic meanings and thus ‘secularises’ meaning through the mood of
vital immanence. Ernst’s semantic ontology thereby opens a horizon
of reading within which such a secularized imagistic approach appears
to be just as nonsensical as attempting to secure the meaning of a red
traffic light entirely within the experience of the colour red.
Textuality and the Operations of Symbolic Reading
Ernst’s ontological prioritisation of the symbolic indicates a particu-
lar understanding of textuality as more than the stenographic record of
ideas. The process of theological self-understanding (Selbstverständ-
nis) that a text embodies, although necessarily involving articulation,
is always more than a discursive product. The discursivity of a text is
grounded in an antecedent Vorverständnis, a kind of unspecifiable pre-
apprehension or ‘prophetic insight’ that ‘resides in something deeper
and more basic than the conscious mind’.40 Elsewhere, Ernst describes
Christian faith as the consecration of the ‘genetic moment of Chris-
tianity’ located in the Neuheitserlebnis of the resurrection.41 A simi-
lar relationship obtains between texts the ‘prophetic insights’ that texts
stabilise: texts serve to consecrate across time the prophetic insights of
their authors, thus representing moments in which the generally sym-
bolic character of the world is intensified through the artificiality of the
text’s frame. Texts, then, have an intrinsically symbolic character on
account of their embodiment of these ‘prophetic insights’, which are
located both in and beyond their discursive codification.
Within Ernst’s thought, at least two particular semantic operations
are integral to the strategy of symbolic reading that corresponds to
this account of textuality. The first extends a fundamentally Chris-
tian tension between universalism and particularism into an account
of the relationship between logos and language. Christianity locates
39 Karl Rahner, ‘The Theology of the Symbol’, in Theological Investigations Vol 4
(1966), 221-52; Stephen M. Fields, Being as Symbol: On The Origins and Development of
Karl Rahner’s Metaphysics (Washington DC: Georgetown University Press, 2000).
40 ME, 84.
41 ME, 215.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
805
within the particularity of the person of Christ the ultimate univer-
sal meaning of Being.42 Universal meaning is, to borrow from Przy-
wara,43 in-and-beyond Christ, in two senses. Firstly, in a sense indi-
cated by the extra Calvinisticum, the assumption of Jesus’s humanity
as the ‘embodiment’ of the divine word does not indicate an absolute
‘containment’ of it. Secondly, the significance of Christ’s life can only
be fully apprehended in its transfiguration and integration of the en-
tire world of meaning. Consequently, any attempt at a descriptive read-
ing of Christ’s life, in its irreducible particularity, demands that more
than Christ’s life be described; any attempt to close Christ off from the
broader world of meaning will ipso facto violate the integrity of Christ
himself (by performing an imagistic ‘sideways’ reading). Transposed
into linguistic terms, the ontology of meaning acknowledges the pres-
ence of ultimate meaning (logos) in-and-beyond language (logoi). This
‘dynamic transcendence’44 characterises symbolic strategies of read-
ing more generally: symbolic texts are marked by a relational transcen-
dence that in no way compromises immanence. Similarly, texts are pos-
sessed of semi-permeable boundaries; symbolic readings acknowledge
textual meanings to be both inside-and-beyond those boundaries in a
non-contrastive sense.
The porosity of semantic boundaries is a crucial feature of the sec-
ond linguistic operation that characterises symbolic reading, located
in metaphor.45 Whilst noting the ways in which Aquinas identifies the
categories of ‘symbol’ and ‘metaphor’,46 Ernst differentiates metaphor
from symbol by reading it as a semantic praxis, ‘the mental operation
proper to symbolism’,47 which ‘carries meaning over’ from one se-
mantic domain to another. Although the semantic transfer of metaphor
can involve the ‘translation’ of meanings within the same semantic do-
main, it more properly refers to the transference of meanings between
the sensible-material domain and the higher order of the immaterial-
intelligible, through the semantic mediation of some aspect of sensible
reality.48 As Marie-Dominique Chenu observes in his account of the
symbolist mentality of the middle ages, ‘metaphor is obedient to the
necessities imposed by transcendent realities’:49 metaphor is not, then,
a simple projection of immanent human meanings, but rather these
42 ME, 32.
43 Erich Przywara, Analogia Entis: Metaphysik (München: Kösel, 1932).
44 See ME, 32 and 13-27.
45 Cornelius Ernst, ‘Metaphor and Ontology in Sacra Doctrina’, The Thomist 38(1974):
422-25; ‘Truth and Verification in Theology’, New Blackfriars 40, no. 468 (1959): 100-11;
‘Meaning and Metaphor in Theology’, New Blackfriars 61, no. 718 (1980): 100-12.
46 ME, 64.
47 ME, 68.
48 ME, 67.
49 Marie-Dominique Chenu, Nature, Man and Society in the Twelfth Century (Chicago:
Chicago University Press, 1968), 138.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

806
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
human meanings labouring under the intense pressure of determination
by the transcendent object that they communicate. The catachresis of
metaphor pushes at the limits of our words, making them more commu-
nicatively capacious; symbolic reading likewise recognises the overde-
termined character of texts. According to Ernst, metaphor is not re-
ducible to predication, nor sharply differentiated from literal speech.50
Likewise, metaphor is not primarily understood as a decorative feature
of language that indicates only an aesthetic excess over intelligibility.
Rather, metaphor refers to a skilful practice by which an intelligent
agent negotiates their semantic habitat by way of ‘reading’: metaphor
simply corresponds to the symbolic character of reality.
Of particular importance to Ernst is the category of ontological
metaphor. His most extensive use of the concept is found in a ver-
sion of his ‘Meaning and Metaphor’ essay that was not included in
Multiple Echo, but was subsequently published in New Blackfriars in
1980.51 Linguistically, ontological metaphors represent an abstract and
intangible reality (like an emotion or an activity) in terms of some-
thing that is concrete and tangible (like an object or person).52 For ex-
ample, the question ‘how did you get into systematic theology?’ uses
spatial language, derived from experience of containers, to articulate
the process of becoming interested in the otherwise abstract concept
of the discipline of systematics. These sorts of ontological metaphors
are deeply intuitive to a native speaker and might only be recognised
as metaphors after philosophical reflection.53 Indeed, many ontological
metaphors are concealed within quotidian patterns of expression. The
statement ‘there was much joy’, for instance, uses quantifiers drawn
from experience of extended objects to narrate the intensity of an ex-
perience that has no physical extension per se (but which does have
proportionate affects within the observable world). The essence of an
ontological metaphor, then, is to communicate an unboundaried real-
ity by the use of a mediating, boundaried, reality that is drawn from
empirically observable actuality. As such, texts are themselves onto-
logically metaphoric: the reading of a text embraces the limitation of
its boundaries to reach towards the horizon of infinite meaning that
asymptotically recedes behind it.
The suggestion that Ernst’s work be taken to illustrate a concern
for readability (albeit in an existentially extended sense) might seem
50 ME, 71-74.
51 Ernst, Meaning and Metaphor.
52 As Boers puts it, developing the typology presented by Lakoff and Johnson, ‘ontolog-
ical metaphors allow us to conceive of abstract concepts as concrete entities’, see: Spatial
Prepositions and Metaphor (Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1996), 21. The literature on ‘on-
tological metaphors’ is now vast. See: George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live
By, 2nd ed. (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2003), 25; Clive Cazeaux, Metaphor and
Continental Philosophy (New York: Routledge, 2007), 197.
53 See Donald C. Williams, ‘The Myth of Passage’, Philosophy 48, no. 15 (1951): 457-72.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
807
ironic, given his reputation for a certain stylistic opacity. To use exam-
ples drawn solely from the ranks of his brethren, Ernst’s writing has
been described as ‘contorted’,54 riddled by ‘over-complexification’55
and even as simply ‘pretentious’.56 Anachronistically, Ernst’s writing
often approximates a style associated more with Radical Orthodoxy
than with the ‘house style’ of a Province that has cherished shorter sen-
tences and unambiguous clarity. Nonetheless, this criticism has, per-
haps, been overstated. Although there are certainly moments when
Ernst’s prose struggles to yield a straightforward meaning, there are
also moments of lucidity: if his essay on ‘Theological Method’ is an
example of his most prolix and obscure, his book on grace and the es-
say on metaphor are clearly written and communicative, even if at times
poetic. In essence, however, Ernst’s style corresponds to the account of
language that he develops; his texts are performative with respect to the
new horizon of meaning that he seeks to open for his students. Ernst’s
writing, in all of its density, exposes the potency of language in its dy-
namic transcendence and ontological metaphoricity. Ernst’s analysis of
language seeks not only to demonstrate the ways in which God-talk
places creaturely discourse under an intense pressure that pushes at the
boundaries of its intelligibility, but to expose the mysteric (because in-
trinsically theological) character of all language, even the most quotid-
ian. The density of Ernst’s prose, then, corresponds to the ontological
depths that he finds within meaning, which is not simply read off the
world as brute propositions entirely expressible in the language of lit-
eral description. Just as the givenness into which we are embedded pro-
and e-vokes our semantic activity, so Ernst’s texts can be engaged only
through a kind of cognitive grappling. Here, Ernst is concerned—to
used Heideggerian terms—to push beyond ‘ontic concretions’57 into
the realm of the truly ontological, refusing to substitute a description
of entities and their behaviours in place of an ontological analysis of its
mode of being.
Thomistic Pedagogy: Reading and/as Engaged Contemplation
If Ernst’s approach to reading and writing is indeed animated by these
performative concerns, his thought is best conceived as a re-enactment
54 Simon Tugwell, ‘Cornelius Ernst OP’, New Blackfriars 59(1978): 2-4.
55 Aidan Nichols, ‘Catholic Theology in Britain’, online: http://www.christendom-awake.
org/pages/anichols/theolog1.html
56 Edmund Hill, ‘Cornelius Ernst OP: Multiple Echo’, Fergus Kerr OP and Timothy Rad-
cliffe OP (eds.),” The Thomist 46, no. 4 (1982): 631-36.
57 Jan Slaby, ‘Ontic’, in The Cambridge Heidegger Lexicon, ed. Mark A. Wrathall (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021), 542-46.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

808
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
of Thomistic pedagogy in semantic idiom. The question of faithfulness
is then partially transferred from the mediation of content to the fidelity
of performance. Ernst inherited an awareness of Aquinas as a peda-
gogue from Victor White, for whom the Summa Theologiæ was not
primarily a textbook for students (as it had customarily been taken to
be), but a manual for teachers of introductory theology courses, helping
them to anticipate and provoke discussion and debate.58 The dialogical
character of the Summa indicates an isomorphism with Wittgenstein’s
Philosophical Investigations, in which Wittgenstein’s engagement with
his interlocutors serves to elicit a response from the reader that exposes
the concealed ‘deep logic’ of their thought. A faithful reading of the
Investigations entails both the rendering intelligible of an argument as
well as the uncovering of impulses that generate the ‘picture’ that holds
us captive.
Ernst’s re-performance of Thomistic pedagogy constitutes theology
as the discipline of ‘engaged contemplation’ or ‘contemplative engage-
ment’59 in service of the divine logos.60 The extended sense of reading
that Ernst cultivates is not only engaged in this sense of enacting a re-
lationship of a text to the world, but also engaging of its practitioners,
involving the whole human person in the paradoxical hyper-activity of
contemplation.61 Reading as ‘engaged contemplation’ means learning
to repeatedly allow ourselves—with all of our personal history, frailty
and affective idiosyncrasy—to be confronted, through the vehicle of
a text, with the question of ultimate meaning, and thus with the theo-
logical interpretation of the meaning of our own lives. Such a strategy
of reading can be sustained only within the context of a life lived in
the presence of the ultimate answer,62 a semantic horizon that points
beyond itself and extends into infinity. Reading within the horizon of
ultimate meaning thus awakens us more and more deeply to the onto-
logical depths of reality, containing within itself a pre-apprehension of
the radical inadequacy of any human articulations of it.
58 Victor White, Holy Teaching: The Idea of Theology According to St. Thomas Aquinas
(London: Blackfriars Publications, 1958).
59 ME, 151. Graham Ward has recently developed an account of theology as ‘engaged
systematics’. Ernst would have had considerable sympathy with Ward’s proposals, but would
avoid, given his understanding of Aquinas as a thematic thinker, have preferred not to deploy
the term ‘systematics’. ‘Contemplation’ more precisely evokes the perspective of meaning
that Ernst is seeking to develop. Ward’s proposals, meanwhile, are embedded within the first
volume of his systematics (something Ernst’s sporadic approach to writing could not have
sustained). See: Graham Ward, How the Light Gets In (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2016).
60 Ernst’s notion of ‘servanthood of the Word’ has been taken up into the 2016 Edition of
the Order of Preachers’ Ratio Formationis Generalis.
61 For an exploration of these themes, see: Simone Kotva, Effort and Grace: On the Spir-
itual Exercise of Philosophy (London: Bloomsbury, 2020).
62 ME, 152.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
809
Similarly, the Summa guides and resources the teacher (on White’s
account) in the development of a praxis of theology that engages the
student with questions and solicits from them a response. That Aquinas
explicitly considered such questions of pedagogy is clear, not only
from the historical record of his experimental ‘studium personale’ in
Rome,63 but equally from the text of the Summa Theologiæ itself. The
prologue of the prima pars speaks of the true Catholic teacher as one
who takes the student by the hand, leading them (manuductio) through
a theological journey into beatitude.64 The intellectual itinerary of the
summa emerges as a kind of intellectual exercise, which is inaugurated
with two questions that establish the inescapable ontological horizon
within which this disciplina operates:65 the first, on sacra doctrina, es-
tablishes the presence of ultimate meaning (through the mediation of
a subalternated science);66 the second, on the five ways, establishes
the unity of the world of meaning in the divine logos.67 The Neo-
platonic exitus-reditus structure, identified by Ernst’s sometime cor-
respondent M.-D. Chenu,68 not only determines in a general way the
‘emergence’ of creation as ordained to final consummation, but also
indicates the theologian’s own journey into truth, performed in their
theological reading and eschatologically consummated in Christ.69
In an authentic reading of the Summa, then, training in theologi-
cal argumentation and formation in the craft of Christian holiness are
somewhat coextensive: the theological life and the communication of
truth are both brought into the service of the life of sanctifying grace.70
63 Jean-Pierre Torrell, St Thomas Aquinas: The Person and His Work, trans. Robert Royal
(Washington DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1996), 142-59; See also: Leonard
E. Boyle, ‘The Setting of the Summa Theologiae’, in Aquinas’s Summa Theologiae: Critical
Essays, ed. Brian Davies (Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006), 1-24.
64 This point has been made forcefully by Peter M. Candler, Theology, Rhetoric,
Manuduction: Or Reading Scripture Together on the Path to God, Radical Traditions (Lon-
don: SCM Press, 2006).
65 On qq. 1 and 2 of the prima pars, see: Fergus Kerr, After Aquinas: Versions of Thomism
(Oxford: Blackwells, 2002), 52-72; Frederick Christian Bauerschmidt, Thomas Aquinas:
Faith, Reason and Following Christ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 41-82, 91-
106; Victor Preller, Divine Science and the Science of God (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1967), 108-79; Fergus Kerr, ‘Real Knowledge or ‘Enlightened Ignorance: Eric Mascall
on the Apophatic Thomisms of Victor Preller and Victor White’, in Grammar and Grace, ed.
Jeffrey Stout and Robert MacSwain (London: SCM Press, 2004), 103-23.
66 ME, 9.
67 ME, 7-8.
68 Marie-Dominique Chenu, ‘Le plan de la somme théologique de saint Thomas’, Revue
Thomiste 47(1939): 93-107.
69 The connection between sanctification, theosis and the discipline of theology has been
articulated by Fáinche Ryan, Formation in Holiness: Thomas Aquinas on Sacra Doctrina
(Utrecht: Thomas Instituut/Peeters Leuven, 2007); Anna Ngaire Williams, ‘Deification in the
Summa theologiae: A Structural Interpretation of the Prima Pars’, The Thomist 61, no. 2
(1997): 219-55.
70 Cf., ME, 121.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

810
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
Indeed, this formative function is reflected not only in the macrostruc-
ture of the Summa, but equally in the microstructure of the Summa’s ba-
sic unit, the article.71 Framed as a theological question using the parti-
cle utrum, the article is constituted by a call-and-response of objections
and their answers. This indicates a further isomorphism with Wittgen-
stein’s Investigations, which contain a vast array of questions, many
rhetorical or aporetic, confused and confusing.72 Whereas Wittgenstein
seems largely to use questions to move us from ‘unobvious nonsense
to obvious nonsense’73 by indicating the ways in which our questions
are non-sensical or misplaced, Aquinas’s questions are pre-refined—
though they sometimes undergo further purification by way of dis-
tinguishing their meaning. Questions serve Aquinas in giving overall
shape and dynamism to the structure of his Summa. Importantly, the
invocation of proper names (whether appeals to authorities or intellec-
tual adversaries) is always nested within these questions, so that the
aporiai within the canon of texts are exposed and resolved by refer-
ence to the truth or falsity of a question: it is the question which drives
reading, and name-invocation that serves this movement.
In the Dominican context in which Aquinas taught, the rhyth-
mic backwards and forwards motion that characterises each article is
evocative of the antiphonal character of the chanted liturgy. Likewise,
Aquinas’s eclectic use of sources that were also deployed in the liturgy
would have evoked a rich penumbra of memories and associations. The
respondeo—Aquinas’s conclusion or resolution—is not located at the
end of the article, but in the middle, and therefore does not bring the
motion of reading to a point of rest. The response of the teacher does
not end the dialogue and leave the student satisfied that they now know
the ‘correct’ answer, but rather propels the student to return (in almost
every case) to the objections and find, in responding to them, the full
implications of the respondeo itself. Similarly, the theologian is only
able to read the Christian meaning of time through discernment of the
Christian meaning of their own times;74 the light of the logos is seen
only as it illumines and integrates the logoi of the present moment.
‘Thomism’ as Meta-Reading
As has become clear, theology cannot read the theological meanings
entertained by the Christian tradition and its texts without itself being
71 Otto Bird, ‘How to Read an Article of the Summa’, New Scholasticism 27, no. 2 (1953):
129-59.
72 Egan, Authentic Philosophy, 224-26.
73 PI, §464.
74 ME, 108.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
811
an instance of that tradition and of those meanings.75 Consequently,
theological reading only ever exists as a kind of culture, in which
‘prophetic insight’ (Vorverständnis) is cultivated and disciplined into
a theological ‘competence’ that is productive of discursivity. The com-
mitment to cultivating such a disciplined culture of convivial reading is
self-involving and invokes dynamics of apprenticeship and formation.
For better or for worse, engaged contemplation retains the highly self-
conscious methodological preoccupations of contemporary theology
more broadly. Nonetheless, if ‘Thomism’ has any meaningful sense
within the horizon of Ernst’s proposed ontology, it is as the cultivation
and elicitation of a shared context within which Aquinas’s texts have
an enduring readability. There is, of course, no sense that only one in-
tellectual culture can provide for the readability of Aquinas—not every
Thomist needs to live the ‘significant life’76 of a Dominican house of
studies—but any such culture will be meaningful and intelligible to any
other such culture: so ‘Thomism’ retains its plasticity.
Part of the strength of the English Dominican province’s ‘Thomism’
has been the cultivation of an ecology of reading, within which multiple
‘Thomisms’ have flourished in mutually intelligible (and interrogative)
coexistence. The extent to which Ernst contributed to the formation of
such an ecology of reading is hard to adjudicate, but he hints towards it
in his development of an account of engaged contemplation as ‘meta-
theology’.77 The contents of the ‘meta’, here, are specified by the epis-
temological correlates of his theological ontology. Theology can only
thrive when it is consciously conducted coram God as the ‘meaning of
meaning’ and when possessed of an ineliminable wonder at the mystery
of its own being.78 Ernst acknowledges that, in his own time, there were
only ‘anticipations’ of such a meta-theology;79 it is difficult to know
where he would look for such a theology in the decades after his death.
Nonetheless, three features of this anticipated meta-theology are clear
and can usefully contribute to the development of a practice that might
be termed ‘meta-reading’. Firstly, meta-theology involves a movement
beyond ‘theologies’ to an integrative and unitive ‘Theology’: in other
words, a relativisation of the gestural economy of name-invocation.
This process involves reflection upon the historical reality of the-
ological development and the emergence of theological opposition,
thereby raising the question of the meaning of the history of dogma and
the meaning of fractured plurality. Theological readings of this dog-
matic diffusion should be performatively ontologically metaphoric, in
75 ME, 79.
76 ME, 149-157.
77 ME, 76-86, particularly 85.
78 For an examination of this theme from a phenomenological perspective, see: Steven
DeLay, Before God: Exercises in Subjectivity (London: Bloomsbury, 2019).
79 ME, 85.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

812
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
seeking to sacramentally realise the re-unification (by transfiguration)
of this diversity in Christ. Secondly, meta-theology is attuned to the in-
tentional cultivation of the symbolic and metaphoric within in the me-
diated operations of dynamic transcendence. Whilst the definitive ‘on-
tic’ answer to theological questioning is available solely in Jesus Christ,
the ontological meaning of this is worked out by proceeding through
what Ernst terms ‘the starting point of the logos-eik¯on-must¯erion’.80
In other words, our particular practices of reading are ultimately to
be nested within the Ur-Text of Christ. Thirdly, this meta-theology is
realized only as a ‘total human culture’,81 that is, as a progressive com-
munal discovery of a common identity in Jesus Christ, in ways that
necessarily elude total specification.
In the meta-reading that is informed by such a meta-theology, the
‘meta’ is specified not only by the mystical elements of Ernst’s Neo-
platonism and its horizon of meaning, but by a commitment to rather
mundane communal practices of symbolic reading, as indicated above.
‘Thomism’ in this Ernstian mode signals a performative recovery of
Augustine’s wonder at encountering Ambrose’s silent reading. The
fact that we read (and not only that we can read) is itself an eikon
of the must¯erion of Christ—and the continuation of that reading the
urgent task of the theologian. This mystery of reading has often been
taken for granted, commodified by a quantitative rendering of what
is to be gained from (rather than through) reading and a consequent
quasi-idolatrous desire to master vast swathes of material (a desire
indulged—but never satisfied—by name-invocation). In the film Der-
rida, the philosophe himself was asked if he had read all the books
in his library: ‘only three or four’, he replied, ‘but those three or four
really, really well’.
Attentiveness to the unspecifiable coefficient of meta-reading ought
not undermine the obvious fact that Aquinas’s texts are intentionally
intelligible, and that information-communication is a significant (per-
haps sometimes predominant) mode of their operation. Meta-reading
is still reading in the conventional sense of the term, albeit reading
that indwells the ‘meta-’ so as to expose and disrupt the presupposi-
tions that animate the imagistic strategies of reading that contribute to
our self-bafflement. Meta-reading exposes the enormous artificiality of
reading for information alone. The contribution that the ‘meta’ makes
to theological reading resembles (perhaps uncomfortably for some) the
monastic practice of lectio divina. As has been noted elsewhere in re-
spect to Simone Weil’s reading-for-attentiveness, the type of attention
cultivated by these strategies of reading hints towards the reverential.82
80 ME, 85.
81 ME, 84.
82 Robert Zaretsky, The Subversive Weil. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021):
Ch. 2.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
813
Indeed, it is notable that some of Ernst’s most helpful resources in the
development of a theological meta-reading are located in his treatment
of worship and sacramental liturgy.
Like the proposed meta-reading, Ernst understands liturgy in terms
of an active constituting of the subjective conditions for theological
knowledge. In his essay ‘how to see an angel?’ (a question that Barth
thought was stupid),83 Ernst explicitly deals with the liturgy as the en-
acted locus for certain types of knowledge. Liturgy ‘creates a special
kind of state’,84 in which there is a ‘transformation of the visible world
into something fulfilled that we can call invisible’.85 The question of
seeing an angel is not stupid, but only because in the liturgy an event is
performed in which the human and the angelic share a community with
one another. This community is determined by an acknowledgment of a
shared practice, that of praising the triune glory. This liturgical knowl-
edge is mediated by ecstasis, by being-with (Mitsein), and it is this
mode of being-with that the liturgy enacts in an intensified form. To
put this in terms of meta-reading: ‘Thomism’ demarcates a semantic
locus in which we are able to be-with Aquinas’s texts by way of shar-
ing a task, that of the rhythmic and self-involving quest for ultimate
truth in our reditus (with Christ) to God.
Crucially, it is a pre-requisite of Ernst’s account of liturgical knowl-
edge by being-with that the subject does something: viz. ‘create a di-
mension of life that wasn’t there until we actually elicited it, by actually
doing something by performing something historically’.86 Two impor-
tant insights are buried within this laconic phrase. Firstly, the choice
of verb—‘elicited’, rather than, say, ‘constructed’—indicates a meta-
physical limit on the human contribution: the presupposition, unsur-
prisingly, is of an antecedent givenness, an action or state of affairs,
upon which the action of worship (or meta-reading) depends. Secondly,
the description of the activity performed as ‘historical’ contains within
it two notions that are essential to historicity. The first is that of em-
bodiment. The action of worship or meta-reading that is performed and
enacted is a bodily activity, the disciplines of attentiveness embedded
within them are just as bodily as they are intellectual. The second con-
tained notion is that of sociality:87 as historical, bodily, creatures, Ernst
understands us to be always already enmeshed in webs of relationships,
bound together in the histories that we make and share. As historical,
then, the liturgical assembly is necessarily a community, possessed of
a certain structured conviviality.
83 CD III/3: 477.
84 ME, 198.
85 ME, 199.
86 ME, 201.
87 ME, 27-28, 79.
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

814
On Being a Thomist: Cornelius Ernst’s Meta-Theology
So where does this leave the economy of name-invocation as a means
of stabilising rhizomatic theological pluralism? Only a commitment to
sustaining the readability of texts can prevent such an economy col-
lapsing into mere gesture. The best contribution that we can make,
then, lies in the disciplined cultivation of meta-reading, (re-)performing
‘a dimension of life that wasn’t there until we actually elicited it, by
actually doing something historically’. Thomism thus understood is a
far more demanding task than understanding and manipulating dog-
matic axioms. Nonetheless, a Thomism so-conceived better explains
why generations of English Dominicans have found that the texts of
Aquinas do not leave them alone.
Oliver James Keenan OP
Blackfriars, Oxford
oliver.keenan@english.op.org
C⃝2021 Provincial Council of the English Province of the Order of Preachers
 17412005, 2021, 1101, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nbfr.12686 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

