 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Reflections on Things at Hand:  
Contemplating Ecohuman 
Sustainability 
 
By Guy Burneko, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  2    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2016  by  Guy C. Burneko. All rights reserved 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  3    
Table of Contents 
New Reflections on Things at Hand: Contemplating  Ecohuman Sustainability 
Dedication 
Preface and Acknowledgements 
Prologue and Introduction 
Renaissance Prelude 
1.0 Poetics,  Evocative Hermeneutics and Cosmogenesis 
2.0 The God Connection 
2.1 Opacity and Contraction 
2.2 At Play in The Field of Light 
3.0 Transparency and Entanglement 
3.1 The Whole is in the Part 
3.2 Integral Diaphaneity and Transparency 
3.2.1 Quantum of Value 
3.2.2 OntoHermeneutic Luminosity 
3.3 OntoHermeneutic Pluralism 
4.0 The Shu Fits 
4.1 Neurognostic Shu 
5.0 Caveats and Analogues 
5.1 How the Light Gets In 
6.0 K=2: A Joyous Cosmology 
7.0 A Playful Symmetry 
7.1 Comment on a Contemplative Coevolutionary 
Optimization Thrust 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  4    
8.0 Polyphasic Neurognostics: or How Silly Saves Us From 
Ourselves 
8.1 Silly Sagesse 
9.0 A/Musing Interlude 
10.0 The PEAR Proposition 
10.1 Ecomythic Ψ 
11.0 “The Lunchbox Theorem” or Speaking in the First Person 
Resonant 
12.0 The Narrative of Contemplative Conduct as Self-
Organizing Resonance: Notes for a Future Beyond 
Sustainability 
12.1 Reprise 
13.0 MetaMethod 
14.0 Illuminating Variants and Analogues 
15.0 Sustaining Ecosocial Mindfulness: Syllogism, 
Synchronicity & Yijing 
16.0 Below the Mountain Emerges the Spring 
17.0 References Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  5    
 
Dedication 
 
 
I dedicate this work to dear Greta. You know who you are; you 
know what you’re talking about. And as my ears open, my heart 
and my mind are enlarged and enlightened anew.  
 
L'aspetto che lei assume quando sorride un poco non si può dire 
né tenere a mente, a tal punto è una cosa prodigiosa, nuova e 
nobile. 
Dante, Vita Nuova XXI 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  6    
Preface/Acknowledgements 
 
 
 
 
It’s been many years since I first read pages of astronomy and cosmology, began 
visiting the starry night skies, and began enjoying the novels and other narratives of my 
own and of different cultures of the world. All these gifts combined in exciting and 
inviting my soul. Later in grad school and again in fellowships I was enriched by studies 
in literature, myth, religion and in advanced scientific speculation of our own and other 
times. I was broadened as an NEH summer fellow at Stanford, 19κ5, in “Chinese 
Literature in an Interlingual Context,” and in a 19ι4 NEH summer fellowship at The 
Claremont Graduate University in “Myth, Symbolic Modes and Ideology”; most 
illuminating was the “Academy of Consciousness Studies” fellowship at Princeton 
University (1994, sponsored by the Fetzer Institute at Princeton Engineering Anomalies 
Research Laboratory (PEAR, succeeded by the International Consciousness Research 
Laboratories, ICRL.org). A partial repository of the related lore and learning appears in 
the Endnotes and the References of this book. 
 
The time it might take to name all the persons -- family, friends, comrades and 
colleagues (not to mention natural and cultural settings) -- who in one way and another 
nourished my work here would be as long as it would take to read the book itself through. 
 
But  I will with ardent delight begin with my parents Julian and Betty, my 
brothers Mark, Paul and Chris and their partners and children and most particularly the 
challenging questions raised over the years by Paul. I bow to my own gifted partner Greta 
D’Amico, a wonderful writer whose combinations of good judgment, good cooking, 
courage and astute observation have given me cause and pause to relearn almost daily. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  7    
And I sing the thanks and  praise I feel for my daughter, Eva, son-in-law Christer Medin 
and their gifted and valorous kids, Nora and Patrik and the bounty of their family in 
Sweden. 
 
And you know who we are….. from Fort Stanwix Elementary School and from 
Oneida and Rome Free Academy to Fordham in the 60s Bronx. From 8th grade and on I 
salute John M. Fisher, Larry Panasci, Ray Wells, John La Raia, Steve Keihm,  John 
O’Reilly, and Sal Carbonetto  and many other friends dear in memory. Thence to the 
cabal at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks, where Judy Mimken and I began a life of 
correspondence and editorialization; Hilton Wolfe encouraged my thinking and 
godfathered its testing with Pat O’Rourke in Bethel on the Kuskokwim  before I made 
my way to what I still think was as beautiful a gift among us as an institution can offer at 
Emory’s Graduate Institute of the Liberal Arts PhD program in Atlanta. There Bobby 
Paul and Gene Bianchi showed me how the doors and windows could be opened even in 
the most severe disciplinary quarters, and Syd Stegall shared lifelong musics of intellect, 
humor and pulled pork.  And that led to Dalian, China and eventually on to the 
collegiality and friendship of Leslie Combs in the Shenandoah and the good example of 
Alfonso Montuori in San Francisco. Bill and Jen Sisco in Anchorage. And then 
enchanting Cascadia and the Salish Sea, Shierry Nicholsen, green Seattle in all its 
raiment and the ecovillage work of Chris Mare. Based now on Whidbey Island I enjoy 
the most varied and genuinely interesting friends, colleagues and conversations a small 
archipelago and its region can offer: Anne Sayvetz, Haidi Sternberg, Thom McCabe, 
Glenn Roberts and Marjie Cunningham, Jim and Marj Baker, The Simpletons, Trish and 
Tripp at the DoubleBluff Brewpub, Clyde the Greek, Jamie Whitaker, Susanne Fest, Kate 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  8    
Davies, Becky and Ed Breeze, Dorothy Anderson and the singing savant Larry Shafer; 
Gary, India and Tulip Rassner-Donovan, Bob Snow, Tamara Petersen, Jake and all their 
kids, Josh Hauser over at the Moonraker, Chris and Christy Korrow, Detmar and Christa 
Straub. All in all a parcel of EarthSea singularities and heroes. 
 
A special thank you to Chuck Scurlock for editing, mentoring, and general good-
exampling. And as ever, I acknowledge the writers, the scholars, the thinkers, and the 
librarians who care for them. It takes a universe. 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  9    
 
 
 
 
Prologue and Introduction 
We often speak of the sustainability of the natural environment and of our 
relations with it in terms of maintaining natural resources for future generations to 
continue enjoying the comforts, conveniences and profits of advanced development. And 
yet while we move toward laudable cradle-to-cradle, permaculture, ecovillage design and 
related practices in doing this, we at the same time still continue the mentality of doing 
things along these lines in order to get a reward, a payoff for our effort. This is 
understandable given the nature of the ego which relatively quickly carried us from 
agriculture and urbanization to industrialization to environmental crisis. But there may be 
other kinds of ego-ing, or of non-egoing altogether, that better support and accord with 
the extreme long-term sustainability and continuing fruitful coevolution of ecohuman or 
Earth-human systems. In fact, the practice of attentive ecosocial mindfulness as an 
alternative to ego-as-we-know-it can take us beyond sustainability understood simply as a 
means to our long-term extraction of reward from nature to something more like our 
actually living as generative and regenerative performances of the self-rewarding patterns 
and processes of the life of the universe – as an end in itself, not a means to some external 
better thing. A prime theme of this book, then, is that in the ecosocial mindfulness of full 
attention to experience regardless of its potential benefits we are more likely to find the 
extreme-long-term wellbeing of sustaining Earth-human relations. In one relatively recent 
example, we're invited -- in the timely summer 2014 "Minding Our Minds" issue of The 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  10    
Hedgehog Review dedicated to the topic of attention -- to "ecologies of attention. . .that 
pull us out of ourselves and allow us to join the world in a mood of appreciative 
discernment."1  
From Thomas Berry’s point of view, for an even more expansive instance, a 
functional cosmology is in order, one that is in effect our living and embodied experience 
of the spontaneities of the Earth. Another way of appreciating his notion of functional 
cosmology is in the experience of ourselves as a dimensionality of the Earth, of nature, 
and, by extension, of cosmogenesis, and of the ongoing coevolution of the community, 
the communion, of the interrelated events and systems of the universe. We are that 
communion becoming conscious of itself. In this nondual sense, we embody and enact, 
we participate or perform, we do not simply represent in concepts or control through 
gainful strategies, the ongoing life of things. In a functional cosmology, unaddicted to 
external payoffs, we live as -- more than we manipulate or seek to extract reward from – 
cosmogenesis.2 
I infer from this that contemplative conduct of life is conducive to a flourishing 
ecohuman or anthropocosmic future. The contemplativity I conceive is so  highly 
attentive to experience that the individual ego, at least temporarily or provisionally, loses, 
allays or forgets itself in the event of complete attentiveness to experience, especially 
with nature. Hereas the subject/object separation is suspended, and we enjoy the flow of 
life without reaching or needing or desiring to reach beyond the “objects” of our attention 
for potential “subjective” rewards external to the event. What is effectively the self-
attentiveness of the nondualizing contemplative event is its own reward in this 
sustainability narrative – to a degree that exceeds everyday consumerist, manipulative or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  11    
otherwise intentional reward orientations and outcomes. To the degree we attend to, with 
and as nature in ecohumane wholing, we realize cosmogenesis in, as and for itself (and) 
through ourselves. The first person ecocontemplative experience – diversely exampled in 
the shaman or the sage, the mature contemplative monk, in ecosocial mindfulness, in the 
ecology of imagination in childhood, in a feeling for the organism or as a passageway for 
new connections -- is a fractal, microcosmic and metonymic, or we might say, a 
cosmomorphic instantiation of the first or omniperson cosmogenic event, the ever-present 
origin or unfolding.  In the contemplative researches of Huayan Buddhism, all the diverse 
modes and events of the universe, including ourselves, other persons, and natural 
phenomena at all scales, are experienced as a differentiated and yet nontotalizable whole 
process or system that is fully reducible neither to subjects or objects. Such 
interdependently co-originating things may be said each to contain or express the 
universe without end. Can there be any experience with a better payoff? Anyone whose 
life is as rich as this, even at odd intervals, hardly needs to fret and twitch about 
extracting more from the world – as if that world and its welfare were separable from our 
kinds of thought and interaction with it and one another and all our relations.3 
In the fullness of attentive engagement, whether described as contemplative, 
meditative, dreamlike, visionary, mystical or ecstatic, we can experience the nondualizing 
flow of human/nature, of self/other, of person/planet that is intrinsically rewarding. 
Because it is intrinsically rewarding, like play or spontaneous, sometimes synchronistic 
insight, it is not ego-reinforced or ego-reinforcing. Not therefore, reaching out and 
beyond or instrumentalizing experience for payoffs, especially payoffs and rewards that 
become further objectified and externalized as fame, wealth, power and domination, we 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  12    
are disinclined to stamp a deeper and larger footprint on the natural environment. Instead, 
in fact, as in many nondualist and indigenous traditions, we experience ourselves and our 
communities as a resonant and cocreative dimension or mode of the Earth, of 
cosmogenesis, in its self-realizing, self-organizing, self-sustaining and self-celebrating.4  
In this selection of interrelated writings, I draw from across disciplines, cultures, 
historical periods, structures of consciousness and genres in an attempt to evoke the 
potentials and values of contemplative ecohuman/e sustainability. In result, this is an 
anthology, a mosaic, a stew, of diversely polyphonous allusiveness as well as an 
integrative essay. No one can be expert in all the areas of seeming relevance, and in 
addition to practicing discursive exposition, critical argument, neologism and frequent 
analogy in this conversation among insights, I occasionally also meditatively interact 
with Yijing as a means of developing or unconcealing implications and instances of the 
kind of spontaneous humanocosmic resonance that seems most sustainable and, more-
than-sustainable, generative or flourishing. I believe this resonance both in experience 
and theory outsatisfies our souls and psyches far beyond the grasp of extraction, 
manipulation, domination and accumulation. It liberates and sustains even as it reveals 
and realizes – sometimes aconceptually or arationally – the self-rewarding communion of 
life in interbeing.5  
Writing this way, I confess and evidence that however many references and notes 
there are strewn around here – e. g., from areas as diverse as quantum field theory and the 
theories of self-organization, complexity or emergent dynamics to Daoist and 
NeoConfucian ontohermeneutics, ecosocial studies, archetypal psychology, cosmology, 
anthropology, parapsychology, comparative noetics and religious studies – this is really 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  13    
in spirit, “entention” and occasional thematic refrains and repetitions, an incantation, an 
en-chantment. It is also the evocative self-singing of a song of sustainingly shared 
becoming, a quietly active liturgy of our contemplative experience of cosmogenesis 
and/as the contemplative self-experience of cosmogenesis. Tuning language with the 
aptitudes of emergent ecopoiesis, I try ecopoetically to evoke, at least to suggest, the 
sustainability potentials of self-rewarding, celebratory and reciprocally cocreative 
interhuman, ecohuman and anthropocosmic attentionality.6  
Zhu Xi's (1130-1200)  NeoConfucian anthology Jin-Si Lu or Reflections on 
Things at Hand – meaning "to extend on the basis of similarity in kind" --  was a 
compilation of diverse lore and insight teaching that it is in a contemplative mode that we 
best learn to perform and participate in daily affairs the sustaining patterns of the 
universe, and that the character of the contemplative sage is identical with that of Heaven 
and Earth. It is the daring play and work of contemplation, intimates Terry Tempest 
Williams more recently in Finding Beauty in a Broken World, that releases us to this 
generative, more-than-sustaining, and flourishing interaction.7 
Endnotes: Prologue & Introduction 
     Regarding the Endnotes and text throughout this essay: All sources are fully identified 
in the References at the end of the book. If an author having only one entry in the 
References is named in the text, s/he will not ordinarily be mentioned in the notes except 
when a relevant page number or comment is given; e. g. Deacon. Authors having more 
than one Reference entry (including those with co-authors) will appear in the notes with 
the specific year(s) of the relevant publication(s) except in cases where any and all of the 
referenced works of that author are considered relevant; e. g. Laughlin. Unascribed 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  14    
allusions or quotes in the text will in the notes typically be referenced to their sources in 
the respective order in which they appeared. Familiar sources or those themes easily 
accessed online are not noted or an internet address is provided; e. g. Pico’s “Oration.” 
Throughout the text, Earth is capitalized in most uses, as a gesture recognizing its, or hir, 
significance in our lives with a note of courtesy, deference or respect somewhat in the 
spirit of Thomas Berry (pace David Abram's "Note to the Reader" 2011: xi). Some 
themes, quotes and terms are offered as refrains and appear several times throughout, e. 
g. Zhang Zai’s “Heaven is my father, Earth is my mother. . .” 
1.) cradle to cradle, McDonough and Braungart; permaculture, Mollison; ecovillage 
design in Mare and Lindegger, eds.; on non-egoing see Wu 1990: passim; ecologies of 
attention Crawford: 26; and see the story of Michael Faraday as told by Neil deGrasse 
Tyson for a glimpse of research for its own sake in the video series Cosmos: A Spacetime 
Odyssey: "The Electric Boy" -- season 1, episode 10, presented by Fox and National 
Geographic, http://www.cosmosontv.com/watch/250569283639 (accessed 7.24.14). For 
an exquisite contextualization of ecosocial mindfulness as a variant of theoria and theoria 
physike see Foltz' The Noetics of Nature; on attention/interruption see especially Laurie 
Zoloth, “2014 AAR Presidential Address: Interrupting Your Life: An Ethics for the 
Coming Storm” http://jaar.oxfordjournals.org/content/84/1/3.full  (accessed 5.26.16). 
2.) Berry 1988: 66, 87-91, 121, 132, and passim. Exploration of the role of the 
contemplative sage in the communion of Heaven, Earth and Humankind in 
NeoConfucian tradition finds heartening analogy with elements of contemporary 
cosmological thinking via the “priestly” role of humanity in performing, sustaining and 
celebrating (the divine incarnation in) the life of nature and cosmos found in Eastern 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  15    
Orthodox Christianity. The interested reader can lean more beginning with the closing 
pages of Vedral on apophatic reasoning in quantum information theory and continuing 
with Nesteruk’s The Universe as Communion and then, in no particular order, the works 
of: Abram, Bordeianu, Chryssavgis and Foltz, Foltz, Munteanu, Pope Francis, Purser, et 
al., Unger and Unger and Smolin. 
3. highly attentive see Gallagher, Wallace; flow, Csikzentmihalyi; person/planet, Roszak; 
shaman, Berry ibid.: 211-12, and see Eliade, Harner; sage, Jones and Culliney; ecology of 
imagination, Cobb; feeling for the organism, Keller; on mature contemplatives see 
Laughlin, Laughlin, McManus and d’Aquili, Laughlin and Throop; ever-present origin, 
Gebser; Huayan see Cleary: 30, 35; on first person attentiveness see Abram 2011. 
4.) dreamlike, visionary, see Berry ibid. and see Obeyesekere; human/nature. . . 
person/planet see G. Bateson 1972, 1979 and Roszak, see also Primack and Abrams; 
synchronistic see von Franz; indigenous traditions, Berry ibid.: 180-93 and passim; 
celebratory, ibid.: 69 and passim 
5.) structures of consciousness see Gebser 1985; polyphonous allusiveness (and evocative 
hermeneutics) see Wu and also n.b. Girardot’s reflections (1983: 29-43) on stew as an apt 
ontohermeneutic trope; Yijing se Cheng 1995, 2003; communion of life in interbeing see 
Grim; for reflections bearing on the theme of Yijing and EcoSocial Mindfulness see 
Burneko 2004, see also Hershock and the work of Cleary 
6.) entention in Deacon passim; on incitement, incantation, enchantment, evocation see 
Jullien, and see Wu on musical and evocative hermeneutics; celebration see again Berry 
1988 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  16    
7.) NeoConfucian anthology see Zhu Xi: 94; daring play of contemplation cf. Williams: 
385.  
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  17    
 
 
 
Renaissance Prelude 
The degradation of our environment calls our unselfcritical anthropocentrism into 
question. From well before Pico della Mirandola's Renaissance "Oration on the Dignity 
of Man" until our own time, the importance of the human as pinnacle of value and the 
arbiter of  meaning on Earth (today meriting the upper case) has been comparatively 
unquestioned.1 In the Abrahamic religious traditions, humankind has held a privileged 
place as vicar, image and cardinal agent of God in the dispensation of value. Pico wrote 
of the new Prometheus that he was the center of the world and bounded by no limits. 
Yet, as expansionist European humanism spread around the world to varying 
degrees its message of the worth of (some) human persons, it also fostered an 
increasingly instrumentalist view of nature, especially through its Enlightenment 
rationalist strain exacerbated by elements of Platonism and of Baconian and Cartesian 
dualism. With colonization, industrialization and modern objectivistic scientism, the raw 
and other materials of Earth and, by extension, the cosmos became more and more the 
means to personal, national and commercial ends. And humans correlatively made 
instruments of themselves, one another and of their gifts not (only) to the greater glory of 
God but to the extrinsic ends of dominion, status and private accumulation. The Earth 
was increasingly subdued and abused for the sake of anthropocentric gratification. 
The commodification of the Earth and the commodification of human aspiration 
and ability reinforced one another. Our ego-demands on the natural environment resulted 
increasingly from our expectations of extrinsic rewards measurable in consumption, 
imposed influence, and the wealth of ledger-book accountings. These accounts were 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  18    
external to the actual activities they presumed to quantify and tally, and, further, they 
externalized the nonquantifiable or inconvenient costs of environmental degradation, 
occupational hazard, social injustice, etc. To meet the reward expectations of a mentality 
of unending economic growth, we made human selves and other kinds of persons 
servitors of the bottom line. We have left deep and imposing footprints all over the 
natural world as well as on our collective psyche in our enterprise. 
Today, with the degradation of the ecosocial environment, our unexamined 
anthropocentric humanism becomes problematic both for its abuse of natural systems and 
also its monetistic reductions of human value and effort. Ecohumane dignity has been 
contracted to the highest bidder. As Thomas Berry avers, our connection with cosmos 
and Earth has become “dysfunctional,” and we are “autistic” with respect to the natural 
universe. We reductively see it as a collocation of objects and not as a community, a 
celebratory communion, of subjects.2 Yet in the new and more sustaining narrative Berry 
proposes, we and all our relations, the nonhuman persons, emerge together in the process 
of cosmogenesis as attest evolutionary systems sciences, indigenous traditions, nondual 
and process philosophies and phenomenology. 
Our autism and dysfunction appear as ironic and exaggerated legacies of the 
paradigm promoted by Pico. However, even in his manifesto there is a refrain that with 
contemporary modification may yet help us to find our way from an unwittingly arrogant 
and environmentally destructive Humanism to a more-than-sustaining Earth-resonant 
conduct that might better be called Ecohumanism for its mutually beneficial Earth-human 
relations “that emerge among the patterns of nature without, however, being confined by 
or reducible to them.”3 For in asserting the significant value of humanity, Pico also 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  19    
averred that we are endowed with attributes that may prove relevant to the further 
revision of our self understanding for ecohumane sustainability today, and to what Berry 
correspondingly calls the reinventing of the human.4 
One attribute Pico noted from his perspective in the 1480s was that given our 
metaphorical or epistemological centrality we can observe, contemplate and experience 
the whole universe. We can interpret him to mean that we are touched by and can in-
corporate all experience; we are capax universi, capable of the universe, of universing. A 
second was that unlike, or more than, the nonhuman persons we know, we can to varying 
degrees fashion ourselves, our understanding and experience, in forms we imagine and 
choose.5 This is largely because unlike the other animals, we are more generalized, less 
specialized  -- we can imitate and expand their gifts and discover new ones. From 
biomimicry to self-actualization and notions of evolving consciousness, versions of these 
ideas are still fruitfully alive among us, as are others still emerging. For instance, 
Laughlin and his colleagues think that we may be neurobiologically, and Jung speculates 
that we may be archetypally and evolutionarily, preselected for holistic insight and 
integral experience. Abrams and Primack additionally propose that we are “at least part 
of the self-consciousness of the universe. The moment enough of us recognize this – and 
become willing to accept the logical consequences – is the moment we become a cosmic 
society.” 6 
If we transdisciplinarily, interculturally and dramatically reinterpret the 
Renaissance ideas of capax  universi in the evolutionary context of our emerging 
cosmological and environmental awareness, we foresee how we may outgrow our earlier 
cultural excesses in behalf of ecohumane sustainability. For instance, we may say today 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  20    
that we are hardly central in cosmic perspective or importance. Yet our consciousness, as 
much as it may be an emergent of the universe process, is also a self-aware mode of its 
contextualization, narratization, actualization and (self)interpretation. In this sense, our 
awareness is not necessarily directive but may be seen as what Deacon calls an 
emergently “ententional” co-condition of anthropo-cosmic (self)realization – as being in 
relationship with, evoked by, or organized to realize what is not-yet and has never been, 
or is not already constituted or denominated. In his thinking, what we conceive of as the 
intentionality of our purposes, meanings, values, consciousness, etc. is a focused 
expression or instantiation of the emergent, the ententional, field dynamics of 
cosmogenesis itself in teleodynamic forms and aptitudes by which (we) unfold ever new 
and ecohumane ways of participating and en-valuing cosmogenesis. 
Abrams and Primack further speculate in this vein that we have a responsibility to 
educate our young to the ecological richness and possible uniqueness of consciousness 
and ententional life on Earth. They state emphatically on the basis of informed 
contemporary research that, “We may be the locus of the universe’s consciousness. If we 
could just stay aware of this – if our thinking lived up to this standard – we humans could 
solve our worst problems.”7 Ours may not be an anthropocentric universe anymore, but 
we (and the universe through us) may be finding ourselves to be cosmomorphic 
presences here, especially as (our) ententionality performs the sustainingly ecohumane 
resonance of mutually beneficial Earth-human functioning.  
Interculturally stated, (our) anthropocosmic self-contemplative observation and 
reflective “investigation of things,” to use a relevant phrase of the NeoConfucian Zhu Xi 
writing in the 1100s, demonstrate (our) coevolutionary abilities as meaning-and-value 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  21    
constructing participant/observers in and in interaction with the universe. We know this 
as much from the narrative theory of Bocchi and Ceruti as from the depictions of 
quantum relations developed by Zajonc and by Laszlo and from the cosmogonic 
realizations of Swimme and Berry that the universe centers and articulates itself in each 
and all. The theoretical physicist Henry Stapp succinctly introduces this theme -- in what 
will become, in various terms and emphases, a refrain throughout my presentation -- 
noting that the entirely mechanistic idea of a “meaningless billiard-ball universe” has 
been swept away and  replaced with,  
a universe in which we human beings, by means of our value-based 
[e]ntentional efforts, can make a difference first in our own behaviors, 
thence in the social matrix in which we are embedded, and eventually in 
the entire physical reality that sustains our streams of conscious 
experiences.8  
And from contemplative traditions as well as from phenomenological or 
psychological depth analysis, we understand that dehabituated yet self-aware 
consciousness may engage the variety of existence without insistently privileging its own 
kind of observation and form of being, as is variously expressed by Deikman on the 
deautomatization of consciousness in mystical experience, Gebser on consciousness’ 
various structures and their potential integrality, Guenther on the non-necessity of ego as 
the prime foundation and orientation of experience, Kafatos and Nadeau on the part-
whole relations disclosed in contemporary physics, and White writing of the post-
foundationalist benefits of a weak ontology. And in doing so, dehabituated awareness 
releases the world (human and nonhuman alike) from the habits of our dualizing 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  22    
instrumentalism and commodification. Recited with more tonality and several more 
syllables, a nondualizing dehabituation of (our) consciousness and conduct in a universe 
of onto-metaphorical or onto-analogical quantum all-connectedness among events and 
awareness manifests (our) ententionality as sustaining resonance with and as the self-
reflexive spontaneity of anthropocosmic ongoing-wholing. This may appear in local, 
human and in nonlocal or distributed and probabilistic ecohuman and humanocosmic 
ways. And our options include the transformative power of the word in a new narrative or 
universe story, one helping us in conduct and rhetoric to an appropriate I-Thou with one 
another in and with our natural world.  
That humans are not restricted to a sole specialized endowment of consciousness 
but are generalized in aptitude for contemporary ecohumane interbeing and for 
“ententionally” coevolutionary thinking and interaction means we can participate in and 
hereby optimally (or at least in approximate mutual benefit and reciprocity) share the life 
of all things in diversely sustaining ways according to our forms of inquiry, conduct, 
narration, and active contemplation amid them, and as a function, an actual event or 
performance, of the process of ongoing-wholing that we and they together embody, 
envalue, celebrate and display. In experiences of attentiveness with the minute particulars 
of things so complete that there is little or even nothing of “selfhood,” as Blake named it, 
left over, we recover our solidarity with them and as all-of-this-going-on here and now -- 
that is, as the active (self-)imagination of the universe process. This recurring notion of 
attention-occasioned ongoing-wholing will be indebted foremost to the quantum 
theorization of Henry Stapp and collaterally to philosophical hermeneutics and Gestalt 
psychology. I take from Stapp the conception that events and phenomena exhibit “an 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  23    
element of wholeness, symbolized by the quantum of action” allowing us to speak of our 
observation of the universe as an interaction with it, as, in a way, (its) anthropocosmic 
self-performance in the sense that (ourΨ participant observation “must be a part of 
nature’s process that far transcends its relevance to human consciousness” alone. (OurΨ 
contemplative attentiveness and ententionality by this measure and in the context of 
quantum entanglement or nonlocality, is an anthropocosmic (irreducible to the human 
alone) performance and eventuation of the units, wholes, and unities of reality, of real-
ization, around us. (Our) worlding and co-worlding in more-or-less coherent and unique 
wholes is evoked in and with (our) participant awareness, the moreso and the more richly 
or sustainably so to the degree it is not prematurely contracted or opacified by ego-
metrics. Likewise, in this speculation, things, events and beings in their relations may be   
said to co-construct or to co-evoke one another in multiple, holarchic, reciprocal or 
simultaneous “wholings” of the field of (what we callΨ superpositioned wavefunction 
possibilityήpotential each according to “its” co-constitutive kind. The itness of each kind 
is inseverable from the interminate valence and morphogenesis of the field/process 
including all similarly interdependent "others." Coevolution in this sense is centered or 
enwholed everywhere  and concluded nowhere (according to Swimme, Primack and 
Abrams, and reminiscent of Cusa and Huayan) – each and/as other a focusing and 
rewholing of the(ir) field of interbeing.9 Value is in, not external to, the fully attentive 
holistic or contemplative event. Unsustainable, externalized “bottom-line” notions of 
value are superseded when we are fully mindful and attentive. And the aggressively 
anthropocentrizing ego-appetitive mentality of environmental acquisition and domination 
is evaporated, outgrown or modulated by both active and passive forms of self-rewarding 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  24    
humanocosmic and ecohuman contemplation, entention and attention in the immediate 
gift of events. Rather than grasping for payoffs, we discover a kind of cosmomorphic 
intellection and conduct intrinsically conducive to sustaining multiple and 
interpenetrating forms of life and consciousness. 
The onto-logic at work here is that of contemplative and narrative traditions 
which find that with the abeyance in consciousness of our ego-perspective and its self-
interested subject-object divisions, “worlding” appears as self-organizing and self-
rewarding “experience-as-such” not fractioned into self and other. Such consciousness or 
“contemplative observation” is sometimes called in Chinese tradition guan (Yijing #20) 
and may be characterized as the  “ontohermeneutical” and “interactive seeing” that finds 
and performs the simultaneously objective and subjective creativity of things and persons 
and their mutual “ontocosmological” interpenetrations.10 
In other cultural wor(l)ds, while the human ego-mind is no longer so dominant, 
centrally executive and manipulative or all-seeing as it seemed to be for Pico’s and later 
Humanism, our contemplatively disegoed consciousness as (self)attentively undivided, 
nonreductive “experience-as-such” may nondualistically and ecohumanely open up, 
allow or release dimensions of real-ization other than the one to which we are most 
habituated, namely the subject-object structure of existence which, according to 
Guenther’s understanding of Tibetan Buddhism, and repeated with his emphasis, “is far 
from being normative for all experience.” Guenther speculates further that in these 
dimensions, information, meaning and contemplative, yet interactive, attentiveness may 
bear us to more encompassing ontohermeneutic experiences of our being, and of 
interbeing, than is our habit in a switch “from an examination of the parts of reality to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  25    
reality itself. . .as an undivided and indivisible whole. . . as it unfolds in its totality or 
spontaneity.”11 
 
This switch “presentiates” (in Gebser’s vocabulary of the integral consciousness 
structureΨ what Grim calls “the interbeing of cosmology and community” and what 
Gregory Bateson calls “the ecology of mind,” that is implicit throughout nondualized 
cosmogenesis in its differential simultaneously “imparting and receiving,” as Gebser puts 
it, of ever-present origin or ongoing cocreativity.  This purported switch, dehabituation, 
transformation, “emergent dynamic” or metanoia of consciousness and conduct opens us 
to what the Chinese text Huainanzi accordingly calls the “resonance” or ganying of all 
supposedly separate things in the  universe. This may also be characterized as experience 
of “prior unity” where discussed by Adi Da and as the quantum or akashic “connectivity” 
elaborated by Laszlo and by Abraham and Roy with which, according to O’Murchu and 
to Bohm, we become attuned through meditation.12  
Nor, however, does transformative awareness need to be formulated in our 
familiar linear, cognicentric terms as a hierarchical ascent, as in Pico’s narrative of a 
Great Chain of Being, or even as a psychedelic “expansion” of consciousness and being 
with Leary or the McKennas. They, glosses Berman, illustrate “the error of the 
transcendent or transpersonal search for ‘the ground [or apex] of  Being,’ when we 
cannot grasp that Being requires no ground.”13 Conceiving an Ultimate at the other end 
of an externalization or dualization that at this end terminates in an ego needing, 
therefore, to reglue itself back to such -- and, consequently, needing to expropriate or 
appropriate as much of this “environment” as possible to fill its lack -- our self-separating 
perspective severs into pieces what is neither severable nor ontohermeneutically 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  26    
reducible to begin with for the very reason that there is no self-subsisting there there, no x 
utter(ab)ly other than our (wh)y. Our ontohermeneutics then, the auto-differentiating 
complex of mind and/as nature, can be taken as an ecopoietically analogical display of an 
apophatic acategory.  The problematic is perhaps less in the notion of an ultimate 
“grounding” than that of an “othering” that presupposes an absolute somewhat or 
someplace else to (inter)being here now. 14 
 
As Tu Weiming correspondingly suggests in his intercultural interpretation of the 
Confucian classic Zhongyong titled as Centrality and Commonality, “the realization of 
the deepest meaning of  humanity necessitates. . .moving beyond the anthropological 
realm.”15 As we do this, contemplative experience as well as coevolutionary cosmology 
both demonstrate that human nature and ontology are focal imbrications in a field of 
relatively selfless, i. e., coconstituting, cocreating (cheng) sidereal and biocultural self-
organization processes the resonantly performative co-actualization of our identity with 
and as which, according to our contemplative self-cultivation through the nondualizing  
investigation of things, allows us to realize our “generalized” nature as that of, not 
beyond or without, the field or continuum of being(s). Not external to the ecosystem, we 
need not punishingly extract value and meaning by trying to take and make things out of 
it, but simply, i. e. nonmanipulatively, to presence (it): disegoed coevolution is 
sustainingly Self-rewarding experience. Again, this is not somnolent inertia but the 
common sense practical ententionality of noncoercive wu wei. And instead of biting at 
the pie of nature as if taking something outside into ourselves, we get (share) far more 
nourishment “from” the world through nonreductively experiencing ourselves in, with 
and “as” worlding’s ongoing-wholing, as Earth-human or anthropocosmic co-worlding. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  27    
This, again, is “not to transcend humanity but to work through it”  by embodying 
the cheng or basic “truth,” “authenticity” and “sincerity” of the not-two way of 
cosmogenesis. In the traditional Chinese view, it is the selfless – cocreatively 
interdependent -- nature of Heaven and Earth that makes them endlessly productive and 
reproductive. Relatively selflessly – in self-rewardingly attentive contemplativity 
according ourselves with these -- we transform and realize ourselves as sustainably 
forming one body in sustainingly and flourishingly co-self-actualization with all things, 
with Heaven and Earth. Rather than an anthropocentric domination of a world of objects 
this is more the ententional communion of emergently intersubjective cocreation Berry 
and Deacon quite differently discuss. We move hereby from the calculating survivalist 
regime of powerful and privative incursions into the bounty of Earth toward sustaining 
planetary commonweal spontaneously experienced as a nondominating (inter-) 
attentiveness whose contemplative releaseήfullness is its own reward. It’s not fatuous 
wishing that makes it so, but nondoing the habitual twoing.16 
As we hereby embody the inherent mutuality and reciprocity among things 
without heedless impositions upon them and ourselves, we continually real-ize (our) 
authenticity. And as this is “an integral part of the ‘myriad things,’ a complete realization 
of humanity must lead to the realization of things as well”: “The very process of 
becoming sincere [or non-imposing] may be conceived as a way of restructuring the 
world.” Expressed in the nondualizing terms of quantum cosmogenesis, this is to say 
“reductionism is ruled out. . . .consciousness, or mind, can be properly defined as a phase 
in the process of the evolution of the cosmos. . . .intimately connected with the whole”; 
indeed, “the dynamic neuronal patterns” of the brain “infold within themselves the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  28    
previous stages of the life of the cosmos, and are seamlessly interconnected with all other 
activities in the cosmos. . . . human consciousness ‘partakes’ or ‘participates in’ the 
conscious universe.”17  
And throughout this essay, I take this restructuring to mean a way of coming not 
only to the sustainability of life forms on Earth but beyond sustainability to existential 
and ontohermeneutic resonance with and as the field or continuum in which all perform 
their varying foci and reciprocal co-focusing of interbeing. The practice of genuinely 
fruitful environmentalism in this view is inherently, albeit not exclusively, nondualizing 
contemplative conduct and consciousness. In their comparative selflessness of 
uncommon attentiveness, practical contemplative conduct and contemplatively tuned 
experience are inherently self-rewarding ecosocial performances of the resonantly 
cogrowthful realm(s) of kosmos and anthropos not prematurely divided and 
positivistically  reduced by/into self and other. Sustainability is not just survivability but 
lived, eco-contemplatively attuned (and tuning) nondualizing resonance (ganying) with 
and as Earth-cosmos in dramatic (f)act and in (our) ontonarration. 
And it is not solely found in meditative stillness in various forms, but in the 
nonmanipulative craft, the practical art, of an ontoaesthetic and ontohermeneutic ars 
contextualis that integrates analogical, mythical, synchronistic and narrative 
understanding with logical, ecopolitical or scientific understanding. Through a 
contemplative sustainability based in self-rewarding attentiveness more than gainful 
extraction, control or manipulation, the simultaneously objective and subjective 
expressions of life in their ongoingly reciprocal connections and compenetrations 
sustainingly complete and express one another as the ongoingly ententional self-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  29    
celebrating intimacy of cosmomorphic interbeing in analogy with the universe, i. e., with 
cosmogenesis unfragmented into exaggeratedly individualizing and unsustainable efforts 
to control and use other being(s).  
While Pico’s Humanism is no longer a beacon to us in his original terms, his 
intuition of capax universi does unwittingly preface a more generously ecohumane 
experience of life lived today in "analogia universi," in what the Chinese sage may speak 
of as the embodied consciousness of “centrality and commonality,” i. e., simultaneously 
“field and focus” (zhongyong). This is what might today also be considered autotelic, 
self-organizationally co-growthful systems ententionality (zheng, rectitude) in the 
sustaining fruitful and flourishing conduct of (our) contemplatively resonant ecohumane 
interbeing amid “all our relations” – sidereal, organic, psychophysical and quantum 
probabilistic: reciprocating (shu) Heaven, Earth and Humanity in contemporary ancient 
understanding.18 
Endnotes: Renaissance Prelude 
1.Ψ Pico’s “Oration”  http:ήήcscs.umich.eduή~crshaliziήMirandolaή (accessed ι.16.12Ψ; see 
Burneko 2003, 2004, 2010; see also Lynn White, Jr. Foltz: 120-21 and elsewhere offers a 
far-reaching and nuanced interpretation of White noting White's distinction that whereas 
the Latin and Roman versions of Christianity may indeed have warranted the abuse of 
nature, in the Greek, Russian and Byzantine church, the works of nature were icons, 
"godly images" and communications of God with humankind. Foltz notes that, ". . .godly 
images can be  made by artists only because the earth itself is fundamentally iconic." 
2.) Berry 1988: 16, 45-46 
3.) Burneko 2004: 183; see Deacon 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  30    
4.) Berry 1988: 82 
5.) Tarnas 2001: 215; see Primack and Abrams and Abrams and Primack 
6.) Laughlin; see Jung 1963, 1969; see Abrams and Primack: 154 and von Franz 1980, 
1992 
7.) Deacon: 542-45, 549; Abrams and Primack: 162; Deacon speaks of ententionality as 
an emergent function or property of an evolutionarily maturing universe. Our 
attentiveness, consciousness, meaning and value are among its expressions or, as I will 
often speak of them, its performances. I’ll often use forms of the word ententionality 
rather than intentionality to emphasize my idea that sustaining ecohumane potentials of 
mind, value and meaning are endogenous or inherent in cosmogenesis and not original 
with or necessarily specific to individual human ego. As our thinking and conduct 
nondualistically perform emergent ententional aptitudes of cosmogenesis, we may say, 
although somewhat awkwardly, they perform or are enwholing fractal expressions of 
humanocosmogenesis. An invaluable critique and contextualization of and a complement 
to the emergentist view is one provided by Wallace 2007 and is based in quantum and 
Buddhist contemplative research  
8.) Zhu Xi (Chu Hsi): 94, for many NeoConfucians, the investigation of things and 
related self-reflection and reflection on things at hand is in part described as including a 
kind of onto-analogization or reciprocity (shu) between ourselves and the sustaining 
pattern/principle (li) of cocreative nature; Zajonc 2004; Laszlo 2003; see also Swimme 
1996, Swimme and Berry; Stapp: 7; see also Deacon: 135, 140; see also Gefter, Amanda  
“The Case Against Reality” http://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2016/04/the-
illusion-of-reality/479559/ (accessed 4.27.16) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  31    
9.) Blake in Frye: 58 and passim; ongoing-wholing see Stapp: 66-67, 76-77, 79, 82, 88-
89, 91, 93, 103, 105, 108, 112, 117, 131-32, 135-37, 140; centered or enwholed 
everywhere see Swimme 1996, Abrams and Primack, Primack and Abrams; on holarchy 
see Koestler 1979, and on related fractals see Mandelbrot; Cusa[nus] thought God is a 
circle whose center is everywhere and circumference nowhere, see also Cleary on 
Huayan 
10.) experience-as-such, Guenther 1989: 3; ontohermeneutical (onto-metaphorical, onto-
analogical, etc.) see Cheng 1995: 162-63 
11.) Guenther 1989: 3, 247-4κ; see Gebser on “integral consciousness” 
12.) Gebser 1985: 7 and passim; see G. Bateson 1972 and 1979: 92; Huainanzi see Le 
Blanc, trans.; emergent dynamic Deacon; Laszlo 2ίί3, 2ίί4; O’Murchu: 16κ-69; Bohm 
1976: 18, 32, 53; see Laughlin and Throop; also see Obeyesekere: 160-168 
13.) Berman 2000: 232 
14.Ψ regarding analogical display of an apophatic acategory I’ll here and there recall 
variations of this trope or problematic, including Deacon’s focus (2Ψ not on the materials 
nor even the processes of natural systems so much as on that which is absent to them and 
thereby allows, or one may say that evokes, the emergence of enhanced function: “A 
something-that-is-not-a-thing has physical consequences. . . . increasing one’s sense of 
belonging in the universe.” Analogously, reports Bateson, the difference that makes a 
difference in mental and ecosocial processes, “is a nonsubstantial phenomenon” (19ι9: 
92). See also Derrida on différance and the argument of John Scotus Eriugena’s via 
negativa that Deus itaque nescit se quid est quia non est quid: (Even) God does not know 
what He is because God is not a what. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  32    
15.) Tu 1989: 77 
16.) not to transcend humanity ibid.; and see Adi Da on non-twoing; See also the Eastern 
Orthodox eco/anthropo-hermeneutic 
17.) an integral part Tu 1989: 78, 79; reductionism is ruled out Kafatos and Nadeau 1990: 
177; see Laughlin; see also Smolin; and see Swimme 1996 
18.) see Tu 1989; Ames and Hall 2001; see especially Abrams and Primack on the 
anthropocosmically “pivotal” significance of human life and consciousness as interpreted 
by their contemporary cosmology/cosmogony, e. g., chap. 5: 79-9κ; see Gribbin’s related 
discussions. Tegmark: 150 reports that by the premises of eternal inflation and the 
metaverse, anything that can happen is enabled actually to happen. I infer from this that 
ontoanalogies of the sorts I offer throughout this essay among events, modes of 
consciousness, disciplines and cultures across time are meaningful, viable and ecosocially 
sustaining in (the realization of the potentials of) cosmogenesis. See Fritjof Capra on 
"The Systems View of Life,"  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=If2Fw0z6uxY#t=30/ 
(accessed 8.8.14); see the critique of metaverse cosmologies in Unger and Smolin 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  33    
 
 
1.0 Poetics,  Evocative Hermeneutics and Cosmogenesis 
Catching 
 
A recurring theme of this exploration is that a root of sustaining cultural meaning 
for both religion and science is cosmology or, in more dynamic terms, everywhere-
ongoing cosmogenesis – this, as Einstein alluded, is the matrix of mystery from which 
both arise. My idea is that resonance or attunement with cosmogenesis through 
contemplative attentiveness in daily life is self-rewarding in, and to the extent of, 
releasing us from our drives to keep using the universe around us, Earth, for external 
gains beyond, or outside, our immediate experience of it. I believe that complete 
attentiveness to experience in its minute particulars brings diminished regard for its 
external payoffs in a way of living not just sustainably but more-than-sustainably in 
immediate performance of the life of the cosmos. Because the contemplative ecstasy of 
performing the life of the cosmos is far more intrinsically satisfying and lasting than are 
extrinsic rewards from the extraction of resources and the accumulation of money, status 
or power, it calls us to conduct less destructive of the natural and social environments 
through the experience of sustainability understood as our being a dimensionality of 
cosmogenesis as expressed on Earth, not just Earth stewards, occupants, consumers or 
manipulators.1  
A further inference to draw from this realization is that in our genuinely attending 
to cosmogenesis in its vast and its minute scales and modes of interaction (organismic, 
quotidian, interpersonal, ecosocial, seasonal, astronomical, etc.), universe self-awareness 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  34    
is unfolding, since we the attenders are also reflexive modes and nodes of that which is 
being attended to. Likewise, we envalue and contextualize, we interpret, express, give 
meaning to, and share meaning with, the universe with which we attend. We might say 
that our ententional consciousness is also the coevolving self-awareness of the 
intersystem of being(s), of a universe irreducible to ego-self or other. And authentic 
attentiveness, to the degree we are rapt, dehabituated or dis-egoed, is the self-aware 
experience the all-connected ongoing-wholing has of itself by or in the mode of each who 
also, if tacitly, embodies this wholeness (wholingness, w/holyness).2  
Intercultural ways of construing the values and meanings of intense attentiveness 
are diversely illuminating. For instance, expressed in the various modes of what he calls 
“aphoristic thinking,” and “secular spirituality,” in “the complex world of new age 
religion” (with its emerging hybridizations of mythopoeia and contemporary sciences), 
and in the visionary experience where, he says, we think both physically and psychically 
prior to thinking metaphysically, Obeyesekere finds numerous intercultural examples of a 
fruitfully contemplative or nonegoistic “passive cerebration,” and of  nondual 
cosmogenic (or cosmodelicΨ “It-thinking” that complements and supersedes or 
contextualizes “the active I-dependent cerebral activity involved in our rational discursive 
thinking processes.”3  
In analogous ancient Chinese terms, through seamlessly attentive inter-
responsiveness or resonance (ganying) with the dao of natural coevolutionary processes, 
the contemplative sage ecohumanist in the comprehensively attentive participant-
observation called guan is nonpartially alert to and expressive of subtle and incipient 
changes in the environment, even able to anticipate their advent. We can further adapt 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  35    
this insight to understand that s/he thereby spontaneously conducts hirself with a 
sustaining, ecosocially precautionary, i. e. nonimposing, wu wei based on the “sincerity 
and serious attentiveness. . . .of a genuine heart[mind] which feels and comprehend[s] 
reality by ‘feeling and responsiveness’ (ganyingΨ from overall viewing.”4  
In result, the categories of the supposedly subjective and objective are again from 
an intercultural view relatively nondual. There is no absolute firm or fixed division 
between them -- no bystander podium from which to declare absolutely this or that, “so,” 
or “not so.” The operative narratives hybridize and self-select in the absence, 
relativization or abeyance of an apodictic master narrative pretending to an immaculately 
objective point of view. And the various forms of our attentiveness to things along with 
our inter-attentive conduct among one another, especially in those forms of conduct 
contemplatively conducive to and expressive of nondualizing experience and of the 
reciprocal coconstitution among events and phenomena, may be understood as resonating 
performances of the self-organizing of a cosmos whose life, in the present narrative, is 
also our life. In complete (or no longer foremost appetitive or self-centered) attentiveness, 
the ego oriented to extrinsic reward is abated and outgrown in the intrinsic reward of 
nondual flow and existential analogy, reciprocity. Life becomes performance understood 
not as a symbolic simulation or representation of -- or a straining for -- something 
external, but as embodied immediate experience, as the microcosmic, fractally self-
similar or holonically performative event and visionary instantiation of macrocosmic 
process, of the all-inclusive symmetry of cosmogenesis in the mutually generative minute 
particulars of lived experience.5  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  36    
In Herbert Guenther’s illustrative integration of Tibetan Buddhism and recent 
theory of self-organization (or what Deacon calls “emergent dynamics”Ψ, the “symmetry” 
of humanocosmic nonduality and interpenetration is sustained in contemplative 
experience. Any transformation, change or break in this symmetry that nevertheless 
“approximates” and “reflects the initial undivided whole” would be what many 
worldwide know as Buddha or awakening, bodhi.6 There would presumably be more of 
this around if we and our children were more inclined to contemplative kinds of life 
engagement. 
In the scale of ecosocial mindfulness, such contemplative conduct bears on the 
extreme-long-term existence beyond sustainability that I urge is more an ententional 
resonance with and as the universe rather than just environmentally apt survival in it. 
Additionally, by the evidence of both the varieties of religious experience and various 
kinds of quantitative and qualitative science, we find that through our ententional conduct 
and our languaging, our narratives, our paradigms, theories, analogies, values, choices, 
imaginaries and thoughts, we are both emergents and active participants, co-creators in 
analogia entis to some indefinite degree, from, with and as the processes of 
cosmogenesis. In the holoperspective of guan, the Chinese trope of ontohermeneutic 
vision, and depending on the structure of consciousness, narrative or myth in play, we 
can simultaneously behold, participatingly influence, experience and perform a complex 
world that is not dualistically reduced, essentialized, fixed or, as Morin says, 
“simplified.”7 
Through the unitas multiplex of existentially comprehensive and creative guan, 
we’re not eliminating or ignoring differences and alternatives between things or between 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  37    
ourselves and things but offering ourselves in fully attentive play “as . . .integrated 
entit[ies] toward an integrated response [to things] as beginning from the same source . . . 
. by way of contemplation and even meditation.” Hereby nondual ontohermeneutical 
guan receives meaning and value from and imparts these to the ecosocial process in 
attentively embodying the ever-present origin (in) experience revealing nondual 
“experience-as-such” in each occasion unfragmented and unreduced into subject(s) and 
object(s), nor reduced to homogeneous totalism or monism.8  
The ego perspective of our dualizingly routinized kind of worlding makes 
everything into an object for our subject (which itself becomes similarly objectified); and 
we’re thereby always on the outside of things looking in(toΨ or, more anthropocentrically, 
down on(to) them. In nondualizing contemplation-like experience, e. g., guan, yoga, 
mindfulness or a naked attentiveness so entire it leaves little over in the way of separate 
ego-self and other, experience seems more like seeing and feeling life from the inside out. 
Only there is no outside, for experience-as-such, as Guenther interprets the Tibetan 
experience, is fully and self-rewardingly experiencing itself. And herein, according to the 
Chinese experience of guan interpreted by Cheng, the so-called subject and object 
reciprocally participate in the look and feel of things, the look and feel of the coevolving 
universe. There is little need to grasp, grab and control where nothing is outsided and 
externalized. Conversely, and with particular respect to environmental sustainability, 
nothing is externalizable where everything, humans and other kinds of persons and 
systems, is reciprocally and resonantly connected. 
The kind of languaging that resonantly performs the irreducibility of experience-
as-such may initially confuse, destabilize, dehabituate and reconstitute our conventional, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  38    
our unsustainable and habitually ego-perspectivated, instrumental understanding. In the 
experience, however, genuinely sustainable ecohumane resonance accords with an 
apophatic nondualism, a functional mysticism of everyday life. In this sense, it abates, it 
is sometimes a silencing or unsaying of, all our usual kneejerks and defaults of 
instrumental ego-consciousness, positivist assertion and accomplishment, all our 
substantialist and reificationist or unilaterally self-interested objectivist declarations. 
Similarly, attempts to bespeak the ongoing-wholing of e-co-worlding may sound silly, 
gnomic, contrived or nonsensical in a positivist or a reductionist ear. Yet more apposite 
modes of sustaining ecosocial intercourse may be music, song, poetry, dance, and 
celebratory chant, even incantation or mantram. It’s a risk worth taking; it’s the music of 
the Earth and other spheres, of contemplative, visionary and analogical ecopoiesis that is 
playing. Obeyesekere demurs, suggesting that apophasis may be but a language game; 
but Gregory Bateson, Whorf and Gödel all demonstrate that what eludes saying in formal 
or referential terms is performed and bespoken in patterns of connectivity that both 
exceed and compenetrate axioms of subject/object reduction.9  
In our frequently voicing the indefinitely-long sustainable, because irreducible, 
Earth-human (or more emphatically, humanocosmic) resonance-relation, events, things 
and human and nonhuman kinds of persons interact and communion as gerunds whose 
coconstituting subjectifyings enact existing as ongoing (all interconnected self-) 
celebrating, i. e. as autotelic -- rather than external-referential -- reward. In this sense it is 
a “silent music” as contrasted with our characteristically noisome (self-)promotional 
brouhaha in the service of external or private gain – which itself, as Nicholsen will 
suggest in a moment, is dumbness of a sort.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  39    
Additionally, William Johnston, S. J. does not shy from affirming that the 
corresponding contemplative or meditative ontohermeneutic is a remediating theme in 
“the healing of the universe. . . . and here lies the vocation of the cosmic person. . . .the 
mystic.” For he proposes that the greatest problem in the world today is the imperfection 
of our love; that is to say, our lack of a nondualizing, nonseparative mysticism. And with 
the mystes comes celebratory unsaying, comes dialogic detour and analogy and 
apophasis. For always straight-on prosaic positivistic assertion abides in and reinforces a 
world-experience of dualized and substantialized egos and entities, whereas the 
contemplative releases, bespeaks, and as Berry says, “celebrates” the analogies of 
innerconnected mutual cocreation and cogenerative process.10  
But we need not reach back quite so far as the ancient gerund-biased Chinese 
language, the evolutionary noetics of Richard Maurice Bucke’s 19ί1 Cosmic 
Consciousness, or the neuroreligious meditation of Johnston. For a more recent example, 
Shierry Weber Nicholsen recalls for us that we need both cultural expression “and the 
direct experience of nature’s own speech. . . .[for] In the absence of a culture to foster our 
intimacy with wildness, we are left speechless – not only deaf but dumb.” And Terry 
Tempest Williams appears in the anthology Moral Ground  (2010) to connect the 
emerging notes of the ecohumane languaging of the world, sustainingly hearing it and 
one another, and a correspondingly effective contemplative ecology in asking:  
Can we be generous? Can we listen with our whole beings, not just our 
minds, and offer our attention rather than our opinions? . . .It is time to 
ask, when will our national culture of self-interest stop cutting the bonds 
of community to shore up individual gain and instead begin to nourish 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  40    
communal life. . . .required is a change of consciousness. . . .a reflective 
activism born out of humility, not arrogance. Reflection, with deep time 
spent in the consideration of [human and non-human] others, opens the 
door to becoming a compassionate participant in the world.11 
Since we still think in a prequantum mode largely conditioned by a dualism of 
mind or nature, of the material or the mental or spiritual, of private human persons or 
“others,” of locally separable events, etc., dualistic influence touches all our attempts to 
speak and function nondualizingly, much less contemplatively and compassionately. In 
each case, Einstein has reminded us that our task is to widen the circle of compassion to 
include not just all living creatures of endless forms beautiful but also the whole of 
nature.  
In the upaya spirit of skillful means, however, we don’t need to fight dualisms 
(they are busy enough fighting each other, and they may offer some tactical benefits). But 
when they come up, we can de-reify, de-ontologize, de-essentialize and re-ecologize 
them (and ourselvesΨ, or the “parties” and “halves” of them, in rhetorical and poetically 
evocative as well as in plurepistemic and dialogical ways – and who is to certify that 
reason is not also a rhetorical mode? Nor need we exacerbate the name calling and 
demonization. We are all in the ark together, analogues of one another and of the sea of 
coexistence. At the same time, however, we know from experience that monopolism in 
consciousness as in capital leads to a one-sidedness lacking the diversity that is 
sustainability in human and other coevolving natural systems. I suggest that nondual 
contemplative sensibility is also analogous and polythetic awareness – not a monistic so 
much as an integral form of polyphasic consciousness and of a co-responsive or co-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  41    
evocative conduct. Its is an eco-logic, the dream(ing) of the Earth suggests Thomas 
Berry. 
Or to put this another way, amid various kinds of reasonings and perspectives and 
especially among those instrumental, ego-intensifying and dualizing, we can beneficially 
interpolate nondualizing aesthetic and “evocative” ontohermeneutics of the kind offered 
by Zhuangzi and ably discussed by Kuang-ming Wu, who writes on this point that there 
is no single cognitively complete position: “This is what it means to be alive. It entails a 
vivacious playing with any position and a meandering among many situations.” Because 
this is lively and vital, the corresponding ecosocial sustainability is not, or is not only, a 
matter of certifiable cognicentric episteme, i. e., some sort of  general, fixed, total or 
essentialized conclusion, certainty or plan. It is more a knack, a kind of lived practical 
reason or phronesis, a dao-like waying that comes about by our (co)walking (with/as) the 
coevolutionary processes of the Earth in all the variety of their and our minute 
particulars. It is, perhaps, like an updated “[co]evolutionary humanism,” as was offered 
by Julian Huxley, something like Skolimowski’s “participatory” mind, or Corrington’s 
“hermeneutic of emancipatory reenactment” in which even arational or archaic 
perceptions are freed to participate in creating new meaningfulness. More practically 
stated, to borrow the words of Obeyesekere: 
Implicit in this book is a plea to open our minds to forms of intuitive 
understanding rather than shut the door on them. If that were to happen, 
Western thought might not only be receptive to the [onto]epistemological 
thinking of Hindu and Buddhist [and Confucian, Daoist, indigenous, 
visionary, poetic, new age, etc.] philosophers, but they might also be able 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  42    
to enrich their own philosophical and scientific traditions by opening 
themselves to the varied forms of visionary and intuitive thinking. . . .12 
An evocative and poetic ontohermeneutics, a transdisciplinary and intercultural 
contemplative consciousness/experience/process of deep and broad (meta)intellectual and 
interexistential analogy, is (in) sustainably and meaningfully according our understanding 
and lived experience with our universe (and one another) and not necessarily desiring or 
obtaining thereby a terminal, total, positivistic 1:1 scaling between our thoughts and 
(thus, control of) what is going on all around us in a supposedly external universe of 
more-or-less fixed essences (that are largely constructed as essentialistically fixed by an 
ego that is fixed in its own self-ascriptions and intentions). This is authentically real-izing 
in active and passive intellect/experience (our) (co)self-manifesting (as the) life of the 
universe on Earth.13 
The life-giving and life-enhancing (eco)poietics of our embodied ecohumane or 
ecocosmic (self-)understanding will count for far more than manipulative ratiocination 
alone, monistic, dualistic, technocratic or otherwise, in sustainingly cultivating the long 
term well-being of living systems. For such interpretive po(i)etics both impart and 
receive the inherent ecoήhumane semiosis of cosmogenesis. From the “constitutive 
analogical approach” of Deacon’s sagacious scientific resource studying “how mind 
emerged from nature” we learn correlatively that, “the very concept of interpretation can 
be cashed out in terms of teleodynamic work. . . .” and “link energetic processes, form 
generation processes, and social-cognitive processes.” “New forms of work. . .are 
constantly emerging,” and among these forms are the negative capabilities, willing 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  43    
suspensions of dis/belief, and contemplative ecopoietic vision-ententions of a 
(co)worlding irreducible to either/or and their control.14 
The move towards ecosocially singing (multiple octaves of) worlding in/as the 
first person(s) cosmic, and not just shouting a commandingly objectifying idea about it, is 
the move towards liberating another order of being/consciousness than has dominated for 
many eras of lifetimes. Earth will endure in any case. Ecocidal degradation, however, is 
the warning light of our own suicide, not to say of semiocide in a lack of imagination. 
Accordingly, prosaic attempts like this one to communicate nondualized 
autopoiesis and more-than-sustaining ecohumanopoiesis will themselves perform often 
clumsy, aspiringly lyrical, intermittently playful, redundant, reiterative, recursive and 
rhetorical tropics of the concourse of what David Bohm calls the rheomode languaging of 
everywhere-interconnected-process-existence. And hereby, concursive and analogistic 
language reveals itself as coeval and covalent with physis in cosmogenesis, noogenesis, 
anthropogenesis and ecosemiogenesis in the ontosemantic play of evoking the self-
understanding of that which has no opposite – creatio continua. Languaging enacting the 
every-varyingly inter-nesting patterns of culture and/as nature -- in the spillover saying 
(zhi yanΨ of Zhuangzi, Joyce’s streaming consciousness, the multivariate structures of 
scientific revolutions, Jullien’s detours or in Morin’s treatment of  methodological 
disjunction-conjunction -- simultaneously embodies, (re)presents, performatively 
instantiates and evokes the ontosemiotic and ecosemiotic foci of the interminate field of 
reciprocal interbeing.15  
In the context of coevolutionary self-organization, the stochastic combinations of 
chance, emergent novelty and determinism, of order and chaos in the messages of natural 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  44    
language, are (reciprocal with) those of natural systems of cosmogenesis. Attentive 
responsiveness to the incipient meaningfulness of language, poiesis, is akin with attentive 
responsiveness to changes in and potentials of (sustainable eco-, semio-, and autopoiesis 
in) natural systems – the moreso as our ways of thinkspeak shape the events we 
experience, as we’ve learned from quantum theoreticians and the structuring of scientific 
revolutions alike. This is even more so when we recall that the natural systems in, as and 
with which our consciousness and language evolve (thereby) demonstrate and perform 
them(our)selves as self-reflexive, co-conscious systems.  This appears as much so in 
synchronistic phenomena studied by Jung and von Franz as in the emergent dynamics of 
ententional and celebratory semiogenesis we may infer from Deacon, Berry or 
Corrington. Meaning, languaging, valuing and choosing are no less constituents of 
coevolving Earthlife than are bosons, thermodynamics, molecules and coacervates. We 
are increasingly imbricated in coevolutionary response-ability and, accordingly, “There is 
no such thing as an immaculate perception” or unqualifiedly objectifiable, separable 
event.16 
 
Put more expansively, this is to propose that, with the insights of quantum-
connective and dynamic emergentist ontohermeneutic sensibility, the world is made not 
(just) of bits of matter but of events, of tendencies and self-organizingly autopoietic 
potentials for meaningful wholing to occur having “both a psychologically described 
aspect, which is essentially an increment in knowledge [meaning, value], and also a  
physically described aspect” that is an action, choice or in- or en-tentionality that 
“abruptly changes” the set of potentialities “concordant” with the psychological change 
or dimension. Fresh vision, new analogies, alternating structures and states of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  45    
consciousness of the kinds described by Gebser, Grof and others all offer meaningful and 
sustaining correlations, including (interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary and intercultural) 
analogies and emergent and reciprocal dynamics among random, stochastic and 
deterministic systems, and certainly among noetic, psychocultural and psychocosmic  
ones (e. g. YijingΨ. Whereas, “the equilibrium state of maximum entropy is one in which 
correlations are minimized.”17  
The ongoing self-shaping of energy, information, meaning and value in the 
universe that makes newly emerging capacities possible and sustainable is not today 
effected foremost in re-presenting the single vision of Newton’s sleep in the competitive 
service of Nobodaddy Ego but, it appears, in the dawning of eternity’s sunrise where 
ontohermeneutic this, that and the Other sing together on the ecotone of sustainingly 
reciprocal generation. Moreover, in the perspective of the co-constituting and biocultural 
interplay of (onto)analogies, disciplines and mentalities -- as in the interplay, as Deacon 
seems to conceive it of thermodynamics, morphodynamics and “teleodynamics (e. g. life, 
semiosisΨ” -- the emergence of sustaining meaning and conduct “is not bound to specific 
material substrates or component dynamical processes” and is thus potentially universal. 
There is no end to the en-chantment.18  
The native cosmos-born Homeland Earth ecosemeity of ecopoietic languaging’s 
seminal craft, skillful means and practical wisdom (as polytropic metis, phronesis, guan, 
zhi yan, upaya or simple incantation, and as what ancient China called zhi, a kind of 
active, transitive, knowing that does not merely re-present but real-izes experience) plays 
all at once to con-fuse, complexify, analogize, clarify, ambiguate and sustainingly to 
continue (our) experience -- the self-experiencing, of the self-organizing rhythms and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  46    
patterns of kosmos. Its meaningfulness is no less, if not somewhat more, in its self-
coherent spontaneously autopoietic pattern dynamic (that includes us) than in any 
putatively independent universe we dualizingly employ it both to refer to and 
simultaneously to constitutively mete out, as a metric to (control) a product. In Zhuangzi, 
for example, “goblet words” and “spillover saying,” zhi yan, sustainingly leaven us and 
open-ended ontogenesis. Such labile and non-absolutizing language spontaneously, and 
reflexively, expresses, enlivens and performatively coconstitutes (with/in our conduct of 
ecohuman semiosis) the un-twoable human-cosmic intersystem.19  
Thereby, again, its eco- and autosemeity are not entirely other than our own; for 
we are both themes, emergent activations and contextualizations of the everywhere-
ongoing-interweaving, as evidenced in part by the shared etymology of text and tantra 
and by what Deacon has reported above. This kind of evocative and poetic 
ontohermeneutic acts more to indetermine and descertain than to ascertain or to certify 
our conventional dualistic and ego-perspectivated forma mentis. Unsaying and 
analogically deliteralizing and hybridizing experience is sustaining play of liberation 
from the dualistic rigors of this (over, against, to, from) or that. And spontaneously 
singing (Earth’sΨ self-rewardingly coherent ecocontemplative songs is more likely a 
sustainingly resonant articulation of cosmic compresence and meaning in daily living 
than is dis-cursively reinforcing dualizing anthropocentric attachments in the rationalized 
arguments, plans and protocols of privative extraction, concupiscence, image-
management and manipulative control. 
Naturally coevolving systems, like and as natural ecohumane languaging or 
semiosis, eventually express sentient recursive complexity as an emergent aptitude, that 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  47    
is, as differential patterns and processes able reflexively to (re)cognize and 
(co)consciously modify themselves and/as one another. Sustainably developing in 
resonance with these coevolutionary aptitudes while also – nonimposingly (wu wei), 
spontaneously and, thus without excessive-ego-calculation – transformatively emerging 
amid while also influencing their expressions to various degrees is a mode of (our) eco-
self-re-organization of the self-referencing, the emergently yet nontotalizingly self-
coherent, self-realizing autocosmogenesis that we also know as ourselves in spontaneous 
ecopoiesis. We and this (or It in Obeyesekere) are not two. Clarifies Deacon with 
emphasis, “the experience of being sentient is what it feels like to be evolution.”20   
Nor is ecological co-consciousness necessarily limited to the organophysical 
systems familiar to us on the Earth; the platforms or substances (e. g., C, Si, terrestrial or 
extraterrestrial etc.) are not the issue so much as are the autogenic teleodynamics in the 
environment of the not-yet that Deacon emphasizes. To put it another way, the 
emergently self-aware context of all-connected cosmogenesis, as already suggested, also 
expresses itself in the language and culture which simultaneously embody and interpret 
or contextualize it, not only in increasingly self-referential physical systems. In “closing 
the loop of awareness that began with the birth of our cosmos some 14 billion years ago,” 
writes Elgin, “[w]e are the eyes, hands, voices, and heart of the cosmos.” Foretold the 
(now familiar and no longer so ancient) Chinese in a similar vein, the clarified heart/mind 
(xin) of the sage – an aptitude it was understood that anyone can cultivate -- is the 
heart/mind of the universe. The traditional task was to recover what the cosmologist 
Swimme today also calls “the hidden heart of the cosmos.” Zhang Zai thought that what 
fills the universe was his body; what directs the universe he regarded as his nature. And 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  48    
in this event, remarks Elgin, “The scope and quality of our collective attention is the most 
precious resource we have as a [eco]human community.” For, I add, in the project of 
creatio continua, our complete attentiveness in each setting is a performative existential 
relation in and a sustaining activation of ongoing humanocosmic wholing.21 
This is not necessarily due to some occult transaction of forces or magic, but 
because the humanocosmic wholing is not amenable to reduction or decomposition to any 
category, human, cosmic or otherwise. For every this, mulls Zhuangzi, there is a that. The 
(so-called) part, the participating human self or member is not simply an 
ontoepistemically fixed algorithm of a finished whole, but a dimensioning, and a key-
signature, of ongoing ontohermeneutic celebration, of evocatively self-singing en-
chantment. The tongue is a rudder of worlding as the bark of spacetimemeaning navigates 
self-organizing songlines of cocreation. Wisdom, recounts Basso, sits in places. And, 
language, choirs Abram, "is not a specifically human possession, but is a property of the 
animate earth in which we humans participate."22  
Hybridizing cultures and disciplines in the sustaining ecology of meaning, it takes 
a measure of narrative attentiveness, myth, synchronicity or serendipity and evocative 
language as well as some intuition, contemplative (onto)analogy, comparative noetics, 
critical thinking, math and bench science to real-ize the potentials of this. A foremost 
threat to long term sustainability is in continuing to reduce the biocentric (e)co-tention 
among Earth and humans (and among humans with one another) into a univocal, abstract 
one-sidedly dominatory, anthropocentric, cognicentric, egodelic and/or remunerative 
intention. We similarly reduce our education -- the emerging self-education potentials of 
the Earth-human intersystem – to strategies of marketable employability by way of tiny 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  49    
bits of similarly marketable credit hours for and distribution requirements in conveniently 
quantifiable coursework – no experiential or extended interpretive/critical thinking-and-
writing assignments, just the multiple choice or apply-the-correct-formula type. 
Pertinently characterizing attention as “an ecological process,” Burrow further describes 
“cotention, contrasted with “ditention,” as a type of attention that “relates the organism as 
a whole to the environment as a whole.” Ecosocially and educationally whole-some 
cotention in this respect appears as a variant of Chinese guan, or what Cheng has 
described as the nondualizing “ontohermeneutical seeing” and “comprehensive 
observation” that I think educe and perform the potentials of a genuinely sustaining 
contemplative ecology.23  
In a hyper-rationalized epoch like our own, it’s essential to acknowledge 
languaging, analogy, poetic evocation, contemplative and aesthetic vision, intuition, 
qualitative impression and expression as (co)constituents of the universe – ones having 
emergent ententional/causal implications, according to Deacon, not to mention William 
Blake. It is more likely amiss just to trade in meaning or semiosis viewed as 
epiphenomenal add-ons to the universe. Their a/rational aptitudes are in any case as old 
as the Big Bang (which was at least smart enough to get itself to where we are now, good 
and bad) and evidently still source the ratio (for the two need not be divorced – if indeed 
they prove to be two at all) according, in varying measure, to Kekulé, Mendeleev, 
Einstein, Bunn, Whorf, George Steiner and many others.24  
And enjoying occasions of the productive ambiguity or plurisemeity languages’ 
inherent poetry may offer to a concourse of unprecedented interexistential analogies, 
(occasions of the kinds discussed by Wu, Hershock, Hall and Ames, that perform 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  50    
existential allusions and analogies unconstrained by a positivistic discourse entirely of 
definitions, certainties, essentialisms and univocal syllogisms), we might also reflect on 
evidence of cocreative anthropocosmic ententionality as expressed in ideoneistically 
constructivist ontohermeneutic paradigms like Yijing, in the quantum complementarities 
of the observer and the observed, in synchronistic events, and statistically in human 
interactions with Random Event Generators (REGs) as studied by the International 
Consciousness  Research Laboratories (ICRL) – meanwhile allowing, highlighting and 
ambiguating throughout the polyvalence of words and constructs like “ententionality” 
and the question whether “it” (or Obeyesekere’s “It”Ψ inheres only in the (cosmically 
embedded) subject or is (also) coinherent with all modes of  emergent cosmic process. 
Who, indeed, is asking the question?25  
And if ententionality (choice, meaning, value etc.) does not fully reduce to ego-
self, is it not better or more sustainingly thought of as fractal, microcosmic embodiment, 
as resonance or participation (in an irreducibly emergent ecohuman wholing) rather than 
as the fragmenting epiphenomenal projection from some seemingly detached part called 
x towards or upon some sectorized and externalized y? The value of serendipity and 
synchronicity here is also covalent with, if not more valuable than, that of design and 
syllogism. This is not only because our culturally shaped mentality is inseverable from 
the dynamics of the universe around and within us whence synchronicities emerge (and 
upon which our life depends or amid which it unfolds), but also because whose 
“ententions” and “meanings” are at issue is no more certifiable as “its” own than as 
“ours.” Nor can the ratio exhaustively embody or enact the holos (unless, perhaps, we 
conceive a Plotinian nous or a medieval intellectus agens which, ironically, only rephrase 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  51    
the issue of cosmic intelligence in ways indifferent to the findings of evolutionary and 
complexity science). In any case, ratio of itself is still beholden to the limits set by 
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem, not to say to the ecology of mind and nature. 
Paradoxically, any emergence of such nous or intellectus, if we care to use such 
terms in the context of an evolving universe, comes with the transforming, relativizing 
and muting of the active ego’s version of worlding. The authentically active intellect 
(agens) is realized in the dehabituation or dissipation of insistently active egocentrism. 
The emergence is what occurs when we are passive, receptive or released -- cf. 
Heidegger’s Gelassenheit (releasement), Daoist/Confucian wu wei, wu nian, (action 
without effort, conduct without precedent, no-mindΨ, Keats’ “negative capability” -- from 
altogether ego-defined and ego-defining experience. Here, Deikman’s 
“deautomatization” as the heart of mystic and contemplative experience complements 
Obeyesekere’s repeated implication of contemplative or  “passive cerebration” as the 
heart of awakening in shamans, sages and scientists and in the advent of what is also a 
contemporary “secular spirituality.”26   
The study of replicability in cultivation of (our) (especially serendipitous or 
synchronistic) cocreative potentials, and of the questions of the localization of entention, 
meaning and awareness, carries some researchers to what they call “the margins of 
reality” in a science that is of the subjective as much as it is of the objective domain. 
Simultaneously, in our planetarily intercultural and transitional epoch, the resources of 
world mythopoeia and languaging become covalent with science in developing the self-
understanding of a cosmogenesis that is more-than-sustainably resonant among the 
mutually present registers of rational, arational, intuitive, conative, and sidereal, organic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  52    
and ecosocial modes of being – or again, Heaven, Earth and Humanity, as in the classical 
Chinese narrative of things. It is possible, suggests Tarnas,  
that the deeper truths not only of our spiritual life but of the very cosmos 
require, and reward, an essentially aesthetic and moral engagement.  
. . . .Yet this larger engagement with the cosmos will require of us a 
profound shift in what we regard as legitimate knowledge.27  
Our conventional mindset, for example, will balk at the implied idea that 
seemingly randomly, stochastically or radically transdisciplinarily associated images, 
words, or ideas can have practical or rational value. Indeed these may not. But practical 
(ego-laden) and rational (less conspicuously also ego-laden) insights are not the sole or 
most capacious sources of sustainable and sustaining meaning and conduct. Neither 
would I propose the appositional in complete isolation from the propositional or the 
practical. The sustainable evolution of ecohumane life is not a forced choice test so much 
as the exploration of (yet absent) opportunities not predetermined or precluded by its 
precedents. And if we are not invoking a priori creative, intelligent God-design in the 
construction of the universe, some interpenetration of serendipity and bricolage has its 
place in the autopoietic emergence story. But for that matter, where do we stand that we 
can say anything with finality? Best is to sing the story of the journey of the universe that 
most sustains our hearts and minds and/as the life of Earth-human cocreativity. Our 
arguments over the nature and composition of the universe are for the sake of life, not life 
for the sake of the argument. 
Towards a sustaining metaconceptual or aconceptual experience of knowledge, of 
truth lived and not simply thought, an emerging axiological, aesthetic and experimental 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  53    
anthropocosmogenesis convokes and evokes faculties of language, feeling, vision, 
intellect, sensation and intuition, as well as others yet undeveloped, perhaps, ranging 
from ecosemeic or synchronistic kinds of reason to an archetypal (self)(re)cognition of an 
intelligent universe. Not only as an aptitude to comprehend a priori universal principles 
but also as (our) performative and ecohumane embodiment of the always-emerging 
intelligence of the universe in its/our ongoing creatio or ziran/li, this (self)(re)cognizing 
of the emergent dynamics, of empathy, of the autopoietic intellectus agens or nous 
poietikos of kosmos, Gaia, anima mundi, etc. is the natural complement to 
ontohermeneutic discovery, reinvention/rehabilitation of ourselves as teleodynamic 
ecocosmic presence. We may find that genuine sustainability is not so much in finding 
out (supposedly eternal) truths of the objective universe in finished, precise terms as in 
the surprise and celebration of our poietically coinhering localization-embodiment of 
(its/our) interminately nondualizing potentials for spontaneously celebratory self-soing, 
Chinese ziran – that-which-is-of-itself-what-it-is.28  
Narratizing this in the terms of contemporary sciences: Not all life, sentience, 
consciousness and value must (be held to) proceed from only carbon-based Earth systems 
or from a prior and external creator-god, or a metaphysical One; and there is no limit in 
spacetime or meaning to the extent “ententionality” can reach, or the depth from which it 
can emerge, in the universe.  Wherever there is relation, however, whether among 
archaic, mythical, rational and integral structures of consciousness (per Gebser) and/or 
among molecular, biochemical, ecological, ecocultural and other emergently 
teleodynamic systems – i. e., wherever this and that to covarying degrees are 
coconstituting one another, always tending, even if incompletely, to complete, qualify, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  54    
analogize or to evoke one andήas another’s potentials in ever further realms and tiers of 
similarly interacting systems – (t)here is the sustainably emergent dynamics of life, 
consciousness, meaning and active value. Here Deacon pronounces the latest, 
poeticήevocative word, of evolutionary neurocomplexity and biosciences: “ententional. . . 
to describe all phenomena that are intrinsically incomplete in the sense of being in 
relationship to, constituted by, or organized to achieve something non-intrinsic.” 
Phenomena are, I agree, in reciprocal and coconstitutive relationship and do de facto, 
organize to achieve something non-intrinsic. But I think the realization and emergence of 
non-intrinsic aptitudes is more a matter of surprise in self- and co-discovery and an 
unexpected disclosure (of aptitudes, functionality or awareness say) than a purposive 
matter of “mission accomplished.” I’d suggest the “achievement,” of and in attentiveness 
(if we are speaking of human relations with/in worlding) is the spontaneous emergence of 
unpredictable functionalities in and as the release, delight, play or ecstasy, the intrinsic 
reward, of selfless attentiveness, dehabituating interaction and engagement. The 
teleodynamic system doesn’t know what’s going to happen; and the spontaneous, 
instantaneous or synchronistic and serendipitous emergence of new insight, aptitude or 
function as “an alignment with the. .  .teleodynamic tendencies of the whole system” 
implies to me the self-enjoyment of the whole in and as the part whose unselfing 
“vacancy” in attentive reciprocity with its environment is its simultaneous proficiency 
(upaya) and delight (nirvana).  Put the other way around, the delight of unselfingly 
attentive reciprocity is coevolutionary sustainability. What Thomas Berry calls functional 
or sustaining cosmology is conduct/attentiveness unconcealing the potentials for 
sustaining coexistence rendered absent, eclipsed and opacified by individual and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  55    
anthropocentric ego-insistence. How this could  be phrased in terms of thermodynamic 
and organophysical systems is not so clear, except to begin with Deacon’s ziran and wu 
wei-like idea that all forms of work and achievement in the universe emerge from 
spontaneous natural least effort orthograde tendencies among interacting systems.29  
A no less evocative contemporary preface to a sustainable visionary ecohumanism 
relates a form of interepistemic and intercultural ententionality from an anthropological 
perspective. On the premise that profound noetic diversity is as central to the 
“achievement” of sustainability as is biodiversity, and that the noetic and the physical 
discover, surprise, “complete” or complement one another (if they are two at all, of which 
I am not at all sureΨ I invoke Obeyesekere’s idea:   
Rationality for me still remains a powerful means of knowing, but I 
criticize here the closure of our minds to modes of knowledge, especially 
visionary knowledge, that bypass the cogito. Hence the focus of this essay 
is on those who brought their visions and intuitive understandings within 
the frame of rational thinking. Visions appear. . . . They are not thought 
out. . . . 30  
And yet again, in what Blake calls “intellectual vision,” the originary “It-
thinking” of cosmogenesis -- as if speaking through us in the first person plural cosmic (It 
+ We, or It as modulated by our minimally egoed selves) -- can express whole worlds of 
coherent if not always completely rationalized sensibility as embodied in our 
performance, each according to hir attentional, conceptual, poetic, aesthetic and other 
circumstance, of Its gifts and emergent dynamics. The recursive and reciprocal 
anthropocosmic and ontohermeneutic algorithm Obeyesekere offers look like this:  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  56    
prior thoughts or fantasy  activity with or without the mediation of the I > 
visions, dreams, and ideas mediated by the It > reformulation of the 
visionary knowledge through I-thinking > the process in reverse.31  
As a coda and as a response to the preceding, we might again reflect that 
knowledge rarely comes to us untouched by human hands nor but through our categories 
of understanding, as Kant would have suggested. And visio may as often be noetic as 
pictorial, even given Obeyesekere’s alerts about conceptualism, and especially as it is I-
centered.  But let’s press the point and turn Kant inside out so to speak, as we might also 
have done with Pico’s Renaissance Oration. If contemporary cosmology and systems 
science are on to anything, it is that the universe (or the metaverse, as the case may be for 
Smolin, Tegmark and others) is contoured by ongoing processes of self-organization, or 
better, emergent dynamics all of whose constants, elements, phases or dimensions are 
reciprocally involved, locally and nonlocally, in one another’s functioning – including the 
ententional, causal, noetic and poetic aptitudes of human beings. We embody and 
analogize even if we do not, as Pico said, consummate creation, i. e. universe-
consciousness-coevolution or anthropocosmogenesis.  
In this case, the attentiveness, knowledge construction, interpretation, and 
application most in evocative accord with such systems poiesis and ecopoiesis would also 
be (like) Its recursive and reflexive expression, a poetic singing or self-singing of the 
correlated ecohuman diversity of things, a (self-)rewarding (self-)celebrating fractal of 
ongoing-wholing in self-organizing and autopoietic coherence neither instrumentally nor 
calculatingly referred to any supposedly external measure, and not necessarily to the 
measure of the human and of human categories. Indeed, any such measure itself does not 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  57    
occur apart from the integral ecohuman, coevolutionary functioning that evokes and 
convokes universe potentials in feeling, intuition, imagery and myth as much as in 
discourse, falsification/verification methodologies or, for that matter, the green fire of 
wild eyes, Gaia, and the interplay of those cosmological constants. And at this point we 
can fleetingly underline the prospect that in a holistic all-connected quantum universe of 
the ten thousand kinds of local and nonlocal things and of humans with them, 
circumstantially spontaneous synchronistic events and analogous expressions or 
associations make as much sense as expressions, beacons and sources of meaningful 
choice and action for sustainability as does (programmatically routinized, ego-
perspectivated and dualizing) rational syllogistic thinking especially where it is geared to 
exclusively human, or ego-human, ends. Thinking with, like and as cosmogenesis is 
bound to look curiously multiform. The heart-mind, xin, of the sage sustainingly 
feels/thinks with and as the patterns and processes of cosmogenesis; for s/he and it are 
not of two or of altogether disparate natures. 32  
Our individual and our cocreative voicing in celebratory communion of ways of 
knowing across cultures, disciplines, time periods and species evidences a self-knowing 
and a self-realizing of the all-connected universe in a self-rewardingly poietic cosmic 
contemplation that is also effectively an integral form of sustainable Earth-human self-
knowing. Going far beyond sustainability alone as if this were only a matter of 
maintaining quantitative reference to external limits and conditions, (CO2, 350 ppm, etc.) 
such functional (even if neo-uroboric) Earth-human self-knowing in self-rewarding 
humanocosmic celebration would effect or constitute a fresh order of cosmic interbeing, a 
new order or emergent dimension of Earth-human and humanocosmic presencing of a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  58    
kind perhaps best prototyped by the sage or shaman – and expressive of the ententional 
features of an emergent dynamics that “predate natural selection” and that are not limited 
to the human brain or neural signals.33  
Effective in daily life and behavior yet entirely unlimited to, or by, ego-
instrumentalisms alone, such an order of integral, emergently dynamic and coherent 
cosmic a/musement would in its contemplatively reflexive poiesis long outsustain 
conventional notions of Earth husbandry in the (f)act of being also spontaneously, 
comprehensively, and perhaps synchronistically self-rewarding to limitless ententional 
degrees and thus recall us from seeking external rewards in limited material environments 
already suffering from ego-exacerbating compulsions. Sustainability in this story is in our 
resonance with and as the autopoiesis of a Cosmos- and Earth- and Human-dimensioned 
event-process ever evocative of and responsive to (our) ecopoietic 
communion/participation. Contemplative attentiveness sustainingly be-speaks and be-
sings a self-realizing universe/canticle resounding in the resonance and reciprocity of 
each particular in re-ligio.34  
Endnotes: Poetics, Evocative Hermeneutics and Cosmogenesis 
1.) Einstein in Explore 3.3: 310; a dimensionality of cosmogenesis see Berry 1988: 132; 
on cosmogenesis see also Berry 1999: 163-64; see Burrow on cotention 
2.) rapt see Gallagher; see also Deikman on deautomatization; see Polanyi on tacit 
knowing 
3.) Obeyesekere: 6, 12, xii, 15, 44-5, 202, 53, 57, 41 
4.) Cheng 1995: 187, 189; see Burneko 2004, 2010, 2011 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  59    
5.Ψ see Burneko 2ίί4, 2ί1ί; relevant here is John Lilly’s maxim: “In the province of the 
mind what one believes to be true, either is true or becomes true within certain limits. 
These limits are to be found experimentally and experientially. When so found these 
limits turn out to be further beliefs to be transcended. In the province of the mind there 
are no limits. However, in the province of the body there are definite limits not to be 
transcended.” http:ήήwww.intuition.orgήtxtήlilly.htmή (accessed ι.1ι.12Ψ, see also 
http://www.johnclilly.com/ (accessed 7.17.12); see Unger; see also Nesteruk 
6.) Guenther 1989: 7; see also Wallace 2007 on ontohermeneutic symmetry in both 
Tibetan Buddhism and quantum theorization 
7.) see Bocchi and Ceruti; Kuhn; Deacon; Obeyesekere; ontohermeneutics see also 
Cheng 1995; see Morin 2008: 3; see Gebser; and on the participation of the observer in 
and with the observed see Stapp, Kafatos and Nadeau and see Laughlin and Throop. 
Foltz: xvi, 83 succinctly contextualizes analogia entis as a somewhat cerebralized or 
displaced variant of the earlier and more profound experience of and participation in the 
holy, the dimension of the iconic or of natura naturans, that is the topic of his excellent 
book The Noetics of Nature 
8.) unitas multiplex, Morin 2008:4; as integrated entities. . .guan, Cheng 1995: 163, 167-
8, 174-75; impart and receive see Gebser 1985: 261 and passim; experience-as-such 
Guenther 1989: 3; see Burneko 2010, 2011 
9.) Obeyesekere: 149;  G. Bateson 1979: 11, 92; Whorf: 261-63; on Gödel see 
Hofstadter: 697, 707 and passim 
10.) Johnston: 134-35; see also Laszlo on nondual connectivity; unsaying see Sells; 
detour see Jullien; analogy see Przywara; celebration in Berry 1988: 13-15 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  60    
11.) Nicholsen: 29; Williams in Moore and Nelson: 431-32  
12.) Wu 1982:19; Corrington 1994: 8; Obeyesekere: 5 
13.) on 1:1 see Kafatos and Nadeau; passive intellect see Obeyesekere: 7, 35, 41, 43  
14.) Deacon: 419, 369, 368; cf. the theme of sobornost or ontohermeneutic conciliarity in 
Eastern Orthodox tradition 
15.Ψ see Wu 199ί: 12, 21 on “goblet words,” zhi yan; rheomode, Bohm 1976: 62-63, 75, 
and see Bohm 1981: 27-47; see Kuhn; see Ames and Hall 2001; Morin 2008: 6; 
concourse distinguished from discourse--see concursive and discursive languaging 
discussed in Hershock: 55, 66, 77-80 and passim 
16.) natural language and cosmogenesis see J. Campbell; self-reflexive co-conscious 
systems see Deacon; immaculate perception, Campbell: 49; no separable event see Stapp, 
Laszlo, Kafatos and Nadeau; see also Wallace 2007 
17.) psychologically described, Stapp: 9; equilibrium, Deacon: 228; transdisciplinary, 
Burneko 1988, 2003; see also Gast 
1κ.Ψ Newton’s sleep, Nobodaddy, eternity’s sunrise see Blake in Frye; Deacon: 2ιί; see 
also Berman 1984 
19.) Homeland Earth, Morin; metis, zhi yan see Raphals, Graham 1981, 1989; also see 
Burneko 2003, 2004, 2010, 2011; self-organizing see Morin; pattern dynamic, Whorf; see 
also G. Bateson 1979; goblet words see especially Wu 1990: 21 and passim; on ancient 
rhetorics see Lipson and Binkley 
20.) recursive complexity see Bateson, S. Kauffman, Deacon; eco-self-re-organization in 
Morin 1999, 2008: xxxv, xxiv; non ego-calculatingly see Obeyesekere: 45, 375; Deacon 
to be evolution: 502 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  61    
21.) autogenic teleodynamics see Deacon: 564 and chaps. 9, 10; Elgin: 125, 181; Zhang 
Zai in DeBary: 469; see Primack and Abrams on the uniqueness of life on Earth 
22.) see also Chatwin; Abram 2011:11 
23.) cotention, (e)co-tention see Burrow in Galt: 59; see Cobb; Cheng 1995; see Burneko 
1988, 2010, 2011 
24.) on intuition and imagination see also Hoffman on Einstein, Jung, Whitehead, 
Obeyesekere, Dirac, Hadamard, Gleick, Feynman, Avens; G. Steiner (2001: 337 original 
emphasisΨ deserves a note here, somewhat in tribute to Nietzsche: “The human intellect 
will persist in posing questions which science has ruled illicit or unanswerable. . . .An 
imp of demonic triviality inhabits the imperial régime of the sciences. It could be that 
music knows better, although there is nothing more intractable to definition than the 
nature of that knowledge.” 
25.)  Hall and Ames 1987: 295-99 passim speak of the value of allusive language in the 
sagely conduct of what I call ecosocial affairs. It is a languaging (we might say a 
software, occasion or event) suited to sustainingly interhuman and interexistential Earth-
human reciprocity, deference, and mutual analogizing (shu), that is embodied in the 
virtuosity of the sage as a master communicator whose performative role among humans 
and with/in sustainably optimizing the transformations of things is primarily evocative. 
For the sage, they say, for the mature contemplative, “analogical communication is the 
central methodology”; “the function of. . .language is primarily evocative,” and “thinking 
[i]s attunement” with a corresponding “deemphasi[s of] propositional utterance” and 
dualistic sectorization of experience. Think again here of Whorf’s encomium that 
“reference is the lesser part of meaning, patternment the greater” (261Ψ and wonder what 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  62    
this suggests of languaging, poiesis, understood as a constituent, mode or dimension of, 
and not simply as an instrument of  control or reference to, anthropocosmic development 
and self-awareness.   
Mentioning a theme bearing on the ontohermeneutic interplay of the individual 
ego-intentionality and the more far-reachingly psychocosmic implications raised by 
Deacon of ententionality – ententionality that, even if reducible to natural and physical 
processes is never decomposable from them (nor in its eventuation, they from one 
another) and is consequently expressive of the all-connected potentials of self-sustaining 
anthropocosmogenesis in its thermo- morpho- and teleodynamic registers – Hall and 
Ames ibid.:302-3ί3 say of the sage Confucius (KongziΨ that, “There is simply no reason 
to claim that [he] has ‘in mind’ what he wishes to teach” because “education [i]s 
evocation,” or “the stimulation of novel responses” through the “mutual evocation which 
leads. . . to increased understanding of complex issues” (see Morin 2ίίκΨ.  In other 
words, the sustaining sagely resonance of human-cosmic aptitudes inheres in the open- 
and co-self-organizing systems character of hir self-rewardingly attentive 
ontohermeneutic interactions more than in effecting the propositional and programmatic 
closure so often associated with the command, control, commodification and 
commercialization of experience by an intent ego (Burneko 2004, 2010;  see Jones and 
Culliney).  
 
If we keep in mind the notion of interpretation (hermeneutics) as a participated  
nondual activity in and of (our) world(ing), as a performative/constitutive and not only a 
representative expression of ecohuman/cosmic dynamics, then a term like 
ontohermeneutics evokes the lived, no less constitutive, daily and experiential dimensions 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  63    
of our interbeing and not simply a roster of ideas about x or y (see Cheng and also 
Neville).  What Hall and Ames 1995: 226 call the “productively vague” aspects of this 
way of speaking allow a “vast, seamless, range of meanings” with no necessary 
presumption of literalism. We hereby may “learn not only to cope with vagueness, but to 
exploit it. . . .to reconstitute the several meanings as an integrated whole” in thinking and 
experiencing, “underscor[ing] the place of correlative modalities of thinking. . . 
suggesting that meaningfulness is the consequence of efficacious dispositioning which 
juxtaposes things in a mutually enhancing and fruitful manner” much as is awkwardly 
attempted in this essay and as in music, song, incantation, poetry, Yijing or the 
movements of healthy children and animals in our sustaining field of being.  
 
Translated into the dramatically less vague language of contemporary scientific 
research in the ontohermeneutics of human interactions with the environment, this may 
be  expressed in the terms of the kinds of replicable work, reported in Explore: 301, once 
done at the International Consciousness Research Laboratories (www.icrl.org):  
. . .[T]he surrender of individual subjective identity within the 
human/machine bond is manifested in the appearance of objective 
information on the digital output string of the bonded system; i. e., the 
entropy of that data string has literally been reduced by the resonance. 
And when this human/machine resonance is enhanced by a bond between 
co-operating participants, the entropy reduction appears to be more 
pronounced.  
 
The kind of thinking that is resonance or attunement is learning 
(cosmomorphically) to think sustainably like and as the Earth or the Universe thinks. It is, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  64    
as Thomas Berry and Stuart Kauffman have said, a question of reinventing the human, 
the sacred, the mind itself. The subject(s) and the object(s) (of this) formulation are up for 
grabs. 
26.) Obeyesekere: 7, 41, 156-68; negative capability see N. Scott 
27.) margins of  reality, Jahn and Dunne 1987, 1997, 2011; see especially Jahn and 
Dunne “Science of the Subjective” in Explore: 295-305; see also www.ICRL.org (though 
as of this writing, icrl focuses on publishing and communications rather than research; 
Tarnas 2006: 486 
28.) see Burneko 1981b, Berry 1988 empathy, Rifkin, and see Ehrenreich; teleodynamics, 
Deacon; see Wagner’s translation of Daodejing; ziran is tzu-jan in Hershock; see 
Johnson. Smolin in Unger and Smolin argues that even fundamental laws and constants 
of nature alter in the inclusive reality of time 
29.) not only carbon-based see Jantsch 1980: 308, Deacon: 563, 564, see too Shklovskii 
and Sagan; ententional Deacon: 27; surprise ibid.: 542; an alignment with the 
teleodynamics of the whole system, Deacon: 566; see also Berry 1988: 195 on 
spontaneities of the Earth; self-enjoyment of the whole as that of anthropocosmic 
ongoing-wholing being renewed, renewing itself, in each event of dynamic systems 
emergence and of humanocosmic/ecohuman constellation of quantum wavefunction 
comprobabilities, see Stapp, Kafatos and Nadeau; functional cosmology, Berry ibid.: 90; 
natural orthograde tendencies, Deacon: 335, 337, 343, 551. On the question of life 
elsewhere in the universe – and the implicit larger question whether this is an intelligent 
universe, I entirely acknowledge the account of the uniqueness of our presence here given 
by Abrams and Primack, chap. 5. I’m personally inclined to think intelligent life exists or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  65    
can exist elsewhere (see, e. g., Shklovskii and Sagan); it seems to be an intelligent 
universe. Whether it’d have to be carbon-based or not I’m not competent to say. “We 
may be the locus of the universe’s consciousness” as they say (162Ψ. And there may be 
indefinitely many such loci. Many or sole as the kind(s) of consciousness in the 
universe(sΨ may be, I do repeatedly affirm with these authors (142Ψ that “precisely at this 
moment for our species, when so much is required of us, a cosmic opportunity has fallen 
into our laps. A potentially empowering, transcendent origin story has appeared that 
could unify so many around the world who may not see eye to eye on many other things.” 
Extraordinary or not, “humanity could have a cosmically long future.” 
30.) ecohumanism see Burneko 2004; Obeyesekere: 4 
31.) Obeyesekere 40, 45, 268, 549, and see 35, 43, 69 to learn more about It 
32.) see ibid.: 115; not of two or altogether disparate natures see Jones and Culliney; see 
Burneko 2ίί4, 2ί1ί. At the same time, I have to confess, by the argument of Deacon’s 
own sort of Incompleteness Theorem, that we also find we somehow are, or contribute to, 
completing and maturing the universe – notably as self-sustainingly aware Earthlife 
33.) neo-uroboric see Abrams and Primack: 155; emergent dynamics, Deacon: 534; 
predate natural selection, ibid.: 136, 534 
34.) see Swimme 1996 and also http://www.sivideo.com/cosmos/ (accessed 7.17.12) 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  66    
2.0 The God Connection 
 
Consider a well known verse of scripture. One version of the Gayatri Mantram 
adapted from the Rig Veda reads: 
Everything on the Earth, in between, and above is arising from one radiant source. 
As my thoughts, words, and deeds 
embody this complete unity, 
I am the peace of this moment. 
 This verse will do as a short synopsis of some of the ideas of this essay, though I 
write more as a psychocosmic-nondualist than as a consciousness-monist. And other 
themes or elaborations will be introduced as they become relevant. One of the more 
fruitful of these comes to us from the thoughtful work of the astrophysicist Bernard 
Haisch, author of The God Theory: Universes, Zero-Point Fields, and What’s Behind It 
All. In a scrumptious combination of informed scientific and metaphysical speculation, 
Haisch integrates his scientific background with his earlier religious experience studying 
for the priesthood at the Benedictine seminary of St. Meinrad Archabbey in the hills of 
southern Indiana.  
 
At some point in making the transition from seminarian to family-man and 
professional scientist, Haisch, like Pascal, made his wager: 
As science integrates the in-depth knowledge of the physical world,  it will 
be channeled into a new and exciting line of inquiry that acknowledges the 
expanded reality of consciousness as a creative force in the universe and 
the spiritual creative power embodied in our own minds.1 
 
Haisch, further, makes no bones early on that a key premise of The God Theory 
is, like that of the mantram above, that, “we are, quite literally, one with God, and God is, 
quite literally, one with us.”2 My interest in this appealingly forthright premise is less in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  67    
arguing with or to one side of its apparently unqualified monism or panentheism than in 
building from it to suggest how it emerges from and harmonizes with contemporary field 
theory having implications for the extreme long term resonance-aptitudes of intelligent 
life on Earth – for dwelling appropriately and sustainingly in the Earth household of our 
interbeing: οἰțεȓωσȚςήoikeíōsis. On later pages I will with Zhuangzi and others raise some 
questions concerning unqualified reductionisms and totalisms of various sorts, spiritual, 
scientific or otherwise, about the nature of God, nature or humankind. 
 
But at this early moment in the exploration, I want to mention Haisch’s informed 
reflection that, “we are the creating intelligence made manifest . . . . actually mak[ing] 
our universe and then entering into it,” and his related notion of “creation as [an] 
intelligent subtraction” whereby “our physical universe comes about when the Godhead 
selectively limits itself . . . and manifest[s itself as] a realm of space and time.”3  These 
ideas and earlier religious and mythopoeic versions of them will allow us to construe his 
thinking in the expanding context of the contemporary science by which Haisch 
elaborates his theory. 
 
And I’d parenthetically invite readers to compare and contrast Haisch’s 
subtractive Kabbalistic insight about God – in the Zimzum imagery of self-constraining 
power, function, value and intelligent ententionality in the (creation of the) universe – 
with Terrence Deacon’s intuitions of “absential efficacy,” i. e., “that whenever we 
recognize that a system exhibits ententional  properties, it is not because of something 
added to the physical processes involved, but rather quite literally because it depends on 
the physical fact of something specifically missing from that object or process.” And 
also, How much of an analogy is there to be developed between the self-constraining 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  68    
Zimzum of supposed cosmic omnipotence in religious lore and the coevolutionary 
“constraints” that Deacon sees as essential to the allowing, evoking and dynamic 
emerging of order, ententionality and organization in scientifically conceived 
cosmogenesis and in noogenesis? 4 One discourse is theological the other is quantitative 
and positivistic, but their form and structure are similar. And, in the context of both 
contemporary philosophical hermeneutics and quantum indeterminacy and 
complementarity, we are inevitably invited to wonder to what extent the orders, 
dimensions and functionalities of cosmogenesis may interpenetrate in meaningful 
analogies, if not in measurable quantities, as we find our way to sustainability not 
premised foremost on anthropocentric egoism and its instruments. Asked another way, If 
sustaining meaning is the issue rather than objective veracity alone, the ways in which 
and the tropes by which human participation in the construction of reality is realized and 
characterized are, in fact, constituents – not necessarily arbiters, or add-ons --- in 
cosmogenesis. This is only a long way of saying that cosmogenesis realizes itself, 
fractally if not totum simul, in its recursive and self-referential -- in our contemplative – 
contextualizations, reflections and reveries. 
The subtractive interpretation of cosmogenesis in Haisch has a pedigree, then, in 
the Kabbalistic teaching of  Zimzum or Tsimtsum, the “concentration,” “contraction,” 
“withdrawal” or “retreat” of God Who by this self-shrinkage makes possible the 
existence of the physical universe. As Gershom Scholem puts it, following Isaac Luria, 
“God was compelled to make room for the world by, as it were, abandoning a region 
within Himself.” Nicholas of Cusa also offers a complement to this way of thinking in 
discussing the universe as being only a restricted form of the maximum, the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  69    
“interminate.” “In fact,” he writes (with what could be adopted as relevance for a notion 
of ecological or ecospiritual understanding todayΨ, “in every creature the universe is the 
creature . . . .all things are contracted in order to form each creature.” And in the earlier 
Christian doctrine of kenosis or self-emptying, as Dan Carrere argues in his book 
Creating a Human World, we find (through its cognate implication of incarnated in-this-
world-embodimentΨ an “individuating and social clearing space for relationships.” 
Altogether, it is as if to say interminate wholing enfolds itself into and as the 
uniquenesses of existence which by that same token, and as fractal experiments in the 
same project, in emptying themselves of ego-totalism afford, disclose or unfold the 
emergent opportunities for the mutual sustainability of diverse all-togethering. Expanding 
with Kierkegaard, Freud and Heidegger and like Armstrong a psychocultural 
interpretation of self-emptying kenosis having what I think are far reaching ecosocial 
implications in relation with a sustaining contemplative attentiveness, Carrere relates that 
it is a process of realizing a more authentically actualized (or what the NeoConfucians 
called cheng) humanity, a 
’dying away’ from everything that resists, represses, or evades the finite 
Earth of simple and uncontested human being, opening more and more 
beyond immediate self-interest to the otherness of all that relativizes and 
voids a privileged lordly life – the ‘exalted’ domination of omnipresent 
narcissism.5 
 
The way in which Haisch brings to contemporary parlance the ideas of cosmic 
Zimzum and self-emptying is to emphasize that creation is not “making something out of 
nothing [but] a filtering process that makes something out of everything . . .  [and] We are 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  70    
nothing less than a part of that Godhead” having, I will add with Carrere, aptitudes and 
abilities of empathy, care, love and responsibility for one another and for all our relations 
who share this Earthly experience. And to these aptitudes I will also add the quantum 
theorizations of Stapp that our ecosocial attention is co-constitutive in selecting and 
stabilizing, in filtering, the myriad superposed brain-mind and mind-cosmos-nature 
comprobabilities and potentialities that we experience as our world, one “that is 
constituted not of matter. . .but rather of an informational structure. . . .” Adds Deacon, 
There is more here than stuff. There is how stuff is organized and related 
to other stuff. And there is more than what is actual. There is [the yet-
absent] what could be, what should be, what can’t be, what is possible, 
and what is impossible. If quantum physicists can learn to become 
comfortable with the material causal consequences of the superposition of 
alternate, as-yet-unrealized states of matter, it shouldn’t be too great a leap 
to begin to get comfortable with the superposition of the present and the  
absent in our functions, meanings, experiences and values.6  
I reckon this to indicate that in the comparatively selfless mature contemplative 
and sagelike disposition of attentiveness is the care and sustainability of superposed 
Earthlife and anthropocosmic potentials. 
 
 
I might observe at this still prefatory point of analogization that while for Haisch 
the subtraction or absential self-limiting of the radiant quantum-field or God-field source 
and origin of all (nature and mind) is the very essence of cosmogenesis and thus of 
human ability and thought as well, a fractal human variant of this same subtraction is for 
Carrere also (as might be ententional constraint for Deacon) a remedy to the inveterate 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  71    
hubris of anthropocentric ability and thought in ecosocial or environmental practice. The 
boon of self-forbearance by which theo/genesis makes space, literally spacetime, for 
creation and cosmogenesis in Haisch is echoed in Carrere by the skillful means of 
personal, interpersonal, ecosocial and environmental rectitude in our conduct of  
interhuman and cultural or planetary affairs. And, in the related Confucian understanding 
of the embodied relationality of Heaven, Earth and Humankind and their mutually 
beneficial performance mediated through our sagely conduct -- of mutual likening, 
deference, accordant wu wei, and forbearance, reciprocity or yielding, shu, under the sign 
of Daoist and Confucian ziran, i. e., self-organizing “that-which-is-of-itself-what-it-is” 
naturalness -- we will find further variants of the humanocosmic sensibility glossed thus 
far.7  
 
But for now, even more than the themes of human or precursor systemic 
constraint or divine contraction (cf. self-cultivation, mindfulness, conscious attention and 
cotentionΨ, the signature trope of Haisch’ understanding of cosmogenesis is what in 
today’s physics is called the everywhere connected quantum vacuum field or, under the 
name he prefers, the zero-point field – the context for all that emerges and is reciprocally 
shaped, entended or that sustainingly concerts itself into existence.8  
This idea arises from the fact, as we now understand things, that there is no 
absolute cessation of temperature or activity in this universe. For example, no matter how 
cold things get down around absolute zero where all motion supposedly stops, there is 
always an irreducible quantum of the jumping around of (sub)atomic activity, an 
indeterminate jitterbug zitterbewegung radiance of oscillation and vibration that is 
everywhere and is the compresent basis of everything. Or, stated more graphically and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  72    
exigently, even at the level of the smallest, the lowest, the coldest, the most fundamental 
dimension of the physical universe, there is always a statistical hopping-into-being-and-
skipping-away of elemental phenomena. These have the potential for self-organization as 
they linger, interconnect, superpose their relative probabilities and mutually, if sometimes 
nonlocally, develop. And these may further organize into sentient beings like ourselves 
who in turn can find emergent modes of ordering and manufacturing physical, utilitarian 
things as well as of, evidence suggests, ententionally maintaining immediate, direct and, 
with practice, dynamically stabilized resonance with the statistically minute but ever-
present dynamic field origin/context of space, time and consciousness. We, in other 
words, can interact with the gross, statistically stable perdurance of the large and small 
events and objects of spacetime; and according to evidence we can also interact with the 
field in stabilizing or sustaining, the minutest incipient probabilistic fluctuations and 
vibrations that are ever-present. Our ententionality is constituent and cocreative with/in 
cosmogenesis from (and to some extent as) which it emerges on Earth. In turn, 
cosmogenesis may be said to be contextualized, to (self-)contextualize, interpret and 
realize itself, through and as ourselves. Interculturally intriguing in this connection are 
also the spanda, incipient throbs or pulses of divine consciousness giving rise to the 
universe hierarchy as modeled in their discussion of consciousness and the quantum 
vacuum by Abraham and Roy.9  
In the end, as Haich suggests, we are also the actual/virtual field-fluctuations; 
mind and nature compenetrate, so to speak. In his view, there is an apparent recirculation 
and interpenetration of influence from the cosmic through the human, and from the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  73    
human to the cosmic. It is a view not alien to other members of the contemporary 
scientific and humanistic communities.10  
The quantum context is statistical in that the place, time, duration and amount of coming-
into-being of an energy packet cannot be predicted with certainty and is related to the 
entirety of the interminate and interconnected field, including us participant-observers. 
Neither can its exact place and motion both be told at the same time -- even when it does 
stick around for a while. Thus, says Haisch in his chapter “The Zero-Point Field,” 
at every possible frequency, there will always be a tiny bit of 
electromagnetic jiggling going on. And if you add up all these ceaseless 
fluctuations, you get a background sea of light whose total energy is 
enormous This is the . . . zero-point-field . . . . We can imagine a true 
vacuum, devoid of everything, but in the real world, a quantum vacuum is 
permeated by the zero-point field with its ceaseless . . . waves.11 
 
Moreover, we cannot see it directly because it is everywhere (and our sight works 
only by way of contrastsΨ, Haisch explains; “it acts as a kind of blinding light” or field of 
radiance to whose presence we are, therefore, effectively blind; and “[t]he world of light 
[and phenomena] that we do see is all the rest of the light that exists over and above the 
zero-point field.” All of cosmic space, then, Haisch argues, is presumably a self-luminous 
plenum of this zero-point energy. And everything on Earth, in between and above arises 
as folds, complexifications, condensations, phases in creatio continua from, and as a 
mode of, its radiant ever-presencing source. Our universe is poised floating and bouncing 
in, or as a contracted and fractal subset of, the self-actualizing themes and potentials of 
the interminate zero-point field with whose ceaseless humanocosmically in-formed 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  74    
probability waves we and our ententionalities interact (participating in the 
actualizing/localizing/focusing/stabilizing) in subtle yet measurable ways in the lab and 
in the field.12  
And analogously, from the lab work of prescientific ancients investigating things 
through anthropocosmic interaction with the world by the I Ching (= Yijing), we find 
testimony of the compenetration of Earthly and heavenly patterns and potentials with the 
heart-mind of the contemplative sage. By this practice, the mature contemplative learned 
to “respond . . . to ‘incipient’. . . change, [compresently expressed] both in external events 
and in the mind.” Such a sensitive and immediate, embodied responsiveness in an 
intuitive spontaneity uncluttered by ego-calculation or over-ratiocination permitted 
harmony, optimization or congruence with (and between) the social and natural 
environment(sΨ, in what we might think of today as an ecohumanely sustaining “way of 
fitting into the pattern of change, of attaining harmony with the Dao.” Where the sage’s 
mind was “clear and free-flowing, unobstructed by murky [qi]” -- (qi being the 
premodern psychophysical approximation of the humanocosmically probabilistic zero-
point field which, attenuated and clarified, was the spiritual clarity of sincere, or 
authentic, heart-mind (xin), and which, dense and opaque, was inert matter) -- s/he could 
“therefore detect and respond to the subtlest patterns in things” and sustainingly interact 
with them in a continuum of resonant or mutually beneficial accord.  It should be 
emphasized that the sagely worldview is one of comprehensively and creatively 
functional humano-cosmological co-operation and con-duct and, thus, expressive of a 
nondualizing participant/observer guan ententionality. It is based in completely attentive 
and meditative interaction with the natural and social cosmos, not necessarily on 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  75    
complete withdrawal; and it is certainly not based on oppressive domination of nature 
and other persons. Drawing on this tradition, Berry emphasizes for us today the wisdom 
of a “functional cosmology” of relating with the Earth and the natural world in a mutually 
enhancing way.13  
 
Haisch, with his colleagues Hal Puthoff, Alfonso Rueda and others has theorized 
further along the lines of stochastic electrodynamics (SED, to be distinguished from 
quantum electrodynamics, (QED) that our entire universe -- and particularly the physical 
inertia of bodies at rest or in motion -- may not be a fundamental but a derivative, a 
fluctuation or instability in the zero-point sea of luminosity. To that I add a speculation 
linked with the Chinese insight that the field of all pervading qi is both psycho/cosmic. 
What we experience as our conventional discursive thoughts and essentializing self/other 
“objectifications,” then, may be also derivative expressions of fixity, inertia, drag or 
habituation in, or of, the otherwise pliantly fluid psychocosm -- of the reflexive, self-
referential self-organizing systems-and-semeo-dynamics of the nondualized participant-
observer-field universe. By this analogy, one to which I’ll return, to the degree we trade 
in fixed and thus inattentive thoughts, perspectives and stances, we experience and 
reinforce the inertia, opacity, density and occlusion of the sustainingly ongoing flowing-
wholing that the Chinese knew as qi’s production and reproduction. And unsustainably 
assiduous ego-minded intentionality hastening to private satisfaction and external 
rewards at the expense of an externalized environment has its counterpart, in my 
intercultural narrative, in the acceleration in the field modeled by some quantum theorists 
as inertia.14  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  76    
An inference from my construction of thought-as-inertia is that modes of 
consciousness and co-consciousness that are least freighted by self interest and by 
habituation, that are most relaxed, “released” and “empty” of conventional ego and 
“selfhood,”  or the arrogance and self-importance that "add on slowness" or drag in 
Chinese lore, are those that may most attentively enact and attune or accord with the 
overall radiant process-field-of-being, the analogous zero-point field and the, as it is often 
described, psychocosmic field of qi. Contemplative attentiveness would be an example of 
such resonant and cocreative consciousness, due to the relative loss or abatement of dense 
ego-self that occurs in continued attentiveness to experience without external aims. These 
modes or states of consciousness would appear less as, or in, (permutations of) composed 
and finished thoughts than as, perhaps, open-ended ongoing awareness. They would 
emerge as associative or analogical thinking rather than conclusively finished 
propositional thoughts, and as epiphanies, synchronicities, intuitions, charisms, 
celebrations or functional, yet unforced and non-self-aggrandizingly held, qualities and 
ententions more readily according with, and probabilistically engaging the psychocosmic 
wavefunction to collapse or to present as, what one NeoConfucian spoke of as the co-
sustainingly “affinitive correspondence” of the sage and the natural world. In this 
interpretation, the “releasement” or Gelassenheit of Heidegger is once again cognate with 
the wu wei ziran of Daoist and Confucian lore, Christian kenosis, and with Buddhist 
upaya or skillful conduct, practical phronesis, and the expedient means of contemplative 
conduct, i. e. fluent thinking and conduct that is attentively engaged performance of and 
with the field of interbeing to the degree it is empty of ponderous self.15 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  77    
Presumably, as our contemplative conduct resonates less interruptingly and less 
impositionally withήin the field, we come to think “as the field thinks.”  We resonantly 
embody and dehabituatedly enact unprecedented ontohermeneutic reciprocity (wu wei 
ganying shu), if not perfect harmony, in co-tentiveness with nature and (the potentials of) 
all other(s) as we engage with and as the sustainably self-organizing process of that 
radiant field of or in which our presencing is a mode, expression, and to some ecogenic 
extent, a cybernetic rudder or participating entention. In the contemplative practice of 
life, “the sage can exert a transforming [ecosocial] influence.” The un-self-centering 
openness in participation with the interpenetrating and superposing of quantum potentials 
or with psychocosmic qi or with Gaia by this interpretation is expressed as diversely as 
the “negative capability” of our empathic sensibilities, as the classical Chinese shu, 
reciprocity, and as wu wei, the action without effort performative of the ziran or natural 
“that-which-is-of-itself-what-it-is” of which Daodejing speaks. At the same time, we may 
further speculate that it is not the utilitarian thought-objects and external goal-rewards of 
ego-freighted-and-mediated experience that are of greatest value in the sustaining 
resonance of nondual (Earth-human) psychocosm but the intrinsically self-fulfilling 
experiences and dynamically emergent meaning patterns (co)evoked through our 
attentive participation. Again, to a hyper-rational or appetitive consciousness, these ideas 
may initially seem irrelevant, or just plain silly. But long earlier we were no more afraid 
to conceive something quia absurdum than today we may find we are redeemed from 
ourselves by the same logic. Or in the more exciting refrain of Richard Tarnas, 
Is it not much more plausible that human nature, in all its creative 
multidimensional depths and heights, emerges from the very essence of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  78    
the cosmos, and that the human spirit is the spirit of the cosmos itself as 
inflected through us and enacted by us? . . . . is ultimately the cosmos’s 
intelligence expressing its creative brilliance?16 
Endnotes: The God Connection 
“The God Connection” is the original of my later much-revised essay titled 
“Anthropocosmic Communitas for Long-Term Sustainability” presented at Transgressing 
Boundaries:  Interdisciplinary Culture, Psychoanalysis and Anthropology, A Festschrift 
in Honor of Robert A. Paul at Emory University, Atlanta, 2.29.16 
1.) Haisch 2006: 3 
2.) ibid.: 15 
3.) ibid.: 17, 31, 30; for oikeiosis see, e. g., 
http://www.uvm.edu/~jbailly/courses/196Stoicism/notes/oikeiosis.html/ (accessed 
8.16.14)  
4.) Zimzum, Scholem 1965: passim; Deacon: 42-45, 182-2ί5, 54κ; see Gleiser’s hardy 
critique of the monotheistic and totalistic impulses in contemporary cosmology 
5.) Scholem 1961: 261; Cusanus 1954: 83; Carrere: 157, 159; consider how the Zimzum 
theme parallels that of the Big Bang cosmogony depicted by  Primack and Abrams 
6.) Haisch 2006: 31; Stapp: 38; Deacon: 544-45 
7.) wu wei see Hershock; ziran see Wagner; see Burneko 2004 and 1991, 1992 
8.) see also Abraham and Roy; see Yuasa; Deacon: 548; also see Sheldrake 
9.) on stabilization of or in the field see Stapp and regarding the central nervous system 
see also Buhner: 58; evidence see Jahn and Dunne 1987, 2011; see also Explore, 
Laughlin et al., Laughlin and Throop, Wallace 2007; www.icrl.org 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  79    
10.) see Jahn and Dunne 1987, 2011, Laughlin and Throop 2001, Jones and Culliney 
1999, Goswami 1995, Laszlo 2ίί3, O’Murchu, Swimme, Swimme and Berry; again see 
Primack and Abrams, Sheldrake. Please keep in mind that I am not entering a dog in the 
fight as to whether consciousness created the universe or vice versa. I do acknowledge a 
naturalistic and nondualistic cosmogenesis, but I cannot say there is not something toto 
coelo other and different going on. At the same time, it’s no more clear to me that what 
we call cosmogenesis/naturans or God aren't variants of one another than that the 
attributes of either are specifiable independent of the other. I tend to be apophatic about 
the event/process theos and more comfortably think (of) an evolving, reflexively self-
aware, omnicentric and omnipotential universe of indeterminate orders (e. g. anthropo 
+theo + cosmic) not completely reducible and not decomposable to any one order – either 
substantial or ontohermeneutical. If God has to be an issue, it is for me the coproductive 
reciprocity or local intimacy and the nonlocal connectivity of everything with and within 
everything. For convenience’ sake, I think all, nothing, not-yet, absent, etc. are as much 
“a part of“ the ongoing-wholing as are tuna fish, black holes, contemplative attentiveness, 
my love for my daughter and grandchildren, dao and différance. 
11.) Haisch 2006: 79 
12.) ibid.:71; see Corrington (notably re: “folds”Ψ, Abraham and Roy, Stapp, Jahn and 
Dunne; on experiments in the field see especially Jahn and Dunne 2011: 105-16 
13.) the mature contemplative learned to respond. . . in Smith, et al.:169-205 passim; 
Berry 1988: xiii, 90; see Liu 2001; Burneko 2004, 2010; Sheldrake: 82 shares my 
speculation about the analogy between qi (chi) and the zero-point field, and see Wallace 
2007: 46-49, 78-84 for a similar exposition 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  80    
14.) fluctuation or instability Haisch 2006: 76; see Haisch 2006: 81-83; see Paul Davies 
“On the meaning of Mach’s Principle” http:ήήwww.padrak.comήineήINERTIA.html 
(accessed 4.23.12); Yuasa 1993 offers a comprehensive contemporary interpretation of qi 
or “ki-energy” 
15.) affinitive correspondence in Tucker and Berthrong: 130; it is the continuity of 
humans and nature through qi often emphasized in Daoist and NeoConfucian traditions 
that encourages the notion of qi as being psychocosmic and psychophysiological and thus 
interpretable as a construct amenable alike to ontohermeneutical and to quantum 
probabilistic considerations, see Tu 1985: 36; and see also Cheng 1986: 361 on all-
sustaining dao as the form and activity of qi acting in accord with which is acting 
according to our true anthropocosmic nature “leading to seasoned and proportionate 
evolution and sustenance of life.” As an enactment of value, this is “true” living as truth 
is characterized by Neville. And as, by analogy, (our) contemplatively fluent performance 
of qi or dao effects the possibilities of the irreducibly anthropo-cosmic quantum field, 
Cheng 19κ6: 36κ finds: “Life is not only part of the whole nature of qi, [cf. the 
wavefunction, the field] but it is vested in every particle and wave of the qi”; see also 
Elgin, McTaggart 2002.  
As to the prospective connection between ego- and thought-releasement in the 
experience of sustainingly interactive fluency with the quantum domain see Jahn and 
Dunne 2011: 58, 71 who note playfulness and the value of resonance. Keep in mind here 
Mengzi’s ancient maxim that “Great is the man who has not lost his childlike heart” and 
the ancient Chinese understanding that: “The universe is not a mere physical reality but, 
more importantly, a hermeneutical reality. . . .The sage as a true human being is able to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  81    
listen to the sound of the universe and interacts with, interprets, and communicates with 
the universe,” original emphasis in Tucker and Berthrong: 1ιι-78 
16.Ψ the sage can exert Smith: 1ι1, and see Wagner’s translation of Daodejing; empathic 
sensibilities see Rifkin; negative capability see N. Scott; Tarnas 2006: 492 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  82    
 
2.1 Opacity and Contraction 
Just as it’s not ordinarily the sizes and shapes of letters that most meaningfully 
engage us when we read but the significance of the words, it’s not tools of themselves 
that prove most sustaining when used in shaping culture but, rather, the  possibilities of 
noetic and ethical growth and a resulting openness, sometimes even an authenticity in our 
ecosocial relations, that is important. This growth is something that ironically is often 
eclipsed by a narrow ego/control instrumentalism focus in a hurry to quantify and profit. 
Contemplative openness for a “neutralized” ego, one not imposing itself on experience, 
has something of an analogue in the open-to-the-not-yet ententional dimension offered by 
Deacon. Without an expansion or occasional relaxation of focus, ego ratiocinations and 
habituations otherwise tend dualizingly to reduce the possibilities of coworlding to the 
either/or of our self-interested thoughts and then to reduce further to (bottom-line 
fixations on) dense, or inert stuff, to inattentive conventions, habits or to repeatedly 
iterated physical and mental tools of yet further ego-intensification and inertia.  
An alternative eco-resonant conduct of interbeing might well outgrow or liberate 
our focus on the opposed object(ification) and subject(ification) regimens by which it is 
customarily occluded. Letting-go is lightening-up. Our compulsions for gain, control and 
manipulation make us dense and opaque to the luminous field of possibilities in the very 
moment we treat the world around us as an objective mass of matter with no intrinsic or 
evolving meaning. Correlatively, a genuinely emergent and open ententionality of 
Earth/human-eco-semiosis in thinking and conduct remains co-responsive in the 
relational and thus the always incomplete character of experience and events as persons 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  83    
and natural world sustainably complete-without-terminating or reducing one another in 
“constitutive absence” and releasement.1  
The speculation about unrelievedly dis-cursive rational/mental thought as an 
experience of noetic inertia having a physical analogue, i. e., inertia in the not-twoable 
field or psychocosm,  is connected to the idea, expanded with Rueda, Haisch and Puthoff, 
that the sea of quantum light opposes the acceleration of matter; “the action of that 
quantum light is what makes matter the seemingly solid, stable stuff of which we and our 
world are made.” The explicit simile would be that the inertia of matter expressed by its 
acceleration against the field is (likeΨ the inertia of Gebser’s “mental-rational 
consciousness structure” linearly, perspectivally and conceptually pushing or accelerating 
to sector, order and control the field (of ever-present-origin-experience). Narrowly 
utilitarian self-interest would be an acceleration vector here expressing an onto-
metaphorical noetic and physical reification or intensifying (ego-)imposition, much like 
what Blake has denominated “Selfhood,” “contraction” and “opacity.” The outcome is 
the objectification of self and of the other living forms of the world and a corresponding 
mechanical push-pull onto-epistemo-econocracy.2  
By this comparison, what we customarily experience as thought is the internal or 
subjectively experienced form of the resistance of the quantum vacuum (also analogized 
as psychocosmic qi, superposed Earth-human comprobabilities, or, per Haisch, the God-
field) to our univocal, hasty or pushy ego-intentionality. The external or objective form of 
this resistance is what we know as the inertia of mass in material objects and events. 
Fixed, repetitive thoughts in this sense are analogously (and reiteratively compulsive) 
dense things; and the un-thinging, de-essentializing or releasing of things as being 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  84    
foremost (objects of and for) ego-instruments goes together in analogy with the non-
thinking of fixed, terminated and closed or compulsively self-ish thoughts. Or more 
pointedly proposed, extreme long term sustainability-value may be less found in our 
formal, techne- and market-disciplined and systematic thought’s anthropoepistemic fixity 
of dualized utilitarian reference (to objective rewards and contents) than in ecosemeic 
thinking’s ongoingly emergent and intrinsically fluent com-patterning in self-rewarding 
resonance with and as the processes of cosmos and Earth -- the performative evocation 
and convocation of  ecopoietic and ecohuman patterns not necessarily referred to some 
external category or metric of existence or fully reducible either to human or cosmic 
foundations. In an open, coconstitutive or nondualized psychocosm, there is no absolute 
external. And we can contrast externally directed or individual privative “intentionality” 
with various expressions of a more humanocosmically open and self-rewardingly 
sustaining attentionality and participatory “ententionality” by way of Morin’s “open,” 
“complex,” “strategic” and “undisciplined” (as contrasted with programmaticΨ thinking, 
along with classical Chinese wuzhi  or “unprincipled” thinking, together connoting 
something of an anthropo- “cosmic clarity” expressed as “an inherent communicative 
possibility (de) with the cosmic field (daoΨ.”3  
 
We may distinguish “thought” as the re-presentation of experience in repeated, 
reproduced finished concepts. “Thinking” in turn may be considered the spontaneous, 
lively, open-ended play of heart-mind (xin) with or as (i. e., presentiating/participating) 
the unending flow of experience. With Morin, ongoing, embodied creative and recreative 
thinking may be understood as an emergent performance of  the ecosystemic openness 
and metasystemic self-reflexivity in self-organizing or emergently dynamic human, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  85    
ecohuman and cosmogenic systems. Fixed and concluded thought is hereby seen not as a 
byproduct or result of anything else so much as eo ipso the expression and manifestation 
of inertia. Once again, by onto-analogy, what acceleration of mass is in the field (of “a 
universe of consciousness” with Haisch, or “the conscious universe” per RadinΨ, the 
insistent acceleration-intensification, i. e., habituation/insistence or persistence of 
conventional thought and ego-intentionality is. Thoughts as characterized here are things, 
alike clots in the qi, inertia in the field, curds in the Way. The proposal is that the 
universe appears as it does to the degree we think as we do, and that the relaxation and 
deceleration of some of our thus far dominant thought forms reduces inertia or drag, 
dysfunction, deracination and entropy in sustainable ecosocial cosmogenesis.4 
And more significantly, by this premise, by this reasoning based on an analogical 
speculation, non-ego-inertialized modes of ententionality would express and perform in 
their “resonance” and approximate “symmetry transformations” of the field of Being the 
open freedom, diaphaneity and transparency of the ever-originating integral 
psychocosmic whole-field-presentiation spoken of by Gebser. Such modes remain to be 
investigated in depth, for they have been long neglected by the imperial epistemologies of 
a colonial and postcolonial history.5  
It is apparently from related andragogical perspectives that Buddhist teachings 
often term what we would conventionally call thoughts “thought-obstructions” on the 
ground that they tend to be mutually reinforcingly associated with ego-attachments on the 
one hand, often for personal, political, economic or military power, and tend misleadingly 
and contentiously to separate or reduce unbounded or all connected ongoing-wholing on 
the other. They render experience opaque. By the same token, “When our mind works 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  86    
freely without any hindrance, and is at liberty to ‘come’ or to ‘go,’ we attain Samadhi of 
Prajna, or liberation. Such a state is called the function of ‘thoughtlessness.” Quite 
dramatically expressed in yet another set of terms,  
Fully in accord with the visions of many Daoist traditions, [we] cosmic 
beings travel lightly through the world because [we] have learned to 
mentally visualize and physically embody the broad extent of [our] cosmic 
environment within [our] own being. [We] are transparent individuals who 
have achieved  the highest clarity. . . .perfectly harmonized and fully 
transparent  to all that is around [us].6  
In its several now familiar forms ranging from Keats’ poetic “negative capability” 
of resting easy amid mysteries and uncertainties to mystical kenosis, Zimzum and 
constitutive absentialism and to the “liberating intimacy” of wu wei or “conduct that is 
unprecedented” and to the yet-to-be discussed “lunchbox theorem” of psi research, we 
find a golden thread of analogical intimations indicating that a reiteratively heavy-handed 
literalism or reductionism, a dense-minded imposition of ego-inflationary schemes upon 
monotonically and positivistically conceived interpersonal and ecosocial life-relations, 
corresponds to the manner in which objects acquire inertia and inflexibility in the field. 
Lightening-up is enlightening by this formula; what Morin calls “deceleration” is 
liberation. And ecopoiesis in living systems becomes resonantly ontopoietic in the field 
of our lived experience. As Hershock says from a Chan venue, the liberating intimacy of 
inter-poietically attentive or unfreighted contemplative conduct and thinking is 
releasement from dis-cursive manipulation and dominion in an opening towards the 
“concursive,” “unconstrained and yet profoundly sensitive skill” of a cosmopoietic, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  87    
“wholeness or roundedness that remains vibrantly responsive” and  sustainingly 
“appropriate” in a “world of ever-changing circumstances.” “Completely a sphere of 
peaceful disposition,” as was said of Cheng Hao going on a thousand years ago.7  
Endnotes: Opacity and Contraction 
1.) Deacon: 547, 549; see Abram 2011 
2.) the action of that quantum light, Haisch 2006: 81; see Gebser on mental/rational 
consciousness; see Blake in Frye; see Burneko 1997, 2003: 81-100 
3.) not necessarily referred see Whorf: 261; ecosemeic see Corrington; open, complex, 
etc. see Morin 2008; wuzhi see Wu 1990: 184, 383; inherent communicative possibility J. 
Miller: 358; see  Sheldrake chap. 4 
4.) flow see Corrington 1994: 175 and see Csikzentmihalyi; Morin 2008: 29; Haisch 
2006: 128 
5.) reasoning based upon a speculation see G. Steiner 1998 who points out that with 
language we can say what is not (or not yet) so and can reason based on what is 
speculated or supposed; resonance and symmetry transformations, Guenther 1989: 189; 
imperial epistemologies see Deloria 2002; see also Radin 1997: 296 and Burneko 1981a 
and 1981b, 1985 
6.) When our mind works freely in Price and Wong, trans. The Sutra of Hui-Neng: 32; 
Fully in accord in Miller: 358-59 
7.) negative capability in Durr 1970: 23, and see N. Scott; kenosis, Zimzum see Haisch, 
Scholem; constitutive absentialism see Deacon; liberating intimacy see Hershock: 57; 
lunchbox theorem, Academy of Consciousness Studies 1994, personal notes, see Explore 
3.3: 219, 301-303 and www.icrl.org, and see Jahn and Dunne 2011: 105-16, (the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  88    
Academy was generously sponsored by The Fetzer Institute); Morin 1999: 121; 
concursive, appropriate see Hershock: 77, 94; sphere of peaceful disposition in Zhu Xi: 
304; "This shift of perspective is encouraged by the [Huayan] teaching as a means to 
develop what is called a 'round and clear' understanding, which  may also be translated as 
'complete awareness' or 'complete illumination'" notes Cleary: 41  
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  89    
2.2 At Play in The Field of Light 
 
Following Haisch’s notion of the God Theory to its source and end brings us to 
what Gebser might call Ever-Present Origin where, for instance,  Gebser speaks of “the 
itself. . .which pervades or ‘shines through’ everything in which the diaphanous 
spirituality, in its originary presence, is able to become transparent. This presence of 
origin. . . . anticipates space and time”; and, says Gebser, completing the onto-cosmo-
hermeneutic circuit, “it is in and by the human itself that the presence of origin which 
‘corresponds’ to it could become diaphanously visible.”1 Back-translated into the idiom 
of contemporary  cosmology, this, here, is what the Big Bang is doing now. 
Beyond proposing that “quantum light is what makes matter the seemingly solid, 
stable stuff of which we and our world is made” and is the milieu in which the 
acceleration and activity of matter manifests (as) resistance or inertia, the point Haisch 
wants to emphasize concerns the character and source of this all-connecting, 
omnipresently all-embracing first or “quantum light.” The physical universe sustained by 
the luminous sea of quantum light he reports could, by the premises of Einstein’s special 
relativity theory, be seen, all of it, in a single point, at a single moment, at a glance if one 
were indeed moving at the speed of light. “In the reference frame of light” asserts Haisch, 
(as often does Jung in reference to the unconsciousΨ “there is no space and time”; 
“distance has no place in its existence.”2 
Haisch then observes that with relativity theory, we have less a “luminiferous 
ether” (of the kind considered by MaxwellΨ that is supporting light as its by-product and 
instead more a luminosity that, “we can almost say . . . creates space-time . . . . ‘Let there 
be light,’” underlines the astrophysicist at this point, “may express more than a poetic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  90    
mythology after all.” And he then proceeds to ground his insight (or analogyΨ by alluding 
to Kabbalah, to the text known as the Haggadah, and to a key passage therein asserting 
that the light created “in the beginning,” Bereshet, “is not the same as the light emitted by 
the Sun, the Moon and the stars, which appeared only on the fourth day.” Rather, cites 
Haisch, “The light of the first day was of a sort that would have enabled man to see the 
world at a glance from one end to the other.” 3 Indeed, photons at the constant (non-
accelerating) speed of light move without mass or inertia in, or manifest as, the field; 
illuminated or illuminating thinking, by analogy, is a mode of its everpresencing. 
And it is this everywhere all-at-once and ever-present originating light connecting 
all the universe that Bernie Haisch conceives as the self-luminous quantum zero-point 
creationήradiation. He tells us that we may therefore “regard the laws of physics as the 
manifestation of God’s ideas, not the limits of God’s creative potential.” For Haisch, 
whatever else his poetic physics professes, wants to clarify that God (“all descriptions of 
[whomήwhich] are necessarily wrong”Ψ is acting in the unfolding of spacetime creation 
and is everpresently resident in and even as the universe and the subtending field of light. 
He states, in a manner that reminds the reader of the lore of Shiva Nataraja and the 
dance, play and cosmic lila of South Asian sensibilities, that, the end and “the creation of 
universes comes about through the [en]tention of an infinite intelligence for the purpose 
of experiencing itself in its infinite diversity.” Berry makes a similarly pertinent allusion 
to the “planetary” and “universal [eco]socialism” based in Thomas Aquinas’ argument of 
the Summa Theologica that, “because the divine goodness ‘could not be adequately 
represented by one creature alone [God] produced many and diverse creatures.” And 
Haisch makes clear that the cosmical revealment-concealment motif is riposte to any 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  91    
notion that universes just come and go in an unconscious cycle or sequence with no 
evident meaning. For Haisch, God-as-light comes first in the ententional order of 
cosmogenesis, but is never separated from it. In Tarnas’ cognate worldview emphasizing 
less the luminosity of the field/origin of nature and consciousness than their correlation 
and reciprocal influence, we learn that “the human condition [is] one of embeddedness 
and creative participation in a living cosmos of unfolding meaning and purpose.”4  
A historical note is that Haisch’s thinking is reminiscent of other precedent 
conceptions such as that of Henry More in 1672 that infinite space was the precondition 
of all existence and the best example of spiritual reality, of, in fact, God, and the foremost 
topic of metaphysics. For More, space was not only real but divine. Thus did More return 
God to (primacy in and with respect to) the physical universe from which He had been 
excluded (or absconded) in the physics of Descartes and other “Nullibists” of the time. 
Again, it may be helpful to note parenthetically that where More posits space Haisch 
posits the quantum vacuum or zero-point field. Yet both seem to identify this absentialist 
position-of-no-position with God in its being apparently devoid of substance, all-
encompassing, originative and divine in each case. It is as much as (apophatically) to say 
in a trope of the via negativa that ί = 1 or ί = ∞. And I offer with perfect relevance to the 
theological and the scientific logics together in play here, what Herbert Guerry writes in a 
paper entitled “A Rational Model for the Via Negativa,”  
If the explanation need not appeal to a law, reduce to the familiar, predict, 
and so on, but must add something different to the explicandum, then if it 
is the existence of the world for which we seek an explanation, then since 
the world (everything) is being explained the explicans must at least add 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  92    
something different to the explicandum. But that which is different from 
everything will be nothing at all.5 
 
Mu. 
 
According to some recent physics, all spacetime itself may be a derivative, just an 
“adorning detail” that derives from something more fundamental. Yet if so, in 
dualistically conceiving our relation with that “something,” Tibetan Buddhism will 
suggest, 
The models we adopt rely on derivations based on ‘from’ and ‘to’ that 
inevitably restrict the knowledge available ‘here’ and ‘now’ . . . . From the 
outset we are outsiders, repeatedly taking stands, we affirm that we are 
bystanders.6  
In any case, the purpose of this short section is interculturally to highlight, using 
the contemporary physics perspective of his cosmology, Haisch’s work as an approach to 
the nondual premise of naturally self-organizing connectedness among the phases and 
modes of Being (while implying that his quantum vacuum nondualism stands in analogy 
with the psychocosmic qi in Chinese lore which when dense is appearing as opaque 
matter and when clarified or attenuated as luminous sage-mind). My concern here is not 
so much with the nature, definition or existence of God nor whether God is in or is prior 
to the universe, nor again in arguing whether science or religion is the more apt onto-
interpretive approach. But it seems reasonable to me, and no less relevant, it seems 
ontoaesthetically apt that what we call God and cosmogenesis may be “treated as” not-
two. And the kindred formulations are numerous. In one more, for instance, monistic 
rather than nondualistic, “gross space, time and matter are created from a rapidly 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  93    
fluctuating dynamical cellular network by an algorithmic process of condensation. The 
dynamic network corresponds to divine consciousness.”7 Haisch’s almost folksy reply is 
at the end of this section. 
I am less inclined positively to assert anything here than to suggest, in the manner 
of Stephen White’s “weak ontology,” that diverse fundamental ways of thinking and 
orientations such as those of science and religion are at the same moment both 
contestable and yet necessary. “The latter insight,” he writes, “demands from us the 
affirmative gesture of constructing foundations, the former prevents us from carrying out 
this task in a traditional [exclusivist or monopolar] fashion.”8 Again, delighted Zhuangzi, 
for every this there is a that. 
And no less reasonable or credible than Haisch’s is the scientifically informed 
speculation of systems theorist Erich Jantsch’s The Self-Organizing Universe which 
offers the (Morin-like) emphasis that in a universe demonstrating capacities for self-
transformation and “the opening up of new levels of self-organization – of new levels of 
mind – the chord of consciousness becomes richer . . . .” 
In the infinite, it falls together with the divine . . . . in the total 
evolutionary dynamics of a multilevel reality. . . .[I]n true mysticism [the 
God idea] is placed into the unfolding and self-realization of evolution. 
God is thus not absolute, he evolves himself – he is evolution. . . .God is 
not the creator, but the mind of the universe.9  
More than Haisch, Jantsch underscores that whatever we mean by God is not prior 
to nor separate from the universe. And yet Haisch offers too a theme from his chapter 
titled “Explaining Consciousness” wherein, like Jantsch, he affirms an overall evolution 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  94    
of consciousness, a consciousness that is the cosmic ground of all things; and he also 
respects its unique appearance in and as each sentient being. “The Big Bang and 
evolution are just tools whereby our particular universe and its conscious life forms 
become actualized in open-ended, novel, creative ways, not by detailed design.”  
Following Eddington, Jeans and earlier cosmologists not yet afflicted by an 
exaggeratedly positivistic reductionism, Haisch also recounts in his chapter entitled “A 
Purposeful Universe” that  
You do have the power to set aside the unhealthy dogmas of both religion 
and scientism. You can open your mind and use reason and intuition in 
roughly equal measure to figure out what you truly are. And that will 
change the world.10  
. . . . . 
Everything on the Earth, in between, and above 
is arising from one radiant source. 
As my thoughts, words, and deeds 
embody this complete unity, 
I am the peace of this moment. 
 
Endnotes: At Play in The Field of Light 
1.Ψ Gebser 19κ5: 135; Gebser wouldn’t be likely to reduceήequate Ever-Present Origin 
to/with Big Bang, I am making a mental/rational and rhetorical point/analogy. Compare 
Gebser’s Ever-Present Origin as “the Itself” with Obeyesekere’s  “It-thinking” 
2.) Haisch 2006: 82, 93, 94; see Jung 1963: 305; see also Primack and Abrams 
3.) Haisch 2006: 97, 98, 99 
 
4.) Haisch 2006: 104, 247, 66; see Rea 2007: 6-20, 123; Berry 1988: 79; Tarnas 2006: 
293, original emphasis; for an interpretation of the laws of nature as habits see Sheldrake: 
97-101; cf. Eastern Orthodox ontotheological trope of nature as eikon, person, 
performance of God/Field/that-which-cannot-be-objectified 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  95    
5.) Henry More in Koyré: 137, 147; Guerry: 1-14; and consider the efficacy of the 
absential in Deacon 
6.) spacetime derivative, Greene: 485; the models we adopt, Tulku: 177 
7.) clarified qi as sage mind see Smith et al.:171, 235; gross space, Abraham and Roy: 31. 
James Riley suggests aisthesis of/as awe conducive to humility (kenosis) and the 
gratitude/satisfaction of here-now embodiment in place, life place and bioregion 
 (personal communication 8.13.14) 
8.) see White 2005; White 2000: 8; Zhuangzi in Wu 1990 192-197, see also Wu: 215 
“everything depends one on the other in a radically reciprocal manner,” and Wu: 3ι3 “. . . 
the language of exploration is polythetic in meaning and non-thetic in its evocative 
[e]ntent” 
9.) Jantsch 1980: 308 
10.) the Big Bang Haisch 2006: 67; you do have the power ibid.150; see also Morin 
2008: 56-57 on open-ended creativity and preparing for the unexpected; take a break 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sl_ExU46KXE/ (accessed 7.29.12) 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  96    
 
3.0 Transparency and Entanglement 
 
 
From the perspectives of recent physics and cosmology as expressed in Ervin 
Laszlo’s The Connectivity Hypothesis, it may be said that from the most minute to the 
cosmic scale, each in-forms all and all in-forms each. And we learn that,  
the resulting integral wave function of the universe in-forms systems on 
all levels from the single particle to the universe-less-one. . . . in-formation 
is physically effective without conveying manifest energy: it ‘in-forms’ 
the systems that receive it [in a] two-way process. In one direction . . . 
particles, and systems, structure the plenum in their region creating 
interference-patterns that code their wave function. In the other direction, 
the structured plenum – the Ȍ field – informs the particles and systems of 
particles that structure it . . . . particles are in-formed with the wave 
function of the highest-level system of which they are a part.1  
There are three themes of special note here. One is that there is the eventuation of 
physical effect in the universe by non-physical means. Ours is not exclusively, not even 
foremost, a mechanistic cosmos. Information, “meaning” if you will, is as much a mode 
of world and universe-development as is matter. (The latter is beginning to appear as 
derivative of the field rather than as a primum notum of creation.) And non-energy/matter 
significance in affecting or coordinating physical events in our world is hardly an esoteric 
notion; it might be expressed as simply as the difference/différance between a green and a 
red signal light at a busy intersection. Or in another construction, one almost musically 
Pythagorean, in its implication,  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  97    
There is no need to search for physical forces to connect. . . collective 
consciousness and the physical universe, or the individual mind and 
body[:]. . . . Instead. . . only mathematical connections between tattvas 
[levels, phases]. . . .That is, dynamical links pop up between nodes on 
different levels of creation according to rules that connect the whole 
shebang.2  
We see this as an emphasis on the “ecology of mind” as Gregory Bateson names 
it in his discussions of mind andήas the differential “pattern that connects.” The basic 
quantum of mind in Bateson’s work is “a difference that makes a difference”; and even a 
minute (or nonphysical) difference as information (e. g. 0,1) can have a large cascade of  
influence in physical systems.  Additionally, to the degree the difference that makes a 
difference indicates the minimum unit of mind for Bateson, so does the “constraint” 
differentiating processes and properties in their mutual completion in Deacon express 
itself as what Bateson calls “the vast mental process [of] evolution” and as what Deacon 
refers to as its ententional work of semiogenesis.3  
Gradually, our understanding (as a mode) of the universe begins to make it look 
in result even more like a hermeneutic, an aesthetic and an axiological cosmology. As 
wrote the cosmologist Sir James Jeans several decades ago, “the universe begins to look 
more like a great thought than like a great machine.” Saying this is not necessarily 
importing a transcendental idealism into contemporary sensibility. The present question 
is not whether there really is a physical or nonphysical dimension to universe at all but 
rather the extent to which our experience of and as cosmos is a participatory one 
irreducible to subject to object to so-called mind to matter. Is there a pregiven world, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  98    
period? Or do we humans in various ways world and co-world together and with the so-
called external or natural environment? And how do our contemplative or non-self-full 
conduct and ententionality perform and sustainingly (as well as compassionately) 
participate, stabilize or continue the ever-present-ongoing? If reality emerges for us as 
our consciousness interacts with/as the universe, the field, to what extent is real-ization 
altered as we ententionally resonate less self-fully, or more transparently and inclusively, 
with and as this field of coconstituting event/differentials?4  
Another theme of special note is that because of  quantum “entanglement, a 
highly manifest form of correlation” throughout time and space among events or things 
that have or have had any contact, the premises that they are all somehow one or 
connected or superpositioned together, or that they are never conclusively describable as 
entirely two, as entirely separated -- or even that they are all “members of one another” as 
is asserted in mystical teachings and Christian gospel -- cannot be undiscerningly waved 
away. We can conceive that the entanglement of things with one another and with us in 
our experience is an expression of  mutual transparency as well as of co-constitution. And 
a non-imposingly resonant (wu wei), i. e., a lightly but authentically maintained 
“entention,” may be an occasion of enlightening conduct in and of an innerconnected 
kosmos. In an intercultural instance, the “reciprocal communication” or xiangtong that 
relates humans and universe in Daoist and NeoConfucian settings is related to the 
experience that humans have a potential and a duty for sustaining, i. e., for “protecting, 
circulating, and cultivating the [psychophysical] qi of Central Harmony (zhong he) 
between Heaven and Earth [and Humankind].” That allusion becomes the more fertile as 
the role or nature of qi is compared with that of the Quantum Vacuum, Zero-Point Energy 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  99    
or Ȍ Field and xiangtong with the familiar notion of yinyang interaction and mutual 
complementation in psychocosmic affairs.5 
Thirdly, the ontohermeneutic and biocultural contexts, modes or wavefunctions 
(these terms are deliberately intended here as analogous) of any aspects of the coevolving 
universe are in-formed or perfused by, are provisionally constrained or contracted forms 
of, the overall universing itself. In now familiar terms, “particles in nature are in-formed 
with the wavefunction of the highest-level system of which they are a part . . .the highest-
level wavefunction . . . in-forms the lower-level (subΨsystems.” This does not repudiate 
the evidence that we can distinguish, say, the zones or constraints of the atomic elements 
from those of biological, social, and cultural phenomena and subsequently factor these in 
turn from still wider realms of the galactic, noetic or universal. But it does imply that 
within the universe system ensembles we feel and receive (from), and we impart back 
(to), all, both near and far, presumably all the time: xiangtong. Even at remote distances 
of space and time there are cosmic symmetry-transformative degrees of correlation, 
“which, while individually not measurable, at cosmic dimensions ha[ve] statistically 
significant effects.”6 
 
 The ideas of resonance will return in a reintroduction of prior research once done 
through Princeton’s Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) and at the related 
International Consciousness Research Laboratories (ICRL). But for now, I begin to look 
directly at the cognate questions of the self-organization of the resonance potentials in the 
universe and especially at how these may be understood in and understood as the 
conduct, words and insights of mature contemplatives receptively and responsively 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  100    
according with and simultaneously imparting to, co-constituting, their ecosocial realities 
in conduct that is sustainingly dissipative of entropy, opacity or inertia. 
An avenue in this general direction will take us again to the work of Jean Gebser 
on the “diaphaneity” and “transparency” of what he has called the “integral 
consciousness structure.” For such notions of diaphaneity and transparency will window 
the two-way intercourse of “the part,” the holonic or fractal member, with and as the 
in(de)terminate wholing, and suggest the integral, holistic or fractal way, including 
statistical, the whole acts in and as the part.7 
Endnotes: Transparency and Entanglement 
1.) Laszlo 2003: 74-75 passim 
2.) Abraham and Roy: 119 
3.) G. Bateson 1972, 1979: 92-100, 157, and passim.; G. Bateson and M. C. Bateson 
1987; Deacon: 368-69, also see 182-205 on constraint 
4.) aesthetic and axiological cosmology in Hall and Ames 1995: 134, 274-77; Jeans 1931: 
158; on resonance with the field see Jahn and Dunne 1987:61, 243 and 2011; see Stapp 
on the extent to which human participation dynamically stabilizes, however 
provisionally, the wavefunction of anthropocosmic possibility – this issue is not one of 
maintaining stasis in the face of change but one of dynamic equilibrium, to borrow 
phrasing from systems thinking – Can we stabilize a sustainable planet/consciousness?; Is 
sustainability itself in some sense sustainable? Clearly resonance with/in the field is not 
the same thing as immutability or as control; see Krista Tippett, “Reconnecting with 
Compassion” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  101    
http://www.ted.com/talks/krista_tippett_reconnecting_with_compassion.html/ (accessed 
4.25.12) 
5.) entanglement in Laszlo 2003: 75; members of one another, Romans 12:5; xiangtong 
Lai: 96; see Yuasa 1993, 2008 
6.) informed with the wavefunction in Laszlo 2003:75, 77; statistically significant effects 
see Jahn and Dunne 2011, and see International Consciousness Research Laboratories 
www.icrl.org; Global Consciousness Project http://noosphere.princeton.edu 
7.) Gebser 1985: passim.; also see work authored and co-authored by Laughlin; also see  
Sheldrake; cf. Cleary: 30-33 synopsis of  Huayan "Contemplation of the Reality Realm" 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  102    
 
 
3.1 The Whole is in the Part 
 
I’ll repeat that when I say contemplative, I do not mean foremost or only quietist, 
ascetic or even especially reclusive. I do mean a pronounced, nondualizingly attentive 
and ego-neutralizingly ecohumane a-utilitarian conduct of life: (but not therefore 
impractical; wood still needs hewing). Being mindful of nondual cosmogenesis in 
thinking and conduct in daily life and/or in more formal meditative practices without 
making a fetish of it would probably also count as contemplative. I’m not a purist. What 
I’m talking about is experience that is self-rewardingly attuned as the functional 
embodiment of sustaining ecosemiotic resonance -- mutually beneficial Earth-Human 
relations.1 This isn’t a necessarily gnostic, an especially esoteric, a retired or a fatalistic 
way to live. It is clearly, however, not much articulated in common Chamber of 
Commerce parlance. 
And a short note of moderation is worth making at this New Age point. If the 
discussion of mature contemplation eventually involves meaning, active information2, or 
practical ententions having a direct effect in the physical world, it’s worth mentioning 
briefly that the aim here is not to confuse siddhi or paranormal intervention with 
enlightenment. The former may be a derivative or “another roadside attraction” 
accompaniment of the latter in some traditions. But no genuinely awakened person is 
likely to have sought paranormal gifts for hirself alone nor for their own sake. 
Conversely, a mature insight might be that the potentials for such miracles are strewn all 
over the place yet are everywhere eclipsed by our usual bustling normative ego, our 
appetite-and-aversion orientations; and only because of these do they seem (even more 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  103    
than synchronicities) rare or valuable. In any case, the question is sustainability with/in 
nature, not control over it. 
We should take, proposes the Sufi, the wheat and not the basket in which it is 
contained when we engage the matter of authentically contemplative conduct as a 
sustaining mode of e/co-resonant ecoworlding. Put differently, if thoughts are things, it is 
in non-thinking/thinging according to our habituated ego-intending regime that allows 
optimal, fluent resonance in Seinfeld, being (the) field. And if it comes to that, as Stapp 
and other more-or-less orthodox quantum theorists note, each choice we make in the way 
of an observation, measurement, or action in the world is an intervention and a 
participation in, and to some quantum extent a provisional stabilization of, the 
interminate field of compresent possibility-potentials. Considering our cosmic 
evolutionary history, we may even say our choices or ententions are a mode of the cosmic 
process realizing itself in ecohuman form. And the more sustainedly attentive or 
contemplatively cotentive we are with each other and with Earth processes, the more 
likely is sustaining resonance. Pressing the pedal to the metal in an ego-race for 
(supernatural) power is as deficient a way of travel as we can conceive. 
 
The real issue of contemplative meaning in worlding is not in cultivating the 
might and control imperatives of what Gebser calls the “magical structure of 
consciousness” but, rather, it is what Guenther in his interpretation of Dzogchen 
Buddhism has called, using the combined idioms of contemporary physical theory and 
theory of self-organizing systems, the way of “approximate symmetry transformation” or 
a dynamic performance of the integral auto-potentials of Being, of what we might also 
analogize as the possibility wave-field. In this narrative, the way is, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  104    
Being’s holomovement experienced in and through its dynamics by the 
person ‘in tune’ with it. . . .an unfolding process, a vector feeling-tone, 
complementary to and inseparable from Being’s resonance (Tib. thugs-rje) 
with itself as the whole and with all its manifestations.3  
A dynamically emergent system, one that creatively self-organizes to increasingly 
complex or labile interactive regimes by dissipating or outgrowing disorder and entropy, 
Guenther tells us, self-evolves a new order or structure by transformatively dissolving 
and superseding the inflexible stasis of a former one and thereby dynamically unfolding 
and ramifying the system’s (or in the case of sagely maturation, approximating Being’sΨ 
complete meaning-and-being potential far from equilibrium or randomness. The 
implication here is that in sagely being you are “Being All” that you can be. 
As a playful emergence of both beauty and understanding this (never with 
finality) culminates in a fully developed or mature person. And “’Buddha’ [awakened, 
holy person, saint or sage] would be an approximate symmetry transformation of Being” 
reflecting “the initial undivided whole. . . . [while] an ‘ordinary person’ would be an 
approximation-displacement symmetry transformation.” This “ordinariness” is the 
routine experience we might think of as not being attentively or ongoingly attuned with 
or performative of the field of interbeing, of nonfunctionally focusing its fullness in our 
conduct (of it) because of our incontemplatively lopsided or dualizing experience as 
selves other than/to it.4  
A sustaining existential eco-holism, by contrast, would be the lived experience tat 
tvam asi. And in the narrative ongoing-wholing of contemporary humanophysical holism, 
it is with a contemplatively sustained and noninstrumentalizing attentiveness to, with and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  105    
as the events of life, one another and nature -- without lapsing overmuch into precedent, 
rote, compulsion and ego-inertia -- that we are most likely to stabilize, i. e., sustainably to 
evoke and cocultivate in dynamic flow, the sustainingly self-organizing and mutually 
beneficial Earth-human potentials of self-rewarding resonance relations. Adds quantum 
seer Bohm, “this proposal becomes itself an active factor in the totality of existence 
which includes ourselves as well as the objects of our thoughts and experimental 
investigations.”5 
Theoretically, in the modes of brain/mind quantum interactivity and in social, 
ecosocial and perhaps yet other mind/nature domains, it is through the relatively disegoed 
attentiveness typified best, but not only, by the mature contemplative, that sustainingly 
cocreative resonance relations are dynamically and ongoingly stabilized without lapsing 
into the entropy of fixed thoughts and attachments or random disconnectednesses. Our 
ecopoetic narratives help shape our attention and our choices, ententions or 
“interventions” in the co-self-organizing field of being and Ȍ-possibility; and, likewise, 
the corresponding field-feedback we get is as much an articulation of the humanocosmic 
dialogue as is the self-celebrating realization of the field, of kosmos, in and as a form of 
our own ecopoietic interbeing. Sustainingly concelebratory coworlding emerges more 
fruitfully as reciprocal and polythetic story-ing than as univocally instrumental object-ing 
I propose that the indetermination, the freedom of our choices of ways of 
engaging the universe, is inseverable from the indeterminacy of its processes with and as 
which we coemerge, co-attend, coevolve and concelebrate. In the terms of one school of 
quantum theorization, this is to say that “The process of thought is not. . .merely a 
representation of the manifest world, rather it makes an important contribution to how 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  106    
we experience this world.” More expansively, the self-rewardingly attentive 
contemplation of and by the humanocosmic intersystem and its corresponding canticle or 
living “universe story” conduces and communicates the prolonged enrichment of 
sustainingly beneficial coexistence. The world sings interbeing; the canticle to the 
cosmos is also the canticle of the cosmos.6  
This concelebratory canticle of interbeing “places” and contextualizes an analogy 
with the ideas of Terrence Deacon about how dynamic and living systems as wholes and 
as holons emergently realize purpose and completion only, it seems, in complementing 
one another’s incompleteness. In the absential sunya of one another, void or incomplete 
of self-subsistence and of pre-set ends, they in self-organizing to greater degrees of 
complexity and co-ordination realize ongoing wholing and thereby capacities for self-
aware harmony and sustainability. Like notes of music, we and other living beings 
resoundingly complete and complement potentials and purposes none has alone. 
Implicate in the minute and explicate uniqueness of each riff, suggests Bohm the 
quantum sideman, is all that jazz -- a sound garden of past, present, and  future-
ententional all-togethering in every bouquet. In μουσȚțȒ as in φυσȚțȒ,  
[T]here is a feeling of both tension and harmony between the various co-
present transformations, and this feeling is indeed what is primary in the 
apprehension of the music in its undivided state of flowing movement. In 
listening to music, one is therefore directly perceiving an implicate order. 
. .active in the sense that it continually flows into emotional, physical, and 
other responses, that are inseparable from the transformations out of which 
it is essentially constituted.7  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  107    
Borrowing once more from Bohm’s Wholeness and the Implicate Order with an 
ear for the music of  the life of the Earth and other spheres, we can say the order of 
sustainably emergent dynamics andήas sustaining ontohermeneutic concelebration, “is 
comprehended in terms of. . .inter-penetrating and intermingling elements in different 
degrees of enfoldment all present together.”8 Improvising with this in the polyphonous 
and polythetic style of Wu playing with Zhuangzi, we learn maturely to be-sing the world 
in (sustainableΨ harmony as we learn to “hear things. . . .equivalent to letting things in, 
and letting oneself disappear in things, and letting oneself be in them.” In this 
ontohermeneutic playfulness, continues Wu’s jam with Zhuangzi, “the world is a 
mutuality of pipings of cosmic-and-individual life. To discern and live it is [sustaining] 
joy; to violate it in [unsustainable] self-assertion is confusion and suffering.”9 
Wu concludes with relevance to singing, languaging and living the ongoing-
wholing playing (inΨ each part, we don’t need a “single, orthodox import” or 
foundationalistήreductionist “imprimatur.”  
Instead, in a thematically congenial group of perspectives there thrives an 
indefinite variety of interpretations. The different visions of reality [these 
‘goblet words’] inspire among readers are the piping of [humans], echoing 
various experiences in life, the piping of [E]arth. These are without 
exception manifestations of the unutterable, primordial piping of heaven, 
the Non-being that be-comes, at the root of all, that cannot be talked about 
but only encountered in various spontaneities of things. . .that suggest 
imaginative perspectives and creative interpretations. . . . Used in this way, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  108    
language is a vehicle for various regions of the world to encounter one 
another. . . 10 
. . . hybridized, coimplied and performed on the sustainingly fertile ecotone of 
transdisciplinary, intercultural, and interexistential resonance.  
Endnotes: The Whole is in the Part 
1.) see Berry 1988 on functional cosmology; ecosemiosis see Corrington 1994 
2.) active information see Bohm in Weber 1986: 46 
3.Ψ Being’s holomovement, Guenther 19κ9: 24ι 
4.) Buddha in Guenther 1989: 6;  nonfunctionally focusing see Zhongyong, Ames and 
Hall 2001 
5.) likely to stabilize, Stapp: 42; Bohm 1981: 213, original emphasis  
6.) indetermination, Stapp: 24; the process of thought, Bohm 1981: 205 original 
emphasis; canticle, Swimme 1990/1995 
7.) holons, Koestler 1979; there is a feeling Bohm 1981: 200, original emphasis 
8.) Bohm ibid.: 203, original emphasis; see Noble 
9.) Wu 1990: 186 original emphasis; ibid.: 244   
10.) Wu 1982: 39; goblet words, zhi yan, get their name from an ancient kind of drinking 
cup that tipped when full and righted itself when empty. Zhuangzi uses the term to 
characterize language that spontaneously responds to the fluctuations and varying 
complexities of the world with appropriate discernment. Pointing out that for Zhuangzi  
“thoughts are ferments, not relics,” Wu 19κ2: 33 adds emphasis that “the meaning is the 
reader’s as [s/he] is evoked by the discourse” ibid.: 35. See also Graham 19κ9: 2ί1 who 
says of this “spillover saying” that it’s a “fluid language, which keeps its equilibrium 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  109    
through changing meanings and viewpoints. . . .not according to any rules of 
argumentation, but by that unanalyzable knack which [is] at the back of all successful 
behaviour. . . the sign that Heaven is working through us.” See also Bohm (19κ1Ψ on 
language in the rheomode; on interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary, intercultural and 
nondualistically ontohermeneutic modes of consciousness and conduct see Burneko 
19κκ, and see especially Primack and Abrams: 36 “Both scientific and traditional 
cosmologies are in some sense searching for the same thing: a voice through which the 
universe can talk to us.” 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  110    
 
3.2 Integral Diaphaneity and Transparency 
 
Jean Gebser’s book The Ever-Present Origin describes the ego-perspectival world 
of a good many of us “ordinary” persons as a spatialization of thought that dualistically 
“locates and determines the observer as well as the observed.” The “deficient” effect of 
this subject-object perspectivalism and of our prevalent corresponding “mentalήrational” 
consciousness structure,  
is the restriction of man to a limited segment where he perceives only one 
sector of reality. . .only able to perceive a partial view. . . .the part 
outweighs the whole. . . . as the whole cannot be approached from a 
perspectival attitude to the world, we merely superimpose the character of 
wholeness onto the sector, the result being the familiar ‘totality.’1  
 
To experience the ever-opening and emergent ongoing-wholing, he claims, 
requires a change of consciousness, a “mutation” that he calls “aperspectival” or 
“integral”—a mutation evidenced in our century in the concern of the arts and sciences 
with time (or process), the supersession of dualism, and a tendency towards arationality. 
The integral consciousness mutation he emphasizes has the nondual(izing) property of 
integrally "presentiating," and of "rendering whole"  or "diaphanous" i. e., "transparent," 
(what Huayan  calls interdependent, "round" or "whole") our being and our ways of 
knowing with one another and with/as the everpresent originary and cocreative event of 
worlding – notably as experienced in embodied face-to-face, communal and earth/place-
based settings. If conventional method, in Gebser's terms, can only deal sequentially with 
one thing at a time (and in a subject vs. object way), the ontohermeneutic knack of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  111    
diaphany "at least allows the integral simultaneity to be made transparent." I try 
sometimes to use transdisciplinary and intercultural analogies, in the spirit of Joyce, 
Proust or Pynchon, to similar effect. With specific regard to quantum thinking, Gebser 
approvingly repeats a suggestion that, “our intellect [is] inadequate to understand nature 
and consequently we are unable to reproduce its mechanism by means of a conceptual 
construct...[T]he objective essence of things consists of a structure and not something of 
substance.”2 And from what we read in Laszlo, Haisch, Guenther and, later, will find in 
Stuart Kauffman, perhaps anything that might be called “essential” in structure is better 
understood as quantum jumps or emergences of self-organizing pattern-in-process along 
the lines of Heisenberg’s reflection that the transition from possibility to actuality takes 
place when and where we devote our attention, (technically speaking, where we make 
observations and measurements).  
 
It’s relevant to note here the quantum implications that our attentiveness and 
choice are involved in discontinuously changing the distribution and evocation of the 
possibilities of cosmogenesis or the continuum of being.3 One question is partly, then, of 
whether certain phases or structures of consciousness are more noticeably implicated in 
cocreative resonance with, or as, the psychophysical cocreation of (our) reality. And 
another question is how and to what degrees we (will) sustainingly participate in the 
development of the living systems of Earth and possibly elsewhere. Gebser’s discussions 
of an integral structure of consciousness analogous, though not identical, to what I call 
contemplative sensibility or certain sages a comprehensive and creative guan-awareness 
are thus especially pertinent to the nondual interpretation and future practice of our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  112    
“transparent” participation in quantum self-organization in cosmogenesis and anthropo-
eco-poiesis.4 
Endnotes: Integral Diaphaneity and Transparency 
1.) Gebser 1985: 18 
2.) see ibid.: 376-77; integral simultaneity ibid.: 2; in his prefatory explanation of the 
traditional Huayan self-description as "round," "interpenetrating," "nondual" and 
"whole," Odin: xiii-xiv elaborates by noting "the contemplative envisagement of li-shih-
wu-ai or the 'non-obstructive interpenetration of universal-principle with particular-
phenomena' as well as shih-shih-wu-ai or the 'non-obstructive-interpenetration of 
particular-phenomena with particular-phenomena." 
3.) see Stapp: 95 
4.) Gebser 1985: 145-46 and passim does not, however, equate contemplation and 
integral consciousness; transparent idem. 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  113    
  
 
 
 
3.2.1 Quantum of Value 
 
 
I demur from Stapp’s phrasing that “contemporary physical theory allows, and. . . 
entails, an interactive dualism” because in my experience, the participantήobserver and 
the evolving universe do not reduce entirely to imperviously separate, dualizable 
categories of participant/observer and evolving universe. Dualism, even when qualified 
as “interactive,”  seems to me a (more-or-less skillful) means, but not an absolute of 
experience and thought. There is plenty of apparent interaction, and maybe an abundance 
of epistemological dualism. But ontohermeneutic dualism?  I don’t think so; especially 
since what we seem to be dealing with in quantum theory is no more what is going on in 
nature than it is our knowledge and description of it—and this entails nondual 
constitutive narratives, values, choices and the evolution of a consciousness that is 
already, from Teilhard to Berry, Deacon and to Abram, a dimension of the universe. We 
often let our epistemological dualism shoulder its way into the conversation in a manner 
that evokes ontohermeneutic nondualism to correct and complement it. I am not a 
physicist. But neither is sustainable humanocosmic resonance to be left to any sort of 
experts; this is something we all do together. We are implicated in cosmogenesis.1 
 
I won’t cavil over vocabulary, but the mindfulness of the universe Stapp speaks of 
is in my understanding nondual experience, however usefully dualized its rational-mental 
quantum explication may be. This is because all of us can “learn to be sages” in the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  114    
solidarity of the first person co-conscious cosmic and can experience self and cosmos, 
mind and/as event, as coeval and co-relevant “every step of the way”: each a 
complementary and co-creative this to the other’s co-evocative that in non-twoed 
meaning and interbeing. Our voicing, measuring, and participating of the cosmic event 
and its Earth forms “occurs in a stream of consciousness, which is an aspect of nature’s 
psychophysical process. It occurs ‘to’ a person only by virtue of the fact that a person is, 
actually,. . .a stream of psychophysical events.”2  
 
But for that matter, neither does Stapp himself cavil over whether his “orthodox” 
quantum view is properly to be called “interactive dualism” or something else. In fact, he 
tacitly invokes the unsayability premise with respect to the noncategorizability of a 
genuinely psycho-physical kosmos much as ancient mystics have done with respect to 
God, or, as with Spinoza's formula Deus sive Natura.  For example, after tempering the 
issue by saying we’re dealing with something “sophisticated” in the way “mental 
intention influences quantum processes,” Stapp goes on to offer an effectively apophatic 
estimation of the (non)dualism question altogether. He first acknowledges the 
psychological and physical aspects of nature, “although neither aspect is a ‘substance’ in 
the normalήusual everyday sense.” Then, proposing that the “physical descriptions specify 
‘potentialities’ for psychophysical events to occur” he goes on to emphasize, again, 
“Each such event” has both psychologically and physically described aspects, ”the latter . 
. .expressed as a ‘reduction’ of the prior set of potentialities. . . .“ Finally comes his 
agnostic demurrer: “I leave to you the task of applying the appropriate labels.”3  
 
OK, I vote nondualism, nirdvandva: especially since we are reminded by Stapp 
that, “The key point is that the [quantum] theory deals with the descriptions themselves, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  115    
not with what the descriptions are descriptions of. So it is sufficient to say that nature is a 
process that apparently has two aspects that we can and do describe in different ways, 
psychological and physical,” that we use, (and here he cites BohrΨ, “to communicate to 
others what we have done and what we have learnt.”4  And with such narrative, 
description, communication and interaction, I choose to participate in the quantum field -- 
of which I am an active dimensioning and contextualization every bit as much as I am a 
coevolutionary emergent -- to consider life in not just a nondual but also an inherently 
(though not exclusively) poetic/poietic way, in the full sense of that word for an attentive, 
participatory, interactively sustaining making-with and making-in and making-as 
ongoing and self-rewardingly celebratory wholing and worlding.  
 
A tacit dimension of this auto-po(i)etic axio-ontohermeneutic comprises also the 
noninstrumental, contemplative, docta ignorantia, “negative capability,” ziran and wu 
wei taught us in the past and reconceived in the ontophronesis of Michael Polanyi’s 
realization that “into every act of knowing there enters a passionate,” or what I may call a 
fully and ecopoietically attentive, “contribution of the person knowing what is being 
known, [and this is] no mere imperfection but a vital component of hi[r] knowledge.” 
Obeyesekere reminds us that the paradoxical interplay of passive cerebration and the 
passio of our participation noting that, “once the truths have been discovered intuitively 
through the special passive agency of the ‘It’ [the imaginal, contemplative or disegoed 
awareness], there is a later process. . .whereby the thinking ‘I’ reappears and gives 
discursive meaning. . . .”5  
 
And also to this point I suggest that no more than quantum theory is poetry the 
reserved province of experts. There is enough physical and noetic uncertainty, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  116    
connectedness and ecopolitical indeterminacy in the world that any thoughtfully attentive 
participation contributes meaningfully to constellating or dynamically stabilizing the 
resonant sustainability potentials of the human-cosmic process of Earth. Poetic analogies 
and mathematical equations or algorithms are alike skillful practices of Earth-human 
sustainability and functional cosmogenesis. Stated in the even more cosmopoietic terms 
of a “visionary physics,” this is to suggest that our noetic, poietic and imaginal aptitudes 
enact, evoke and con-fluence and do not simply re-present those of nature. And we are all 
of us in the play; conversely, anyone can become a sage. And it can even be said we have 
an ethical or “placing” responsibility to become anthropocosmically co-conscious. 
 
There is a spectrum of alternate noetics. In one frequency domain, Blake looks 
through the other end of the telescope than Locke does and sees external nature as a 
contraction, distortion or usurpation of artistic imagination. Bachelard’s tuning of the 
philosophy of science complementarily claims that realization takes precedence over 
reality, and that we need to push or carry nature as far as our minds will go. He also, 
acknowledging that mind is a factor in evolution, says that: “To think reality properly is 
to profit by its ambiguities in such a way as to modify and arouse thought.” And hereat I 
will convoke such notions as quantum indeterminacy and uncertainty relations with those 
developed by Hall and Ames concerning creative cross-cultural anachronism and the 
productive ambiguity of the languagings of worlding, as well as my own previously 
intimated argument that sustainability probably inheres less in getting things right in 
some final and precise instrumentalist encyclopedia than in spontaneously singing and 
ecosocially “authenticating” in attentive celebration without regard for instrumental gain 
the ongoing-wholing of self-organizing humanocosmic ars contextualis. This is as much 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  117    
the dance of, as it is the performative (self-)narration of, nonlocal Earth-human 
sustainability potentials, Ȍ, collapsed, constrained and moreover sculpted, into quanta of 
value by our attentively meaningful choices. The provisional indeterminacy 
ontohermeneutic may be: “Do now what is only given to you; every meaning is unique,” 
i. e., is the pivotal ecopoietic here and now enactment of what has no opposite.6  
 
The usual downstream way of putting the question about the sectoring of (and by) 
the I from the not-I, the person from the planet or consciousness from cosmogenesis 
disregards the (self-reflective) accomplishment of cosmological science itself in having 
shown us, in Swimme’s pithy way of putting it, that upstream of everything “the stars are 
our ancestors.” We are they with mortgages and metaphysics. And like the mystic-
astrophysicist Haisch has said, we can understand the laws of the universe because we 
and they come from the same place, the somethings made from everything. We can 
assert, once more, that consciousness is an emergent of physis, but it’s also the case that 
evolving physis has incomplete ontohermeneutic presence or existence without (what is 
ultimately its own self-interpretive) awareness. Even if these started  from being two 
separate sectors or categories, their conjoined teleodynamic trend, to adopt Deacon’s 
thinking for its sustainability implications, is toward  “the interpretive capacity. . .to 
generate a specific form of work. . .likely to maintain or improve this capacity” in an 
“outcome that replenishes this capacity.”7 Sustaining Earthlife is now, if it has not always 
been, an ecohumane project or performance; and cosmogenesis continues to be an 
interminately (and indefinitely) anthropocosmic one. 
Endnotes: Quantum of Value 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  118    
1.) Stapp: 81; see also Explore and International Consciousness Research Laboratories 
www.icrl.org/ (accessed 7.29.12); on nondual narratives and on our implication in 
cosmogenesis see Abram 2011 
2.) learn to be a sage see Cheng Hao in Zhu Xi: 219; occurs in a stream of consciousness, 
Stapp: 132 
3.) Stapp: 81, 108, 109, 126; see also Sells 
4.) Stapp: 126 
5.) Polanyi: xiv; Obeyesekere: 43 
6.) Blake see Ault: 29, and see Frye; Bachelard: 30, 14; Hall and Ames 1987; quanta of 
value, Stapp 66-6ι, 116, 143, 1ιί;  every meaning is unique, the phrase “Do now what is 
only given to you ή Every meaning is unique” occurred to me during a series of long 
meditations accompanied by active imaginations which I subsequently drew in color, 
Anchorage, Alaska 10.28 – 11.1.94  
7.) Swimme 2011: 29; something made from everything that is (also) non-self-subsistent 
anything in Wallace 2007: 113 and passim;  Haisch 2006: 31; Deacon 399, 398 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  119    
 
 
3.2.2 OntoHermeneutic Luminosity 
 
 
Overall, returning to the topic of ontohermeneutic transparency and diaphaneity, 
Gebser points to an integration (we might say today an ecology) of all the consciousness 
structures he identifies (archaic, magical, mythical, rational-mental and integral) rather 
than to an exclusive dependence on any one of them, as the way to a sustaining holistic 
aperspectivalism. 
Just as the magic structure cannot be represented but only lived, the 
mythical structure not represented but only experienced, and the rational 
structure neither lived nor experienced but only represented and 
conceptualized, so the integral structure cannot be represented but only 
‘awared-in-truth’. . . . . . In the face of these. . .structures and the fact that 
not only originality but also lived events, experience, conception, and 
thinking or cognition must be achieved in and through us, [the integral 
structure] cannot be attained by synthesis [of the two worlds of the rational 
and the irrational] but only by integration [of all the world or structures of 
consciousness, each of which is valid as well as necessary]. And one of 
the ‘avenues’ toward this integration is for us to concretize the previous 
structures that constitute us. This means that they must at the same time 
[through creative temporics] become present to our awareness in their 
respective degrees of consciousness. . . .To live these structures together, 
commensurate with their respective degrees of conscious awareness, is to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  120    
approach an integrated, integral [ever-presently originating] life.1  
 
Equally relevant is Gebser’s understanding that the various structures of 
consciousness do not succeed one another in time as a linear perspective of evolutionary 
consciousness development might be supposed to offer. Rather, their seeming succession 
is an artifact of the consciousness structure commonly used today to envisage them and 
much else, namely, the linear perspectival mental-rational consciousness which sectorizes 
the world into temporal segments of past, present and future just as it 
ontoepistemologically sectorizes (what Guenther might call experience-as-such) into 
atoms of self/subject and other/object. We see the world as a series of evolutionary 
variations because that is how we see, not necessarily because that solely is how the 
world is.  
 
Gebser emphasizes, rather, that these consciousness structures are compresent 
mutations, each a different way or possibility of worlding, and not just steps leading to 
the apex we identify as our mental-rational outlook. We may take them as reciprocally in-
forming (meta)quanta of meaning and value, the analogical jumps “between” which and 
the hybrid integrations of which generate large-scale wholings of psychophysical or 
ecosocial realization for commonweal. Likewise, a creative temporics of consciousness, 
Gebser thinks, allows an integral synchrony or, as he suggests, “achronicity,” of all of 
these consciousness structures, and, in this case, of nonlinearized and nonfragmented 
noetic and life experience. Otherwise stated, the way the world is is not completely 
severable from who we (think we) are and how we narratistically or paradigmatically 
view things including ourselves and our natural environs. From a physicist’s point-of-
view as much as from a cultural historian’s or an ecoethicist’s, “The conception of self is 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  121    
the basis of values and thence of behavior. . .It is irrational. . .to cling today to false and 
inadequate nineteenth century concepts about your basic nature, while ignoring the 
profound impact upon these concepts of the twentieth century revolution in science.”  
This is a contemporary variant of the opening theme of the Dhammapada; “All that we 
are is the result of what we have thought.”2  
 
It also returns to mind in its emphasis on integral and simultaneous multiple 
modes of  experience the quantum notion of the mutual and seemingly simultaneous 
inter-nesting and superpositioning or entangling of wavefunctions throughout the order of 
interbeing. For Gebser, this is the synchronic/achronic interplay of mutually and 
integrally (and therefore) transparent and diaphanous structures of consciousness that 
impart and receive the ever-present and original “radiance of being” which may be 
variantly characterized as psychophysical qi, quantum vacuum field, as parousia, Indra's 
Net, or as unsayable anthropocosmic compresencing.3 
 
Accordingly, one of the gifts, one of the “efficient” characteristics of the integral 
consciousness when and where it does appear is an “overcoming of the “I” not in 
egolessness or egotism but in the “achronon and transparency” of ego-freedom. This 
“means freedom from the self . . .”  
It is not a loss or a denial of the ‘I,” not an ego-cide but an overcoming of  
ego. Consciousness of the self was the characteristic of the mental con- 
sciousness structure; freedom from the ‘I” is the characteristic of the 
integral structure.4  
 
Noting his penetrating critique of the “motorization, mechanization and 
technologization” of contemporary life that I to a considerable extent share in using the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  122    
coding “instrumentalism” while also acknowledging Gebser’s occasionally 
cryptoeschatological construal of “the coalescence of the spiritual with our 
consciousness,” I point to what seems to me the more germane trope of his outline of 
noetics. This is “the shining through (diaphaneity or transparencyΨ [a]s the form of 
appearance (epiphanyΨ of the spiritual.” And I think of this transparency in the full light 
of the radiant sea of cosmic presence navigated by Haisch, as well as the all-at-once 
connectivity of this autoluminous kind of presence demonstrated by Laszlo and later to 
be discussed by Laughlin and Throop as a form of our mature contemplative 
neurognostic participation in (and as foci of)  the field or the “quantum sea.”5  
 
I’ll by-the-way remark that the terms spirit and spiritual usually carry dualizing 
connotations I’ll forgo, but I appreciate Gebser’s reflection that “to the extent that 
luminescence becomes a prominent attribute of spirit, its various forms are. . . 
erroneously equated with thinking or reason, understanding or intellect, most notably in 
philosophical discussions.” The ecosocial sustainability virtue I find in his “integral 
structure of consciousness” is that it bespeaks open and free, diaphanousήtransparent, 
aperspectival, ego-free and multivalent “World-Verition,” i. e., indual humanocosmic 
worlding perceived, received as well as imparted in/as attentive presence (ever-present 
origin). This is a functionally luminous cosmogenic ontohermeneutic and not simply an 
opacifying set of conceptualization or instrumentalization schemes.6  
 
I’d further analogize post-egoic or aperspectival, non-sectorizing integral 
consciousness with the contemplative turn I find in attentive sage-like experience by 
mentioning here Laszlo’s (also somewhat cryptoeschatologicalΨ formulation that the 
virtual-energy “domain constitutes the primordial nature of God” which he thinks 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  123    
evolves to expresses itself in the adunatio of “the completely in-formed virtual-energy 
domain [of] the consequent nature of God.” 7 And the in-forming, the implicate or 
unbroken cosmic webbing and internetting of mutually imparting and receiving 
superposed wavefunction potentials and anthropocosmic resonances is apparently 
performed and is both displayed and midwifed -- to highlight now a term of  hermeneutic, 
maieutic, organic, reciprocal, coconstitutive and dialogical provenance underlining 
dimensions of sharing life and meaning -- in the interexistential diaphaneity and 
transparency of the aperspectival (contemplative or sagely) consciousness. 
 
In a quick synopsis of the issues of diaphaneity and transparency that almost 
explicitly invokes the radiant and transparent field considered by Haisch through its 
imaginal lineage from Haggadah (while also prefacing the interpenetrative potentials of 
all modes of life and of Being in “the interbeing of  cosmology and community” as John 
Grim titles it -- with memory both of Building the Earth per Teilhard and of The Great 
Work interpreted to us by Thomas Berry) we learn from Gebser, with his own emphasis, 
that: 
Transparency (diaphaneity) is the form of manifestation (epiphany) of the 
spiritual. Our concern is to render transparent everything latent . . . to 
render transparent our own origin, our entire human past, as well as the 
present, which already contains the future. . . . This transparency or 
diaphaneity [of man as a cosmogonic whole and the interplay of the 
various consciousness structures which constitute him] is particularly 
evident during transitional periods [such as our own] . . . . It is perhaps 
unnecessary to reiterate that we cannot employ the methods. . . dependent 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  124    
on our present [mental/rational] consciousness. . . . Contemporary 
methods employ predominantly dualistic procedures that do not extend 
beyond simple subject-object relationships; they limit our understanding to 
what is commensurate with the present Western mentality. . . .Our 
‘method’ is not just a ‘measured’ assessment, but above and beyond this 
an attempt at ‘diaphany’ or rendering transparent. . . .no longer dualistic. . 
. . Our concern is with a new reality. . .functioning and effectual integrally. 
. .where origin by virtue of ‘presentiation,’ blossoms forth anew; and one 
in which the present is all-encompassing and entire. Integral reality is the 
world’s transparency [through space, time, culture and noetic structure], a 
perceiving of the world as truth: a mutual per- ceiving and imparting of 
truth of the world and of [humanity] and of all that transluces both.8  
 
Could this not have been penned almost as well by Wolfhart Pannenberg who 
taught that the present exists only by its participation in the future, or by Unger and 
Smolin on the compresence of all cosmic evolution in any one of its “moments” and 
processes?  How redolent is it of both the process metaphysics of Whitehead and of 
Huayan Buddhism? And is it not delightingly responsive to the license of “cross-cultural 
anachronism” we’ve seen granted interpretive exploration by Hall and Ames in their 
book Thinking through Confucius? And from a different but, we now intuit, connected 
quarter Stapp writes that the radical shift from an outdated physical view of humans as 
isolated, mechanical automata to “integral participant[s] in a non-local holistic process 
that gives form and meaning to the evolving universe is a seismic event of potentially 
momentous proportions.” And if by now this marriage of Eros and Irony hasn’t elicited a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  125    
felicitous tweak of the field, the last word must be lent to Robbins’ crazy wisdom “In 
Defiance of Gravity.”9  
Endnotes: OntoHermeneutic Luminosity 
1.) Gebser 1985: 267-272 passim 
2.) the achronon, achronicity and creative temporics ibid.: 355; the conception of self, 
Stapp: 143; Dhammapada see Buddha; achronicity in Gebser seems to correspond to 
nonlinearly and nonspatially sequenced or segmented experience, nondualizing 
attentivenessήexperience or “experience-as-such” in Guenther’s terms.        
3.) radiance, Combs 1996 
4.) efficient and deficient consciousness see Gebser 1985: 142; freedom from the self. . . 
ibid.: 532 
5.) coalescence, ibid: 542; see also the discussion of intervisibility in Devereux 1993, 
1994 
6.) see Gebser 1985: 235, 267-276 
7.) Laszlo 2003: 117; for Gebser 1985: 24, contemplativity never fully realizes 
integrality. In this essay, I frequently express myself in and with emphasis on analogies, 
complementarities and correspondences which Gebser says are indicative of the mythical 
consciousness structure foremost among whose forms of realization and thought are 
“contemplation and voicing.” If I understand Gebser’s taxonomy, I suppose I am often 
voicing integrality in the language of “soulήpsyche” and a form of “spoken myth” 
attempting (to bespeak) integrality in complementarity and correspondence. For a 
complete “synoptic table’ of Gebser’s consciousness structures and their various forms of 
realization and thought, etc., see the fold-out at the very end, (see Gebser: 1985); on 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  126    
anthropocosmic voicing see again Primack and Abrams: 36 and note their version of 
integral consciousness in “This book’s attempt at seeking meaning through history, 
symbols, imagery, metaphors, and contemplation, as well as straight scientific 
explanation, [that] is not entirely cosmology, but perhaps. . .is the point of cosmology,” 
(38 emphasis added); see also Abram 2011;  for another version of integral sensibility cf. 
the “integral ecology” of Pope Francis’ 2ί15 encyclical Laudato Si’; and see too Vico on 
study methods. 
8.) Gebser 1985: 7, with his emphasis 
9.) process metaphysics see Odin; Stapp: 140; Eros and Irony Hall 1982 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  127    
 
 
3.3 OntoHermeneutic Pluralism 
 
 
In the journal International Synergy and later in my book By the Torch of Chaos 
and Doubt, I reflected that Gaston Bachelard, formerly a physical chemist but better 
known later as a phenomenologist, has also offered us a rationale for a practice of 
polyepistemic transparency and (a way of construing) resonance, though his project 
works primarily within the givens of the mental/rational mode described by Gebser. An 
extension of Bachelard’s basic premise meshes smoothly with Gebser’s, and each 
reinforces the insight that internoetic diversity, like ecological interdependence or 
hybridization, is often a hallmark of sustainability. This diversity has far-reaching 
educational implications, as I’ll propose later on. 
 
 
According to Bachelard, symbolic systems of language and theory fail to say “no” 
to their own conventions and thus tend to conceal or obstruct insight as much as to reveal 
or unconceal it. In this case, prevailing modes of thought,  
the Aristotelian, the Euclidean, the Newtonian, even the criticist spirit of 
Kant, [have left] structural layers in the human mind akin to the geological 
strata of the [E]arth, and we need knowledge about these layers, self-
knowledge about these layers, self-knowledge and self-correction, before 
we can proceed....[There is a] need that every scientist and every 
teacher...draw up for himself...an epistemological profile . . . .1  
of such layers, that we may in full consciousness recognize their respective influences on, 
suitability for, and limits with respect to, our lived experience and, I may add, to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  128    
sustaining and more than sustainable modes of conduct and interaction. 
 
Like Gebser, Bachelard posits a plurality of strategies of consciousness though, I 
emphasize, Bachelard is working largely with an epistemic repertoire of mental-rational 
strategies whereas Gebser is working with altogether incommensurable, yet integrateable, 
structures, of which the mental-rational is but a single (though presently quite dominant) 
instance. I invoke contemplative sensibility as the attentively integrative ontohermeneutic 
of (such) multiple kinds of awareness and as, correspondingly, the aptitude for 
spontaneous evocation, selection and dynamic stabilization or self-organization of 
optimal meaning, value and sustainability possibilities in diverse contexts. 
 
Gebser speaks of the simultaneous integration of structures of consciousness as 
the advent of a new diaphanous or aperspectival consciousness. Bachelard emphasizes 
the epistemic dialectic whereby multiple epistemes’ mutually corrective intercourse or 
compenetration permit a subsequent “dialectical generalization” that includes what it 
denies by virtue of the process of the mind in its (we may say today self-organizing and 
emergently ententional) engagement with the world – in coworlding together and with/as 
the terrestrial system. For Bachelard, and others such as Skolimowski, Wu, and Gregory 
Bateson, Edith Cobb, Peter Hershock and David Bohm, the dialectical or dialogical 
aspect of knowing/learning/co-becoming effects itself not through a terminal or totalized 
synthesis of so-called opposites but through a dynamic integral ecology of mutually 
evocative complements.2  
 
The Socratic elenchos (or conviction of meaning/value) appears by this 
interpretation as the integral situational self-waring or verition, as Gebser puts it, of 
ongoing wholing, a fractal instantiation of the whole (or wholing) ecology of mind-being, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  129    
however partial its syllogistic steps. And if Gebser’s premise of ever-present origin, or 
related themes of quantum nonlocality and interconnectedness, or again those of 
archetypal contamination and connectedness abide, the sustainable self-waring of 
cosmogenesis is for humanity as reliably a matter of nonsectorial synchronistic as it is of 
piecemeal syllogistic address. Presumably an all-connected kosmos manifests its 
ongoing-wholing in each diversely unique event.3  
 
Or, to carry the reflection a step further, the understanding of mathematics as 
being (alsoΨ an archetypal music of “aesthetic evaluations” contributing to the ever-
varying recreation of the psychophysical universe well corresponds with the highlighting 
of arational as well as rational value in sustaining anthropocosmic self-understanding. 
This is put in the Daoist idea of the ars contextualis or aesthetic cosmology (contrasted 
with single-ordered exclusively logical-positivist, reductionist, mechanist, univocal or 
instrumentalist outlooks) whereby, and whereas, acting as “pivots of the dao” or dao shu, 
we sustainingly cocreate person, community and world in realizing and correlating how 
each particular, and especially living, thing  construes, (receives) contextualizes and 
simultaneously contributes or imparts to the interminate environment in its multivariate 
ongoing-wholing.  Expressed far more dramatically in the formalism of quantum 
cosmology, “’Our knowledge’ can then be interpreted to be the aggregate of the 
conscious knowledge of all systems that possess consciousness.” And if (ourΨ 
consciousness is cocreatively implicate in evolutionary origins and in our choices, values 
and ententions in the universe, neither can consciousness be understood to inhere solely 
in the zone of the interhuman – as have already proposed, in different ways, Teilhard, 
Gregory Bateson and Deacon.4 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  130    
 
The philosophy of contemporary physics particularly appeals to Bachelard as 
being “the only open-ended philosophy. All other philosophies posit their principles as 
intangible, their primary truths as total and complete”; all other philosophies, he 
declaims, “glory in their closedness.” However Gadamer, Heidegger and Derrida, along 
with students and scholars of Chan/Zen and other contemplative experience,  have also 
gone a long way towards prising us from a closed philosophical purview of the sort 
against which Bachelard struggles; and they have thus pointed to the open-endedness of 
the human, noetic, and social sciences as well. But in any case, writes Bachelard, 
. . .we must recognize the fact that new experience says no to old 
experience, otherwise we are quite evidently not up against a new 
experience at all. But for a mind which can turn principle into dialectic, 
which can accommodate new kinds of experience, which can enrich its 
body of explanation without partiality to some supposedly natural organon 
designed to explain away everything this ‘no’ is never final.5  
 
Because the epistemological pluralism he calls for is never terminal--never 
achieves a final synthesis or a terminus -- but instead generates a simultaneous and 
ongoing (omnicentrically dialogical) integration/ecology of diversely imparting and 
receiving approaches, and because, also, Bachelard’s highlighting of experience and not 
solely of conceptualization emerges so clearly in his essay, it’s possible to indicate a 
decisive link between his thinking and that of Gebser at this point. For if we extend 
Bachelard’s idea of epistemological pluralism beyond the domain of what Gebser calls 
the mental/rational consciousness structure and speak instead of a noetic pluralism as 
well, that is, of a plural ecology of topoi, loci, modes, states, phases or regions of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  131    
existentially valid ongoing-wholing and not simply conceptually postulated 
consciousness, a diversity which, in turn, does not reduce to any one such mode nor to a 
denominator among them, we find that the arguments of Bachelard concerning 
epistemological lability within rational perspectival consciousness and those of Gebser 
concerning the aperspectival lability emergent among the several different consciousness 
structures or phases are essentially cognate, since for both Gebser and Bachelard the 
desired avenue is: a) integral/open rather than synthetic/closed; and b) 
experimental/experiential as well as conceptual, i. e., a lived-experience of the realities 
that eventuate with the skillful means, practical wisdom, phronesis and knack of 
transformed participatory consciousness and not only a conceptual representation made 
from the prospect of a given structure of consciousness. 
 
If we look at the development of consciousness as it appears “over time,” we 
invoke a linear-evolutionary paradigm or narrative by which we conceive antecedent 
states or structures as either giving way to superseding ones or, to say the same thing a 
little bit differently, fusing or “merging into” superseding ones. But, notes Lama Govinda 
(in an essay on Gebser), the sequence and linearity entailed is a consequence of our 
discursive and causal thought-perspective that places a relation of temporal succession on 
the modes of consciousness and thus obscures other possibilities of interpretation. “In 
other words, it is the reflective and discursive mind, our mode of thinking, which selects 
and determines the standpoint on which the perspective” depends.6  
 
Developing the premise of Gebser’s original title, The Ever-Present Origin, 
(Ursprung und Gegenwart), Govinda argues that origin of consciousness is not a 
beginning in time but the “ever-present possibility of a spontaneous springing into 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  132    
action.” Thus, for Govinda and Gebser, as for Bachelard, and perhaps Deacon, all 
epistemes and noetic structures may be taken as tropes of the aperspectival realm of 
freedom of potential that Buddhist doctrine, Govinda reminds us, calls Sunyata—the field 
of characterless but “all containing” emptiness. “Insofar,” Govinda claims somewhat 
univocally, “as we have access to the ever-present Origin in the depth of our psyche. . .we 
partake of the realm of freedom; insofar as we are [egoistically] involved in the 
existential evolution of our time and our individual position therein, we are subject to 
necessity.”7 My own manifesto, naturally, is for existential involvement in sustaining 
ontohermeneutic resonance as a mode not of ananke but of autotelic celebration – or 
perhaps, as the dynamic emergence that comes with the wu wei/ziran orthograde 
coevolutionary collaboration of constraints seen by Deacon. And for Sheldrake, even the 
most fundamental cosmic constraints – its laws and constants – may be understood as 
habits in emergent anthropocosmic coevolution. 
 
Then, using for what might be called the midwifing of the (Socratic or Christian) 
metanoia or metastrophe occurring through interresponsive dialogue and reciprocal or 
shared noetic/attentional transformation the traditional Buddhist formula of “the turning-
about in the deepest seat of one’s consciousness” (that recalls also the dissipative 
“awakening” dynamic emergent in Guenther or the integral consciousness “mutation” in 
Gebser),  Govinda goes on to hold that the openness-practice of contemplative meditation 
hereby referred to is the natural and appropriate complement and corrective to 
mental/rational ego-perspectivalism. Contemplative meditation is for him, then,  
the means to reconnect the individual with the whole, i. e., to make an 
individual conscious of his individual origin...[and] to become conscious 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  133    
of the fact that every individual is a unique opportunity to become a focal 
point of awareness, in which the universe becomes conscious of itself.8 
 
This is an enactment of ecohumane poiesis and of the irreducible differential 
patternήprocess we are and inhabit in our worldingήdwelling. It’s worth a note here that 
contemplation in this sense connotes the ecstasy of flow, of fluent and nondivisively 
sustaining participation in the Earth-Human mode of cosmogenesis, and as such it 
evidences a  homely, a re-creational and not necessarily Transcendent, ecstasy of 
deselfing, coselfing and ecoselfing ourselves in the interbeing of cosmology and 
community that Grim associates with indigenous traditions and ecology. 
 
As I’ll adapt Berman to characterize it, this is not foremost the ecstasy of a 
“vertical” ascent gnosticism or “unitive trance” divided from terra and humus but more 
what he (invoking others) calls: a “paradox” ontohermeneutic, a “mature ambiguity,” 
“omnivalence,” “wide as opposed to narrow attention,” and “alertness,” more a “’world 
presence’ rather than a world view” or a “search for certainty” or a “fusion with the 
Absolute” of one kind or another. Its overall feel, Berman thinks, is one of our 
compresencing with and as the ecosocial (f)acts of life and nature, not prematurely 
forcing them and ourselves into plans, categories and judgments: a “wide, as opposed to 
narrow attention. . . .still and receptive. . ..a universal attention which does not inscribe 
itself on any point and tries to be on all points. . .[in] alertness.” Again, Berman cites 
Ong, it is “world presence” rather than world view. In Obeyesekere’s relevant phrasing, 
“it is a mistake to think the It [‘outside the rational cogito’] does not think. It does not 
think discursively,” i. e., divisively.9  
 
In the somewhat amplified sensibility offered by NeoConfucian experience, the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  134    
ecstasy of mature contemplative conduct is expressed in “forming one body with. . . all 
things,” attentively and aperspectivally integrated with, and functioning as, but not (or 
not unconsciouslyΨ immersed in the cosmic process, “so as,” we learn from Wang Yang-
ming, “mutually to sustain and support the life of one another without any desire for 
exalted position or strife for external things.” For the (NeoΨConfucians and, in various 
emphases, the Daoists, unprepossessingly gazing, or comprehensively attending in guan, 
on the interplay of yinyang that is dao or nature, one learns to emulate the naturally 
sustaining inter-transformations or xiangtong of events and phenomena in reciprocal 
development and mutual co-growthing rather than through domination and calculation. 
By this “ecological cosmology,” “The person who knows the  principles of 
transformation will be able to ‘forward the undertakings of  Heaven and Earth.’”10  
 
How ententionally, I wonder, does such a contemplative negative capability 
attend in resonance with absential or the not-yet fragmented and non-localized yet-to-
occur potentials of the anthropoquantum field of interbeing and, correspondingly, when 
choosing or relaxing to a focus, “collapse,” respond with and enact – I do not say simply 
engage – the polycentric ongoing-wholing (of Earth-humanΨ Ȍ-potentials in mutually 
beneficial and ecohumane ways? The words of the Chinese classic Zhongyong, aka 
Focusing the Familiar, intimate in answer that when we are overmuch leaning towards 
and leaning away from ego-specified outcomes in noncontemplative urgency we are least 
likely to perform the cheng or “integrity,” even the “sincerity,” of ongoing cosmic 
creativity; and the exemplary person prizes such sustaining cocreativity.11  
 
Likewise, the ontohermeneutic import of Govinda’s vision, with coloration from 
such humanocosmic praxis as that of Teilhard, Chaisson, Aurobindo, Laszlo, Cobb, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  135    
Jantsch or Jung lays a claim on educators and civic leaders by reminding us of a 
pragmatic contemporary insight stated by Paulo Freire, namely, that “transitivity of 
consciousness makes [the hu]man ‘permeable.’ It leads hi[r] to replace hi[r] 
disengagement from existence with almost total engagement.”  Claims Freire further, 
. . .the prerequisite for this task [is] a form of education enabling the 
people to reflect on themselves, their responsibilities, and their role in the 
new cultural climate—indeed, to reflect on their very power of 
reflection.12 
 
And this, I propose, cannot comprehensively proceed by reliance on a single 
consciousness-mode whose perspectives remain exclusively atomistic, conceptual, 
cognicentric, dualistic and mentalistic (or magical, or mythic for that matter), i. e., 
uncontextualized, uncomplemented or not compensatorily ecologized by a corresponding 
aperspectival, integral or holistic refreshment, a different logical type or, perhaps, “level” 
(with the caveat that level-talk imports unsustaining “Transcendence” preoccupationsΨ. A 
contemplative complement and context to unalloyed discursive-instrumental thought is 
an emerging preface to a healthful and functionally ententional cosmology reaching 
beyond sustainable survival to the thriving resonance of humanocosmic enlightenment-
conduct. Such conduct accords with the interpenetrating (xiangtong) dynamics of 
cosmogenesis displayed in our lives as ecosocial mindfulness and conduct of a mature 
order.  
 
If we object here that reflective/critical consciousness is impossible in a mode of 
meditative, aperspectival or other “anomalous” states of awareness, we are only 
demonstrating a lack of understanding of the nature of discerning meditation, on the one 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  136    
hand, while dismissing on the other the import of the argument thus far: that no 
consciousness structure of itself may lay claim either to apodicity or to sustaining value. 
It is, as Morin also emphasizes, only the integration/dialecticization/recycling and 
ententional mutual complementation of the rational and the arational, the transparent 
integration of the perspectival with the aperspectival, (or of the (inter)subjective and the 
objective) that can offer us, and be demonstrated by us, as the self-organizational lability 
and pliancy, flexibility and open attentiveness we require for a sustainable global 
postmodern milieu that is also the opening eye of planetary and cosmic culture.13  
 
Meaningfulness and the knacks of practically sagacious interpretive phronesis or 
ecopolitical parrhesia -- the liberating aptitude of free persons naturally to speak back to, 
through and beyond powerfully authoritative, often authoritarian, interests, habits and 
conventions, to interpret/invent the world anew with almost childlike spontaneity, fluency 
and authenticity -- flourish in a network of ontohermeneutic (re)circulation: the diverse, 
ecohumanely caring ecology of Earthmind or the self-reflexive pattern that connects. “All 
people are my brothers and sisters, and all things are my companions” averred Zhang Zai. 
With even a modest contemplation-like practice, in family, work, community, research or 
celebration, 
 
 
[The] ill effects of selfish desires and the separation between oneself 
and one’s environment disappear. Although the world is vast and people 
and things are numerous, the capacity of our heart extends to every place 
and forms one body with all things.14  
 
The issue of the powers of contemplative and critical reflection is also the issue of 
the aptitudes of a self-reflexive universe. The issue of the powers of reflection in an 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  137    
epistemically plural and ontohermeneutically connected environment is but one aspect of 
a noetic curriculum, and another is suggested by Heidegger’s notion of Gelassenheit—
releasement of, or from, our conventional mentalist/dominator regime of straining on 
tiptoe for the unimpeachable veracity of propositional closure, of the fetish for control, of 
the addiction to univocal, absolute ontoepistemological reduction, the iron circumference 
of technocratic or manipulative reason: ultimate solution. 
 
Says Gebser of his own work in this regard:  
There was no mention there of the evolution of consciousness, for. . . 
evolution is only a partial view. . .a view that arises from the perspective 
of the Mental/Rational structure. The manifestation of the new 
consciousness is not a milestone on the path to a so-called higher 
development; it is, rather, on the one hand, an enrichment and 
intensification of the human consciousness and, on the other, our 
conscious response to the Integral Structure of the world, which through 
us becomes transparent. This. . .process activates in us the new 
consciousness that has always been latent in us.15  
 
Translated into language specifically disposed towards an attentive way of living 
in attunement with the ecologically integrated life systems of Earth and the coherent field 
processes of cosmogenesis, this “Great Work”  (Chinese da hua, “great transformation’Ψ 
in our epoch is, as Thomas  Berry says, “being present to the planet in a mutually 
beneficial manner.” From his point of view, a new, an integral consciousness, would 
signal “the reinvention of the human.”  
We have moved from cosmos to cosmogenesis, from the mandala journey 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  138    
toward the center of an abiding world to the irreversible journey of the 
universe itself, as the primary sacred journey. This journey of the universe 
is the journey of each individual being in the universe.16 
 
And rather than equate this psychocosmic journey with the spatialized perspective 
of a merely linear progress as promoted in what Gebser has called mental/rational 
consciousness, Berry suggests in a comprehensively aperspectival guan-like way that 
“earlier awakening of the human mind took place in a spatial mode of understanding.” 
But, he writes, we now face the imperative of far more capacious transformative learning: 
 
 
To move from this abiding spatial context of personal identity to a sense 
of identity with [the field of] an emergent universe is a transition . . . . 
[which experiences] human intelligence as an integral component of the 
universe.17  
 
Again, in the chaste summation of today’s physics, 
The failure of [the] locality condition absolutely precludes. . .classical 
physics. We do live in a quantum world in which far-apart aspects are 
linked in ways quite contrary to the mechanistic conception of nature. . . . 
in which our streams of consciousness are naturally and efficaciously 
imbedded. . . .[in] the mind-matter connection, and hence. . .the nature of 
our own being.18  
Endnotes: OntoHermeneutic Pluralism 
This section is indebted to my early (19κκΨ “Interdisciplinary, Transdisciplinary and 
Intercultural Education: Postmodern Noetics and Guerilla Hermeneutics” and the 
publishers of the journal  International Synergy. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  139    
1.) Bachelard: vii, xi 
2.) see Bachelard: 116-117; on  non-totalization see also Gödel in Hofstadter; see Wilden; 
repeats Zhuangzi, for every this a that. 
3.) see Kafatos and Nadeau 
4.) archetypal, von Franz 1974: 45; aesthetic evaluations, Stapp 156; arational, von Franz 
1980: 16-17; ars contextualis, Ames in Callicott and Ames: 114; systems that possess 
consciousness, Stapp: 163; see Abram 2011. 
5.) Bachelard 6-7, 9;  see also Parkes 
6.) Govinda: 110; on fusion see Deacon and see also Paul Humphreys 
7.) Govinda: 109-111 passim; Bachelard: 110-11 speaks of an “elementary education in 
non-elementalism” wherein concepts are reconceived as “crossroads at which one would 
become conscious of one’s freedom in metaphorical activity. . . .many-branching 
conceptualization. . .plurality of meanings. . .dislocating of meanings”; see Deacon: 343; 
compare the argument of Govinda that the origin of consciousness is not in time with 
those of Swimme, and of Primack and Abrams, that the origins of the universe, the Big 
Bang, are not in spacetime; see Unger and Smolin on the extent to which understanding 
of cosmogenesis and the birth and complexification of (eco) self awareness are 
reciprocal. 
8.) contemplative meditation, Govinda: 110-11; see Guenther 1989: 14; see again 
Primack and Abrams, Swimme 1996 
9.) paradox, etc., various sources in Berman 2000: 1-18 passim; see Berman 1989; 
Obeyesekere: 474. I would not exclude unitive trance and the like from a planetary noetic 
repertoire of meaningful and sustaining practices – but I do think it’s an acquired taste in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  140    
the industrialized world. That’s all the more reason to consider its values. See Clottes and 
Lewis-Williams, Eliade, Aldous Huxley, McKenna 1991, Harner, Grinspoon and 
Bakalar, Grof, Belo 
10.) Wang 119-120; the person who knows, Zhang Zai in Tucker 1994:115; see also 
Kaibara Ekken 2007; see Burneko 2004, 2010 
11.) Zhongyong see Ames and Hall: 134; in authentically, sincerely attentive resonance it 
may be less the case that we “collapse,” focus or constellate anthropocosmic 
wavefunction potentials than that the (thus) non- or un-dualized field self-constellates 
relevant forms participated by our nonforcing ententionality; see Jahn and Dunne 2011 
and Explore: 295-3ί5 “Science of the Subjective” 
12.) Freire 1973: 16-17 passim 
13.) sustaining value see Obeyesekere chaps. 7, 8; Morin 2008 
14.) the ill effects in Kaibara: 132 
15.) Gebser 1974: 109 
16.) Berry 1999: 3, 159, 164; see also Swimme and Tucker 2011; see also Primack and 
Abrams 
17.) Berry 1999: 190, 192 
18.) Stapp: 186 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  141    
 
4.0 The Shu Fits 
Bernard Haisch in attempting to place contemporary scientific understanding of 
the foundations of things in direct relation with a religious outlook bears repeating when 
he emphasizes at each turn that “there may be a spiritual substance to science as well as a 
scientific substance to spirit, with light as the key link. The time has come to reintegrate 
the two.” And his arguments proceed along lines stating that we can understand the rules 
by which the universe works because in a central way, “we made them up.” That is to 
say, we are and have ever been for Haisch emerging embodiments of the evolution of the 
universe from its origin, of the luminous field and its unendingly interpenetrating 
possibilities. Knowing it is (knowing) ourselves.1  
Today we might even say that when the quantum physicist looks ever more 
minutely into the ways of worlding, s/he finds that what s/he is looking into are hir own 
eyes and hir own way of looking. And in the event, s/he sees that the interinvolving 
looker-as-looked-at becomes the self-celebrating of an ongoing-wholing of attentiveness 
itself not finally ontologically reducible to subjective or objective parts: a cosmogonic 
contemplation without a fixed contemplator. Our acts of quantum wholing participate, 
contribute to, create and recreate the ongoing-wholing of cosmogenesis, as we may 
interpret Stapp to indicate. Furthermore, our individually tuned and sustained 
contemplation, entention and attention maintain and stabilize “templates for action” that, 
multiplied by whole populations, can participate in the beyond-sustainability resonance 
of lifesystems on Earth in limitless ways. We can also think of this kind of contemplative 
or attentional axio-cosmo-genesis in terms of repeated acts of not-overly-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  142    
instrumentalizing contextualization and interpretation that are eo ipso ontohermeneutic 
enwholings of ongoing Earth-human and humanocosmic compresencing. Nor does the 
use of the term contemplative necessarily imply esoteric practices so much as an 
awareness and expression in daily experience of cosmological and Earth-human 
interconnectedness – Berry’s “functional cosmology.”2  
Metaphysically, Haisch would tell us (and we do well to keep both Stapp and 
Blake in mind hereΨ, “it is not matter that creates an illusion of consciousness, but 
consciousness that creates an illusion of matter.” Religiously, he would tell us, with an 
eye on Christian understandings of incarnation, that “God lives in the physical universe 
through us.” And not twenty pages into his account he relates in the first person, “’The 
One who became many is becoming one again.’ That is how I view what we are all doing 
right now.”3 The supposed emptiness of the zero-point field is for him also the substance 
and adunatio of things seen and unseen. In terms not derived from Christian heritage, we 
find analogous nondualism or panentheism prefaced in Kabbalistic Tikkun and the 
nirdvandva of Sanatana Dharma as well as the uncarved block, pu, fecund chaos, 
Hundun, and Central Harmony, zhonghe, of Daoism. The latter as an expression of 
“reciprocal communication” or xiangtong among Heaven, Earth and Humanity stands in 
further analogy with today’s quantum vacuum and field theory in the idea of zhonghe qi 
and the mutually beneficial contemplative cultivation of everywhere present 
psychophysical qi for ecosocial commonweal. 
 
For his part, Ervin Laszlo, as a systems theorist, wants in turn to emphasize the 
ineluctable connectedness among all modes and phases of existence; after all, 
“Foundation of an Integral Science of Quantum, Cosmos, Life, and Consciousness” is the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  143    
subtitle of his book The Connectivity Hypothesis. As if translating the imagery of the 
Dance of Shiva, performer, creator and destroyer of universes, into the discursive 
language of evolutionary cosmology, Laszlo postscripts his text with the affirmation that:  
The evolution of the metaverse through cyclic evolution of universes 
conduces to the full realization of the evolutionary potentials encoded in 
the primordial cosmic plenum – to the complete coherence of all things 
that exist in space and time. It marks the full achievement of divine 
creativity: ultimate coherence in the mind of God.4  
 
And on his way to unfolding this grand vision, Laszlo does not hesitate to reason 
on the speculation that among humans the Ȍ  (psiΨfield or collective wavefunction attains 
a vital and active psychological dimension: 
The individual’s brain is in-formed with the collective wavefunction of 
the human species as well as with the wavefunction of the 
socioecological system in which the individual participates.  [Repressed 
in modern persons this] remains present in the subconscious domains of 
the mind [as transpersonal intuitions, images and] species-wide 
‘archetypes’. . . .The[se] shape the emotional and intuitive aspects of 
behavior and may surface to conscious awareness in meditative and other 
altered states. The cerebral activity of generation after generation of 
individuals integrated in the collective wavefunction of the species, in-
forms the brain and nervous system of successive  generations of 
individuals.5  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  144    
 
Again, feeling no need to divide them and make claims that either consciousness 
or matter is temporally, metaphysically or religiously primary in the order of things at 
this juncture -- and acknowledging the differences in nuance among Haisch, Laszlo, 
Stapp and Abraham and Roy, not to mention Deacon who expressly disallows 
panpsychism or any “serendipitous compatibility with certain interpretations of quantum 
physics,” while also acknowledging the “role for the mark of absence” as “causally 
relevant” in “properties and degrees of freedom not actualized” in the emergent  
dynamics of living systems 6 -- I am happy enough for now only to suggest that neither 
reduces entirely to the other. And in defense of this ambiguation, I advert to Palmer’s 
“promise of paradox” in looking to the palpable and irreducible spontaneities of 
interbeing in physical and noetic modes for illumination about the simultaneously 
subjective/objective compresencing demonstrating i. e., embodying, sustaining self/other 
knowing.  
In making his own steps towards an “ecology of mind” linking Sήself- and-other- 
knowing,7 Thomas Berry will view cosmology, ecology and humanity as fractals or 
analogues of one another in a future dimensioning of our interrelationship with one 
another and/as Earth and also in our presencing to one another and with the universe. 
That mutual presencing to one another is as much affective as propositional and based on 
sensitive, spontaneous self-organizing responsiveness to incipient circumstances more 
than on supposedly unaltering or ever-iterated law-like principles or deliberate programs. 
 
When early on in his The Great Work  Berry reminds us that, “We are not here to 
control. We are here to become integral with the larger Earth community. The 
community itself and each of its members has ultimately a wild component, a creative 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  145    
spontaneity that is its deepest reality, its most profound mystery” he is in language that is 
ethical, imagistic and ecospiritual speaking to our contemporary need to (re)create a 
nondualizingly “functional cosmology.” And in signaling that spontaneous resonance 
with natural systems in nondominative “ecology is [our foremost] functional cosmology,” 
8 he is also implicitly expressing an insight resonant with a no less profound one of the 
complexity science of MacArthur Fellow Stuart Kauffman who writes, “the spontaneous 
emergence of self-sustaining webs [of life] is so natural and robust that it is even deeper 
than the specific chemistry that happens to exist on [E]arth; it is rooted in mathematics 
itself.” Similarly, implicit in Berry’s idea along with Deacon’s demotion of the primacy 
of natural selection (as “a classic case of the ends  justifying the means, by preserving 
them, retrospectively”Ψ comes an expansion of the evolutionary purview beyond life-as-
we-know-it where Deacon says “adaptations and organisms are. . .general types that exist 
irrespective of the specific details of their emobdiment.”9 
 Further, a kind of living-cosmos coevolutionary awareness may not be limited 
either to contemporary ecohumane or to systems scientific literacy, but cultivated also by 
a sensibility born of what we often theatricize as the untamed “shamans of prehistory” 
who quite likely experienced “trance and magic in the painted caves” and who also, as 
aboriginal persons “of high degree” enjoyed concourse and intercourse with the 
spontaneities of the Earth developed in ritual “archaic techniques of ecstasy” and 
capacities for ecomental imagery. These archaic and yet ever-available techniques 
presage in embodied aesthetic expression initiatic and altered-consciousness experience 
of the emergence of living forms from what we know today were never entirely inert rock 
and stone but the agents and matrices of biogeological eukaryosis and autocatalysis.10  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  146    
Berman will diminish the significance of shamanic techniques of ecstasy; and 
conversely, not all will focus with Abraham and Roy on the essentially 
computational/digital character of cosmic systems nor with Kauffman on the efficacy of 
computer models for the(ir) depiction of their evolution. But the value of symphonizing, 
integrating or eco-hybridizing (parts of) these and related sensibilities is in opening the 
doors of perception to a polyvalent lived experience, not only a monothetic conceptual 
understanding, of human life as what Berry has called a dimension of the life of the 
cosmos.  We don’t have to tussle over supposedly useful, veracious and certain outlooks 
or methods (ontohermeneutic nomadism is just fine, says Berman) because the 
transformation we are undergoing is not (just) one of consciousness about the universe 
but a sustaining self-realization of (our co-)consciousness as the universe aware. Besides, 
we want to think carefully and make discerning choices among ways of thinking; science 
and math are no less valuable to us than are analogy, poetry and visual art. Repeats Stapp 
in the neoshamanic idiom of quantum participation, “The most salient feature of quantum 
theory is that the mathematics has a causal gap that. . . provides a perfect place for Homo 
sapiens as we know and experience ourselves.” And Hall and Ames correspondingly 
reassure us of the ontoaxiological value of analogical and correlative thinking that though 
not presumptive of a “single-ordered world. . . .accepts the priority of change or process” 
and accounts for things “by appeal to correlative procedures rather than” exclusively by 
determining “agencies or principles.” The functional “pragmatic” value of analogical 
thinking, these writers believe, is as a complement to causal thinking, each being a 
“contingent strateg[y] humans employ to accommodate themselves to their 
surroundings.” Rounding out the sustaining emergent functionality of an 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  147    
ontohermeneutically diverse participation (as in guan), with Kafatos and Nadeau who 
report in The Conscious Universe that “complementarity is the fundamental structuring 
principle in our conscious constructions of reality in both ordinary and mathematical 
languages” we find this may be so throughout “the evolution of  human thought.”11  
We may find versions of Berry’s functional cosmology articulated again, for 
instances (and according with the customs and cultural clothing of traditional 
Confucianism and Daoism), in connection with the notion of ziran, usually translated as 
naturalness, the natural, the self-so, but also described by Peter D. Hershock in his 
Liberating Intimacy as sage “conduct that is spontaneous and complete. . . . express[ing] 
the tao [dao] with unselfconscious virtuosity, freely improvising with – and hence 
becoming inseparable from – whatever comes his or her way.” Such practice in the form 
of wu wei is for Hershock, once more, a version of a self-organization of interbeing 
embodied as emergently dynamic “conduct that is unprecedented.”12  
It is conduct in that it recognizes social mores; and yet it is unprecedented in that 
it spontaneously adapts with minutely attentive intimacy and (I will add eco-) social 
virtuosity to the nuances of each new setting and circumstance,  affording newly 
emergent value, meaning and functionality in the process. This is to suggest that hir self-
organizingly “unhesitating improvisation” with all the social, ecosocial and cosmic 
environment evidences the mature contemplative not as one who abides in the quietist 
“nonaction” of folding hir arms and closing hir mouth that is frequently associated with 
wu wei but as one who, states Mary Evelyn Tucker in the first sentence of the 
Introduction to the brilliantly conceived and edited two-volume Confucian Spirituality, 
sustainingly discovers “one’s cosmological being amidst daily affairs. . . .The means of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  148    
self-transformation is through cultivation of oneself in relation to others and to the natural 
world.” And lest the connection with his ideas on functional cosmology be lost amid the 
intervening allusions, the very first of the essays in the compendium just mentioned is by 
Berry, a scholar of Chinese philosophy and religion before he became a geologian, who 
writes therein, “the sage personality” as an archetypal personality in China and 
presumably elsewhere,  
is not a conquering hero but an integrating personality; in the sage all 
realms of being are harmonized. Nor is the sage a yogi seeking release 
from the limitations of the phenomenal world; the sage is rather a person  
entering into the deepest rhythms of all natural phenomena. Nor is the 
Chinese sage a saint caught up in a unifying love for a personal deity who 
is both intimate and transcendent; the sage is rather a functional co-creator 
of the universe together with Heaven and Earth.13  
 
This, in terms from classical Chinese understanding still bearing relevance today, 
is the functioning of the mature contemplative, one whose mindfulness keeps hir 
sustainingly in “liberating intimacy” with the vagaries of social, ecosocial and cosmic 
self-organization dynamics. Such functional mindfulness, goes beyond participating in 
sustaining the seemingly external natural systems on which we feel ourselves dependent 
to actually resonating (with) these as an intelligent and self-reflexive pulse of  (their and 
our) co-growthful interbeing itself. This is one way to point towards the simultaneously 
subjective and the objective, the all-at-onceing of a humanocosmogenesis and anthropo-
kenosis that crossculturally touches also on the “I am That am” of Abrahamic lore and, 
much later, Coleridge’s view of the integrative, cocreative imagination as the repetition 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  149    
of that “I am” in works of poetic art. Other analogues include the philosophical theology 
that finds the divine within nature and the systems theory that finds God in “the unfolding 
and self-realization of evolution” or that finds, indeed, that “self consistently co-
constructing nature itself has given rise to all that we have called upon a transcendental 
Creator God to author.”14  
From Berry, we may move to more Chinese lore expressing functional cosmology 
in contemplative conduct understood as self-organizing resonance beyond sustainability. 
The expression is offered in the terms of the Dao Shu or “pivot of the Dao. Traditionally, 
the term Dao Shu was used as a synonym or metaphor for the mature contemplative, the 
sage. Relevant here is that among the arts and practices of “the mature contemplative” are 
not only that of wu wei but also those of wuxin and shu. Wuxin is glossed by Ames and 
Hall in their “philosophical translation” of the Daodejing as “unmediated thinking and 
feeling.” Elsewhere often translated as no-mind (or non-egoic heart-and-mind), and 
similar to the wuzhi or unprincipled, (i.e., the non-rote kind of spontaneous) 
conduct/awareness that Morin, in turn, will call trans- or un-disciplinary, the term seems 
to connote in philosophical Daoism (Daojia) the kind of interaction and conduct in affairs 
by which a person of contemplative orientation forgoes mastery of situations (through 
ego-imposition, fixed reference or fixed rule) in favor of attentive, careful listening to and 
observing persons human, more-than-human and other-than-human. Another way of 
emphasizing its significance is to see wuxin as the not-front-loading of situations with 
aims of personal gain so as to optimize and harmonize or to integrate among the givens of 
any situation the potentials of all its participants, constituents or contributors. Coupled 
with the performance of ziran, this would be more to live in a way that flexibly and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  150    
sustainingly accords with and focuses the field of the natural or the naturally and 
mutually self-organizing aptitudes co-emergent in the cosmic or ecosocial context as a 
whole and less to live as an unrelentingly premier individual among a collocation of 
similarly competing “parts” or as the promoter of a device-, imposition- or ego-laden 
action agenda. Its immediacy and spontaneity of sustaining responsiveness abide in its 
acting as a dimension or fractal of ongoing-wholing and less as an independently 
calculating part (“having designs” on the wholingΨ.15 
In this respect, any order that comes about is the performance of the mutual-self-
soing of each-with-others rather than an imposed or planned affair. For example, as Hall 
and Ames have pertinently and strikingly illustrated, “There is simply no reason to claim 
that Confucius has ‘in mind’ what he wishes to teach. . . .his appeal to the ingenuity of his 
disciples involves the recognition that appropriating the tradition will depend upon the 
novel circumstances of his disciples’ context.” This is also a characterization of the 
fittingness of a shu or reciprocity congruent with both interhuman and emergent 
ecohumane potentials for sustainable ontohermeneutic co-growthing and co-worlding.16  
 
 Shu is a term with an apparently bottomless set of mutually entailing implications 
and meanings – including (according to different interpreters) reciprocity, self-analogy, 
yielding, self-likeness, deference, deferential transactions, altruizing, co-growthing, 
compassion, sympathetic concern, open-heartedness, etc. We can begin its partial 
unpackaging with some commentary on the Zhuangzi (= Chuang Tzu) offered in Wu 
Kuang-ming’s incomparably hospitable The Butterfly as Companion where he informs 
us, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  151    
Therefore, Chuang Tzu proposes that the subject embody the Pivot of the 
Way [dao shu] of things’ mutualities. The subject must fit himself in the 
Pivot, fit the Pivot ‘in the center of the Circle’. . . of the world, and 
thereby respond endlessly and freely to things by ‘following along’. . .and 
‘walking both’ [liang xing. . .] ways – the way of things and the way of the 
subject.17  
In this Wu-way of (non)doing worlding, we avoid unsustainingly thinging the 
things in our environment and making things of ourselves in the process. This comes 
about by spontaneously co-responsive iterations, (think of Stapp’s action template or of 
what Laughlin and colleagues speak of as holistic attunement), not premised foremost on 
individual gain – because individuality of the kind familiar in the west since, say, Bacon 
or Descartes, is not taken as the primum notum of interbeing. For that matter, Being has 
never required the categories of substance or entity for its adequate definition.  
And by another relation of ancient idiom that recalls Jantsch and S. Kauffman 
where they speak, respectively, of cycles of naturally occurring “autocatalytic self-
reproduction” and of self-organizing “networks” that “need not be built one component at 
a time [but] can spring full-grown from a primordial soup,” Wu further elaborates that in 
the Daoist purview of shu, all things are “mutually involving and arranging. . . 
themselves in wheels and wheels.” “Such a wheeling is always beginning (always [as 
Zhuangzi says] ‘yet to begin to beginΨ. . .,’ and so without definite beginning or end.’”18  
In the Zhuangzi and in several interpretations of the Analects of Kongzi, “Things 
mutually wait on one another, and are waited on by one another. . . .All this illustrates a 
radical interdependence among things. . . .ontological interdependence.” And this idea 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  152    
brings us back to such language as Laszlo’s about a “coherent universe, where all things 
are intrinsically connected,” and Haisch’s ontohermeneutic echo of Bohr that given a 
scientifically posited oneness (or not-twoness) of all in (and as) the zero-point field, there 
is a “principle of complementarity. . . between reality as a scientific experiment and 
reality as a spiritual experience.”19  
It’s thus of little surprise to read in Wu’s book on Zhuangzi, “Modern physics and 
ancient intuition in the I Ching tell us that things. . .are. . .a rhythmic system of resonating 
togetherness.” And so, for ancient wisdom and modern science, it is conceivable that shu 
– both as a performance of spontaneous ontohermeneutic co-evocation and as an 
emergent practice of the correspondingly appropriate participatory (eco)epistemology of 
integral “verition,” i. e. the simultaneous and mutually diaphanous subjective/objective 
imparting and receiving of which Gebser speaks -- be taken as a viable central practice of 
the kind of present day “planetary thinking” that Martin Heidegger called for and be 
interpreted as the sustaining “activity of ‘attunement,’ presupposed in every act of 
communication, [and] that illustrates the most comprehensive form of thinking – thinking 
that moves toward the attainment of sagehood.” This is sustainably thinking with and as 
the field of interbeing, whether we connote this by qi, Ȍ,  or 
 .20“Thinking through 
Confucius” with Hall and Ames, we learn that the original of the term for the sage 
connoted a big-eared hearing and listening, and thus a nonprogrammatically codified yet 
capacious, sensitively astute, minutely and im-mediately co-responsive, spontaneously 
improvisational attunement with and enactment of the movements of the sidereal, 
seasonal, sociocultural and interpersonal situations compenetrating with/in, around, and 
coconstituting, hir. Attentiveness and sensitivity to events, persons and incipient 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  153    
contextual and environmental changes to such a degree instantiated hir being with and 
amid them through and as a performative (and sustainingly vital) practical-philosophical 
knack, dao or phronesis, one which is conducive to emergent conduct apposite to the 
functional “interbeing of cosmology and community” and that links back in culture to 
indigenous shamanic techniques as well as to our own present considerations of what 
Berry identifies as “the great work” of aligning our individual life projects with “the 
universe itself. . . .[as] the primary referent in the being and the activities of all derivative 
modes of being.” As we spontaneously and fittingly attune our own experience withήin 
the socioecological and ecopolitical auto-poiesis of events and creatures great and small, 
we learn anew to walk each mile of life in shu with all others, embodying their and our 
cocreativity, along the path that is laid down in our mutual liang xing or double walking 
of self and/as other.21 Where ego absents itself in complete attentiveness, sustainable 
universing takes place, “places” itself. 
Hereby, the ecosocial “project of becoming a person combines the sense of 
‘placing oneself in another’s place’ (shuΨ and that of ‘doing one’s best. . .to effect one’s 
insight.’” This is the way, the knack or dao of the mature eco-contemplative -- an inner- 
and inter-active sagelike participating, focusing and, some quantum theory might say, 
cocreatively “intervening” in the field. Indeed, as Hall and Ames point out, the genuinely 
signifying, exemplary or “’authoritative person’. . . as a process of integrative person 
making . . . incorporates the interests of others as his own and conducts himself in a 
manner that addresses the general good.” In Heidegger’s terms, such thinking, gathering, 
building and dwelling by a kind of absential ontohermeneutical releasement or self-
emptying of officious ego-bravado, preconceptions and fixed rules, allows the (therefore 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  154    
more spontaneous, sensitive and capacious) emergent conduct and ecopoietic thinking of 
the maturing one and thus sustainingly allows hir and other forms of life the full 
expression of what Blake might have called the universe in the minute particularity of 
their varied grains of sand. And this allows also, this manifests as, the self-organizing 
optimization of the livelihood and well being of each as a mode and node of an ongoing 
and interminate wholing that moves through and beyond sustainability in/to resonant 
integral coexistence. For nothing is perpetually sustainable in a universe of change 
except, perhaps, the spontaneous and sincere entention or aptitude of wholeful/mutual 
benefit. Such ecocontemplativity looks less like a deliberate virtue and more like the wu 
wei ziran of unforced attentionality amid affairs; and no gift may be greater than the 
sustaining gift of (our) complete attention shared with other human and nonhuman 
persons.22 
The sage, mature contemplative, or ecosocially mindful person in our time is by 
this interpretation also a “master communicator” not only in poetic, concursive and 
discursive languaging/worlding but in authentic, co-responsive conduct open-to-being(s). 
Sήhe as an “aggregate self, transmits meaning through the orchestration and attuning of 
hi[r] composite dispositions.”  A more politically trenchant restatement of this thematic is 
that, “’Authority’ means, ultimately, to be the author of oneself” or of one’s authentic self 
(chengΨ; and such (coΨ“authoring of self and world includes the offering of self and world 
for the enjoyment of others.” This further includes, Hall and Ames propose, a “quality of 
humility [zheng, that is both] a sense of one’s excellence and the differential excellences 
of others.” And they go on to observe that we must occasionally “risk failure in order to 
author our own existence” on these terms; and “the most obvious risks are those 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  155    
associated with . . . civil disobedience. . . .But allowance for civil disobedience is 
compelling for Confucius,” for civil disobedience “reflects the conception of person as 
being fundamentally coextensive with his social and political [and natural] environments. 
For this reason, civil disobedience is a major phenomenon during the establishment of a 
new dynasty.” 23  
And in its not-particularly-polemicized variants, Occupy Ecosociality is the 
liberatory dao shu, Hermes or Trickster embodiment of dis-ego-habituating, of 
deconditioning and (thus) of unconditionally sustaining interbeing amid, and in the 
process of forgoing, socio-instrumental limitations, (cl)aims and conventions. The 
ecosocial sage’s evocative languaging and enviro-resonantly wu kind of waying allow us 
to learn with hir “to move in the arena of conditioned experience without being trapped 
by it” in the sustaining performance of (hirΨ ecohumanely “compassionate wiles.”24 
Could Thomas More, Thomas Jefferson, Henry David Thoreau, Pope Francis, Gary 
Snyder or Julia Butterfly Hill have conducted themselves more ably? 
A new story of ecosocial significance sustainingly reconnecting ourselves with 
the cosmic continuum is effectively a disobedient subversion of canonical tales of self-
interest, private gain, mutual objectification and anthropocentric instrumentalism. With 
such narratives as those of Haisch, Stapp, Berry, Swimme, Primack and Abrams and the 
many others recruited together here, and as well in the music of nature, we begin to hear 
in ourselves the song of sustaining interbeing. The steps of development of a human-
cosmic holism, a cosmic religious sense, as Einstein thought of it, are taken as much in 
the parables and choices we make as in the little leaps of quantum events. Now we are 
ready to find the quantum of value expressed as the self-narratization of humanocosmic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  156    
contemplation. Repeated another way, “You do have the power to set aside the unhealthy 
dogmas of both religion and scientism. You can open your mind and use reason and 
intuition in roughly equal measure to figure out what you truly are. And that will change 
the world.” Coursing time and the river, wrote Mark Twain. . . . 
Narrative should flow as flows the brook down through the hills and the 
leafy woodlands. . .a brook that never goes straight for a minute, but goes. 
. . sometimes ungrammatically. . .but always going, and always following 
at least one law. . . the law of narrative, which has no law. Nothing to do 
but make the trip, the how of it is not important so that the trip is made.25  
Endnotes: The Shu Fits 
1.) Haisch 2006: 152, 138; see also Primack and Abrams 
2.) Stapp: 8-10, 33, templates for action chap. 5; see Laughlin et al.; Berry 1988: 66 
3.) Haisch 2006:137, 18 
4.) Laszlo 2003: 118; see Unger and Smolin and consider the extent to which their 
“singular universe” hypothesis reinforces Laszlo’s original intuition 
5.) ibid.: 91; see Sheldrake: 188 and passim on morphic resonance 
6.) Deacon: 73, 540; on paradox see also Colie, Delcourt, Doob, and Berman 2000 
7.) see G. Bateson 1972, Cobb; also see Primack and Abrams 
8.) we are not here to control Berry 1999: 48, functional cosmology ibid.: 84 
9.) S. Kauffman 1995: 60; see also Abraham and Roy: 119; Deacon: 423; see Primack 
and Abrams for an expansion and critique of this idea 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  157    
10.) painted caves, Clottes and Lewis-Williams; see Lewis-Williams; high degree, Elkin; 
techniques of ecstasy, Eliade, Abram 2011; rock and stone see Shklovskii and Sagan; 
eukaryosis Margulis, Margulis and D. Sagan; autocatalysis see Jantsch; see also Harding 
11.) Berman 2000; S. Kauffman 1995; Berry 1988: 195; Stapp:143, see Wertheim; Hall 
and Ames 1995: xvii-xviii; Kafatos and Nadeau: 128; see again Primack and Abrams 
12.) Hershock: 129; see Deacon passim on emergent dynamics of function, value, 
meaning; cf. Paul’s Mixed Messages as it bears on the themes of complementarity and 
agon in bioculturally dialogical poiesis 
13.) improvisation, Hershock: 75; closing hir mouth according to an early critique and 
interpretation of Zhuangzi by Guo Xiang, fl. 292 C. E. see www.iep.utm.edu/guoxiang 
(accessed 9.26.12);  Tucker in Tu and Tucker 2003: 1; Berry ibid.: 44; the way Primack 
and Abrams: 295 put the idea in their intensively scientifically informed contemplation is 
this: “ We uphold the new universe – but only if we too, like the ancients, consciously do 
uphold it in our thoughts and actions.” 
14.) intimacy, Hershock; I Am that (I) Am, Exodus 3:14; cf. Coleridge “Imagination and 
Fancy” in Biographia Literaria see Sana Shahid, http://www.online-
literature.com/forums/showthread.php?t=16344 (accessed 5.2.12); on divine within 
nature see Corrington; self-realization of evolution, Jantsch: 308; self consistently co-
constructing nature S. Kauffman 2008: 232 
15.) pivot, Wu 1990: 175, also having connotations of axis mundi, see ibid. 161; see also 
Kerényi: 84 on Hermes stropheus—the “socket in which the pivot of the door moves”; 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  158    
mature contemplative in Laughlin et al. 1992: 24-25 and passim; Daodejing see Laozi 
2003: 67; Morin 2008: 32; more-than-human, Abram, for an ecological highlight see 
Deloria; personal gain, see the “business deal mentality” in Varela et al.: 246 
16.) Hall and Ames 1987: 303; co-growthing, co-worlding after Wu 1990 
17.) Wu 1990: 175; this theme will be revisited 
18.) autocatalytic Jantsch: 101; networks S. Kauffman 1995: 45; wheels in Wu 1990: 
179-180 
19.) interdependence Wu: 1990: 173; Laszlo 2003: 101; Haisch 2006: 150; see the 
Cosmic Uroboros in Primack and Abrams chaps. 6 and 10 
20.) Wu 1990: 181; modern science see Grof 1984; Heidegger see Varela, et al: 241; 
sagehood Hall and Ames 1987: 255; on participatory thinking see Skolimowski 
21.) Hall and Ames 1987: 257-58; interbeing, Grim, and see Morin On Complexity; Berry 
2006: 149 and Berry 1999; liang xing in Wu 1990: 162, (Wu throughout uses the since 
outmoded Wade-Giles orthography, e. g. liang hsing) 
22.) project of becoming, Lau in Hall and Ames 1987: 50; intervening, Stapp: 10; Hall 
and Ames 1987:122; Heidegger: 145-161 passim;  cf. “[T]rue love is really the same as 
awareness. They are identical” cited in Harland and Keepin :155; on perpetual 
sustainability cf. eternal inflation in Primack and Abrams 
23.) communicator. . .aggregate self,  Hall and Ames 1987: 261; author(ity), ibid.: 180; 
humility, ibid.: 181; civil disobedience, ibid.: 181-82 
24.) in the arena of conditioned experience, S. McClintock: 109 
25.) you do have the power. . . .change the world, Haisch 2006: 150; Twain in Lapham: 
32; see Swimme and Berry; also see Swimme and Tucker and view their film Journey of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  159    
the Universe in company with Primack and Abrams; the idea of (re)connecting ourselves 
with the cosmic continuum raises questions about whether there is ever really any 
possible disconnection and about whether, in light of contemporary cosmology, we might 
better murmur of a quantumuum 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  160    
 
 
4.1 Neurognostic Shu 
The preceding reconnaissance of shu is preface to a reflection that shu in its 
various intercultural formulations, if it can be formulized at all, performs illumination. It 
demonstrates the interexistential illumination, diaphaneity and transparency that, and 
how, each process and event of the world, including our consciousness and inner worlds, 
compenetrates with others. And in that way shu demonstrates the confluent luminosity or 
enlightenment of existence, the auto-luminescence of seemingly independent phenomena 
when experienced as mutually transparent and diaphanous through their co-implication, 
co-evocation and co-evolution. This is as much expressive of the diaphaneity and 
transparency of the integral consciousness extensively discussed by Gebser as of the 
quantum field of Haisch or classical Chinese Qi or Huayan. The life of the world on 
human, social, organophysical and cosmological scales is in such viewing or guan 
inherently and coherently transparent, not just cocreative and coproductive. Where the 
processes of inter-involvement are most interrupted and imposed upon by the excessive 
habituations of the ego and its imperatives of dominion, instrumentalism, gain and utility, 
they are found to be existentially opaque, monothetic or monotonous. And where they are 
released of such ego reduction and ego-inertia to any degree, they afford clear light, fresh 
air, and the emergent opportunities for mutual interaction that can sustainably grow in 
coherence, resonance and harmony or systems co-optimization. 
We might infer from such a prospect that the nondual mystical experiences 
throughout time and traditions remain perennially viable, though yet to be put in terms 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  161    
and settings that accommodate our growing humanistic and scientific learning. Put in 
religious though not in theological terms, they affirmatively propose that the eye by 
which we receive glittering kosmos is the eye that imparts illumination unto the ongoing 
cosmogenesis that is also our self-renewing.  
In the negative or “wu-forms” of ancient China -- for instance wu wei or “actions 
[that are] uncompromised by stored knowledge or ingrained habits. . .relatively 
unmediated. . .accommodating and spontaneous” and wuzhi or “unprincipled knowing” i. 
e., knowing that “does not appeal to rules or principles determining the existence, the 
meaning, or the activity of a phenomenon” -- we find what might be summed as, once 
again, the open-field engagement of wuxin or “unmediated thinking and feeling” and as 
wuzheng or “striving without contentiousness.” All in all, the wu-forms indicate an 
illuminative way-of-worlding that “seeks to optimize relationships through collaborative 
actions that, in the absence of coercion, enable one to make the most of any situation.” 
And it takes little imagination to inquire whether unchecked present day large scale 
command-and-control capitalist or other privative econocratic mentalities well comport 
with such modes of conduct leading beyond unsustainability to sustainability and to 
humanocosmic resonance.1 
 
Of course, the advent of the controlling monothetic ego does not occur only in the 
particular interplex of industrial-culture trends and tendencies. And as Carl Jung well 
observed, individuation in any society is a process that integrates and yet certainly grows 
beyond egohood in allowing our orientation in the world while psychologically maturing 
towards realizing symbols, ententions and values of wholeness whether in ancient or 
modern guise. Individuation instantiates self-realization through the conscious 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  162    
differentiation and reintegration of our faculties and functions (including our capacities 
for action) as we outgrow an immature or largely unconscious pro forma subscription to 
the persona-package inscribed into us by our social conventions. But in outgrowing our 
“persona,” we become consciously aware of archetypal tendencies in the unconscious 
psyche that open us to the Self, a dimension of (inter)being of which the ego-persona is 
only a node, face(t),  mask or phase. And these archetypal tendencies are finally 
indistinguishable from nature itself: organic, ecological nature, cosmic nature, quantum 
wavefunction nature and cosmogenesis. Further, with Jung the archetypes of the 
unconscious are “not only spontaneous but can actually take the lead” in our development 
towards self-, or Self-realization.2  
In a transdisciplinary parenthesis that might be read as a neurognostic 
biologization of archetypal psychology, Laughlin and others will expand these ideas in a 
way that makes Jung’s work itself seem like a psychologization of cosmogenesis. Their 
work gives us reason to understand human being as tuned and evolutionarily pre-adapted 
to symbols and experiences of wholeness conducive to the kind of transparency and 
resonant sustainability I have invoked here and, for instance, in my article titled 
“Contemplative  Ecology.” And in her book Psyche and Matter, Marie-Louise von Franz, 
who knew Jung’s work firsthand, declares unqualifiedly that for him, “our consciousness 
does have cosmogonic significance” and adds with emphatic relevance for a later 
development of the present essay, “but that goes for everything existing, and not just the 
meaning of synchronistic events” since, at the very minimum, all “space, time, and causal 
connection, does not exist or exists only hypothetically if not perceived by an observer. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  163    
Our consciousness is the ‘actualizer’ of all existence – a truth that today every physicist 
will confirm.”3  
Aligning our ego-selves in some appropriate more or less conscious 
resonance/relation with the archetypal work of the unconscious (presumably cosmos-
infused and collective) psyche -- in our embodied integration of what classical China 
would have called Heaven, Earth and Humankind -- we may, perhaps, more fluidly and 
fluently transluce and transduce the sustaining psychophysical energy/meaning of 
cosmos. This is interculturally comprehensible as qi to the Chinese, as the analogous 
“spontaneous emergence of self-sustaining . . .so natural and robust that it is . . . rooted in 
mathematics itself,” or as the superposed humanocosmic comprobabilities of the quantum 
vacuum field. These tropes, symbols and paradigms are expressions amenable to 
meaningful, illuminative and more than sustaining attitudes and conduct, nurturing, I 
gladly repeat, “profound awareness of the human condition as one of embeddedness and 
creative participation in a living cosmos of unfolding meaning and purpose.”4  
 
A refining note is that neither is the question of the humanocosmic resonance 
realized through intensification of consciousness and the abatement (not, however, the 
destruction) of ego necessarily premised on substance and energy models of 
cosmogenesis; nor are the psychoid archetypes reducible in objectifying terms to 
separable categories of mind or nature. And in China, for example, qi was indeed 
understood as a vital energy that permeated the entire cosmos, much like the quantum 
plenum Laszlo describes. Yet it varied in its texture from rarefied and refined sage heart-
mind, xin, to the grossly material. The continuum of qi was the psychocosmic continuum 
of material body and of sincere, noetic heart/mind. Looking inward to nourish the most 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  164    
refined form of qi was the way of realizing oneness (or nondual-ness) with cosmos. And 
this was best done by what Zhuangzi called xin-zhai or the “fasting” of the heartήmind, 
allowing one’s heartήmind to be emptied of everything overly be-egoed and filled, 
suffused or as if “oned” with the psychocosmic qi whose cultivation alone “can sharpen 
one’s sensitivity and ability to the highest degree in order to monitor the rhythm of the 
ever-ongoing cosmic transformation.”5  
Dense, thick, opaque qi demonstrated the turbidity and numbness of material 
inertia. Light and lively, qi, by some considered itchy, was fluently responsive in both the 
subject and the object. As the luminous mind of the sage, qi was delicate or subtle in 
penetrating the phenomena which it itself constituted. A complementarity of seeming 
opposites, its expression was both the yin and the yang of existence. Authentic accord 
therewith was the goal of sage study, and it was by tradition an aspiration, even a 
responsibility, closed to no human being – analogous to what Jung in his autobiography 
thought was our ethical responsibility to become increasingly conscious.6 
 
Correlatively, as von Franz points out in Psyche and Matter from an analytical 
psychological and an archetypal perspective on the human penchant to regard 
reductionism (particularly the reduction of phenomena to rationally explicable matter-
energy models) as the foremost and only legitimate way to make sense of things: 
Wolfgang Pauli [physicist co-author with Jung of a book on synchronicity 
titled The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche] has gone so far as to 
define physical knowledge as the coming-to-meet of inner psychological 
images and outer facts. Rudolf Carnap prefers to narrow this even further 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  165    
and say that the knowledge of physics consists of images that have been 
purified into mathematical formulae. 
And she further observes that, 
. . .there is not a single important scientific paradigm that is not based on a 
primal archetypal intuition. . . .mind and matter are nothing graspable in 
and of themselves, but are ultimately forms of appearance of essentially . . 
.transpsychic being. . . . In sum, that which we designate as matter or 
energy in the external world is an archetypal image, just as the mind is. . . 
.Jung [she invokes for emphasis at this point] spoke of the cosmogonic 
meaning of human consciousness.7  
 
And so we find, given statements like these anyway, that the whole edifice of 
understanding regarding the ecologies of mind, matter and the field-of-interbeing is as 
likely to be that of a nondual (auto)ontohermeneutic as of an objectivist substantialist or 
entitative ontology. In other words, any bottom line affirmation about “the nature of” this 
or that is relativized (and uroborized) at once by the real possibility that it is (also) an 
“imaginal” construction irreducible to any categorizable source or foundational notum 
(whether physical, divine or noetic or other, according to Avens); and, (to make a point 
more logically accessible to the contemporary mind), it is also relativized by any 
alternative, complementary or contradictory affirmation in the spirit of White’s “weak 
ontology.” More significantly, as Zhuangzi and Gebser might collaboratively put it, 
where there is no ego-perspectivating self there is no other. Evocatively translates Wu 
Kuang-ming from his butterfly meditation on the “Things, Theories – Sorting 
Themselves Out” chapter of the Zhuangzi: 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  166    
(And then we can see that) this(-yes) is also that, that 
 
 
is also this (-yes); 
 
 
That is also one yes-and-no, this(-yes) is also 
 
 
one yes-and-no. 
 
 
Indeed, are-there in-fact that and this? Indeed, are there not 
 
 
in-fact that and this?  
 
 
Where none of that or this obtains its 
 
 
counterpart – people call it the Tao Pivot. 
 
 
Then the Pivot begins to obtain its middle point 
 
 
of the circle, and with it, it responds 
 
 
till there-is-no-end. 
 
 
This(-yes) is also one ‘there-is-no-end’: 
 
 
no is also one ‘there-is-no-end. 
 
 
And so I said, ‘There is none like judging things 
 
 
with the standard of the illumination of clarity.’ 
 
The mutual thissing and thatting will go on. Where they stop nobody knows. And 
when we find our way to a clarifying un-thissing and non-thatting, what’s left? I leave 
that to your imagination. Some say, “there is as yet no satisfactory theory of 
measurement.”8  
Endnotes: Neurognostic Shu 
1.) wu-forms see Ames and Hall 2003: 36 passim; wuxin, ibid.: 46; wuzheng, ibid.:38; 
seeks to optimize relationships, ibid.: 48; see Burneko 2004, 2010 
2.) Jung see deLaszlo 1959: 154, 143-157 passim; see also Tarnas 2006, Obeyesekere 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  167    
3.) Laughlin 1992, 2001; von Franz 1992: 231 
4.) mathematics itself, S. Kauffman 1995: 60; profound awareness, Tarnas 2006: 293 
5.Ψ sharpen one’s sensitivity, Yü in Tu and Tucker 2003: 72; cf. Unger and Smolin – qi 
may be construed in analogy with some nonquantifiable mode of cosmogenesis or one in 
a series/ecology of universe modalities in its evolutionary development 
6.) see Jung 1963: 192-93, see also Jung, The Undiscovered Self 
7.) von Franz 1992: 13-17; in Explore, n. b. Jahn and Dunne “Science of the Subjective”: 
295-305 
8.) Wu 1990:140-41; see Avens, S. Kauffman 2008: 232; theory of measurement, 
Abraham and Roy: 61; see Neville’s fine book, Recovery of the Measure: Interpretation 
and Nature 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  168    
 
5.0 Caveats and Analogues 
 
Whenever a sphere of insight is opened analogically, no strictly delimited 
precision of a syllogistic sort can be expected through its polysemeity. In an all-
connected and mutually contextualizing kosmos of the ontohermeneutic kind described 
by physics and hermeneutic philosophy today, analogy is a broad road to self and to 
self/other understanding. And an evolving universe of interminately compresencing, 
inherently probabilistic events and modalities, noetic, physical and otherwise, one having 
(thus) no final or certain objectifiable character, inescapably reflects (on) itself in 
analogical and appositional forms, despite Berman’s warning about the risks of totalism 
or pathology in analogical reasoning.1  
For that matter, Aristotle early proposed we should not expect any more precision 
than a thing will admit of, period.  And where air-tight deductions are made from clear 
and distinct Cartesian premises, these deductions, alert Kuhn and others, are still guided 
or influenced by the imaginal and the cultural context wherefrom the premises are born. 
Especially with respect to the emergent understanding and self-understanding of 
complexly self-organizing and ecosocial systems, “There is. . .a correspondence,” Morin 
asserts, “between the open perspective at the foundation of the theory of open systems 
and the infinite crack opened at the summit of every cognitive system by Gödel’s 
theorem.” And for another matter, even formally circumscribed syllogistic premises 
derive their meanings from the tacit, suppressed realm of all the otherwise unvoiced 
language and meaning possibility that supports them and in which they are embedded – 
much as Zhuangzi points out that in walking we only use one small space of footing at a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  169    
time, yet the value of its little domain is inseverable from the whole of the Earth. The 
useful interdepends with the useless in thinking as in interbeing.2  
The part-to-whole relation presupposed by mechanistic and epistemo-atomistic 
analysis imposes on the interminate universe-process a regimen or template of 
consciousness immured in a bits and pieces ontoepistemology.  Alternatively, the 
ongoing-wholing of recent quantum and ontohermeneutic sensibility attempts to express 
itself in a nondualizing narrative of value, event and consciousness cocreation – 
sometimes with unanticipated results.  Abraham and Roy, for instance, speak of  a 
hierarchized cosmogony of definite meditatively accessible ‘quantum’ or tattva levels (a 
version of ‘pieces’Ψ producing in their intervallic regions a potentially ever “finer, 
vibratory field”; and these levels can presumably communicate in mathematico-semiotic 
if not in other signals.3 Yet their significance is coproductive: however distinct each is, 
each level is a this to another’s that, as are digital to analogue and intuitive to rational 
modes of consciousness. Paradoxical inscrutables ever giggle their way into this 
conversation, and meaning appears as much a matter of plural and of un- and re-meaning 
as of (piecemeal) univocal assertion. 
The deeper and broader environment for even (for especially?) the most rigorous 
syllogistic reasoning is an ontohermeneutic fusion and perfusion of horizons, i. e., the 
arational and not-yet-entirely-objectifying response, analogy or self-likening we make 
with the universe. Rational premises are choices and express values; yet they cannot of 
themselves or in combination guarantee life-enhancing values and meanings. Entirely 
rational projects have endorsed for us war and ecocide. From this purview the multivocal 
analogy, image, or the symbol, emerges fractally and holonomically embodying 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  170    
interminate cosmogenesis and birthing thought, including rational thought. And the 
surplus of life-meaning of the symbol projects into, recycles or compenetrates with, just 
as it is manifested from and pervaded by, the interminate wholing in and as which it 
emerges. And while there is a history of ecocide to report from times or places more 
symbolic and less rationalized in sensibility than our own, an implicit question remains of 
what we mean by the truth of our present approach to life. If it is only, if it is guided and 
coded only by, a correspondence established between our concepts and the universe of 
separated objects, an immoderate and divisive ratio is likely to be a bane especially if 
these concepts and models are the instruments and methods of ego inflation and 
domination.4 
But if we find a truth value of our conduct of life to be the value in natural 
systems and in cosmogenesis that is (also) appropriately embodied and enacted in our 
emergent relations with them as well as with one another, we have a greater likelihood of 
mutually beneficial and sustainable functionality. A contemplatively, attentionally and 
co-tentionally evoked symbolic, analogical consciousness (the self-awareness of 
cosmogenesis) -- and even more, a polyphasic ecology of both analogical and rational 
sensibility -- is far likelier in its field of open comprehension (not to say of archetypal 
connection with and expression of natural processes) to midwife or enact a sustaining 
carryover of value “from” cosmogenesis “to” our conduct as its reflexive embodiments 
and interpreters/contextualizers on the bits of Earth where we stand than is ego-ratio 
alone likely to do. We need both, just as, analogously speaking, we walk on two legs and 
see with two eyes. Neville’s naturalistic theory of interpretation seems pragmatically to 
open a door in just this direction as where he speaks of interpretation “as a part of nature. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  171    
. . .a special kind of participation in the natural world by natural beings” like ourselves 
the “truth” of whose long-term sustainability of Earth-human relations is to be found in 
“the carryover of value” from the world into our interpretive ontohermeneutic withήas it 
as inflected and textured by our biological, cultural, ecosemiotic and ententional 
resonance-aptitudes. In this view, (our) consciousness continues, contextualizes, and 
interprets now emergent axio-cosmogenesis while maintaining its sustainable ecosocial 
footing in the coevolutionary dynamics of an Earth-Human-Cosmogenesis intersystem of 
and as which, “Every one of us is entitled to say, ‘I am what the expanding universe is 
doing here and  now.’” 5 
Again, my emphasis is that this presumed carryover or anthropocosmic 
analogizing doesn’t necessarily exempt symbolic, metaphorical, analogical and generally 
poetic thinking from the antienvironmental excesses that have been associated with an 
instrumentalizing ratio. It is only to suggest that the symbol (analogy, metaphor etc.) 
gives rise to thought and presentiates through it a more broadly holistic 
ontohermeneutical environment, one better comprehending and instantiating the natural 
universe. As Ricoeur puts it, “The eclipse of the objective, manipulable world thus makes 
way for the revelation of a new dimension of reality and truth.” Here, I highlight the 
value of judiciously undoing – or better, of complementing -- objectification and 
manipulation, in order more authentically to experience the natural, the real. And even 
again, more carefully put, the question at hand is less one of the total “eclipse” than of the 
“relativization” of excessively zweckrational coconsciousness. An alternative way of 
expressing the sustaining value of contemplative, analogical, and generally appositional 
awareness and corresponding forms of ecosocial conduct (especially as complements to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  172    
rational/mental awareness) is to observe with Primack and Abrams that “History’s most 
powerful cosmological images are not just arbitrary inventions – they may be discoveries 
about  human nature” and especially useful if they help convey a scientifically pertinent 
message of and for ecohumane coworlding. 6 
The symbol, as analogical experience and as open-ended thinking, wholes or 
compresences its environment and meaningfully contributes to it, as does the attentive 
presencing of mature contemplative interbeing, shu, in its living analogy of and as the 
everywhere ongoing. By further analogy, if not so evidently by propositional logic, the 
primal sources of our understanding tacitly harbor and signal the mutual transparency of 
self and/to other, of ongoing worlding and thought(s)-about-world. Where the 
ontohermeneutic of mutual contextualization is performed there is self-beheld the 
diaphaneity of the field open to inter-being.7 Performance of this may be understood as 
the contemplative reason of which positivistic ratiocination is a special and limited case. 
Or in still other words, we can see with Gebser that in a rationalized mentalist 
perspective, every line of reasoning links an effect to a cause. But the tacit causer of these 
linkages themselves is the thinking ego which refers all nets and organizations of even 
the most putatively objective meaning to its own mode of perspectivating the world --  a 
linear and spatializing mode which includes its own separative perspectivation of itself as 
a central, separate, prior or autonomous “conceiver” (and prospective manipulator) of 
things. In this, ironically, is an often hidden analogy between our way of thinking and our 
image of the external creator-God. But the structure of our dualizing ontoepistemology 
like that of our similarly essentializing and dualizing theology repeatedly eclipses and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  173    
excludes, so to speak,  a “prior unity” senior to all the dualities and dichotomies of 
ego/ratio-fragmented interbeing.8  
Nor do all cultures maintain an exclusively cause-effect paradigm as the sole 
source of valid meaningfulness. In ancient China, “what-goes-with-what?” seems to have 
been the question of value, more than was “what-causes-what?” This was in part a 
reflection of the Chinese experience that all events including humans were co-
constitutive, and that mature contemplative human beings pliantly corresponsive in 
transparent and relatively seamless mutual interpenetrations with one another and the 
ongoing worlding most ably abetted the sustainable, if not the always optimal, inter-
transformations of the ten thousand kinds of things. No one then would expect 
objectively to figure out all the relations among things always in process (without 
thinging hirself and them in the attempt to “statify” the processΨ, and so dynamic, 
polysemous techniques of comparative not-foremost-ego-premised resonance were 
developed. It was as if, by creative anachronistic analogy, the quantum theoretical 
forgoing today of an exact 1:1 correspondence between our thoughts and the event-
indeterminacies of the world were practiced in the earlier Chinese conduct of 
coordinating greater ranges of experience with physical reality by ontohermeneutically -- 
i. e., simultaneously embodying and interpreting -- carrying into our lives and conduct the 
performative value of the nondualizable quantum ongoing-wholing event(s).9 
Among these practices were various rituals (though these often seemed to me to 
mean more to the Confucians than to the Daoists) and consultations with the classic text 
Yijing. This was not solely to read the earliest germinating incipience of events of change 
so as to align with them for benefit for all, but actually through the repeated practice of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  174    
contemplative consultation to become resonantly entrained, as if in a feedback relation, 
with events as imaged by the Yi so as eventually to make additional consultation with the 
classic more-or-less dispensable. Learning to be a sage connoted learning the dao of 
spontaneous optimization or of sustainability in ontohermeneutic co-operation and 
coordination with and as the ecosocial events of cosmogenesis.10 More flexibly capacious 
than a dualistic command-and-control management model or a discursive epistemological 
one, this was a nondual concursive participation model of efficient, multivalent 
cocreative existence. In its/our cocreativity may be found, if we integrate our new found 
environmental awareness, a model or trope for a future of existential resonance beyond 
ego-rationed sustainability alone. 
The suggestion here is that while linear discursive rationalism provides a certain 
measure of mental clarity and control, it does so by the exclusion of resonance 
(particularly in its unambiguous utility-service to external rewards) and, not to mince 
words, by the exclusion of the joy or ecstasy of compresencing in unqualified 
attentiveness the intrinsically self-satisfying cocreativity of experience-as-such: untwoed 
humano/cosmogenesis.11 As I’ll mention below, resonance may also reduce randomicity 
in ecosocial systems.  
By this reading, where we are technocratically and econocratically attempting 
increasing control over events in narrowing, ego-rationally selected (profit) centers of 
focus, we are simultaneously suppressing our participatory options for sustainability in 
their self-organization and, perhaps, in doing so, actually maximizing the degrees of 
randomness, disquiet and dysfunction in the world. The artifacts of this outcome may be 
the headlines of the daily news. Or to put this with more specific intercultural relevance 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  175    
to the field discussed by Haisch and Laszlo, the presumably inherent microphysical 
randomness of the field is likely to remain unavailable as a medium for evoking or 
coordinating self-organizing order-through-resonance (dao, ziran) to the degree we are 
acceleratedly imposing programmatic order (luan, that is really chaos to Zhuangzi) in the 
(macro)world specified and parsed by ego, especially when ego-inertia is using reason as 
an instrumental minion of itself and no longer releasing it as practical contemplative 
theoria and as the knack of self-rewarding ecosocial and interpersonal attentiveness to 
value in cosmogenesis. 
 
And if we misdoubt any talk of contemplative theoria as a meaningful or skillful 
way of conducting ecohuman affairs, we might also remember that the universe has 
evidenced self-organizing potentials that far exceed any manipulation of our own 
zweckrational manufacture. A restatement of this is that the ecopoietic reach of 
spontaneously self-organizing cosmogenesis -- recursively self-aware and 
coevolutionarily optimized or satisficed in the ecoresonantly contemplative conduct of its 
sage-like embodiments -- far exceeds the grasp of the invisible hand. Furthermore, while 
an aggressively competitive utilitarian praxis has its tactical place, as surely as night the 
day will disruption, disorder and unhappiness follow its unbalanced and exaggerated 
appearances – the more so where it is bred not of life-enhancing values but of arrogant 
self-interest and denials of authenticity or empathy in the name of individual or corporate 
and national status, power or gain. Each assertion we make for ego-aggrandizement that 
is not also an attentively and spontaneously attuned response tacitly mindful of the weal 
of all contributory participants and factors is an unreflective exaggeration and ignorant 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  176    
exacerbation of the addictive ego of the person, the corporation or of the state against the 
welfare of its larger context. 
 Following Gebser here, the distempered or deracinated ego thus becomes one end 
of a more or less rigid axis on whose other end is the world whose appearance cannot in 
result be but one of separated parts separated from the ego whose own self-separation 
(from experience and from other egos) has thus effected and enforced the atomization 
and division of self and other and the ensuing imperative to manipulate and to dominate. 
The radial lines of reasoning, the lines of argument, are in this case also the dis-cursive 
form of the lines of ego-perspectivation. The (thus) reified and substantialized, 
essentialized, or entified termini of these lines are the atomized human and other natural 
persons or systems below, around and outside us whose distanciation makes it less likely 
we’ll be able to “import” their value in sustaining interpretive and behavioral truth. They 
appear as they do much because we are as we are in engaging them. Nor, to repeat, is this 
so remote an insight from those of The Dhammapada and the Sermon on the Mount that 
as we think so are we or from The Parable of the Yeast that we are (all potentially) in 
some measure the leaven in the loaf of life-transformation and celebration. 
And looking at the matter from an even wider angle, the imaginations that give 
rise to sciences, religions, philosophies arts or myths and literatures are themselves, 
inevitably, emergents, attunements, analogues and embodiments of the social, 
environmental and cosmological contexts in which we live. What we do and how we 
think, fragmented, holistic, poetic or rational, are fractals of the ongoing everywhere. 
And it is today taking an integral and nondual or contemplative kind of (co)consciousness 
to begin to see the ways by which we have not only disenchanted the natural world but 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  177    
deracinated it and reduced and uprooted ourselves from the living intersystem of 
autopoietic field connectivity with which we are embodied and imbricated. Called 
integrative, contemplative, attentive, or something else, a style of (un)thinking and of 
conducting ourselves anew in mutually according Earth-human relations is an apparently 
unavoidable phase in sustainable ecohumane maturation. “We will change” affirm 
Primack and  Abrams, “when we accept our cosmological truths, when we identify with 
and honor the forces of the early universe as our oldest ancestors.”12 
Called holistic, nondualistic, systemic, ecological or nothing else, the emerging 
functionally connective sensibility is the (re)appearance of the aptitude for inclusively 
compresencing self/other-self experience viable alike as mind, feeling and the 
spontaneously embodied conduct of cosmogenesis or, in its further contemplative 
reaches, experience-as-such. An apt ontohermeneutic of and for such experience and the 
relevant modes of conduct sustainingly resonant with its open-ended self-unfolding and 
self-exploration (in not primarily ham-fisted predatory and objectifyingly command 
premised exchanges) might also provisionally be given the name ars contextualis.  
Writing in such terms about Zhuangzi and about the Daodejing of Laozi, Roger T. 
Ames helpfully observes that instead of more, albeit alternative metaphysics, what we 
may really be in need of are ways “to think in terms other than those of metaphysics” 
altogether. And even if we are not able to pull the plug on metaphysical thinking along 
with the bath water of our (metaphysics-induced) ecosocial and environmental 
dysfunctions, we can, as Ames reflects, find “enjoyment in the ancient ‘art’ of tao [dao 
shu, pivot of the dao]. . . .It produces an ars contextualis. . .in the most basic processes of 
making a person, making a community, and making a world.” Ames goes on to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  178    
distinguish such art of mutual contextualization from antiseptic, distanciated inquiry into 
the fixed essences of things (ontologia generalis) on one hand and from ratiocinative 
descriptions of the fixed principles of all-encompassing science (scientia universalis) on 
another.13 
By underscoring the art and (auto)poiesis of contextualization, the embodied, 
integral, imaginal, feelings-toned and archetypal spontaneity of authentically attentive 
being-with-another-here-and-now, Ames’ interpretation endows it with the self-
rewarding aptitudes of actual mutual en-joyment and delight that come only with a 
relative vacation from the ego of one-way voice, intentionality and action. In an 
ontohermeneutic environment fusing “ontoepistemology” and “ontocosmology” are 
contextualizing arts resonantly related with the (co)world(ing) of other being(s) – not 
least our children and the nonhuman persons around us. And this seems to be a 
concomitant and a cause of the equanimity, focusing of the field, joy or ecstasy of even 
rudimentary contemplative self-emptying and kenosis, the zuo wang (or “sitting 
[self]forgetting”Ψ recommended as a practice by Zhuangzi and by certain NeoConfucians. 
This may be taken as an advanced functional form of the absential efficacy highlighted 
by Deacon’s invocation of Laozi’s virtue of emptiness throughout his book on emergent 
dynamics.14  
Ames seems to join the relevance of classical Chinese thinking with my present 
attempt at a nonimpositional and simultaneously-imparting-receiving integrative 
orientation when he states that traditional Chinese understanding “presupposes the 
activity of contextualization in which any particular in its environment is assessed by 
recourse to its construal of the environment and, alternatively, the contribution made by 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  179    
the environment to the constitution of that specific particular.” Homing in more closely 
on the issues here, Hall and Ames cite Herbert Fingarette’s understanding that Confucian 
thinking in turn is always comparing likenesses and not differences and is thus less based 
on abstract theoretical universalizing than on being able to “grasp analogy with the other 
person,” “extending oneself to other things” and “weighing others with oneself.” And 
further, note the two, the Confucian emphasis is not on taking oneself or one’s personal 
perspective (ego, metaphysics, etc.) as the fixed point of reference in any situation but on 
the “bi-directionality” of reciprocal shu in which self is clarified in relation with others as 
these are simultaneously clarified in relation with self. This permits not only the 
spontaneous emergence of sustainable harmonious, optimum or unprecedented conduct 
but also, “a source of enjoyment because enjoyment involves attuning the dispositions 
represented by the constituent particulars.” How different should we think this experience 
of mutual and reciprocal completion/constitution or sustainable ententional co-growthing 
is from what Deacon describes as the key element in emergent teleodynamics for 
“phenomena that are intrinsically incomplete in the sense of being in relationship to, 
constituted by, or organized to achieve something. . . . includ[ing] function, information, 
meaning, reference, representation, agency, purpose, sentience, and value?15 
 
Inviting the way of analogizing or self-likening is more than granting 
ontometaphorical status to a literary trope. It is evoking the self-rewarding experience of 
resonant (never totalized) enwholing, or eco-self-other (re)connecting in both quantum 
and ecohumanistic forms whose simultaneous ontohermeneutic inclusivity and 
irreducibility actually perform and do not only conceptually re-present sensitive indual 
responses to ecosocial and ecological change.  Interculturally imagined as the lived 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  180    
performance of the arts of beneficial mutual self/other contextualization in and as the 
collective field, or as the wave function of compresent environmental, social, organismic 
and cosmogenic self-organization dynamics, the way or dao of analogizing, shu, offers a 
mode of the self-rewardingly ecstatic illumination associated with traditional nirvana, 
unio mystica, and the self-forgetting/emptying whose functional cosmology sustainingly 
slakes our “wild hunger” for environmental exploitation and consumption.16  
 
A question at this point is the extent to which the lived analogy or reciprocity, 
shu, between outward physical events and inward psychological states is the event-
context of a more-than-sustainable long term ecohumane resonance. One preface to this 
is in the quantum theoretical characterization of  events as having both a psychological 
and a material aspect. As Stapp reintroduces us to the quantum of value in words that 
deserve repetition and dynamic stabilization in our templates of worlding: 
One’s weighting of the welfare of the whole, and one’s sensitivity to the 
feelings of others will surely be enhanced when the individual sees his or 
her own judgments and efforts as causally effective – hence important – 
inputs into a cooperative effort to develop the vast yet-to-be-fixed 
potentialities of a quantum universe that, as Bohr emphasized, can be 
properly conceived only as an intricately interconnected whole. . . . 
Quantum physics, joined to a natural embedding ontology, brings our 
human minds squarely into the dynamical workings of nature.17 
 
And we may now infer, vice versa, the dynamical workings of interconnected and 
cosmic nature are active in and as our minds. 
Endnotes: Caveats and Analogues 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  181    
1.)  Berman 2000; the way Primack and Abrams conceive things, for cosmology to be 
meaningful, and for us to find a meaningful place in the cosmos thereby, it needs to make 
use of the resources of symbolism, analogy and metaphor as well as of math and science. 
They state, for instance: 51, “Great imagery is an essential  ingredient of cosmology. 
Cosmology is always based on symbolism – there has never been and can never be any 
way of describing the whole universe in straightforward language.” 
2.) Morin 2008: 28; pace Berman 2000: 240; Zhuangzi in Watson, trans. Chuang Tzu: 
136-37 
3.) bits and pieces, Burneko 1997: 83; see Kafatos and Nadeau; Abraham and Roy: 177-
180 
4.) surplus of meaning, Ricoeur; history of ecocide, Elvin 
5.) Neville: 4, 5; carryover of value ibid.: 12, and passim; every one of us, Primack and 
Abrams: 269; cf. Paul 
6.) Ricoeur: 68; Primack and Abrams: 58; cf. Unger and Smolin, Nesteruk, Chryssavgis 
and Foltz, Foltz   
7.) see Burneko 2010 
8.) prior unity, Adi Da: 35; see Guenther 
9.) see Kafatos and Nadeau; Yijing, see below, would be an example if understood not as 
a statification of anthropocosmic process but as its instantiation, participation and 
performance, i. e. it is “The Classic of Changes,” see Lynn 
10.) the dao of spontaneous optimization, Burneko 1992: 96; even to read mention of 
Yijing as a potential mode of ecohumane functionality takes many out of their comfort 
zone, a relevant response is made by Primack and Abrams: 33 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  182    
11.Ψ untwoed cosmogenesis, Burneko 2ί1ί; this isn’t to take away from the delight of 
individual conceptual discovery or insight, whether of a careerist or of a spontaneous 
unpremeditated sort, but to place it in the context of anthropocosmic self-delight and of 
Earth-human celebration of the kind Thomas Berry connects with functional cosmology 
12.) see Berman 1981; see also Burneko 2010, 2011;  Primack and Abrams: 299; and see 
Swimme and Tucker on the stars as our ancestors – it’s a family affair; In the background 
of this and the preceding paragraphs I acknowledge Neville: 240, 255 that a function of 
(ententionality inΨ interpretation is to “alienate the interpreter from the immediacy of 
imagination so as to deal critically with a world.” Yet, he says, this distanciation “might 
be contained within the orbit of interpretation.” And in his saying this and also that “the 
capacity to [interpret or] represent is a part of nature,” I find the note corresponding to 
my own emphasis. I think that in this cosmic era as Primack and Abrams will say, 
cosmos interprets itself through, but not exclusively or entirely as, ourselves. We are a 
mode of the self-awareness of cosmogenesis only one phase or portion of whose 
aptitudes is the critical capacity, the objective/subjective perspectivation of ongoing-
wholing, that (nevertheless) does not finally repose squarely in separate categories of 
humanity or nature, of consciousness or of matter. My intimation is that the 
contemplative, nondual, celebratory, analogical and acritical ontohermeneutic is more 
generally and broadly sustaining of life-value than is one limited to alienation and 
distanciation. But as Neville helps to clarify, we need and use interpretation, a naturally 
evolving event or process, to evoke, educe, clarify and appreciate meaningful and 
sustaining relations with worlding’s minute particulars and specificities that are also 
ourselves according to the nature or intensity of our contemplative attentiveness. In 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  183    
Neville’s: 252 metaphysics of common sense, “Network meaning includes both. . . 
general elements referrable to all harmonies, and less general, finally concrete, elements 
that are referrable only to historical harmonies. . . .The character [knack or dao as well as 
degree of ontohermeneutic reciprocity, shu] of [e]ntentionality. . .depends on the mix of 
these two arrangements of generality.”  
I feel obliged to reply here briefly, to Bruno Latour’s discussion of “political 
ecology” and “compositionism” saying, in the spirit of his subtitle “Why We must Care 
for Our Technologies as We do Our Children” that  Yes – a planned parental 
contraception of calculatedly acquisitive ego-intensive values and initiatives is an 
ecohumane  benefit as is judicious family and population growth. To “limit ourselves, 
and return to our narrow confines, leaving the nonhumans alone in as pristine a Nature as 
possible” is not  my kind of  response to the current dissonance either. But resonance 
with nature and cosmogenesis is. If the “emancipation” he speaks of is the issue, I think it 
goes well beyond “continuing to care for unwanted consequences” towards an alleviation 
of the mentality that insists on acting only to its own anthropocentric advantage from the  
basis of an egoism that is no more the best metric of anthropocosmic well-being than is 
mental/rational consciousness (especially in the deficient modes described by Gebser) the 
best or sole venue of mature human development or of sustaining eco-human resonance 
(accessed 2.1.16) 
13.) other than those of metaphysics altogether in Callicott and Ames 1989: 114; ars 
contextualis idem. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  184    
14.) autopoiesis, Varela et al.: 43-52 and passim; ontoepistemology and ontocosmology 
see Cheng in Tucker and Berthrong 1993: 211 passim; focusing of the field, Ames and 
Hall 2001: 7, and see R. Taylor; Deacon: 18, 160, 540 
15.) presupposes the activity in Callicott and Ames 1989: 114; extending oneself in Hall 
and Ames 1987: 287-88;  a source of enjoyment, Hall and Ames 1987: 289; Deacon: 549; 
cf. also notions of mutual or (co)dependent origination/causation as pratityasamutpada 
and the related theme of sunya(ta), emptiness (of self-subsistence). See also, by way of 
somewhat far-reaching cosmological analogy, the interrelation of dark energy and dark 
matter with ordinary energy and matter in Primack and Abrams; and contemplate the 
interculturally metaphysical conceit that emerges when their “Double Dark Theory” is 
punned and packaged with Daoist xuan de “where in fact the Sage Ruler is depicted as 
operating the xuan de. . . the capacity coming from That-which-is-Dark” Wagner: 488 -- 
the sage is identical with That-which-is-Dark ibid.: 309 – the Teaching or “Study of the 
Dark,” the DarkLore of the “capacity coming from” “necessary unrecognizability” is 
known as xuanxue, ibid.: 42 
16.) in sitting-self-forgetting or meditative zuo wang the mature contemplative, the sage, 
“reduces excess by way of supplementing deficiency, this is not the way of 
[conventionally habituated and nonattentive] men,” “Only someone without an 
[individual] person who has eliminated his private [interests] from [his] That-which-is-of-
itself-what-it-is [ziran] will then indeed be able to ‘be [with his] capacity in accord with 
[that of] Heaven and  Earth’” Wang Bi in Wagner: 3ιι;  compare the theme of "wild 
hunger" as developed in Wilshire 1998 
17.) Stapp: 116-17; see Primack and Abrams 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  185    
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  186    
 
 
5.1 How the Light Gets In 
A graphic form of expressing the analogical way of living and of thinking is to 
make a life-worthy analogy between the arts of Zimzum and kenosis and the sitting-
emptying of the mind of thoughts so that it can be filled with “overflowing qi,” or 
“circulating qi” and then to make a further analogy between these notions and that of the 
temporary elimination of discursive thought understood as an expression of inertia or of 
contraction and opacity in the quantum or Ȍ field. Of course, these are analogies and 
ideas, and not necessarily what traditions have known as enlightenment “itself.” For that 
matter, as ideas they are themselves obstructions as much as potential illuminations, at 
least until embodied and “diaphanized” in spontaneous uncalculating life acts and events. 
They do, though, have their ontohermeneutic pedigree in lectio divina, dillug, 
kefitsah and the NeoConfucian views of Wang Yangming that in attentively reading 
meaningful books and comparing ideas among them, ge yi, and in thinking thereon and 
therewith in sincerity, our minds interpenetrate with those of the sages (datong) and with 
the process or principle of the universe (li) just as, in the same act, the wisdom of texts, 
events, cultures and ages interpenetrates.1 Our transdisciplinary or nonreductively 
(un)disciplined (wuzhi)  experience hereby becomes integrally identified with the 
sustaining ongoing-wholing of universe meaning and value as the event of 
axiocosmogenesis.  
Yet such ontohermeneutic analogies may prime the pump of our imagination, as 
Obeyesekere avers, in reinventing human society oriented towards a mature awakening 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  187    
rather than towards comparatively immature ego interests. In emptying ourselves of our 
habituations to some degree, and in opening ourselves to others and to (or as) the self-
sustaining flow of cocreativity in the universe, however culturally expressed, we expand 
the scope of relationship and thereby the potentials of sustainable coexistence in forming 
one body with Heaven and Earth. 
Yet again, what do I know about enlightenment? – better called awakening 
(Sanskrit bodhiΨ according to Guenther’s translation and with his accompanying 
clarification that it connotes “an awareness of the fact that one is done with whatever had 
an obscuring and impeding influence.”2  By naming it the way I do, I make an objective 
“what” of it, identify it as a finished state, and imply it obliges not only discipline and 
effort but also various kinds of recusance. It savors in result of the “spiritual materialism” 
critiqued by Chögyam Trungpa. And a critical reader will ask whether the natural ziran 
of sagely compresencing of the things of the world either in mutual benefit or 
interexistential analogy really unfolds a moment of ecstatic awareness, something like 
awakening “original mind,” or just inclines us to a slacker “Whatever.” And Is not the 
analogy between qi and the zero-point field too facile; or is it a timely, albeit limited, 
intercultural insight into the continuum of creation? Does not such analogizing merely 
confuse issues while alternatively reifying, substantializing and ambiguating such 
thematics as ego or spontaneity? Or again, Does existential analogy (also) amplify and 
synchroni(sti)cally presentiate diverse and unanticipated symphony among orders of 
meaningfulness? Does the way of analogization conflate the digital and the analogue 
conduct of our awareness? Are there clear or absolute answers to such questions? Who is 
asking the question? 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  188    
 
I do not know for certain. I do know that (as) in ancient Chinese, to know is an 
active and transitive verb; zhi, for instance, connotes, according to Wang Yangming, not 
only knowing-that and knowing-how but also knowing as a “transformative act” which is 
part of the “quest for the lost heart” and  an “expanding [of] primordial awareness,” zhi 
liangzhi, that is “without fail enlightening”; “we learn to ‘expand’ our awareness by 
extending its orbit of concern to an ever-enlarging circle of relationships.” Instructs 
Einstein once more, our task is to widen our circles of compassion to embrace all living 
creatures, and the whole of nature.3  
And yet again, ours is not a traffic with absolutes, terminal, certifiable yes or no, 
apodictically separable this and that, nor commerce with absolute reference or totalizable 
referents. In philosophical hermeneutics, quantum uncertainty relations and in complex 
systems, co-productivity, indeterminacy, unpredictability and the logics of yes-and-no, of 
more-or-less prevail. Morin in Homeland Earth reminds us on the one hand that  
We have been obliged to forsake an orderly, perfect, and eternal universe 
in favor of [one] in which order, disorder, and organization enter into 
dialogue in a manner at once complementary, concurrent, and 
antagonistic.  
He also says,  
[W]e belong completely to biological, physical, and cosmic nature [and] 
we belong completely to culture. . .to the universe of speech, myth, ideas, 
reason, and consciousness.4  
Where do we draw the lines; where would we stand to do any “terminally” 
veracious line-drawing between systems, epistemes or ways of knowing? “The principle 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  189    
of identity applied to humans and cosmos is at best that of unitas multiplex – multifaceted 
integrality or coherence.  And the strategies and modes of reason, or meaning-making 
and meaning-imparting, are therefore plural and circumstantial, complementary, 
analogical, concurrent, and, says Morin, even sometimes antagonistic according to time 
and situation. Things and ideas are mixed, polythetic, polyvalent and complex; and in the 
later to be explored question of synchronicity, physical and mental or psychic aspects of 
events acausally co-eventuate (as) meaningfulness.5  
For a small instance, a proposition to follow in a later page (that the 
contemplative sage performs and evokes cogrowthful optimization among things in a 
way that seems congruent with an algorithm of evolutionary systems theory) is not based 
in absolutes. The mathematics Stuart Kauffman will describe there is statistical in its 
actual instantiations. Moreover, for another small instance, my own intercultural mix-
and-match comparison and analogization of practices and ideas (Chinese ge yi, “concept-
matching”Ψ evidences as much a drive-by Trickster guerilla hermeneutic as it does the 
multiple reasoning of the hermeneutic fusion of horizons, Bachelard’s epistemic 
spectrum, Gebser’s structures of consciousness,  Socratic dialogue and elenchos, Rorty’s 
transdisciplinary “edification,” “evocation” in Wu, “personal knowledge” for Polanyi, 
phronesis, a demonstration of the “metis” of “knowing words,” and semiosis, 
ecosemiosis, and “hermetic drift.” Think again also of synchronicity and the more-or-less 
freely associative Kabbalistic tactics of dillug and kefitsah and also of the choice the 
scientist and the hermeneut make in enframing, in “probing” a situation and thereby 
participating in collapsing, evoking, constellating and dynamically stabilizing a quantum 
of value-potential. Like Whitman, we are large; our ontohermeneutic systems ecology of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  190    
mind (as natureΨ contains and is embedded among multitudes of “self-eco-re-organizing” 
tropes, knacks and tactics. Sustainability is interpretive and (eco)poietic diversity; 
attentively participated diversity is emergently dynamic resonance, and sustainable 
reciprocity, shu, xiangtong, unitas multiplex.6  
An ontomethodological consultation with Yijing at this point offers: Jian 
(hexagram #53), Gradual Progress: advance with rectitude, compliant with the way of 
nature; proceed by infiltrating, step-by-step, don’t try to dominate. This rectitude, or eco-
courtesy even, may be seen as a model for nonimposingly comprehensive, contemplative 
and cocreative participation in life and Earth systems whereby the ten thousand kinds of 
things become nourished. Writes Cheng in his article “On the Environmental Ethics of 
the Tao and the Ch’i,” 
[M]an is part of the environment; the environment is part of man; and they 
both are a part of the same whole. . . .the universal process of 
transformation. . . .Within this totality of transformation, man and his 
environment are interdependent, interacting as well as interpenetrating 
elements. Hence man cannot treat his environment as a mere object for 
knowing, controlling, and exploitation. . . .Man is part of this unity, 
harmony, and balance, and should contribute to their continuous 
sustenance and growth. This is the supreme categorical imperative for 
man’s behavior toward the environment.7  
We are inescapably (in) the mix, never without it; we may conceivably concourse 
the intersecting resources of mind and nature, those biophysical, those rational and those 
arational, in sustainably coordinating experience and meaning. An enliveningly 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  191    
polyphonous celebratory canto com-poses, even when it does not outsound, monothetic, 
explanatory, and (therefore often) agonistic discourses. Faure is so sensitive to the 
mixture of crosscurrents contextualizing any cultural declaration or analogy – for 
example, traditional professions of spontaneity in Daoist lifeways – that he prologues his 
book The Rhetoric of Immediacy with Paul  Valéry’s aphorism that “the bottom of our 
mind is paved with crossroads.”  And again, Was not Hermes the patron of 
interexistential crossroads (tri-via) as well as of lucky finds, windfalls, things thrown, 
falling or coming together, e. g., symbols (sym-ballein), and analogies, thieves and 
exchanges, barters, swaps, associations, appraisals and hermeneutic interpretations of all 
kinds -- the gate, stropheus, paradoxically swinging yes to all the nos arrayed against one 
other? And Is Hermes today an archetype of the anthropocosmic ecotone?8  
And even seemingly straightforward intimations throughout its cultural history 
that “clarity” and “illumination” are the property and provenance of living in concursive 
resonance with qi are themselves simultaneously undercut and complemented in 
traditional China by young Wang Bi’s (226-249 C. E.) paradoxical interpretation that 
Daodejing must be read primarily as an exercise in xuanxue (“scholarly investigation of 
that which is dark.”Ψ Wang’s translator adds a note emphasizing not just the spiritual 
luminosity of a contemplative sage-king seated, per tradition, en-lightened upon a 
southward facing throne, but also, as earlier noted, the “Sage-Ruler. . . operating the xuan 
de, the capacity coming from That-which-is-Dark.” The bottom of (ourΨ mind is paved 
with yinyang.9 
And here a crepuscular reverie takes form. More paradoxically, the dark -- as a 
trope of emptiness and of what Deacon has spoken of as the absential condition for 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  192    
creative emergence into the light of day – is also a trope of luminosity. Both themes are 
reconciled where Haisch narratizes in his online essay “Brilliant Disguise” that “the zero-
point field is such a blinding light. Since it is everywhere, inside and outside of us. . .we 
are effectively blind to it.” This blinding vacuum-field luminosity connoting both a 
plenum of radiant being and void opacity, is in turn reminiscent of mystical reports of the 
blinding light from the Christian Transfiguration and the Dark Night of the Soul. In 
complement, we have the additional imagery of Tibetan Buddhism’s sangs-rgyas, or 
buddha-event -- the “process of lighting up,” of “being’s sheer lucency unfolded” in “the 
manner of a dissipative structure.”10  
The blinding or eclipsed, dark, incomplete non-self-subsistent or, as he speaks of 
it, “absential” motif in Deacon’s work constellates for him, in addition, causal and 
ententional qualities as expressions of the incompleteness that is nevertheless world-
constitutive in the sense that “causal power is not located in any ultimate stuff but in. . . 
dynamical organization itself” of elements and entities of universe experience that are not 
complete of themselves, not self-subsistent (sunya, pratityasamutpada), but are ever self-
organizingly realizing their emergent properties in modes of (ever still) incomplete 
interbeing, interminate ongoing-wholing, i. e. the dynamic coconstitution and cocreation 
that is evoked and sustained by (the xuan de ofΨ their mutual “efficacy of absence.”11  
Reverie on this dark saying brings us back to Wang Bi’s interpretation of xuanxue 
telling us, “He who acts by the way of the negative opposite [i. e., the Sage] is the one 
who moves [in accordance with] the Way” or Dao “and that “In order to keep Entity 
complete, it has to be related back to negativity [as is done by the Sage].” This is said in 
commentary at the midpoint of the Daodejing. And its unpositivistic, nonutilitarian wu 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  193    
wei tenor evokes again a variant of Deacon’s dark refrain that the work of life, mind, 
meaning and value creation in cosmogenesis “is itself dependent on the relationships 
between processes that do not require work. . . .So, somewhat paradoxically, interactions 
between systems’ different spontaneous tendencies are responsible for all non-
spontaneous changes” or what we often call work. The dark, blind(ingΨ, negative, 
vacuous, absent, effortless, or wu wei and the empty hole of the socket or vacant hub of a 
wheel, like the sage-pivot of the Dao, enchant together a sustaining harmony of insights 
ontohermeneutically conducive to what Stuart Kauffman writes of as emergent “order for 
free” in our cocreatively sustainable ecoethical “coming home to the universe” in a 
manner of nonmanifest destination.12 
Deacon closes his impressive “constitutive analogical approach” to such emergent 
dynamics understood as the fruit of absential efficacy by also saying, “It is time to find 
our way home” to cosmogenesis. As his dark beacon he references Laozi’s: “Thirty 
spokes converge at the wheel’s hub to a hole that allows it to turn. . . .Though we can 
only work with what is there, use comes from what is not there.” The ontohermeneutic 
docta ignorantia hid in the dark cloud of unknowing that is Deacon’s incompleteness 
theorem has yet another ontopoietic analogue in a zaddik reverie promised at the end of 
this chapter.13 
In a universe of cosmogenic uncertainty and co-production relations absent 
absolute or totalizable reference, self-subsistent essences, fixed natures, structures or 
monothetic identities, a universe in which each is the centering of interconnected all, 
integrative analogy and the plurivocal arts of nondualizing contextualization offer the 
complex sustainable meaningfulness, (the carryover of value) of the ecology of mind 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  194    
and/as nature. (Even, or especially) If there is no perfect optimization algorithm, no 
perfect spontaneity, fixed, unchanging, certifiable this or immutable and pure an sich 
that, the Dao Shu -- the existential pivot(ing) of and as the Dao -- makes the (what Kosko 
denominates as the occasionally “fuzzy”Ψ  point. The life of sustainable cultural meaning 
and, correspondingly, of practices that refresh, regrow, and reinvent the world of 
interhuman and ecohumane being – the co-growth of Heaven, Earth and Humanity in 
familiar Chinese terms – is performed in our ongoing and attentively intimate 
ontohermeneutic currency with and as the many recirculating variants and dimensions of 
coworlding.14  
This polythetic cocreativity is, as Blake foreknew, by a restriction of 
contemplative and imaginal aptitudes experienced as an only-external, reduced 
disenchanted, pregiven world of categoricals untouched by human hands. Otherwise, ours 
is the common currency of all forms of life in the self-organizing auto-contextualization 
characterized in one kind of languaging as Stropheus. This, Kerényi describes afresh, is 
the epithet given Hermes as “the ‘socket’ in which the pivot of the door moves. . .closely 
related to door hinges and therefore to the entrance.” Likewise, from Daodejing we learn, 
“’The doors of Heaven’ refers to that from which All Under Heaven comes forth. The 
‘opening and closing’ are the phases of order and chaos”; “emulate returning” is the 
refrain of Laozi. The coevolutionary reciprocity of interhuman shu is the embodiment of 
the dao shu, the pivot of exchange and interbeing in ecosocial concepts and conduct.15  
For Kerényi, Hermes Stropheus, Hermes-as-Pivot is every person who gatelike  in 
language and conduct blazes and opens recycling pathways leading from within afar and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  195    
into the distance – and back again. And most notably, Hermes is the turning gate and, I 
think, an anthropocosmic presentiation of the liminal-shamanic, 
middle realm between [absolutes like] being and non-being. . . 
ambassadorial. . .The primordial mediator and messenger moves between 
the absolute ‘no’ and the absolute ‘yes,’ or, more correctly, between two 
‘nos’ that are lined up against each other. . . .From out of a trackless world 
– unrestricted, flowing. . .— he conjures up the new creation.16  
As harbinger of the intercontextual arts of ontohermeneutics, archetypal Hermes 
is also presage of conjoined languaging/worlding and self/other co-selfing (the walking 
both paths of liang xing). And if we recall the linguist Benjamin Lee Whorf, we find that 
the point of language is not foremost an externalized or absolute anything: “Reference is 
the lesser part of meaning, patternment the greater” -- perhaps no matter what the topic. 
The very category of “referent” is internal  (or only indefinitely or doctrinally external) to 
the ongoing process of mutual implication in linguistics, culture and ecology. And while 
we may express a rationalist scholiast regret that the pattern différance implied here (or in 
G. Bateson or with Derrida) affords only a continual and unendingly differential 
interaction and elision among signs (or meanings or events), we find an enrichingly 
compensatory weak-ontological insight expressed in the “differential theology” of Robert 
Magliola’s intertextualization (datong) of deconstruction and the Madhyamika Buddhism 
of Nagarjuna where he invokes Heidegger to clarify that, 
Validity, and the truth that consecrates validity, is at bottom founded not 
on subcultures or ‘critical schools’ but on Being; truth is only mediated 
through subcultures and critical schools. For Heidegger, different critical 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  196    
schools can reflect different facets of Being. . . . Heidegger is not 
advocating an ‘anything goes’ criticism. But he is saying that if we wish 
we can simultaneously affirm some contradictory [or just quite disparately 
tuned] schools and interpretations. . . . Reality can mean several things at 
the same time, and still be radically One [or not-two].17  
 
And it is only to take the routine and familiar bait to begin again at this point with 
questions about what we mean by Reality (in the singular, no less) and whether it is not 
digital, analogue, two, one, some, or none of the above. And why are these questions put 
as either/or anyway, kemo sabe?  And again, Who is asking? 
The labyrinthine, polysemous and plurespistemic multivocality of images, 
archetypes, language, symbols, analogies, dialectics and paradoxes serves in sustainingly 
liberating the open endedness of experience from our inertial contracting and legalist-
reductionist-contractual ego-fetish for univocal and monocultural correctness, 
instrumental control and command while also diversely enriching our ways of co-
enjoying Being I and Tao. This is in large part because it performs and reproduces the 
reciprocity, value-carryover and the mutually evocative character, of emergently dynamic 
coevolving eco(social)systems.18 
By way of another jump-cut intercultural analogy, the general idea of fruitfully 
hybrid irreducibility in language and ontoepistemology as an evocation of fractal and 
holonomic Being-field-potential can be illustratively further “amplified” with comments 
from her interpretation of the medieval text La Mort Le Roi Artu by Denyse Delcourt 
subtitled “Couverture, Detours, et Labyrinthe.” States Delcourt of the medieval 
propensity to convoke in a single labyrinthine or paradoxical form two opposed ideas, the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  197    
dialectical interpretive operation depended on the readers’ and listeners’ participation to 
capture the truth hidden in the labyrinth of meanings. And referring to Penelope Doob’s 
The Idea of the Labyrinth, Delcourt tells us further that in such narrative or discourse 
with its consequent “surplus of meaning,” “De même, intimement liêe à l’image du 
labyrinthe se trouve l’idée de la concordia discors ou réconciliation harmonieuse des 
contraires.” How unlike this in ontohermeneutic effect and influence is the unitas 
multiplex of Morin’s On Complexity or are the gnomically multivalent words of Laozi?: 
 
 
He [the Sage] who acts by way of the negative opposite is the one 
who moves [in accordance with] the Way. . . .[T]o be esteemed takes 
[acting as if] being despised as [its] root. . . . The entities of All Under 
Heaven have [their] life in [the realm of] Entity, but Entity has [its] life in 
negativity. . . . In order to keep Entity complete, it has to be related back to 
negativity [as is done by the Sage].  
In the no less gnomic riposte made by the Deacon of biological anthropology and 
neuroscience,  
On the one hand, I have somehow lost the solidity that I once took for 
granted, me-the-physical-body is no longer so certain; and yet on the other 
hand my uncertainty about my place in the world, the place of meaning 
and value in the scheme of things, seems more assured with the realization 
that I may be more like the hole at the wheel’s hub than the rim of the 
wheel itself.19  
 
Inscrutably heady this. Thus also, I suspect, the Earthy play of Eros and Irony. At 
one and the same time we seek all-compassing inclusivity and comprehensivity of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  198    
comprehension, (not to mention the ego-linked sense of totalization), and yet with Gödel 
and Nicholas of Cusa alike we also sense the interminate relativization and non-
closability of anything we might come up with, notably including ourselves. Wanting to 
get to the bottom of the world(ing) and figure it all out cannot exclude its glittering and 
winsome beauties of processual incompleteness, its self-reflecting recursivity, its ever 
uncaptive wonder, and the transdisciplinary realization that, as Hall says in his Eros and 
Irony: A Prelude to Philosophical Anarchism,  “The regressive impulse by theoretical 
forms of reduction is counterproductive from a communicational” [and, I will add, an 
ecosocial or field] “perspective.” And he goes on later to say,  
Thus knowledge of any kind has as its ultimate justification a context 
which can only be called mystical in the sense it involves a noetic 
experience of the Totality ultimately inexpressible in propositional form.  
The punchline relevant to my essay is inescapable: 
Chaos, the Implicate Order, the hologrammatic pluriverse. . .is a context 
within which many orders obtain. The unity of these orders is. . .not 
propositionally expressible but is nonetheless experienceable at the level 
of mystical intuition. . . .responsible knowing is mystical [and] one of the 
responsibilities of the mystic is to advertise the relevance of that vision 
which grounds his thinking. . . .through the [sustaining] return of eros to 
the world of praxis.20  
 
Blake’s  responsibility is, “I must Create a System or be enslav’d by another 
Man’s. ή I will not Reason & Compare: my business is to Create.” Leonard Cohen’s 
promised Kabbalistic “Anthem” replies, “Ring the bells that still can ring. ή Forget your 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  199    
perfect offering. / There is a crack in everything. ή That’s how the light gets in,” from his 
CD The Future. The sustainable ecosemeity of the world is the enchanting interplay of 
scientists, sages, poets and mystics withήin “the dream of the Earth” in “the work of 
daring contemplation.”21  
Endnotes: How the Light Gets In 
1.) Wang 1963: 208; cf.  entering and sharing “the mind of the fathers” in Eastern 
Orthodox tradition 
2.) Guenther 1989: 120 
3.) for Wang see Tu in Tu and Tucker 2004: 156; Einstein see 
http://compassion.is/quotes/albert-einstein  (accessed 7.26.12) 
4.) more-or-less Kosko; Morin 1999: 44, 40; Gadamer writes somewhere of the 
“equifundamentality of the one and the indeterminate two” 
5.) unitas multiplex, Morin 1999: 41 and Morin 2008: 4; on acausality see von Franz 
19κί. When we ask “Who is asking the question?” we might reply nondualistically, but 
maybe also a little glibly, “It is the universe who asks, universing embodied as our 
anthropocosmic selves.” But when we say self or self-as-a-dimensionality-of-
cosmogenesis, we have no fixed, defined or self-subsistent universe, or totalizable subject 
or object to point to or from. This is partly because no signal is fast enough to connect 
across universing all-at-once in conventional spacetime terms, say Primack and Abrams. 
And also, quantum indeterminacies of events and of inseparable observer/observed 
relations make total reference or closure unreachable, fuzzy at best according to Bart 
Kosko, undecidable according to Gödel. A self-realizing (anthropo)cosmogenesis is 
never a completely “stabilized” event. The center of universing, physically per Swimme, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  200    
Primack and Abrams, and ontohermeneutically as well, per Cheng, is anywhere “in” an 
interminably expanding “spacetime” (that is alsoΨ meaning and cobecoming. All 
wholings are apparently fractals and holons of (one another?) -- an ongoing (wholing) 
reducible to no one whole nor attributable to any external wholer. Creatio Continua is a 
performance of the incompleteness proposed by Deacon as well as by Gödel. Yet in 
Wilden’s pithy terms (4κιΨ “I know little – yet – of the possible solutions – but the first 
step is to discover the real nature of the questions. And only when man-and-womankind 
can truly say: ‘we and the [E]arth, our mother, are of one mind,’ will these questions have 
been answered in the most real and material sense. Then and only then will the 
[eco]human revolution have finally taken place. . . .”; see www.whidbeygeodome.org 
(accessed 11.5.12) 
6.) S. Kauffman 1995, cf. Samuelson and Troein at http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-
mat/0505481 for related discussion (accessed 7.26.12); trickster guerilla hermeneutic, 
Burneko 1981a and see Keller, Kerényi; fusion of horizons, Gadamer; evocation, Wu 
1990; Polanyi 1964;  phronesis, Hoy: 55, 60; knowing words, Raphals 1992; hermetic 
drift in Corrington, 1994: 71; dillug, kefitsah, Scholem 1961: 135-36; value-potential, 
Stapp: 24, 33; mind as nature, Bateson 1979; self-eco-re-organizing, Morin 2008: xxxv; 
my brother Paul calls mine Tourette’s hermeneutic; see a problematization of ge yi at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geyi/ and a more familiar synopsis at 
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/313958/geyi/  (accessed 7.15.14); compare 
also Chinese ge wu or "the investigation of things" in Zhu Xi (Chu Hsi) 
ι.Ψ things become nourished, Cheng 1995; “Environmental Ethics,” Cheng 19κ6: 36ι; cf. 
precautionary wu wei 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  201    
8.) Faure 1991: 3; Hermes see Kerényi; the etymology of ex-plain is flatten out 
9.) xuanxue in Wagner 2003: 1; xuan de ibid.: 488; see note 15 in the preceding section 
10.) Deacon: 45; Transfiguration Mark 9: 2-8; Dark Night see St. John of the Cross La 
noche oscura del alma;  buddha-event, Guenther 1989: 14, 93, 101, 134, this may be 
considered a trope of dissipating or dispelling the ignorance/darkness of sunya -- which 
Guenther considers misleadingly rendered as “void” or “empty”-of-self-subsistence 
11.) Deacon: 22-31, 45 
12.) Wang Bi see Wagner: 257; Deacon: 337 original emphasis; socket see Kerényi;  hub 
see Wu 1990; S. Kauffman 1995 chap. 4 
13.) Deacon: 419, 45, 545, 18 
14.) absent absolute reference see Kafatos and Nadeau, O’Murchu; each is the center see 
Swimme 1996, Primack and Abrams; carryover of value see Neville; algorithm see S. 
Kauffman; spontaneity see Faure; see Deacon: 542 -- he speaks of formal and of final or 
ententional causes in coevolution and cosmogenesis, but there is no way of knowing what 
is going to happen when fingers meet keyboards or the constraints of alphabets begin to 
release words and meanings 
15.) Kerényi: 77; Laozi in Wagner: 149 
16.) Kerényi: 77; cf. Heidegger on Holzwege (aka Dao) 
17.) Whorf: 261; Magliola: 82-κ3; cf. Morin’s unitas multiplex; cf. Deacon’s emphasis (e. 
g., chap. 9) that telos (arguably a mode of referent) is dynamically emergent, not 
pregiven, and is ongoing or interminate and co-constitutive with diverse and even 
fundamentally different kinds of spontaneous self-organization 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  202    
18.) plurepistemic see Bachelard; I and Tao see Herman; on the language of mathematics 
see Wigner 
19.) amplified see Delcourt; on amplification also see Jung 1963: 310; surplus of 
meaning see Ricoeur and see Delcourt: 52; Laozi in Wagner: 257; Deacon: 540 
20.) Gödel in Hofstadter; Hall: 196, 204, 209-10 
21.) Blake in Frye 1969: 12; the dream of the Earth, Berry 1988; the work of daring 
contemplation, Williams: 385; see also Burneko 2010, 2011 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  203    
 
6.0 K=2: A Joyous Cosmology 
 
This chapter offers a revised and considerably expanded presentation of some 
ideas expressed in my essay “Ecohumanism: The Spontaneities of the Earth, Ziran, and 
K=2,”  published in the Journal of Chinese Philosophy. It continues several of the 
preceding speculations with a further development of the ideas of Stuart Kauffman about 
an inherent and natural tendency among developing or evolving systems to create 
optimum or sustainable developmental flexibility at the edge of order and chaos. I link 
these ideas with those about the aptitudes of a mature contemplative sensibility 
seamlessly to be-speak and real-ize (zhi yan, zhi) in thinking and lived experience overall 
systems potential, and to realize some optimum degree of symmetry transformation, as  
Guenther speaks of it, in diverse or multiply imbricated interhuman and ecohuman 
relations. This might also be expressed in terms of a dynamic focal equilibrium or 
ongoing self-organizing stabilization of the field of changing potentials, e. g. acts of 
contemplative participant/observer guan as events of quantum wholing. In this, I suggest 
that the lore of the sage is analogous with some quantitatively and qualitatively based 
scientific models like Kauffman’s and Deacon’s as they bear on the further potentials of 
emergent humanocosmic resonance in sustainable conduct, cotention and reflection. 
We recall that Thomas Berry’s theme of the spontaneities of the Earth in The 
Dream of the Earth speaks to the genetic, archetypal and developmental embodiment in 
ourselves of the rhythms and patterns of cosmic nature unweighted by too much ego-
investment in the conventional win-or-lose relation with things, events and other beings. 
Releasing ourselves in these spontaneities we realize authentic and spontaneous 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  204    
expression of experience-as-such before (or beyond) dividing things into rational or 
otherwise mutually excluding ego-perspectivated categories of self and other, order and 
disorder, or humans and nature. This is correlatively a releasement of natural life forms, 
rhythms and patterns from our premier instrumentalism and commodification of them 
and from making our own lives utensils for conventionally defined success.  
Berry intimates degrees of freedom in interhuman and ecohuman relations that are 
emergent among the patterns of nature without, however, being limited or reduced to 
them. And Kauffman shows that such releasement does not necessarily imply a “fall” into 
chaos, since it is at the margins of what we separately categorize as chaos and orderliness 
that sustainable developmental flexibility, evolutionary flexibility in his emphasis, 
performs itself. It is on the edge of chaos, he tells us, that “the most complex behaviors 
[or conduct] can occur – orderly enough to ensure stability [or sustainability], yet full of 
flexibility and surprise. Indeed, this is what we mean by complexity” and perhaps what 
we mean as well by the self-organizational wu wei of contemplatively sustainable and 
unprogrammed conduct that is unprecedentedly fresh in each circumstance. This is also a 
variant of the “auto-eco-reorganization equipped with a cognitive dimension” offered by 
Morin.1  
Consider too this parenthetic amplification. As the relations between (or the 
relativity of) order and chaos in physical and organic systems can be bridged, or 
accommodated, in self-organizing flexibility and can surprise us with a corresponding 
growth in complexity, so can we surmise that when our ordinary state of (ego-
perspectival, rational-mental and ditentive/discursive, or Zweckrational)  awareness is 
relativized by experience of different states or phases of consciousness alternative, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  205    
nondual and more integral, complex noetic structures may emerge. A dramatically altered 
phase of consciousness – attentional, contemplatively engendered or entheogen induced -
- might well feel chaotic or even disequilibrating until, as in the lyric of Jimi Hendrix, we 
become experienced and our neurocognitive systems become reentrained (with an 
accompanying cosmogenic reattunement) as Laughlin and others propose. In ritual 
shamanism, write some thinkers to be explored later, this is apparently the case. Yet 
whether it appears initially chaotic or not, the hybridization and integration of 
unprecedented noetic aptitudes on the margins with familiar ones -- if the ingress of 
novelty or psychic impetus is not so great as to derange us (and our civilization) 
permanently -- can deep evoke potentials for sustainable self-and-other understanding 
otherwise closed to us. The self-organizing polynoetic system makes a quantum value-
jump to a new wholing/regime of meaning and related conduct. And a supposedly 
normative phase of consciousness thus enrichingly hybridized would in all likelihood 
admit us to a refreshed anthropocosmology. The evolution of consciousness thus far 
indicates we are creatively if unpredictably preadapted for the venture. Our resonance as 
a sustainable dimension of Earth and kosmos, or chaosmos, as the case may be, is as 
much, if not much more, a matter of our sensitively corresponsive choices or ententions 
as it is of random variations. As we nonreductively accord with and attune to nature and 
incipient change in the Earth-human dynamic, natural selection looks more like 
emergently ententional ecohumane self-organization (something implied where Deacon 
looks at “natural selection in terms of teleodynamic work”Ψ; and conversely, to the degree 
cosmic nature is embodied in our forms of presence and conduct, we constellate and 
perform the auto-optimization of evolutionary field potentials. It’s not that we unilaterally 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  206    
cause this, but that we cooperate and perform in daily interactions the field/ecotone 
whose character is no less that of human consciousness than of natural systems. Neville 
allows us to extend this parenthesis further steps in this direction when after introducing 
us to the idea that interpretation is a part of nature and a participation in the natural world 
he also suggests that our ententional consciousness and conduct emerge in the all-relating 
field of cosmic nature “happen[ing] at every experiential moment, but . . .never complete 
or satisfied in a moment. . . . requir[ing] at least the movement of making a change. . . 
even if only a change of idea. . . . manifesting in interaction.” I infer from this that if 
hereby the “natural function” of interpretation, and of “the highly complex semiotic act” 
of contemplation, and even the self-less bliss of attentionality are natural events of 
cosmogenesis, then his thinking of truth as “the reality of the world as interpretations’ 
measure” is congruent with affirming truth and value as the self-measuring of the 
coevolutionary process whereby anthropocosmogenesis is simultaneously axiogenesis. 
By this measure, ecohumane sustainability would be something like: the inherently 
rewarding or celebratory self-aware experience of anthropocosmogenesis.2 
Access to a dramatically alternate consciousness, a release from our usual ego and 
social habituations, is often experienced both as a literal ek-stasis or standing outside or 
beyond our conventional sense(s) of things and as a self-rewarding joy of being 
undivided “experience-as-such”: “a joyous cosmology” for many throughout history, says 
Alan Watts. In unio mystica, we may feel ourselves and our universe transformed and 
even united in a continuum of being with Heaven, Humanity, Earth and all our relations 
cogrowing here with/in us. Common features of mystical experience may include the 
intense reality of events, their unity and connectedness, a measure of explanatory 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  207    
irreducibility, and overall, a remarkable, numinous and memorable, even a guiding, 
vision or attitude towards world and life experience. Acknowledging here Berman’s 
healthy skepticism concerning “fusion,” “oneness,” “large-scale explanations of the 
world”  and “paradigm-shift addiction,” I at the same time convoke his even more 
valuable theme of epistemic peregrination with mine of alter(n)ation, analogization and 
hybridization with citations found at the close of his book on “nomadic spirituality”: “At 
the core of every human being, there is a revolt against that which is fixed” (D. H. 
LawrenceΨ; “If human  beings forget poetry [paradox, redacts Berman] they will forget 
themselves” (Octavio PazΨ.3 The sustainability of coevolving structures and states or 
phases of consciousness, and of ecohumane life on Earth, is in part in ontohermeneutic 
disobedience to dominant monothetic and especially instrumentalist points of view 
through transformative ecopoietic and econoetic ars contextualis – e. g., the experience 
of ourselves with other kinds of persons as the noninstrumentally self-rewarding play of 
cosmogenesis’ auto-interpretation. 
All in all, hypothesizes Arthur Deikman about the psychobiological and 
psychocultural bases of mystical, shamanic, meditative or entheogen induced alternative 
consciousness phases, these are “a consequence of a deautomatization of the 
psychological structures that organize, limit, select and interpret perceptual stimuli”; and 
this expansive and liberating pliancy he thinks of as “the undoing of automatization” and 
fixity, presumably by “reinvesting actions and percepts with attention.” A dis-egoed 
attentiveness to the “minute particulars” of experience, Blake reminds us again, reveals 
“eternity’s sunrise” in all contexts. For, he writes in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, 
“If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear to man as it is, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  208    
infinite, ή For man has closed himself up, till he sees all things thro’ narrow chinks of his 
cavern.” This contemplative, intensified or refined kind of attentiveness in the 
psychosocial and ecosocial realms we may take as the overture, if it is not the actual 
instantiation, of ecohumane systems optimization aptitudes for mature functional 
interbeing and a sustainable orientation. “The Great Work” (da hua) of  transformative 
shu as our self-other-likening can be taken hereby as applying as much to alternative 
consciousness as to other (kinds of) persons and values; and it demonstrates in its 
diversity a sustaining multiepistemological and interexistentially evocative 
ontohermeneutics of psychophysical resonance.4 
The natural self-soing of our interhuman and ecohuman relations authentically 
responsive to coevolutionary processes without being merely random or, alternatively, 
frustrated by interfering or coercive imposition--one person or system or outlook 
stultifyingly connected with or totalistically enframing another--manifests the ziran of 
unforced mutuality pivoting on the reciprocities of self and other, and those of chaos and 
order or “culture” and “nature.” Sustainably living on the yinyang edge of chaos and 
order is the paradox of living connectedly responsive and in attentive coevolution with 
the tendencies of self and psyche, with experience, and with other (kinds of) persons and 
diverse living systems amid a polyphony of structures of life and consciousness without 
being held and fixed; without imposing, trapping, and binding, by and among these, and 
without being unrelated and dispersed or alienated with respect to these. Sustainability is 
confluently participated diversity. A contemplative no-mind abets our release from the 
fixed ego-outlooks that harden or fracture into ecohuman systems entropy. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  209    
The spontaneities of Earth whether understood as genetic coding bred of cosmic 
coevolution or as anthropocosmic ziran or natural self-so-ness, are partly suggested also 
by Stuart Kauffman’s algorithm, K=2. K is the number or density of connections and 
mutual inputs among any number of “parts” of a system. In Kauffman’s computer 
models, the numbers of parts can vary; and their respective mutual interconnections, 
(apart from the number of elements themselves), can also vary in number and in their 
respective degrees of bias, tendency or activity-- e. g., active, passive, sometimes more-
or-less of either, etc.—at, above, or below the degree predicted by pure chance or, say, 
half-on, half-off. If  I understand K aright, no matter how many parts (organelles, 
subsystems, etc.) are involved, systems and nests of systems are most likely optimally to 
self-organize when the connections among the parts are not many more or fewer than two 
each. “Sparsely connected networks [where the number of connections, i. e.,  K, equals 2] 
exhibit internal order; densely connected ones veer into chaos and networks with a single 
connection per element freeze into mindlessly dull behavior.” I speculate whether 
something similar holds among ideas, cultures, individual persons and all our relations. 
On the one hand, such speculation is forewarned against reductionism. At the same time, 
the intersystem that is (now) coevolving,  speculates quantum orthodoxy itself, is 
“mindful universe,” “conscious universe.”5  
If we again invoke “cross-cultural anachronism”6 to back-translate the K=2 motif 
into the idiom of traditional Chinese culture, there are the two inputs of yin and yang 
traditionally understood as the expression of a nondual supreme ultimate(less)ness, taiji 
or wuji paradoxically embodied as, and affecting and interconnecting, each with each and 
with all. The sage’s contemplative way of living (inΨ its non-self-imposing cotentiveness 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  210    
is sensitively responsive to this unitas multiplex in its varying degrees of compenetrative 
intensity. And s/he simultaneously interacts with – receives from and imparts to, 
xiangtong -- the world accordingly and concursively in real-izing sustaining situational 
development that is attuned with the interplay of the yinyang not only of the given 
concrete setting but of that setting as it and the beings involved embody, enact, be-speak 
and re-sound the multiply enfolded registers of minute, nonlocal, natural, ecosocial and 
anthropocosmic polyphony.  
Although, to digress a bit, there is little of a linear or progressive evolutionary 
model of the kind associated with the neo-Darwinian synthesis in the Chinese worldview, 
there is surely an anthropocosmogenic one handsomely opened to the contemporary 
reader in Tu Weiming’s Confucian Thought: Selfhood as Creative Transformation. And 
Tu’s words, following those of such earlier thinkers as Mencius (Mengzi) and Wang 
Yangming, are useful here in enriching the context for intercultural dialogue with the 
natural sciences while opening the doors to a wider postanthropocentric evolutionary 
imaginary than we, for the most part, have yet had in the contemporary industrial world: 
. . .[T]he Confucian vision of ‘forming one body with Heaven and Earth 
and the myriad things’ is anthropocosmic in the sense that the complete 
realization of the self, which is tantamount to the full actualization of 
humanity, entails the unity of humankind with Heaven. . . .This 
broadening and deepening of the self can be characterized . . .as the 
manifestation of the ‘great self’ and the concomitant dis- solution of the 
‘small self’. . .Through the full realization of our human sensitivity, we 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  211    
can truly understand our nature. . . .Since sagehood means the most 
genuine and authentic manifestation of humanity.7  
Tu states further that, according to the Chinese Doctrine of the Mean or Zhongyong -- 
attributed to Kongzi’s grandson Zisi, (and helpfully translated with the title connotations 
of “Centrality and Commonality,” and “Focusing the Familiar”Ψ –  as an integral 
participant of the creative processes of the sidereal, organic and the ecosocial modes of 
universe, “man is not only endowed with the ‘centrality’ (the most refined quality [or qi]) 
of the universe but is charged with the mission of bringing the cosmic transformation to 
its fruition. . . .the Way is nothing other than the actualization of true human nature” in 
contemplative sage conduct.8  
And traditionally, learning to be a sage, shengxue, was, as we’ve heard before, 
something anyone can aspire to do, and is responsible for cultivating. This aptitude was 
believed to be rooted in human nature – itself understood as enrooted with the all-
pervading psychophysical qi of Heaven, Earth and Human being (analogous with what 
we might today say is the all-pervading quantum vacuum) -- as a kind of  “common 
human denominator” of mature, (authentic, flourishing, actualized, cheng) and 
sustainingly cofunctioning human being.9 In other words, sageliness was understood as 
an inherent bio- and psychocosmic functionality or dimensionality, analogous with how 
the K=2 algorithm is understandable as inherent in optimally sustainable coevolutionary 
Earth-human self-organization.  
In today’s vocabulary we also have begun attributing ethical and noetic qualities 
to the evolving Ȍ field of all-possibility saying, as does Peat, following Bohm, “Meaning 
can act on matter and, presumably, matter on meaning. . . .Information is, in some way, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  212    
encoded in the wave function.” Peat also discusses synchronicity in this connection, a 
topic we’ll explore later on as a sustainability complement to conventional logics. Laszlo 
also states, with explicit reference to “the fully in-formed Ȍ field,” in a manner 
reminiscent of Haisch, that for “introspective” or contemplative observers “evolution 
leads from a mystical nothingness filled with potential, to a mystical coherence that 
embraces everything in the whole of experience.” And Stapp is again gently unremitting 
in his quantum-valuation that because humans are integral participants in the nonlocal 
formation and en-meaning of ongoing-wholing, quantum theory is about the 
incorporation of our conscious “choices” in any understanding of how the universe and 
its sustainable Earth-human intersystem works.10  
Such interpretations as Tu’s do not, of course, describe a random-variation-and-
natural-selection version of evolutionary thinking, but they are hardly an inept preface to 
what, as we have seen, Berry (and before him Tu, and again before him Mote) has 
alluded to as a dynamic functional cosmology. They preserve something of gua 53’s note 
of  cosmomorphic Jian, “gradual advance,” and of the earlier mentioned “precautionary 
wu wei” while de-emphasizing notions of pushing or “accelerating” anthropocentric 
progress with their paradoxical invocation of anthropocosmic interbeing or shu as the 
natural expression of sustainability. This is notably so when we think of the technical and 
industrial influence human choice can make in the well-being of the overall ecohuman 
intersystem and with respect to other planets and life systems we may encounter. In the 
universing we humans do together with all other kinds of living beings, the sustaining 
centrality of enlightened heart/mind or xin may be understood henceforth no longer as 
anthropocentric but, as Tu reminds us, as our “anthropocosmic” participation in the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  213    
dispelling (or non-accumulation) of numbing inertia in the field – whether we image this 
as the cosmic field of psychophysical qi, the self-organizing universe of Jantsch, the 
plenum envisaged by Laszlo, the akasha in Abraham and Roy, as Gaia or as Seinfeld. 
And this participation at optimum enacts the dynamics of the living edge of resonant 
interexistence in an “exuberant equipoise” beyond simply maintaining our customary 
precedent egocentric definitions of necessity, desire and their satisfaction.11 The ecoethics 
of this abide, in large part, in forgoing the fixed opinionated mind or prejudice as well as 
one’s tendency to regard one’s own or one’s cultural or anthropocentric standard of 
success, right and wrong as the universal standard. In the contemplative practice of 
Zhuangzi’s “mindless mind” (wu xin, wu nian, wu zhi)  it is a sustaining reinvention of 
experience and knowledge as profoundly maturing existence in the life all things share on 
the Earth, in between and above. 
Furthermore, in the earlier Chinese purview (which like the contemporary 
naturalistic scientific view need not posit an external or prior creator god) our real nature 
is a self-organizing or “self-creating and self-directing activity” that is (inherent inΨ 
cosmogenesis. This activity or dimension (of ongoing-wholing -- again, often related to 
the cosmogonic category of cheng or “sincerity”Ψ trends in the profound or maturely 
contemplative person in a manner, or through a mentality, that allows all things of the 
Earth and of Humanity and of the sidereal or Heavenly rhythms fruitfully to complete 
themselves in and with us. Conversely stated, the attuned contemplative in hir conduct 
(optimally) concresces and enacts or embodies the sustaining patterns of cosmos. The 
profound person acts naturally, according with ziran, as if nothing special is going on in 
daily life, and yet s/he acts so as to make self-other-environment-optimizing choices 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  214    
because hir work is (or is aligned with) the Great Work of self-other-environment 
transformation (da hua) undeformed by selfish desires bred of a. . . 
self-centeredness that belittle[s] the authentic human capacity to take part 
in the transformative processes of heaven and [E]arth. . . .Forming a trinity 
with heaven and [E]arth [which is] forming one body with the myriad 
things, [and which] enjoins us from applying the subject-object dichotomy 
to nature.12  
And if this premodern view is not a significantly expansive contribution to the 
implications of an ententional coevolutionary sustainability paradigm of “the continuity 
of being,”13 then neither have been such contemporary science-specific contributions as: 
Julian Huxley’s Essays of a Humanist (1964Ψ, C. H. Waddington’s Towards a 
Theoretical Biology (1969Ψ, Gregory Bateson’s Mind and Nature (1979), O. W. Markley 
and Willis Harman’s Changing Images of Man (19κ2Ψ, Evelyn Fox Keller’s A Feeling for 
the Organism (19κ3Ψ, Eric Chaisson’s The Life Era (19κιΨ, Henryk Skolimowski’s The 
Participatory Mind (1994Ψ, Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan’s What Is Life? (1995), 
Denis Noble’s The Music of Life (2ίί6Ψ, Matthew Hall’s Plants as Persons (2011), 
Terrence Deacon’s Incomplete Nature (2012) and numerous other works. Nor does this 
listing but mention the capacious and leavening oeuvres of Teilhard de Chardin, Bergson, 
Sri Aurobindo or Rudolph Steiner.14   
The digression concluded, we turn again to Stuart Kauffman who observes--on 
the scalings, pivotings, and the interplexings of chaos and order in complex, and flexibly 
self-growing systems -- that there seems to be an axis “running from orderly behavior to 
chaotic behavior.” There is too much order, stasis, if we equate order with a predictable 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  215    
totalism or fixation; too much chaos or random novelty if we equate freedom with 
unconnected indifference or detachment. K=2, for the Goldilocks purposes of this 
introduction, is just about right.15 
 It can dynamically balance the diversity of things on the pliant edge, the 
(re)turning pivot, where they are not so tightly connected as to be mutually restraining, 
and not so disconnected as to be isolated or rote. For any system, there is a critical value 
where it can change phase state, from chaotic to ordered: at the edge of chaos and order.16 
This variable, correlated and liminal yinyang interplay of order, randomicity, 
disequilibration and dynamic equilibrium, I think, is the ontometaphorical  place of the 
emerging anthropocosmic sage-as-Dao Shu, or pivot of the Dao whose flexible 
intercourse with the worlds of Heaven, Earth and Humankind and whose spontaneous 
and sensitively accordant conduct (wu wei) among them authentically enacts the 
(sometimes more, sometimes less) yin and yang K=2 evolutionary-optimization-
algorithm spontaneities of ongoingly sustainable self-organizing 
(anthropo)cosmogenesis, the Great Transformation (wu hua, da hua). 
In this way, I propose that the Daoist, (New or Neo)-Confucian, “Ecozoic” and 
systems theoretical sensibilities abide as (mutually constitutive, mutually completing and 
as analogically irreducible) sisters in the dynamically emerging planetary noetic 
repertoire of nondual sustainability insight and conduct. I think their mutually 
complementary functional cosmology, ontohermeneutics, language and imagery 
satisfyingly engage a repertoire of diverse aptitudes in global ecohuman self-
understanding for the future, and lend themselves to a more generous and apt 
understanding for beyond-sustainable Earth-human-resonance interactions than those 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  216    
proper to a single culture or episteme alone, notably including one imposing dualistic, 
reductionistic or utilitarian imperatives.17 
In an enhanced or, with Morin, a complex planetary thinking and conduct, 
practical contemplative sageliness is functional cosmology. And this expresses itself as 
an ecohumane environmentalism beyond sustainability: as anthropocosmic resonance. 
This needn’t connote anything esoteric so much as something in the way of a relaxation 
of ego tension and acceleration, something generous and liberating for ourselves and all 
living beings near and afar. Recovering such sweetness and soothing, or recovering, “the 
lost heartήmind” as NeoConfucian tradition puts it, is the nondual work of mature 
contemplative anthropocosmology, a functioning nonideologized relation with and 
embodiment of the spontaneities of ever-ongoing emergent creativity throughout the 
universe(s).  
Adapting the old phrasing of classical China in yet another way, this is to propose 
that there is a mutually beneficial feedback relation between a functional 
anthropocosmological outlook, a mature ecosocial environmentalism, and zhi liangzhi, 
“expanding primordial awareness.”18 The not-foremost-ego/utilitarian humanocosmic 
functionality of a contemplatively sustaining self-rewarding primordial awareness – 
nondualizing attentiveness -- engenders a mature environmentalism in broadening and 
tuning our experience of (our interminate) identity. We hereby feel less driven to impose 
narrowly competitive, aggressive, ego-selfish motives on our own being, that of other 
persons or on the well-being of the organic and more far reaching natural systems whose 
life we share – and from “whom” we demand and extract the artifacts of our worth. We 
are less compelled to extract resources from the Earth as we find inherent reward in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  217    
attentive and cotentive relations with, and as a dimensionality of, Earth. In turn, an 
authentically sustaining ecosocial environment (nourished by a wholing 
environmentalism) encourages and abets us in letting go of our control fetish for gain and 
the mediocrities of societally conventioned success so that we can spontaneously 
experience the one body of Heaven-Earth-and-Humanity in concelebratory conduct. 
Herein is a mature ethic of the self evident inclinations to life, liberty and happiness. 
 
In attuning us to the “spontaneities within us,” Thomas Berry  is looking “beyond 
our genetic coding....to the universe” repeating that, ”the human is less a being on the 
[E]arth or in the universe than a dimension of the [E]arth and indeed of the universe 
itself.” The carryover value of this resource, declares Berry, is the source of a guidance or 
cosmomorphic meaningfulness that “possesses inherent authenticity.” Berry further refers 
to Laozi, writing that the “Chinese sage...tells us that the human models itself on the 
[E]arth,” Earth on heaven, heaven on the Dao, and “Dao models itself on its own 
spontaneity” or ziran.19  
 
In Berry’s understanding, this noncalculating, nonmanipulative spontaneity is “the 
guiding force of the universe” whose creativity and awesomeness are realized by us “in 
the depths of our own being and of the cosmic order itself.” Our problem today, he 
reflects, is that having lost contact with the deepest sources of creativity, having been 
long deracinated, abusive and “autistic” with respect to nature and to what is natural 
within ourselves, we must reconnect ourselves and our cultures with that by which 
culture and nature alike flower in co-growthful responsiveness.  The (nonobjectifiable) 
that-by-which (suoyi) the ten thousand kinds of things come opens to us in what Wang 
Bi, for his part, describes as the non-interference of entities spontaneously 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  218    
complementing one another in a seamless way so profound that their spontaneities, 
embodied as the sage, allow hir in turn to “perform the same role in society that Dao 
performs in the cosmos.”20  
 
In Confucian terms, it is the mark and role of a great person to have a 
transformative effect on others yet, seemingly paradoxically to us today, by doing 
nothing special towards that end – nothing earnestly preplanned in careerist, educational 
or bureaucratic, technopolitical terms. The transforming influence is rather more like play 
than like effort or duty in evoking the incipiently optimal possibilities of each daily 
situation without making any exemplary issue or monitory fuss in the process. In this way 
of nonassertive or nonimpositional conduct (that Deacon might characterize as 
“orthograde”Ψ mature contemplative sageliness can be learned (through its exampleΨ by 
anyone according to hir circumstance in life.21 It’s not rocket science – indeed, it is the 
very learning to be a sage that is the sustaining root rationale of any kind of learning at 
all.  
It’s not a quantitatively exact science so much an ontohermeneutic ars 
contextualis, and as much the unlearning of the devices of the world as anything else, but 
it is a minutely particular and particularly attentive/responsive embodiment and 
polyvalent wholing of situational coherence. And the study of books and traditions along 
with the investigation of things -- conducted not for status, power, gain and repute but for 
the autocatalytic expansion of naturally implicit awareness-optimization potentials -- are 
alike cases of becoming a sage. We live in a time when sagesse connotes fusty old men 
and women in arcane ritual or reclusive settings. But in fact, they even in their own times, 
and certainly we in ours, can be seen as simply going about the business of hewing wood 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  219    
and drawing water, raising children and keeping up our homes, yet each of us ever (to 
offer a refrainΨ: spontaneously “discovering [our] cosmological being amidst daily affairs 
. . . .The means of self-transformation is through cultivation of oneself in relation to 
others and to the natural world.”22  
 
Berry’s authentic spontaneities emerge from nature; and nature expresses the 
sustaining self-organizing ziran, the “that-which-is-of-itself-what-it-is” of cosmogenesis. 
So in the case of Berry’s “functional cosmology” and that of  Chinese tradition, the 
appeal is made, as it also is with Kauffman’s complexity science researches, to the 
perfectly natural and cosmically ever-present as the source of/and order of beings, 
organisms, environments, things and their dynamic co-self-organizing relations. In 
ontology and ethics, by this measure, in non-self-aggrandizingly according with and as 
what is natural, and therefore by accommodating correlative order and chaos as the 
varieties and emergent modes of cosmic unfolding, the sage moves nonimposingly (wu 
wei) with and as the all-sustaining Dao, the original of sustainable meaning. To the extent 
truth is in anything like the carryover of value from cosmogenesis to our embodied 
performance of its (auto)ontohermeneutic, our contemplative resonance with and as the 
spontaneities of the Earth is, as Neville proposes, “sustaining” in and of “appropriateness 
for our existential conduct” notably through “[eco]poetically creative representations” 
that can provide “[e]ntentional orientation to. . .our natural-cultural world” while 
“making the interpreter true to [its] objects” in “grasp[ing] the value of. . .how its 
components are harmonized.” Wagner cites the Wenzi permitting us to say that: “as a 
consequence there is none of the transformations of the ten thousand kinds of beings that 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  220    
[s/he] is not matching, and there is none of the changes of the hundred kinds of affairs 
that [the sage or mature ecocontemplative] is not corresponding to.”23  
 
This ancient conclusion seems to find an evocative contemporary analogue in 
Deacon’s reconception of “living and mental causality” in cosmogenesis, one reinstating 
“subjective experience as a legitimate participant in the web of physical causes and 
effects” and reintroducing “[en]tentional phenomena back into the natural sciences.” 
Berry responds that, having emerged to the point of experiencing our life and our living 
environment as a community of subjects, not just as a mere collocation of objects, we 
realize  
. . . the communion of each reality of the universe with every other reality 
in the universe. Here our scientific awareness confirms, with a magnificent 
overview, the ancient awareness that we live in a universe – a single, if 
multiform, energy event. . . .The ecological age fosters the deep awareness 
of the sacred presence within each reality of the universe. . . .Our primary 
need for the various lifeforms of the planet is a psychic, rather than a 
physical, need.”24  
By not too much ego-interfering with, by trending with, what we conventionally 
distinguish as the chaos and the order of things—a question that for Zhuangzi often 
comes down to a “this” from one point of view and a “that” from another—the realized 
and “unadorned, uncarved” (pu) person sustainingly comports with the Great 
Transformation, wu hua, in navigating “by the torch of chaos and doubt” the liminal edge 
of order and chaos where turns and re-turns (fu, fan, gui) the communitas of the 
meaningful and mutual “orthograde” and “contragrade” growth (and declineΨ of events, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  221    
beings and things. This is certainly a new view of eschaton as a gateway in every 
situation be it interpersonal or ecosocial.25  
Looking contemplatively into ourselves “investigating things” inward and 
outward, as Chinese lore has it – especially our multiple roots in sidereal, Earthly and 
ecosocial coevolution -- we find the authenticity of interhuman and ecohuman relations in 
Earth, in the universe itself, a universe which, again, is “so immediate...that it escapes our 
notice, yet whatever authenticity exists in our cultural creations is derived from these 
spontaneities within us.” And these spontaneities, “come from an abyss of [zero point, 
psychocosmic qi, archetypal, etc.] energy and a capacity for intelligible order” of which 
our instrumentalizing (and instrumentalist) conscious awareness offers only faint and 
fragmentary glimpses. The more is this so in that it is here in the spontaneously self-
organizing origins of order and life that the pliant give-and-take of simultaneous yes-and-
no is so pronounced,  and whose “fearful symmetry” is so paradoxically elusive of 
“single-vision and Newton’s sleep” as Blake has told.26  
The archetypal (primordial psychic and probabilistic cosmic) tendencies birth 
interhuman and ecohuman spontaneity as evidenced in creative insight and synchronicity. 
And in proposing this Jung, followed by Berry, also gestures in the direction of the 
holistic “anthropocosmic” sensibility given name by Tu. Again, Jung emphasizes that, 
“the archetype is pure, unvitiated nature”; and as it is related with instinct, its 
ententionality is both physiological and noetic in our experience. Jungians speak of the 
psychophysical and psychomental unus mundus and of the “psychoid” aspect of the 
unconscious archetypes, of “the part of the psychic realm where the psychic element 
appears to mix with inorganic matter,” and thus suggest the inextricability of our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  222    
psychomental, ontohermeneutic or anthropocosmic complexity from nature and cosmos 
as Morin, Deacon, Primack and Abrams and Neville also propose in their different 
emphases.27  
Analogously, the quantum theorist David Bohm in developing his ideas of the 
implicate and the explicate orders of phenomena in the cosmic “holomovement” wherein 
”everything is enfolded into everything” proposes that henceforth scientific research be 
complemented by a practice relevant to the “undivided wholeness” disclosed by 
contemporary as well as ancient research. More specifically, (and presumably in 
connection with his decades-long communication with J. Krishnamurti on such topics), 
Bohm in his Fragmentation and Wholeness commends to future science research (as well 
as to political, civic and daily living),  
. . .techniques of meditation that lead the whole process of mental 
operation non-verbally to the sort of quiet state of orderly and smooth flow 
needed to end fragmentation, both in the actual process of thought and in 
its content.28  
Though engaging different discourses, Jung, Berry, Bohm and Tu Weiming are 
singing counterpoint harmony. In the language of a dramatically inclusive NeoConfucian 
Humanism, enchants Tu with Wang Yangming, “humanity...’forms one body with 
Heaven, Earth, and the myriad things.’ Self-realization...is ultimate 
transformation...which enables us to embody the family, community, nation, world and 
cosmos in our sensitivity.” Invites Berry, on a trope from Teilhard, 
[W]e must go beyond the human into the universe itself and its mode of 
functioning. Until the human is understood as a dimension of the [E]arth, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  223    
we have no secure basis for understanding....Beyond the [E]arth, of 
course, is the universe and the curvature of space. This curve is reflected 
in...that psychic curve whereby the entire universe reflects back on itself in 
human intelligence.29  
And using, like Heraclitus, more graphic imagery than that of abstract “chaos” or 
“order” to  make his point, Berry also asserts that, “the universe, [E]arth, life, and 
consciousness are all violent processes.” Anticipating a little of  Kauffman’s 
interpretation of the theory of  self-organization in the cosmos, Berry concerning the 
ever-present yinyang of the world process says that, “creativity has been associated with a 
disequilibrium, a tension of forces, whether this be in a physical, biological, or 
consciousness context.”30 This disequilibrium, sometimes bred of hybridization or 
paradox, indicates a departure from the fixity, rote or randomness of a system 
underinformed by novelty or oppressed by imposed or mutual internal blockages. In 
some schools of systems thinking, order is discussed as being likely far from equilibrium, 
and this is taken up in another chapter in the colloquy between Morin and Wang 
Yangming.  
In Kauffman’s languaging, the most evolutionarily lively, because of being most 
flexible, kinds of order are those close(r) to the edge of, on the (re)turning carousel of, 
both the systemically and dialogically open, responsively intimate zone and that of 
obdurate inertia, the predictable, unconsciously habitual or existentially and conceptually 
closed. The gloss can be made that death is the most equilibrated, stable, inert and 
predictable – entropic -- state, and that life is by definition then far from it – unless we 
take the even deeper view that life-and-death are married at every point. And this indeed 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  224    
is the insight of philosophical-religious and some ascetic and monastic conceptions of the 
ars moriendi connoting the death to self or kenosis that allows greater life. 
In the potent evolutionary and systems science language of Kauffman’s At Home 
in the Universe, we read that: 
Life, then, unrolls in...small and large bursts of speciations, and small and 
large bursts of extinctions....the same phenomena at all levels: from 
ecosystems to economic systems undergoing technological 
evolution....small and large avalanches even occur in evolving cultural 
systems....[The] fate of all complex adapting systems... is to evolve to a 
natural state between order and chaos. . . .31  
As he puts it, the incontrovertibly natural tendency cosmos wide of systems of 
even modest diversity is towards a far-from-equilibrium optimization or approximation of     
dynamic – not of fixed --  continuity, and flexibility. “[N]ear the transition to chaos 
affords the best mixture of stability and flexibility.” If we collocate the Chinese, quantum 
and the systems outlooks, we might by analogy say that each of those K=2 yinyang 
inputs, element to element, holon to/in holon, subsystem to subsystem, in its (sometimes 
varying, “fuzzy,” more-or-lessΨ “on” or “off” mode in the collective wave function helps 
spontaneously self-organize creative complexity from diversity and from the creative-
destructive creativity inherent in things Earthly and astronomical. 32 In the 
contemplatively anthropocosmic play of entropy or disorder with negentropy or order 
(information, entention, cotentive resonance, meaning, value) may emerge unanticipated 
degrees of mutually beneficial responsiveness, sustainable life, and wisdom.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  225    
The highlight is not simply that order compensates and complements disorder in 
self-organizing complexity; it is richness of meaning bred of the stochastic hybridization 
of the predictable and the random. The ecohuman resonance or sustainability implied 
here is not to be reductively understood as a kind of rote mimesis or as mindless 
immersion in nature but as enlivening participation, celebration and musical, 
improvisational, self-aware (auto)poiesis with, in and as cosmogenesis. Our 
contemplatively ecosocial conduct is our sustained and sustaining fractal participation in 
the life of Earth; or, in another framing, it is  the guan-like enactment of active 
information; and again still, it is the quantum wholing of meaningful events in choice and 
value. And if we rely on mimetic models for conceiving anthropocosmic conduct as a 
nondual “way of coworlding,” that which is being instantiated is not a finished state or 
outlook but, as Bohm might say, a continuingly creative movement of unbroken wholing. 
Nor can we sustainably use a re-presentationally colored metaphor of mimesis if our 
conception presumes a dualized observer and observed. We need instead the untwoing 
mimesis/phronesis of a functional or operational mysticism. Such mysticism as functional 
nondualism or as Berry’s functional cosmology can also be understood as the ecosocial 
or ecohumane mode of cosmogenesis -- our participation with and ability to present,  co-
consciously to presence and creatively to perform and embody, not just our ability 
meaningfully to re-present, cosmogenesis.33 
The spontaneity and authenticity of the sage, for hir part, seem “just so” in hir 
own indual accommodation with, intercourse with, or enactment of, what we convention 
as chaos (cf. luan) and (correlative) order, (ziran). From the Daoist metaviewpoint, much 
of what our civilized life calls order is, with its inauthentically pro forma this and its 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  226    
exploitively manipulative that, the worst kind of chaos (luan). And just as a given input -- 
chemical, electronic, emotional or political -- may be (more or less) active or inactive, 
and just as too much, little, or the imposition of one or another regime can overdo or 
undo a whole system, so too may we understand in the Chinese idiom of cosmogenesis 
that yin and yang in their varying and complementary compresence everywhere may 
seem to be deficiently, excessively or (onlyΨ relatively “on” or “off.” 
Tradition expressly points to the subtlety of this phenomenology in observing that 
even in the advanced yin of winter night, when least yang is evident, yet the yang of a 
winter dawn is that of the yang of a midsummer day whose waning in coolness at 
eventide bespeaks, likewise, the yin of midwinter. Thus, by way of analogy with what 
Jung calls enantiodromia, or the turning into one another of the intercourse and play of 
opposites, while too much/little of any tendency or bias can immobilize or disintegrate a 
system, there is in the contemplative dynamic equilibrium or dynamic stabilization of our 
conduct, consciousness, attitude and action template -- in the spontaneously cocreative 
emergent nonequilibrium between orderliness and chaotification, self and world(ing) -- 
the return or “relating back,” fan, fu, to ziran, “that-which-is-of-itself-what-it-is.” This is 
also an ever-present form or origin of re-ligio as much as of, concludes Stapp, “the mind-
matter connection, and hence . . .the nature of our own being.” 34 
Mature contemplative (sometimes ecopoieticΨ languaging and “conduct that is 
unprecedented or wu wei” in its nonattached co-responsiveness with the coming-and-
going of corelevant order and chaos reveal and embody original mind’s natural ziran as 
“completely improvisational relationship with all that occurs.” In Thomas Berry’s 
vocabulary, it will be the re-emerging “shamanic personality” who, open to the relative 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  227    
building-up and the building-down solve et coagula of psyche, s/Self and system, is best 
“supported by the ultimate powers of the universe as they make themselves present to us 
through the spontaneities within our own beings.” Says Berry, 
 
 
Our problem is, of course, the problem of recognizing the primacy of 
the natural world and its spontaneous functioning in all that we do. Our 
own actions can be truly creative only when they are guided by these 
deeper spontaneities.35  
 
And, he continues in proposing a variant of the negative opposite of the 
Heraclitean violence above, “the Peace of Earth is not some fixed condition, but a 
creative process activated by polarity tensions requiring a high level of endurance....a 
groping toward an ever more complete expression of the numinous mystery.”36  
Emphasizing here less the numen than the empirical evidence of coevolutionary 
self-organization, Kauffman nevertheless states in this connection that evolutionary 
selection achieves and maintains complex systems poised on the 
boundary, or edge, between order and chaos. These systems are best able 
to coordinate complex tasks and evolve in a complex environment. The 
typical, or generic, properties of such poised systems emerge as potential 
ahistorical universals in biology. . . .  
and thus in emergent biocultural and noetic as well as ecological coevolution. And just as 
the realization of optimum, mature or sustainable flexibility of response in the 
autopresencing of creative attunement is an irreducibly emergent property of the overall 
systemically dynamic whole in question (“violent” or notΨ, and not a conventionally 
atomic, i. e., private affair, similarly may we understand, concerning emerging 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  228    
contemporary globalism, ententional planetary thinking and anthropocosmic holism, what 
Hershock says upon a Chan motif: there is only, “the continual unfolding of the narration 
that we speak of as the one or whole-mind [yi xin], there can be no solitary salvation—no 
private liberation which is attained as some special ‘here’ and then spread out to 
encompass ‘others.’”37  
When Kauffman does explore the issue of the numinous dimension of 
cosmogenesis under the title Reinventing the Sacred, he underlines in his “Beyond 
Reductionism” chapter that of the “injuries” of an unsustainable “consumer oriented, 
materialistic, and commodified” world narrative, two of the greatest have been “the 
reductionistic scientific worldview” and the “lack of a global ethic. . . . that spans our 
traditions and our responsibilities to all of life, one another, and the planet.” Our 
narratives have licensed and have become our world-experience. Yet when undeformed 
by their own extravagantly anthropocentric tropes and conventions, they may outgrow 
and liberate themselves and us who live with and by them to the benefit of Earth’s 
lifesystems as well. With respect to the case of recent probabilistic quantum and fractal 
science, say the authors of The Narrative Universe for example, the evidence of 
contemporary research bespeaks a narrative of “the sciences of quality,” and we are 
hereby reminded of the ineradicable place of aspirational choice, value, ententionality 
and poetry in resonantly sustaining life in the future. Indeed, we are yet to rediscover that 
“prediction and repetition” are not the foremost “intellectual operations. . .[their] 
unilateral privileg[ing] the assertion of truth at the expense of listening to the voices of 
others and of things themselves” unsustainingly abstracts, and extracts, us from 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  229    
spontaneous, attentive, self-rewardingly concelebratory ongoing-wholing-worlding.38 
This only sounds silly when we’re thinking we’re so smart. 
 
Sustaining and sustainable self-organization teleodynamics as discussed by 
Deacon or by Primack and Abrams may also be construed as an intercultural knack. One 
interpretation of this is recalling that no more than do the meanings of these sentences 
reduce without remainder to the words on the page does the sustainable practice, value, 
meaning and communication of our holism or environmentalism, i. e., our ecohumanism, 
reduce neatly to a set of propositions and practices drawn from one or another particular 
trope, category, discourse or culture. The amateur ge yi (ko i), or concept-comparing, (cf. 
dillug, kefitsah) which allows, integrates and collocates themes and allusions from 
diverse cultural and disciplinary sources may, in this essay, express its own 
(transdisciplinarily disequilibratedΨ spontaneity of the “ecology of mind”  in our time. 
This attempt towards a planetary eco-ethos with other ongoing intercultural and 
polythetic experiments (like, for examples, the Global Cooperative Forum, the Forum on 
Religion and Ecology at Yale, or the Association for Contemplative Mind in Higher 
Education) could be construed as a noetic performance of anthropocosm, or of the simple 
fact that around the world, “Earth’s insights” are diversely realized and expressed. In 
either case, we (and nature-with-us) require the planetary diversity and counterpoint of 
idioms, imageries, concepts, states of consciousness, feelings and knacks adequately to 
bespeak, and to embody the holistic, the ongoingly-wholing, system of Earth-human 
relations. “The voice of the Earth” spontaneously articulates the authentic self-soing of 
the Earth-human dynamic in the a/historic polyphony of sage ecohumane sensibilities.39 
Perhaps a play of anthropocosmic coconsciousness will carry us from an exclusively 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  230    
anthropocentric experience to one that is more genuinely cosmomorphic or 
cosmocentrizing. 
 
This further suggests to us that as we engage “more than human,” and larger-than, 
or other-than-ego spheres of co-becoming, as we enact, communion, and embody, and do 
not simply (in concepts and agenda) re-present cosmos — realized in classical China as 
Heaven, Earth and Humanity or in recent science as self-organizing system-field or in 
ecotheology as “the universe story” — we will learn also authentically and spontaneously 
to real-ize and fluently, performatively, to be/speak, to sing, and ontohermeneutically to 
hear and understand within and around us (guan) a nondualizing language of 
coevolution.40 
Learning from the global noetic repertoire (to be and to bespeak the 
compenetratingly cosmic, and natural Earth-human in) the nondual dialects of ancient 
and contemporary culture and science is a practice of cocultivating anthropocosmic self-
understanding and appropriate epistemology, technology, action, or skillful and expedient 
means of further life on Earth. The genuine, resonant and beyond-sustainable 
planetization of Earth, in this sense, is the ecophilosophical act, i. e., the knack, the 
practical wisdom or phronesis of outgrowing our routinized language and ego-habituated 
preferences in favor of, certainly at least in complement with, values, ways of thinking, 
speaking and living that are nonimpositional, unprecedented, and that are circumstantially 
and ontohermeneutically improvisational or what Morin has called “undisciplinary” (cf. 
Chinese wuzhiΨ and “strategic” rather than punctiliously, univocally and totalistically 
programmatic. This is also a kind of ontohermeneutic horizon-fusing and expansion as 
intercultural, polyphasic and interexistential Earth-human resonance. These ways may 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  231    
also preserve the music of the diversity of life forms of all kinds in their continuing 
polyphony and exchange of substance, information, meaning, vitality, energy and 
relationship, ordered and disordered according to their respective-yet-always-related 
context and circumstance.41 
 
This may be effectively, once more, the outgrowing of dualistic and polarizing as 
well as totalizing ego-perspectives and of the one-sidedly utilitarian, objectifying, 
commodificationist  attachment/perspective of the mutually reinforcing individual, 
institutional, corporate and the state ego(s). Experience of the nondual global noetic 
repertoire in its narratistic, existential, imaginal and its conceptual variety—partly 
compassed, for example, in Harvard University’s “Religions of the World and Ecology” 
series of books—allows us to experiment with a holistic, and even a “precautionary” 
environmental ethos of wu wei, on one hand, and a modest epistemotherapy of Light 
Conversation, (qing tanΨ and knack of evocatively “metic intelligence” on another.42  
My own hybrid discourse-narrative’s dualization between essentialized 
instrumentalism there and similarly reified spontaneous resonance here along with its 
own kind of relatively persistent rhetorical instrumentalism invites critique on grounds I 
myself have offered. I am not insensitive to the problems. Our way is paved with 
crossroads. We have to do together in the ecologization of mind and culture something 
that Wu says is characteristic of the shaman-trickster Zhuangzi regarding “the sorting that 
evens things out,” and that something is evocative ontohermeneutics. “We change life by 
making life coherent, and we are. . .changed by living the coherence we continually 
[co]create. . . . We must be evoked to live our lives as we have never lived.” The liminal 
quantum leap of poetic evocation, “allows what is normally peripheral to move to center 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  232    
stage, and become ‘an opportunity for realizing that an accepted pattern has no 
necessity’” and leads in part “to the forging of communitas” as the shaman, poet, trickster 
relativizes, problematizes, “challenges and negates conventional social (and physical) 
realities” in midwifing a new paradigm for sustainable ecosocial engagement.43  
But then again, says Berman, another paradigm may not be quite the thing; more 
metaphysics, agrees Ames, is exactly the problem. And Hall outs the issue entirely in 
suggesting the act of communication itself is “ideally, noninstrumental” altogether, 
becoming more authentically sustaining and practical the more playful and contemplative 
it is. But Morin finds Ariadne’s thread in all this discursive to and fro with a special, tacit 
relevance to the question of ecohumane resonance beyond sustainability alone: “The 
pathology of reason is rationalization, which encloses reality in a system of ideas that are 
coherent but partial and unilateral, and does not know that a part of reality is 
unrationalizable, and that rationality’s mission is to dialogue with the unrationalizable.” 
This is a meta-order of coherence unfamiliar to us. And this, pertinently yet 
inconclusively, is just the point McClintock makes in observing that whatever the 
unconditioned does in any conditioned situation, (the Buddha in her illustrationΨ, “it  
must all be seen to be his teaching. . . .a kind of theater, in which words are merely one 
facet of the way” every aspect of which is “aesthetic” as Ames also said and Berry too in 
speaking of a self-rewardingly and self-referentially “celebratory” humanocosmic 
coherence.44  
Univocal epistemic Truth in thought is less the sustaining issue than is living 
meaning or carryover of functional cosmogenic value in living ontohermeneutic 
experience; and meaning does not reduce; even its circumstantial locality is nonlocally 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  233    
and is nondually complicit with everything we can, as Morin also says, “distinguish 
without disjoining,” “associate without identifying or reducing” or, I’ll propose, conflate 
without confusing. In Wu’s apposite meditation on Zhuangzi, “the extent of being human 
and alive is gauged by the extent to which one can draw implications (unexpected as well 
as expected) out of an incident – be it literary, psychic, or historical,” be it in analogy, 
coincidence, synchronicity or reverie; who does this is “a creator, a poet. The extent of 
being alive is proportional to the extent to which one is a poet. It is the power with which 
one branches out of. . .one’s ordinary” or habituated life. As if to echo the unlikely team 
of Deacon, Einstein and Laozi in speaking of the relations with nature of the sage or 
“consummate person” (zhen ren), Ames invites our contemplation this way: The sage 
embraces the de, i. e., “the arising of the particular in a process vision of experience” 
through becoming attentionally or ententionally “coextensive with” the particulars of hir 
environment. . . .  
The absence of a ‘dis-integrating’ ego-self makes [hir] open to the de of 
[hir] whole natural environment so that the environment contributes to 
[hir], making  [hir] potent and productive, and [s/he] contributes to the 
environment, strengthening, enhancing, and interpreting its natural 
direction. [Hir] presencing in the world is colored by the de of [hir] whole 
environment extending out to embrace ultimately all of existence. . . . 
Viewed from the perspective of the discriminated particularity, [s/he] is 
[sustainingly] transforming something other than [hir]self; from the 
perspective of [hir] diffusion within [hir]context, [s/he] has become a 
larger focus of what it is that is [sustainably] self-transforming.45 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  234    
The relativization of linguistic, conceptual and noetic structures, one by another in 
discursive and, as Hershock tellingly says, “concursive” forms itself begins (theΨ one’s 
nondual mind (or self-)likening (shu) of or with another. In this ontohermeneutic shu, 
they simultaneously improvise coworlding in a polytropic, a resource-full, econoetic 
whose new words, analogies and images, as Goethe one time suggested, provide the raft 
to a further shore of mind, and perhaps occasionally, to no-mind -- unconditioned, 
dehabituated mind, wuxin, wunian, paused and leisured, skhole -- in the advent of a 
mature contemplative consciousness--on, of, and as Earth--that is integrally capax 
universi  (capable of experiencing the wholeness, the fullness of existence) without being 
anthropocentrically appetitive, manipulative, totalistic or reductive. (Our) 
nonmanipulative “activity” integrating the particular de with the dao of any 
wholing/contextualization is (performing) wu wei -- often translated as nonaction or ziran  
and now what might also be considered the spontaneity or natural self-soness of the self-
organizingly emergent dynamics of more-than-sustainable anthropocosmic 
co(en)tention.46  
In (re)turning with Berry to the spontaneities of the Earth for a fresh narration, 
conception and sustaining experience of ecosocial coherence born in the tendencies and 
aptitudes of cosmogenesis itself, we turn anew to the shamanic aptitudes. These are as 
much those of the traditional contemplative sustainably deconditioning hir conventional 
habituation as those of the swift-seeing opportunas of deconditioned Hermes shaman and 
trickster, the always-underway journeyer, messenger, crosser of boundaries, god of lucky 
finds, crossroads, thefts, windfalls and synchronistic events of ongoing-wholing for 
whom diremptions, inconsistencies, crosscurrents, error and entropy can be as fruitful, if 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  235    
not more, as (univocal, cognicentric) Truth in sustaining the ecology of mind and 
interbeing. The serio ludere of this is fractally reinscribed in Morin’s notion of a 
“complex thinking” that satisfies the present need for,  
seeking out the relation of inseparability and of inter-retro-action between 
each phenomenon and its context and of every context with the planetary 
context. . . . an ecologized thinking that, instead of isolating the object [or 
cultural or disciplinary theme] being studied, considers it in and through 
its auto-eco-organizational relation to [all else]. . . .recogniz[ing] its 
incompleteness. . . .but also the whole in the part. . . .[in the] planetary 
complex involv[ing] a ceaseless movement from the part to the whole and 
from the whole to the part.47 
 
Our experience of the ever-transformative wu hua teaches us that what is order 
from here is not so from there, that what is no at one time is yes another; and we, 
likewise, are imparters and receivers, embodiments and participant-observers of yes and 
no, person and planet, dynamically singing together a psychophysical and humanocosmic 
ongoing-wholing which is probabilistically present in every part as intimated by Jung, 
Pauli, von Franz and others. Orderly syllogisms, synchronistic opportunas, the story, 
myth, dream and probability space correspond with one another in evoking, performing 
and dynamically stabilizing our souls’ eήcoherency codes.  Responding thus does our 
vocabulary of terms and concepts outgrow that of one arena, point of view, consciousness 
structure, cultural area or disciplinary concern as we come to understand that-by-which 
phenomenal and cognitive change proceed.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  236    
The one who knows this in hirself and others is called wise, or ming, and such 
immediate knowing is distinguished by the Daoist, we are told, from conventional 
distinction making. As Raphals states this, “the metaknowledge that results from Taoist 
ming cannot be mapped logically onto the polarities of language. Nor. . .common-sense.” 
Indeed, Raphals returns to the Zhuangzi to reflect that the categories of language and 
morality, of chaos or order, themselves arise from the “’small knowledge’ of a limited 
point of view” -- one from which, we might remind ourselves, orderly schools of small 
fry cannot imagine the abyssal free and easy soundings of great fish. For, as Zhuangzi has 
intimated to us in different metaphor, their “cognitive judgments put the cart before the 
horse.” 48 
Who contemplatively embodies great knowledge or ming does not disquiet hirself 
over the essentializing labels of order or chaos, mind or nature, same or different, shi or 
fei – nor with dualizing (of) science (from) religion or art -- but with the spontaneity of 
authentic shu s/he concourses the self-organizingly diverse doings and thinkings of 
humans and of nature, thus sustainingly articulating their anthropocosmic wholing(s) by 
the knack of a stochastic languaging/worlding and mode of consciousness marrying the 
random with the predictable, novelty with order, and finding psyche with/in physis. Thus 
the crazy sometimes far-from-equilibrium-with-the norm self-organizing wisdom of 
contemplatives, sages, scholars, scribes and householders who bring out of their 
storerooms things both old and new. The roofbeam of the old order is sagging, responds 
Yijing  #28, Da Guo at this moment; it is an exceptional situation, a crisis; and 
extraordinary measures are in order. At the same time, having a correspondingly great 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  237    
idea means being excessive. And “The road of excess,” always reports Blake, “leads to 
the palace of wisdom.”49 
As Jeremy Campbell clarifies in this ecosemiogenic regard, life itself may be 
more like language “conveying information that is partly predictable and partly 
unpredictable” than like throwing dice or shooting fish in a barrel. In this sense, more-
than-sustainable ecohumane life, consciousness and languaging may at optimum share in 
the autopoietic knack of  “great knowledge...entail[ing] the unimpeded perception of 
transformation. What great knowledge recognizes as a continuous process of 
transformation, small knowledge and language mistakenly perceive as polar opposites: 
death and life, survival and ruin. . .” order and chaos, win and lose.50  
Letting go now and then of the competitive, ego-reductive win-lose, shi-fei (“’tis-
‘tisn’t”Ψ mentality and yielding or releasing (cf. wu wei, Gelassenheit, shu), here and 
there, to the ziran of wuxin -- the natural mind of disegoed anthropocosmogenesis -- 
might free up a sustainingly playful and sagely “metaknowledge” “unimpeded by the 
normative categories” or over-reliance on “the business deal mentality.” Raphals reminds 
us not only that the “metaknowledge” of Daoist ming cannot be “mapped logically onto 
the polarities of language,” but also that, it “refrain[s] from the futile purposiveness 
of...wei” or polemic “deeming,” assertive pushing and discursive, commercial or partisan 
political self-aggrandizing. Releasing the languaging and attending of Humanity in 
appositeness with, in unprecedentedly concursive conduct as, the spontaneities of the 
intellectually, culturally and ecologically diverse Earth may also be the participation--in a 
world of dynamically emergent self-organizing (degrees of) order and chaos--of a self-
rewardingly playful mode of creative teleodynamic articulation and coevolution at, and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  238    
(always already) beyond, the threshold of all the familiar regime of ego-laden goals, 
duties, defaults and habituations. “Thus the Chinese say that through a  holy, earnest play 
we can get closer to discovering the objective order of the universe.”51  
 
Authentic spontaneity of language as and with, not simply or objectifyingly about, 
the rhythms and patterns of cosmic nature in daily life is participation with and poiesis as 
the Great Transformation. It bespeaks, in the felicitous phrasing of Chung-ying Cheng,  
the joyous “ontocosmology of life-creativity [that] is at the same time ecological.”52  Not 
setting up opposites, (cl)aims, holdings and fixed positions to fight among and over nor 
monothetically asserting oneness as another contender in the ring, this (para)mentality 
and its modes of language and conduct poetically and autopoietically sustain, and are 
sustained by, the ever-various and cogrowthful life of things in the nondual 
anthropocosm that is also ecocosm today. “Raise high the roofbeam, carpenters.”53 
Endnotes: K=2: A Joyous Cosmology 
1.) the most complex behaviors, S. Kauffman 1995: 87; Morin 1999: 33 
2.) Laughlin and others 1990; preadapted for the venture, S. Kauffman 2008: 36; Deacon: 
363; Neville participation in the natural world: 4-5, manifesting in interaction, ibid.: 300, 
natural function, ibid.: 301, semiotic act,, ibid.: 310, self-less bliss, ibid.: 291, measure, 
ibid: 301; Primack and Abrams: 288-90 offer an intriguing view of the evolution of 
consciousness in the universe in the section titled “Integrating cosmic Ideas into our 
Lives”; see Stapledon; see also Bucke. Sustainability as the celebratory self-aware 
experience of anthropocosmogenesis  when modulated into terms offered by Thomas 
Berry 19κκ: 69 becomes, “. . .the purpose of all our science, technology, industry, 
manufacturing, commerce, and finance is celebration, planetary celebration. That is what 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  239    
moves the stars through the heavens and the [E]arth through its seasons. The final norm 
of judgment concerning the success or failure of our technologies is the extent to which 
they enable us to participate more fully in this grand festival”; cf. Latour 
3.) Watts 1962; Berman fusion, etc., 2000: 116, 220, 229; citations, ibid. including D. H. 
Lawrence, 244,  Octavio Paz, 245 
4.) Deikman: 220-21; Blake in Erdman: 39; sustainable orientation, Burneko 2004, 2010, 
2011; Great Work, Berry 1999 
5.) K=2  S. Kauffman 1995: 85, passim; see Stapp; see Kafatos and Nadeau; Deacon is 
also entirely pertinent here. Throughout this essay I continue tacitly and overtly to 
problematize/complement Stuart Kauffman’s 1995 notion of  coevolutionary 
“optimization” with alternative constructions such as Varela, et al.: 196-97 on 
“satisficing” between coevolving systems or between systemsήorganisms and their 
environments. Changizi cited by Pavlus: 71 in a discussion of what are called complex 
computational “P versus NP problems” having a seemingly similar structure provides a 
helpful benchmark regarding coevolutionary optimization, satisficing, evolutionary 
bricolage, (and related themes of phronesis and upayaΨ by saying: “life doesn’t always 
require perfection to function well. . .. .often an imperfect approximating algorithm is 
enough.” Or, say Abrams and Primack: 9ι with perfect relevance to the larger issues of 
my own essay, “the goal should be sustainable prosperity, which is perfectly defined by 
the Zen saying, ‘Enough is a feast.’” 
6.) find creative cross-cultural anachronism again in Hall and Ames 1987: 7, 12, see also 
in this work a far-reaching inquiry into the ontohermeneutic significance and use of 
intercultural analogy.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  240    
7.) forming one body, Tu: 1985: 10, broadening and deepening, ibid.: 14, the full 
realization, ibid.: 15 
κ.Ψ “Centrality and Commonality,” Tu 19κ9;  “Focusing the Familiar,” Ames and Hall; 
contemplative sage conduct, Tu 1985: 73; on the centrality of humanity see the 
contemporary cosmology of Primack and Abrams: ι who write, for example, “The 
possession of this new story is a gift so extraordinary that most of us don’t know what to 
do with it. . . .The universe is here, and it’s more coherent and potentially meaningful for 
our lives than anyone imagined. . . .There is no geographic center to an expanding 
universe, but we are central in several unexpected ways. . .for example, we are in the 
center of all possible sizes. . .we are made of the rarest material. . .and we are living at the 
midpoint of time. . . .These and other forms of centrality have each been a scientific 
discovery, not an anthropocentric way of reading the data.” Their attempt to evoke 
conscious anthropocosmic relevance as a sustaining factor in our lives, outgrowing the 
anthropocentrism of earlier eras, is analogous with what I think of as the cosmomorphic 
dimension of ecohumane being and, correlatively, with what Berry 1988: 198-99 means 
when he talks of humans as Earth becoming conscious of itself and as being a 
dimensionality of the universe, “activat[ing] the most profound dimension of the universe 
itself, its capacity to reflect on and celebrate itself in conscious self-awareness” (ibid.: 
132); see also Swimme 1996; revisit Pico and capax universi ~ capable of universing 
ourselves 
9.) denominator, de Bary in Tu and Tucker 2004: 79 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  241    
1ί.Ψ Peat in “Active Information, Meaning and Form,” 
www.fdavidpeat.com/bibliography (accessed 10.28.05); Laszlo: 2003: 117; Stapp: 140, 
143 
11.) Berry 1988;  Gaia see Harding, Plotkin; exuberant equipoise, Rapp: 165; cf. Jian 
“gradual advance” with Abrams and Primack: 92-94 and passim on the “slow growth” of 
“sustainable civilization”; see also the Slow City Movement, città lenta, 
http://www.slowmovement.com/slow_cities.php/ (accessed 10.22.12) 
12.) self-creating and self-directing, Tu 1985: 20, cf., ziran; self-centeredness ibid.: 46 
13.) continuity of being, Tu 1985: 35 
14.Ψ Keller’s book is about the work of Nobel laureate Barbara McClintock; again see 
Primack and Abrams 
15.) S. Kauffman 1995: 86; see Burneko 2004 
16.Ψ edge of chaos and order, S. Kauffman 1995: κ5; see Deacon’s richly developed 
discussion of constraints in dynamic emergence 
17.) Ecozoic, Berry 1999: 8; see Primack and Abrams: 308 note 2 and online postings 
relevant to their UC Santa Cruz “Cosmology and Culture” course: 
http://www.ucsc.edu/search/?cx=012090462228956765947%3Ad0ywvq7bxee&cof=FO
RID%3A9&ie=UTF-8&q=cosmology+and+culture&x=9&y=8/ (accessed 7.27.12) 
18.) primordial awareness, Tu in Tu and Tucker 2004: 156; see also Mengzi (Mencius): 
2ίι “Humanity is the heart. . . .The Way of learning is nothing other than this: searching 
for the heart that’s wandered away” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  242    
19.) spontaneities, Berry 1988: 195; beyond our genetic coding, ibid.: 195, inherent 
authenticity, ibid.: 196, cf. cheng also zheng, rectitude; Laozi in ibid.: 196; see Burneko 
2010 
20.) guiding force, Berry 1988: 196; cosmic order itself, ibid.: 197; autistic, ibid.: 215; 
Wang Bi in Wagner 2ίί3: κ; Primack and Abrams: κ5 say again of cosmogenesis, “This 
is science: you are all this”;  an overture to this contemporary science is the ancient 
wisdom of recovering or re-inaugurating “lost contact with the deepest sources” in what 
Mengzi, Zhu Xi: 126 and others called recovering the lost heart/mind (xin). Zhu Xi: 129 
points out, however, that trying artificially to make the heart/mind grow is no help just as 
“always doing something with expectation” of reward is its own defeat – and Zhu: 138 
continues saying “When the [heart]mind is free from selfishness, it can immediately 
extend itself and operate anywhere,” also see ibid.: 15ί 
21.) Deacon: 223 
22.) cosmological being, Tucker in Tu and Tucker 2003:1 
23.) ziran, Wagner 2003: 194, passim; functional cosmology, Berry 1988: 66; Neville: 
299, 318-319;  Wenzi  in Wagner: 103 
24.) Deacon: 538; Berry 1988: 45-46, original emphasis 
25.) Zhuangzi in Watson, trans. 1964: 37; see also chaos and doubt Burneko 2003; 
orthograde and contragrade, Deacon: 549, 551; eschaton as a gateway see Koestler and 
see Elgin: see Turner on liminality 
26.) so immediate, Berry 1988: 195; from an abyss, idem.; look for Blake in Frye; cf. ge 
wu  as "investigating things" in Zhu Xi 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  243    
27.) anthropocosmic in Tucker and Berthrong: 19; pure unvitiated nature in deLaszlo: 80; 
psychoid, von Franz 1992: 4; see also von Franz 1974; see Bohm and Peat 
28.) holomovement, Bohm 1981 repr.: 177-78; undivided wholeness, ibid.: 144; 
techniques of meditation, Bohm 1976: 18 
29.) humanity forms one body in Tucker and Berthrong 1998: 19; Berry 1988: 219; see 
The Future of Man, Teilhard de Chardin: 282-88 
30.) Berry 1988: 216, 217 
31.) S. Kauffman 1995: 15 
32.) far-from-equilibrium optimization, S. Kauffman 1995: 21, 87, 91; near the transition, 
ibid.: 91; fuzzy see Kosko  
33.) stochastic hybridization, Campbell; fractal participation, Jones and Culliney, and see 
Burneko 2004; guan-like enactment of active information, Cheng 1995 and Bohm 
http://www.implicity.org/Downloads/Bohm_meaning+information.pdf/ (accessed 
7.15.14); in choice and value see Stapp; operational mysticism, Burneko 1981a: 10, 2010; 
Berry 1988; in humanocosmic terms that are both plaintive and galvanizing Primack and 
Abrams: 294 write, “The sheer importance of what is happening at the end of this human 
inflationary period on Earth, whether the results are brilliant or terrible, is likely to make 
our age a mythic one to our distant descendants. Only realize it! We matter beyond our 
wildest imagination.” See Vedral 
34.) Tradition also points, He Yan in Wagner 2003: 54; enantiodromia in deLaszlo: 89, 
247 and cf. Deacon on the interplay of orthograde and contragrade dynamics; 
chaotification cf. hundun in Wu 1990 and see Burneko 1986, Girardot; ziran in Wagner: 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  244    
194-95; Stapp: 1κ6, Stapp’s affiliation, not incidentally, is with Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory 
35.) wu wei. . .completely improvisational, Hershock: 57, 181; Berry 1988: 211, 48; see 
Abram 2011 
36.) Berry 1988: 220-21 
3ι.Ψ selection achieves and maintains, S. Kauffman 1993: xv, see also Deacon’s far-
reaching reinterpretation of natural selection; irreducible emergent property, S. Kauffman 
1993: 30;  yi xin (in current pinyin orthography, i-hsin in original), Hershock: 197 
38.) S. Kauffman 8-9; the sciences of quality, Bocchi and Ceruti: 234; prediction and  
repetition, ibid.: 25κ; see Erasmus and section κ.1 “Silly Sagesse” of the book you’re 
now  reading 
39.) ecology of mind, G. Bateson 19ι2; Earth’s insights, Callicott 1994;  the voice of the 
Earth, Roszak; see Primack and Abrams: 3-12 and the accompanying website 
http://viewfromthecenter.com/ (accessed 10.22.12); see also Burneko 1981b, 1988, 2003. 
I pause to suggest anew that self-organizingly emergent teleodynamic ententionality in 
any system (e. g. as treated by Deacon) may eventuate values, meanings, mind, etc. But 
this does not necessarily mean that any specific, predictable outcomes are likely to result. 
Self-aware cosmogenesis interculturally, interpersonally, transdisciplinarily or otherwise 
attentive to its ongoing-wholing aspects and potentials is interminately open 
anthropocosmogenesis – the spontaneous knack, bricolage, lun, satisficing arts, 
phronesis, or optimizing, etc. of which are performed by the contemplative in the zone of 
the ecosocial according to no formal rule or end as the spontaneous aptitude to perform 
sustainingly especially without “all the information” or an agenda beforehand, see 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  245    
Graham 1989: 186-91. And see above (note 35) re: the implications that wu wei as 
completely improvisational” interaction as Hershock: 57, 181 interprets it may be a 
satisfactory way of talking about, and of performing, the various modalities of sustaining 
cosmic, life and (inter)personal coevolution – i. e. the non-self-interested and reciprocal-
co-creating process(es) of cosmogenesis may be  described as wu wei (and ziran), best 
embodied and performed among humans as the sage or similar contemplative (see Jones 
and Culliney 1999 and Burneko 1991, 1992, 2004). This raises the question as to the 
degree cosmogenesis may be characterized as a contemplative process, with and before 
the emergence of the human/ego. The issue is less the success or the content of conduct 
metered by conventioned standards than it is of (our) attentiveness fasting the heart/mind 
of these and comparatively “ceasing to distinguish [our]self from what all the time has 
been acting through [us],” (see Graham ibid.:19κΨ -- call it “spontaneities,” Berry 19κκ, 
“dynamic emergence,” Deacon,” “flow, play,” Csikzentmihalyi, “the dao that can’t be 
told,” Laozi, “the sacred everything,” Fox: κ, “resonance,” Jahn and Dunne 2ί11, “the 
cosmic uroboros,” Primack and Abrams: 2ι6, 2κ6, “not-two,” Adi Da, “or in saying say 
nothing” in Graham ibid.: 2ί1. For the numerous and fertile connotations of lun, “sort,” 
“reason,” “the sorting that evens things out” see Wu 199ί; also see Polanyi on knack as 
personal knowledge or tacit knowing 
40.) more-than-human, Abram, see also Basso, Chatwin; the universe story, Swimme and 
Berry; guan see Cheng 1995; Primack and Abrams: 240 
41.) ecophilosophical act see Pieper:18, Hadot; Morin 2008: 32, 55; programmatic see J. 
Scott and also Polanyi; see Burneko 1988, Primack and Abrams; see Scott Two Cheers 
for Anarchism 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  246    
42.Ψ precautionary see “Earth Charter 2ίί2” in Miller and Westra: 9-15; light 
conversationalists, Blofeld 1973; metic intelligence, Raphals: xii, 6 
43.) Wu 1990: 8; poetic evocation, McClintock: 99; liminality see Turner 
44.) Berman 2000; Ames in Callicott and Ames: 114; D. Hall: 186; Morin 2008: 6; 
McClintock: 95-96; aesthetic, Ames in Callicott and Ames: 115-119; celebratory, Berry 
1988: 13-15 
45.) Morin 2008: 6; Wu 1990: 197; Ames in Callicott and Ames: 125, 130-31 
46.) Hershock: 55, 77; contemplative consciousness see Pieper: 38, 85; wu wei, Ames in  
Callicott and Ames: 129; anthropocosmic co(en)tention see Deacon 
47.) Berry 1988: 211-12; Hermes in Hillman: 163, see also Kerényi; Morin 1999: 130-31 
48.) conventional distinction making see Cook; Raphals: 80, 88; Zhuangzi in Raphals: 89 
49.) crazy wisdom, Robbins; things both old and new, Matthew 13:52; Blake see 
http://www.gailgastfield.com/mhh/mhh7.jpg/ and 
http://www.levity.com/alchemy/blake_ma.html/ (accessed 7.28.12) 
50.) Campbell: 12; great knowledge, Zhuangzi in Raphals: 98, 100 
51.) normative categories, Raphals: 76, 80; business deal mentality, Varela et al.: 246; 
metaknowledge, Raphals: 80, 81; thus the Chinese say, von Franz: 1980: 117; see also 
http://www.thecorporation.com/ (accessed 7.28.12) 
52.) Cheng in Tucker and Berthrong: 217; Deacon closes his book The Symbolic Species: 
The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997: 464 with 
what I will take as an ecopoietic antiphon: “And this may help us to recognize that the 
universe isn’t, after all, the soulless, blindly spinning clockwork we fear we are a part of, 
but is, instead, nascent heart and mind,” xin 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  247    
53. J. D. Salinger 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  248    
 
7.0 A Playful Symmetry 
 
On the way of an evocative hermeneutics, a way of developing insights beyond 
the univocal, linear and rational means of what Blake called the “consecutive” or 
“systematic reasoning” that leads to a “confident insolence” about things, we can include 
other, more analogical, polyphasic, synchronistic and paradoxical tactics of 
comprehension. The mutual amplification of diverse ideas from disparate sources (ge yi) 
found in classical Chinese thinking is recapitulated, for instance, in Jung’s idea of our 
amplification of meaning-resonance through the interpretive “circumambulation” of an 
archetypal image, or of symbols of wholeness like mandala or the cross. Hereby the 
conscious ego-intellect in active imaginal interactions with the unconscious ambles 
around the many-faceted theme or image allowing itself to be “penetrated” by the 
numerous associations and varied meaning resonances that may arise.1  
As understood by Jung and others, the archetypes, irrepresentable in themselves, 
as unconscious tendencies to patternment in psycho-cosmogenesis (the unus mundus 
discussed by von Franz) and as processual anthropocosmic probabilities rather than fixed, 
essentialized,  and entirely objectifiable things, appear as images, dreams, insights and 
sometimes in emotionally charged situations wearing the clothing, so to speak, of the 
circumstance, time and culture at hand. It’s theorized that in cases of synchronicity – the 
acausal meaningfulness of a coincident physical event and inward subjective state – an 
archetype is expressed in both physical and psychic aspects when there is some arousal of 
attention and interest for those involved. To the degree our individuating egos form a 
conscious relationship with archetypes, these archetypal tendencies presumably inform 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  249    
and activate our aptitudes for wiser – dynamically balancing, interexistentially 
symmetrizing and whole-somely more sustaining -- choices. Also, to the degree 
archetypal pattern-processes “at bottom” merge indistinguishably with nature and 
interpenetrate with one another, they are analogous to the field of superposed quantum 
possibilities that calls for some act or attention on our part to express itself in a manifest 
way. But Jung was explicit in warning “against taking the archetypes. . .or psi-powers to 
be the causal agency of synchronistic events.” These events do not seem amenable to 
being intentionally manufactured at will; synchronicity is acausal meaningfulness, in any 
case, thinks Jung. Neither physical nor psychic causation is privileged here; nor does a 
conventional quantitative energy model seem to apply, for it would suggest the effects 
would diminish with distance or time, yet these do not always seem relevant.2  
Progoff, however, persuasively argues synchronicity may be induced or evoked 
saying it cannot be forced but that we can become sensitive to it – and he proposes such 
cultivation as keeping a journal, maintaining an atmosphere of dialogue with the 
archetypes, and we might think to add using biofeedback and contemplative or attentional 
practices, even Yijing. We also know from Gebser that taking an ego-utilitarian view only 
exacerbates magic will-to-power ego-orientations already well established on our side of 
Earth-human relations. At the same time, a meticulous review of the question notes that 
Jung did not close the theoretical door on the possibility -- one based on his own version 
of lab or, in his case, couch science -- that while each case of synchronicity is unique, “all 
reality may consist of such. . . .our statistical methods create only an abstract mental 
schema of reality. . . .Actual reality consists in fact of a sum of completely individual 
exceptions.” Every meaning is unique. And Jung’s idea that “all reality may consist of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  250    
such” leaves open to us the  possibility of a general synchronistic background constant of 
psychophysical meaningfulness that we, along lines sketched by Gebser, by habitual 
abstraction or instrumental ego-ratio have eclipsed, rend(er)ing experience compressed 
into the special case of abstract, linear-causal space and time indifferently populated by 
ourselves and other (similarly abstractedΨ “sectorizations.”3 
Progoff enlarges the theme to note that “[t]he patterns that arise within the 
processes of evolution as the psychoid, nonpsychic ground of human development, are 
thus correspondences of the universe manifested in the individual being.” They are called 
psychoid to emphasize they are objective natural phenomena and not just private 
psychological events or processes. Jung underlines the idea that if meaningful 
coincidence of universe and psyche in a given synchronistic event can’t be explained in 
linear-causal or ego-perspectivated terms, then the connecting principle must lie in the 
equal significance of outward event and inward state. In other words, the tertium 
comparationis, the thing physis and psyche have in common at that moment, is 
(irreducibly anthropocosmic) meaning itself.  Synchronistic meaning, analogous with 
what, sometimes following Corrington, I have called the ecosemiotic event, exists 
“outside” as well as “inside” the psyche. As Jung puts it elsewhere, consciousness and 
meaning have a cosmogonic function. This is, again, redacted by Berry as the idea that 
human consciousness is a dimensionality of the universe; and Stapp has repeated in 
various ways his quantum understanding that “nature is a process that has aspects that we 
can and do describe in two different ways, psychological and physical.” Is it time to say 
something like: the evolution of the universe is the evolution of consciousness; the 
evolution of consciousness is the evolution of the universe; cosmogenesis is noogenesis?4  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  251    
Experience of the unconscious, in this view, bring us into direct contact with what 
Berry has called the spontaneities of Earth and what Progoff identifies as “the primary, 
most pervasive processes of the universe.” The archetypes, in turn, alter as they are 
consciously engaged according to the realtime circumstances of the engagement. And to 
the extent our noninstrumentalizing attention or open contemplative interest expresses a 
“surrender of individual subjective identity” (with or to the universeΨ the entropy of 
experience -- as evidenced in the terms of research on significantly nonrandom outcomes 
of (non-physically-mediated) human interactions with otherwise random event generators 
(REGs) -- may be said to be reduced, negentropically empatterned or filtered, perhaps 
attitudinally, archetypally or in relation with structured attentiveness. By way of the terms 
of quantum interpretation, the familiar (and perhaps, but not necessarily, synchronistic) 
collapse or constellation of the interminate wavefunction possibility field in the choices 
and (f)acts of our unique partly-given and partly-constructed humanocosmic contexts 
may be understood as exactly that, an event of anthropocosmic participation co-
originating in our attention and interest with/in/as irreducible ongoing-worlding. We 
might even infer it is undivided psycho-cosmogenesis itself that is expressing meaning, 
entention, value and choice -- through attentive engagement and resonance in each 
synchronistic event and through a dynamically stabilized “template for action” within and 
beyond the individual mind-brain in most other routine “measurement” events.5 
We may infer too, along with other researchers, that to the degree we resonantly 
accord with the patterns of cosmogenesis – sensitively attentive, nondominatory – we 
find “consciousness as a proactive agency in the establishment of reality” according to 
the prospect of a “Science of the Subjective.” Of course, in the case of synchronicity 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  252    
there are other formulations. Albertus Magnus following Avicenna speaks of “great 
excess of passion [that]. . .binds things” (cf. gua 28 of YijingΨ; and Jung observes that “In 
the intuitive or ‘mantic’ experiment-with-the-whole. . .there is, [unlike in a sterile lab 
setting] no need of any question which imposes conditions and restricts the wholeness of 
the natural process.” Nevertheless, Jung, as the rishis before him, warns against taking 
synchronistic or paranormal events, siddhi, as important ego-aims or instruments.6  
For that matter, any psychologically healthful participation in cosmogenesis, if we 
are to use such terms, depends, for Jung, on an individuated self, more richly 
dimensioned than ego alone, engaging in consciously cocreative relation and 
participation and not simply immersed in phenomena.  Sustainable well-being in person 
and (with) planet is a function of relationships and community – this calls more for 
reciprocity and accord than for fusion – though unio and a living sense of unus mundus 
will retain always both therapeutic, numinous and recreational value. In the end, a 
contemplative relaxation or pause (Greek skhole, school) of the insistent ego-perspective 
is also a source of mature liberal culture itself. Pieper introduces  his little book, Leisure 
the Basis of  Culture saying this “philosophical act” 
. . .is a fundamental relation to reality, a full personal attitude which is by 
no manner of means at the sole disposal of the ratio; it is an attitude which 
presupposes [literal and figurative] silence, a contemplative attention to 
things, in which [we begin] to see how worthy of veneration they really 
are.7  
Whether in the lab, at the Confucian ritual or around the tribal fire, our aptitudes 
for effective resonance with the wholing patterns and tendencies of natural possibility 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  253    
seem more evident when we get out of our own way through a yielding or suspension of 
ego-intentionality. Whether expressed in “excess” of feeling, dehabituation of our normal 
selfing/interest or paradigm, practice of Yijing, in contemplation, kenosis, Gelassenheit, 
paradoxical omnivalence, guan, fixing dinner, reading or taking a walk in the woods, the 
implications from the various sources are that sustainable, functional, mutually beneficial 
Earth-human relation, is more likely to be found by detensifying our ego-orientation to 
some at least moderately effective degree.  And similarly, the occasional letting go of 
everyday ego concerns (not even speaking here of egotistical and egoistical 
preoccupations) in relaxed and broad yet genuine attentiveness allows us coherent pattern 
recognition of the kind the quantum patriarchs associated with their downtime-from-
arduous-concentration insights and discoveries made while abed, taking a bath or riding 
the bus. Put differently, we learn from shamanic trance, contemplative reverie, amurakh 
or meditative ataraxia, that we can receive/impart little with a clenched fist.8  
The discerning reader will see I have here speedily conflated some reflections on 
synchronicity conceived from an archetypal point of view with research ideas about 
significant statistical anomalies in human interactions with random event generators 
(REG).  This ge yi hybridization is a homespun practice of metis, phronesis, or upaya 
towards a deconditioning of our default codifications of understanding and experience 
and of conducting discourse for sustainability. 9 As we learned from Yijing near the end 
of chapter 6, a great or a sincere idea matching a great crisis is inevitably excessive. 
There is no need to worry about losing promotion and tenure (through methodological 
mix-and-match, for instance) if the clean water is drying up or the soil is poisoning us to 
death. It may be helpful to keep on hand the reflection that whether by ratiocination, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  254    
reason, contemplation, dream, or metaphor, in trance, dance, altered state or naked 
attention, across those disciplines precisely quantitative as well as those expansively 
qualitative or poetic -- and yet again through invoking radically diverse cultures and the 
insights of diverse time periods and disciplines -- we learn arts of analogization and 
mazeway reformulation by which productively and sustainingly to contextualize and to 
engage ambiguity and uncertainty.  
“Association, the tool of creativity, raises awareness of possible connections 
between apparently disparate interpretations and allows the consciousness to move 
beyond duality. . . . [This] empowers rather than reduces the uncertainty” for, the more 
uncertainty the greater potential for insight and information. In uncertainty “at the 
margins of reality. . .consciousness has provisional access not only to those realities with 
which it is familiar, but also to the vaster uncertainty that constitutes the ultimate 
Source.” I do not know if or what this source may be; beyond an apophatic nondualism 
that is not an affirmative monism (as I understand these terms) I remain openhearted as to 
the nature or interrelation of inward and outward, mind, spirit, body, matter, god, psyche, 
etc. I am singing a seasonal song, not establishing a fixed doctrine. But I do say with 
Zhuangzi, for every this there is a that, in every that is this; and with the physicists,  
ecologians and the philosophical hermeneuts, I find that everything is connected – and 
often recirculating.  Murmurs again Zhuang Zhou, where they find no opposition is “the 
hinge of the Way [Dao Shu]. . . .it can respond endlessly. . . .So I say, the best thing to 
use is clarity.”  
Both knowledge and illumination culminate in the single notion of yet-to-
begin-to-be (wei shi yuΨ. We on our part must dwell in the realm of ‘yet-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  255    
to-begin-to-have-yes-and-no,’ where there is no ‘formation’ or 
‘deformation’. . .where we discard the ‘false  brilliance’ (of geniuses. . . .Ψ 
To be enlightened about this, we must ‘dwell in diverse ordinaries’ where 
there are no experts, whether they are musicians or logicians. This is to go 
‘by clarity-illumination.’10  
This is not the formal way of straight-on academic-discursive and generally 
sequential, propositionally cumulative reasoning, but more the more-or-less 
contemplative network/field reverie of a polythetic, open-ended existential dialogue or 
horizon-fusing process whereby the sureties of the acculturated ego are relativized 
(rendered uncertain, descertained) by what comes up and whereby, at the same time, the 
ego can begin entering a nuanced and “polyphasic” relationship with multiply meaningful 
insights that arise directly through the spontaneities of nature, so to speak, and that also 
enrich and expand the hyperindividual’s outlooks beyond those of restricted ego-self 
interest and cognicentric convention in sometimes quite alternative states and modes of 
consciousness and in intuitions or in experiences, performances of and as the universing 
in anthropocosmic forms. These experiences are those we have of the universe and 
simultaneously they are the universe experiencing itself. It was kinesthetic imaging that 
put Einstein on a beam of light well before it was logic; and it was logic, as Obeyesekere 
reminds us, that gave the imaginal its conceptual efficacy. And in the ecology of mind 
and experience, no one kind of awareness can lay claim to veracity, for it varies with our 
ways of knowing and does not come in the singular. Or to let Gebser again emphatically 
expound upon the matter with what I will take as ontohermeneutic relevance to the issue 
of a more-than-sustainable lifeworld, using the word verition as I would use 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  256    
contemplation -- Integration (of human experience, natural systems and the structures of 
consciousness): 
cannot be effected by mere thinking. . .but requires another capacity which 
we shall call ‘verition’ or ‘waring’ and encompasses the ‘sense’ of 
perceiving as well as imparting verity or truth. Only through this 
reciprocal perception and impartation of truth by man and the world can 
the world become transparent for us. . . .That is to say: through. . .verition 
the merely audible, intuitable, and visible world will be present in its 
entirety or wholeness.  What is necessary is that this integrity and 
integrality be actualized. 
And again Terry Tempest Williams responds: “Finding beauty in a broken world 
becomes more than the art of assemblage. It is the work of daring contemplation that 
inspires action.”11  
 
In this essay, I’m dealing not so much with images of the kind that stirred Einstein 
as with (the languaging of) multiply interlaced ideas; and their hybrid evocative effect is 
taken as helpful for our future political and ecopolitical life. In allowing such mutually 
amplifying ideas “edifying” concourse in our “contemplation in a world of action,” we 
turn with the planetary repertoire of cultural and imaginal expression, drawn from myth, 
tradition, science and so forth. And all of this cumulatively enriches a genuinely 
transdisciplinary, intercultural hermeneutics of evocation for the practical purposes of 
living beyond sustainability in resonance with one another and with our greater 
environment. The threads of different disciplines, cultures, mind-states and traditions 
lengthen, and their interbraiding reveals itself as raiment of our shared life. 12  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  257    
 
Weaving into this Berman’s polytropic “paradox” mode of awareness -- a mature 
and productive ambiguity, omnivalence, and wide attentiveness that is more a 
participated world presence than a world view or a search for certainty – we can infer a 
broad tapestry of implications. Taking paradox consciousness to elide or superpose the 
possibilities of atheoretical and even aconceptual attentiveness with (what is eo ipso 
humanocosmic) cognitive conception, (from concipere, “take together” connoting 
fertilization, hybridization), it suggests a simultaneously appositional and propositional, 
an ideational and an embodied ontohermeneutic that is also ecohumane agency. Conduct 
and embodied consciousness are by this view inseverably and simultaneously, or 
achronically, (and not always equally), the experience of interminately creative and re-
creative humanocosmic sustainability. In this sense, paradoxical awareness is living and 
active Earth-human co-consciousness.13  
Stated in other cultural terms, even theoretical ideas participate the process of 
cosmogenesis and need not necessarily be understood solely as outside comments upon 
it. The implications of this range from the New Age to the Ecozoic Age and the quantum 
abstruse. Zhu Xi believes that true reading, is a “disciplined and reverential encounter 
with the words of the great sages,” (datong) and thus with the embodiments of naturally 
sustaining Dao. Wang Yangming presents the paradox saying that with or without 
reading, or conceptualization at all,  “if my mind is separated from heaven and [E]arth 
and other things then there will be no my mind”; Gregory Bateson, not incidentally, puts 
this as the “necessary unity” of  mind and nature; and Cheng clarifies this further 
indicating that things abide as an ongoing-wholing and the mind is both manifesting this 
and also contributing to its formation. Intellectual intuition concerning this, exclusively 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  258    
reducible neither to arationalism nor esoterics, logic or revelation, is in Confucian  
tradition “predicated on the presumption that since humanity forms an inseparable unity 
with heaven, [E]arth, and the myriad things, its sensibility is in principle all-embracing” 
yet not totalizing, objectifying or manipulatively impositional; “going beyond the 
restrictions of anthropocentrism,” it is, rather, “an ecological insight, locating humanity 
in a highly complex web of interdependency.”14  
Perhaps even more relevant to an expansion of the theme of polyphasic and 
paradox awareness is the prospect that as a natural function of the mind, philosophy is 
both critical inquiry and spiritual quest “through meditative thinking as well as logical 
reasoning. Such a quest involves man’s whole being rather than merely his cognitive 
faculty” because philosophical learning is (what I’ll here call eco-Ψ “spiritual self-
cultivation”; and education, continues Tu in Humanity and Self-Cultivation, “far from 
being the accumulation of empirical knowledge” is for learning inter- and eco-culturally 
“conceived” as a sustaining process of humanocosmic “self-authentication amid a variety 
of depersonalizing forces.”15  
 
The ancient and indigenous ways of experiencing the world are not inert, dead or 
irrelevant, nor are contemporary and scientistic rigors exclusive means or determinative 
ways to eunoia. It is only a rational/mental evolutionary perspectivalism of the kind 
Gebser critiques that relegates an earlier time’s forma mentis to the category of mere 
(in)fancy. But such perspectivalism is proper only to one among many possible 
structures, states or phases of consciousness. And on this topic, it is still an open question 
of what, or whose, historical and evolutionary time is. Spengler’s proposition that we 
ourselves are time and Bergson’s concerning durée make no less sense than does the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  259    
linear sequencing of supposedly objective and independent eons, minutes and 10-43 
seconds. Gebser suggests, in seeking to evoke us from the dogmatic (and largely 
corporateΨ slumbers of our quantitative clockwork “time anxiety,” that we look to the 
“achronon” of a non- or post-egoic “creative temporics” of “time concretion” or “time 
freedom” whereby diverse phases and structures of consciousness enjoy compresence in 
the integral, “aperspectival” diaphaneity of ever-present origin. The different structures of 
consciousness experienced “throughout time” may hereby be nonprejudicially 
experienced “synchronously” and integrated achronically – somewhat in the spirit of 
what Zhuangzi calls “not-yet-beginning-to-be-a-beginning” of divided this and that, then 
and now.16  
In speaking of such ontohermeneutics at work in (and in interpreting) Zhuangzi, 
Wu Kuang-ming beseeches us that such a polyvalent “method of evocation is not for 
aimless sophistic dispersion but for fruitful life peregrination” and promisingly asserts as 
well that “the result is life lived in ‘fun.’” And even if fun is left out of our dutiful career 
and empire calculations, there is still much room for, (as we see in revisiting Guenther on 
the rDzogs-chen tradition of Tibetan BuddhismΨ, “creativity, play and ornament.” These 
three categories, we may note en route, instance in their superposed holistic implication 
and coactivation – and in their unexpected roles as the actual and foremost characteristics 
of Being -- “awe” of the kind Kauffman proposes in his book Reinventing the Sacred. 
Such awe, reverie-bred reverence, waring and respect, Kauffman judges, have become 
powerfully unfashionable in what he thinks is our confused postmodern society; yet they 
may together be entraining correctives and complements to our vexing, dominating 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  260    
monotonic, monothetic and monophasically reductive consciousness and its attendant 
antiecological outcomes – as underscored in Kauffman’s apostrophe: 
Friend, you cannot even predict the motions of three coupled pendula. 
You have hardly a prayer with three mutually gravitating objects. We let 
loose pesticides on our crops; the insects become ill and are eaten by birds 
that sicken and die, allowing the insects to proliferate in increased 
abundance. The crops are destroyed. So much for control. Bacon, you 
were brilliant, but the world is more complex than your philosophy.17  
 
A similar contemplation of the awesome “matrix of mystery” that we are and 
inhabit is coded in the now familiar words of Einstein that: “The most beautiful 
experience we can have is the mysterious. It is the fundamental emotion which stands at 
the cradle of true art and true science.”  We don’t know beforehand where and how 
understanding will appear. Fun, creativity, play, ornament and awe, along with the 
mysterious, the laughably just-crazy-enough-to-be-true turns in theory-formation 
promoted by Bohr and Feynman, and the blessing grace of unpredictable insights so far 
removed from our earnest paradigms and platitudes that they initially seem flat-out silly, 
evidence a qualitative, even a profoundly self (a)musing, dimension of kosmos. 18 
“Nature” Feynman is quoted as saying, “uses only the longest threads to weave 
her pattern, so each small piece of the fabric reveals the organization of the entire 
tapestry.” In its holographic interweaving of poetics with physics, self in other, and mind 
as nature, a nondualizingly ecocontemplative awakening as guan, contemplative verition, 
and wuxin more-than-sustainingly discloses the integrated orders of interbeing in their, in 
our, dynamically coherent text/textile of living experience. The fractal warp and weft of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  261    
anthropocosmic incarnation constitute the dancing body of intrinsically de-lightful shared 
life and intelligence in all forms; we are universing in each syllable, text, movement and 
sound we create. In this playfully musing etymological version of a string theory, the 
embodied tantra (loom and warp of thread or string that joins and connects) in ongoing-
ontohermeneutic-wholing is the life enhancing sutra (string of precepts; cf. suture) that 
con-ceives together the objective eco-anthropo-cosmic fabric as a communion of co-
creatively (and more-and-less) ententional subjectivities sometimes mythopoeically 
imaged as Indra’s Net or Gaia or the Dreamtime. Such imaginals interpreted by Capra, in 
a discussion of S-matrix and quantum holism, suggest that everything in the universe is 
connected to everything else, “a dynamic  web of interrelated events” and no part, “none 
of the properties of any part” of it is fundamental.” Yet in light of  a quantum 
entanglement (that includes our own consciousness in the constellation of probabilities) 
even such seemingly innocent words as “part” and “determined” seem a little Newtonian. 
As Kafatos and Nadeau report, (the) matter seems even more a question of ((our) 
knowledge of) interacting-event possibilities in relation with which, Kauffman goes on to 
say in almost revivalist tones, “since reason truly is an insufficient guide. . . .we truly 
need to reinvent the sacred. . . based on the ultimate values we come to choose” in co-
responsibility for “the global civilization.”19  
This ever-varying tapestry of biocultural analogues, rhizomes, tropes and etymons 
effloresces as the self-(a)musing comedy (komos, a/musical and dancing festivity) of 
sparkling, glittering, ever-renewing kosmos. Silly it is; blessedly silly in its hip-hop, open 
drum and Wagnerian ontohermeneutic samplings, selig all the way down; because in a 
universe-that-is-our-be(com)ing it is as much our coevolutionary choices and our chants 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  262    
and econarratives as it is the coequal and corelevant randomicities of the quantum field 
that evoke and enact (the meaning of) self-rewardingly shared well-being. From the 
quaintly teleodynamic enchantments of Dante’s Divine Comedy wherein the “Intelligence 
unfolds its bounty, multiplied through the stars” the “organs of the universe” (Par. ii), to 
Elgin’s 21st century vision of a living “universe that . . . is connected with itself through 
the tissue of consciousness in non-local ways. . . . [having] a self-reflexive capacity that 
enables systems at every scale of existence to exercise some freedom of choice,” we are 
steeped in the juicy humor of things. All our arts and sciences, with the rhododendrons, 
Jesus and Buddha, are the chuckling vestiges of an ever-present, deep-bellied guffaw 
resounding in trypanosomes, toucans, terza rima, and the Trifid Nebula.20 
 But it’s back to Tibetan Buddhism as understood by Guenther in light of 
contemporary systems science that our intercultural ge yi of concept-matching-and-
sampling now carries us; though once again we need to remind ourselves that the 
accumulation and development of ideas alone, no matter how illuminating they may be, 
is not what is traditionally known as enlightenment. Again, however, gladly to study, 
learn and teach are ways of  authentically embodying ecohumane flourishing since in all 
our sincere acts we are “that being who through self-transformation. . .realizes not only 
the moral goodness that is intrinsic to [our] nature but also the cosmic creativity that 
embraces the universe in its entirety.” As Primack and Abrams have recontextualized this 
in the contemporary setting, “Since we’re all immersed in the universe and much of it is 
immersed in us, there is indisputably a relationship between the universe and us. A real 
relationship is not something  you can view from outside, but something  you participate 
in. But how do we relate to the universe? All our relating tools are small.”21  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  263    
Such a problem for us in an unsustaining epoch of consumption and credit default 
econocracy is perhaps not our small concepts and outlooks or our "uncertainty relations," 
even less our dis-cursive ego habituations themselves than the monopoly on choices 
granted them by our attachments to the gainful prowess achieved thereby. However, 
Blake admonishes, “If a fool would persist in his folly he would become wise.” And so 
we may across cultures and mentalities transdisciplinarily work with our ideas and even 
with, or through, our attachments as a subset of skillful means -- the upaya by which we 
deconstruct some of our conventional ego-intellect compulsions in the process of 
contemplatively “retuning” or “reentraining” our “neurognostic” aptitudes and templates 
for complex internoetic or polyphasic paradox consciousness and for choosing mature 
experience in ecohumane and anthropocosmic relationship.22  
 
As Jeremy Hayward summarizes in his Foreword to Herbert Guenther’s From 
Reductionism to Creativity: rDzogs-chen and the New Sciences of Mind, the self-
organizing field of nondual “mindήexperienceήworld [i. e., “experience-as-such”] evolves 
dynamically” as a continuity of Being according to “inherent principles.”23 We may 
provisionally (and ontopoietically) analogize these inherent principles (neither stipulating 
nor denying here any particular goals) with the naturalist Chinese ziran of that-which-is-
of-itself-what-it-is and with the cosmically natural aptitudes of coevolutionary systems 
optimization or satisficing encoded in yinyang K=2 as well as with the suggestion of its 
bricoleur tinkering amid what Berry has identified as cosmo-archetypal spontaneities of 
Earth.  
The dynamic emergence of the (self)organization/realization of experience-as-
such, Hayward recounts, is that of nondualized subject and object mutually being brought 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  264    
forth as what contemporary systems theory calls an open system, a dynamic system far 
from equilibrium, one at the border of chaos and order and open (to B/being(s)) in its 
exchanges (xiangtong, huitong) of information, novelty, entention, energy and entropy 
with its environment. Such structurally coupled systems can be metastable, and if they 
receive too much or inappropriate input beyond a certain range they can, as Kauffman 
has also noted, devolve or, with suitable input and interaction, coevolve to another 
metastable process/phase of still greater organization, complexity, recursivity and 
meaning/information. In moving to complex states or dynamically stable phases of 
organization, such a self-organizing system presents itself as a dissipative structure, that 
is, dissipative of complete randomness, of disorder -- one of greater resonance and 
sustainable coherence. And, Hayward confirms, although rDzogs-chen’s mature 
contemplatives did not use the systems science concepts of dissipative structures to 
develop their ideas, Guenther is spot-on in his interpretation that, 
the concept of dissipative structure applies to the system experience-as-
such, as well as to the other natural systems for which it was originally 
used by Ilya Prigogine. . . .The translation of the Tibetan term sangs-
rgyas, meaning ‘buddha,’ as ‘dissipative structure’ is . . .an accurate 
rendering of the intended meaning of the term. . . .The Sanskrit term 
buddha [awakened one]. . . .refers to the dispelling of confusion, or the 
dissipation of disorder, entropy.24  
 
Expressing in terms of symmetry transformations the awakening ententionality of 
a sustainably unfolding systems dynamic, Guenther demonstrates that mature 
contemplative experience-as-such presentiated (to use Gebser’s term for the articulation 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  265    
of integral verition) in Tibetan practice is an approximate symmetry transformation of 
Being -- (i. e., a carryover of value in/to lived ontohermeneutic experience as Neville 
might conceive it or, by my analogy, a performance of or resonance with/in the quantum-
connectivity/anthropocosmic-possibility field,  cf., Abraham and Roy’s akasha and 
Chinese Qi) -- also characterizable as the unlimiting openness to and of Being described 
by Heidegger as authenticity, or NeoConfucianism’s humanocosmic cheng. The wholing 
or reciprocal Being-as-such symmetry-approximation potentials of  authenticity of 
interhuman and ecohumane conduct can be taken as the complement to, and remedy for, 
the sundry kinds of ego-aggrandizing and culturally approved but unsustaining 
conventional business deal mentality symmetry-breaks in actual experience by which we 
not only limit our choices for pliant and resonant response-ability with the world but also 
effectively deracinate, up- or un-root, our sustaining connection with, and our cocreative 
conduct as, the creatio continua of the ecocontinuum of Being-as-beings. The 
dynamically ongoing sustainability of undivided Being-as-such can be actualized in daily 
and ecohumane life, instantiated, as contemplatively mature acts which preserve and 
perform, which approximate rather than appear to fragment, eclipse and deviate from, its 
ongoing-wholing. 
 
Our unanalyzed habitual instrumentalism and societally approved ways of 
(mis)conducting our ecopolitical affairs are, by this account, evidences of a broken 
anthropocosmic relationship rather than of an approximate symmetry transformation of 
the field of (inter)Being, i. e., a diminished or truncated phase and state of the limitless 
wholing that is self/other-indivisible experience-as-such. “This devolution brings with it” 
says Hayward, “the reductionistic attitude to our lived world, and the possibility of man 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  266    
not to ‘go astray’ in this direction but to evolve in the direction of sangs-rgyas is. . . 
[ontohermeneutic] creativity.”25   
 
In his own penultimate exposition of contemplative rDzogs-chen conduct and 
cosmopoietic resonance/orientation, Guenther writes that these thinkers. . . 
quite literally ‘saw’ the evolution of the high-intensity level of what, for 
want of a better term, I have called the ‘buddha’-experience (sangs-rgyas), 
as a transformative process of Being’s triune cognitiveness, the 
transformations of which – symmetry transformations, which in spite of 
being symmetry breaks do not ‘break down’ into disparate entities – are 
described in terms of creativity. . .playfulness. . . and adornment. . . .Thus 
the triune dynamics or creativity of Being presents the. . . gestalt 
experience of Being’s meaningfulness; its playfulness [or coming-to-
presence]. . . as possible regions of concern and world-engagement. . . ; 
and its adornment or recombination. . .the gestalt of cultural forecasts.26  
 
Yet for all the unsustainability indictments that may be made of a (broken-down) 
personal, corporate or national ego resistant to its own analysis or reluctant to allow a 
multiplicity of phases of consciousness other than that alone of instrumental 
commodification, objectification and manipulation, Guenther points out the Tibetan 
paradox-emphasis is on, instead, superseding the differencing of one kind of orientation 
from another as better or worse. He says, “The decisive point is to transcend both in 
understanding their complementarity”; and he cites a classic Tibetan source that 
emphasizes “non-meddling.” He offers this traditional text: 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  267    
Since there will be no cessation to their stirring as long as one does not 
understand them to be of the nature of the field, do not try to crush them, 
or meddle with them, or transform them. Once you have recognized this 
very field for what it is and have settled in its dynamic dimension, the 
poisons subside by themselves, dissipate by themselves, and resume their 
freedom that is Being’s freedom.27  
 
Here is an intercultural analogue with the wu wei noninterference conduct found 
in Laozi’s Daodejing, with a measure of the passive cerebration seen in Obeyesekere, 
with the ecohumane potentials of a contemplative template stabilization as found in 
Stapp, with White’s weak ontology, with Zhuangzi’s walking both ways, with Keats’ 
negative capability, and with the NeoConfucian premise of transformative self-
cultivation. At this point, Mr. Feynman might joke about this docta ignorantia that, “I 
think it’s much more interesting to live not knowing than to have answers which might be 
wrong.” It’s not in competitively or aggressively using the ego against the ego in order to 
impose an alternative, a perfected or a preferred order that we fully realize (our) 
anthropocosmic choices and potentials, but in relinquishing or outgrowing to degrees the 
impulse to imposition itself. And as Wilden demonstrates, the best way to undo or 
creatively hybridize an unsustaining ideology, mindset or paradigm is not simply and 
assertively to deploy another one, but sometimes morphodynamically to take/allow the 
game off the field altogether – e. g. in squirmy analogy, undisciplinary discourse, co-self-
referential humor or generally indualizing silliness.28 
Likewise, a conduct of ecosocial wu wei (not inaction, but spontaneously 
accordant action, resonance) in our interactions with the larger natural environment, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  268    
particularly when the variables and outcomes of our actions are uncertain, is far more 
sustainable than is errant development for external profit. It is Gelassenheit with respect 
to all orders of life conduct and states or phases of consciousness more than the assertive 
positivistic establishment of the primacy of any one of them that is the beyond-
sustainability-to-resonance proposition. The sustaining benefit of such self-rewardingly 
econoetic contemplative attentiveness/openness is that it supersedes, integrates or 
sublates those subsets or breaks of conduct and ideation that are partial, lopsided and 
closed, notably those that are unsustainably ego- and ecopathic. In simpler terms suited to 
the Earth Charter Precautionary Principle, it is more lifeworthy to engage all forms of life 
with precautionarily noncalculating responsiveness, in reciprocity, relationship and 
respect than to have a master anthropocentrizing theory and agenda for how the universe 
works. At the same time, the contemplatively nondualizing or nonimpositional and less 
instrumentalizing way of life that affords such engagement is inherently rewarding to the 
extent that the external benefits of more aggressive orientations diminish and appear no 
longer so benign as they do under an ego-perspectivated mental-cultural regime – we 
touch the Earth more lightly in being rooted more deeply in relational attentiveness.29 
“Only in passing beyond dualism can life’s dynamic meaningfulness be lived on 
all levels of human existence” writes Guenther. And he cites another text to the effect that 
any effort to put this contemplative experience into words only obscures its free flow: 
“Therefore when this [nondual] process is left to itself in what it is, it continues operating 
optimally.” My own expository project in contrast with this process or lifeway --  in 
verbally thematizing, conceptualizing, and thus reducing the contemplatively cocreative 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  269    
flow of nondualized experience it proposes -- might correspond in rDzogs-chen to 
“obscuration.”30 
So I advert to yet another classical Tibetan conclusion that while the thematizing-
reducing mind obscures the field openness-emptiness of Being and fragments its 
wholingήsymmetry into disparate pieces, in the same process “the spoken word . . . 
obscures (Being’sΨ resonance so that a dialogue is set up.” “In still other words,” I 
suggest in ironic quotation marks, a mature contemplative consciousness beyond-
sustainability recognizes that:  
Being’s sheer lucency, similar to the luminaries of the sun and moon in the 
sky, is within us, but is made invisible through the power of 
‘nonunderstanding,’ which playfully conjures up the customary [and often 
adversarial] subject-object dichotomy, out of which one’s environing 
world and the living beings in it with their interests and concerns with it 
are constructed. All this is similar to a huge cloud passing over the sun. . . 
. [O]ut of Being’s creative dynamics, Being’s obscuration proceeds in a 
playful manner.31  
 
And thus another paradoxical Irony: by this construction, “the invisible hand” 
invoked by Adam Smith to legitimize and enforce the competitive practices of now 
unsustainable development in our ecopolitical economy unexpectedly reappears as a 
playful mode of the Eros of the continuity of Being. This reappearance, Guenther 
instructs us, is the work of both “obscuring and clearing as modes of Being’s spontaneity 
. . . another term for its holomovement. . .and its abidingness. . . call[s] to mind 
Heidegger’s ideas of concealment, unconcealment and revealment with respect to Dasein, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  270    
with which the Buddhist terms have a certain affinity.” In such a Gingerbread Man 
ontohermeneutic, 
. . . .Man’s orientation toward revealment reasserts itself in this play of 
obscuring and clearing. The upshot of the matter is the grandiose idea of 
rDzogs-chen thought that Being conceals and obscures itself by 
‘immersing’ itself in us as a kind of camouflage, but also reveals itself 
through us; and what is so revealed is Being itself that is our humanity.32 
I find in the preceding citation a hopeful analogue if not a recapitulation of such 
diversely resonant notions as that of Zimzum, Deacon’s absentialist emergence dynamics, 
Christian incarnation, of Lila or the playful cosmic hide-and-seek, lost-and-found of 
India’s metaphysics rehearsed in Watts’ The Joyous Cosmology, and a dramatic ethico-
cosmogonic recasting of Gadamer’s “fusion of horizons” and his “equifundamentality of 
the indeterminate two with the one.” And in its implication of sustainable 
nonimpositional coexistence through an ententional cultivation of self-knowledge beyond 
(but not without) instrumental knowledge, we even hear an intercultural echo of that silly 
parable of the ravens and the flowers who neither sow nor reap, nor spin nor weave in 
competitive accumulation. There is here more than an accepting soupçon, likewise, of the 
Biblical “Take the plank out of your own eye first, and then you will see clearly enough 
to take the splinter out of your brother’s eye.” And we also have with the quotes above 
another analogue still, the one of the traditional Confucian remembrance of reciprocity, 
shu, not to do to others what we ourselves would not want done to us. And this memorial 
may well be especially valid in the contemporary political-environmental context be we 
human persons or nonhuman persons in the ecocosm. In a word or two, we sentient 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  271    
beings are all (in) this together. Our path is laid down in walking – one day to a (Green) 
Tea Party, another to the Council of all Beings.33 
“Nice, nice, very nice” sing Ambrosia the refrain. And the bobbling symmetry of 
this way of co-walking, of walking the darklight way of self-and/as-other, enacts 
ongoing-wholing far from equilibrium with any of our precedent forms of conduct and 
culture that seek a hegemony of planetary consciousness. It is as much to justify and to 
impose (the supposed security of) a worldview as it is to create wealth, wellbeing and 
influence that we take to unsustainably extreme, then voluptuous then slatternly 
development worldwide. All the points have been made, even as children cry in hunger 
and the glaciers weep. 34 
Now we need to practice the arts of undoing such stern, one-sided, unremittingly 
militant assaults on the natural world as the desire unsustainably to extract privative and 
anthropocentric gain. Any wellbeing we expect can be only e-co-wellbeing. 
Commonweal among persons and among persons and Earth arises in the same way. 
Mutual benefit is in dynamic ecoexistential symmetry or reciprocity, experiencing each 
(and each other) as an embodiment of an ever-expanding and multifocal ongoing-wholing 
whose benefit and delight is in (its) self-realization and not reward sought beyond an 
ecohumane form of the life of the universe itself. Such self-delighting self-realization is 
celebration; it is self-rewarding play; and it is the inexpressible wisdom of a silliness 
(selig, blessedness) that confounds every bit of our exaggeratedly dutiful obeisances to 
pride, progress, self-promotion and self-protection. With the contemplatively unclenched 
hand does a more-than-sustainably resonant ecoworlding embody, feel and give of 
itself.35 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  272    
Endnotes: A Playful Symmetry 
1.) evocative hermeneutics, Wu 1990: 104. Please note that contemplatively evocative 
ontohermeneutics (see Cheng 1995, 2003) as a self/other coconstitutive mode of the 
ongoing-wholing of an all-connected universe may also be understood as or in analogy 
with anthropocosmic “structural coupling” as discussed in Varela et al.: 196-98 wherein 
the authors helpfully point out that coevolutionary systems “optimization” (highlighted 
by S. Kauffman 1995 and often mentioned in this essay) might better be denominated as 
the “bricolage,” “satisficing” or “natural drift” of a “coimplicative relation, since” they 
argue “organism and medium mutually specify each other” without, however, necessarily 
having a preset goal. This coimplication sorts well with the reciprocity of anthropocosmic 
shu and analogization or (co-)self-likening through whose bricolage and “tinkering” 
otherwise seemingly independent or disparate processes and sensibilities sustainingly 
cocreate and interact. Their emergent ententionalities “bring forth” or realize a domain of 
coevolutionary potentials and aptitudes as well as ever-varying problematics that may 
never be finally resolved (although they may be encompassed in some not-yet emergent 
ontohermeneutic, suggest Primack and Abrams:  23-2ι, and see DeaconΨ since “this 
domain does not exist ‘out there’ in an environment that acts as a landing pad for 
organisms that somehow drop or parachute into the world.” I’ll again draw attention to 
the onto-epistemo-rhetorical complementarity between optimization and satisficing in 
order to let them find their own ontohermeneutic way in what Zhuangzi calls “the sorting 
that evens things out” (qi wu lun) see Wu 1990: 171-72; see Blake in Erdman 1970: 41; 
penetrated, Laughlin et al. 1992: 36 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  273    
2.) von Franz 1992; choices see Edinger; causal agency, von Franz 1992: 231; acausal 
meaningfulness see Jung 1960, see von Franz 1980, 1992 and Explore; distance or time 
see Jahn and Dunne 2011: 161-67 and section III 
3.) Progoff 1973; all reality von Franz 1992: 211;  sectorizations see Gebser 1985 
4.) Progoff 1973: 82; synchronistic meaning, Jung and Pauli: 91; cosmogonic function, 
von Franz 1992: 231; see Stapp: 126, 165; cosmogenesis is noogenesis see Primack and 
Abrams, see also Teilhard 
5.) Berry 1988: 195-96 and chap. 5; Progoff: 83; surrender of individual identity, Jahn 
and Dunne in Explore: 326 also see 299, 322, and see Laughlin et al.; see also Jung 1963: 
302; template for action see Stapp; measurement events see Stapp and see also Kafatos 
and Nadeau 
6.) Science of the Subjective, Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 298, 299, 301, 322; Albertus 
Magnus, Jung in Jung and Pauli: 45, 50 
7.) individuated self see deLaszlo: 93-94; Pieper: 18; there is an intriguing discussion of 
differentiated cosmogonic uroborism in Primack and Abrams 
8.) see Eliade; Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 322; and see the very interesting essays by 
Shweder, on shamanic cognition, and on divination by Turner and Moore, respectively, in 
Lessa and Vogt; for a brief discussion of both high arousal and low arousal creative 
attentionality see Burneko 1981b: 129-35; The fact that I am organizing ideas and 
language via ego-resources in the name of other-than-egoic  experience is only  one 
framing of the movie of life-paradoxicality 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  274    
9.) for more on REGs see the International Consciousness Research Laboratories, 
http://www.icrl.org/ (accessed 2.2.16). Compare conducting discourse with the more 
aptly named “concourse” in Hershock, passim 
10.) association, Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 333-35; Zhuang Zhou in Chuang Tzu, 
Watson trans.: 34-35; both knowledge and illumination in Wu 1990: 200 
11.) polyphasic (consciousness), Laughlin, et al. 1992: 155, 289-91; Gebser 1985: 261, 
268; ways of knowing see Belenky, et al and Koestler 1964; Williams: 385 
12.) edifying, Rorty 1979; contemplation in a world of action, Merton 1998; see again 
Primack and Abrams: 58 writing on intercultural and multimodal anthropocosmogeny: 
“History’s most powerful cosmological images are not just” the emperor’s new clothes or 
“arbitrary inventions – they may be discoveries about human nature. . . .The next 
centering cosmology must incorporate the best science of our time, welcoming future 
corrections, but it will inevitably involve the same patient and loving work of cultural  
cutting and pasting that brought to life the great cosmologies of the past” (original 
emphasis) 
13.) Berman 2000: 1-18; aconceptual see Pylkkö; appositional and propositional, Bogen 
14.) New Age to the Ecozoic Age and the quantum abstruse see, for instance, Berry 1999: 
8, Abraham and Roy, Jahn and Dunne 2009, 2011, Tart; Zhu Xi in Tu and Tucker 2004: 
108-09; Wang in Cheng 1991: 419; also see Wang 1963: 166, 189, 221, 252, 255, 257, 
273, see also Tu and Tucker 2004: 158; G. Bateson 1979; ongoing-wholing see Cheng 
idem and see Stapp; Confucian tradition, Tu 1985: 20-21 
15.) spiritual quest in Tu, Humanity and Self-Cultivation 1979: 83, 180 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  275    
16.) Gebser 1985: 356-62;  Zhuangzi in Wu 1990: 144; see Unger and Smolin on the 
nature of time 
1ι.Ψ Wu 199ί: 99; Guenther 19κ9: 23ί; Kauffman’s apostrophe in 1995: 3ί2-303; see 
“reinventing the human” in Berry 1999: 159; also see Hessel and Morin; find waring in 
Gebser 1985: 261 
18.) matrix of mystery Guenther 1984; Einstein displayed in the Einstein Spacearium, the 
U. S. National Air and Space Museum’s planetarium in Washington D. C.; Feynman in 
Gleick; Bohr http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Niels_Bohr/ (accessed 5.20.2012) 
19.) Feynman in Gleick: 165; Capra 1984: 276 and passim, see Capra 1982; Kafatos and 
Nadeau 1990: 55-59; S. Kauffman 2008: 282; on Newtonian mechanism and mereology 
see Burneko 199ι; Dreamtime in Chatwin’s The Songlines; Deloria offers an apposite 
critique of  “evolution, creationism, and other myths”;  some etymologies of tantra 
include roots for stretch, expand, extend, cf. textile/text 
2ί.Ψ Elgin 2ίί9: 52, 55; Primack and Abrams: ι2 comment: “A universe picture can only 
be pushed out by a more satisfying universe picture” 
21.) to study, learn and teach, Tu, Humanity and Self-Cultivation: 104-05, that being, 
ibid.: 112; see also Chaucer The Canterbury Tales: General Prologue, ll. 287-310; 
Primack and Abrams: 289; see Zhu Xi: passim 
22.) Blake in Erdman 1970: 36; retuning or reentraining our neurognostic aptitudes see 
Stapp, and see Laughlin, et al. 
23.) Hayward  in Guenther 1989: ix-xiv 
24.) Hayward in idem: xi; see Morin 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  276    
25.Ψ Hayward in Guenther 19κ9: xiii, cf. creativity in the title of Guenther’s book; for 
more reflections on things at hand see Levin: 250-51, “Mudra as Thinking” 
26.) Guenther ibid.: 230 
27.) the decisive point. . .since there will be in ibid.: 233 
2κ.Ψ Feynman in Gleick: 43κ; re: Wilden see also the pertinence of Gödel’s Theorems in 
Hofstadter; on morphodynamics see Deacon: 235 and his notion that: “a backdoor to the 
second law of thermodynamics. . .allows—even promotes—the spontaneous increase of 
order, correlated regularities, and complex partitioning of dynamical features under 
certain conditions. Ironically, these conditions also inevitably include a reliable and 
relentless increase of entropy” (original emphasisΨ; also see Deacon on the interplay of 
orthograde and contragrade dynamics and his account that (what I take here as 
nonassertive or wu wei) orthograde change is  “consistent with the spontaneous ‘natural’ 
tendency to change irrespective of external interference. . . .[It] literally refers to going 
with the grade or tilt or tendency of things, as in falling, or ‘going along with the flow.’ 
[Deacon] will call changes in the state of a system that must be extrinsically forced, 
because they run counter to orthograde tendencies, contragrade changes. . . .even though 
contragrade changes are not spontaneous and intrinsic, they are in no way unnatural or 
artificial. They are merely the result of the interaction between contrasting orthograde 
processes. . . . Contragrade change is the natural consequence of one orthograde process 
influencing a different orthograde process. . . .This implies that in one sense ALL change 
ultimately originates from spontaneous [wu wei, ziran] processes” (223-24 passim, 
emphasis eagerly added) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  277    
29.) on the uncertainty of outcomes see chap. 4 in Morin 2008; precautionary approach, 
“Earth Charter” in Miller and Westra: 12; master theory see Morin 2008 Appendix 1; 
ecosocial wu wei see Burneko 2004, 2010 
30.) Guenther 1989: 234, therefore. . . .obscuration, ibid.: 239 
31.Ψ the spoken word in Guenther 19κ9: 239, emphasis added; Being’s sheer lucency, 
ibid.: 240-41 
32.Ψ obscuring and clearing, ibid: 242; Man’s orientation, ibid.: 243; cf. Zimzum and the 
play of obscuration and revealment 
33.) Watts 1962: 77; fusion of horizons Gadamer 1976: xviii; equifundamentality 
Gadamer 1980: xiii; parable, Luke 12: 22-32; the plank, Matthew 7: 1-5; cf. Vedral’s 
discussion of apophasis; cf. Chryssavgis and Foltz and Eastern Orthodox tradition on 
incarnation, eikon and the experience of creatio continua 
34.) Ambrosia sound recording of their album Ambrosia Los Angeles: 20th Century 
Records, 19ι5 including lyric “Nice, nice very nice” -- hear at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sbEf5Piehes/; see also Kurt Vonnegut Cat’s Cradle; 
Council of all Beings see http://www.rainforestinfo.org.au/deep-eco/coab-flier.htm/; also 
view the film Corporation, trailer at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xa3wyaEe9vE/ 
(accessed 7.30.12) 
35.) celebrate with Carrere: 135-65; Guenther 1989: 6-7 makes clear his conception of 
symmetry as a dynamic and not a static ontohermeneutic event or process 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  278    
 
7.1 Comment on a Contemplative Coevolutionary 
Optimization Thrust 
 
 
For Kongzi, ritual was the liminal (or liminoid) reset for our resonant integral and 
holistic presencing of communitas with the sidereal, the Earthly and the human, the 
cultural  and today we may include the Zero Point Field also. A relevant contemporary 
source discussing biocultural relations among myth, ritual, consciousness and the 
quantum sea proposes, in turn, “The brain may be trued from the bottom up by way of 
direct interaction with the quantum sea and tuned from the top down by way of  the 
eidetic cosmology inherent in mythic systems” and explicitly suggests this is related to 
the traditional way of the sage and related ritual performance.1  
Similarly, understood not as pro forma behaviors but as spontaneous practices of 
attunement and reattunement or humanocosmic reentrainment, rituals capaciously 
defined can be interpreted as conduct, performances and practices -- sometimes 
contemplative, sometimes shamanic-ecstatic, sometimes paradoxical in Berman’s sense, 
and sometimes simply functional -- not only in and of the contexts of the coevolutionary 
optimization or satisficing models offered respectively by S. Kauffman and by Varela et 
al., but also of the analogous yet very physical aptitudes described in the imagery used, 
say, by Zhuangzi describing Cook Ding who in forgetting his ego-self carved oxen so 
fluidly that for nineteen years he didn’t need to sharpen his knife. This was, according to 
Wu Kuang-ming, because, “beautiful execution” is in “going along with the ‘grain’ of 
things, being selflessly in unison with the rhythms of the wherefroms and the wheretos of 
events and those events and things loosening up their difficulties. . . .The loosening is the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  279    
way of nourishing.” Unexpectedly, in Blake this wu wei attentiveness is offered in yet 
another way: “Damn. braces: Bless relaxes.”2  
 
I’ll return later to the topic of ritual, but in preparing to go there it’s helpful to 
recall that the diaphaneity and transparency Gebser associated with an integral 
consciousness is not limited to just one phase or structure of awareness potentials but a 
unitas multiplex of several. And the lucency or illumination traditionally connected with 
various ancient interpretations and experiences of enlightenment and awakening abide as 
well in his contemporary arguments about the presentiation of ever-present origin in our 
experience, though he speaks less of contemplative and meditative culture in particular 
than he does of the diaphaneity of the integral structure of consciousness -- one of being 
ego-free and of, correlatively, being “achronic, time-free. . . .[wherein] origin is present. 
In truth we ware the whole, and the whole wares us” in the integral event of imparting, 
carrying-over and receiving truth or understanding in our ego-free interactions with the 
world. And what Gebser has to say is congruent with what Guenther writes about the 
contemplative rDzogs-chen understanding of awakening or enlightenment experience and 
its amplification of the topic of the luminosity of the simultaneous imparting and 
receiving of diverse orders, meanings or events in the field of Being.3  
 
Discussing in this connection “optimal functioning of the system as a whole” as 
not being amenable to zoning or classifying into types, Guenther reminds us that such 
apparently disparate classifications or territories are in any case but the play and the 
beauty of the “originary awareness of the whole.” This  play compasses the paradoxical 
complementarity of simultaneous opacity and transparency, and “the transparent may be 
considered as an approximation symmetry with respect to the whole of which it is a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  280    
transformation, and the opaque as an approximate displacement of symmetry.” It is in his 
interpretation of the contemplative tradition our over-attention to the unsustainingly 
“opaque,” (especially in the inertia of the objectifyingly ego-centrated and instrumental 
thought taken as if it were the total realityΨ that makes for “obscuration-obstruction.” In 
this case, ours is the unsustainable situation Maslow mentioned of treating every situation 
as a nail because our only tool is a hammer. Put differently, it is to point out that we 
make, sell, consume and are sold what is not always nutritious for us; and nutrition aside, 
buying and selling are increasingly the foreground concerns of our attention. Gebser 
similarly notes that in the mental-rational structure of consciousness, the part, the formula 
or concept, the ego-ambition, often eclipses and thus replaces the (verition and mutually-
imparting-and-receiving presentiation of) ongoing humanocosmic wholing and, 
conversely, that we mistake the ongoing-wholing with a finished conceptual totum or, 
worse, an exploitive agenda.4  
By another irony, the univocity and clarity, not to say the quantitative precision, 
of our thoughts can even predispose us to forms of  adherence to them, often ideological, 
that may be as occasionally counterproductive as ambiguity of thinking may be in 
different ways. In contrast, mathematics and phronesis, knack or practical wisdom (as 
well as diversity of insight and value) work more sustainingly together in the play of 
polylogue and mutual complementarity than would either one alone in supremacy. This is 
the moreso when we find ourselves reminded by Marie-Louise von Franz first, that “any 
logical system within which arithmetics can be developed is essentially incomplete” and 
second, that “the natural integers. . .are a partly irrational basis for our rational 
reasoning.”5  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  281    
In one idiom, nirvana and samsara differ by not so much as a hair’s breadth. And 
in turning to such ideas as that of the quantum physicist David Bohm on the “implicate” 
and the “explicate” orders of cosmic creativity or in suggesting earlier on that we may 
interpret thought(obstruction) as inertia in the quantum or qi field, I am again attuning 
myself with the general notion that this (the precise, the quantifiable separate part) and 
that (the amorphously ontohermeneutic ongoing-wholing -- the absential, incomplete, 
non-self-subsistence of parts) are not two. Or to put it another way, cognitive specificity 
is inseverable from  Anaximander’s apeiron, the unbounded. “This” is not to assert 
positivistically that unmediated experience of unbounded liberation nirvana, for instance, 
“is the same as” immediate resonance with the quantum vacuum field. But it is to think 
and act as if the one and the other are not two; and, from an ontometaphoric or 
ontohermeneutic point of view, the quantum field may well be taken as a luminous 
fractal, subset or symmetry approximation of Being, the unmitigated experience of which 
in ecohumane resonance is taken, per Guenther, as “Being’s sheer lucency.”6  
But the real point in highlighting phronesis and aesthetic and axiological 
dimensions of contemplative cosmogenesis is that sustaining meaning is as important as 
sustaining nutrition – and the former may be today’s ecopolitical condition of the latter in 
a very not-by-bread-alone kind of way. If we are what we eat, we also eat (or not) 
according to what we think and what influential figures want us to think – not just while 
we’re at the grocery store, if there is one, (and if we have the moneyΨ, but in Congress, 
The Chamber of Commerce, World Bank, NYSE, IMF, UN, etc. The question is not 
simply whether our tools are the right ones or in the right hands but also, as we have 
heard from Primack and Abrams, whether they’re big enough – cosmomorphic enough – 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  282    
to accord with our anthropocosmic status and condition – and the bigness is not a 
function of quantitative size but of attentiveness. Is our kind of consciousness big enough 
not to stand in its own way as a participant and focalization of cosmogenesis in sustaining 
everyday living? 
It’s one thing to critique discursive thought as an obstruction or as inertia in the 
(Being or vacuum) field ; it is a related but perhaps more capacious insight provisionally 
to acknowledge this while simultaneously acknowledging thought as one of the modes of 
field-ing (which is in the process of thinking or real-izing itself). In either case, we have 
created a thought about the status of thought. And much of our thought about thought, 
thinking or anything else walks on two legs. Diaphanous thinking doesn’t stop here, nor 
with forced choices between nirvana and samsara, science or religion or art, explicate or 
implicate, optimizing or satisficing – the real question is what nourishes and sustains 
Earth-human interbeing, and whom or what we turn to for such soul-food and for 
example in how to grow and cook it ourselves. The first and real teacher is the universe. 
 
For instance, pointing out that an earlier Tibetan Buddhist understanding 
conceived, much as S. Kauffman would say, that living systems tend to optimize 
themselves, Guenther goes on to note that this “optimization thrust” was even then 
understood not as a teleology but more as what today would be called a self-organizing 
principle and that the mature contemplative experience of later Buddhism was to center 
not on this as a way from a here to some there, but on the freedom of the person “in tune” 
with Being’s holomovement: “an unfolding process, a vector feeling-tone complementary 
to and inseparable from Being’s resonance with itself as the whole and with all its 
manifestations.” I reiterate that Varela and his colleagues helpfully nuance this theme 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  283    
with concrete relevance to questions of ecosocial sustainability through their 
understanding that in coevolutionary bricolage structurally coupled self-organizing 
systems dynamically emerge such that there is a “coimplicative relation, since organism 
and medium mutually specify each other” thus permitting “the satisficing of viable 
trajectories.” Their related images of satisficing and tinkering express the coevolutionary 
anthropocosmic process as a flexible, improvisational, circumstantially apt one – an 
insight that tempers without traducing the seemingly Platonic idealism connoted in 
unqualified use of the term optimization or reliance on the (albeit statistically based, i. e., 
nonabsolute) coevolutionary systems algorithm highlighted by Kauffman.7  
 
One meaning-value of contrasting while hybridizing the satisficing with the 
optimizing models is in trying to suggest that the one is of embodied processes of 
cosmogenesis co-responsive with life, mind and ententionality, notably as articulated and 
nonmanipulatively performed in contemplative human participation inclusive of intuition, 
knack, spontaneity, synchronicity and cocreativity. The carryover of cosmogenesis’ value 
in this case is performed in (and nonquantifiably corresponsive with) our xin, heart/mind 
wu wei. Whereas the other, in talking about living systems foremost in terms of an 
algorithmic norm which, furthermore, might be misconstrued as reducible to marketable 
apps, rules and regulations of some kind supposed to create a better world,  lends itself to 
mis-acknowledging or supplanting (our) in-the-moment attentiveness/emergence as a 
spontaneous performance of anthropocosmic ontohermeneutics with a covert call to duty 
in the service of re-presenting evolution, as if it were apart from ourselves, with a 
calculated formulation of evolutionary assembly-line efficiency. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  284    
The case is not so bleak. Placing his understanding of coevolutionary processes in 
the larger ecopolitical ontohermeneutical circle (as if to warn us off from a too-easy 
appropriation of a mathematized invisible hand justification for our sightless 
anthropocentrisms), Kauffman himself reminds us in turn that science works best within 
a context whose political machinery evolves toward  good compromises, thus affirming 
his optimistic view of “democracy. . .as utterly natural” and allowing us to experience 
ourselves in a partnership, not a manufactory or ownership relation, with Earth and Earth 
systems. For, to adapt his words, “in [the] collectively autocatalytic set” of an 
ecodemocratically sustainable Earth-human intersystem “there is no central, directing 
agency” – surely neither ego nor technology – for “ecology and economy are already 
implicit in coevolution.” And Kauffman, like von Franz, also invokes Gödel in 
suggesting that “there will be statements about how such a world evolves that are 
formally undecidable” on his way to positivistically concluding nevertheless that 
evolving systems and organisms “are not contraptions piled on contraptions all the way 
down, but expressions of a deeper order inherent in all life.” Poignantly, and in a tone 
reminiscent of Thomas Berry, Kauffman paeans, 
We make our worlds together. All we can do is be locally wise. . . .we are 
part of life. . .heritors of almost 4 billion years of biological unfolding. If 
profound participation in such a process is not worthy of awe and respect, 
if it is not sacred, then what might be?”8  
On this crosstalk ecotone of satisficingly self-tinkered contraptions and 
(potentially) forced march optimization algorithms, our future ecosocial work will be 
discerningly to participate with and as the life systems of  Earth and Cosmos -- Heaven, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  285    
Earth and Humankind -- in the hybridization of the (admittedly hyper-hypostatized) self-
optimizing “deeper order” potentials with the similarly self-organizing anthropocosmic 
“bricoleur satisficing” aptitudes inherent in organic evolution and human conduct 
according to time, place and circumstance. The key anthropocosmic sustainability theme 
at the moment is that It Happens all by Itself – this, we, here is it now and as much a 
project of our hearts, minds, imaginations and poetics as of quarks, leptons and the speed 
of time. This will be a matter of sage-like rational, mathematical, arational, 
contemplative, interpretive, attentive and sometimes unconscious or aconceptual 
interactions with one another and with the universe. . . . 
. . . .And here I pause as I (infrequently) do in the writing, and I ritualistically 
throw the coins to hear what Heaven and Earth and I together have to say at this moment. 
Result, Yijing gua #27, Yi,  “The Corners of the Mouth, Jaws, Nourishment, Sustaining”: 
Contemplate what nourishes people and what you are nourishing. 
Think about what you give and what you ask for. Seek out the source of 
what goes in and out of your mouth and the mouths of others. The answer 
to your question lies there.  
As Heaven and Earth nourish the myriad things, so the sage 
nourishes. . . .A time of nourishment is indeed great!  
Watch people nourishing others and observe what manner of 
things they seek to nourish themselves. . . .The celestial and terrestrial 
forces give nourishment to all; the holy sage nourishes everybody from 
those who are truly worthy to the people as a whole. The timely 
application of this hexagram is of the highest importance.9  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  286    
 
By the timely arts of synchronistic bricolage , the message of this quaintly arcane 
text is, in  one interpretation,  about how we choose to nourish ourselves and one another 
– all our relations. In its way, it highlights anew the basic questions of what kind of world 
we want to live in. We do choose. We know, as Primack and Abrams tell us, we have an 
extraordinary role in the life of the Earth. Cosmogenesis is inescapably also 
axiocosmogenesis: the evolution of value and meaning. Our choice and value are 
emergent amid self-organizing stuff-dynamics. The future ententionality and 
sustainability of Earthlife abide increasingly in the values performed in our conduct and 
awareness and not exclusively or even foremost in molecules, genes, gravitation or 
mathematical combinatorics. Furthermore, the statistics of evolutionary  models and the 
uncertainties of quantum theoretical ones alike show us there is a broad(ening) range of 
emergent humanocosmic possibilities that is (ours) to engage. We learn anew, as Primack 
and Abrams and as Sheldrake compellingly recall us to ourselves, that the cosmos is a 
developing organism. 
 
Guenther, echoing Berry’s theme of the reinvention of the human and Kaufman’s 
of reinventing the sacred, proposes from the contemplative perspective that we start 
learning to think nonreductively, and a-representationally “thinking of thinking. . .in the 
context of the whole” of (ourΨ cosmogenesis, and he seems recurringly relevant in doing 
so. The self-organizing-ongoing-wholing-unfolding in each instance, he concludes, is the 
way itself, not the way to something else. And we with all our relations, “endless forms 
most beautiful,” hymns Darwin, are the cocreative and conurturant wayfarer(sΨ as well as 
being together (on) the way(s). Ontohermeneutic nourishment is humanocosmic 
sustenance.10 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  287    
Endnotes: Comment on a Contemplative Coevolutionary Optimization Thrust 
1.) liminality and communitas see Turner; the brain may be trued, Laughlin and Throop 
2001: 729;  on myth and ritual and the holism of the Cosmic Uroboros, see Primack and 
Abrams: 33-37 and chap. 6 and see Combs and Holland, Coomaraswamy, Girardot, 
selected essays in Lessa and Vogt, Laszlo 2003, Radin, Jones and Culliney, McTaggart, 
Jahn and Dunne, and see Stapp on action templates 
2.) Cook Ding in Wu 1990: 324; Blake in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, Erdman 
1970: 37 
3.) Gebser 19κ5: 543; see also the anthropocosmic sustainability implications of Neville’s 
idea of truth as the carryover or imparting of value from experience to interpretation and 
practical conduct; see Guenther 1989 chap. 13 
4.) Guenther 1989: 238; Gebser 1985: 18; exploitive agenda see James Scott, see also 
Morin 2008 on programmatic as contrasted with strategic and tactical thinking; Guenther 
19κ9: 23ι expatiates saying “There actually exists a kind of feedback loop between the 
predictability of a world reduced to regularities and the affective-emotional response to it, 
in that the one tends to reinforce the other. . . .we, quite irrationally, equate the knowable 
with the ‘objective’. . . .” And we uncritically think, or are authoritatively told, thereby, 
how things are and what’s good for us; “for your own good,” as Alice Miller summed it 
in a not unrelated context; see Burneko 1996 
5.Ψ polylogue see Wu 199ί Chap. 2 “Things, Theories – Sorting Themselves Out”; von 
Franz 1992: 268-69; see Wigner 
6.) Bohm see Weber; the “this and that” construction (after ZhuangziΨ concresces the 
themes of mutual causation or co-constitution, e. g.,  pratityasamutpada, with Deacon’s 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  288    
incompleteness theorem; here and above thought, noun, is a finished, terminated entity, 
and thinking, gerund, is ongoing process (with no particular “processor” necessarily 
specifiable); apeiron “the unlimited” or “unbounded” is in the philosophy of the 6th 
century B.C. Greek, Anaximander of Miletus; Primack and Abrams show our entire 
universe may be but one among indefinitely many such bubbles in the cosmologically 
hypothesized “eternal inflation,” (but keep in mind Unger and Smolin’s “singular 
universe” critique of this ideaΨ; Blake’s axiocosmological genius shows that in morals 
and also in the imaginative/contemplative evocation of the world we share, only to 
generalize is to be an idiot – it’s in the minute particulars that the whole truth is 
attentively found (andΨ enacted: “How do you know but ev’ry Bird that cuts the airy way, 
/ Is an immense  world of delight, clos’d by your senses five?” in Erdman 19ιί: 35; 
lucency, Guenther 1989: 240 
7.) Guenther 1989: 246, 247, emphasis added; Varela et al.: 197; algorithm, S. Kauffman 
1995: κ3. There’s an analogy between sustainable coevolutionary and ecosocial processes 
as improvisational bricolage and the interpretation of wu wei in Hershock: 5ι as “conduct 
that is unprecedented”; see Sheldrake chap. 3 discussing the extent to which the laws and 
constants of nature are unchanging or may in fact be more habit-, knack- or wu wei-like 
8.) S. Kauffman ibid.: 271, 275, 289, 304, 303; as for central, directing agency or rules 
and regulations for euvolution, to coin a correspondingly bad term, I note that Kauffman: 
3ί3 says “We have presumed to command, based on our best knowledge and even our 
best intentions. We have presumed to commandeer, based on the availability of 
resources, renewable or not, that lay readily at hand. We do not know what we are 
doing.” I note too that the poignancy I find in his statement that “We make our worlds 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  289    
together” sounds to me a little like an acknowledgement of, and even a (deferentialΨ hand 
offered to, Varela, Thompson and Rosch. Kauffman’s commitment to what seems the 
computational purity of the K=2 optimization algorithm prevents a full appreciation of 
the spontaneities, the improvisational play of creative (and ecohuman) evolution as it is 
expressed where, by contrast, Varela et al.: 2ίι invoke the idea of “intelligence” 
emergent in the universe not as “being the capacity to solve a problem” but as ”the 
capacity to enter a shared world of significance”; but see also Kauffman’s Reinventing 
the Sacred 
9.) It Happens all by Itself see Burneko 1991 and in Combs, ed. 1992; contemplate, 
Karcher: 92; As Heaven and Earth, Wang Bi: 305; Watch, Blofeld: 140; see Vaihinger; 
again see Sheldrake: 52 “cosmos as a developing organism” 
10.) Guenther 1989: 248; The last sentence of the 6th ed., 1κι2, of Darwin’s Origin of 
Species: “There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been 
originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this 
planet has gone circling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a 
beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being 
evolved." http://www.conifers.org/topics/darwin.htm/ from the Gymnosperm Database/ 
see also http://www.literature.org/authors/darwin-charles/the-origin-of-species-6th-
edition/index.html/  (accessed 5.21.12); see Tegmark for an invigorating essay on the 
ontomathematical character of cosmogenesis 
 
A final long note here, again from the reliably and judiciously comprehensive 
Primack and Abrams: 48, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  290    
What we need to take from this is the attitude that multiple nondogmatic 
interpretations of the cosmos are more inspirational than a single arbitrary 
story. . . .It is essential for creativity and the cultivation of the human spirit 
that dogma – that is, beliefs inspired by tradition or authority – be seen as 
a matter of personal choice, but that facts be accepted. This requires that 
there be a clear method for distinguishing dogma from facts. 
I acknowledge also that as we really do begin to understand the universe from the 
inside out, as these authors propose, (288) scientific facts are also the acts, choices, and 
(f)acts of -- science, religion and autopoietic arts are sisters, members, and organs of -- 
indivisible humanocosmogenesis singing all together “I am Becoming What I am 
Becoming,” idem; and see Exodus 3: 14 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  291    
 
8.0 Polyphasic Neurognostics: or How Silly Saves Us From 
Ourselves 
 
 
Charles Laughlin, John McManus and Eugene d’Aquili report in their extensive 
“neurophenomenology of human consciousness” that what we call knowing is the 
biocultural organization of the sensorium all around us, and that we live by symbols 
which we neurologically organize in our ever-changing relationships with the field of 
which we are an integral subsystem (and, I think, a reflexively cocreative 
ontohermeneutic contextualization-ententionality).  The field of which these writers 
speak is foremost that of our cognized experience, but neither do they disallow the degree 
to which our direct interaction with the quantum field discussed by Haisch, Laszlo and 
others is relevant to their ideas. I relate human experience to the vacuum or zero-point 
field on the premise that this field constitutes or suffuses and is also influenced by our 
manners of techne, conduct and thought or contemplation. A minimum hypothesis is the 
tautologous one that neurophysical and neuropsychic functions of the brain-mind system 
are connected with the properties of the everywhere-present field. This is a quantifiable 
variant of the premise of the psychocosmic unus mundus as amplified by Jung and von 
Franz.1 We both receive and impart according to the state or complexity of our own 
ongoing organization; and the field (of whatever biopsychocultural or  psychophysical 
extent we prefer to emphasize) manifests itself in our perceptual lives as transforms (in 
broken or approximate symmetry) of the ongoing-wholing event(s) within, among and 
beyond ourselves. Or to say this perhaps more judiciously, the self-experience of the 
interminate field of experience-as-such through its subjective and objective décalage in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  292    
our conventionally ego-fractionated lives is a fractal of the overall symmetry of the 
continuum of being(s). As affirmed in the apothegm nirvana is samsara, even our 
fractiousness bespeaks in its ornamental concealments the holomovement of the yet to be 
properly introduced Mr. Hundun, the Daoist version of Bohm’s everything-in-everything. 
 
As we grow in evolutionary (neuroanatomical) and developmental (cultural-
initiaticΨ maturation, each precedent form of ego (“but a nodule in a vast field of living 
neural organization,”Ψ is relativized and displaced from center stage. “Potentially, the 
field of being may reveal itself and the illusion of a separate object in an objective world 
is replaced, not by merely a unitary view of the world, but by a unitary being-in-the-
world.” We can speculate that such unitary being-in-the-world is also nondual 
presencing-of-worlding, of ongoing wholing, and of cosmogenesis as (our) (inter)being.2 
Illustratively, the shaman “undergoes spontaneously, then formally 
[ritualistically] the. . .rites of passage” that evidence crossculturally, presumably because 
of our common psychoneural development, a common or archetypal pattern, e. g., of 
wholing or death and a rebirth to a refreshed and renewed order of meaning that can be 
transmitted as cultural nourishment. In this model, during the shamanic quest or 
entrancement phase a separation from the collective mores and outlooks, subsequent 
differentiation, and then “integration take place progressively, and the world is seen 
anew.” And others may learn from the initiate’s example to experience the world anew 
inaugurating yet another “cycle of meaning.” Expanding on the symbolic anthropology of 
Victor Turner at this point, we might consider that cycles of liminality and (ultimately 
cosmic) communitas in the evolution of consciousness correspond with and activate 
biocultural and biophysical potentials of the field. This recycling of meaning, of the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  293    
ecosemeity potentials of Earth-human coexistence that do not abide in or exclusively 
reduce either to Earth or to human systems, will inevitably make novel analogies and 
meanings seeming anomalous, incongruous, meaningless or just plain silly at first: e.g., 
Earth orbits the sun; women have the vote; trees have standing; your FieldREG readout is 
far from random. Yet once again, “We do live in a quantum world in which far-apart 
aspects are linked in ways quite contrary to the mechanistic conception of nature. . . .a 
nonlocal reality in which our streams of consciousness are naturally and efficaciously 
imbedded.”3  
Making a point in their language that reminds me of the significance of play as an 
ontohermeneutical performance as well as an epistemological category in Guenther’s 
discussions of rDzogs-chen awakening experience (and perhaps as effective in “optimal 
satisficing” regimesΨ, we learn from Laughlin and his colleagues that at various points in 
the cycling and recycling of phases or states of consciousness, play is a “phase in which 
somatic systems are ‘freed-up’ from the immediate demands of outer adaptation in the 
interests of optimizing development of neurocognitive and somatic structures, which will 
be used in future adaptations.” Turner expresses this ritual play as the “unused 
evolutionary  potential” revealed and released in group and humanocosmic communitas 
and obliquely hints at a covert synchronistic  or negentropic constant herein whereby the 
“very forces of disorder” are put “at the service of the social order.” Writing with what 
seems to me a NeoConfucian accent, Turner summarizes that “spontaneous communitas 
is nature in dialogue with [conventional social] structure”; ecosocial resonance-
sustainability is, in my parlance, the self-rewarding play of astructural contemplative 
communitas.4  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  294    
For the purposes of this exposition play, as an abeyance of or complement to a 
routinely structured instrumental intentionality, may be likened with mature 
contemplation as a mode of psychosomatic refreshment and releasement and as the 
serioludic supersession of habituated consciousness and accompanying monotonic modes 
of reality-formation, ones upholding a fixed view or cosmology – the approved, 
instrumentally important, official and calculatingly officious/manipulative view. 
Conversely, the play of mature contemplation may be understood as a practice of an open 
and sensitive attentiveness significantly (and signifyingly) differing from the judgment- 
(and cost-) distributing automatism by which much of our day-to-day ego-business is 
accomplished. In either case, play like poetry and like dreaming as Obeyesekere 
conceives it, is an instantiation and means of sustaining systems' well-being in human, 
interhuman and ecohuman(e) development. And as parents and children know from long 
experience, there is no play like silly play. Silliness, especially in the context of authentic 
art and science, is the matrix of creative insight. If really new understanding is your 
project, you have to be willing to sound completely absurd in the terms set by precedent. 
Another way of saying this is that radically fresh comprehension creates its own terms 
and criteria of comprehensibility. Gödel showed as much, so did Feynman, Gandhi, Joyce 
and Monet. 5  
The Minister of Right-Thought will remind us that not all that is silly is radically 
fresh anything, nor is an unfamiliar antipasto of ideas, attitudes and tropes necessarily 
nourishing. But we pay too much a priori attention to that man behind the curtain. This 
obeisance allows his own “dogmatism” of a priori this-deeming and that-deeming to 
throw “a monkey wrench of staticity into the dynamic reciprocity” of the smoothly 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  295    
turning wheels within wheels of ongoing wholing; “then indifference withdraws the 
subject from such reciprocity. . . .And since living participation in the onto[hermeneutic]  
mutualities is crucial for making up the world, allowing dogmatism, indifference, and 
withdrawal to prevail unmakes the world.”6  
 
Spontaneous, if arational, meaningfulness can arise in playful or other-than-
instrumental practice to the degree calculating ego is neutralized or passive; and in 
“maximally polyphasic societies” (those completely open to the exploration of plural 
states of consciousnessΨ “reality is conceived as existing on multiple levels. . . All, or a 
portion of the population, are guided into confirmatory experiences via symbolic text, 
ritual action, or instruction” and tactics of consciousness alteration. And while Laughlin 
and his colleagues note this may be done under the tutelage of a shaman or master adept, 
sometimes even a gifted rhetor, it bears recalling that in the Daoist and Confucian 
purview as well as Gebser’s integral consciousness, the contemplative sage simply by 
doing nothing special in the affairs of life has a transformative effect on those around hir 
– not by a magical impulsion but by the simple presencing of participant accord/entention 
with/as the inherent patterns of dynamic (humano)cosmic self-organization, the dao of 
ziran. Stating that in what they call “polyphasic void societies” such “Void 
Consciousness. . .high status” exemplars are “the most difficult to operationalize” exactly 
because mature contemplatives are not necessarily doing anything special to record or 
photograph, these authors also denominate them as not just adepts but as “the greatest 
healers, guides, leaders, sages, and teachers.” We may also add they are “nourishing” 
ecosages, and, in their sustaining mindful-playfulness with prime-time conventions, holy 
fools.7  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  296    
Endnotes: Polyphasic Neurognostics: or How Silly Saves Us From Ourselves 
1.) Laughlin et al. 1992: 241; cognized experience. . . direct interaction, ibid. 
Introduction: 18, and see Laughlin and Throop; Jung and von Franz; see von Franz 1992; 
I speak of a continuum of Being or beings and yet also acknowledge this continuum as a 
generic term for a universe that also appears to be jumpy with quantum zitterbewegung 
self-punctuations and, according to recent word, as measured in material terms is about 
ιί% “dark energy,” 25% “cold dark matter,” some 4% “invisible atoms,” and hence, 
what with one thing and another, only about 0.51% visible matter – that’s the part where 
we think we are most of the time. Where we actually are depends on whether 
matter/energy is our only metric, whether there is more than one universe, and, among 
other things, how much Is, or is going on, concerning which we don’t have the faintest 
clue or conventional rational/mental access, including God, however conceived or left 
apophatically unformulated, so to speak; for more see Primack and Abrams “Double 
Dark Theory”: 1ί5, 115; and see Wang Bi’s intercultural analogue xuanxue in Wagner 
and in Lynn; keep in mind that in his quantum ontohermeneutic Bohm 1981: 11 speaks 
not of discontinuities but of an “Undivided Wholeness in Flowing Movement” in which 
“mind and matter are not separate substances.” It is poets’ work sorting all this out. See 
Paul on bio/physical/cultural dynamics 
2.) but a nodule, Laughlin et al., 1992: 264, potentially, ibid.: 266; see again Primack and 
Abrams 
3.) undergoes spontaneously. . .cycle of meaning, Laughlin, et al. 1992: 272-73, 214; we 
do live in a quantum world, Stapp: 186 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  297    
4.) Making a point, Laughlin and McManus 1982 in Laughlin, et al. 1992: 287; Turner: 
93, 140; self-rewarding play see Csikzentmihalyi, Brown, Ehrenreich 
5.) Obeyesekere: 8; see Gandhi: 149 
6.) monkey wrench, Wu 1990: 175; see Burneko 1991, 1992, 1997; better too many 
wrong than the contraception of all new, not to say silly, ideas; Blake’s take on this is 
even more visceral, but I will limit myself to “Exuberance is Beauty” and “Improvement 
makes strait roads, but the crooked roads without Improvement, are roads of Genius” in 
Erdman: 3ι.  If we’re talking in terms of econoetic contraception, it’s the calculating and 
over-regulatory ego allowing only those images, practices and expressions that fit the 
paradigm of familiarity, gain and domination that needs moderation or contemplative 
regulation so that we may be more sensitively attentive to (its) otherwise damaging 
ecosocial incipiencies and, correspondingly, be more attentive and responsive to the 
(imaginal, synchronistic, recreational, etc.) incipiencies of new life and sustaining 
meaning -- ecosemeity, integral Earth-human meaning and value -- otherwise eclipsed, 
deformed, reduced, neglected, or prevented by ego-formulated policies and practices;  
“the voice of the Earth” is being drowned out, see Roszak 1992. It might be argued 
likewise that it’s not ego that is problematic but that we are, it is, in un- or only semi-
conscious thrall to some unacknowledged, dis-integrated archetype of the unconscious. If 
so, all the more reason consciously to re- and co-ordinate ourselves afresh with the richer 
scope and more diversely varied, self-balancing modes of wholesome and integral Earth-
human interaction that contact with the archetypal unconscious – itself at bottom pure 
unvitiated nature – offers. Thomas Berry 19κκ: 1κι writes. “We have so developed our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  298    
rational processes, our phenomenal ego, that we have lost much of the earlier communion 
we had with the archetypal world of our own unconscious.” 
7.) maximally polyphasic societies. . . polyphasic void societies,  Laughlin et al. 1992: 
294-95; see Miyamoto: 59; rhetor see Gummer; nourishing ecosages again see Gummer: 
138, 140 writing not exactly of the sage but of the Buddhist orator or preacher who offers 
“a skillful enactment of. . .emptiness (sunyataΨ” and whose “oration of the sutra in an 
appropriate ritual context [with] inspired eloquence. . .not only causes extraordinary 
human flourishing, but also initiates and sustains a cycle of cosmic flourishing that 
extends to the initiates and permeates deep into the [E]arth”; holy fools see Hafiz: 95 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  299    
 
8.1 Silly Sagesse 
 
I might further bridge some of the ideas of the quantum vacuum field with those 
of the field of cognized experience and its neurognostic mediation in alternative phases of 
consciousness by means of analogies drawn from the traditions of contemplative conduct 
in (and of) the continuum of being(s) in Confucian and Daoist China, keeping in mind the 
not incidental fact that while Confucian and Daoist lifeways are not necessarily shamanic 
properly speaking, they did seem to emerge from what was believed to be an earlier 
shamanic context.  For instance, Girardot (who is with Wu, I think, to a deep reading of 
Zhuangzi and China what Northrop Frye is to one of Blake and the West) writes about 
the “nameless men” who learned sageliness by releasing their minds to a wandering in 
simplicity, reunifying their psychophysical qi, the vital energy of the universe, with the 
void in going along with the spontaneity or ziran of things -- not relying on the tactics of 
making and saving face, i. e., not relying on instrumentalizing ego and on social values of 
fame, fortune and discursive expertise.1  
Of this mystical wandering and early Daoism in general, some scholars have 
offered that it reflects a shamanic consciousness structure and the induction of ecstatic 
trance through meditations, ritual dancing, drumming and chanting. The journey far from 
the home base of the societally coded mode of consciousness and culture (and back again 
with unexpected gifts) is, suggests Girardot, a return to the creation time, (or what Gebser 
might variously call archaic or mythical consciousness or “ever-present origin”Ψ one 
opening to the Great Abyss or void where the dehabituated senses find through 
contemplation nothing to perceive. In this connection, there is the related interpretive 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  300    
notion that Daoism is the relocation of  a shamanic consciousness onto a philosophical 
and mystical plane. And to the extent the shaman-sage forms one body, heart and mind 
(xin) with the psychocosmic qi that informs and subtends the universe, sh/e is by analogy 
participating, performing, dynamically stabilizing or probabilistically modulating the 
similarly all-connecting zero-point field characterized in contemporary physics. Hir 
conduct enacts and participatingly sustains the continuum of coevolving being(s) even as 
it is interdependent with them. Analogously, the blessing of an imagination free to silly 
itself in creative imaginals or metaphors, as Bachelard writes of physical science, is its 
openness. It doesn’t posit itself as total, complete or closed – and thus, in its way, carries 
nature as far as the mind will go.2 As we now understand the ecology of things, mind and 
nature coevolve (as) one another, not-two at any point ever since what the 
metacosmologist Zhuangzi described as the not-yet-beginning-to-be-a-beginning. 
Nor, similarly, is it such a long reach at this point to conceive of the cave-
incubated journey from the Paleolithic social world of shamanic ecstasy through and 
beyond the ego-reinforcements of a Cartesian mechanism and back to the generative 
emptiness of a quantum vacuum field as being an evolutionary and a now rationalized 
expression of a primal neurognostic aptitude to reinstantiate in the order of mind and 
experience the order of an undivided holomovement and functional cosmology requiring, 
as we recall Bohm suggesting, meditatively altered states of consciousness for adequate 
imagery and investigation. Variants of this archetypal and neurognostic “journey out-and-
in” recur in forms as various as the songs of the Moody Blues, the adunatio of Eriugena, 
Bonaventura’s itinerarium, Teilhard’s noogenesis,  Elgin’s “cosmophilia,” and the 
Cosmic Uroboros of Primack and Abrams.3 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  301    
 
This may sound silly. But silly is the point right now. The charism of a genuinely 
fruitful idea or experience (or recirculation of archaic themes in new circumstances) 
initially appears silly until contextualized into familiarity; for new wine a new bottle. We 
have known this at least since Thomas Kuhn, at least. Remember the expression of this 
politics of consciousness, for example, where offered as step two of Mahatma Gandhi’s 
mapping of the epistemo-political issues in which he somewhere states: “First they ignore 
you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win.” Nor was Erasmus amiss 
in composing the Praise of Folly (in the name of his “best disputant,” Thomas MoreΨ. 
And look always to the ravens of the air. 
More pertinently, the expanded etymology of the English word silly is, according 
to Eric Partridge, rooted in Middle and Old English words meaning good, happy, of good 
fortune and in the German word selig, meaning “blest.”4 Being blessed is sister to being 
in a state of grace, holiness, of profoundly wholing, enwholed or whole-some disposition; 
and the terms holy and whole are themselves related etymologically to holism, holistic, 
health and healing. By this kind of evidence, a life beyond sustainability alone lived in 
holistic resonance with the field of being(s), as with the quantum field-of-connectivity 
subtending and interfusing all cosmic events and eventualities, is a living and a hale, 
functional cosmology of integral existence. It is the integral ecosocial form and fractal of 
disegoed ententional cosmogenesis. Contemplating this (contemplating itself) is flat-out 
fun. If this is silly, it is also pragmatic, as well as potentially holy foolery. Largely 
because such inherently self-rewarding experience is less imposing on the natural 
environment it is an ecological and psychospiritual good. And it healthfully tempers and 
sustainably contextualizes the pompous arrogance of anthropocentric profit mesmerism. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  302    
The deep eye finds the heart of life, the heart of the cosmos as  Swimme writes, not in 
propositions, balance sheets and formulations alone. We also and moreso, hear and 
together bespeak it in the canticle of the universe, the spontaneities of the Earth, twilight 
lullaby, shared poetry and the bright rhapsodic guffaws of  those May rhododendrons. 
Such deinstrumentalized living can be an ongoing approximate-symmetry 
transformation process as well as a state of consciousness of experience-as-such 
undivided into the competing this and that subject-objectivism that excessively and 
unsustainably eclipses what the old Chinese have been calling our “lost heart” of 
interbeing with the world(ing) and one another. Intrinsically rewarding and ecstatic – or 
perhaps enstatic -- in nondual contrast with the extrinsic environmental satisfactions of 
ego-reductive grasping, its continuum of living humanocosmic resonance sustainingly 
relieves and releases Earth from our ego’s unsustainable objectifications, divisions and 
impositions. In contemplatively outgrowing the metrics of an increasingly gross product 
we more fluently re-member and participate in the subtle generativities of the universe. 
Writes the cosmologist Brian Swimme in The Hidden Heart of the Cosmos, “The task of 
education then will focus on learning how to ‘read’ the universe so that one might enter 
and inhabit the universe as a communion event.”5 
  
Let’s hear the key part of a precautionarily relevant parable from Zhuangzi as 
retold in “The Bored to Death” chapter of Girardot’s felicitous Myth and Meaning in 
Early Daoism: The Theme of Chaos (hun-tun). Here we find that the Emperor of the 
North and the Emperor of the South (whose names are sometimes given as “fast” and 
“furious”Ψ often joined one another to hang out with Hundun -- primal chaos, orthograde 
and primal wholeness, or golden age -- in the territory where he was the Emperor of the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  303    
Center. Goofy, squiggly, shapeless Hundun always treated them very generously; and 
they always came away from their visits feeling refreshed and restored, enwholed. One 
time, the Emperors of the North and South talked together and asked one another how 
they could courteously reciprocate Hundun’s virtue saying, “’Men all have seven 
openings in order to see, hear, eat, and breathe. He alone doesn’t have any. Let’s try 
boring him some.’ Each day they bored one hole, and on the seventh day Hundun died.”6  
 
The imaginal and the archetypal nature of this fracturing fairy tale doesn’t allow 
for a single monosemous interpretation, hence Girardot’s book length study of it. But its 
outline in this context is that of the dismembering, dividing and fragmenting of unbroken, 
and thus healthful, spontaneous wholeness, or wholing, by means of the societally 
conventioned ego tactics of trying with dutiful deliberation to reciprocate (or manipulate) 
according to a conscious plan of face- (or mask-) making.7 What begins as Hundun’s 
(and our own implicit) unselfconscious and spontaneously open naturalness (self-
organizing ziran) and bounty of  authentically holistic and reciprocal interbeing is 
perspectivally, conceptually and egocentrically divided, carved and (thus) deadened. The 
fable raises the crosscultural  question as to whether what we conventionally do with our 
insistently ego-interventional intentionality isn’t more a fragmenting and a boring than a 
fractalling, anthropocosmically self-likening and (thus) sustainingly enlivening 
procedure. And where do we learn the contemplative-like ars contextualis whereby our 
acts, ententions and aims conduce to a sustainable dynamic stabilizing, a fractally 
ecogenic self-organizing of Earth-human or humanocosmic wholing? 
The name or title of Hundun interculturally evokes the memory of similar 
reduplicatively titled primal persons, events and mythemes such as Humpty Dumpty, the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  304    
tohu-va-bohu of Genesis, Norse Ginnungagap and assorted mumbo-jumbo dear alike to 
children and sages. The related Chinese imagery is extensive, reaching far beyond the hu-
lu gourd and the calabash to the cosmic mountain homophone K’un-lun, and to stew and 
bouillabaisse. In the associated lore of Hundun, we learn s/he (or it) was often likened to 
a lumpish yellow sack, an infant (embryo, fetus), a formless, faceless blob, an egg, a 
pumpkin and the uncarved block (pu) so often linked in Chinese lore to the undivided 
mentality of the sage – a sage whose virtue or potency was in turn premised largely on 
the fact that s/he did not actively court approval or embody benison in order to gain face 
and save face by imitating distorting conventions and norms for success but was simply 
self-so-virtuoso for any and all seasons. The uncalculatingly fructile spontaneity of 
Hundun’s egoless (or even mindless, wu nian) disport, or, say, of Morin’s 
“undisciplined” way of knowing, (“unprincipled,” i. e. not according to set rules -- 
wuzhi), was taken by Daoists as a rejoinder to some Confucian overemphases on the 
ceremonial, ritual, we might say the institutional(ized) protocols of  civilization, which 
were thought by the Daoists to be luan -- the real disorder in the world, chaos. For the 
Daoists, the ever present confluencing of things in Hundun expressed the sustaining and 
sustainable natural order as contrasted, as we’ll see in a moment, with the over-contrived, 
calculating and manipulative.8  
In the terms offered by Victor Turner, Hundun can be taken as a metonym of the 
ever-present communitas or field of interbeing -- “men in their wholeness wholly 
attending” together with being-in-its-wholeness -- that is the mythic and ritually 
reinstantiated nonstructural, uncarved source/refreshment of ordered or rationalized 
structure. It is liminal, marginal, even silly with respect to conventional structures, status 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  305    
aims and mindset; and yet it is the pre-eminent condition of creative fertility and not-yet-
routinized potency from and as which we learn the arts of resonantly sustaining humane 
and ecohumane reciprocity. In its liminality with respect to structure and division, social 
and ecosocial communitas is ontohermeneutically inclusive and compenetratively hybrid. 
Like other archetypes irrepresentable in itself, it offers in its varied clothing of Hundun 
imagery a polymorphic analogy with the quantum field, with the “fuzzy logics” of 
both/and reasoning, and with all approximate symmetry transform modes of the 
coincidentia oppositorum of the continuum of being(s) at (and secreted within) the 
margins of discriminated reality.9  
Evoking less a particular referent than a way of looking at (better, of guaning) and 
sustainingly dwelling with things, (the myth of) Hundun, states Girardot, embodies in its 
saturated all-mixed-upedness and undifferentiated fecundity multiple and large or small 
returns to a fertile and primal condition when any sort of “revolutionary” change or new 
creation (seasonal, social, epistemological, ecopolitical or religious) is occurring. Any 
change in mentality, dynasty, administration, major paradigm or metaphysic in Chinese 
or global history might be affiliated with “the enigmatic Emperor of the Center.”10  
We may therefore today, in a time and mindspace where Gaia befriends 
geoscience and scientists dialogue with sages, liken Hundun to the fertile all embracing 
and formless vacuum field, as s/he was in earlier times equated with the Great Abyss 
where the not-yet-conditioned senses perceived nothing, a state later conceived as no-
mind, wu nian, wu xin. And in the conjoint analogy among the uncarved being of the 
sage, Bohm’s unbroken field holomovement of the universe, the absential efficacy of 
Deacon’s emergent dynamics, Hundun, and the fecund chaos of a childlike openness to a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  306    
field of Being not prematurely inscribed, engraved and conscripted by conventional 
etiquettes, epistemologies and proprietary instru-mentalities, we glimpse a way old-and-
new myth correlates a generous abundance of (initially confusing) meaningfulness that 
can in turn be fed forward in our lives to nourish a new (re)turn in the cycles of ever 
renewing and resonantly sustaining meaning.11  
The neurognosis described by Laughlin and colleagues, with the archetypal 
aptitudes for psychic wholeness described among Jungians and the Tibetan tradition of 
interest to Guenther, or the eco-self-re-organization dynamics of complex systems 
elaborated by Morin, S. Kauffman, Deacon and others all together suggest we are wired 
for It.  It wires itself. One feature of this lumpy mixing-up Hundunish analogy (with its 
hearty stew of interpenetrating meanings drawn from across disciplines, times and 
cultures) predicts that the psychomental repertoire of the future trends towards a 
restoration of nondual experience emblematized by the mature contemplative aptitude for 
multiple, multipolar and in particular nondivisive and ecological-nonreductive, 
consciousness structures, omnivalent attentiveness or paradox awareness as we have read 
in Berman, “complex thinking,” as, again, Morin would have it, or “ontohermeneutic 
guan” in the contexts explored by Cheng. In his own version of the new science Laszlo, 
although he cannot resist the Bollywood siddhi idiom of “harnessing one’s mind to the 
forces of the universe,” does declare that “the ancient writings describe ‘the way,’” 
namely, yoga; and he quotes Grof saying, “each of us contains the information about the 
entire universe or all of existence, has potential experiential access to all its parts, and in a 
sense is the whole cosmic network.”12  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  307    
As it is expressed in religion and science alike, especially as these touch on issues 
of cosmogenesis and the ecohumane incarnation and participation of continuing creation, 
we are reminded on the hand of religious thinking expressed by Wolfhart Pannenberg 
that the wholing of our being is what it is only through participation in the evolving 
future whose liminality (or eschaton) with respect to the now is the ever-present 
condition for (re-cognizing the Earth-human communitas of) the present moment. And 
for the Christian theology of Pannenberg, the field of the Holy Spirit, the openness to the 
world, is ecstatically, ecologically, and evolutionarily expressive of inseverably relational 
modes of being. Our ententional yet nonassertive ecohumane participation in the 
openness of and to futurity is coconstitutive, not just expressive, of resonantly sustaining 
anthropocosmogenesis. On the complementary hand of contemporary speculative 
scientific thinking, Deacon assures us that (our) life and meaning in the universe are as 
much shaped in correspondence with, and by, the superposition of the present and the 
future, the absent, the yet-emerging, as by any more narrowly conceived  dynamics. 
Additionally, suggest Laughlin and Throop, (analogously with Stapp) the ultimately 
archetypal and cosmically empatterned neurognosis that abets the self-organization of 
neural networks (as well as our interpersonal and cultural forms of holistic self 
awareness) works also at the level of the quantum field. . . . by penetrating to and being 
penetrated by events in the quantum sea . . . .  
In a sense neural networks may be organized to operate as transducers into 
consciousness of patterned quantum-level activity and, reciprocally, from 
consciousness into quantum-level activity. Transformations of neural 
activity may produce transformations in the structure of the sea, and visa 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  308    
versa [sic]. . . . The brain may be trued [dynamically stabilized, accorded or 
entrained with the holistic realities of B/being]  from the bottom up by way 
of direct inter-action with the quantum sea and trued from the top down by 
way of the eidetic [neurognostically mediated] cosmology inherent in 
[religio-]mythic systems.13  
The brain-mind of the mature contemplative (in the work of Laughlin and 
colleagues) like the heart-mind (in Daoist and Confucian tradition) can through 
dehabituation be released and evoked, taught, and cultivated, to experience everyday 
events and affairs as “instantiations of the totality” and spontaneously or consciously to 
participate  
the normally invisible causation behind apparently discrete events. Each 
human brain may indeed prove to be a microcosm that contains -- like the 
proverbial mustard seed, or the more modern hologram – all the wisdom 
of the ages requiring only the optimal conditions of development for each 
person to individuate [to mature] into a sage. And some of those 
conditions have to do with participating within an intact mind-brain-
[heart-] trueing, mythopoietic system.14  
 
Such functional mythopoiesis understood in the context of emergently dynamic 
cosmic self-organization potentials expressed alike in (meta)physical and complex 
organic systems and in the conscious ententionality of evolving cultural systems is a 
feature of the hundun work now at hand. Hence we have, by way of illustration, Laszlo’s 
connectivity hypotheses that in the interconnected wholing, the non-twoing advaitavada 
of the universe, the wave function of the universe in-forms all systems throughout space 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  309    
and time and that “the primordial virtual-energy domain. . . .constitutes the primordial 
nature of God.” Likewise, Haisch has quite dramatically, if sometimes theistically, 
proposed that “God lives in the physical universe through us” and that the mythic path 
now “must be one that leads to spiritual wisdom on a road paved by scientific 
knowledge.”15  
 
My conflation of myth and science hereat is not a deficiency in thinking or 
syntax. It is a proposal that contemporary scienza nuova (as contrasted with careerist 
scientism) is as much reasonably comprehensible as mythopoeia with decimal points as 
that nondualist religious spirituality (as contrasted with doctrinal religiosity) is a mode of 
contemplative science and the self-contemplation of anthropocosmogenesis. Again, not a 
lapse (albeit an excess) in syntax, for I mean to say that experimental religion in its latent 
senses of re-ligio and re-legere, reconnection and attentive beholding, is, with the sister 
mythopoeia of science, a constituent and reflexive ententional participant in the creatio 
continua of what we might comfortably call the holomovement, the spontaneities of the 
cosmos, the connecting pattern processes of psychophysical qi, the mystical body of the 
cosmic Christ, or the liberatory playful complex self-organization of zero-point 
experience-as-such. I am clearly not fussy here. As Mr. Hundun and his Sufi friends 
might say, take the wheat, not the measure in which it is contained. As Zhuangzi did say, 
words are like nets; take the meaning and leave the net behind. And on Occam’s note of 
simple logical economy, inquires Hal Puthoff writing from the Institute for Advanced 
Studies at Austin in 2002,  
How uneconomical Nature would have to be to posit, on the one hand, an 
all-pervading energetic field of ki [qi, or mana, prana, barakah, élan vital, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  310    
etc.]. . . and on the other hand, also posit an all-pervasive energetic field of 
quantum zero-point energy. It appear[s]. . .more likely that we [are] 
dealing with a single underlying substructure which goes by various 
names in various cosmologies, depending on whether it is in its pre-
manifest random form, or patterned at various hierarchical levels, 
including the ‘purely material.’16 
 
I don’t ignore the somewhat reductionist implication here and elsewhere that by 
whatever name there is some supposed Urstoff or basic (psycho)(physical) something-or-
other out of which, into which, from which, with which and as which all the I and Thou 
and this and that (co)-create. (To a considerable extent, we are hostages to the 
essentialism, sectorization, grammar and syntax of Indo-European nouns and 
prepositions.) Having earlier raised this question in suggesting that where the 
hermeneutic ontology of mutual contextualization or ongoing-wholing is performed (the 
ontohermeneutic of hundun saturation) there is self-beheld the diaphaneity of the 
interminate field (open to) inter-being – the translucence of things/events to things/events 
and of thoughts to thoughts as well as to things, etc. -- I was trying to propose not only 
that ontos need not be substantified -- however rarefied, organic or conscious the 
substance proposed -- but also that anthropo-cosmo-onto-hermeneutics may not even fit 
neatly into the traditional category/discipline of ontology, objective, subjective, temporal 
or spatial or other in form. Phatic cognicentrism itself is up for critique. Again, all 
assertions and postulations are ever-only-mutually-co-produced and co-meaningful, as 
are those (minds) who make them, in whose ecology they emerge. Neither, however, do I 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  311    
propose something transcendent to categories we know, for reasons accordant with 
Berman’s critique of vertical ascent gnosticisms.17  
Put another way, this is to ask if the real openness to and presencing of Being (an 
already essentialized place-holder term for what is at best a “placing” of and in meaning 
of which spatiotemporal placing is a mode or correlateΨ isn’t the event, the 
pattern/process of more-or-less radical inter-transformation of (an) inter- and co-
responsive yet authentically acategorical “this” having no categorizable “what,” or even 
much of “that,” about it except in the circumstantially varying (and often ego-fractional 
as contrasted with fractal) ways we ongoingly (try to) re-en-whole the already 
spontaneously ongoing-wholing. The attribute of “its” authenticity abides in (ourΨ 
communal and evolutionarily or cosmically in-formed compresencing of a field of 
relations-in-process none of whose after the fact discernments as self, other, object, idea, 
galaxy, tuna fish or quantum anything can be referred to anything other than the 
noncategorizable interplay of the aforementioned afoundationally coevoking thises and 
thats. In which case the issue is not reference but performance or instantiation. (Any 
category or event being what it is in corresponsiveness with others, all mutually co-
constituting – irreducibly subject- and object-ifying one another.) No amount of deeming 
and disputing does much more than pick out and point out reified states and elements of 
the irreducible ongoing everywhere – and generally does so from the point of view of a 
certain ego-perspectivating somebody (who in doing so supposes sh/e ex-sists, i. e. picks 
hirself out) with-out -- i. e., objectifyingly differencing hirself from -- the ever 
compresencing origination-field (of be(com)ing-as-suchΨ. “Identical with the Great 
Thoroughfare,” in sitting down and forgetting ourselves, we see that “inherent in things 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  312    
[is] that they are ties to each other, that one kind calls up another” and that “It is inherent 
in everything that it will transform of itself. . . . Whatever is an end is also a start.”18 By 
such a measure, the resonance of anthropocosmic sustainability is toujours en route. 
The theme is not of denying the experience of very specific somebodies, but 
realizing that anybody and anything – especially including all living persons be they 
human or not human -- is an instantiation of (still, not yet an abstraction from) a nothing 
“special,” an incompletely objectifiable and incompletely subjectifiable Hundun 
experience-geography that only by cultural convention and individual egocultural habitus 
is differentially thematizable into (increasingly ego-) essentialized this and that, here and 
there. It is in conduct, contemplation and function here that sustainingly resonant 
anthropocosmic ars contextualis and (ego’sΨ ars moriendi autocatalytically interpenetrate 
and cocreate. 
In trail blazing this seemingly way, I am attempting to place practical 
sustainability and related philosophy -- seen by Heidegger as an authentic performance of 
being(sΨή(Being’sΨ releasement, Gelassenheit, and not foremost as an ontocognitive 
activity of essentialized ego-subjects and their ego-perspectivated object(s) -- into 
ontohermeneutical analogy with, for instance, John Scotus Eriugena’s ninth century 
insight that, likewise, God “is not a what,” not a determinate essence. In yet other words, 
if for Heidegger the love of wisdom is really a mature assenting openness to shared 
transformation (as was also the view of Confucian religiousness according to Tu 
Weiming), none of us is entirely other than all-of-us-and-our-environment. And the large 
ecology of Us that we each in our diverse ways fractally compresence is the interminate 
(multifocally ontohermeneutic gathering/togethering and quantum probabilistically 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  313    
eventuating) ongoing-wholing of everything which in the act reduces to no thing yet is 
paradoxically compresenced in or as the minute particulars of each.19  
In theory, then, as our presence is also the interfusing compresencing of 
acategorizable or irreducible experience-as-such, our never completely localized 
sensitivity to incipient (environmental and ecohuman) changes throughout is clarified, 
and thus our (precautionary?, ego-contracepting?) aptitude for sustainability tuned, to the 
degree we contemplatively de-emphasize our ego-instrumental aims on the (not-yet) 
event(s) of life as if life were an externalizable event from which we draw resources of 
individual benefit. As Pannenberg and Deacon quite differently imply, our 
contemplatively sustaining now is inherently future-morphic; we can allow ourselves, or 
non-impositionally choose, to be ententionally sensitive to dysfunctional ecosocial  
changes before they undertake the formality of actually occurring because of this, in the 
same way, as Haisch again suggests, we understand the laws of nature because we are 
they. And further, according with the creative temporics of Gebser, futurity and presence 
are compresent as ever-present origin undivided into absolute categories of time, space, 
self/other or, most ecorelevantly, the externalizations of person/planet.20  
We can by another analogy adapt a related, mystically apposite, and somewhat 
apophatic, logic here. Eriugena declares that even God (the whole, the maximum in Cusa, 
Α and ȍ in Christian lore, coincidentia oppositorum in alchemical, wuji) is thought to be 
ignorant of Himself as a separate anything because s/he (in the Gaian) cannot know what 
s/he is. And this is because, to repeat, Eriugena thinks God is not a what, not a 
determinate or a fixed essence or entity. The corresponding socioecological 
ontohermeneutic would be that of a learned ignorance or docta ignorantia suited to our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  314    
exercising the precautionary wu wei of not too readily engaging in the deeming of this 
and that as being of a certain use value and, by extension, of our not being too 
impositional of special (ego- or anthropo-centric) interests into or upon the plenitude of 
ecobecoming, and thus diminishing (self+other) interbeing in the act (while externalizing 
inconvenient truth-costs at the same time).21 
 
If, as Laughlin and Throop conclude, “myth penetrates to the archetypal level of 
the mind-brain, which is in direct interaction with the reality of the being and its 
environment,”22  then coherent and contemplative contemporary ecomythic tuning is 
likely, especially in the broader intercultural sense of a coherent science/religion 
ecumenism, to influence brain plasticity, resonant psychomental integration with the 
octaves of existence from quantum field to sage mind, and a planetary culture beyond 
sustainability. Such anthropocosmically resonant polyculture has the potential to display 
and perform cosmogeny which, whether we see it to be bioarchetypally, 
psychophysically or neurognostically and communally mediated, demonstrates in real-
time ecohumane relations integrally ontohermeneutic functioning of a sustainingly 
mature order. This will probably be an improvement over the contemporary condition.23  
Moreover, the coevolutionary satisficing potentials in this afforded by a mature, 
knowledgeable, contemplative and educational orientation worldwide suggest the 
prospect of a deeper resonance than ecohumanity – an emergently self-aware dimension 
of coevolving universe – has before enjoyed. We are now, anew, on the margins of 
reality. The Great Transformational Work (da hua) is retuning the whole order of order in 
our mature contemplative experience of ourselves mindfully and unimposingly 
performing, while interacting with, our daily biophysical and ecosocial environment in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  315    
cosmic, ecosocial and interpersonal depth and play. Is this story any less sustaining or 
more silly than the nasty, brutish and short survivalist subtext long familiar and 
repeatedly broadcast to us? 24  
And if it comes to a question of choosing narratives – as if we could make 
genuinely narrative-independent choices apart from a significant contemplative 
deconditioning and dehabituating of our consciousness, if even then – How necessary is it 
that the tale do any better than clarify our “understanding of the actual conditions and 
terms for survival” amid “the ceaseless interconnectedness and interpenetration of the 
whole” in full awareness that “physics is no longer the business of disclosing pre-existent 
truths. . . revealed truths” that we can carry in our heads as perfect maps of an ever-
ongoing-worlding in whose diverse wholing(s) we are participants? Here Kafatos and 
Nadeau celebrate that our understanding is always a participation of the so-called 
subjective and objective; its therefore sustaining ontohermeneutic value is less in absolute 
and certain conceptual Truth than in “help[ing] us coordinate greater ranges of experience 
with physical reality. . . . conceiving our relationship to this reality [in ways that make] 
the business of being conscious human beings a good deal more meaningful than 
classical physics ever allowed.”25  
It can’t be that hard; not rocket science for sure. And from the sutras to St. Francis 
to Henry David Thoreau and Laudato Si’ the refrain has been “simplify, simplify.” Even 
at the heart of complexity theory is the insight of unitas multiplex or the diversified, 
unreduced conjunction of one and many(fold). Writing about sustainability at the end of 
his book Complexity Waldrop adds, we are not likely to go from the present state A to a 
more or less sustainable state B, period. Rather, “You have to assume that the transitions 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  316    
are going to continue forever. . . .[as] systems that remain continuously dynamic, and that 
are embedded in environments that themselves are continuously dynamic.” Herein and, 
more importantly, hereas, through the coevolution and communication of wisdom in the 
forms of our learning, our resonance, our more-or-less seamless participation in the 
Earth-human unitas multiplex fractal of cosmogenesis, is sustainability – perhaps, thinks 
Waldrop, midwifed by a contemplatively-informed “renunciation or sublimation or 
transformation of our traditional appetites: to outbreed, outconsume, and conquer our 
rivals, especially our rivals in other tribes. These impulses may once have been adaptive. 
. . .But we no longer have the incautious luxury of tolerating them.”26  
 Or perhaps we will learn to deliteralize and to ritualize them (cf. Sanskrit rita/rta) 
in sustaining, life-affirming and less violent ways that accord with the creative and 
recreative patterns and processes of self-rewarding and self-sustaining coexistence 
(Chinese sheng-sheng). We are here invited literally and metaphorically to dance in the 
streets – to dance with our hands and feet announces one early sage -- as a viable mode of 
ecopolitical debate, competition, celebration and concourse. In ritually and dramatically 
synchronizing, reciprocating and alternating rhythmic movements – with all the built-in 
coevolutionary advantages of our mirror neurons – we may experience a measure of self-
loss and also an enlarged measure of individuation, certainly a chance to excel in (co-) 
self-rewarding individual-with-group flow/performances of energies, patterns and 
aptitudes that thrive but do not abide uniquely in the human body politic.27  
Speaking further of the benefit of public festivities and danced rituals, Ehrenreich 
notes these reconnect persons with one another and, as in Turner’s communitas, with the 
natural world and the universe; they allow us releasement from ourselves and our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  317    
compulsions. And in spontaneous ecosocial reconciliation with one another verging on 
oneness, these long rejected shamanic and to some silly-seeming events offer sustainingly 
self-rewarding “mind-preserving, lifesaving techniques of ecstasy.” Expressed 
ecopolitically, Ehrenreich puts this in the premise that, “People must find, in their 
movement, the immediate joy of solidarity, if only because, in the face of overwhelming 
state and corporate power, solidarity is their sole source of strength.” And for Thomas 
Berry, in realizing ourselves as a dimensionality of the Earth, of cosmogenesis, this self-
rewarding solidarity realizes itself as the universe in its in(de)terminate, anthropocosmic 
quantum-choice-related mode of interbeing: Cosmogenesis, noogenesis, axiogenesis, eco-
self-sustaining-sheng-sheng.28 
No! closes Ehrenreich’s narrative of collective self-rewarding-joy with a smiling 
samba nod to the bystanding Protestant Work Ethic arm-in-arm with the instrumentalist 
Spirit of Capitalism, “There [i]s no ‘point’” to the concelebratory fête, Silly! – no 
fundamentalist, productivist or positivist overtones, “ideological message, or money to be 
made -- just the chance. . .to acknowledge the miracle of our simultaneous existence with 
some sort of celebration.” And translating this eco-empathic body-languaging into the 
comprehensively guan-like terms of ancient Chinese philosophy, those also of Gebser’s 
integral consciousness, the event and embodied celebration of sustaining ecoexistence is 
as much in “introducing empathy into the field of science as a tool of observation” as it is 
in dancing in the streets and otherwise celebrating cosmogenic meaning, performing 
cosmogenesis itself, in the (f)acts of everyday life. Not just an uroboric participation 
mystique, clarifies Rifkin, “reaffiliating with the biosphere is an empathic experience that 
has to be felt as well as intellectualized to be meaningful. It also has to be practiced.” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  318    
Planetization, continues Rifkin with a tacit nod of his own to Teilhard, “opens up the 
possibility of extending the empathic sensibility [shu, ren] to our species as a whole, as 
well as to the many other species that make up the life of this planet” and also the 
possibility  of  “. . .the next phase of [eco]human consciousness – the extension of the 
central nervous system of the human race from the geosphere to the biosphere.”29  
Elgin, drawing the relevant ethical conclusion concerning anthropocosmogenesis 
expressive of a “continuum of consciousness. . . .not confined within the brain [. . .but] a 
field property of the universe itself,” a universe, moreover “arising as a freshly unified 
whole at each moment,” also states that “[b]ecause everything arises or emerges along 
with everything else. . .the condition of anything depends upon the condition of 
everything to which it is connected – and that is the totality of the universe.” And, he 
continues with a contemplative coda, if as a “maturing civilization” we view the universe 
as fundamentally alive. . .then simplicity of living makes sense. Now we want to reduce 
the busyness and clutter that distract us from diving deep into existence. . . .[through] 
voluntary simplicity, sophisticated simplicity, green living, ephemeral living, conserver 
living, and Earth-friendly” or what others call cradle-to-cradle “ecoeffective” living.30  
Endnotes: Silly Sagesse 
1.) Earlier shamanic context, Eliade; Kohn; Girardot 1983: 109 
2.) Girardot 1983: 82-83; interdependent, Morin 2008:114 ; Bachelard: 7-14 
3.) altered states also see Wilshire 1998; Moody Blues see Burneko 1971; Eriugena see 
Bett; contemplation on Cosmic Uroboros in Primack and Abrams: 177-78, see also ibid., 
160, 284, and see Nun, the Great Abyss in Egyptian mythology ibid.: 44-45, 309,  359 
4.) Partridge 1977: 623 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  319    
5.) the lost heart, see again Mencius (Mengzi); also see Yü in Tu and Tucker 2003: 77-79 
writing, “Chinese ‘Learning of the Mind and the Heart’ (xinxue). . . can be equated 
neither with ‘psychology’ nor with philosophy of mind in the West. Thus we find in 
Mencius, ‘penetrating one’s own mind and knowing one’s own nature in order to know 
Heaven’; in Zhuangzi, ‘fasting of heart’ for attainment of oneness with Dao; and in Chan 
Buddhism, ‘point directly to the human mind’ and ‘see one’s nature and become a 
Buddha.’” I’ll make a further reach here in citing Wang Yangming (ibid.: ικΨ as his 
contemplative imagery anticipates both the anthropo-cosmic co-construction of reality in 
quantum speculation and the absential efficacy of Deacon: “Before you look at these 
flowers, they and your mind are in a state of silent vacancy. As you come to look at them, 
their colors at once show up clearly. From this you can know that these flowers are not 
external to your mind.” Nor, I add, is mind necessarily internal to,  decomposable to, the 
flowers. Either way, (Hall and Ames 19κι: 3ί2Ψ such “allusive analogies are attempts to 
set up resonances between poles of a modeling relationship. . . . The educating [Rorty 
might say edifying] function of the model is defined not in terms of imitation but 
evocation”; Swimme: 1ί1; Already in far away Bhutan the economy of eudaimonia is an 
aim of ecohumane governmental policy as related by Helena Norberg-Hodge and others 
in their timely documentary film, “The Economics of Happiness” 
(http://www.theeconomicsofhappiness.org/; see also the International Society for 
Ecology and Culture, http://www.localfutures.org/ or the Sustainable Seattle Area 
Happiness Initiative, SAHI, at http://www.sustainableseattle.org/sahi/; also see The 
Hedgehog Review (summer 2ί12Ψ on “Sustain-Ability?” http:ήήwww.iasc-
culture.org/THR/index.php/ (accessed 8.1.12) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  320    
6.) in Girardot 1983: 81 
7.) mask, see persona as mask; see Jacobi 196ι: 3ι; cf. Chinese “face,” e. g. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Search/Face_%28sociological_concept%29/ 
(accessed 8.1.12); the etiquette of such carving is expressed in the corresponding 
intellectual niceties of contrasting or opposing this to that (in making an argument) ((to 
prove a pointΨΨ (((to advance a careerΨΨΨ, see Zhuangzi in Wu 199ί on “the sorting that 
evens things out”; see too the traditional Daoist image of the sage or of sagemind as the 
uncarved block, pu; see also Girardot and Wu 1990 on hundun as a variant motif 
8.) related Chinese imagery see Girardot passim, also see how Girardot interprets 
knowledge in the Daoist context, e. g. 153; undisciplined, Morin 2008: 32; see also in 
Hoff pu, note 2 
9.) wholly attending, Turner: 128 and see Turner passim; fuzzy logics, Kosko; on 
archetypes being irrepresentable tendencies known to us only through personal and 
cultural imagery see Jung, and for an introduction see deLaszlo: 84, and passim 
10.) guan see Cheng 1995, Burneko 2010; Girardot 1983: 22; see Kuhn 
11.) Gaia in Harding, Ruether; scientists dialogue with sages, Weber; Grof 1984; Dalai 
Lama 2005 and in Zajonc 2004 
12.Ψ It wires itself, “It” can be taken here as Hundunlike all-togethering and also in terms 
of the unconscious or It-thinking discussed by Obeyesekere; also see Burneko 1992; 
Berman 2000; Morin 2008; Cheng 1995; Laszlo 1996: 212, 213 
13.) relational modes of being cf. parousia; see too the ethicality of “vigilant passivity,” 
transaction and engagement with the other and “neutraliz[ing] the reflexive desires of the 
self” in Miyamoto; similarly on openness to the other see Levinas; penetrating to and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  321    
being penetrated by events in the quantum sea, Laughlin and Throop 2001: 728-29; see 
also Primack and  Abrams: 37-43; see Deacon: 545 on the superpositioned present and 
absent                 
14.) the normally invisible causation, Laughlin and Throop idem; see Tu and Tucker 
2ίί3: 4, 5, 21, 24, and passim on sagehood as “the attainment of one’s cosmological 
being”; see Laszlo 19κι: 1ι  and also, idem, “The brain acts as a transducer of wave 
functions into mind events.  The total system of perception and cognition has 
characteristics of brain as well as of mind; it is best identified with the compound term 
‘brainήmind.” We can as well infer that nondual brainήmind or cosmos/consciousness 
appears as a dialogue in whose reciprocity is ecohumane resonance 
15.) Laszlo 2003: 106-107, 116 original emphasis; Haisch 2006: 137, 140 
16.) contemplative science see Wallace: 3, 6, 8,  and ibid.: 164-65 Wallace states,  “So 
relative space-time, mass-energy, and body-mind emerge from the ultimate symmetry of 
the absolute [cf. quantum vacuum] space of phenomena. . .primordial consciousness, and 
the energy of primordial consciousness, all of which are coextensive and of the same 
nature. These two sets of ultimate and relative phenomena have no inherent identities of 
their own apart from the conceptual networks in which they are conceived or apart from 
each other. . . .These topics call for thorough, comparative analysis, and if it turns out that 
there are truths on which science and the great contemplative traditions of the world 
come together, those may be the most important truths that can be known by humanity”; 
Wallace: 16κ reflects that, “Buddhist contemplatives have long maintained that the 
participatory nature of the mind is revealed most clearly when the mind is empowered by 
the unified cultivation of meditative quiescence. . .and contemplative insight. . .This is a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  322    
hypothesis that can be tested experientially, setting aside all dogmas and commitments to 
unsubstantiated beliefs, scientific or religious”; Cosmic Christ see Fox and see also 
Teilhard 1959: 207, also see Thunberg; see again Jantsch: 308-11; Puthoff  
www.earthtech.org/publications/ (accessed 5.31.12); experimental religion, see 
experimental theology in Pullman 
17.) Berman 1989, 2000 
18.) Great Thoroughfare, Zhuangzi in Watson trans.: 87; It is inherent, Graham: 118; 
Whatever is an end, ibid.: 148 
19.) Eriugena in Weinberg: 51; Tu 1979; see interpretations of Zuhandenheit, 
Zuhandensein in Parkes and in Zimmerman and in Bruce Foltz 
2ί.Ψ personήplanet, Roszak 19ι9. A sentence that begins “In theory. . .” amid a Sargasso 
of syllables is not testament of an especially contemplative experience unless you’re 
willing to grant that keeping something in mind a long time with real heart is part of the 
job; otherwise, and even then, once you catch a fish better to leave the net of words 
behind; consider NeoConfucian meditation jing zuo; see also in Rodney Taylor: 2ι “The 
absolute importance of a scholar’s practicing quiet-sitting is like the necessity of a boat 
having a rudder” also in ibid.: 154, “holding the mind like a smile and not stiffening the 
mind, one must sit relaxed,” see also a pertinent précis noting that jing zuo did not 
necessarily forgo conscious thought and reflection at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jing_zuo/ (accessed 10.23.12) 
21.) Eriugena see Weinberg: 51 and Bett: 27 non est quid; precautionary wu wei Burneko 
2ίί4; see Al Gore’s film An Inconvenient Truth 
http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=8847562857479496579/ (accessed 8.1.12); 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  323    
consider docta ignorantia a kind of discipline or yoga of self-constraint that keeps us 
from squandering our attention and natural resources on ego-specified diffractions and 
distractions – see again Deacon on emergent dynamics of self-constraining systems in 
(co)evolution; see theme of apophatic/incarnational/nondual anthropocosmology in 
Eastern Orthodox cosmology 
22.) Laughlin and Throop 2001: 729 
23.) probably be an improvement -- Faites vos jeux!;  E. Christopher Mare, a colleague 
and former Antioch U.-Seattle grad student of mine, writes in his summer 2012 Ph. D. 
dissertation proposal “Neurophenomenology of Settlement Morphology” for the Fielding 
Graduate University a timely and trenchant expansion of the received  notion of 
sustainability saying: “I used to be concerned about ‘sustainability’ as a worthwhile goal; 
now I think this goal ‘sustainability’ – with everybody suddenly wanting to go ‘green’ – 
is essentially about trying to make the spectacle work, with less and less cheap energy 
available, when that may very well be a futile effort simply because the gridded 
substructure, like any mechanical system, is prone to entropy. These days I think more 
about beyond sustainability, beyond mere steady-state material maintenance to conditions 
where human beings may thrive in personal and planetary plenitude.  If it can be 
demonstrated, through this Dissertation, that settlement morphology influences neural 
patterning, and by extension consciousness, then the path to beyond sustainability may 
begin with taking a closer look at the organization of the substructure upon which we 
play our lives – it is not incidental” (Mare 2ί12: 62: unpublished ms, original emphasisΨ. 
Primack and Abrams: 294 (emphasis added) also write less of sustainability proper than 
of resonance in view of the fact, to reiterate, that “no human goal today is more pressing 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  324    
then the search for sustainable prosperity. . . . founded on harmony with the universe” 
24.) margins of reality, Jahn and Dunne 1987/2009; see Elgin; Primack and Abrams: 297 
add, “The next decades – the active lifetimes of the people reading this book and our 
children – will create the blueprint of the future [E]arth. . . .,” and they continue: 29κ [I]f 
all people build on the groundwork of recent discoveries, they will be able to. . .create a 
visual and poetic language through which the universe. . .can speak accurately and 
meaningfully. . .,” concluding, with emphasis: 299 “We will change when we accept our 
cosmological truths, when we identify with and honor the forces of the early universe as 
our oldest ancestors. . . . When with all our minds and hearts we grasp that we are central 
to the expanding universe, we will have connected. Then we too, like our ancient 
ancestors the world over [in myth, ritual and traditional cosmogenic understanding] can 
say once again with confidence and commitment that we uphold the universe.” 
25.) the actual conditions, Kafatos and Nadeau 1990: 186; ceaseless interconnectedness, 
ibid.: 187; physics is no longer in the business, ibid.: 59; see Neville on truth as the 
carryover of value from cosmogenesis; Kafatos and Nadeau ibid.: 187-88 add in a 
manner reminiscent of Primack and Abrams note 24 above: “Central to this vision would 
be a cosmos rippling with tension evolving out of itself endless examples of the awe and 
wonder of its seamlessly interconnected life. And central to the cultivation and practice of 
the spiritual  pattern of the [ecosocial] community would be a profound acceptance of the 
astonishing fact of our being. Equally important, this vision also requires that we 
appreciate that the conditions for our being and becoming were conducive to a radical 
freedom – the freedom  which allowed us to fashion our own reality.” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  325    
26.) unitas multiplex, Morin 2008: 4, 6; you have to assume, Waldrop: 356; renunciation 
or sublimation,  ibid.: 351; see Morin 1999: 116, 121 on deceleration; Berry 1988: 140-
141 on post-patriarchal society; see The Hedgehog Review note 5 above and included 
essays with such titles as: “Abundance on Trial” by Joshua J. Yates, “Sustainability and 
Empire” by J. Donald Hughes, “The Historical Production (and ConsumptionΨ of 
Unsustainability” by Benjamin R. Cohen 
27.) dancing in the streets, Ehrenreich: 27; see Sheets-Johnstone; cf. Chinese li, ritual, 
principle, e. g., propriety in Tu’s translation of the Zhongyong; spontaneities of the Earth 
in Berry 1988; also see Laughlin et al. 
28.) mind-preserving,  Ehrenreich: 153; people must find, ibid.: 259; see Rifkin on 
empathic civilization; and see Eliade, Harner, Elkin, Larsen on shamanism 
29.) Ehrenreich: 261; introducing empathy, Rifkin, quoting Kohut, in his The Empathic 
Civilization, also Rifkin: 609, 611, 615, 612; cf. Laughlin and Throop; see McTaggart 
2002, 2011 
30.) Elgin: 46, 73, 173, 174-75; ecoeffective, McDonough and Braungart: 76, 157-86 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  326    
 
 
 
 
9.0 A/Musing Interlude 
Everything on the [E]arth, in between, and above is arising from one radiant source. 
As my thoughts, words, and deeds 
embody this complete unity,  
I am the peace of this moment. 
(Rig Veda) 
 
Finding beauty in a broken world becomes more than the art of assemblage. It is the work 
of daring contemplation that inspires action. 
(Terry Tempest Williams, Finding Beauty in a Broken World 2008: 385) 
 
Words are not just wind. . . .But if what they have to say is not fixed, then do they really 
say something? . . . So I say, ‘that’ comes out of ‘this’ and ‘this’ depends on ‘that’ – 
which is to say that ‘this’ and ‘that’ give birth to each other. . . .The sage too recognizes a 
‘this,’ but a ‘this’ which is also ‘that,’ a ‘that’ which is also ‘this’. . . .A state in which 
‘this’ and ‘that’ no longer find their opposites is called the hinge of the Way [dao shu]. 
When the  hinge is fitted into the socket, it can respond endlessly. 
(Zhuangzi) 
 
A human being is part of a whole, called by us the ‘Universe,’ a part limited in time and 
space. He experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings, as something separated from 
the rest – a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This delusion is a kind of prison 
for us, restricting us to our personal desires and to affection for a few persons nearest us. 
Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circles of 
compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its beauty. 
(Albert Einstein) 
 
Part of the structure of all life or order, is that it extends beyond itself. To the extent a 
system has life, it is helping to make some larger whole alive. The field goes out beyond 
its own immediate confines, and every center draws its strength from other centers, often 
lying far beyond it. It is, therefore, an essential attribute of all life, that it represents a 
connection between the space where the order occurs, and the space beyond. 
It is certain that life is not something local, a thing which merely happens in a painting or 
a person or a mountain. It is a relation between the thing where it occurs and the world 
beyond. It is a phenomenon which depends on the whole universe, and the extent to 
which the larger order of the universe penetrates and soothes, the order of the part whose 
order we are looking at. In such a world, the order springs fundamentally, and ultimately, 
from the connection of each part to its surroundings. 
(Christopher Alexander, The Luminous Ground 2004: 306-307) 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  327    
Heaven is my father and [E]arth is my mother, and even such a small being as I finds an 
intimate place in their midst. 
Therefore, that which fills the universe I regard as my body and that which directs the 
universe I regard as my nature. 
All persons are my brothers and sisters, and all things are my companions. 
(Zhang Zai) 
 
Yet I am a child of the Milky Way. The night is my mother. I am made of the dust of 
stars. Every atom in my body was forged in a star. When the universe exploded into 
being, already the bird longed for the wood and the fish for the pool. When the first 
galaxies fell into luminous clumps, already  matter was struggling toward consciousness. 
The star clouds in Sagittarius are a burning bush. If there is a voice in Sagittarius, I’d be a 
fool not to listen. If God’s voice in the night is a scrawny cry, then I’ll prick up my ears. 
If night’s faint light fails to knock me off my feet, then I’ll sit back on a dark hillside and 
wait and watch. A hint here and a trait there. Listening and watching. Waiting, always 
waiting, for the tingle in the spine. 
(Chet Raymo, The Soul of the Night: An Astronomical Pilgrimage 1992: 205) 
. . .But when he associated with people, he was completely a sphere of peaceful 
disposition. 
(Zhu Xi) 
Because we have an intrinsic non-local pattern recognition system, with innovation 
enabled by the noise implicit in the limit to self-referencing, we see that reality is 
analogous to the operation of neural networks, that it is mind-like. 
(in Ralph Abraham and Sisir Roy, Demystifying the Akasha: Consciousness and the  
Quantum Vacuum 2010: 84) 
 
But for a long while they sang only each alone, or but a few together, while the rest 
hearkened; for each comprehended only that part of the mind of Ilúvatar from which he 
came, and in the understanding of their brethren they grew but slowly. Yet ever as they 
listened they came to deeper understanding, and increased in unison and harmony. 
(J.R.R. Tolkien, The Silmarillion, 1998: 15) 
 
Analogy is the key to all human communion with the nonhuman whether the divine or 
the natural world. . . .The effort to reduce all wisdom to a univocal language is a primary 
error or failure of our times. . . .Human language arose, however, not only as a means of 
attunement  between persons but also between humans and the natural world. The belief 
that meaningful speech is a purely human property was entirely alien to those oral 
communities who first evolved our various ways of speaking. By holding to such a belief 
today, we may well be inhibiting the basic function of language. By denying that birds 
and other animals have their own modes of communication, by insisting that the river has 
no real voice and that the ground of nature is mute, we stifle our direct experience. We 
cut ourselves off from the deep meanings in many of our words, severing our own 
language from that which supports and sustains it. We then wonder why we are often 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  328    
unable to communicate even among ourselves. We need poets and artists to  restore this 
forgotten language. 
(Thomas Berry, The Sacred Universe, 2009: 145-46) 
 
This man and his kind of de will extend things in all directions to make one. 
(Zhuangzi) 
 
“Have you understood all this?” They said, “Yes.” And he said to them, “Well then, 
every scribe who becomes a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like a householder who 
brings out from his storeroom things both new and old.” 
(Matthew 13:51-2) 
 
Vision exceeds method, and reshapes practice and discourse, according to its needs. 
(Roberto Mangabeira Unger and Lee Smolin, The Singular Universe and the Reality of 
Time, 2015:  xix) 
 
How we treat the natural world around us – ‘the environment,’ as environmental science 
calls it, ‘creation’ (ktisisΨ and ‘cosmos’ (kosmos) as the ancient Jews and Greeks and 
early Christians called it – follows effortlessly, quietly, but inexorably from the way we 
see it. From the way we conceive it. From our relation to it. And from the way we speak 
about it. The poet and agrarian writer Wendell Berry states this with eloquence: 
‘The problem, as it appears to me, is that we are utilizing the wrong language. The 
language we use to speak of the world and its creatures, including ourselves, has gained a 
certain analytical power, (along with a lot of expertish pomp) but has lost much of its 
power to designate what is being analyzed and to convey and respect [our] care or 
affection or devotion toward it. As a result we have a lot of genuinely concerned people 
calling upon us to ‘save’ a world which their language simultaneously reduces to an 
assemblage of perfectly featureless and dispirited ‘ecosystems,’ ‘organisms,’ 
‘environments,’ ‘mechanisms,’ and the like. It is impossible to prefigure the salvation of 
the world in the same language by which the world has been dismembered and defaced.’ 
(in Bruce V. Foltz,  The Noetics of Nature: Environmental Philosophy and the Holy 
Beauty of the Visible, 2014: 21) 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  329    
 
 
 
10.0 “The PEAR Proposition”  
 
In the summer of 1994, I was chosen to be a member of the interdisciplinary 
Academy of Consciousness Studies, sponsored by the Fetzer Institute and hosted by the 
Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratories (PEAR) and the International 
Consciousness Research Laboratories (ICRL), at Princeton University. (PEAR has since 
closed, after some thirty years of research into consciousness-related physical 
phenomena; and ICRL maintains related publishing projects.) This was an intensive two 
week symposium featuring the work and findings of researchers who in various ways had 
been for several years and still continue studying issues relevant to “the role of 
consciousness in the establishment of physical reality.” 1  Our common interest was in the 
interrelationships of consciousness and environment in the construction of reality, 
acknowledging the dynamic complementarity of science and spirituality. Much of the 
research fell under the heading of what is often called parapsychology. And a major focus 
of the research and of our discussions was the role of (what I have, with Deacon in mind, 
been calling) the ententionality  of persons with respect to the manifestation and 
disposition of physical phenomena. 
The principal presenters from PEAR and ICRL came from diverse backgrounds in 
consciousness research, biocultural anthropology, bioelectromagnetics, engineering 
anomalies, religious studies, quantum vacuum theory, sacred landscapes, the philosophy 
of science and other areas. Those of us like myself selected as respondents and 
participants came from a very diverse array of countries and from experiences only 
partially enumerated as psychiatry, artificial intelligence, adult education, broadcast 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  330    
services, archaeology, mathematics and intercultural humanities or interdisciplinary 
liberal studies including phenomenology and, as in my case, the evolution of 
consciousness. 
 
It was an extremely collegial and an intellectually intoxicating experience. But 
instead of trying to summarize all of what went on then, or work that has continued since, 
(a little of which is sketched in the preceding pages), I want to focus on one day’s 
meeting as a way of gathering together some of the ideas I’ve been working with thus far. 
We were on that day having a “deeply engaging” discussion “of the pervasive presence of 
ritual in human activities ranging from everyday habits, to religion, to science.”2 
 
An account of the relevance of this discussion to the present essay begins in the 
fact that over the decades of PEAR and related ICRL experiments, the principal 
researchers had learned to create settings in which individual test subjects claiming no 
special knowledge of or expertise in anomalous phenomena could register notable 
nonrandom results in their interactions with mechanical and electronic devices in the 
absence of physical contact with them. These devices were expressly designed to be 
unbiased by any known physical contact or bioelectric influences. In other words, as in 
the case of the portable Random Event Generator (known as a FieldREG) that was in the 
room with us that day, these electronic devices were machines expressly designed to 
produce, when left to themselves, an entirely random output. You could think of the 
FieldREG as a black box impervious to any known physical alterations of its consistently 
random output of 0s and 1s. In the terms of a strictly materialistic and dualistic science of 
the kind still dominant, they are untouchable and unresponsive – all they can do is 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  331    
produce entirely random, disordered output or “noise” (in fact, they make no sound at 
all). 
 
So far as conventional science can testify, any significant deviation from a chance 
output of the FieldREG is not attributable to internal or external bias. If in the presence of 
an individual or a group of persons the instrument produces a statistically significant 
nonrandom output, the result is considered an anomaly by the conventional canons of 
scientific inquiry. It constitutes the kind of anomaly described by Kuhn in his well known 
book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.  
As you’ll recall from Kuhn’s work, when presumably properly conducted 
scientific research confronts an anomaly, especially a recurring anomaly, that cannot be 
explained by poor design or use of equipment or of the theory on which the equipment 
and the experiment are based, theory needs to be reconceived. And with theory 
reconception, as history shows, philosophical, metaphysical and deeper, often cultural 
notions of order are also often called into question. Discussing examples of scientific 
crisis and the subsequent emergence of new theories, Kuhn writes that “a novel theory 
emerge[s] only after a pronounced failure in the normal problem-solving activity”; and 
this is when the celebrated process of paradigm shift occurs.3 We are only now beginning 
to imagine what goes on when the issue is not simply a restructuring of theoretical 
conception but mutations of consciousness itself, as discussed in Jean Gebser’s work. 
 
The context for the Academy was that for decades researchers had been 
discovering repeated anomalies in laboratory controlled interactions between individuals 
and the random event generators (REGs).  They observed that persons expressing an 
entention that the REG produce an outcome significantly different from random often in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  332    
measurable fact found that such an anomalous output indeed occurred – a subjectively 
meaningful outcome from an objectively inert instrument in the “presence of” a 
subjectively expressed entention. (We are at the outset briefly reminded here of Jung’s 
somewhat similar formulation of a synchronistic event as a mode of “acausal 
orderedness” or connectedness: “the meaningful coming together of an inner idea and an 
outer happening.”Ψ4  
Sometimes the REG output was anomalously above or below random, (and 
sometimes it was significantly the opposite of the expressed entention), but it was 
frequently and cumulatively anomalous to a statistically significant degree. It is like 
saying the REG distribution of 0s and 1s became conspicuously nonrandom when some 
persons entered an ententional relation with it. Yet in the absence of physical contact, it 
was hard to say whether, or by what, the nonrandom output was “caused” or if causation 
is even the issue. Here is where the possibility of acausal meaningfulness enters the room. 
I should say that at the Academy of Consciousness Studies, the analogy between such 
nonrandom controlled experimental outcomes and experiential (i. e. uncontrolled) 
synchronicity was sometimes made but was not so pronounced as I am making it here.5  
In and outside the labs, in the field at public events, (pre)historic sites, symposia, 
entertainments, in remote interactions and viewings, in religious and other convocations, 
such nonrandom anomalies in the output were also often recorded when the (sometimes 
numerous) persons involved shared a heightened interest in the events and proceedings. 
At the online Global Consciousness Project you can check this out yourself anytime and 
actively explore a “realtime display” “registering resonance and coherence in the world.” 
Particularly interesting are “operator” (meaning participantΨ, effect findings discussed 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  333    
later and involving subjective reports of: a “sense of ‘resonance’ or ‘bond’ with the 
machine.”6  
The paradigm of mechanistic and dualistic physical science does not account for 
any of these anomalies. Why should a REG care or how would it know who felt or 
thought what about its output – or anything else? What do we infer from the clear 
evidence that human consciousness and entention seem to “interact” directly and without 
known physical influence in the course of phenomena? This question is repeatedly 
amplified by my deliberate parlaying of Deacon’s use of the term ententionality to 
connote it as a dimension of cosmogenesis (rather than as reducible to ego-intentionality 
aloneΨ, as a conscious or not conscious “carryover” of value, as Neville might say, 
wherein mind and universe cocreate anthropocosmogenesis. And how does the 
cultivation, dynamic stabilization or the mere occasional event of such meaningful 
interaction or correspondence contribute to our understandings of further Earth-human 
and humanocosmic resonance beyond sustainability alone?  
The Academy was convened to allow expert researchers into these anomalies to 
share their findings and ideas about them with a broader group of scientists and 
humanists whose own backgrounds, transdisciplinary and intercultural interests and 
research qualifications seemed relevant to an advance in understanding the implications 
of this investigation of things. My own more recent inquiry into life in resonance beyond 
sustainability has been partially influenced by the conjunction of PEAR and ICRL 
investigations with implications of the ideas of, for instance, the NeoConfucian Zhu Xi, 
that ecosocial peace and commonweal most likely begin with our contemplative self-
cultivation in what he called rectifying (zheng) the mind by making the will sincere 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  334    
(cheng) through the extension of knowledge in investigating things – in autotelic 
attentiveness to subjective and objective events. And to the degree sustainable 
anthropocosmic resonance has long been a matter of investigative value, Philo of 
Alexandria “sees in this sympathy a ‘necessity and friendship that joins the universe 
together’ (necessity anticipates our causality, friendship anticipates synchronicity.Ψ”7  
 
Hence the particular summer day discussion of which I write. The ritual 
discussion was characterized, I emphasize, by animated, friendly, highly attentive 
interactions; the group was approaching a state of what Csikzentmihalyi calls flow. There 
was a semiformal presentation followed by a wide-ranging sharing of insights and 
scholarship from many quarters. Everyone seemed sincerely, thoughtfully engaged and 
interested, all together in a by-then familiar setting. But there was more. At one point 
after the initial presentation, when the discussion was well underway, something was felt 
among several of us. Each one did not at first know that others were feeling it also. We 
were having an academic colloquy, after all, not a séance. 
In my case, the feeling was a subjective experience of an almost palpable 
“fluttering” in the environment. It did not seem localized in my body, but more a “gentle, 
warm, dark” vibration in the atmosphere around us that penetrated into and through me 
with subtle affect and as a gentle, nonspecific cognitive alert. The dark quality I 
associated with it did not seem in any way threatening or even completely unfamiliar. I 
had experienced it a small handful of times before in my life, more as a youth than as an 
adult. The last time I had felt it, it happened many years before while I was having a 
similarly absorbing interaction with a Jesuit novice while at a volunteer project on which 
we were working in Alaska. At the time, he also had felt something going on while we 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  335    
were talking, and when he mentioned it, I told him that I had always thought of it as an 
expression of the Holy Ghost, though neither then nor now would I think that image is 
the only suitable one. (In Church lore, the special proprium or property of the Holy Spirit 
is connection.) 
 
At the time of the Academy symposium, it was for me mildly thrilling but not 
disquieting, nor was it in any way conceptually illuminating. It was more like a quiet yet 
emphatically distinct acknowledgment or intensification of our common enthusiasm. Yet 
again, however, I knew from lifelong experience that as often as I had been 
enthusiastically engaged in anything the experience was only very rarely accompanied by 
this characteristic vibration. In any case, at this point in the Academy discussion, I 
wanted to call attention to what I so distinctly felt without, in doing so, causing it to go 
away. Soon arrived an opportunity to offer my thoughts. I rely on personal notes, 
memory and an audio tape recording of the discussion to tell the tale. 
Another participant offered comments to the effect that ritual could be thought of 
as a kind of contemplative “mindfulness” that even among scientists occurs in their work 
and reflections when they mindfully go for a walk, say, to feel a part of the Earth and to 
make connections among ideas and findings. He finished, and then another speaker 
mentioned how organizations have found “ways to ceremonialize transitional states”; and 
this is a form of ritual, as we know from Victor Turner’s work on liminality and the 
communitas I was by then feeling (and soon after, that “we” disclosed we had been 
feeling together). For by that time, our degree of mutual marginalization from the usual 
quotient of attention was, as I will momentarily relate, explicitly evident to others as well. 
The speaker before me concluded by saying, with allusion to Michelangelo, that in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  336    
careful attention to even trifling details is perfection, and that “perfection is in no way 
trifling.” In such attentiveness to detail and to one another, “life is a gem.” 
 
Then I spoke, and I said only, as cryptically as I could to draw attention to the 
experience without altering the vibe, “We are speaking of ritual, and we’re practicing 
communion.” That was that, for the moment, and no further announcements about the 
numen ensued for a minute or two until another spoke up with audible feeling in his voice 
and said he had felt while listening for the previous little while that, “the energy in the 
room has shifted and gone really deep”; and he “wanted to know if anybody else was 
feeling it.” He added that the atmosphere in the room felt “charged,” that it “had some 
silence in it,” and that it felt to him like “something significant is happening.” He finished 
by reporting that there seemed among us at that moment “some deep feeling, individually 
and collectively” about our interaction on the topic of ritual; “It feels different in here 
now.” And the following person added, “without intending to interrupt the mystique,” 
that we could use “ritual to produce data about consciousness. . . . [and about] very 
extraordinary experiences” and thereby extend the data base. 
 
By themselves, these reports are “only,” by the conventions of contemporary 
academic discourse, mutually reinforcing subjective comments. But then again, the case 
is that each was made independently in that no collusion to make such statements 
occurred. But there is more, as I said. It turned out that the feelings many of us 
simultaneously and collectively experienced had an external correlate in the readout of 
the FieldREG that was stationed someplace in the room at the time and of whose 
presence there at our sessions neither I, nor, I believe, any others (except the PEAR 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  337    
technicians who had routinely placed it there) had any knowledge. The REG-symposium 
interaction produced objective data about our extraordinary experience. 
Only after the fact, we learned the FieldREG had been there and that the output of 
the device at the time of our ritual discussion/interaction registered as an extreme and 
intense departure from the baseline of the purely random norm. Of the 60 sessions held 
over the two weeks of our time together, the hour of “ritual” interaction evidenced “the 
most extreme deviation of any.” The demonstrated fact was that a shared (and, in Stapp’s 
sense, stabilized) psychomental state anomalously corresponded with a meaningful 
(supposedly completely separate) physical event. Before and after the event, among the 
discussion topics of the overall Academy were, Whether one was the cause of the other; 
or Whether each was the expression of an underlying cause. And keeping in mind what 
Jung had to say, there is the possibility of an acausal connecting principle manifesting as 
a creative act, a display of a creatio continua in both psychic and physical aspects.8  
This is, once again, the definition of a spontaneous synchronistic event as 
interpreted by Jung and his colleagues. We’ve all heard the story of the scratching at his 
office window of a scarabeid beetle at the very moment his analysand was telling Jung of 
a significant dream she’d recently had about one. This event also has the same kind of 
structure as the meaningful coincidence between human ententionality or interest and, 
again supposedly external or remote, cosmogonic patterns in the traditional context of 
Yijing.9 
 
In their subsequent article about our Academy discussion and similar event 
registrations by the portable REG technology --  in its “passive monitoring of 
environmental backgrounds. . . where human consciousness might conceivably be 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  338    
altering or organizing a surrounding ‘field’ of potential information, most broadly 
construed, without specific intention or even direct attention to the experimental device 
by any of the participants” -- the PEAR authors also proposed that these be viewed as 
“periods of unusually coherent, cognitive interaction, creative enthusiasm, or other forms 
of emotional intensity.” These experiences are now objectifiably quantifiable as examples 
of what appears to be resonance between persons and REGs, and I think, between persons 
and the universe as understood in the new physics or ancient wisdom traditions. In this 
sense, the FieldREG “acquires a double entendre: i. e., the device has been deployed in a 
‘field’ situation, to monitor changes in a consciousness ‘field.’”10  
Again in the spirit of intercultural dialogue with the sciences, I speculate that the 
(consciousness-and/as-cosmos) field might be taken as that of the cosmic zero-point or 
quantum vacuum field discussed by the astrophysicist Bernard Haisch in his before-
mentioned book The God Theory as the Kabbalistic ayin or the void God creates within 
himself allowing the manifestation of creation. Haisch makes an analogy proposing that 
just as the Big Bang lingers on in the remnant microwave cosmic background radiation 
everywhere detected, so may the everywhere connected zero-point field be a “scaled-
down echo of the ayin within the confines of our space-time universe.”11  Noting 
Haisch’s emphasis that creation is not an act in time but a creatio continua sustaining of 
and ongoingly embodied as the physical universe, we are additionally returned to his idea 
that our lives and our consciousness also, perhaps fractally, embody and participate God 
(i. e., unsayable not-a-what) in the form of the universe, and that the lives we live are thus 
an exploration, or self-investigation in the complementary and interpenetrating mental 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  339    
and physical modes, of a sustainingly interminate nondual psychophysical creativity 
throughout our universe.  
In such a speculation,  locally meaningful interplay of random and nonrandom (as 
well as of observer and observed Ȍ or wave-function comprobabilities) might be recast as 
resonant self-tuning or satisficing of the all-compassing nonlocal psychophysical field 
eventuating as irreducible (i. e., both/neither material/noetic) endo- or eco-semeity: 
meaningfulness as ontohermeneutical display and nondualizing 
enactment/performance/carryover of evolving psychocosm in our lived experience rather 
than as an epistemological reference to an external objective cosm by an in-the-same-act 
self-externalizing “subjective” one. Music is of somewhat analogous nature; celebration 
as and of the spontaneities of Earth heralded by Berry may be also; and a different 
pedigree is found, once again, in Whorf’s realization that reference is the lesser part of 
meaning and coevolutionary patternment the greater.12 In any case, sincere, that is, non-
calculatingly instrumental open-ended contemplation or open-minded attentiveness, 
cotentiveness, and resonance, rather than zweckrational retentiveness and ego-specific 
intentiveness may prove more aptly functional in participating and cocultivating the 
sustainable semio-, eco- and cosmo-genesis of nonrandom, coherent self-organization.  
By this metric, too much ego-intentionality (luan) can eclipse, opacify or diffract 
sustainingly contemplative anthropocosmic, i. e., spontaneously coevolutionary, 
ententionality (ziran). Put in different terms with a nondual humanocosmic bracketing, 
the familiar and environmentally excessive self-prioritization, exaggeration and self-
protection of the conventional individual and corporate ego assert the stasis of control 
and thereby lose openness to and sustainable resonance and exchange with the world. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  340    
“An open state of order may be maintained only in a state of non-equilibrium [self-
emptying, dehabituation, dynamic emergence, etc.]. There has to be [anthropocosmic] 
exchange with the environment and the system renews itself continuously. Being and 
becoming fall together at this level. . . . The reduction to one level, the ancient dream of 
physics [and atomic egoism] is no longer possible” or sustainable.13  
Haisch’s visionary interpretation of the enlarged reality of consciousness in the 
universe has occurred with the supersession of Cartesian views by, especially, the 
participatory ontohermeneutics of quantum thinking demonstrating consciousness as an 
apparently proactive and creative dimension embodied in, if not limited to, our minds as 
they interact or resonate with physical cosmic reality in the ongoing creatio. In less 
theological terms than Haisch uses, Jung and von Franz in diverse places also write of 
psychophysical synchronicities and other acausally meaningful events as acts of ongoing 
creativity in time -- performances of atemporal archetypes in simultaneously 
psychological and physical clothing whose meaningfulness instantiates or contributes 
something new and nourishing in the universe. To the extent emergent contemplative 
consciousness coevolves with/in and as a mode of cosmogenesis in teleodynamic 
meanings, archetypes, etc., it expresses and performs the nondual en-tentionality of the 
universe that is ontohermeneutically prior to and compresent in intentionality as the latter 
is usually limited to and by personal egoism. This is to suggest that mature contemplative 
individuation is effectively describable, once again, as “discovering one’s cosmological 
being amidst daily affairs. . . .becoming more fully human within the world”: an 
entention that has been found not only in Confucian but in many indigenous traditions.14 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  341    
And taking the lead from still others, we can expand the interpretive 
complementarity inherent in quantum wave/particle models to include the 
complementarity of different states or structures of consciousness and that of mind and 
nature in/as cosmogenesis. And here as elsewhere we can remind ourselves that 
developed analogies, even (or especially?Ψ if drawn, like Haisch’s, between widely 
disparate projects like those of Kabbalah and contemporary physics, can often allow us 
refreshed insight, scope, perspective, and, especially important for Primack and Abrams, 
lived, meaningful innerconnection with cosmogenesis abroad and with Homeland Earth, 
as Morin names our placing. Some argue that analogies are not rational and are thus 
unreliable resources. But Marie-Louise von Franz has argued that all cultural 
understandings including science grow from arational archetypes and intuitions. For that 
matter, in a world now conceived of nonlocal connectedness and superposed 
observer/event possibilities, it only makes sense to cultivate the analogical aptitude in 
interhuman and ecosocial contextualizations of experience. The ancient Chinese love of 
learning, haoxue, taught as a matter of course that self-cultivation in practices of 
contemplative, ontohermeneutical and interexistential analogization and self-
analogization (shu) with others – natural, cosmic, human -- is sustaining and mutually, 
we may today say ecologically, beneficial.  Among other things, it dehabituates the 
default dualizing essentialism of ego and other in co-constitutive relationships and 
correlations suited to a participatory and processual worlding – to experiencing “’things’ 
relationally, and related differently, at different periods of time” in often “’gerundical’ 
language” well-according with sustainable and satisficing  participation in the “ars 
contextualis” of the wanwu, i. e., the “ten thousand” events or things, “continuous with 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  342    
one another, and at the same time unique” which “make up the world including the 
human world.” And in their book on biogenetic structuralism and mature contemplation, 
Charles Laughlin and colleagues propose that neurognostic brain processes mediate 
multiple phases or states of consciousness and elements of mythopoeia that help “true” 
our thinking, analogical, logical and otherwise, to the ways the world works.15  
I ask anew if we might better speak of the worlding or co-worlding we do and 
perform together with (and as enactors of)  universing rather than of a fixed objective 
world entity with a fixed essence or nature –“ the way it works” – into which we fit or at 
which we direct and apply ourselves as if always approaching from the outside. We and 
world, self and other, this and that ontohermeneutically cocreate one another in this 
proposed sense. We are again reminded that Jung, writing more generally, emphasized 
the “cosmogonic” meaning of consciousness without privileging its rational, intentional 
or arational modalities. And to the degree the ontological status of the nonlocally 
connected universe (comprising what we call mind and nature) is not entirely reducible to 
ascertainable apodicity, the conscious, attentive practical wisdom or precautionary wu 
wei phronesis of contemplative analogy is at minimum a meaningful way of ecogenically 
investigating events and things, of nonabusively (re)connecting human persons with the 
interconnected ontohermeneutic wholing and thereby sustainably coordinating our 
interhuman and ecohumane experience.16  
Playing an extended riff on Zhuangzi along with Wu, I wonder that if so big a 
thing as the universe can fit into so small a thing as our thinking minds, there must be no 
end to who we are and nothing of which we ought to be careless; Heaven, Earth and 
Humankind are relations, not just locations. Yet, “to be truly big” doesn’t belong to any 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  343    
kind of being or thinking, but paradoxically “includes being both big and small. It is to 
change.” And such transformative learning means that what is useful here in this case is 
not so useful there in that. Yet again, and paradoxically, useless things hereby can be 
useful -- as Deacon has learned from Laozi that absence of anything in the hub of a wheel 
is exactly what makes its axle capable of endlessly turning back and forth, just like the 
absent or not-yet dimension of emergently teleodynamic situations renders self-
organizing systems capable of growth in complexity, value, meaning, self-awareness and 
ententionality. Continuing in the Chinese idiom, the implication is that single-valued or 
“great utility is useless. . . . simply because. . . .frisky roaming is creation. . . .Creation 
now turns out to be everywhere in fresh ‘useless’ creativity.” This is especially so where 
we do not over-utilize or commodify our ego-selves, or use our minds like machines. “If 
we do not vacate ourselves from ourselves,” through steep attentiveness and occasional 
contemplative mind-fasting (xin zhaiΨ “we shall be slaves to our set minds.” By 
complement, “the extent of being alive is proportional to the extent to which one is a 
poet. It is the power with which one branches out” of the habituations, monothetic fixities 
and ego-addictions typical of unsustainable situations. And further, the degree of 
deautomatizing our thoughts and conduct is “the degree of being human and alive. . . 
gauged by the degree to which one can find noteworthy implications [and analogies] in 
both the ordinaries and the extraordinaries alike” of ecohumane coexistence. The sage 
correspondingly has an un-selfing and a co-selfing “knack for implications” and 
intellectual, existential, and ecosocial or anthropocosmic analogies. S/he experiences the 
world as “a mutuality of pipings of cosmic-and-individual life.” Fully attentively and 
non-imposingly “to discern and live it is joy; to violate it in [habitual] self-assertion is 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  344    
confusion and suffering. . . .human piping should promote cosmic chorus [and 
celebration] not pulverizing us [and the natural environment] in [unsustainable] self-
assertion and petty achievements. For [unwonted ego-] assertive achievements hinder 
universal  reciprocal thriving. . . . [And] we do not (want to) realize that our (opposition) 
makes sense only in terms of our opponents, on whom we interdepend. In our blindness 
we turn our mutuality into mutual [competitiveness and] destruction.”   
For the [flourishing, sustaining and sustainable] understanding of living 
actuality to take place we must lose our set-mind [cheng xin] which 
dogmatically  judges paradoxes to be rational aberrations, for we prejudge 
here that our logical apparatus should  monitor reality without being 
rocked, much less jarred. We must instead quietly let in the vibration that 
shakes our mind-chamber (xin shi), and we are received into the recesses 
of actuality. . . on such cosmic waves. . . .17  
The issue in extreme long term ecohumane sustainability and flourishing 
experienced as resonance among the modes and orders of Human, Earth and Cosmic 
interexistence will likely prove to be an integrally attentive contemplative and 
autopoietically embodied conduct of self-rewardingly evocative ecosemeity and 
concelebration more than it has been of dualizing metaphysical, positivistic, conceptual 
or industrial/instrumental control and distraction. The ripe PEAR experience of our group 
attentionality as registered in our physical environment was a spontaneous, 
noncalculating event of self-rewarding or Earth-human resonance. Lived, existentially 
meaningful bodymind and cosmos/consciousness analogies and complementarities are 
contemplative emergents from, fractals and dynamically emergent contextualizations of, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  345    
and mindful behaviors as the self-organizing field of interbeing embodying sustainingly 
cogrowthful reciprocity (shu).  
This may be translated into the Chinese as: One becomes sustainably. . .  
fully human within community. . . .The preferred course of action is to 
integrate all levels of the community (family, neighborhood, clan, race, 
nation, world, universe, cosmos) into the process of self-transformation. 
The Confucians believe that this gradual process of inclusion is inherent in 
the project of leaning to be fully human. 
Imperfectly translated back into the analogous language of Science, this is to 
propose with the PEAR and ICRL cognoscenti that  
. . .[S]ince the relative magnitude of the alterations of the atomic 
eigenvalues in their. . .configurations depends on the degree of interaction 
of the participating elements, i. e., on the mutual defor-mation of their 
separate potential profiles and on the resonance of their individual wave 
functions, larger consciousness effects should be expected among persons 
naturally disposed to some merging of their individual identities. Common 
examples would be. . . parent/child or identical twin bonds, but less 
biological resonances may also qualify. . . as among lovers, close friends, 
colleagues, or teammates. . . . In general, whenever any device, process, or 
task is perceived to take on meaningful anthropomorphic qualities it 
acquires thereby the requisite properties of a consciousness wave function 
for purposes of  resonant interaction with its perceiver. . . .[I]t is precisely 
through such [existential and imaginal analogies as] processes of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  346    
organization and correlation that the characteristics of reality and of its 
embracing consciousness are specified, and possibly even manifested. 
 It takes a universe. And it makes for a cosmomorphic ecovillage. The ensuing 
ententional transformation is not in transcendent escape from the (f)acts of human and 
Earth existence nor in planning, pushing and shoving for external reward and 
improvement but in sustainingly attuning waves of attentively fruitful anthropocosmic 
resonance and contemplatively self-aware Earth-human ganying. Again invited to 
participate in the conversation, again Yijing responds (gua #2κΨ “It is an exceptional time 
and situation; therefore extraordinary measures are demanded.” 18 
Endnotes: The PEAR Proposition 
1.) see www.ICRL.org/ and http://www.princeton.edu/~pear/ (accessed 3.7.14); and see 
The PEAR Proposition available at http://www.psyleron.com/pearprop.aspx (accessed 
2.11.16); the phrasing "the role of consciousness in the establishment of physical reality" 
appears at 
http://books.google.com/books/about/Margins_of_Reality_The_Role_of_Conscious.html
?id=6Z37bRnWUTMC/ (accessed 3.7.14), and  was sometimes used in Academy 
discussions  
2.) Nelson, et al. 1996: 123 
3.) Kuhn: 74-ι5 and passim; there is a stirring reappraisal of Kuhn’s work in Primack and 
Abrams: 24 “Kuhn was wrong. . . .an encompassing theory does not overthrow the older 
theory – instead, it defines the limits within which the older theory is reliably true.” 
4.) synchronistic event in von Franz 1992: 214, 204 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  347    
5.) Comprehensive detail as to the scope and practices of the related research is found in 
Jahn and Dunne 1987/2009; Jahn and Dunne 2011; Explore 3.3 (May/June 2007): 191-
346; see also note 1 to obtain the DVD set of The PEAR Proposition 
6.) Global Consciousness Project http://www.global-mind.org/index.html/ (accessed 
3.7.14); resonance or bond Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 299 
7.) Zhu Xi, Reflections on Things at Hand 102; Philo in von Franz 1992: 210 
8.)  most extreme deviation of any see Nelson, et al. 1996: 123 and in Explore: 281, these 
authors give the details of the discussion with an accompanying graphic display of the 
FieldREG response; acausal connecting principle see von Franz 1980: 110, and passim; 
see also Stapp, Peat, Combs and Holland 
9.) see Elgin, Explore, Jahn & Dunne, Jung and Pauli, Radin, Stapp, von Franz 1974; see 
Smith, et al.; see also Cheng 2003 on Yijing ontohermeneutics 
10.) passive monitoring, Nelson, et al. 1996: 112;   double entendre, idem 
11.) scaled down, Haisch 2006: 116; It bears repeating that when Haisch speaks of 
scaling down, or writes, for example, of “creation as intelligent subtraction,” ibid.: 31, he 
mines a lode not only analogous with negative theology and neti neti, but also, with the 
“incompleteness” theorem of Deacon (which I implicitly identify as cognate in turn with 
Gödel’s Incompleteness TheoremΨ; for more on Haisch and colleagues see:  
B. Haisch “Brilliant Disguises: Light, Matter and the Zero Point-Field” 
http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/~sai/zpf_haisch.htm/ (accessed 3.7.14);  
H. E. Puthoff, “Searching for the Universal Matrix in Metaphysics” 
http://earthtech.org/publications/RNOST_v2_p22.pdf/ (accessed 3.7.14);  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  348    
H. E. Puthoff “Quantum Vacuum Fluctuations: A New Rosetta Stone of Physics?” 
http://www.ldolphin.org/zpe.html/ (accessed. 3.7.14);  
P. Davies “On the Meaning of Mach’s Principle” 
http://www.padrak.com/ine/INERTIA.html/ (accessed 3.7.14); 
see also “Zero Point Energy and the Zero Point Field” www.calphysics.orgήzpe.htmlή  
(accessed 3.ι.14Ψ. In the spirit of cosmopoietic reconnaissance, I’m tempted to offer a 
casual analogy between the 2.725 K cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB) 
discovered in 1964 by Penzias and Wilson and the gentle, warm, dark vibration 
mentioned in the narrative above (CMB, Greene: 515 note 4 and passim, and see Primack 
and Abrams) 
12.) Whorf: 261 
13.) an open state, Jantsch: 27 
14.Ψ Haisch’s visionary interpretation see Haisch 2ίί6: 3,116, 122, 150; von Franz 1980; 
Jung 1963; ontohermeneutically prior see Adi Da: 316, 35, on the “prior unity. . . .senior 
to all apparent signs of disunity,” Da uses the term prior in the sense of inherent or a 
priori rather than previous; discovering one’s cosmological being Tucker in Tu and 
Tucker 2004: 1; and see also Primack and Abrams: 33-3κ, and ibid.: 35 “myth is 
cosmology’s native language. . . . [in] cultivat[ing] a sense of kinship or organic 
connection with the universe itself”; and contemporary scientific mythos in Gleiser: 6 
again allows that “we – imperfect accidents of creation – are how the Universe thinks 
about itself” and again ibid.: 156 that “Life is one with Earth”; see again 
www.whidbeygeodome.org and http://www.newstories.org/projects/the-whidbey-
geodome/ (accessed 3.7.14) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  349    
15.) complementarity of states or structures of consciousness see Gebser, Combs 2009; 
and that of mind and nature see Kafatos and Nadeau 1999: 13, 91, Jahn and Dunne 1987; 
von Franz 1992:15; experiencing things relationally, Ames and Rosemont: 17, 27, 28, 30; 
Laughlin et al. 1992; see also G. Bateson 1972, 1979 on analogy/abduction in and as 
ecology of  mindήnature nonduality, and see again Neville’s discussion of truth; note that 
Primack and Abrams, like Haisch, also call on Kabbalistic mythos – in their case to  
make a persuasive point abut the relevance of analogical thinking to meaningfully 
sustainable anthropocosmic experience; on gerundical languaging see also Bohm 1981, 
chap. 2 on “the  rheomode,” and see Bohm 19ι6: ι2, and see again  Wu 199ί on “goblet 
words” or “spillover saying” 
16.) as if always approaching from the outside, compare Primack and Abrams: 43 on the 
experience of being the cosmos, see also ibid.: 165 “to feel coherent and at home in the 
wholeness, ” and on 2κκ “we need to experience the universe from the inside. We have to 
imagine ourselves in our proper place, inside the symbols. . . ..Until we find our symbolic 
place in the universe, we will always misinterpret ourselves, feeling as though we are 
outside. . . . “; Jung in von Franz 1992:1ι, 231; sustainably coordinating our. . . 
experience see Kafatos and Nadeau 1999: 213-214 
17.) all citations from Wu 1990: 88, 193, 197, 226, 242, 244, 259; see Wu 1982: 39-47 on 
“Musical Hermeneutics” and evocative ontohermeneutics 
18.) fully human within community, Tu 1989: 97; since the relative magnitude, Jahn and 
Dunne 2011: 266-6κ passim; it’s the stereoscopy, stereophony and mutual 
completion/kenosis of (the elements of) poetic and cosmopoietic analogies that release 
and reveal emergent sustainingly anthropocosmomorphic potentials and aptitudes; The 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  350    
premise of self-aware Earth-human resonance or ganying does not hang on Earth being 
conscious of humans as humans suppose they are of  Earth – in fact, the self-awareness 
suggested here does not at all  reduce or decompose to either side of the emergent 
anthropocosmic dynamic. For since we are emergents of cosmogenesis as well as its 
contextualizers, we already find Earth presence embodied and invested in our own being 
even as we, self-reflexive “prolongations” Teilhard says,  and Earth “dimensionalities” of 
the cosmogenesisήgeogenesis eventήcontext in Berry’s terms, attentively look as, to and 
with Earth for/in mutually sustaining well-being in, again says Berry (1988:45), the 
differentiated intersubjective communion of the event which has no opposite. Local 
events and meaningful conduct in nonrandom coherence are nonlocally complicit: 
Complete the circuit, “Touch the Earth”; see McLuhan and also see Hill and Yuha on the 
significance of choice in the circle of life – Hoka Hey! 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  351    
 
10.1 Ecomythic Ψ 
 
Another step in the expansion of the implications of PEAR and ICRL research is 
that taken by the systems theorist Ervin Laszlo who proposes a new science integrating 
perennial philosophy and recent developments in our view of the everywhere 
interconnected universe as expressed in quantum and statistical dynamics. Desiring to 
reduce cumbersome phraseology like “the vacuum-based zero-point holofield” to 
something more convenient, he proposes the term Ȍ field (psi field), and speaks of it as 
being both morphogenetic, generative of the forms of physical, organic, and noetic 
experience, and of carrying them in its plenitude. He writes that it is an interactive 
structure in the quantum vacuum, which is itself, he (perhaps reductively) thinks, the 
most fundamental feature of the universe. And the reality of this field, not to be confused 
with the ordinary vacuum of empty space, is everywhere present in space and time. Its 
holographic structure “in-forms” the physical universe just as it informs the living world 
and the realm of consciousness. It is, thus, the primary and ever-present or originative 
feature of reality interconnecting all mental and physical phenomena as it enters into all 
our interactions with that reality.1 It’s  helpful for me to keep in mind that the presumed 
primacy or originality of this field is relativized and complemented by consciousness co-
evolving as the self-reflexive experience of the field – its ontohermeneutic self-
contextualization. 
In Laszlo, an intercultural analogy is made, in the name of the integral science he 
proposes, between the everywhere superposed wave functions of events of sidereal and of 
local or microscopic magnitude and the Akasha of the Upanishads. He hereby wants us to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  352    
conceive the holistic Ȍ field of each universe (in what is perhaps an evolving sequence of 
universes in the metaverse) as contributing to the in-formation of each newer version of 
cosmos. In this narrative, he likens the Akashic record to the implicit wave-function 
memory of the “self-creating and self-recording universe.”2  
What Laszlo proposes has an abiding further analogy in the traditional concept of 
the psycho-cosmic or psycho-physical unus mundus Jung found in alchemy and in the 
archetypal mandala images of wholeness in dream and religious settings. Not 
incidentally, according with Laughlin and others’ views that the brain is evolutionarily 
biased to offer symbols of wholeness and transformation, the imagery and holistic 
language of “psychophysical” compresence is also that often used to translate the 
connotations of the Chinese word qi, or vital cosmic energy field whose permutations 
constitute all phenomena whether gross, as matter, or subtle and clarified, as the mind of 
the sage or Heaven itself.3  
 
With more specific relevance to researches in what seem to be anomalous 
phenomena like the repeatedly found resonance between an individual or a group feeling 
and a supposedly independent FieldREG output, Laszlo continues his argument that we 
understand the holofield of physics as the all-possibility-inclusive wave function or Ȍ 
field on the grounds that it is self referential in its in-forming of organisms with both their 
own morphology as well as that of their milieu and can therefore be taken as a 
“generalized sort of ‘psyche’ operating in the womb of nature.” This speculation is 
sufficiently like those of Jung, Pauli and von Franz on the nature and operation of the 
unconscious, especially in synchronistic phenomena, that the comparison today seems 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  353    
almost self-evident. It is almost gratuitous to make further analogy with old Chinese ideas 
of taiji in cosmos.4  
The analogies become more interesting when we again remind ourselves that for 
archetypal psychology, the psychoid dimension of the archetypes merges 
indistinguishably with nature. Further, Schrödinger’s wave function Ȍ collapses or 
constellates into one meaningful actuality out of an indefinite matrix of otherwise latent 
or implicate possibilities only with the participating “intervention” of an observation, 
perhaps better connoted by guan, just as the whole psychophysical possibility-dimension 
of a synchronistic (or REG) event is meaningfully manifested only with the interest, 
attention and ententionality of the participant-observer(s) in a particular existential 
setting. Briefly noted, however, is some physicists’ belief “that the notion of 
wavefunction collapse will ultimately be dispensed with.” 5  
 
Yet Laszlo proposes still another rationale for his interpretation of the Ȍ field as 
the compresencing of the simultaneously material and psychomental field. He explicitly 
suggests, not unlike Laughlin and others have done, that this field “creates spontaneous 
communication between human brains as well as between human brains and the 
environment” and goes on to say, “Though the field’s effects are not limited to ESP and 
other esoterica, they convey the kind of information that has been traditionally subsumed 
under the heading of ‘psi phenomena.’”6  
 
It’s thus not surprising that PEAR authors offer, after discussions of theoretical 
and technical issues at their time of publication, some pertinent cultural and politically 
astute comments on the scientific and ecosocial implications of anomalous phenomena: 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  354    
. . . .[P]erhaps most importantly. . .clear establishment of a salient role for 
group consciousness in the establishment of reality could hold sweeping 
implications for our collective and individual views of our-selves, our 
relationships to others, and to the world in which we exist. These, in turn, 
could impact our values, our priorities, our sense of opportunity and 
responsibility, and our entire style of life.7  
 
This question of the style and manner of the conduct of life, especially in this day 
of pronounced ecological concern, has more to do, I think, with our dominant mythopoeic 
and archetypal motivations (in both scientific and in traditional or religious forms) than it 
has to do with such familiar issues as consumerism, or status, ego, workplace concerns or 
even with popular cultural constructions of matter and mind. These are of course deeply 
connected with one another as well as with our personal and collective metaphysics and 
aspirations. But I think the evidence of history, certainly since Freud, Jung and Einstein, 
shows that what moves us are the deep-question formulations which Elgin invites us to 
explore and that only myth (with, according to Obeyesekere, its sisters vision, art, ritual, 
dream and contemplative reverie) is capacious or flexible enough to accommodate. These 
are the province of the cosmic religious sense of which Einstein spoke often, one not 
alien to the ecstatic naturalism of Corrington, nor indeed to Morin’s “complex” or 
Berman’s “paradox-,” or Primack and Abrams’ “uroboric-thinking.” 
If this is speaking for ontohermeneutical atavism, it is not a call here for a 
wholesale Archaic Revival à la McKenna of entheogenic trance and magic back in the 
painted caves – not that that doesn’t have a pronounced positive value as well as a 
pronounced rationale – but for widespread cultivation of a timely hybrid of contemplative 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  355    
(not necessarily quietist or exaggeratedly reclusive) attentiveness with everyday life and 
thought according with lines of inquiry set out by, say, Primack and Abrams in their The 
View from the Center of the Universe, B. Alan Wallace in his Contemplative Science and 
by Winifred Gallagher in her Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life. The latter is more a 
book about attention as a strategy for well-being, “that wonderful Eastern approach” as 
one researcher is quoted as saying, and thus more akin to an instrumental appropriation of 
techne than most of what I have offered thus far. But we live in interesting times. And the 
implications of Gallagher’s work take us some distance in comprehending the 
possibilities of an unhurried, nonimpositional, skhole conduct of life finding intrinsic 
satisfaction and intrapsychic or ecopsychic wellbeing in events and moments without 
ulterior motivations and expectations. Nor, to raise this question more quickly to those 
pressed for time and mind: Is it a negligible benefit to find that with a contemplatively 
attentive orientation we diminish our abuse of the ecosocial environment while finding 
also that our brains are enjoying increased dopamine? 8  
It might be properly objected that Einstein was a scientist, and not a myth maker. 
But he was also an avowed imagist riding on a beam of light, and the image that gives 
rise to thought does so partly because of its multivalence, the kind of multivalence that 
myth imagery performs and sustains in its psychoid coincidence of such apparent 
opposites as zero-point vacuum, nature, space, time and mind, masculinity and 
femininity, and the familiar particle and wave. Einstein was mythopoeically inclined in 
that, by his own account, his most profound ideas began as sensate imagery long before 
they reached the status of concepts. More significantly, we are reminded by his 
observation posted at the planetarium in his name in D. C., that  the most beautiful 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  356    
experience we can have is that of the mysterious, “the fundamental emotion. . . the cradle 
of true art and true science.”  
Again, it is contemplation, myth and pattern/rhythm/ritual, before it is concept, 
that articulates and enacts the mystery of Being. Or to put it the other way around, the 
longevity, the sustainability, of concepts may related to their archetypal or mythopoeic 
momentum and their psychoid interrootedness with cosmogenesis. We do not ordinarily 
acknowledge this in our rationalistic and instrumentally zweckrational lifestyle, but here 
is precisely the point. Without this often arational depth or scope we are otherwise often 
noetically and experientially stunted, deracinated, flattened out, ex-pla(i)ned to pieces – 
and susceptible to not always sustaining public influences under the banners of rational (i. 
e., monetized) and national self-interest.  And in recovering our ecosocial integrity, we 
may also need to retrieve and reinvent the possibilities of multiply alternative 
consciousness and ententionality structures according with the necessary unity of mind 
and nature, including an ecocontemplative orientation to our conduct of life on/as Earth. 
It was, after all, also Einstein who invited us to widen our embrace to all living creatures 
and to the entirety of nature in its beauty. More recently, O’Murchu has correspondingly 
affirmed that “Meditation is a type of tuning-up process, facilitating communication 
between my being and the ‘being’ of life in the world around me” to the degree “we 
could say that it is not we who meditate” but the innerconnected life of all things, divine, 
humanocosmic, coevolutionary, etc. Here I find the sustaining implications of 
cosmogenesis performed and embodied in our contemplative embrace of the continuum 
of being(sΨ, “letting go, releasing the props, the attachments, the will to power and control 
which has so dominated our Western [now globalized] mind and psyche.”9 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  357    
 
The point is not that myth is or must be primary, albeit inescapably primal, in our 
cultural lives so much as that there are alternative states, structures or phases of 
consciousness than the reigning business deal mentality affords. One of these is the 
mythical, according to Jean Gebser’s The Ever-Present Origin, and others, we know, 
include the magical, the rational-mental and the integral. The matter of lifestyle change 
and quality of life is by this estimation directly connected with that of the phases or 
structures of consciousness by which we live and with the attentiveness, participatory 
ecohumane ententionality, autotelic celebration or awe we allow ourselves amid the 
holistic cosmic and quantum  interconnectivity of experience.  And there is evidence of a 
kind of consciousness (or co-consciousness) in some of the anomalous REG phenomena 
reported that is conducive to their manifestation. If that is the case, and if such awareness 
by whatever name or appropriate means can be nonmanipulatively, i. e., wu wei, 
maintained, communicated, shared and intensified, it may be that a contemplative 
transformation of consciousness beyond what is now dominant is the gate through which 
we pass to forms of thinking and conduct that are far more sustaining in environmental 
terms. 10  
More in immediate resonance with the rhythms and cadences of natural cosmos, 
such forms of thinking may be, therefore, also more ecoeffectively expressive of those 
locally and nonlocally entangled patterns and processes in sustaining world peace and 
eco-comity than that of only ego perspectivated utilitarian self-interest, be it personal, 
corporate or national. We are as deep as the universe which here and there discovers itself 
(anew) through our mind(s) and eye(s). In this depth are our potentials and aptitudes for a 
humanocosmic resonance well beyond the sustainability quotient of such recent, grimly 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  358    
indicative metrics as “stomach share.” In Berman’s simultaneously moderate and yet 
transformative formulation, it’s not that we need some forced march or unsustainably on-
tiptoe ascent, as Zhuangzi would teasingly call it, to a higher consciousness but rather a 
willingness to come to our senses in the paradoxical, and I think contemplative, manner 
of simply decelerating to allow an enlarging yet fully attentive relaxation, refreshment 
and inclusivity of heart/mind (xinΨ in “holding contradictory propositions, or emotions, 
simultaneously; sustaining the tension of this conflict so that a deeper reality can emerge 
than one would have if one simply opted, for example, for Self or Other.” Where neither 
this nor that finds its opposite, there sustainingly flows the way.11  
To put this still another way, our present consciousness orientation 
(objectifyingly) to impose ourselves on the natural world or to impose a monopoly of 
dualizing values on a multipolar ecosocial world makes global and environmental 
sustainability a crisis issue in daily headline fact. It is the question of consciousness 
transformation and not solely of the sub-issue of anomalous mind-matter Ȍ events that 
constitutes the greatest paradigm crisis for this and the next century. And the real 
emphasis, I think, is going to be not (just) on the sustainability of life systems, but on 
living beyond sustainability in actual and attentive nondual resonance with and as the life 
and processes of cosmogenesis. The most probably least helpful approach to 
consciousness cultivation -- or expansion, or dehabituation -- is to engage in serious 
anomaly research with only our familiar instrumentalist attitude to make better fighter 
aircraft, or stock trades etc., again thus eclipsing (our) authentically psychophysical 
(co)cosmogenic realization potentials by the will to ego-power. And in the process, we 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  359    
would only prolong, if not hasten, the ecological degradation evident around us already 
resulting from that same mentality that produced unsustainability to begin with. 
 
I do not, however, think any attempt to recreate mythic, uroboric or primal 
paradox awareness by itself is the answer – and it’s not like it’s disappeared in any case. I 
do think, with Gebser, that the integration of the diverse kinds of consciousness he 
postulates may be, especially as we (re-)learn self-rewarding contemplative attentiveness 
and the corresponding practice of occasional no-mind or wu nian. As Gebser reminds us, 
our present and somewhat deficient mental-rational-control outlook tends to spatialize 
and quantify thought and experience in such a way that we, in taking a linear or 
perspectival view of things (notably with a linear temporics and spatial sectorization of 
thought), in the act constitute ourselves as atomized and frequently aggressively 
competitive (individual, national, corporate) egos separated from one another. And at the 
same time, by the same act, we are separated from the (itself similarly carved up into 
quantifiable $ sized bitsΨ universe “to which” we “apply” our thought – thus finally 
separating from Earth, on whose limited resources we depend.  
The increasingly problematic issues of air, water, oil, economy, labor and 
environment are internal to the very mentality by which we seek to resolve them. 
Hybridizing, transforming or outgrowing that kind of intentionality and its highly 
programmed practices in ecohumanely “sustainful” ways is maybe the only serious 
justification left for the invention we know as “the state.” Or to express my personal 
conviction more clearly, the liberal democratic state or bioregion, however officious and 
clumsy, may be all we have in the way of familiar institutions capable of standing 
between ecohumane well-being and global corporate depredation that is based on the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  360    
misplaced fiduciary obligation (aka common greedΨ to do nothing that doesn’t make 
(ever) more money. I will let that assessment sit a while as I pass on to a more congruous 
point: Transformation of our shared awareness is not occurring by shooting at people’s 
feet to make them dance; and nobody, or very few, are wise enough to “make it happen” 
or to undo the perceived harm with an agenda. When it comes, and the apex generation 
will likely be the last to know, it will be in all likelihood more like a dawning or like a 
disclosed check in chess than like the arrival of the cavalry, of any missionary church, or 
of the Natural Resource Professionals. What may be most sustaining, and ecosocially 
sustainable, is evocation,  permission, liberty and release to a less ego/appetite-
accentuating conduct of life than we have for long known – a liberation or vacation from 
our insistent selfing.12 
The atomization of the physical world and its accompanying mechanistic 
metaphysics has been widespread since the time of Bacon, if not Leucippus and 
Democritus. And the segregation of our temporics into the exclusive categories of past, 
present and future prevents us from an integral experience of the concretion of time (a 
super-posing of time possibilities) and thus from what Gebser, once again, calls the 
transparency of ever-present origin some of whose intercultural analogues in the 
contemporary mentality include the self-luminous vacuum, zero-point, qi, Ȍ field, or 
Cosmic Uroboros that give evidence of (beingΨ an “achronic” sea of primal luminosity, a 
(perhaps quantum punctuated ongoing-wholing) continuum of anthropocosmogenesis. In 
a creative temporics of integral consciousness, by contrast with our habits, the existential 
as well as the conceptual offerings of diverse time and consciousness zones are 
simultaneously, or more precisely in Gebser’s terms achronically, accessible. Such 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  361    
temporics might be immensely helpful for an understanding of our situation and possible 
temperate redirection. In contemplative maturity, in one account, for instance, “relative 
space-time. . . and body-mind emerge from the ultimate symmetry of the absolute space 
of phenomena. . . [and] primordial consciousness, all of which are coextensive and of the 
same nature.”13  
But more importantly, the virtue of an integral multiphasic consciousness (again, 
not unlike the kind discussed in the biogenetic structuralism of Charles Laughlin and 
others) is in redeeming our view of ourselves and the universe from the imposition of, or 
the appropriation of, a part (a single episteme, conception or ideology) mistaken as 
ongoing-wholing. If there is a practice of awareness that allows integral superposing of 
multiple consciousness structures, it clarifies, intensifies and enriches our overall global 
ecology of mind and modes of conduct. And it may also enrich our way of engaging and 
resonating with the superposed probabilities of events. This can be understood as not just 
a multicultural but a genuinely intercultural sensibility. But beyond that, it affords us a 
way to outgrow ego-specific noetic and physical reductionism, even though this 
reductionism is legitimized and enforced by Cartesian, industrial and economic 
imperatives. It allows us a more im-mediate participation in the natural patterns and 
processes of creativity in the universe as adumbrated by, for example, Kongzi, Laozi, 
Zhuangzi, Kauffman, Primack and Abrams, Laszlo and Haisch, and thereby the 
opportunity to experience our lives, and the life of the interpenetrating ecology of things, 
in what Thomas Berry has called a functional cosmology. In such an attentive experience 
of cosmogenesis, we understand ourselves in multiform consciousness as resonantly 
sharing and participating the life of the universe, and not only as assertively sustaining 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  362    
our atomized selves in (and against) a universe (that is therefore reinforcingly 
experienced as inalterably) inexpressive of, indifferent to or unparticipated by our 
ententions and contemplations. But again: the question of immediate participation in the 
life of the cosmos at the quantum or any other scale, while of intriguing value, is here 
rhetorically secondary to the releasement of the world, ourselves, and of other beings in 
the coworlding, from an only and always egoizedly utilitarian conduct of life.14 
Additionally, proposes Gebser, the experience of ever-present origin  
“luminescing in the present” and simultaneously (or achronicallyΨ “disarraying, 
transforming, and liberating it” grants us the aptitude to recognize “the inceptual or 
germinal situations.” These are the incipiencies associated by Chinese tradition with 
Yijing interactions as well as, we now may surmise, the advent of not so anomalous 
mind-matter resonance of the kind studied by PEAR and ICRL. Writes Gebser of the 
real-ization of and accord with the patterns of cosmos discernable through practice of 
Yijing by the mature contemplative who eventually learns hereby how spontaneously to 
accord hirself withήas these patterns and processes in hir conduct, the resultant “creativity 
in man is an effectualization of the creative in the world.” And while not dwelling 
expressly on the topic of synchronicity or anthropocosmic resonance in incipient change, 
Swimme’s cosmology here provides a dramatic affirmation that “the universe is not a 
collection of dead objects but is, rather, a seamless whole community made up of 
cosmos-creating subjects” whose ongoing-wholing and ontohermeneutic re-self-
contextualization/organization teach that. . . 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  363    
That which gave birth to the universe is giving birth in this moment as 
well. . . .Each child is situated in that very place and is rooted in that very 
power that brought forth all the matter and energy in the universe. 
The response is Zhang Zai’s familiar: 
Heaven is my father and [E]arth is my mother, and even such a small 
being as I finds an intimate place in their midst.15  
 
Traditional Chinese understanding often posited that childlike ententions of 
sincerity and authenticity (cheng, also sometimes connoting flourishing and actualizing) 
were transformative conditions of effective creative accord among Heaven, Earth and 
what we can today call Ecohumanity. “All this is so marvelously easy because ‘A great 
person is one who retains the heart of a newborn babe.’” In sustaining (not necessarily 
always consciousΨ “cosmic reference” with the “great body,” writes Tu, sήhe does not 
lose hir “child-like heart” since the “great body” of cosmogenesis “is in the last analysis, 
our original nature. . . .flowing with the cosmic transformation. . . is no more than 
authentic humanity.” This is in part because such spontaneous sincerity and authenticity 
were understood as the veritable substance or performance of cosmos itself. So also for 
Berry are the anegoic spontaneities of (the dream of the) Earth, of the cosmos, understood 
as the macrocosmic complements to microcosmic interhuman and ecohumane resonance. 
Our reciprocal ecosocial entention or shu (as kenosis, skhole, contemplatio) or our 
dehabituating relaxations (in)to openness and responsiveness with the spontaneities of the 
Ȍ field or the psyche, Earth, kosmos, Gaia or anima mundi, in whichever neoshamanic 
formulation we prefer, conduce to the Great Work (as Berry adopting the term da hua, 
“Great Transformation,” from classical Chinese philosophy calls itΨ of mutually 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  364    
beneficial Earth-human presencing. The Great Work of reinventing the human of which 
he has frequently written is not less than aligning our individual and social values, our 
ego and psychoid archetypal dialogue, and our ententional (co)consciousness with (that 
of?) the organic and the planetary rhythms and patterns. This implies a sustainable 
alignment, accord or resonance with the universe and with Earth cycles and patterns (as 
well as with one another and our inward depths) far more nourishingly and sustainingly 
founded, rooted and “racinated,” than the varying notions and practices of an 
unreflectively domineering capitalist or a technocratic instrumentalism. This is the 
contemplative reinvention of both the human and the sacred.16 
Again, though we may with Berry take the shamanic techniques of an ecstatic 
emptying of our normal instrumental awareness as a propaedeutic, it is also well, notes 
Berry, to keep in mind that the larger concern is with nourishing the foundations of a new 
“Ecozoic Era. . .in every realm of human affairs [i. e.,] a mutually enhancing human 
presence within an ever-renewing organic-based Earth community. . . .In the larger 
cultural context [this is the myth] that both guides and drives the action.” And by this 
holistically inclusive myth narrative, be it of an evolutionary failsafe continually 
reorganizing and reorganizing by way of, adaptive brain structures, as Laughlin and 
others propose, or be it of an archetypal ecopsychic pattern of responsive and anticipatory 
nature, I think we are gradually inclining to a more dynamically stable and practically 
effective global consciousness. I think we are increasingly and selectively returning of 
ecogenic necessity, in terms and ways appropriate today, to the archaic techniques, as 
well as unprecedented ones, of self-rewarding attentiveness. I see its potential ek-stasis as 
a focus of an econoetic resource field whose wider scope of relevant practice is probably 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  365    
better captured by the adjective contemplative – paradoxically less intense, yet more 
open, comprehensive and homely. Ecstasy gets the attention, contemplation sustains it; or 
to turn this around, unqualified attentiveness sustains the functional interplay of (our) 
Earth-Human emergence, the ecstasy celebrates it. Berry helpfully uses the word 
“inscendence” to characterize the journey “which can only be engaged by those who have 
moved beyond the early adolescence in which our society has stalled,” and invites us to 
grow up and out to a genuinely “functional cosmology” that is “the great work,” “a 
mystical venture,” and “a numinous venture.”17  
I am thinking about an ecohumane and humanocosmic aptitude for self-
rewardingly contemplative resonance with and as anthropocosmogenesis in what 
Guenther has called the approximate symmetry transformations of Being. The mature or 
awakened contemplative, Guenther reminds us, can be interpreted as an approximate 
transform or presencing in ecohumane conduct of the wholing or dynamic symmetry of 
Being itself, Being-as-such. This in the nondualizing Tibetan meditative and awakening 
tradition is the self-appreciative experience of the universe in its manifestations as 
creativity, ornament and play.18 This is a metaphysics, an ecopolitics, and a daily attitude 
evoking an opening and maturing of lifestyle quite differently premised than that of Wall 
Street and La Bourse. 
 
And we are neurognostically tuned to and for this experience, argued Laughlin 
and others, by brain, myth, symbol, narrative and analogy; religion anticipates it in the 
broadest meanings of communion, sangha, and umma. Also, our coevolutionary biology 
has developed these and other optimizing and satisficing aptitudes for life. These, claims 
Stuart Kaufman, are so deeply knit into the processes of cosmogenesis that they are not 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  366    
only organically emergent but inherent in complex self-organization itself regardless of 
its “platform” as reflected in his K=2 algorithm that systems evolve to their optimal 
(mutual) functioning right at the margins of order and chaos (or of order and randomicity) 
through what might be thought of as their self-tuning yinyang coevolutionary fitness 
strategies. And if Stuart Kauffman is correct, then the whole tilt of self-organizing 
evolutionary development is towards the mutually beneficial correspondence of 
organisms with one another and their environments. This, I think, need not be construed 
as (conformity to) a dominating a priori end planted in or in front of an in any case never-
concluded cosmogenesis from outside it but is more likely an ongoingly emergent 
aptitude/ententionality that is paradoxically responsive to  and expressive of all 
participating thises and thats in their mutual and their respective ongoing-wholing, their 
mutual co-constituting and individual unfolding of emergent, not yet realized and 
incomplete nature. This is statistically, not absolutely the case allows Kauffman; and in 
his work it is a hypothesis based on computer models and Boolean logics more than on 
morphodynamics alone. But it does provisionally allow us a meaningful way to conceive 
and to experience ourselves and coworlding not as byproducts, bystanders or accidents 
but, as Kauffman titles one of his most pertinent books, as being and dwelling At Home in 
the Universe. In Deacon’s intriguing terms, “I feel confident that you too will begin to 
glimpse the qualitative outlines of a future science that is subtle enough to include us, and 
our enigmatically incomplete nature, as legitimate forms of knotting in the fabric of the 
universe.”19  
 
And to the extent we’re apt for organic interrelational tuning to a sustaining 
degree, this will find expression in other resources of biocultural provenance. For, as 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  367    
Jung has taught and Berry after him, these too are the voicing of Earth-and-person in 
contemplative imaginal and archetypal or mythopoeic and ritual forms that can be 
diversely expressed in work, family, education, research, religion, trade and other 
settings. For instance, the ability of the Chinese sage is an embodiment of “that-which-is-
of-itself-what-it-is” ziran or nature, naturalness. It is the knack or ability to conduct 
hirself in satisficing, sustaining and spontaneous contemplative conduct that is 
unprecedented in all situations – i. e., hir conduct, like Cook Ding’s, is an ever minutely 
responsive and unprogrammably varying expression sustainingly according with the 
basic patterns of biocultural circumstance and of the cosmic, archetypal, psychophysical 
or biophysical qi in its ever yinyang transformations. Analogous to the quantum or Ȍ 
field, qi subtends and compresences all beings. And, contemplative conduct in or of the 
field is not a rote application of a fixed mindset or view, it is an ability -- or an unforced, 
nonmanipulative “negative capability,” as Keats wrote -- to perform in every local 
instance the ongoing-wholing of Being (aka nonlocal taiji or wuji, symmetry 
approximation) to the mutual benefit of all participants without imposing distortion or 
ego-fragmentation.20  
This ecology of interbeing at its ecosocial best takes a measure of contemplative 
conduct and practice, as with the Yijing or much else that may be found viable in the 
carryover of value “from” all-connecting anthropocosmogenesis “into” daily life. But as 
Hershock reminds us of sustainable “conduct that is wu wei [unprecedented]” amid the 
incompleteness of nature and humankind at the end of his study, Liberating Intimacy: 
Enlightenment and Social Virtuosity in Ch’an Buddhism, it “is not attained once and for 
all, but depends on the continual relinquishing of form, of our horizons for readiness, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  368    
responsibility, and relevance. As such, it is a continuing endeavor – a responsive dao by 
means of which our de, our virtuosity, openly manifests and grows.”21  
And if this is so of a self-rewardingly attentive contemplative orientation, of 
simply being mindful of resonance implications for both social and ecosocial relations on 
a daily basis, it is a hopeful prospect that the practice of contemplative culture may 
become a highly valued lifestyle on Earth having implications for even further-reaching 
orders of functional cosmogonic and Ecozoic consciousness. The contemplative 
dimension allows us more genuine, unmediated and more autotelically sustainable 
movement in the life and display of the universe on Earth than does the emperor’s now 
threadbare profit-straitened jacket. And it least exacerbates our ongoing environmental 
demands. I’ll round out the context for this by borrowing the words with which Bob Jahn 
and Brenda Dunne – gracious moderators and prime movers of the Academy of 
Consciousness Studies – round out their book on the topic: 
Undergirding all of this, we envision an educational process that can break 
loose from its entrenchment in unproductive, stereotypical, 
philosophically outdated curricula and mentoring strategies into fresh 
formats that better prepare young minds and spirits for deeper  
understanding of the world and of themselves and their neighbors, and for 
loftier, more creative and productive lives, wherein science and spirituality 
ultimately will be more intimately reunited.22 
Endnotes: Ecomythic Ψ 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  369    
1.) Laszlo 2003: 68-77 passim.; see also Primack and Abrams; see too Gleiser’s critique 
of theories of everything and Sheldrake on morphic resonance; see Tegmark on 
cosmogenesis as a self-reflexive mathematical structure or process 
2.) Laszlo 1996:197-9κ; on multiverse see Smolin’s The Life of the Cosmos; see 
Chaisson; and see Abraham and Roy on demystifying the Akasha; see Sheldrake on 
morphic in-formation; see also Bohm and Peat: 93 on “active information,” likewise 
Bohm in Weber and Bohm 1976, 1981; see Primack and Abrams on eternal inflation 
3.) unus mundus, von Franz 1980; for a complementary and sometimes contrasting idea 
see Abraham and Roy; qi in Tu and Tucker 2004: 61 
4.) psyche operating in the womb of nature, Laszlo 1996: 221; taiji, Burneko 2010; see 
Cheng 1995  
5.) psychoid dimension, von Franz 1992; collapse will ultimately be dispensed with, 
Greene: 513; Abraham and Roy offer another critique; and see Tegmark for a masterful 
accounting of the issues 
6.) Laszlo 1996: 220-221 
7.) Nelson, et al. 1996: 139; see Jahn and Dunne 2011; also see Elgin, McTaggart; for  a 
differently angled and equally pertinent discussion of group consciousness as it bears on 
sustainability issues see Benjamin R. Cohen’s essay “The Historical Production (and 
Consumption) of Unsustainability: Technology, Policy, and Culture” in The Hedgehog 
Review 14.2 (summer  2012): 37-51      
8.) trance and magic back in painted caves see Clottes and Lewis-Williams; that 
wonderful Eastern approach in Gallagher: 58;  skhole see Pieper; increased dopamine, 
Gallagher: 172; authentically intrinsic (e. g., contemplatively resonant) satisfaction and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  370    
ecopsychic wellbeing can be contrasted with the manipulated, manipulative and 
external(izing) orientations of intention and choice in the context of groupthink 
synopsized by Cohen: 49 in The Hedgehog Review (2012) where he writes of:  “. . .the 
continued reduction of the breadth of human values to narrow disembodied terms [e. g., 
quantitative control, efficiency, productivity and order become goals in and of 
themselves] while in our environmental activities, we also treat nature in narrow ways. 
Just as one who seeks to dominate nature also seeks to dominate humans, so does one 
who seeks to reduce the breadth and complexity of nature seek to reduce the breadth and 
complexity of humanity. Nourishing, communal, moral, aesthetic, and spiritual values 
fall to the side in the pursuit of control and order for the sake of production and 
consumption.” He continues pointing out that, “The historical production of 
unsustainability was not pre-ordained. It was and remains an active result of public 
policy, cultural identity, and conceptual and physical development – of choices.” See 
Bookchin on social ecology the precedents of the human manipulation of humans as the 
model for the human manipulation and abuse of nature. 
9.) multiply alternative consciousness, Primack and Abrams and see also Tart, Deikman, 
Berry 19κκ, see also Laughlin, Davis, Schlegel, Perkins; O’Murchu: 16κ-69; necessary 
unity, G. Bateson 1979 and T. Berry 1988 
10.) cosmic interconnectivity, e.g. Kauffman: 223 speculates on the quantum brain in 
Reinventing the Sacred -- with specific reference to “the evolutionary emergence of a 
poised quantum coherent-decoherent system” that is “ontologically emergent” and that 
“cannot be deduced or explained by physics alone” -- that consciousness is identical with 
quantum coherent possibilities or partially coherent quantum behavior “yet via 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  371    
decoherence, the quantum coherent mind has consequences that approach classical 
behavior so very closely that  mind can have consequences that create actual physical 
events by the emergence of classicity. . . .quantum coherent, or partially coherent, 
possibilities themselves continue to propagate, but remain acausal. This will become 
mental processes begetting mental processes. . . .the behavior of physical matter, res 
cogitans and res extensa united in one physicalήbiological theory” (2ί9-10 original 
emphasisΨ. He subtly clarifies, again with emphasis: “The quantum coherent mind does 
not, in this view, ‘act’ on matter causally at all. Rather, via decoherence, the quantum 
coherent state has consequences for the physical classical world.” And having made the 
acausal point that he thinks quantum mind does not “cause” things to happen in the 
physical order, he makes the disclosed check of his own ontohermeneutic insight clear in 
writing that, “Immaterial mind, in the sense of pure quantum possibilities, has 
consequences for the material world via decoherence. . . .There simply is no ‘pushing’ in 
the poised coherent-decoherent quantum system. It is entirely acausal” (225Ψ; see also the 
structure of Deacon’s arguments for absential efficacy; see Stapp: 33, 12κ on “templates 
for action” andήas organized quantum states associated with ententional conduct and their 
practice-makes-perfect implications for the art, science and knack of sustainability 
11.) stomach share in The Hedgehog Review (2012): 48; Berman 2000: 6; see Berman 
1989;  decelerating see Morin 1999: 116, 121; neither this nor that see Zhuangzi; flows 
the way, see Deacon on orthograde and contragrade dynamics 
12.) highly programmed see Morin 2008: 63 especially, and see James Scott 63-65; 
shooting at people’s feet see also Wilden’s: lvii-lviii small caps alert : “ALL DISSENT MUST 
BE OF A HIGHER LOGICAL TYPE THAN THAT WITH WHICH IT IS IN CONFLICT. . . .being of a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  372    
logical type should not be confused with contemporary moralizing. . . .What is required. . 
. is a GUERILLA RHETORIC”; see Burneko 1981a; conduct of life see Pieper; see also 
Wendell Berry and see Purser, et al. 
13.) achronic, Gebser: 1985: 308 and passim.; relative space-time, Wallace: 164; Cosmic 
Uroboros see Primack and Abrams: 160 and see E. Neumann and compare quantum 
luminosity in Haisch with double-dark cosmogony in Primack and Abrams 
14.) Laughlin 1992, 2001; Berry 1988: 90-91; see Burneko 1988, 2003, 2010 
15.) Gebser 1985: 316; see Yijing also in Smith, et al., 1990:189, 194-99; Swimme  
1996: 103-04; Zhang Zai: 469 
16.) marvelously easy, Mengzi in Tu and Tucker 2003: 104, and see Matthew 18:3; 
cosmic reference, Tu 1985: 103; sincerity and authenticity, Tu in Tu and Tucker 2003: 
24-25, cf. luminous qi as the mind of the sage, see also Gebser on the diaphaneity and 
interexistential transparency of integral consciousness; Great Work, Berry 1988, 1999; 
psychoid archetypal dialogue see Edinger; see Berry 1988 on spontaneities of the Earth; 
on transformation see also Tu 1979, 1979a; reinvention, see Berry 1988 and S. Kauffman 
2ίίκ; racinated see Cohen’s mushroom trope in The Hedgehog Review (2012): 50 and 
follow the rhizome “The Mushrooms of Language” by Henry Munn in Harner 19ι3 
17.) Ecozoic Era, Berry 1999: 201; inscendence in Plotkin 2008: 8; functional 
cosmology, Berry 1988: 90; great work, mystical venture, numinous venture Berry 2009: 
84, 114, 176; note again (our) is frequently parenthesized throughout to suggest, in a 
mildly sous rature way, that we humans are complicit in cosmogenesis yet not the only 
ways the ongoing-wholing centers or conceives; what we do or conceive is not reducible 
to (our)selves 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  373    
18.) Tibetan, Guenther 1989: 193 
19.) Laughlin et al. 1990; S. Kauffman 1995; Deacon: 17; see Greene; see Burneko 2004, 
2010, 2011; see Kropotkin 
20.) ziran, spontaneous Hershock: 129, passim; Cook Ding in Zhuangzi see A. C. 
Graham’s trans. 19κ1: 63-64; Keats see N. Scott; see Polanyi on knack and 
nonobjectifiable personal or tacit knowing 
21.) carryover of value see Neville; Hershock: 226 
22.) Jahn and Dunne 2011: 346; see Berry 1988: 89-1ίκ chap. κ “The American College 
in the Ecological Age”; contemplative ecohumane coexistence performs and evokes the 
unforced or wu wei (self) contemplation that is anthropo-cosmogenesis 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  374    
 
11.0 “The Lunchbox Theorem” or Speaking in the First Person 
Resonant 
 
 
The PEAR symposium highlighted certain subjective and interpersonal 
characteristics that seemed to be in play when anomalous REG and FieldREG outcomes 
were recorded in numerous experiments over the years. Noted more anecdotally than 
always with the circumspection of formal inquiry, they were nevertheless frequent and 
striking enough to bear on the results of the investigations and said much about the 
conduct of the participants (called “operators” in the literatureΨ in the experiments. 
Consequently, in their article “Science of the Subjective,” Robert Jahn and Brenda Dunne 
provide arguments for the recognition of a proactive role of consciousness as well as for 
the use of interdisciplinary (and I will emphatically add, intercultural) metaphors and 
analogies in the approaches to a more holistic science in which subjective and objective 
aspects “would have to stand in mutually respective and constructive complementarity.” 
Their appeal is also for “more generous interpretations of measurability, replicability, and 
resonance” in this project.1  
 
Of the dozen odd salient features of the research based on about fifty million 
experimental trials noted up to their time of publication (features which later inquiry has 
not repudiated), the following ones stand out for me. These most readily suggest the 
presence and the value of resonance, (in attitude, affect, ententionality, state of mind etc.)  
in our aptitude to participate in the way the universe unfolds; and, correlatively, they 
suggest some versions of the contemplative conduct that could be a salient feature of a 
planetary future beyond sustainability. For instances, there were no indicators of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  375    
superstar performance by individual participants in the experiments. Yet several 
participants registered characteristic individual or personal “signatures” of achievement. 
There were significant differences in the patterns of male and female performance 
(women seemed to produce stronger but less regular nonrandom outcome anomalies, men 
the oppositeΨ.  And “’bonded’ maleήfemale pairs produce[d] the highest scores of any 
operator subsets.”  There were other recorded characteristics. But the one most telling is 
this one: 
Subjective reports from the most successful operators speak of a sense of 
‘resonance’ or ‘bond’ with the machine; of surrendering their sense of 
identity to merge with the machine into a unified system; of exchanging 
roles with the machine; of ‘falling in love’ with it; or of ‘having fun’ with 
it.2  
And relevantly coupled with this resonance for my interest is the repeated 
anecdotal observation by researchers falling under the heading of The Lunchbox 
Theorem. If memory serves, this term was used by Brenda Dunne during a conversational 
interlude in the Academy of Consciousness Studies to describe the attitude with which 
many REG-study participants approached their experimental sessions. Often they came 
on their lunch breaks. Many, and many who often produced significant outcomes, 
maintained a relaxed and even a casual or playful relation with the experimental situation 
and with the REG or other device in question. Some read, ate a sandwich, knitted, or 
otherwise did not get involved in concentrated huffing and puffing to produce 
extraordinary results. At whatever time they appeared for an experimental session, they 
seemed to be there in a spirit of engaged participation without effort (or noticeable ego-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  376    
investment) for a particular outcome. Not everyone took this wu wei lunch break attitude; 
some were more intense, instrumentally oriented or purposefully “active,” and 
threatened, pleaded with or exhorted the machines to perform in certain ways. But as the 
scientists report in The Margins of Reality, there was some serio ludere at work. 
If there is any unity in this diversity of strategy, it would be that most 
effective operators seem to associate successful performance with the 
attainment of some sense of ‘resonance’. . .variously described. . . as: ‘a 
state of immersion in a process which leads to a loss of awareness of 
myself. . .[like] being absorbed in a game, book, . . . or some creative 
occupation.’ ‘I don’t feel any direct control over the device, more like a 
marginal influence when I’m in resonance with the machine. It’s like 
being in a canoe; when it goes where I want, I flow with it. When it 
doesn’t, I try to break the flow and give it a chance to  get back in 
resonance with me.’3  
 
The authors generalize from repeated subjective reports of such flow or resonance 
(reports that are quantitatively evidenced in the statistical outcomes), that these are 
“general ingredients that characterize virtually any form of creative human experience: 1. 
An unrefined. . .environment, resource, or context. . . .2. Consciousness. . .[e]ntention, 
purpose, or desire. 3. A resonance between the consciousness and the environment that 
nurtures the creative task. . . . “4   
And they speculate that the anomalous phenomena under study in the lab may be 
microcosms of a more far-reaching human aptitude for creativity, healing or stimulation. 
In doing so, they invoke existing physical theory where it also attests, as in the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  377    
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, to the apparently proactive aspect of 
the participation of human consciousness in the eventuation of objective events. The 
“physics of experience” that might follow from this acknowledgment comprehends the 
never completely distinguishable subject(ive)-and-object(ive)-together in an ever-
originary integral structure, or integrum of the kind described by Gebser. The PEAR 
inquiry -- and ICRL research that had succeeded it -- together with such insights as 
Gebser’s and those of Bohr, Jung, Laughlin, Throop, Pauli and many others beacons us 
less towards an understanding of either consciousness or the physical world alone and 
more towards a stereoscopic and analogical understandingήexperience of the “cognized 
environment” entailing the indistinguishability (betweenΨ or “interpenetration of an 
otherwise ineffable consciousness into an equally ineffable physical surround.” I wonder 
from this if in a universe of coevolutionary (and nonlocal) connectedness reflexive 
awareness anywhere may be said to bespeak a self-cognizing environment everywhere.5 
In other words, further following Jahn and Dunne,  such quantum principles as 
superposition, indistinguishability and uncertainty or complementarity may be metaphors 
and analogues of consciousness as much as characteristics of physical systems in the 
field-flow of self-organizationally emergent coevolutionary dynamics. Herein, 
cosmogenesis reduces no more to thought than to thing, and only the concourse of 
imagery, intuitive analogy and synchronicity together with the syllogisms of rationalistic 
understanding can begin sustainingly to express the concinnity of inseverable mind and 
matter, I and Thou, as the continuum, field, or the processual ecology, of B/being. An 
alert critic like Gleiser may say at this and other points that it sounds too much like 
looking for a “hidden code of nature [that] is the scientific equivalent of the religious 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  378    
belief in Oneness.” But that would be to miss the nondual, poetic and simultaneously 
apophatic/analogous tone of my theme. Arguing One and Total and Final or Ultimate is a 
different game than singing not-two and ongoing, especially since the trope here is 
sustainable, meaningful and participatory ontopoietics and ontohermeneutics, not 
conclusive certainty about some external something-out-there. The world – (our) co-
worlding -- doesn’t ((necessarily (have toΨΨ work in any one and authoritatively 
objectifiable, codifiable way. We (and) it polythetically and poly-eco-semeically 
collaborate in interminate and emergent ongoing-wholing(s) fully reducible neither to 
anthropo-cosmic self or other. To say so is at the same time to celebrate and to subvert or 
relativize that very statement. Its seeming paradoxicality both undoes and contextualizes 
its univocity. For that matter, as Stephen White’s “weak ontology,” Neville’s 
pragmatically naturalistic ontohermeneutics and Berry’s functional cosmology remind us, 
the issue is how we carry/constitute/conduct sustaining value into functional daily 
versions and fractals of cosmogenesis, not who wins the paradigm wars. And again, says 
Wu of Zhuangzi, “We need to be evoked by a new metaphor in shifting out of our old 
one. . . . such meta-metaphor does not present us with a specific metaphor but, with an 
evocative collage of metaphors, helps us move among metaphors. . . .The world is bigger 
and freer than our own metaphors” but inseverable from them and from us.6  
I’d contextually suggest here, also, that in aesthetically and axiologically 
conceived cosmogenesis, cosmogenesis in which consciousness, entention and choice are 
in some “measure” constituent and which, therefore, finds and expresses truth or meaning 
not so much in some a priori or external referent (where is such an extra-anthropocosmic 
measure or entity?) as in its creatively ongoing-wholing of self-referential and yet far-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  379    
from-equilibrium coherence, i. e. an ars contextualis, there is an analogy or fractal self-
similarity between the quantum jumps in the ongoing-wholing of event-knowledge, 
meaning and value that accompanies our choices, as intimated by Stapp, and the jumps, 
bifurcations or what Thom calls catastrophes of phase, state and 
complexity/consciousness of recursively self-organizing coevolutionary systems of 
micro-, meso-, and macroscopic scale.  In the case of such a nondual holarchic and to 
varying degrees self-aware (axio)cosmogenesis, a sustaining ontohermeneutic knack of 
humano-, eco-, and cosmopoiesis would be appropriate enaction or symmetry 
approximation of the resonance throughout the intersystem, of the superpositioned 
probabilities of the whole in “the part.” Pertinently writes Tulku with relevance to such a 
knack in echo of  Guenther’s systems theoretical interpretation of Tibetan experience-as-
such, “In a union of presence, each part encompasses the whole.” Again chimes Zhang 
Zai that what is our body we share with nature as a rudder of the flow of sustainable 
Earth-human experience. The contemplative sage in hir zones and modes of 
ecoeffectiveness identifies hir character with that of Heaven-and-Earth. And focusing the 
forgoing interdisciplinary and intercultural analogy on the theme of this chapter, quantum 
researcher David Peat concludes that the major barriers to a sustainably “creative 
transformation of consciousness are the attachments of the self, which give rise to a 
mechanical order of becoming in which the more subtle and faster movements of nature 
are lost. . . . Synchronicity gives us an image of what such a transformation may be like. . 
. . [its] creativity dissolves and transcends all structures and distinctions. Synchronicity is 
an image of the creative source.”7  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  380    
 
A variant of the aforementioned notions of anthropocosmic indistinguishability or 
compenetration (per Huayan) in lived experience is ably expressed in the wonderful 
paper titled “Play and Intrinsic Rewards” by Csikzentmihalyi in which he discusses 
activities that are intrinsically rewarding, or autotelic. Characterized by total attentional 
involvement, enjoyment and with feelings of being fun – satisfying in themselves without 
respect to an external payoff -- such activities follow an internal logic needing no 
conscious intervention and “seem to occur only when a person is actively engaged in 
some form of clearly specified interaction with the environment” to such a degree that 
action and awareness e/merge nondualistically. Accompanying these experiences is self-
forgetfulness or a temporary “loss of ego.”  What is lost, of course, is not functionality or 
bodily awareness, but the ego’s “self-construct” which we ordinarily place between the 
world and our responsiveness to its physical or to other human stimuli. Calling this 
agreeable and self-rewarding experience “flow” (like that of athletes performing 
spontaneously in “the zone” of optimal engagement), the author cites sources reporting 
that a person in this state experiences hirself as being a flow. And Csikzentmihalyi 
provisionally concludes that, “The fact that flow is experienced as autotelic . . . as 
intrinsically rewarding, raises this process to a central position in the hierarchy of human 
behaviors.”8  
Flow as intrinsically (contrasted with extrinsically and instrumentally or 
mechanistically) rewarding experience trumps in any value hierarchy other kinds of 
experience that divide the person from the environment and that place the rewards and 
benefits of activity (interactivity, really) outside the person-event-field itself. Such 
divided activity is, I think, a source of most unsustainable conduct and -- notably 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  381    
exaggerated consumerist -- outlooks that are alienating and both ecosocially and 
ecopolitically deracinating. The accessible, everyday, almost homespun character of 
flow, the unprogrammable spontaneity and play quality of it, seem as likely to be found 
in the esoteric metaphysics of nondual Tibetan “experience-as-such” and accompanying 
realization of cosmogenic “creativity, play and ornament” discussed by Guenther as in 
garden variety meditative practice, the even more accessible complete attentiveness we 
may realize in everyday experience, or, for that matter, in kayaking and gardening. This 
is clearly not arcane science.9 
 
Speaking in somewhat similar terms of the experience of communitas among 
persons and between persons and their environments when these persons are liminal or 
marginal with respect to habituated or conventional structurings of consciousness, culture 
and experience, i. e., when they are on what S. Kauffman (or Zhuangzi) might call the 
border between conventionally defined order and chaos, Victor Turner reports that 
“Spontaneous communitas is nature in dialogue with structure, married to it as a woman 
is married to a man.” And while Turner argues that the flow of spontaneous communitas 
cannot be maintained permanently, there is a form of existential communitas, typified for 
him by Buddha, Gandhi, or Tolstoy, in which the radical communitas among human 
persons and among all the kinds of persons and the cosmos is a way of life with enduring 
social, spiritual and, today, ecopolitical implications.10  
Under the sign of attentionally induced or contemplative communitas, the 
sustaining flow of ecosocial and humanocosmic communitas is as close to our undivided 
selves as are the unattached, non-accelerating, non-inertial constancy of thinking/moving 
in the field or the joy of dancing in the streets. They are not two. Understood this way, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  382    
communitas is not only a term for how we experience ourselves with/in (or as a 
fractal/holon of) the environment, but for how we experience ourselves as (a 
dimensionality of) the environment in a functional cosmology. Elements of symbolic 
anthropology, coevolutionary systems theory, contemporary holophysics, consciousness 
research, contemplative conduct and ecosocial hermeneutics here reveal their sistership in 
the context of sustaining life on Earth. The question of contemplative ecology alone 
seems sufficiently big (and timely) to indicate how little these things (need to) differ from 
one another or, to be more precise, to show how through analogy, interpenetration 
(xiangtong) and complementarity they in concert help evoke and midwife an integral 
experience of the nonduality of heart/mind (xin) and eco-self-re-organizing nature 
(ziran)– some of whose most quantitatively verifiable expressions are the nonrandom 
event outcomes previously noted and others, less studied, are the existentially striking 
synchronicities of (inter)personal life. In short, the conduct of our life as a dimensional 
resonance of and with the life of the universe seems, whatever its (apparently local or 
“contained”Ψ expression, a far more sustainable and sustaining alternative than the long 
familiar pillage and profit scheme based, we are reminded afresh, “in values that have no  
limits. . . .control, efficiency, productivity, and order. . . .[namely,] the historical 
production of unsustainability.” Nor are flow, synchronicity, and resonance with the 
(psycho)physical world any odder or more unlikely than were earliest tool-making and 
agriculture or recent research in nonlocality and the inseverability of the observer from 
the observed. 11 
From a deeply ecohumane perspective, the functional cosmology of Thomas 
Berry is juicy with ecopolitical implications. This is the functioning cosmologically of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  383    
the person alive (as Mary Evelyn Tucker is above quotedΨ to “discovering one’s 
cosmological being amidst daily affairs.” Such “self-transformation [occurs] through 
cultivation of oneself in relation to others and to the natural world.” As a supplement to 
the ecosocial ethic implied by this, Turner reminds us that such genuinely 
“transformative experience . . .goes to the root of each person’s being and finds in that 
root something profoundly communal and shared.” This root is also the matrix through 
which we share what Berry has called the “spontaneities” of the Earth. Embodying those 
potentials – resonating with Heaven, Earth and Humankind, the Chinese might add -- we 
(re)align ourselves with the Great Transformation, the Great Work of the Ecozoic Era in 
the most deep-delved composting of consciousness and culture, says Berry, since the end 
of the Cenozoic geological, and certainly of the Paleolithic anthropological era. In the 
radical contemplative communitas of our self-organizing optimization and 
coevolutionarily satisficing attunements with and as the patterns and rhythms of a 
cosmogeny completely reducible neither ontologically nor epistemologically to self or to 
other, to ego-utilities nor to the natural resources on which we impose and apply them, 
we take, as Turner writes, a mature step beyond our habitual clichés of technocratic 
dominance and ecosocial inattentiveness into more vital, corresponsive and aware 
conduct where we find sustaining “glimpses of that unused [co]evolutionary potential in 
mankind that has not yet been externalized and fixed in structure.” In a more ecopoetic 
vein (or ecopoietic, to highlight the nondual autopoietic anthropocosmic ententionality 
implied here) we may say we learn to speak in the first person cosmic, the first person 
resonant; the personal I who articulates worlding, who coworlds with all others, is also 
the all-connected I/We which (or who) articulates me, us and all others.12  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  384    
 
Wisdom, writes Turner with unexpected relevance to the inconvenient truth of our 
own antiecological outlook on the natural processes of the Earth, is “always to find the 
appropriate relationship between structure and communitas under the given 
circumstances of time and place, to accept each modality. . . and not to cling to one when 
its present impetus is spent.” For the situational and circumstantial quality of this kind of 
ecosocially mindful shu, and dao, in its yinyang K=2-like differential and deferential 
conduct, we find additional helpful confirmation in contemplative complements to our 
unremitting and therefore monophasically destructive instrumental consciousness. Judith 
Berling in speaking (for Zhuangzi) about an overwrought civilizational mentality that in 
metaphor as well as social engineering and zweckrational technological prowess seeks to 
bore to death the wholing vitality of Hundun according to preset anthropocentrizing 
ideals of functionality, order and gain, comments that its “excessively utilitarian mindset 
lacks imagination and a sense of fun. . . .The obsession with utility and function is not 
only a matter of missed opportunity; it saps life and energy [and] simply uses one up.” It 
also uses up the natural environment faster than it can renew itself while also using up 
human persons who in eager self- or other-commodification and instrumentalization fall 
beset with a variety of lower back aches, anxieties, depressions and addictions. And it 
stifles or eclipses the unused coevolutionary resonance-occasions of fun, spontaneous 
self-rewarding play, flow, bonding, archetypal feeling-consciousness or simple lunchtime 
attentiveness that we now know from experiment conduce to self-rewarding events, 
choices and conduct which because they are autotelic are sustaining and inherently, not 
merely instrumentally, functional.13  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  385    
Again, like a disclosing or unconcealing, the virtue of a contemplation-like 
consciousness is not in control but in discovery. Better yet, It relieves us and the Earth 
from unsustainably zero-sum game-playing altogether. It’s not (justΨ that we learn earlier 
and more sensitively to attune with incipient and subtle environmental change or (just) to  
make better, more sustainable choices by some sort of daily sitting-(self)forgetting, (zuo 
wangΨ. It’s more like                       
And I encourage you to leave the blank blank; no-mind (wu xin, wu nian) the 
matter for the time being. We’re told one step to practicing ecoeffectiveness is “delight, 
celebration, and fun.” Another trick is essaying a new paradigm “rather than. . .an 
incremental improvement of the old. . . .the [e]ntention is not to be slightly more 
efficient. . . but to change the framework itself” in a transformation or metanoia of values 
and consciousness. Not for another kind of transcendence, nor altogether for inscendence, 
this is more like a contemplatively based appeal to the instincts of fellowship, 
partnership, collaboration, ecosocial solidarity and communion in lived realization that 
“All people are my brothers and sisters, and all things are my companions.” The family 
of Earth Household(ers) extends from the tiniest Planck quarters across an observable 
universe whose spacetimematter may be only an approximation of something more rare 
still to back in (y)our own backyard.  
Calculate what man knows and it cannot compare to what he does not 
know. Calculate the time he is alive and it cannot compare to the time 
before he was born. Yet man takes something so small and tries to exhaust 
the dimensions of something so large! Hence he is muddled and confused. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  386    
. . .Or  how do we know that heaven and [E]arth can fully encompass the 
dimensions of the largest thing possible.14  
So where is the real silliness in our form of life? Wendell Berry replies very 
succinctly: “Well, you can jack up human desire until it’s limitless [but]. . . . 
Limitlessness – of  greed, of ‘growth’ – quickly becomes just silly.” How much more 
renewing than get-and-spend is daily contemplative conduct in understanding and in 
experiencing ourselves as a resonant compresencing and an activation of the cosmogonic 
qi, or the quantum field, or the field of Being or garden variety  coevolutionary ecotopia 
within and as which all things appear? The question is one of ententionality, and 
ententionality is a matter of attentionality, of ego-neutralizing attentiveness or 
anthropocosmic cotention, to, with and as the incipient patterns and processes within and 
around us, and of openness “not to the pressures of society, but to what comes naturally 
from living.” “Respond with awareness” summarizes the Daoist approach to life; this is 
sustainingly to “emulate the Dao” as the ancients said.15 
 
Integrally performing the contemplative possibilities of  an ecohumane 
ententionality irreducible to solely mental-human or to solely material-cosmological or to 
divine factors in the context of the Confucian and Neo-Confucian legacy, we learn from 
Zhu Xi, “Without the mind of heaven and [E]arth to produce things, there would not be 
this body of mine. Only when there is this body of blood-and-qi is the mind of heaven 
and [E]arth to produce things made complete.” For, Bloom allows us to infer, the matter 
of our will, ambition or ententionality from a practical contemplative perspective is less a 
matter of choice among options than one of  “resolve, commitment, or determination” in 
our attentionality and cotention. Again, in the contemplative Chinese purview, our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  387    
entending minds are less agencies of control and command of the supposedly inert or the 
given external and the natural world than they are supple unifying centers of the person 
and have a supporting and coordinating function among all species of persons as diverse 
foci of the field of interbeing. They are the “agency of communication [in the full 
etymological sense, cf. also xiangtong] through which the person recognizes hi[r] 
fundamental relatedness to others and to the totality of being.”16  
In this respect, the (eco)ethical dimension of our lives and ententionalities is not a 
matter of deliberate and determinative ego-choice  alone so much as of (re-solution in) 
increasingly spontaneous accord within the overall patterns and cycles with which we are 
sustainably and interactively imbricated. For these are an endowment in which all things 
and all forms of life participate -- the mature contemplative human person presumably 
doing so most responsively, somewhat in contrast with our usual non- or even anti-
contemplative orientation whose understanding is limited by the self-interest with which 
its ordering of attention can change. Thus, sustaining responsiveness, in turn, is not born 
of reclusive withdrawal from the world but of authentic, if nonassertive, mutually 
beneficial engagement with all the kinds of things that make the universe -- from raising 
children and potatoes to experiencing the resonance with/in the field that allows 
nonrandom order to appear. Mengzi’s dictum, “Always be doing something, but without 
fixation” conveys the sense that “the conscious mind must lead and direct without forcing 
or distorting the. . .normal and natural” and thereby it comprehendingly nourishes our 
relatedness and complementarity, not our compulsive domination, with all forms of life in 
ecoeffective (as well as ecophilosophical and ecopsychologicalΨ realizations. We don’t 
ordinarily think first of NeoConfucian resources for contemporary ecosocial relevance, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  388    
but a progressively more expanded version of the preceding insights offers us a version of 
a generous, well-Earthed and wholesome ententionality. It is based in the self-knowledge 
that attentive, contemplative heart/mind (xinΨ sustainingly “establishes – or, perhaps more 
precisely, recovers – a relation between the one and the many, the part and the whole.” 
For though with Zhu Xi, for instance, mind may not be either discrete or ultimately one, 
“mind as such is relational,” and through this ecology of mind, “the self has access to the 
more complete reality” in internalizing and performing “the metaphysical and moral 
relation between the individual and the totality of being.” “Practice the attitude,” 
encourages Wang Yangming.17  
 
The Neo-Confucian tradition understands our ententionality as the recovery of a 
genuine relation between ourselves and others and between our cultural life and the  
rhythms, patterns and processes of the natural universe. From Zhu Xi, if I may be allowed 
another iteration, we might today learn to interpret the entending heart/mind as the 
relational mind of functional cosmogenesis. Its functionality is to “recognize and 
internalize the metaphysical and moral relation between the individual and the totality of 
being,” to connect nature and the feelings; “situating one’s mind within things. . .  so as 
to acquire insight into their principle” not foremost to dominate and possess all things but 
through reciprocity in relationally imaginative shu, we may say, to enlarge and clarify our 
ecosocially apt practice in an “expansion of [eco]ethical consciousness.” When with a 
nonimpositional and anthropocosmically or cosmomorphically contemplative 
ententionality as contrasted with a self-aggrandizing ego intensity we reconnect (or 
endosymbiotize) ourselves (cf. re-ligio) with the larger ecosocial and cosmic wholing, we 
real-ize in self-rewarding experience and illuminative insight (we guan, zhi, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  389    
comprehensively behold, embody, enact, impart and receive, (re)create, perform and 
make real) an authentically sustaining ethos in the fullest sense of that ecologically 
pertinent term.18   
For an ethos performs the character, the axiological and value-matrix of living 
persons, of living beings embodied in and with (and thus to some extent as) particular 
places, ecorelationships and settings. Ethos is not an abstract norm; it is not a general 
good. It is the sustainable doing, as Blake said, of weal in the minute ententional and 
relation-enhancing particulars of being here now. Its (self)attentive valuing of 
experience-as-such finds in even the minute (f)acts of daily life the ever-present gates of 
“eternity’s sunrise.” It is the emergent enactive and embodied “placing” of value, 
meaning, ecosemeity, in the sense of the “placing of value on” some thing, some setting, 
someone or some practice, and it is the (self-)placing and the enactive performance of 
value in the sense of the resonantly embodying and sharing/giving existential shape, 
habitation and manifestation of, in, to and as a place, a conduct or lifeway, a terrain, a 
Gaia and all those dwelling (t)herewith and (t)hereas -- the leaved, finned, legged, 
feathered and furred.19 
The place or topos which we are now called upon “to place,” to bespeak and 
narratize and sustainingly to embody in our conduct, thought and feeling is the ever 
interminate wholing – processual, nondual, anthropocosmic tropos -- whether we 
nominate it as the physical cosmos, and especially the planet Earth, as the quantum 
domain subtending universe, life and mind, as the psychocosmic unus mundus, or as 
home. In either manner, “We are the world,” sang Michael Jackson and friends. And with 
them, intimates Zhu Xi, a contemplative cultivation of our potentials of mutually 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  390    
beneficial self-other presencing in ecological and ecohumane terms is not a dissolution of 
the consciousness of individual self and responsibility but “expansion of the sense of self 
through an enhanced awareness of the. . . relatedness of all life. In other words [this] 
involves overcoming the unclarity [the inertia or opacity] of mind that derives from the 
indulgence of the ‘selfish human desires’. . . .[not through inhibition of the personality 
but in] release from the obscurity and selfishness which demean and diminish the self.” 
Our narratives of connection and relation need not be exclusively scientific or up-to-the-
minute; but we need them to be ecological, ecumenical and encyclical, far-embracing and 
meaningful in helping us to coordinate our experience with/as Earth-experience in 
resonant mutual flourishing.20 
 
If the long-term mutual well being or eros of humankind and Earth-kind is our 
gently sustained entention, and if the issue of ententionality, or non-anthropocentric will, 
is, as the NeoConfucians had it, less one of making choices, a reductive, consumerist 
view, than it is one of re-cognizing connections and relations, honoring the grounds and 
performing the contextual arts of relatedness and communication expressed, perhaps, not 
with the connotation of an arduous commitment but as orthograde relaxing or naturally 
falling, e/merging, into the mode of remaining unselfishly open beyond sustainability to 
resonantly ecohumane “dwelling in the wide house of the world,” then sustainable self-
organization of the aptitudes for meaningful and enlivening co-dwelling emerges with 
our commitment to – or better, our spontaneously improvisational symphonization with 
and of -- the Great Learning (da xue), the Great Work (da hua), and in participating in the 
datong or intertexturization of sage contemplative conduct, outlook and daily ecosocial 
experience. This is simultaneously an ancient and a contemporary learning to be, if not 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  391    
the sage that each of us potentially is, at least mature, ecologically coconscious 
contemplatives, each of us according to our circumstances, in the “placing” where and as 
which we are living our life in the first, second and omniperson. It is in part for this that 
“one of the most profound human impulses is now and  has always been to bridge the gap 
between self and world in themes and narratives that are progressively more inclusive, 
extended, and refined.” Think how often the Dalai Lama reminds us that his religion is 
kindness; friendship and love are humanocosmic constituents; ahimsa paramo dharma. 21 
Such contemplation requires no hair shirts, nor the refusal to join in the affairs 
and the concerns of the world. It is at minimum what its etymology teaches us: viewing 
reverently, or attentively, abiding with and keeping long in heart-and-mind and conduct a 
valued, sacred, or an enwholing placing of affairs. It is, depending on preference, (one’sΨ 
healing or holistic placing/worlding. A mature contemplative is, in this generic sense, a 
person who has and embodies the sustained noninstrumentalizing (not even necessarily 
always conscious)  entention of resonance, a dynamically or self-organizingly stable 
neurognostic template, or a neurognostic trueing, for openness to different beings and 
realities (perhaps, or not) via a palette of existential analogies and consciousness 
structures in the name of integral Earth-human wellbeing.22  
One of these structures, Berman adjures, will likely contribute to the sustainability 
of culture and ecology only if it develops “the dialectical possibilities that can exist 
between horizontal [paradox, peripheral awareness] and vertical [gnostic ascent] aspects 
of life.” An apposite strategy in this case might include, for ecocultural example, “gentler 
child-rearing practices and a kind of ‘ontological education’ regarding the human 
drivenness for power and its roots in early infancy. . . .but embodiment is quite important 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  392    
to paradox, for without it the practice of a nonformula easily turns into one more formula. 
. . .the conversion of nomadic [or polythetic, non-fixed] consciousness into a position, a 
philosophy. . . .” For their part, reaffirm Primack and Abrams, “by making every effort to 
connect, we will do even more than expand our sense of cosmic identity: we will actually 
make our scientific understanding of the universe more accurate by integrating ourselves 
into the big picture – and we are certainly here.” 23  
I would enjoy a dialectical ménage joining nonformulaic paradox coexistence, 
scientific understanding, and an embodied consciousness practicing the contemplation 
and enactment of the everyday mystery or numen of the universe as an ever-ongoing-
wholing in which all forms of life and nature are involved and compresent. This is 
experiencing as holy and as healthful the spontaneous expressions of our (non-
totalistically) enwholing physical, emotional, mental and spiritual compresencing with, 
and by coevolutionary innerconnection as, all forms of life – from the (perhaps only 
seemingly) most undifferentiated fundamental quantum physical infrastructure to the 
living and the complex conscious organisms with which we directly and indirectly 
interact and on which, with whom, we interdepend. Because of our technical and 
organizational know-how, the well-being of other forms of life particularly depends to 
increasing degrees on our ability noninstrumentally, and nonprogrammatically, to keep 
them in heart/mind for their own sakes as well as for the sake of the sustaining wholing 
of life. Even apart from our powers to create and destroy, we can see that we would not 
be the complex beings we are without the nest, home and terrain of the broader Earth and 
universe systems that surround, support and influence and evoke us. And we embody, 
articulate and contextualizingly influence that physical infrastructure and organismic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  393    
complexity just as the forms of its constants and of all other coevolutionary dynamics 
perfuse our ecosocial, personal, familial, organizational and planetary coexistence. 
Our creativity is (in the context ofΨ nature; nature’s continuum is our being; our 
being is nature’s own emergent becoming and fractal real-ization. And environmentally 
as well as anthropologically, nonimposingly to evoke, relish and nurture ecohumane 
interrelatedness and interaction is to experience ourselves more fully realized in 
responsiveness than in isolation. The part and the whole are interdependent, and the self-
rewardingly attentive entention of contemplative conduct is, as Zhu Xi said, to “enlarge 
and complete” our living experience of resonant affinity with other persons, Earth and 
with the dancing cadences of cosmogenesis. Sustainability everyday extends to us as 
individuals and as families from the ever-present genesis of the universe as expressed by 
Earth. “From one’s household it will extend to the state, and from the state to the world. . 
. .This is ‘completing’ so as to attain full development.” As de Bary expresses it, what 
Zhu Xi seeks “is a self-realization in which [humanity] fulfills all that is distinctively 
human while participating in the creative work of heaven and [E]arth.”  
 
Thomas Berry expresses this idea by saying,  
The Great Work now, as we move into a new millennium, is to carry out 
the transition from a period of human devastation of the Earth to a period 
when humans would be present to the planet in a mutually beneficial 
manner. This historical change. . . .has no  historical parallel since the 
geobiological transitions that took place 67 million years ago when the 
period of the dinosaurs was terminated and a new biological age begun. . .  
. . . . . At such a moment a new revelatory experience is needed. . . .This 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  394    
awakening is our human participation in the dream of the Earth, the dream 
that is carried in its integrity. . .in the depths our genetic coding . . . .We 
probably have not had such participation in the dream of the Earth since 
earlier shamanic times, but therein lies our hope for the future for 
ourselves and for the entire Earth community.24  
Endnotes: The Lunchbox Theorem or Speaking in the First Person Resonant 
1.) Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 295, 297-98 302-ί5, “Science of the Subjective” was 
originally published in Journal of Scientific Exploration 11.2 (1997): 201-224 including a 
bibliography, see Jahn and Dunne 2011 for yet more updated and comprehensive findings 
and related theorization. 
I return here further to complexify the problematic of coevolutionary 
“optimizing” and “satisficing models” both to honor (and bewareΨ the ecopolitical 
program potentials of the former and, even more, to support the ontohermeneutic eco-
phronesis implicit in the latter.  Jahn and Dunne 2011: 268 in speaking of the value of 
“analogies from any province that the human mind has attempted to organize or 
correlate” state “it is through such processes of organization and correlation that the 
characteristics of reality and of its embracing consciousness are specified, and possibly 
even manifested.” Their use of the term “specified” takes us back to “the embodied 
mind” arguments of Varela, et al. who in “articulating a dialogue between. . .Western 
cognitive science and Buddhist meditative psychology” (xviiiΨ propose on these bases 
“the inevitable conclusion. . .that knower and known, mind and world, stand in relation to 
each other through mutual specification or dependent coorigination” (15ίΨ. This may be 
taken to emphasize that the world and our experience stand a) not as premade  b) duality. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  395    
It is to speak not of out-there world and in-here mental representations “of it,” but of and 
as ongoing-co-worlding, (an interaction among persons with one another and with the 
world as events of worlding irreducible to either). (Our) interactive structural couplings 
with, in, and as embodiments or nondual enactments of the coconstituting femto- and 
macro- events and processes of cosmogenesis likewise co-specify, -constitute and 
fractally enact distinctions, generally of a polar or differential yinyang sort, presencing, or 
performing, emergent ontohermeneutically reflexive properties of unreducible embodied 
mind as thus understood: (on specification see also Maturana and Varela: 40; see Deacon; 
see again G. Bateson 1979 and Jacques Derrida on the ontohermeneutics of 
difference/différanceΨ. “[O]rganism and environment are mutually enfolded in multiple 
ways,” again report Varela and colleagues, “and so what constitutes the world of a given 
organism is enacted by that organism’s history of structural coupling. . . .proceed[ing] not 
through optimal adaptation but rather through evolution as natural drift” (2ί2). Yet at this 
point, satisficing coevolutionary drift and algorithmic coevolutionary optimization look 
like complements or analogues of one another. The value of analogies stated by Jahn and 
Dunne may (in turn) be likened with the means of our conduct of coupled interactions 
with one another and the world(ing) of other living and nonliving systems in that 
analogies’ mutualistic dynamic of “this is, or is like, or can be compared with that in 
some way(sΨ” creates a domain (or polycentered networkΨ of interrelated differencings 
specifying alternative and complementary experiences and (emergent self-)interpretations 
of the (everywhere-co-constituting events of the) field of life as we live it (see also Jahn 
and Dunne 2011: 306-07). This in turn is analogous to the stereognosis that comes with 
having two eyes and two ears and two legs, for example. Whether the differential binary 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  396    
complementarity is interpreted in connection with organisms and with symbionts 
(Margulis), with appositional and propositional brain hemispheres (Bogen), paired sense 
organs, yinyang, ontohermeneutic I and Tao (Herman) or simple everyday place and 
time, the insights of Varela, Thompson and Rosch become yet more deeply intriguing 
when placed with Jahn and Dunne’s (2ί11: 1κ9Ψ in the quantum cosmogenic context of  
the “self-reflexive creative organization of random sources.” I find here the implication 
that the indefinitely random or stochastic interplay of superpositioned anthropocosmic Ȍ 
wavefunction possibilities at all coevolutionary scales self-organizingly realizes and 
embodies itself as emergently non- or not-so-random emergent ententionality to the 
degree that co-responsive openness to coupling, to existential resonance, or to reciprocal 
self-likening sensory and relational shu is taking place. If so, it would seem that extreme-
long-term resonance/sustainability of anthropocosmic life systems on/as Earth is more 
likely to the degree we practice a contemplative/attentive openness to (existential as well 
as intellectual and metaphorical) analogy, i. e., a “filter-tuning strategy”(see Jahn and 
Dunne 2011: 298, and section IV.4) of accepting possible alternative representations and 
experiences of reality accessed by metaphor and analogy in concept and in direct 
experience for the realization of sustaining interactive resonance that forgoes the 
egocentric certainties of  monotonic conceptual totalism, monopolistic selfhood and of 
the related “business-deal mentality” through replacing essentializing duality with 
analogic complementarity (Jahn and Dunne 2011: 301, see 298-301 passim.; Varela et 
al.: 246; see White on weak ontology). And this is because it seems that in the lab with 
the REG or in the world with all our relations, sustainable resonance in “planetary 
building requires[/enacts] the embodiment of concern for the other with whom we enact a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  397    
world” (Varela et al.: 246, 24ιΨ as well as a corresponding “rehumanization” of society 
(Hessel and Morin: 25, 61 who also call for “remoralization”: 34 and, not incidentally, 
call also for “values of Confucian benevolence and responsibility”: 35Ψ, a resonant 
reinvention of the human, (Berry 1988) of the sacred, (S. Kauffman 2008) and of 
consciousness; see also Jill M. Kress cited at 
http://muse.jhu.edu/login?auth=0&type=summary&url=/journals/henry_james_review/v0
25/25.3boudreau.html/ (accessed 6.15.12). Resonance as an orthograde or nonforcing 
nonegocentric ententional “cause” (an attitude, mood, a desire, perhapsΨ or as a 
psychocosmic “effect” of dehabituating our egocentrism into the sustaining conduct of 
anthropocosmic healingήwholing, according to Jahn and Dunne, seems to generate “a 
subtle biasing of the emergent tangible, albeit probabilistic, physical events. This process 
may work in the reverse order” (2ί11: 2ι5Ψ. And if what I’ve called contemplation is 
radical attention in play with, and a resonance mode of, the ongoing anthropocosmic 
constellation of sustaining order from zero-point randomicity, then Jahn and Dunne  may 
have yet more to offer in analogy with Varela and colleagues where the former state, 
“Specifically, the operator needs to surrender conscious control of, or investment in, the 
desired result [external payoff] and submit to a state of detached indifference [wu wei]” 
(2ί11: 2ι9Ψ “and maintain a delicate balance between some teleological sense of 
[e]ntention or desire for a particular experimental outcome, with a surrender of conscious 
control or responsibility for the achievement of that goal to the unconscious mind and its 
deeper resources. In so doing, the operator would eschew any. . .’How am I doing?’ 
reassurances. . .which, in this model.. . .obstruct access to the deeper unconscious 
intangible levels of interaction” (2κ3Ψ. (Consult the significance of the Bhagavadgita.) I 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  398    
also keep in mind here Jung’s earlier testimony that the unconscious archetypal psyche as 
a domain of acausal connectedness is pure unvitiated nature, cosmogenesis, as well as 
Edinger’s and Gebser’s ideas that mature individuation or integrality is in the dialogue of 
ego with unconscious and nonconscious or arational structures, not in its extinction. In 
releasing ourselves and the events of worlding from our insistent ego-selfing, we allow 
inter-existential analogy (shu) and resonance (ganying) and realize sustaining Earth-
human coemergence. The somewhat eitherήor question, “Is this coevolutionary 
optimizing or satisficing?” is enfolded with(inΨ the implicitly nondualistic eco-extensive 
and ontohermeneutically entensive one, “Who is asking?” The polarity of 
optimizing/satisficing, and of algorithm/drift are wings by which soars the de-
essentializing cocreating openness of this andήtoήas that. Zhuangzi “simply says, ‘a path is 
made by people walking.’ The language of exploration whets our appetite for a walk into 
the uncharted land. The [terminological and formulaic] map comes later.” In the 
meantime, “the connections are many, and the language of exploration is polythetic in 
meaning and non-thetic in its evocative [e]ntent. It calls forth many potentials of 
associations” (Wu 199ί: 3ι3Ψ. 
2.) Jahn and Dunne in Explore: 288-99, see particularly 299; see Jahn and Dunne 2011: 
332-37; see in Zhu Xi: xviii-xxii passim “extend on the basis of similarity in kind,” “one 
starts with one’s immediate concern,” ren involves love for all”  and  in ibid.: 6 “his order 
is identical with that of the four seasons,” (19Ψ “there is noting that is not himself,” (2κΨ 
“the nature of growth is ren,” (32Ψ “obstruction means that one thinks only of himself,” 
(5ιΨ “do not seek profit. . . .do not calculate on results,” (ιιΨ “the sage identifies his 
character with that of Heaven and Earth,” (12ί-21Ψ “we should anticipate the will of the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  399    
poets in our thought,” (139Ψ “always be doing something without expectation,” (152Ψ “As 
long as one has not gotten rid of the mind formed by habits and  customs, the mind in its 
genuine aspect will not be complete,” “One who possesses de in abundance is 
comparable to the new-born babe” (Laozi in Hall and Ames 19κι: 221Ψ, “Alas, how can I  
find a real great sage who has not lost his childlike mind” (Li Zhi, from “On The 
Childlike Mind” (Tongxin Shuo) in Chang and Owen: 160, with oblique reference to later 
Confucian formalism, prudishness and rigidity; see also Debary et al.: 527-29) 
3.) in Jahn and Dunne 1987: 142; see Jahn and Dunne 2011; see Csikzentmihalyi, 
Sanford, Brown 
4.) in Explore: 300 
5.) and they speculate see Berry 1988: 45, 1999: 169; physics of experience see the 
“visionary physics” of William Blake’s “response to Newton” discussed by Ault; 
cognized environment in Laughlin et al. 1992; interpenetration see Jahn and Dunne in 
Explore: 301 and see Jahn and Dunne 2011; Laughlin was also a participant in the 1994 
PEAR Academy of Consciousness Studies 
6.) Jahn and Dunne 1987, 2011; Gleiser: xiii-xiv; Wu 1990: 108 original emphasis; 
Gleiser does a fine job showing there probably is not, and does not need to be, a single, 
final, all-compassingly monothe(isΨtic Theory of Everything. However, we’re meaning 
making and not just “meaning-seeking creatures” (21ιΨ, and the “Accidental” or “Absurd 
Universe” (21ι-18) some find this one to be is for me simultaneously, and paradoxically, 
contextualized by its own emergent, probably undesigned aptitudes for making effective 
meaning, and ententionality, of and for itself. There are, says Gleiser, the “Unifiers” 
(218), but there are also the not-twoers; and in neither case is it necessary to “believe in a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  400    
grand plan, a mathematical [or other] hyperstructure that underlies all there is” (21κΨ. 
(Compare Tegmark!). When Gleiser says that “Arguments shifting the ‘mind of God’ to 
the ‘mind of the cosmos’ perpetuate our obsession with the notion of Oneness. Our 
existence need not be planned to be meaningful” (22ίΨ, I  respond “OK, on both counts” 
while thinking his critique may be mis-aimed since  oneness ≠ plannedness; and as I’ve 
suggested, one ≠ not-two. In any case, he’d have been able to do more economically what 
he set out by using negative and apophatic types of argumentation, e. g. Guerry, or even 
Gödel, instead of a pejorative attribution of “monotheistic” to all integral cosmology. For 
that matter, How are we to divide person/cosmos/God or, more problematically, to say 
their differences when the meaning of each is a function of all – whether invoked or 
neglected as an ontological hypothesis. We are still in the role of Emerson’s “transparent 
eyeball” (in his 1κ36 essay “Nature”Ψ. We still face Zhuangzi’s not-yet-beginning-to-be-
a-not-yet-beginning when it comes to positivistically asserting “This is where person, 
cosmos, mind, God begins, ends or could have been but isn’t (yet?Ψ.” And cosmos in all 
its modes, material, noetic and otherwise, may yet be all-connected and latently self-
aware from the getgo (see Berry 1988 on differentiation, subjectivity and communion). 
It’s the story that counts, especially if the sustainability of our Earthlife is at stake. One 
version says “Heaven is my father and Earth is my Mother”; another, “I and the father are 
One”; still another, “I am a child of the universe.” We interpretively (coΨcreate a cosmos 
that is ontohermeneutic, not just mathematophysicalistic, even as it substantively and 
emergently expresses itself as us. And when Bachelard: ι named physics as perhaps “the 
only open-ended philosophy,” he was doing much the job Gleiser is doing today, only 
without the need to minimize the integrative tendency. Instead, Bachelard celebrates the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  401    
epistemic spectrum of ways-of-knowing in claiming “that the mind at work is a factor of 
evolution. To think reality properly is to profit by its ambiguities in such a way as to 
modify and arouse thought” (14Ψ. . . .”At this point the dialectical philosophy of ‘why 
not?’ makes its entry. . . characteristic of the new scientific mind” (29Ψ. And if so, then 
certainly S. Kauffman is justified in conjuring the reinvention of the sacred just as 
Teilhard is entitled to paean that research is a form of worship – especially if the theme, 
context or object of worship is no more certifiably not-self than self any more than we 
can find (much less measure) the world without touching it with hand or mind or LHC, 
nor fully see and know ourselves apart from the mirror of  cosmogenesis even as we help 
to fashion it. It’s not that the universe – or the imperative of some prior and external 
universe-maker (see Gleiser: 242, 232, 234) – engineered itself to have consciousness so 
much as that it is ongoingly discovering it and it/self hereby and hereas (see Jantsch: 307-
311). Universes find themselves on the way, always underway; and who knows what new  
constants – or, more Pyrrhonically asked of the professional cosmologists, inconstants 
and asymmetries – may be in the making?; see Primack and Abrams, S. Kauffman 2008; 
see Richard Chirgwin’s “Is Lightspeed really a Limit?: Solving Super-luminal Special 
relativity without Breaking Einstein” (posted in Science 10.2.12): 
www.theregister.co.uk/2012/10/ftl_special_relativity_mathematics/ (accessed 10.10.12); 
see again Unger and Smolin 
7.) ars contextualis in Hall and Ames 1987; on catastrophe theory see Thom, Jantsch; see 
also Deacon re: dynamic emergences as systemic and ontohermeneutic “quantum” jumps 
(though note he is uneven in his regard of the significance of quantum thinking to his 
project and Deacon: ι3 expressly demurs from ideas having “serendipitous compatibility 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  402    
with certain interpretations of quantum  physics”Ψ; probability as the whole in the part see 
von Franz 1980, 1992; also see Mandelbrot on fractals and consider dynamic 
emergences/jumps as fractals of the larger self-organizing wholings in and of which they 
occur/participate/contextualize; cf. Guenther 1989 on symmetry approximations; on 
holarchy and holons see Koestler 1979; in the context of nondual yet differentiated 
holarchy see Deacon: 295-3ί2 speaking of “containment” and “constraint” as ways 
bounded individuality (we may analogically think individuation) dynamically emerges 
while participating and enacting overall dynamic systems emergence; Tulku: 231; Zhang 
Zai also see de Bary and others:  469; Peat: 228, 237 and see also Jahn and Dunne 2011 
on “the source of reality”; the symmetry motifs celebrated in Guenther and critiqued in 
Gleiser may and may not be readily analogized with one another; the former are 
pronouncedly nondual, the latter are conventionally objectified—this uncertainty 
illustrates my theme and that of Jahn and Dunne; the works of Gleiser and those of 
Primack and Abrams together provide delightful contemporary cosmological bookends 
8.) Csikzentmihalyi 1975: 43, 49, 55 
9.) ecosocially and ecopolitically deracinating see Maslow 1971, Cobb 1977; meditative 
practice Csikzentmihalyi 44; kayaking and gardening see Sanford and 
http://www.trappist.net/commerce/bonsai.htm/ (accessed 8.5.12); see Burneko 2010 
10.) spontaneous communitas, Turner: 140, 196-99 and passim 
11.) non-inertial, Haisch 2006: 81-κκ, see also Paul Davies “On the Meaning of Mach’s 
Principle” http:ήήwww.padrak.comήinertia.htmlή (accessed 1ί.5.ίιΨ; dancing, Ehrenreich; 
see also Morin 1999: 116, 121 on deceleration; not-two see Adi Da; eco-self-re-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  403    
organizing nature see Morin 2008: 31; values that have no limit see Cohen in The 
Hedgehog  Review (2012): 49 
12.) Tucker in Tu and Tucker 2003: 1; Turner 1969: 138; spontaneities in Berry 1988: 
195; Great Work/Transformation in Berry 1999: 3-4, 55; unused [co]evolutionary 
potential in Turner 1969: 128; see Foltz 130-149 on the iconic and performative 
dimensions of nature and therewith our participation/instantiation of hypostatic divine 
and ecohuman union, cf. the triadic “persons” of Heaven, Earth and Humankind in 
NeoConfucian tradition 
13.) Turner 1969: 139; Berling in Munro: 106; know from experiment see Jahn and 
Dunne 2011 
14.) ecoeffectiveness in McDonough and Braungart: 173, 182-83; all people in Zhang 
Zai; calculate in Zhuangzi, Watson’s translation: 99; see also Hessel and Morin: 24; see 
Primack and Abrams on Double-Dark Theory 
15.) Wendell Berry: 68-69 in The Hedgehog Review (2012) explains there also that “we 
have a cultural tradition. . . .that you must restrain yourself” and says that this restraint 
(an evocative analogue with the constraint discussed in DeaconΨ “is generosity,” a way of 
“taking care and thought of all others” in not doing all of what you might do just because 
you can and want to – in the way of mountaintop removal mining say, or the making and 
marketing of unwholesome edibles; cf. Pope Francis’ Laudato Si'; openness, Berling in 
Munro: 116; respond with awareness, Graham in Berling: 117 
16.) without the mind, Bloom in Munro: 293; less a matter of choice in Munro: 300, n. b., 
see Jahn and Dunne above and 2ί11: 2ι9, 2κ3, i. e., “maintain a delicate balance between 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  404    
[e]ntention or desire for a particular experimental outcome, with a surrender of conscious 
control. . .for the achievement”; agency of communication in Munro: 3ί1 
17.) spontaneous accord see note 16; also see Bloom in Munro: 300-01; on nonassertive. . 
. engagement see Jahn and Dunne 2011: 189; Mengzi (Mencius) see Bloom in Munro: 
303-04; ecoeffective see McDonough and Braungart chap. 3; contemplative heart/mind in 
Munro: 304-05; practice the attitude, Wang Yangming: 254; see Jahn and Dunne 2011: 
299; see also Tucker and Berthrong, Confucianism and Ecology 
18.) see in Munro: 304-305, 307-309; endosymbiosis see Margulis, Margulis and Sagan, 
Deacon: 314 
19.Ψ being here now see Ram Dass, aka Richard Alpert; also see Watts’ This Is It and see 
Obeyesekere: 35, 43, 69; on placing cf. the etymology of contemplation – con-templum: 
to see (e. g., guan) all around in or from a holy or sacred place, a place of proportionate, 
harmonious, sustaining measure; see Partridge; see also Neville’s Recovery of the 
Measure: Interpretation and Nature; on ethics and ethnology see also Konner 
2ί.Ψ “We Are the World” by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie from the album We Are 
the World. Los Angeles: A&M Recording Studios, 1985; Zhu Xi see Bloom in Munro: 
311  
21.) dwelling in the wide house of the world, Zhu Xi in Munro: 314; profound human 
impulses, Nadeau: 210; Great Work, Berry 1999; see also Great Transformation, Tucker 
and Berthrong: 108, 110; Dalai Lama 
http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Tenzin_Gyatso,_14th_Dalai_Lama/ (accessed 7.17.14); 
ahimsa paramo dharma http://www.hindupedia.com/en/Ahimsa_Paramo_Dharma/ 
(accessed 7.17.14) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  405    
22.) see note 19; see also Partridge; the Orthodox tradition invites  us to become priests 
and communicants in celebrating and sustaining creatio continua, e.g. Chryssavgis and 
Foltz, 147-149 
23.) Berman 2000: 238-39; see also Hessel and Morin 15, 24,  and particularly 32; 
Primack and  Abrams: 293, and see Polanyi; it’s worth also repeating Primack and 
Abrams: idem; on humanocosmological understanding emphasizing it’s not the numbers 
that are important but the imagery: “not to manipulate but to inspire,” see in this regard 
also Edith Cobb’s The Ecology of Imagination in Childhood; and see the pertinent 
research showing that the stories children are now reading are “set in built environments” 
“where the wild things are not” described in The Hedgehog Review (2012): 76 – the 
original source is: J. Allen Williams, Jr., et al. “The Human-Environment Dialogue in 
Award-Winning Children’s Picture Books” in Sociological Inquiry 82.1 (February 2012): 
145-59 
24.) Zhu Xi in Munro: 316; de Bary in Munro: 332; Berry 1999: 3, 1988: passim 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  406    
 
12.0 The Narrative of Contemplative Conduct as Self-
Organizing Resonance: 
Notes for a Future Beyond Sustainability 
 
“The prose of everyday life is necessary to our survival. But poetry is necessary for us 
truly to live.” 
The Path to Hope, Stéphane Hessel and Edgar Morin 
 
 
The bearings for this chapter are again set by Thomas Berry who, as an interpreter 
of world religion, is also often known as a “geologian” for his attempt to unite in an  
ecosocially sustaining and comprehensively creative vision (guan) the narrative, the auto-
narration of the universe, the universe story as told by science, with the teachings of 
indigenous and other religious traditions. His intercultural and transdisciplinary interest 
in doing so demonstrates the mutual relevance of ancient and contemporary 
understandings for a sustaining environmental orientation into the future as well as for 
the self-expression, self-understanding and concelebration of the (evolving consciousness 
of the) universe in our arts, science and other forms of storying. In his view, the narrative 
of cosmogenesis we tell is also the ontohermeneutic self-relating of its story by the 
universe as embodied in ourselves. An indefinitely sustainable future is the story and 
song of the autohermeneutic universe related in terms of mutually beneficial Earth-
human relations. 
Following Berry, I suggested in an earlier version of this theme1 that our evolving 
consciousness is the universe coming-to-consciousness in us and in our relations with our 
greater Self, in the first-person, so to speak.  I continue the contemplation here to propose 
that since we are a conscious dimension of an all-connected universe process of ever-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  407    
present and everywhere ongoing-wholing or cosmogenesis, our emergent aptitude for 
resonance with this, and for performance of this in the events of everyday life is a 
question not just of systems of ideas and policies but of authentic and spontaneous 
existential engagement with and as Earth and cosmic event(s) – many of which are 
mundane as well as celestial, like gravity and the speed of light or, as we shall see, like 
communion, and any of which may be taken as sacred or secular, terrestrial or cosmic, 
depending on this or that ego-perspective. 
Such authentic engagement/embodiment is most clearly evidenced where we least 
impose on and into the world our partial and privative expectations of gain from outside 
or beyond the engagement itself. In other words, in contemplative attentiveness with the 
events of life, being compresent with them rather than calculating or manipulative with 
respect to them – compresent to such a degree we and they are no longer completely 
twoed into self/other, person/planet, etc. – when we are not seeking from them, nor again 
avoiding, particular ego-specified outcomes, we most resonantly accord with the life of 
natural systems in a way that both sustains and optimizes their interactions among 
themselves and our intercourse with and as analogues, embodiments, extensions and 
contextualizations of them. As a version of the idea of sustainability, this allows us to 
think that sustainability is the intrinsically self-rewarding attentiveness or co-tentiveness 
of the universe nondualizedly embodied in the events of daily life. Contemplatively 
attentive daily conduct can be understood as dynamically emergent self-organizing, self-
sustaining, humano-cosmic resonance. Each event of worlding is a co-constitutive fractal 
microcosming of resonant ongoing-wholing. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  408    
A corollary and incentive to this is that the self-rewardingly ententional 
experience of contemplatively evoked anthropocosmic participation far supersedes the 
external rewards of praise, gain, power, status and wealth contrivedly sought by taking 
and making things from Earth or other living systems. Allaying, though not necessarily 
eliminating our need for these things, even a modest contemplativity thus diminishes our 
abuse of Earth and of one another in their pursuit and, therefore, enriches and indefinitely 
extends the sustainability of the Earth-human intersystem while at the same time 
manifesting as self-rewarding delight, joy, ataraxia, bliss, flow or whatever term we 
prefer for ((our) modes of experiencing the play, dance, lila of) disegoed 
anthropocosmogenesis. Or to put this still another way, pursuits of fame and fortune have 
their place as (f)acts of life but not necessarily as defaults front-loaded by our ego-
conventions and ego-instrumentalizing habituations into all situations as inescapable 
conditions of life and behavior. The question, as Gebser reminds us, is not ego-cide but of 
at least occasional ego-freedom; for that matter, ego is not the necessary and sufficient 
condition of ecohumane wellbeing.2  
I don’t think that what I propose might, especially by itself, overnight, serve as a 
total panacea to the problems of the world. And I’ll enjoy in any event the prospect of 
integrating multiple narratives of open-systems ecology of mind and nature, of 
teleodynamic ententionality, of the ravens of the air, the lilies of the field, the Diamond 
Sutra, the Zhuangzi, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, Vedanta, and, for instance, Edgar 
Morin, who avers in tones of  mixed Eros and Irony: “There are black holes in every 
totality. . . .The true conception of totality recognizes the insufficiency of the totality. 
This is the great advance of Adorno over Hegel: ‘The totality is the non-truth.’”3 Again, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  409    
the issue is not a total, complete metaphysic, religion or science but a sustainable open 
narrative meaningfulness that spontaneously bespeaks, that also comprehensively and 
resonantly enacts and accords with, the sustaining systems-semiosis of life on Earth and 
in the universe. If this works through synchronic narrative iterations, incantatory or 
recreational iterations of mutual thematic connectivity or through occasions of 
synchronicity as well as syllogistic logics of consecutive reasoning, so much the better 
for all of us, since we need all the intercultural resources we can muster in the ecology of 
mind as both a sustainably resonant emergent and a sustaining contextualization of 
nature. 
One feature of this ongoing anthropocosmic ars contextualis is that, as Berry has 
pointed out, the universe has a subjective and not solely an objective or objectifying 
dimension. In the name of the resonance/sustainability of nondualized Earth-human 
liveliness, we are now learning (in physics as well as humanities) non-self-other-
objectifyingly, and thus not entirely self-localizingly, to (be)speak a universe event/story 
or present-tense first-person-cosmic autobiography, while at the same time maintaining 
our familiar dialects for dualizing, objectifying and local-izing experience. This seems as 
much implied by a multiverse theory of physics proposing that parallel universes or 
multiverse eventuate as we make observations, measurements and choices as by Berry 
speaking of differentiation, subjectivity and communion as inescapable and irreducible 
"principles on which the universe functions." Since we have never shown life/cosmos 
experience is single-ordered, amenable to a monothetic form or formula, the many-voiced 
(self)narration of a many-ordered event, or process (or an infinite number of events) 
invokes, evokes and convocationally hybridizes/analogizes for commonweal a wealth of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  410    
orders4: ones that are chaosmic, processual, poetic, symbolic, aesthetic, ethical, 
hypothetico-deductive, intuitive, mathematico-physical, positivistic, empirical, 
ontohermeneutic, deontologizable, subitist, revelatory, (a)conceptual(izable), playful and 
indefinitely many. The center of sustaining attention is less a final, ready-made idea of 
things than an ongoing growth of meaningfulness that is irreducible to (just) the Earth or 
the human, to an idea or an event. Stated another way, “I” (the first person 
micro/macrocosmic) choose who and how I am; there is not (only) a single fixed, 
exclusive order or referent. This is also the real-ization that neither in physics nor in 
philosophical hermeneutics do we with certainty know we are not participating members 
in and as the life of things. Order and reference are matters of meaning before they are 
meaningfully made matters of formalized quantitative or objective apodicity. And 
meaning reduces to no one form or venue;  the understanding and self-understanding of 
cosmogenesis is inescapably imaginal, axiological and aesthetic as well as conceptual or 
thetic. Cosmopoiesis, autopoiesis and poetics sing together the coworlding of interbeing. 
To recontextualize the words of  Mengzi, “we should anticipate the will of the poets in 
our thought.”5 
Endnotes: The Narrative of Contemplative Conduct as Self-Organizing Resonance: 
Notes for a Future Beyond Sustainability 
1.Ψ earlier version titled “Contemplative Ecology: Guan for a More-than-Sustainable 
Future” in the Journal of Chinese Philosophy 37.1 (March 2010): 116-130 
2.) Gebser 1985: 532 
3.) Morin 2008: 103; eros and irony see Hall 
4.) on principles of the universe, Berry 1988: 45-46; multiverse see Tegmark; a wealth of 
orders see Gleiser; cf. Unger and Smolin 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  411    
5.) see Primack and Abrams: 298 and note their imaginal contemplative exercises 
throughout, e. g. 42-43 and 84-85; Mengzi in Zhu Xi: 120-21 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  412    
 
12.1 Reprise 
In the perspective of an ever-evolving and interconnected cosmos, the creatio 
continua of an ongoing cosmogenesis, we are embodiments of the all-connected process 
of a continuing creation or, as the interpreter of Neo-Confucianism Tu Weiming has put 
it, a continuum of being. Thus is the human, as Berry once again says,  “less a being on 
the Earth or in the universe than a dimension of the Earth and indeed of the universe 
itself”1  
Saying that human life is a dimension of the universe, Berry is making a large and 
a deep claim. It suggests to me that human life and consciousness participate in the life of 
the Earth, and thus the universe, and do not only respond to or represent it; we may 
choose to experience cosmogenesis and/as ourselves in the onto-cosmo-grammatical first 
person. This implies that consciousness is a constituent feature of the creative continuum. 
This is not to say the universe is or is not digitized or hierarchized as do various 
traditional and some recent systems. It is to say that humanity and cosmogenesis appear 
as analogous and covariant forms of one another or/in some nondualizing, “process” or 
Dao. What we can unambiguously say about this process in conventionally rational terms 
is undone by Gödel’s incompleteness theorems if not stilled to apophasis by what this 
taiji (supreme ultimate) says of and for itself in the paradoxes of mind and nature. Yet 
again, we are not obliged to assert there is but one single-ordered metaphysical form of 
such process(es) nor that it or they necessarily reduce to the familiarly dualized 
categories of person and cosmos, mind and matter, etc. Nor once more, is there any 
obligation to think such process, (perhaps it is better to say event or presence), has a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  413    
totalized, conclusive, terminal expression. Ancient China at this ontoepistemological 
point helpfully speaks not just of supreme ultimate taiji but of wuji, or supreme 
ultimatelessness.2  
We also know from scientific cosmological and philosophical hermeneutic 
perspectives that (our) consciousness is an emergent of a cosmic process of physical and 
organic development, and that cosmic process is coming to know, know about, or fully 
realize itself through (our) conscious presence; nor do we discover ourselves separated 
from cosmogenesis. And in an era of environmental concern, our modes of conduct and 
presencing will figure significantly in the way the universe unfolds in its Earthly forms, 
and in whether these forms continue creatively to develop and thrive – including the 
human mode of being. Berry also sees, again, that there are tendencies and characteristics 
of the unfolding of life and universe that are the same in the inorganic and organic as well 
as the noetic realms. 
 
To recapitulate, from Berry’s point of view, humans, other living beings and the 
panoply of existing things to varying degrees embody cosmogenesis in its evolving 
potentials for differentiation, subjectivity and communion. The universal aspect of 
differentiation is evidenced in the evolutionary variety of forms and qualities, ranging 
from the multiplicity of elements and their resulting combinations to the complex 
ecological, cultural and spiritual forms of life. Subjectivity, Berry explains, refers to an 
increase in the psychic unity that comes with the complexification of structures; it is a 
capacity for interiority. And communion, he elaborates, is the connection of each reality 
in the universe with every other reality.3  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  414    
Communion thus has as much in analogy with the traditional teachings of the 
Purusha, the Christian mystical body, Qi, Gaia, unus mundus or with the anima mundi as 
it does with, say, the all-generating Big Bang, the collective wavefunction of particle 
physics and nonlocal connectivity, the quantum zero-point field, or the unitas multiplex 
of self organizing complexity. This commonality of holistic insight, argued Jung -- and 
notably its recurring numen of holism -- is attributable to transcultural archetypes of the 
collective unconscious which he and subsequent interpreters like Charles Laughlin 
believe are ultimately indistinguishable from cosmic nature itself.4 In this case, attuning 
ourselves with archetypal tendencies and contributing over evolutionary time to their 
transformations is also participating in cosmic nature, in cosmogenesis. 
Much of Berry’s thinking, of course, has been influenced by the paleontologist 
Jesuit Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’s vision of a universe evolving to a culmination of 
conscious self-awareness. But where Teilhard’s focus was on an eventual abandonment 
by consciousness of its organic foothold in a shift to a transcendent plane or convergence 
of awareness, Berry wants to develop the idea that human life is a living performance of 
the multiplex unity of the universe in its diverse physical and organic as well as noetic 
forms. In fact, Berry asks us to understand that the life of the universe in its 
spontaneously self-organizing variety and complexity is compresent with and interfuses 
all that we are all the time. The life of the universe is right here and now – in its recursive 
autopoietics, in the lepton/baryon ratio, in assorted cosmogonic constants, in tendencies 
to subjectivity, communion, complexity, etc. -- it is not only a matter of remote eons and 
light-years. Berry again reminds us in this regard, acknowledging this is not (yet) an 
everyday sensibility for most of us, that:  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  415    
The universe is so immediate to us, is such an immediate presence, that it 
escapes our notice, yet whatever authenticity exists in our cultural 
creations is derived from these spontaneities within us.5  
 
The question of the spontaneities of Earth, and by extension of the processes we 
find throughout the universe, recurs in Berry’s vision – one which is not incidentally 
indebted to his work as an accomplished interpreter of Hindu, Indigenous, Neo-
Confucian and other traditions as well as to his calling as a Christian contemplative. For 
Berry wants to underscore that in individual humans, and in cultural as well as physical 
and organic systems, “the evolutionary process is neither random or determined but 
creative.” And from this he infers that the evolutionary process everywhere “follows 
general patterns of creativity . . . . toward differentiation, inner spontaneity, and 
comprehensive bonding.” Given his view of an everywhere connected universe 
experienced as an overall dynamic or pattern of ongoing creativity (ongoing, interminate, 
irreducible and nondualized), Berry holds that coevolution (as a symbol and as an 
embodied and enacted reality of human and cosmic life) is our main source of psychic 
energy in that:  
The universe must be experienced as the Great Self. Each is fulfilled in the 
other; the Great Self is fulfilled in the individual self, the individual self is 
fulfilled in the Great Self. . . .For in the end the universe can only be 
explained in terms of celebration.6  
 
We may infer from Berry’s words that a self-rewardingly celebratory ecosocial 
ontohermeneutic, not an imperative to a final apodictic theory, control program, 
production scheme or compendium, will sustain an open and nourishing symphony of life 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  416    
and  “consciousness structures,” as Jean Gebser and Gaston Bachelard have proposed. 
This is a concelebratory “ecology of mind,” in Gregory Bateson’s memorable phrasing.7 
This, rather than a monothetic outlook limiting our participatory understanding to the sole 
octave of instrumentalist or zweckrational ego-benefit and profit, is the calling of our 
time.  
We are invited by Berry to reconceive the respective microcosms of our 
individual, corporate and national affiliations, of our private and cultural 
fundamentalisms, and to reinvent each, to reinvent humanity itself, as a mode, fractal or 
holon of the macrocosmic whole, the interminate ongoing wholing of (and as) which each 
event and lifeform is an indexical expression, state or phase. Though we don’t think of 
them so, the dutifully legalistic multiculturalism that outgrows itself to become a 
genuinely intercultural awareness – the nonselfconsciously lived practice of plural 
cultural outlooks and insights – together with the environmentalism that begins to offer 
trees standing in a Council of all Beings are, somewhat like other kinds of marriages, 
hybridizations, and cocultivations, already harbingers and enactments of Berry’s 
functional cosmology.8  
 
Experiencing our local, microcosmic ego-cultural and civic life as a dimension of  
a meaningful and interminately ongoing-wholing with ontohermeneutic and 
ecosemiogenic aptitudes -- rather than as ecosocially exploitive privative and parochially 
instrumental colonization -- is illustratively aided in diverse other contemporary ways. 
One analogue is found in the intercultural hypothesis of a vibrational metaverse whose 
differentiated levels and orders communicate in a matrix field whose ontosemiotic 
correspondences are as much expressive of Saivite spanda or pulses as of the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  417    
mathematics of the nonlocal quantum vacuum. In addition to the corresponding digital 
metaphysic of this constructed by Abraham and Roy is Corrington’s argument of 
“ecstatic naturalism” that emerging from the originary chora, amid the folds and events 
of cosmogenesis, “the entire world is composed of semiotic interaction even if the 
rudimentary forms of semiosis are alien to the conscious structures that pertain to the 
human process”: he adds, “The human process is not so much a level within nature as a 
dimension of nature”; and in his narrative, the quotient of universe-meaning is ever-
growing. Nor does the systems ecohumanism of Edgar Morin refrain from affirming that 
we must outgrow without excluding our local cultural identity in awakening “to our being 
as citizens of the Earth” who form “a partnership of humanity and nature.”9  
It is in the numen of the dynamic interconnections of cosmogenesis that we may 
find the wholing of life beyond merely survivalist sustainability. Attentively and 
cotentively living in this way is functionally living the whole resonant in each of its 
holons in mutually beneficial ways. We experience this resonance when we 
contemplatively or otherwise abate our self-separateness from the ongoing-wholing in an 
attention to circumstances unfreighted by exaggerated ego and manipulative, calculative, 
and privative machinations. From the perspective of this way of living, the accumulation 
of only individual gains through a primarily or solely instrumentalist focus of ego-
consciousness is an existential inauthenticity, an ontohermeneutic eclipse and an onto-
ecological deracination of the wholing, holy and healing potentials always-already 
implicit in (our) ecocosmic co-constitution. 10  
 
We may also understand Berry to suggest that our full embodied and meaningful 
experience of cosmogenesis is one that is concelebratory and affective, immediate and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  418    
spontaneous among life forms, rather than one that can only objectivize, formalize and 
conceptually cerebralize and manipulate them and, in the process, ourselves. This is also 
to propose a hermeneutic rather than a substantialized ontology, one that is interpretive, 
communicative, interpenetrative, dialogical and ongoing or processual among all forms 
of being and meaning. For Berry, we are now ready after an era of industrial assault to 
“renew our human participation in the grand liturgy of the Universe.” The way to this 
renewal, he indicates, (not entirely unlike Berman or Primack and Abrams) is not 
transcendence but “inscendence,” a way of cosmological reverie or creative and 
comprehensive contemplation, ontohermeneutic guan, that inaugurates and restores our 
anthropocosmogonic aptitudes for attentively and cocreatively manifesting the sustaining 
spontaneities of the universe in our daily lives.11  
In the sense that we are completely interwoven with/as an evolving all-connected 
universe expressing emergent ententional (self)consciousness in ourselves and in our 
contemplative aptitudes, this cosmogenesis is a contemplative event. Stated another way, 
cosmogenesis is most sustaining of the diversity of life and systems to the extent it is, to 
use a human-referent neologism, disegoed, or is contemplation-like in its activity and 
choices. NeoConfucians captured something of this notion in identifying cosmogenic 
cocreativity with authenticity (cheng) as a composite feature of, and sustainingly 
interrelating, Humankind, Earth and Heaven, the anthropocosmic. Berry himself has 
pointed out in connection with this insight that everything else we know is universe-
referent; only cosmogenesis, the universe itself, is self-referent -- i. e. adequately 
evocative, capaciously inclusive and all-pervadingly relevant enough to serve as a model 
of interminate sustainability, reciprocity and functional cosmology in our lived 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  419    
experience. Blake says more piquantly, less than all cannot satisfy humankind. These 
ideas are a remediation and compensation of the unbalanced instrumental, or the 
unrelievedly objectivistic treatment of ourselves and the other living persons of Earth 
who are all our relations. 12  
 
Again, in Berry’s understanding, our ontohermeneutic status with the living 
cosmos does not neatly fit the dualistic model of a subject perceiving an object – as Blake 
spoke of “single vision and Newton’s sleep.” We are more like what recent physics and 
systems theory will call holons or fractals embodying/participating the ever greater 
wholes of which we are not so much just parts as resonantly interactive instantiations. In 
an interreligious dialogue with the natural sciences, this idea might also be put as that of 
Nicholas of Cusa who in the 1400s offered a similarly fractal way of thinking in 
discussing the universe as being only a restricted form of the maximum, the 
“interminate.” “In fact,” Cusa repeats (with mystical relevance for ecohumane and 
ecospiritual understanding todayΨ, “in every creature the universe is the creature . . . .all 
things are contracted in order to form each creature.”13 
 
Analogously, and with greater methodological reach, the quantum theorist David 
Bohm -- in developing his ideas of the implicate and the explicate orders of phenomena 
in the cosmic “holomovement” wherein ”everything is enfolded into everything” – 
proposes, we recall, that henceforth scientific research should be complemented by a 
practice relevant to the “undivided wholeness” disclosed by contemporary as well as 
ancient research. The practice Bohm expressly proposes is meditative; it is the practice of 
what the biocultural anthropologist Laughlin and others have called a “mature 
contemplative” orientation in the participation-observation of nature.14 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  420    
 
By the quantum premise that everything is everywhere interconnected in the so-
called vacuum field, all resonates with and in each, and each in each. This field is 
presumably the not-only-local context for all the natural systems, including ecosemiotic 
and human noetic ones, that self-organize to greater degrees of interactive complexity 
and self-awareness. By broad intercultural analogy, the “mature contemplative” 
Confucian and Daoist sage, according to Zhu Xi in the 1100s on the practice of Yijing, 
responds spontaneously and accords with the incipiencies of humanocosmic unfolding. 
And in hir im-mediate presencing of the reciprocity (shu) among things and affairs -- the 
endlessly mutually coconstitutive yinyang of  psychocosmic qi -- hir conduct performs 
the Dao conducive to mutual co-growthing among humanity and Earth and the sustaining 
seasonal or sidereal rhythms. Human mind and culture thuswise become like, and 
spontaneously comport with, the cosmic event – we become considerate of all forms of 
being, etymologically, con-sidera, thinking with, thinking like, Heaven, Earth and all 
living Beings as and in cosmopoiesis.15  
 
In another intercultural analogy and plurespistemic amplification of insights (ge 
yi, ge wu), we can turn here briefly to where Hershock usefully emphasizes –by drawing 
on traditions with which Berry was familiar in theory and contemplative practice (and 
lest anyone seek to make an industry of eco-awakening)  – that the practice of a 
contemplative “is not a way of becoming a ‘buddha’. . .but. . .the virtuosic expression of 
our true and original nature. . . as unhesitatingly conducting ourselves as buddhas.” We 
find, making transdisciplinary use of an analogous construction of ecosocial virtuosity in 
the process, that the field of qi, (of the analogous quantum vacuum, of superpositioned 
humanocosmic quantum possibilities, Ȍ etc. with and in which contemplative resonance 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  421    
may occur) is not necessarily or only “a kind of primordial matter or pure force” but “an 
essentially qualitative expressiveness” that for the ancient Chinese anthropocosmically 
performed itself as a “complex and open-ended system of irreducibly relative or 
contrapuntal values. . . .an unbroken continuum onto which we project divisions for 
purely conventional purposes.” Rapidly translated once more, this is to suggest that the 
meditative physics approved by the quantum theorist Bohm + the mindful universe 
characterized by the quantum theorist Stapp ≈ “bring[ing] our human minds squarely into 
the dynamical workings of nature. . . .now integrated into the unfolding of uncharted and 
yet-to-be-plumbed potentialities of an intricately interconnected whole. . . .”16  
The contemplatively ecosocial mindbody performs what it beholds, and what it 
beholds is the ever-present (anthropo)cosmic origin(al) of itself – which also 
narratistically contextualizes itself, like this. The stories or theories we tell profoundly 
influence the ways we live and, thus, influence the likelihood of sustainability which is 
something that is both central and commonplace (zhongyong) in flourishingly mature 
development.  
We are so committed to tightly holding onto our private and conventional mind 
with both hands that we disable ourselves from functionally opening it, and them, and 
from releasing and imparting, receiving and accepting and resonantly participating the 
endless creation and recreation, sheng-sheng, of humanocosmogenesis, authentic 
cocreativity, cheng, in the translucent indistinction of with/in and with/out. The point of 
having an economy, to put it more directly, is the generation and sustenance of 
ecohumane wellbeing. A foremost contraceptive against such common weal, observe 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  422    
Hessel and Morin, is the mentality of maximal private profit instrumentalism;  unchecked 
finance capitalism is but one of its practices.  
Endnotes: Reprise 
1.) Tu 1985: 35; Berry 1988: 195 
2.) traditional and some recent systems see Coomaraswamy, Abraham and Roy; Gödel 
see Hofstadter; apophasis see Sells; paradox see Wilden; single ordered metaphysical 
form, Hall and Ames 1995: 3-4, 11, 116-17; taiji/wuji in Cheng 1991: 546, it's a 
temptation to theorize  wuji as the non-collapse of the wavefunction as discussed by 
Hugh Everett and developed in Tegmark's chapter "The Level III Multiverse" and 
elsewhere 
3.) Berry 1988: 45; see Primack and Abrams 270-72, 280-83 
4.) nonlocal connectivity see Laszlo 2003; zero-point field see Haisch 2006; unitas 
multiplex of self-organizing complexity n. b., Morin 2008 and see Jantsch, S. Kauffman 
1995; Jung 1959/1969, see also von Franz 1992; see Laughlin 1996 on neurognostic 
archetypal mediation 
5.) Teilhard 1959: 287; see also Aurobindo; see Morin; Berry 1988: 195 and passim 
6.) the evolutionary process. . .general patterns of creativity, Berry 1999: 169; the 
universe must be experienced as the Great Self in Berry 1999: 170; see also Berry in Tu 
and Tucker, Eds., 2003: 39-55, 96-112. It bears repeating, should this be an issue, that a 
trope that seems to hint here at an anthropomorphic cosmos is not anthropocentric; it’s 
the symmetric complement of cosmomorphic. Nondual anthropocosmomorphogenesis, a 
term to be retired immediately, can be considered humanocentric only in the relative 
senses that we (still) see the universe as humans – that’s the way the universe made us – 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  423    
and, cosmologically speaking, we are each a center of an expanding universe but not the 
only such centers, all things are; for clarifications see Primack and Abrams and see also 
Swimme 1996. The larger point is that whatever “the universe made us,” we now find 
ourselves to be emergent co-discoverers and co-makers in and as the anthropo-cosmic 
process; the real center of attraction here, if  we need one, is the self-celebratory nondual 
poiesis/ziran  that is not exclusively cosmic or human 
7.) consciousness structures, Gebser, Bachelard see Burneko 1988, 2003; G. Bateson 
1972 and see also Bateson 1979 
8.) functional cosmology, Berry 1988: 66, 87-88, 90-91, 121 
9.) Saivite spanda see Abraham and Roy,178, and passim; Corrington 1994: 33, 31, 175; 
Morin 1999: 145-46 
10.) beyond merely survivalist sustainability in Mare 1998; the whole resonant in each of 
its holons see Koestler 1978; Berry 1988; see Tegmark for an extensive exploration of 
self-aware structures in cosmogenesis 
11.) Berry 1988: 215, 208; guan in Cheng 1995, see also Burneko 2010; interpenetrative 
ontocosmology is the theme of Huayan, and cf. guan in Cheng 1995, 2003 and Burneko 
2010, 2011 
12.) cosmogenesis is a contemplative event see Kafatos and Nadeau, see also Primack 
and Abrams; self-referent see Berry 1988 
13.) Blake in Erdman 1970: 693; holons see Koestler 1979,  fractals see Mandelbrot; 
Cusa see Cusanus: 83 and recollect Haisch 
14.) holomovement, Bohm 1981: 177-78; undivided wholeness, ibid.: 145; meditative, 
Bohm 1976: 18, 23; mature contemplative,  Laughlin et al., 1990;  again, see the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  424    
contemplative exercises and their significance for “sustainable prosperity. . . .founded on 
harmony with the universe” in Primack and Abrams: 294 who also remind us (124Ψ that 
“The center of our visible universe is not a place but a cosmic collaboration of space, 
time, light and consciousness.” 
15.) self-organize to greater degrees see Jantsch 1980; practice of Yijing see Adler in 
Smith, et al., 1990: 189, 194; mutual co-growthing in Wu 1990 and see Burneko 2004; 
con-sidera see Partridge; the theme of the  mature contemplative is central also in 
Laughlin, et al. 1990  
16.) virtuosic expression, Hershock: 145 original emphasis; field of qi, ibid.: 151; Bohm 
1976: 18, 23 and see Bohm in Weber: 34-35, 41, 43-44, 152-53; bringing our human 
minds, Stapp: 117 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  425    
 
13.0 MetaMethod 
 
 
Moving freely amid cultures, time periods and disciplines, my approach continues 
by way of intellectual analogy among tropes of intercultural and inter- or 
transdisciplinary provenance with an eye as well to embodied analogy in existential 
resonance with and sustaining enactment of the field of interbeing in its complexity and 
simple authenticity. It takes its cue, though I am hardly a mature contemplative, from the 
phenomenological premise that through a contemplative orientation -- a semi-meditative 
alternation or exchange between themes and topics of inquiry and the manners of inquiry 
or engagement itself -- these “meet each other” in the “flow of experience” and 
understanding. Associative and appositional more than just linearly propositional 
analogy, like the rhizomatic polysemeity of narrative, myth, dream or reverie, convokes 
and evokes meaning. And at the same time, analogy is itself a trope and an analogue or 
fractal performance of the sustaining organophysical reciprocity and compenetration of 
self-organizing systems in the universe. And Harding, for instance, tells how his method 
is to convert what would otherwise be sterile cybernetic feedback diagrams “into stories. 
. . into an intuitive experience of the embedded relationships amongst the animate 
subjects that the story speaks of. . . .This practice opens up the senses and intuition, 
allowing one to move through the storied feedbacks in a kind of awakened dream state 
that yields a rich harvest of meaning, significance and belonging.” Here again we find a 
sustaining ecosemeic variant of the ontohermeneutic Dream of the Earth caroled by 
Berry.1 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  426    
 
In the ecology of mind, as in the ecology of other living systems, sustainability is 
evident in diversity and diversity is evident in hybridization or, to  put it another way, 
differential coevolutionary coproduction.2 It takes a universe/story. And a well-told 
(ontohermeneutically cross-pollinating) universe/story, a contemplative self-telling of its 
story by the universe as embodied in poetic consciousness, may serve as a type of 
cybernetic self-regulation or feedback in an otherwise runaway global culture of 
overpopulation, overconsumption and underresponsiveness to the natural universe around 
and within.  
Nor must a sustaining story be made only in the terms of objective, quantitative 
research. Gleiser makes clear, if Kuhn had not before him, there is no end to the making 
of paradigms. Nor must we all agree. The facts and figures are themselves narratives or 
are born in founding dialogues (of verification, falsification, choices of metrics, etc.) 
before they become confirmed data, by which time, new, more encompassing stories 
emerge. “And so it goes.” The proof of well-sustaining life on and with Earth is in doing 
it, storied, quantified or not; for the pragmatic Confucians, “to know [zhi, to real-ize] is to 
authenticate in action.” A contemporary analogue to this worth repeating is that our 
contemplative interpretation of things is a participation in the natural world as connatural 
beings; sustaining truth value is discovered in performance of our anthropocosmic 
resonance.  Correspondingly, the motivating story need be foremost evocative of 
anthropocosmic resonance; the rest may be knowledge enjoyed for its own sake, or as the 
contention (over decimal points?) that comes with augmenting knowledge and sometimes 
the careers based thereon. As Kongzi has it, “Scholars of old would study for their own 
sake, while those of today do so to impress others.” In the name of multiple 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  427    
ontohermeneutics of sustainability, we’re again reminded by the senior tradition that an 
authentically authoritative and sagely person in ecosocial and any matters is one who 
looks after the Earth-human community through effective communication – in all its 
sustaining forms and genres. The sage is a “virtuoso of communication, ‘listening. . .and 
presenting ideas’ that not only come to define the human experience, but which further 
have cosmic implications. . . . a worthy partner with the heavens and the Earth.”3  
Along with hybridizing analogies and metaphors and related kinds of ecosocial 
attentiveness having educational value, the communication, or communion, of a 
contemplative turn in consciousness itself and in conduct may also serve as a corrective, 
complementary or compensatory feedback response to the excessive, one-sided economic 
and cultural reinforcements of a grasping, manipulative and extractive manner of life. In 
more pragmatic terms, a contemplative planetary econoetic may be a more genuinely apt 
Plan B for sustaining ecocivilization than any number of wind farms or ecoeffective 
cradle-to-cradle tactics by themselves. In this case, the contemplative feedback so 
amplifies the deleterious significance of the prominent business deal mentality by simple 
contrast as to render it nonsensical, literally idiotic (i. e., single-, privatively- or fixed-
minded) both in its own ego-instrumental business terms and as a dysfunctional and 
autistic way of coworlding. 4 As such a contemplative way of coworlding gradually 
becomes widespread it gives way to or enacts itself as noninstrumental, i. e., sustainable 
and spontaneously self-rewarding ecosocial behavior not premised on external gain. 
Of course, ecostrategies never come “by themselves”; there are always cohorts of 
activism as well as crosscurrents as Morin has noted; nor, on close analysis, are we drawn 
to an ecopoliticized contemplative agenda of trance-planet totalization; it brings too much 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  428    
to mind the images of zombis verts.  And Totalism, as we have learned from Morin and 
Adorno, is the untruth and the source of many of our present concerns. But the problems 
of today will not be resolved with the thoughts that produced them – and a judicious 
contemplative pedagogy of intuitive and empathetic aptitudes, attentiveness, and of 
unthinking and nonthinking as we have been thinking coupled with more ecocritically 
astute co-thinking, engagingly relevant narratives and substantial childhood hands-on 
gardening, arboriculture and prolonged animal care and contact, etc., may help us more 
sustainably to cultivate any coming era of ecohumane coexistence.5  
There is a deep and flourishing ecology of contemplative and variously green 
alternatives to the unsustainable and unsustaining consumer culture. Amid this diversity 
of eco-contemplative and eco-cultural resources are the sprouts of a fruitful future.6 Each 
of these econoetic mutations, with many others, expresses the sustainingly self-regulating 
feedback emergent in complex (chaordic) coevolutionary humanocosmogenesis on Earth 
to the cumulative degree that, our intelligent and contemplative life being both an 
emergent dimension of and an increasingly significant participant in the lifesystem of 
Earth, such conscious self-regulation may now be understood as a phase of planetary self-
cultivation. Our universe-storying and our mindful moves toward contemplative and 
ecoethical conduct are Earthly performances of the attentive self-awareness, self-
organization, self-regulation, self-celebration and dynamically emergent ententional self-
cultivation of the universe in the form of the human. We are already and for some time 
have been in some places Planet Ashram – the educational base-camp of resonant Gaian 
Earth-human communication with/in and as attentive embodiments of a contemplative 
cosmic yoga of continuously emergent life, intelligence poetry and celebratory kirtan.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  429    
Education in attentiveness, claimed William James someplace in The Principles 
of Psychology, “would be the education par excellence.” And too, we lose nothing if 
some few, or many, or many of us indeed, learn to experience in the rapt attentiveness of 
mindfulness – both sitting and in daily activities – “the innate sense of well-being that 
emerges spontaneously from a balanced mind. . . . primordial consciousness. . .[and] 
freedom from suffering and its source.” Finally, there is yet no universal consensus as to 
what sustainability means; it has fallen into the hands of the attorneys. We are making 
this up as we go along, and have done since there was not-yet-a-beginning-to-be-a-
beginning. 7 How we do this is a function of the ongoing-wholing expressed in the 
choices we make as itsήour coconscious dimension. Not injuring life, your own, others’, 
or the environment’s seems a self-evident ethos. And for many, an ecohumane sensibility 
may develop in some combination of simplicity, città lenta, ecovillage design, 
permaculture design and entheogenic, neoshamanic or contemporary silicon-electricity-
and-brainwave-synchrony-inaugurated avenues to the spontaneities by which we realize 
ourselves as a genuine dimension of Earth-universe cosmogenesis – the Heaven, Earth 
and Humanity interbeing of cosmology and ecocommuion. There is no one way; the issue 
of a sole and central way to sustainability is itself problematic.  
McClellan, for example, challenges the premise of biocentric as much as that of 
anthropocentric outlooks in appealing instead, on what he considers contemplative 
grounds, for a “nondual ecology” saying, “let Everything in. Everything that Moves” 
including “exploitive technology, warfare, social injustice. . .the collapse of planetary life 
support systems for  higher species” because “This is planetary symbiosis at work. 
Perfectly natural. All this creative activity is blowing in the restless wind of change. . . . 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  430    
nondual Ecology. . .would include anything that displays negentropic activity” as 
described in “the field of Complexity.” While ensuing “social injustice, famine. . .and the 
extinction of non competitive species”  he notes do not strike me as sustainworthy 
choices, there is value in recognizing that evolving Earth will endure despite our 
disregard or excess.8  
More problematic in his project, however, is its implication that quantifiable 
biocosmic self-organization is solely or eo ipso the measure and arbiter of sustainingly 
whole-some or nondual ecology, contemplative or otherwise. I think it does not 
adequately acknowledge in emergent dynamics what Morin calls the aspects of 
“openness and self-reflexivity” and corresponding relations that are “eco-systemic and 
meta-systemic.” In Morin’s interpretation of it, self-organization in biogenesis, and in 
cosmogenesis itself as a vast field of interactive potentials, qualitatively outgrows itself; 
it is more than just iterations of increasingly inclusive and complex variables. There do 
seem indeed to be evolutionary and biocultural systems optimization algorithms like 
Stuart Kauffman’s -- and those of honeybee democracy! described by Seeley -- but the 
emergence of subjective, ethical, empathetic, compassionate or ecstatic experiences 
doesn’t reduce to their permutations alone. And if we emphasize the theme of structurally 
coupled coevolutionary satisficing instead of algorithmic optimization proper, it too 
connotes our dramatic and irreducible qualitative participation in Earth-human 
coevolution.  To affirm the idea of coevolutionary structural coupling with a tone of 
contemplative participation is not to affirm que sera, sera inertia, indifference or fatalism 
– for the contemplative tone therein does not reduce to just one side or mode of the 
anthropo-cosmic coevolutionary process. Or put yet another way, what emerges in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  431    
coevolutionary self-organization does not reduce to any interacting set of putative “parts” 
at any scale. This is to say an emergent co-responsive sense of environmental wholing is 
as much a nonmanipulative (non-egocentric) and compenetratingly cosmomorphic or 
anthropocosmic choice, entention, reflexive self-interpretive contextualization or value 
made by “the universe” – aesthetic as much as ecopragmatic – as it is simply the fallout 
of local thermodynamic or morphodynamic comings and goings in cosmogenesis.  It’s 
well to emphasize the ententional, meaningful or spiritual and more than simply 
“negentropic” character of emergent poetics, noetics, ethics and aesthetics in evolution, 
especially when we’re tempted to trade only in quantifiable information-theoretical 
formulations.9 It’s well to emphasize that the ongoing-wholing of cosmogenesis is 
compacted and embodied in (our) values as much as in (our) phenotype. If it gives rise to, 
if we effect and real-ize its/(our) potentials for ecogenic thought and action, these are 
presumably comprehensible as (our) practice in its, i. e., in the (self-) contemplative 
anthropocosmic, resonance-attentiveness that is life-sustaining. Are ecogenic values more 
life-sustaining or cosmomorphic than are anti-environmental or ecopathic ones? I’ll 
invoke and choose (is the point here) an axiology, and axiological cosmology, saying that 
we are one of the “placings” and ways cosmogenesis chooses, or tends, to proceed. We 
participate in the song and the dream and the life of the Earth. 
A self-organizing universe thinks (about) itself; it expresses self-reference and 
self-reflection. It creates values and an ethos or an enacted “placing” of values and 
practices; as and among Earthlings, it learns to take its emergently dynamic ecosocial 
bearings with regard for and among, and not just to, all of its, all of our, relations. 
Cosmogenesis is invested, embodied and enacted in every bit of itself. And so it’s hard 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  432    
for me to just say OK to ecocide or ethnocide in the name of a more vast unfolding of 
coevolutionary potential, especially when it’s that very potential that today says to itself 
“Hold on!” In a contemplative hour, I could perhaps accept the degradations of the 
human and the ecohuman world in the name of something better, long-in-coming. Yet at 
that point, such an acceptance – the moreso if widespread among us -- conceivably goes 
far further than simple acknowledgment and sufferance. It’s so big, it becomes so vast an 
acceptance, that it dissolves or extinguishes (nirvana) the drives and compulsions and 
ego-graspings that give rise to the excesses, degradations and ecosocial injustices in the 
first place. In terms borrowed from Chögyam Trungpa, “We always have a choice: we 
can limit our perception so that we close off vastness, or we can allow vastness to touch 
us.”10 So we can come to realize beforehand that we are already the same “more vast 
unfolding of coevolutionary potential” which we otherwise might invoke to justify partial 
and fragmented participation, wan tolerance and after the fact perceptions. 
We often live as if in the name of exercising our anthropocentric developmental 
virtues we’d told ourselves we’d have to disavow our transparency to cosmogenic ones. 
Nor, as we learned long earlier from the Bhagavadgita, are intrinsically rewarding -- and 
because structurally coupled, “selfless” -- acts of environmental care and remediation, for 
instance, to be forsworn in the name of “creative activity. . . blowing in the restless wind 
of change.” Rather forgo and forswear greed, concupiscence, vanitas and the 
hypertrophied ego that indulges these in its graspings. What’s in play is if not a new 
creation at least a renewal of humanocosmic creativity performed not in domination of 
nature and other human and nonhuman persons but in partnership and membership with 
natural systems and presences: all of us children, and now also in some way siblings, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  433    
midwifes or godparents, of the coevolutionary process. And the question is not where 
coevolutionary potential comes from or even why so much as how to celebrate it and 
sustainingly to concelebrate with and as it – whether we’re the only kids on the block or 
not. We do not need a final theory or explanation or original design plan so much as 
conduct that’s unprecedentedly sustaining in its coevolutionary accord and is so because 
it is unprecedented with respect to the measure of our ego-investments. 
The substantive, constitutive, and not simply derivative characteristics of 
openness and self-reflexivity may be taken as the unpredictable emergences of novelty, 
perhaps even of wisdom or a related ecosophy, in the meta-systemic forms of not just 
negentropic but also of ethical, compassionate, aesthetic and solidarity aptitudes and 
capabilities in the system as these recursively participate in ongoing biocultural, 
ecoethical and cosmomorphic or anthropocosmic development. More illustratively, we 
could say that Aldo Leopold’s Land Ethic, “The Earth Charter,” EarthFirst!, Pope 
Francis’ Laudato Si, Devall and Sessions’ Deep Ecology, Abram’s Becoming Animal and 
Berry’s The Dream of the Earth are similarly recursive and ecoethical emergents of 
cosmic self-organization as expressed on Earth. And these writers, works and 
organizations do not express a quietist acceptance of the extinction of wildlife or of 
ecocide; although neither do all of them cherish aggressive activism and the kind of 
point-scoring that rivals corporate K Street speechwriters’. The spontaneously emergent 
ecoethical feedback offerings they do express in cosmogenesis is, at least in Berry’s 
terms, contemplatively performative of and participatingly resonant with -- not 
completely quiescent, indifferent or transcendent in relation to -- nature; they are newly 
emergent enactments of nature. Again, Berry clarifies,  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  434    
Our best procedure might be to consider that we need not a human answer 
to an Earth problem, but an Earth answer to an Earth problem. The Earth 
will solve its problems, and possibly our own, if we will let the Earth 
function in its own ways. We need only listen to what the Earth is telling 
us. . . .[Y]et we must reach far back into the genetic foundations of our 
cultural formation for a healing and a restructuring at the most basic 
level.11  
And this implies “reinventing the human” not forgoing it. Besides, we just got 
here! This is an ecohumane wu wei and ziran “activism” that does not reduce solely to the 
zone of the human and to human agency undertaken as a category separable (or withheld) 
from the ever-ongoing. It suggests, too, that renewal and sustainability come not from 
being fixed either in a totalistic developmental scheme of anthropocentric interests, as we 
have long been, nor from being fixed in some opposing mode of complete indifference to 
eco+humane weal, nor fixed in postures of aggressive remediation, amelioration and 
ecotage -- or fixed in anything else. As Jullien understands Zhuangzi’s radical 
contemplative activism, to offer another timely intercultural allusion, nourishing 
sustainability is literally life-like in (our) keeping our life open to renewal through the 
alternations of the global life process. “‘To feed one’s life’ does not mean to strive to 
enhance or prolong, to seek to force life to sustain itself and endure. Indeed, it is only 
through de-willing, de-possession, that [human] life can sustain and endure” by according 
with the life of all things in their interbeing. The shining city on a hill then; today maybe 
an ecovillage? More a matter of resonance than an ego-goal-orientation, this “is evolving, 
not resolute. It is not simply a matter of maintaining a harmonious and positive relation to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  435    
the world. . . .It is also ‘to evolve in concert with the world,’” “maintaining oneself in an 
emergent state.” This does not mean the cessation of our life activities but the 
continuation of our living as spontaneously response-able, non-totalistically-self-
aggrandizing and nonmanipulative participants in all-living. We won’t need to keep on 
assaulting and manipulating Earth resources to our exclusive benefit and pride when we 
realize that the undivided Earth-human psychocosm giving rise to life, humanity and 
mind as a continuum of natural, intellectual, spiritual, ethical, poetic and aesthetic 
aptitudes for joy or pathos is always already transparent to, and mirrored in our unforced 
ecocontemplative experience of interbeing right now. This is real negentropy far from               
inertial equilibrium or environmental indifference. Put another way: acceptance is not 
withdrawal. From a related contemplative context we learn through Trungpa that, “Too 
often, people think that solving the world’s problems is based on conquering the [E]arth, 
rather than on touching the [E]arth, touching ground. That is one definition of the setting-
sun mentality. . . . Even though you may be living in a city in the twent[yfirst] century, 
you can learn to experience the sacredness, the nowness, of  reality. That is the basis for 
creating an enlightened society.”12  
And here comes Zhuangzi’s contemplative construal of  sustainability through 
ethologically “placing” a functional Earth-Human relationship upstream of (or 
environmentally surrounding) our decisions whether, when and how to intervene in 
ameliorating a bad environmental condition that itself grows from far too much 
thoughtless and egotistic activity intervening in natural systems: “[O]nly if I liberate 
myself from [my concern with life] will I achieve the ‘transparency of morning’ and rise 
to the full potential of my vitality” which is inherently the natural vitality of all life on 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  436    
Earth and throughout the universe. It is from squandering our vitality in trying so 
exaggeratedly to live well and then better (e. g. DuPont, “better living through 
chemistry”; GE, “we bring good things to life”; L’Oréal, “because I’m worth it”Ψ that we 
eclipse eternity’s sunrise and injure Earth and Earth-human sheng-sheng to begin with.13  
An at least somewhat ego-self-forgettingly attending within and without is, it 
seems, an alternative active contemplative contribution to sustainable, to resonant and 
mutually beneficial, Earth-human relations. In Zhuangzi’s slightly testy terms, there is 
only the process of animation whose vitality derives from clarifying and cultivating 
ourselves in a deeply attentive ecology of what I’ll think of as Earthmind, in the first 
person. “[T]he more I refine myself (or [meditatively] ‘decant,’ ‘unbind,’ or 
‘disencumber’ myselfΨ, the more animated I become. Thus to ‘feed’ the ‘quintessence’ in 
myself (yang jing) means simply (that is, without any metaphysical overlay) to sharpen 
my capacities and keep myself in shape” in attentive reciprocity with the life of 
interbeing everywhere I am. “Similarly and analogously, to ‘feed’ the ‘spiritual’ in 
myself (yang shenΨ usually means to relax and rest my spirit.”14  
I happily salute negentropic self-organization as a constant, even as a kind of 
metric, in cosmogenesis; I also see that sustainable Earth-human self-organization is at 
the border of order and entropy in ecological and human evolution: extinction happens. 
Nor do I hold techne or the “new form of life. . .arisen on this planet, which could be 
called the Technobia” to be de jure reprehensible -- though I demur from the usually 
associated ego-aggrandizing manipulation and calculation that Zhuangzi called “machine 
mind.” I beware, however, static essentializations of “order” and “entropy.” And I like 
much better self-organization’s early Chinese variant  ziran – what happens or is done as 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  437    
wu wei natural self-so-ness and not by purposeful action, wei. As “appropriate, natural, or 
spontaneous” ziran doesn’t “stick out. . .lead[ing] to conflict, frustration, and ‘disease.’” 
Emphasized another way, orthograde ziran in the self-organization of things is in not 
adding to or obstructing life “ by categorizing things according to humanly constructed 
distinctions,” nor is it in either attempting to transcend the human or in being bound by 
things.15  
Ziran as self-organization is lively dynamic emergence. It is the always-self-
outgrowing qualitative liveliness of self-organization in and among Earth and human 
systems and not just their expansive increasingly complex combinations that I celebrate. 
This is a choice. It is a spontaneous choice, more a response, actually, emergent in and 
for the field of coevolving interbeing. Another ontonarratistic choice at this time is not 
for warfare, ecocide, social injustice or the collapse of planetary life support systems for 
higher species. With some precautionary wu wei in our outfit, there’d be fewer of these 
dysfunctionalities to begin with. And we can go with the flow of “let[ting] Everything 
in,” and even respecting the uncontrollable mystery of environmental disaster, as 
McClellan suggests. But we don’t have to go out of our way to invite it to dinner and to 
sleep with our daughters.16  
As Sideris and others point out, nature can be rough indeed; the rhetoric of 
harmony and nonduality and spontaneity can get in the way of understanding natural 
selection, forest fires, extinctions. But again, as Kauffman shows and Deacon yet better, 
natural selection as we usually conceive it (typically with a red-in-tooth-and-claw 
grimace) comes along after the fact of self-organization.17  And in any case, the dynamic 
emergence of ecohumane ententionalities is very much of natural self-organization and is 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  438    
nevertheless also an emergent qualitative mode and accompanying practice of value, 
meaning, consciousness and ethical choice (the ethos of placing) that allow us, the 
embodiments of cosmogenesis, now and then to stand up for it-as-our-self, so to speak – 
it’s OK to keep clean the air for the kids and the water for every kind of living person.  
The implicit logic of my choice (for, and as an emergent of, an axiological 
cosmology) is that the self-singing in us of the universe/story event spontaneously 
expresses a universe ethic, an ethic deriving from its (multiform cosmic) ethos, part-
created and part-perceived in our similarly, but not exclusively, ethos/place-bred 
imagination. For our imagination is not only an index or focalization of cosmogenesis on 
Earth, it is also its emergent participant, its ethological “placing,” or contextualization, to 
some unknown extent, and a contributor of novelty that becomes also and inevitably a 
(recursive) feature of any successive moment of self-universe ongoing-wholing. Like 
faith, an ethical, poetic, narratistic, aesthetic, re-ligious and intellectual imagination is a 
transitive contribution to ongoing-wholing.  
The universe does indeed show a record of catastrophic explosions, die-offs, 
plagues, and devastation. The onto-story does not thereby have to encourage them in all 
instances. It will celebrate life/death in all its forms, but the universe also, in its human 
and ecohumane embodiment, can now make – calls itself to make? -- life-sustaining 
choices; these nondisambiguatably emerge from both halves of the humano/cosmic 
universe/story elision. The self-organizing universe in its/our ecosemiosis is also a self-
transforming universe as expressed by (but probably not only by) human thinking, 
attentive care, spontaneous compassion and other diverse ecopoietics, (da hua). This is, 
as Corrington has put it, an ecstatic naturalism.  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  439    
In giving rise to and midwifing our feelings and the aptitudes for spontaneous 
empathy that contemplative cosmogenesis discovers through us it is all including but not 
necessarily indifferent because of that. In my hybrid interpretation of NeoConfucian and 
biocultural systems cosmogenesis, it is the universe that emergently endows itself with 
such feelings in us who then in spontaneous reciprocity, attentiveness, choice and 
compassion recreate or extend or otherwise instantiate its autopoietic sheng-sheng, its and 
our own sustaining creation and recreation – traditionally most embodied in 
contemplative sagelike conduct according with the sustaining patterns and processes of 
cosmogenesis. This is cosmomorphic conduct that may be anthropomorphically imaged 
but is not therefore necessarily anthropocentric. Grandfather Fire, assure Primack and 
Abrams, is not simply a category mistake in mythos, ethos or dianoia. Nor did “younger 
brother” Black Elk misstep in walking “with the powers of the four quarters. . .a 
relative.” Expressed more aridly, emergently conscious negentropic self-organizing as the 
compenetration of self-reflexive metasystemic self-outgrowing and ecosystemic openness 
is living more intensively or ententionally than the foreground of self-interest 
backgrounded by (a seemingly) indifferent letting-everything-in allows. And in the self-
reflexively complex negentropic counterflow of its emerging self-contemplation, 
ecoethical feedback and accordant ecosocial conduct this process of emergent cosmo-
ethics seems to find voice also in Frost’s poem “West-Running Brook” 
Speaking of contraries, see how the brook 
In that white wave runs counter to itself. 
It is from that in water we were from 
Long, long before we were from any creature. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  440    
. . . . . . . . . . 
It is this backward motion toward the source, 
Against the stream, that most we see ourselves in, 
The tribute of the current to the source. 
It is from this in nature we are from. 
It is most us.18  
Our nondualizing ((and -- because it is recursively and self-referentially 
contributive or fractally constitutive – interminate (self-)) contemplation of the 
inclusively holonic, fractal and symbiotic intersystem(s) of life, Earth and ongoing 
cosmogenesis both is (an expression and an analogue of) and further evokes the 
universe’s emerging self-reflexive awareness of the minutely entwined ecological and 
ecohuman particulars of each coevolving biosystem. We are thus an active 
ontohermeneutic and ontoethical dimension of cosmogenesis that can choose to attend to, 
to care for and to celebrate sustainable coevolution and not just to roll on downhill with 
entropy. Ours is also Earth’s ecoethical “placing,” an ever-ongoing ontohermeneutical 
and symmetry- as well as  asymmetry- approximating embodiment of its onto- and auto-
hermeneutic liveliness. We need not knowingly allow needless degradation of life.19  
A choice, this is even more, in the spirit of  Heideggerian and Christian ideas of 
Gelassenheit and kenosis, our releasement or (re)turn from ego self-interest towards and 
with (in re-ligio) the community of being(s). We may even sacrifice, limit or postpone 
aspects of our way of living and thinking, certainly a measure of our comforts and profits, 
that others may live. And in result, from time to time our contemplative peace of 
heart/mind may find itself resituated/resituating in the larger ecology of Earth- or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  441    
universe-Mind which in “its” performanceήacceptance of destruction as well as creation 
similarly gifts us with the aptitudes for creative and for dehabituating acts of 
environmental and ecosocial upaya, karuna and phronesis as events of its own self-
waring.20  
It seems as unnatural, if nature is our metric, to deny the anguish we feel at the 
degradation of the natural and human environments and to acquiesce to it as it does to 
express wholesale indifference. This is the contrast between Nicholsen and McClellan. 
Of course ecosystems die and worlds end, that is part of how they work. But we don’t 
just throw them away like wanton consumers. Meditative detachment is the context and 
performance not of ego-indifference but of maturely dis-egoed compassion, empathy, and 
fellow-feeling, shu, jen. It’s as altogether natural spontaneously to choose sustaining 
contemplative conduct for human and natural-systems’ wellbeing as it would be, says 
Mengzi, spontaneously to rescue a child about to fall into a well.  
Such spontaneous feelings and choices are among our most coevolutionarily 
sensitive kinds of radar, the moreso as clarified and cultivated through narratives and 
practices of ego-self-forgetting, or at least of ego-tempering.  And such spontaneous 
conduct was already, long before humans appeared, naturalistically incarnated as the 
tribute of the current to its source, as mutual co-production, as negative feedback, as 
biophilia, as well as ecohumane ententions of ren, shu or notably, karuna. Frost’s poem 
echoes in the Sanskrit etymology of karuna, usually translated as compassion but having 
noteworthy connotations of suspending, of (re)turning or departing from the current of 
conventional ego-happiness preoccupations so as, with peaceable and non-manipulative 
heart/mind, xin, spontaneously to feel and accordantly correspond with the ego-mediated 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  442    
suffering of human as well as with the suffering of other diversely sentient environmental 
(kinds of) being(s) expressive of the interminate source or field of interbeing.21  
This is not just wordy poetic metaphysics; and neither science nor religion could 
be effectively recruited to gainsay our aptitude and inclination for ecosocial wholeness 
and wellbeing. Writes Nadeau, for example, “the ability to coordinate increasing ranges 
of experience with new narratives that enlarge the sense of shared meaning and purpose 
between all human [and other] beings has been critical to our survival.” At the same time, 
“science self-reflexively aware of its origins” both expresses and examines these origins 
and the “essential wonder and beauty of the universe,” in “the most communal of all our 
ways of knowing. Most important, it remains aware in the analysis of ‘parts’ of the 
greatest and most startling of scientific facts – the ceaseless interconnectedness and 
interdependence” of everything. Moreover, “The history of religious thought [also] 
reveals a progression . . . toward the conception of spiritual reality as a unified essence in 
which the self is manifested, or mirrored, in intimate connection with the whole.” The 
movement of complementary scientific and religious experience is toward the sustaining 
realization, contemplation and embodied performance of “the single significant whole.” 
And with implicit relevance to the question of the stabilization of our enwholing 
anthropocosmic ententions for sustainability, Stapp again rounds out the theme for the 
moment saying, “Each physical system – including a brain or a template for action – 
inherits quantum features from the quantum state of the universe as a whole.”22 This is a 
variant of the integral (self-)contemplation of verition, or the concurrent imparting and 
receiving in transparency of the emergent dynamics of anthro≈cosmic self-organization, 
an analogue for Gebser’s ever-present origin. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  443    
While we might ordinarily think of ecosocial karuna as a special kind of ethical 
act or effort, it might as well, or better, be seen as the naturally ziran and unimposingly, 
non-interferingly and non-effortful wu wei releasement (Gelassenheit) from ego of 
satisficingly sustaining accord-potentials with and among the co-creating (thus never 
entirely self-subsistent) participants, human and not human, in any situation -- the ten 
thousand kinds of things. Making a special production out of spontaneous karuna 
(including making a negative point about its environmental inconsequentiality) is singling 
oneself out as the doer (or not) of a special kind of action, whereas the coevolutionary 
ecosocial resonance or accord process does not finally reduce to any self-subsisting 
doer(s) to begin with. Such singling out is analogous to the ego singling itself and its 
interests out of the ongoing process of mutual coconstitution (among cocreating events 
and entities) which self-singling is, once again, what makes compassion/precaution, 
humane and environmental, relevant at all. It is, likewise, analogous to singling out just 
one possible source or expression of ethics in disregard of the inherently ethos- and 
ethics-bearing dimensions of others, and of others together, in axiogenesis, be these 
dimensions cosmic self-organization or its emergents and (auto)interpretive 
contextualizations: aesthetics, art, music, language, poetics, play, science, nature, divinity 
religion, myth, pair bonding, biophilia, parental love, filial responsiveness, etc.23  
The problem contemplatively conceived is in the self-singling-out, since karuna, 
as the self-organizing and recreative, imparting and receiving, sheng-sheng is apparently 
always already the case of disegoed, awakened or flexibly other-responsive dao shu in 
the metasystemic mode of  anthropocosmogenesis. “Taking action” as we usually 
proactively think of it may only exacerbate our (egocentric and environmentally 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  444    
degraded) situations. But, once again, sustaining and nonassertive ecosocial wu wei 
conduct is not in doing nothing so much as it is in relatively spontaneously, 
nonmanipulatively, and thus comparatively selflessly, co-responding with (the needs of 
the mutually co-producing and the non-self-subsisting systems of) nature according to 
nature, naturally. It is the self-organizingly and incipiently sage-like conduct of complex 
systems environmentally interacting in the satisficing forms of recursively self-sustaining 
whole systems unfolding-wholing.24 Anything else is standing unsustainably on tiptoe, 
leaning toward and away from things in ego-reinforcing postures of desire and aversion.  
An “event” is contemplatively ethical not just due to spontaneous dis-egoed 
responsiveness but because such spontaneous responsivity is not calculating external or 
privative gain; and in a coevolutionary context this is (our) unmediated compresencing 
with or “placing” of the local coconstitutive elements and processes of interminate or 
incompletely localizable cosmogenesis unfreighted by our self interest and thus in some 
measure liberated to lively and sustainably enlivening accord in making robust and 
efficient (the quantum of) wellbeing for all involved in the particular circumstance or 
“ethos.” Straightforwardly contextualizing the cliché of our repetitively competitive red 
in tooth and claw default, Konner’s contemporary biocultural midrash allows us also to 
declare that: 
Human beings are irrevocably, biologically endowed with strong 
inclinations to feel and act in a manner that their own good judgment tells 
them to reprehend – that is, if they are in the least capable of sympathy 
with the suffering of other. . .creatures, or if they have any sense of the joy 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  445    
and order and beauty of life. The judgment, the sympathy. . .all these 
evolved for other purposes than to save the human species from a 
protracted,  dissolute destruction. Yet there they are. Can we not turn them 
now to this latter purpose?25  
 So again, while I share McClellan’s nondual tack, I make an eco- and systemo-
narrato-ethical as well as an emergent metasystemic contemplative choice in encouraging 
forms of life and mind that are lively yet do not purposefully impose themselves on, or 
self-servingly neglect, others as being more or less desirable, important, sustainable or 
sustaining. Everything that happens is involved in the ecology of the world. But many 
things that happen don’t just happen; they are engineered, coerced, marketed or by willful 
neglect made and allowed to happen. It is the manipulation and willfulness of our 
ecosocial deracination that I think drives us outside the ambit of lively and robust 
wellbeing. The karuna work of healing and wholing ourselves while respecting the life of 
Earth is also re-membering ourselves in conduct and language that does not needlessly 
damage, deracinate, eclipse or neglect the beings and living systems with which, as 
which, with whom, our own life is, as is all life, complexly interwoven.  
It is an ontoethical question, whether we let everything in in the name of nondual 
inclusivity -- war, ecocide, ethnocide -- or by responding in the empathy of spontaneous 
resonance make relatively disegoed choices/responses, narratistic, ethical, practical and 
aesthetic, as to the viable and valuable in any specific context. This need not be a forced-
choice dualism between let-it-be and get-involved. We are already involved. And great 
art as well as an authentic heart will always exceed rote, however whole-some, while 
inaugurating new ideas and conduct.  The question in part is how noncoercively and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  446    
flexibly we engage the world around us: whether continuing fixed in a role as 
manipulators and consumers or as more proximal enactments of the kind of un-stuck wu 
wei, ziran, dao that gives rise to emergent life and mind in the first place.26  
Those choices and those modes of thinking and conduct that are least imposed 
upon in their eventuation and least imposing or least manipulative and coercive in 
participation – that are most naturally spontaneous, lively, in the sense of lifelike, and 
least calculating – seem to me most amenable to continuing sustainable ecohumane and 
anthropocosmic resonance. Too Romantic? Dark Green?, too much ecotheology?  Anima 
Mundi?27 Perhaps such resonance is not a good enough value?  But then: According to 
what? I can only sing the song I am inspired to sing here and now; every meaning is 
unique (in the ecology of interbeing). And if there is not (by this, or any way) a final, 
prior, external, unambiguously and apodictically veracious rector, value or rule(r), it is 
the singing, the songline, by and as which we concelebratorily make our way. Turned 
around, it is the universe/songline that constitutes and expresses sustaining 
ontohermeneutic celebration, satisficing conduct, ententional value and verition. 
Of course, as Wu Kuang-ming interprets Zhuangzi, in taking spontaneity, 
contemplativity, sustainability, ecohumanism, resonance, nondualism, 
anthropocosmogenesis or anything else too literally we block and obscure life with 
cognitive literalisms. Rather than a chant/contest over what contemplative or nondual 
environmentalism “really” means (symmetry, asymmetry, optimizing, satisficing?Ψ, I am 
now, instead, moved, “ennarratized” even, toward acknowledging and thus including the 
alternative emphases that may be made by any others at any times. I need not subscribe to 
each; but by the terms of a weak ontology, in such responsiveness I circumstantially and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  447    
with upaya perform to some extent the mutual co-production by which diverse 
antitheticals emerge in the ecology of mind. This choice at the moment, itself subject to 
change, is an aspect and a function of the eco-ethico-self-organization or self-placing of 
cosmogenesis, (and it also offers it) a contextualization, an auto-interpretation, according 
to the circumstance of the day and moment.28  
My murmurous song or incantation, through analogy, argument, allusion and 
rhetorical foliation is, and is of, the sustainingly lively self-soing of things. Within the 
song/narrative or episteme/paradigm, I sometimes playfully, oftener serioludically, 
meander amid, digress from, and make analogies with and among “positions” (all of 
which positings are to some degree born of somebody’s story; everything sung is sung by 
someone – including the birds in the trees!). Hereby we together relearn to practice a 
sustaining eco-attitude. . .  
that best fits our disposition and the situation in which we are at the 
moment. Since both the subjective and the objective dispositions are 
constantly changing, our positions should accordingly shift. This is what it 
means to be alive. It entails a vivacious playing with any position and a 
meandering among many situations. 29  
In its way, it also expresses a paradoxically nonpurposive (and always imperfect – 
Gleiser might say asymmetrical) karuna entention to re-turn upstream in (what Deacon 
may call) a contragrade resourcing of orthograde ecohumane commonweal.  
Sustainingly lively Earth-human self-organization at the moment calls us to grow 
from an excessively linear and cognicentric ego-imperialism to something at once more 
fruitfully playful, polytropic and less manipulative in the way of coevolution. The 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  448    
metarule is the knack of knowing when to suspend the other rules of busyness. As Gebser 
has said, this is not ego-cide but what we might think of as ego-relativization, as ego 
forming a new kind of co-conscious relationship with the other entities, events and 
dimensionalities of sustainable universe formation. To make an analogy with the ideas of 
Edinger on the sustaining value of establishing an individuated ego-archetype and ego-
Self relationship, I might say we now share an era when the ego is beginning to enter a 
(co)conscious relationship with cosmogenesis as a living and in-forming presence, 
context, source or origin and not just as a mass of material for ego’s use and instrumental 
gratification. Ego is becoming ecofied, to word it badly. In Blake’s insistent simple and 
yet infinite interrogation of our dominant way of conceiving things: “How do you know 
but ev’ry Bird that cuts the airy way, ή Is an immense world of delight, clos’d by your 
senses five?” By what atrophy of imagination have we bartered away vision, the capacity 
for integrated action and contemplation, our cosmic power of participation in analogia 
entis?30 
Analogy, we are learning anew,  is not so much strictly discursive as it is 
playfully “concursive,” an evocative “flowing together in creative integration” of the kind 
examined by Hershock as an expression of enlightenment and social virtuosity in Zen and 
Huayan Buddhism. Analogy comports well with our experience of what Berry calls “the 
dream of the Earth” and its prospects of a meaningfully appreciative yet also critical neo-
shamanic dreamtime re-sensitization to the spontaneities of the Earth and to the cosmos 
itself. Thinking analogically is ecopoietic thinking, and it is the living poiesis of what 
Heidegger considered an openness to Being, an authentically sustaining and a sustainable 
dwelling with the world and saving the world in “setting it free to its own presencing.” In 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  449    
this, analogy is also the discerning practical ecohermeneutic wisdom of eco-phronesis 
rooted in organic reciprocities and symbioses. A major refrain of this essay/en-chantment 
is that a contemplative orientation opens us to an eco- and metasystemic resonance with 
the ecology of life forms as well as of mentalities beyond a merely survivalist 
sustainability And analogical thinking and languaging is an appropriate ontoepistemology 
in a sustaining ecology of mind. Accordingly, it is a variant of the “ontohermeneutical” 
and ontometaphorical way of “comprehensive observation” called guan that has been 
ably disclosed by Cheng.31  
 
We can say that contemplative, analogical life-orientations existentially 
spontaneous and artful alike give immediate dualism-abating expression to the field of 
Being or Seinfeld and perform wholesome transforms of it in our “cognized 
environment.” They may take the forms of quiet(istΨ zuo wang, “sitting-(selfΨforgetting” 
or more demonstrative ones like remaining mindful, whatever we are doing, of the 
interinvolved self-life-universe matrix in action. Shamanic ecstasy is another whole-some 
option for the ecohumane embodiment of natural processes and presences. Through their 
appositional character, such practices of interexistential analogies simultaneously allow 
us free participation in the field interconnectedness of which recent physical and systems 
theories speak. Analogy is a skillful means and a functional tropism of the all-present all-
connectedness of the field. As contemporary literati have said, it can also be a (speech) 
act performative of the field of meaning in its varied degrees of correlation, 
transformation and differential deference.32  
Contemplative analogical/inclusive thinking sustains the cosmogonic diversity of 
things and meanings in a nondual and processual manner of autotelic attentiveness not 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  450    
unlike that offered by rDzogs-chen, Zen, and other meditatively based traditions. It also 
evidences a holistic ecological ethic of the kind offered by Gregory Bateson and by 
Whitehead’s process metaphysics and its underlining of the ever-renewed presencing of 
participant novelty in the universe of compresencing events and ideas. “Or in other 
terms,” as Steve Odin puts it in his book Process Metaphysics and Hua-Yen Buddhism, 
for Hua-yen [Huayan, Kegon], the central value at the cosmological level 
is universal harmony. Yet as Whitehead emphasizes in his book Adventure 
of Ideas, the value of harmony must always be balanced by that of 
‘adventure’. . .which is the primary internal dynamic animating what he 
terms, ‘the creative advance into novelty.’33  
 
Another intercultural reconnaissance of the process/field of Being in its 
Heideggerian as well as its cosmogenic senses has been adroitly conducted by Guenther 
where he developed the analogy between self-organizing systems as disclosed by 
complexity science and the Tibetan rDzogs-chen  experience of emergent awakening. 
Arguing that the Tibetan term for Buddha or awakened one can be properly translated as 
“dissipative structure,” i. e., dissipative of confusion and of the disorder of 
mereologically and ego-existentially fragmented awareness-experience, he convokes 
ancient wisdom and modern science in reflecting that the Tibetan focus was not a way 
from someplace to someplace else so much as that “the ‘way’” was Being’s 
holomovement experienced in and through its dynamics by the person ‘in tune’ with it.” 
We are also reminded that the self-organizing holomovement expresses itself in creative 
play, beauty and understanding as the “fully developed system – a [contemplatively] 
mature person.”34  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  451    
In light of Guenther’s intercultural and transdisciplinary analogy, we may wonder 
that if be(comΨing is the open regioning for all being, the next closest “approximate 
symmetry transformation” of that might be the undivided, all-present quantum vacuum 
field science has reason to study. I am no authority on this and again speculate. Gleiser 
carefully distinguishes the unifying field symmetry sought by contemporary physical 
theory from what he emphasizes are the creative, if imperfect, actual asymmetries, 
imbalances or imperfections that produce creative cosmological and evolutionary 
transformations. His asymmetries appear as such, it seems, foremost in contrast with an 
idealized cosmophysical completeness theorem which in the Tibetan tradition is 
expressed quite otherwise and with a greater experiential reach than mathematico-
deductive inquiry usually offers. But there is a tentative analogy between the two 
versions of symmetry. For instance, in the mature Tibetan contemplative experience 
researched by Guenther,  the ego- “errancy mode” is analogous to what Gleiser would 
call imperfectionήasymmetry, and “the emancipatory mode” is roughly analogous, though 
on a more vast ontohermeneutic scale, to what Gleiser and contemporary natural 
philosophers might call (super)symmetry. Yet in the mature contemplative experience, 
says Guenther, “both movements. . .having a common origin in Being’s [the ongoing-
wholing’s] cognitive quality or intelligence. . .without which the whole’s self-
organization would not be possible, are complementary to each other and remain 
coordinated, their  hierarchy being determined by the intensity of the feeling in and with 
respect to the experience or understanding/innerstanding of them. This amounts to a 
recognition of the role fluctuations [Gleiser’s asymmetriesήimperfections] play in a 
system’s (the human individual’s or the whole of Being’sΨ self-organization.” In other 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  452    
words, Guenther cites a classical source to say, the asymmetry and apparent 
fragmentation of our life and world and science as well as the symmetry expressed by 
some Grand Unifying Theory or as “a Buddha’s Beingness,” are both  “the (operational 
presence of the whole’sΨ pure fact of excitation/excitability. . .[as] superdiaphanous 
[perfect]. . .or flawed [opaque].” Summarily put, nirvana is samsara. The (movements 
and modes of) ontosystemic ongoing-wholing in the case of both contemporary physics 
and ancient contemplative tradition are “again, if we may say so, felt as the whole’s 
(Being’sΨ creativity. .. .which through its imaginative play. . .effect[s] its own 
adornment.” And a symmetry described by a  TOE (Theory of EverythingΨ is no more 
perfect than physical asymmetries and opacities are imperfect when the dualism of both 
their respective  interpretive “monotheisms” is outgrown, superseded, contemplatively 
evaporated. The only reason not to find heaven in a grain of sand is (that of) standing in 
(y)our own way.35  
And we can also infer from the preceding the coevolutionarily effectual aptitude 
for immediate contemplative resonance “between” human consciousness and the ever-
present or all-originating quantum field or field of being.  Again, as Laughlin as written 
in his brave paper, “Archetypes, Neurognosis and the Quantum Sea,” there is evidence 
“in favor of direct neurophysiological-quantum coupling,” and that “neural processing 
and quantum events may interpenetrate.” Neither a physical nor a noetic reductionist, 
Laughlin here and elsewhere wants to emphasize that “neurognostic, or archetypal 
structures in the human brain may transduce insights pertaining to the universal structure 
of the quantum sea. Each human brain may. . .be a microcosm. . .requiring only the 
optimal conditions of development for each person to individuate into a sage.” Mengzi, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  453    
as we know, had also made the point about anthropocosmic resonance long before in 
saying that anyone could become a sage according to hir situation.36  
This resonance is, delightfully, a hypothesis that has been tested in various ways. 
Among the previously mentioned settings for such work have been the Princeton 
Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) laboratories, and the already introduced work 
of the International Consciousness Research Laboratories (ICRL). Nor are these projects 
alone in the exploration, e. g., Radin; Jahn and Dunne; McTaggart. The inviting subtitle 
of Ervin Laszlo’s book The Connectivity Hypothesis: Foundations of an Integral Science 
of Quantum, Cosmos, Life, and Consciousness also invites discussion of the 
superpositioned and compresent quantum or wavefunction fields of all noetic and 
physical phenomena. And Laszlo’s book takes us quite some way in the direction of what 
is not infelicitously called an “experimental theology” in Philip Pullman’s charming 
trilogy which opens with The Golden Compass. We are of course, as Jahn and Dunne say, 
working here at “The Margins of Reality.”37 
For Thomas Berry, resonance will be in the “functional cosmology” I’ve referred 
to as a practice of conduct functioning in spontaneous accord with cosmogenesis in its 
Earth forms -- to realize a future that goes beyond sustainability alone to resonance with 
the life of the universe. This resonance, avers Berry, is the Great Work of our epoch. In 
cultivating this mystique of participation he advocates, we may also want to reconnoiter 
The Joyous Cosmology with Alan Watts, renegotiate The Politics of Ecstasy with 
Timothy Leary, sow New Seeds of Contemplation with Thomas Merton, and repractice 
Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy with Mircea Eliade. For as Berry has 
proposed, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  454    
We are supported by the ultimate powers of the universe as they make 
themselves present to us through the spontaneities of our own beings. We 
need only to become sensitized to these spontaneities. . . .It is the role of 
the shamanic personality, a type that is emerging once again in our 
society.38  
And it is the shaman, claim many interpreters, who is the root stock of religious 
phenomenology, and notably the midwife of sagely ritual and of  anthropocosmic noetic 
resonance-cultivation in Daoist and Confucian understanding. Nor is the point wasted 
that the advent of mature contemporary environmentalism and “green religion” was 
accompanied, and for some inaugurated, by neoshamanic experiences of cosmos, nature 
and wilderness midwifed by psychotropes and entheogens in the 60s and since. There is 
no necessary relation between psychotropes and shamanic or environmental awareness. 
Nevertheless, the neo- or parashamanic relativization and accompanying hybridization of 
habituated awareness was a feature of a complex expression of cultural awareness that 
also included the first EarthDay celebration, popularization of nondual Asian 
philosophies and a widespread introduction to elementary meditative and contemplative 
practice at the same time. The ongoing results have influenced religion, art, politics and 
science as well.39  
In another voicing of the first person, pioneer in chaos theory, Ralph Abraham in 
2ί1ί concludes of his earlier experience of a “one-point focus on spiritual exploration” in 
the late 60s and 70s -- including university teaching and research, travel in India and 
Nepal, smoking ganja, sampling LSD and DMT, and intensively practicing yoga 
meditation -- that “What I learned about cosmos and consciousness. . .cannot be said in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  455    
words, perhaps mathematics will be helpful.” And he tells us, in the course of subsequent 
discussion of the meditatively experienced field that for him supports the “vibration” in 
consciousness: “Attention replaces the self, in that the self seems everywhere, but 
attention can be stopped-down, focused, panned, and zoomed-in, as it were. One is 
everywhere but there is still a personal center of awareness. Yet above, there is nothing 
but the field. . . .”40  
Here as elsewhere in taking up “anthropocosmic” nondualism as a way of 
resonanceήcoexistence beyond sustainability alone, I’m also taking further advantage of 
the creative “cross-cultural anachronism” proposed by David Hall and Roger Ames in 
their noteworthy book Thinking through Confucius. For I want to make use of numerous 
diversely relevant insights while simultaneously demonstrating the analogous, holonic or 
fractal character of planetary thinking itself. Different times, cultures and states of 
awareness are (or are like) what Gebser has called different structures of consciousness in 
presenting valuable awareness and experience. No one source of experience is by itself 
meaningfully relevant or absolute; these must be integrated. Analogy is a sustaining 
mode of integrality. And similarly, no forms of organic life abide independently of 
others. Life and mind both express analogically and ontohermeneutically the ecology of 
mind and nature. 
Abduction among and between living and noetic forms is an expression of their 
mutual and perhaps even optimal sustainability in a way and for a reason similar to 
Aquinas’ claim that the world is full of diversities of life because no one kind of being 
alone could adequately express God’s plenitude. In other, ecological, words, 
sustainability is in hybrid diversity and complementarity. Hybridic abduction or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  456    
analogization among ideas, kinds of consciousness, and among life systems shows itself 
to be fertilizer, nutrition and fruiting emergence in Earth-human sustainability; it is a 
performance of cocreative cosmogenesis. This is even more evidently the case when, as 
in our own time, the relevant awareness may be understood as being not only about life 
and the universe but also as being the living awareness the universe has of itself in its/our 
minute particulars of experience as well, perhaps, as in more far-reaching contemplations 
and reveries, shamanic, conceptual or quite otherwise.41  
Here again meaning and being fall together, much as Heidegger would have 
reflected. And here again we find license to a nondual ontohermeneutic as well as to a 
nondualizing ontoepistemology in revisiting the investigation of things through 
intercultural “concept-matching” or “concept-comparing,” ge yi. Writes Gregory 
Bateson, “all thought would be totally impossible in a universe in which abduction was 
not expectable”; “Similarly, the environment in which the creature lives is another such 
internally coherent abductive system.” And he goes on to say that “thought and evolution 
are alike in a shared stochasticism” [i. e. a learning process of both random and 
nonrandom character] that is inherently and irreducibly relational, interactively 
organizational or what Morin calls “self-eco-re-organizingly” “organizactional.” 42 
In the general contexts of Jungian notions that consciousness has cosmogonic 
resonance qualities, of G. Bateson’s reflections on analogy and abduction in living 
systems and between them and their environs, and of quantum issues of indeterminacy 
and participant/observer measurement relations, (the ongoing-wholing formation of 
quanta of value, meaning or knowledge), we might conduct an analogical reverie or 
thought experiment having to do with the relatively recent discussion of a metaverse, i. e., 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  457    
of multiple evolutionarily sequential or synchronic universes. For instance, just as we can 
find analogies between and among the tiers, modes or phases of a given universe, can’t 
there also be analogies among various different universes? And may we ask if analogies 
in form, function and intensity or ententionality among the themes of one universe – like 
more familiar poetic analogies and existential metaphors, synecdoches, metonyms, etc. –  
could be seen as fractals or vestiges of the interplay, correspondence, vibration or 
oscillation between and among many worlds, somewhat analogous to the way cosmic 
background radiation in this universe today is a relic echo of the (ever-ongoing) Big 
Bang, the Great Flaring Forth? And are we with the living systems we nest amid 
analogues, refrains, echoes and voicings of ongoing/beginning?43 
Might consciousness itself be considered a metasystemic analogue of the 
complementarity relations in microphysical contexts, as anticipated by Jahn in his paper 
“The Complementarity of Consciousness”? And again, is it sufficiently poetic to wonder 
if the four cosmogonic forces known to us, weak, strong, gravitational and 
electromagnetic are fractals and coconstitutive analogs of one another in cosmogenesis? 
Is this cosmogenesis, further -- as these forces contribute to and are recursively 
modulated by the experimenter’s consciousness now both performing and reflecting on 
them (in what is effectively their own self-reflection) -- also contributing, through their 
fractal interactivations as well as through the emergent novelties of consciousness, to 
(our) ever enlarging the circle of inclusive, comprehensive, compassionate and cocreative 
system-mindfulness and system activation in guan-like ontohermeneutic resonance? And 
may we learn nontotalizing (Pylkkö’s “holistic naturalism” will speak of “aconceptual”Ψ 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  458    
and otherwise contemplative or apophatic/parapoetic ways ecohumanely to experiment 
such resonance? 
From the “analogies” formed by the shape-fittings of molecular 
stereospecificities, from the a = b of mathematical “equations,” from principles of 
congruence and commutativity and from musical harmonics formed among tones to the 
sarabands of predator and prey, life and death, this-and-that and yin and yang, in 
polyvalent anthropo- and eco-semiosis – as physical reciprocities, the coherences of 
syllogistic logic, and in poetic analogic – may not be heard the self-singing communion 
song of concelebrating nous and physis, nirvana and samsara – the concordia discors of 
a self-hymning coincidentia oppositorum in which all themes compenetratively disclose 
and cocreate, huitong, xiangtong, their ever-newly-self-organizing analogues in what 
Morin reminds us anew is an interminate unitas multiplex of complexly emergent 
sustainability. Enchants Tolkien in yet another analogical variant of cosmogonic song-
narrative, “and a sound arose of endless interchanging melodies woven in harmony that 
passes beyond hearing into the depths and into the heights. . .and the music and the echo 
of the music went out into the Void, and it was not Void.” There need not to have been 
design and plan beforehand for there to be various nodes, kinds and degrees of self-
waring ongoing-wholing now. And in any case, it is now the performance of the music of 
anthropocosmic resonance that sustains, even as the characters come and go and 
intertransform with various names and costumes, each cosming according to its kind. 44 
A parenthetic value of highlighting such nondual analogic as distinguished from 
asserting monistic (not to say dualistic) models of experience, is, once again, in 
preserving an apophatic and nonpositivistic metaorientation whose open-ended 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  459    
ontohermeneutics precautionarily releases us, releases the environment, and releases 
experience-as-such, from instrumentally manipulative monothetic, conclusive, 
reductively univocal, premature or a priori occlusions, impositions, assertions and 
ascriptions as to “what” the world is or is not – and as to whether that “what” is eternal, 
incontrovertible, unchanging, one, etc., whether as primum notum, telos or arche -- while 
preserving the sustainingly productive ambiguity, or productive vagueness, as Hall and 
Ames speak of it, of multivalent analogizations among the meanings, elements, modes, or 
levels, of potentially multi-, indefinitely-, or a-cosmically ordered existence. For instance, 
even the expressly digital monism of Abraham and Roy in positing a creative 
“consciousness external to physical spacetime” constituting a universe of quite distinct 
pneumatopsychophysical levels (connected not physically but only ontomathematically) 
seems to have it both ways in also positing that “in the space between levels there is yet 
another finer, vibratory [ontosemiotic] field.”45     
The critic might ask here, How fine does it have to be before we call it a nondual 
or analogue continuum outright?  But not to quibble. We may whisper with the abductive 
ontohermeneutic rectitude of  Zhuangzi: “Hmm. . .It is inherent in things that they are ties 
to each other, that one kind calls up another”; “Names are tools for public use, one should 
not have too strong preferences between them.” And his confrere Laozi replies, “Way-
making (dao) that can be put into words is not really way-making / And naming (ming) 
that can assign fixed reference to things is not really naming /. . . .These two – the 
nameless and what is named -- emerge from the same source yet are referred to 
differently. ή Together they are called obscure.” The way of the sages is to do “without 
contentiousness (wuzhengΨ.” Mutually reinforcing fundamentalism, literalism, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  460    
reductionism, selfism and especially the univocal precisions of legalism, by this 
sampling, can be co-relatively unsustaining.46  
 
In this ontohermeneutic context, my continuing intercultural and transdisciplinary 
hypothesis is that meditatively or contemplatively tuned consciousness abets our 
aptitudes for resonant participation with and as the processes of cosmogenesis, and that 
such integral consciousness or nondualizing ententionality, in which conceptual and 
existential analogy and abduction are propaedeutic and efficacious, enhances our 
aptitudes for a holistically meaningful future way of life beyond sustainability-as-
survivability while, and by, tuning (our) emergent and metasystemic aptitudes for 
resonant ententional participation. Whereas sustainability often means carrying on as we 
have done only in a much more environmentally sustainable way (note the laudable book 
Cradle to Cradle), I discern a shift in our way-making (and naming/storying) that moves 
beyond repeating what we have been doing and allows, releases, a mode of coexistence, 
coconsciousness and conduct that is more authentically sustaining and co-responsive 
among human persons with the life of Earth and kosmos through our being spontaneously 
attuned withήas the Earth, humankind and universe in, once more, what Berry calls “The 
Great Work” of making the transition, or the transformation, to being “present to the 
planet in a mutually beneficial manner.” As this is open-ended and neither designed nor 
programmatically plannable, so far as I can see, and also, where most sustaining, not 
particularly instrumental or ego-laden in character, and as, too, it seems to allow for 
diminished opacity and inertia in the psychophysical, qi, Seinfeld, or quantum vacuum 
field, etc., it might also be understood – or understand itself – as  humanocosmic 
playfulness, self-rewarding flow, the nondualizing, acategorical play and poiesis of  a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  461    
nonanthropocentrizing Earth-human contemplation irreducibly, and indecomposably, 
omnicentered in the human, the terrestrial and the cosmic or celestial.  
The pattern is the thing. The beauty belongs to everyone. We all bow. 
Finding beauty in a broken world  becomes more than the art of 
assemblage. It is the work of daring contemplation that inspires action.”47  
Contemplative conduct is more-than-sustainingly self-organizing anthropocosmic 
resonance. There is no overestimating the importance of this transition. As Berry has 
already proposed it, the accompanying “great work” of transition, transformation or 
reinvention of human being “has no historical parallel since the geobiological  transition 
that took place 6ι million years ago” with the opening of the Cenozoic Era  -- when the 
period of dinosaurs ended and a new age of living beings was begun. In his view, we are 
now entering the Ecozoic Era. And for such a transition, he thinks we need a beacon or 
reference that is adequate to the work. And for this he nominates the universe again 
emphasizing, later on in his book The Great Work (with a psychocultural rather than a 
geobiological time-framing): 
The universe is the only self-referent mode of being in the phenomenal 
world. Every other being is universe-referent in itself and in its every 
activity. Awareness that the universe is more cosmogenesis than cosmos 
might be the greatest change in human consciousness that has taken  place 
since the awakening of the human mind in the Paleolithic Period.48  
 
Developing these ideas further, we can see that the contemplative Confucian and 
Daoist sensibilities concerning the processes of change in the indivisible universe as well 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  462    
as its transformative presence in human affairs were expressed in such terms as those of 
Tu Weiming’s summarization that,  
. . .although human nature in its original substance is completely identical 
with the ordering principles of the universe, the human mind has to be 
purified [clarified, cultivated] through learning before it can fully realize 
the principle inherent in human nature.49  
 
Traditionally, the contemplative clarification of consciousness in learning to be a 
sage, a mature contemplative according with and as the patterns of universe growth, is 
something, as we have repeatedly heard, that anyone can do in hir circumstances. In his 
article “Self-Transformation as a Communal Act,” for example, Tu points out that the 
cultivation of “quiet-sitting” was considered an integral part of ge wu  or the 
“investigation of things.” It, and other analogues of the “deceleration” Morin spoke of, 
was a “contemplative praxis” permitting the spontaneous expression in daily affairs of the 
authentic, flourishing cocreativity, (actualizing sincerity, cheng, and situationally 
satisficing, optimizing or dynamically-balancing rectitude, zheng) of cosmos which could 
be expressed in shared human terms; and, because it is inherent in the universe, it is also 
expressed in resonant and mutually beneficial Earth-Human relations. In this sense, the 
entention of the “cultivation of resting” (cf. Greek skhole, school, contemplative leisure) 
or ego-abating Daoist “mind-fasting” (xin zhai) accorded Humanity with Heaven and 
Earth in their seamlessly fecund reciprocities.  Noting the Yijing teaches that “calmness 
must develop naturally out of a state of inner composure,” Tu continues to say that “in 
exercising the art of resting one ought not to try to force results. Rather, the maturation. . . 
requires interchangeable continuances of movement and stillness.” We also find its self-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  463    
rewardingly flowlike expressions in craftwork, recreation, creative musing or tinkering, 
rapt attentiveness and more play.50  
Even transformational stress and strain in the contemplative’s experience of self-
cultivation may be, like anything else, taken as aspects of a self-organizing 
symbiotization of heterogeneity – the proverbial labor pains of emergent dynamics. 
Speaking interculturally of sustainability construed in the transitional context of  “a 
duration of perpetually transforming patterns which depend on people’s will and choice”  
and often agonistic perspectives, I quote Maruyama’s original emphasis in further saying: 
“Since the ‘discovery’ of the mutual causal logic in science (‘unscientific’ cultures had 
known it much earlier), it has become scientifically clear that the basic principle of the 
biological and social universe is increase of diversification, heterogeneity, and 
symbiotization. What survives is not the strongest, but the most symbiotic.”51  I propose 
that a practice of noninstrumentalizing (and an a-judgmental) contemplative attentiveness 
to uncertainty and stress eventually conduces to ontohermeneutic resonance and a self-
rewarding mode of sustaining coevolutionary symbiotization performing, among its best 
practices, a practical aesthetic, epistemological, ontohermeneutic, metasystemic 
ecoethical and interexistential ars contextualis of analogy and abduction in diminishingly 
ego-centered daily life and awareness.  
I will not after all these many pages pretend, dear reader, to be a regular meditator 
or to be any less neurotic than the rest of us in my own be-egoed maunderings. But I 
know from experience as well as from books that it works. And quite apart from daily 
sitting, etc., it well may be simply a matter of keeping (y)our heart/mind relaxed, open, 
and attentively all in the one “placing” of this, here, now -- (y)our transparent eye of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  464    
entention on the ball of mutual Earth-human well-being. In analogy with Meister Eckhart, 
the eye by which we see and conceive is the eye which sees and conceives us. 
 
Such a comparatively (and daily) quiet relaxation or daily diminution of insistent 
instrumental deeming and accomplishing along with the corresponding practice of resting 
or deceleration, seem a long way from Manifest Destiny and its latter day technocratic, 
econocratic or military-industrial-entrepreneurial will to dominion. But then as now, the 
self-aggrandizement of ego in its individual, corporate, imperialistic and anthropocentric 
forms has abided as an obstacle to the attunement of persons in their wholeness wholly 
attending to one another with/in nature as embodiments of the ecological or mystical or 
anthropocosmic body of ongoing cosmogenesis. Choose your analogues. Look to the 
lilies of the field. 
 
I also, of course, personally participate in the self-aggrandizements of a culture of 
global consumerism, status-quest and zweckrational instrumentalism. Nor do I think, 
however, again following Jean Gebser, that egocide or the extinction of ego is the sole or 
necessarily the best approach to a future beyond sustainability. The ego, after all, is a 
useful means of mapping and functioning in a world of composite things and systems. 
But a problem with it is its self-maximization, a principle that in its effects eclipses the 
potentials for sustainingly satisficing, mutually benefiting, the relations of human and 
other kinds of persons together in the everyday instantiations of a cosmogenesis we 
embody and whose self-awareness we are coming to realize as our own 
coconsciousness.52 
In this matrix, self-aggrandizing ego is proving to be somewhat stultifying while 
simultaneously, as Berry said, rendering us autistic to the Earth and to the spontaneities 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  465    
of Earth and cosmos in ways that amplify our dysfunctionality in ecopolitical domains.  
This is why Berry speaks of the Great Work as the most far reaching restructuring of 
Being that we have yet experienced. Regardless of our forms of technology and 
interaction henceforth, we are coming to see that asserting, forcing or imposing ourselves 
in the name of separate and exclusive gain and selfhood is detrimental to the shared Earth 
household of which Gary Snyder wrote at the apex of the ‘6ίs.53  
 
Stating this another way, when Berry proposes that we need to conceive and 
entend a functional cosmology to replace our long dysfunctional cosmology, he thinks 
ecology is a good model of a functional cosmology. It is even “an intimacy producing 
process” in his view. By this logic, a functional cosmology would be instantiated in our 
shared cosmological functioning with other animals and the plants, the Earth and the 
seasons as well as with human persons, and in all our everyday contemplative conduct in 
more-or-less coconscious “sincere” and authentic (cheng) accord not only with but also 
as the self-organizing (ziran) spontaneities of the universe. In a relevant idiom translated 
across time and civilization, Mary Evelyn Tucker again reminds us that “the art of 
Confucian spirituality might [also] be described as discovering one’s cosmological being 
amidst daily affairs.” This is likely not to mean just having pictures of galaxies in our 
minds all day long so much as attentively abiding, dwelling and spontaneously 
performing in relevant Earth-human as well as interhuman ways with the simple 
entention expressed in the etymology of the word “consideration.”54  
In yet another recension, this is the premise of systems theorist Stuart Kauffman’s 
book, The Reinvention of the Sacred, and of what Berry will say is “the reinventing of the 
human” in and as a shared living realization of the numinous dimension of the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  466    
ecocosmic. A functional cosmology is in this view a contemplative experience of our 
shared lifeworld in analogy with, and as the functional presencing of, cosmogenesis itself 
at all scales of being and in all areas of existence. This consideration cannot be 
accomplished by yet more agenda of rationalized command and control imperatives or 
self-servings from the invisible hand. Celebrates Berry the refrain, 
 
 
We are not here to control. We are here to become integral with the 
 
 
larger Earth community. The community itself and each of its members 
 
 
has ultimately a wild component, a creative spontaneity that is its deepest 
 
 
reality.55  
 
Endnotes: MetaMethod 
1.) mature contemplative, Laughlin, et al. 1990: 28; meet each other. Cheng 1995; 
associative and appositional, Bogen, see also Laszlo 2003, Laughlin 1996, G. Bateson 
1979, Burneko 1988, and Obeyesekere; Harding: 117 
2.) differential coevolutionary coproduction see G. Bateson 1979 and Macy 
3.Ψ new stories emerge, e. g., Google News, “Standard Model of how Universe Works 
May be Flawed,” “New Data on Elusive Particle [Higgs Boson] Shrouded in Secrecy” 
http://news.google.com/nwshp?hl=en&tab=wn/ (accessed 6.20.12); Scientific American, 
“The Evolution of Cooperation: Competition is not the only Force that Shaped Life on 
Earth” (cover story July 2ί12Ψ; on more encompassing paradigms and stories see Primack 
and Abrams: 24-25 “Kuhn was wrong” “[A]n encompassing theory does not overthrow 
the older theory [or myth] – instead, it defines the limits within which the older theory is  
reliably true”; also see Primack and Abrams passim on anthropocosmic evocation; and so 
it goes see Vonnegut 1969; to authenticate in action in Confucius: 55, cf. zhixing heyi; 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  467    
sustaining truth value see Neville: 4-6, 12; study for their own sake in Confucius, analect 
14.24: 177-78, see also note 96: 240; virtuoso of communication in Confucius: 62-63, 64, 
see also analects 2.11: 78, 13.17: 166, 15.3: 184, 19.6: 219, 19:12: 220-21; see Abram 
4.) extractive manner of life see Nadeau; Plan B see Lester Brown “Plan B: Mobilizing to 
Save Civilization,” http:ήήwww.pbs.orgήjourneytoplanetearthή (accessed κ.6.12Ψ; see 
ecoeffective in McDonough and Braungart; business deal mentality in Varela et al.: 246, 
245-47 
5.) see Cobb; see also Burnett; see Abram; cf. Pope Francis, sect. 111 and passim: “There 
needs to be a distinctive way of looking at things, a way of thinking, policies, an 
educational programme, a lifestyle and a spirituality which together generate resistance to 
the assault of the technocratic paradigm. Otherwise, even the best ecological initiatives 
can find themselves caught up in the same globalized logic. To seek only a technical 
remedy to each environmental problem which comes up is to separate what is in reality 
interconnected and to mask the true and deepest problems of the global system.” 
6.) see Chapple; Esbjörn-Hargens and Zimmerman, Goerner, et al., Moore and Nelson; 
Tucker and Grim; relevant websites include: Ashrama: www.planetgreen.discovery.com/; 
Assisi Institute: http://www.assisiconferences.com/; Association for Contemplative Mind 
in Higher Education  www.acmhe.org/; Association for Mindfulness in  Education  
http://www.mindfuleducation.org/whatismindfulness.html/; Auroville 
www.auroville.org/; The Thomas Berry Foundation http://www.thomasberry.org/; 
Bioneers http://www.bioneers.org; 
Center for Contemplative Mind in Society  www.contemplativemind.org/; 
The Center for Theology and the Natural Sciences  http://www.ctns.org/; 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  468    
Crestone Mountain Zen Center  http://www.dharmasangha.com/index.html/; 
Earthaven Ecovillage  www.earthaven.org/; Fellowship for Intentional 
Community/Communities Magazine http://communities.ic.org/; Fetzer Institute  
www.fetzer.org/; Findhorn Foundation  http://www.findhorn.org/; The Forum on 
Religion and Ecology  http://fore.research.yale.edu/; The Foundation for Global 
Community http://www.globalcommunity.org/; The Foundation for Shamanic Studies  
http://www.shamanism.org/; Gaia House  http://www.gaiahouse.co.uk/; Gaia Education 
www.gaiaeducation.net/; The Garrison Institute  www.garrisoninstitute.org/; Global 
Community http://www.tip-2-tip.com/index.html/; www.whidbeygeodome.org/; Global 
Footprints http://www.globalfootprints.org/; Green Education Foundation  
http://www.greeneducationfoundation.org/; 
The Institute for Contemplative Living http://www.institute-contemplativeliving.org/; 
The Institute for Contemporary Ancient Learning www.beyondthematrix.com/inst/; 
The Institute for Social  Ecology http://www.social-ecology.org/; The Lindisfarne 
Community http://www.icmi.org/; The Merton Institute for Contemplative Living 
http://www.mertoninstitute.org/; Metta Earth Institute www.mettaearth.org/; 
Naropa University http://www.naropa.edu/; North Cascades Institute 
http://ncascades.org/; The Occidental Arts and Ecology Center http://www.oaec.org/; 
The Pachamama Alliance http://www.pachamama.org/; Schumacher College  
www.schumachercollege.org.uk/; Village Design Institute www.villagedesign.org/; Sea 
Change Radio  http://www.cchange.net/; 
Whidbey Institute at Chinook www.whidbeyinstitute.org/; The Center for Whole 
Communities http://www.wholecommunities.org/ (accessed 8.6.12) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  469    
7.) James see: http://psychclassics.asu.edu/James/Principles/prin11.htm/ (accessed 
6.26.12); see also Burneko 1988, 2003; innate sense of well-being, Wallace: 61, and see 
Gallagher; into the hands of the attorneys see Mare; and on the art of making this up as 
we go along see also The Hedgehog Review (2012): 61-71 interview with Wendell Berry 
and Wes Jackson; see also Varela et al. on bricoleur satisficing  
8.) McClellan: 2-3 
9.) Morin 2008: 29; algorithms see S. Kauffman 1995, see Burneko 2004;  structurally 
coupled, Varela et al.: 202; in Honeybee Democracy: 215, 213-17; on the transformative 
self-outgrowing (“transcendence”Ψ of dynamic systems in scale, complexity and in 
qualitative or spiritual aptitudes, see Primack and Abrams: 283-88 and Deacon 
10.) Trungpa 1984: 103; to say we always have a choice is to say, in ecoevolutionary 
terms, that anthropocosmogenesis is axiocosmogenesis; so why would we sell our 
teleodynamic birthright of ecosocial responsiveness for the pottage of purely 
thermodynamic laissez faire and short-term gain or convenience? To sustain a planet it 
should not take busyness and interference so much as simple attentiveness. But to omit or 
evade calls forth the consequence expressed in the Chinese lore of Yijing cited in Zhu Xi: 
203, “’An infinitesimal mistake in the beginning will lead to an infinite mistake at the 
end’ One must not fail to examine the starting point,” and expressed again in the 
formalism of the sensitive dependence on initial conditions aka the butterfly effect 
sketched by S. Kauffman 1995: 17, and in catastrophe theory as sketched in Abraham 
1994: 47, 58 and detailed in Thom. The point here in response to McClellan is that the 
(human) value-intelligence that the universe generates doesn’t need to stand by wringing 
its hands while the life systems that surround and imbue it are damaged (by it, or by its 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  470    
inattentiveness). The act by which we choose life is the act by which life chooses itself 
(and not just us); see Latour for interesting permutations 
11.) The Earth Charter www.earthcharterinaction.org/; EarthFirst! www.earthfirst.org/ 
(accessed 6.26.12); Laudato si' (5.24.15) Encyclical Letter of the Holy Father Francis on 
Care for our Common Home: 
http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-
francesco_20150524_enciclica-laudato-si.html/ (accessed 2.11.16); Berry 1988: 35, 210-
11 
12.) Jullien 2007: 34, 148, 114 original emphasis; Trungpa 1988: 97-98 original emphasis 
13.) Zhuangzi see Jullien 2007: 34, 38 
14.)  Zhuangzi see Jullien 2007: 60 
15.) sustainable Earth-human self-organization see Sideris, S. Kauffman 1995, Burneko 
2004; Technobia in McClellan: 4; ziran doesn’t stick out in Cook: 214; humanly 
constructed distinctions in Cook: 258 
16.) precautionary wu wei see “Earth Charter” II.6 and Burneko 2004 
17.) Deacon: 429-30 
18.) contemplative sagelike conduct, Burneko 2004; Grandfather Fire in Primack and 
Abrams: 34, see 33-37; Black Elk in Neihardt: 28; Frost see 
http://www.bestoffrost.com/poems-collection/west-running-brook/ (accessed 6.27.12) 
19.) emerging self-reflexive awareness see Margulis and Sagan; see Harding; also see 
Sideris for caveats; keep in mind the fruitfully diverse connotations of the symmetry of 
buddha/awakening experience-as-such for Guenther and those of creative asymmetry in 
cosmogenesis for Gleiser 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  471    
20.) see also Girard: the violence Girard associates with sacrifice aside, the structure of 
expulsion/cessation and subsequent community restoration is relevant; for that matter, 
how much of environmentalism has the structure of confession/repudiation and 
subsequent absolution and ecosocial reaggregation in the forms of community approval 
and resource restoration, conservation and recreation?; see Deikman on dehabituation; 
“its” is productively ambiguous; see Konner 
21.) see Macy, D. Kauffman, Jullien 
22.) Nadeau: 183, 220-222 passim; Stapp 112; see Laughlin et al. 
23.) see Bergson, S. Kauffman, Deacon and consider ecosocial karuna specifically in the 
context of Deacon’s discussion of constraint as a factor in emergent coevolutionary 
dynamics; see Wilson on biophilia and consilience 
24.) metasystemic mode see Morin 2008: 29; incipiently sage-like conduct see Burneko 
2004 
25.) Konner 427; also see Nowak; see Seeley: 215 (emphasis added) asking, What 
underlies a “striking convergence in the design of decision-making systems built of 
neurons and bees?” and theorizing, “A strong possibility is that this striking similarity 
exists because this design is a means of implementing [coevolutionarily] robust, efficient, 
and possibly even optimal decision making.” The imposition of ego(‘sΨ destinations on 
rather than the co-growthing of ecohumane and Earth-human relations is the source of 
unsustainability; see Paul 
26.Ψ see Deacon: 42,  and note p. 33ι where he emphasizes that “contragrade processes 
arise from the interaction of non-identical orthograde processes,” and that “somewhat 
paradoxically, interactions between systems’ different spontaneous tendencies are 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  472    
responsible for all non-spontaneous changes”;  note also the Daoist theme at the top of  
Deacon: 540 
2ι.Ψ see B. Taylor, Ruether, Harding; see also Gleiser’s critique and that of Sideris; see 
Chatwin; least imposed upon see Burneko 1981b 
28.) Wu 1982; weak ontology see White; see the Wendell Berry-Wes Jackson interview 
in The Hedgehog  Review (2012): 69 where Berry states “Instead of expanding, you must 
diversify and complicate” -- complexify, in Morin’s general sense –and Jackson 
reinforces this adding, “And it’s diversity with complementarity. . . .We need both 
working interdependently. As important as it is, diversity alone isn’t enough.” 
29.) see Wu 1982: 19 
30.) see the interpretation of analogia entis in Zeitz’ work on Przywara. I tend not to 
align with the dualism of scholastic traditions of analogia entis as a balance between 
human reason and divine transcendence (13) because I tend not to be a transcendentalist. 
But when Przywara conceives spirituality as a balance between opposed tendencies in a 
concrete panentheistic “aliveness,” i. e.,  God in us and above us, (15Ψ I am happy to 
think him through with an apophatic tone of mind  --  especially when he offers religion 
not as theology or dogma but as poetry (27); see also Hans Urs von Balthasar 1989 on 
theological aesthetics and also, e. g., http://undpress.nd.edu/book/P00882/ (accessed 
κ.6.12Ψ; And Przywara’s is not a two-storey scheme, (31) -- i. e., for him whatever is 
meant by supernatural belongs to the essence of humans, grace and of nature, a natural 
supernatural, a religious a priori, that reminds the reader of Adi Da’s “prior unity” on one 
hand, and Corrington’s ecstatic naturalism as well. And when Przywara conceives life as 
a rhythm of oppositions (33) and when  religion as harmony with created reality is 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  473    
analogized as a form of existential courage (cf. Tillich’s Courage to Be), I am interested 
in his emphasis on what is hereby a concrete ecstatic dynamic and would only choose 
here to replace “God” with something bulky like anthropocosmogenesis in his notion that 
all at all times comes from God and tends towards God. Przywara is also somewhat 
intriguing on account of the criticisms of him (2-3) for being: arbitrary – eigenwillig – in 
coining words, eclectic in his selection and treatment of themes, facile in his  
typologizations and for “his project of including everything in a single synthesis.”; cf. 
Chryssavgis and Foltz (9) and passim– the universe is logos/person and not an object 
31.) concursive, Hershock 1996: 55, 77; Berry 1988: 197, 201, 211-12; ecopoietic see G. 
Bateson 1979 on abduction and the coproductive mind/nature differential; see also 
Corrington; Heidegger 1971: 150; Cheng 1991 and 1995: 163-164 
32.) cognized environment see Laughlin et al. 1992; contemporary literati see Austin and 
others in Adams and Searle; see Eagleton: 127-150 
33.) Odin: 81 
34.) ancient wisdom and modern science see Grof 1984; Buddha see Guenther 1989: 247; 
see Hayward ibid.: 6 
35.) approximate symmetry transformation, Guenther 1989: 6-7, 131, see Laszlo; errancy 
mode, Guenther ibid.: 195, 199; emancipatory mode, ibid.: 216; both movements, idem; 
Buddha’s beingness, idem; creativity, ibid.: 223 emphasis added; see also Guenther’s 
Matrix of Mystery: Scientific and Humanistic Aspects of rDzogs-chen Thought. Boulder: 
Shambhala, 1984 
36.) Laughlin 1996: 375, 395-96; Mencius: 216 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  474    
37.) PEAR http://www.princeton.edu/~pear/; ICRL www.icrl.org/ see also Global 
Consciousness Project http://noosphere.princeton.edu/ (accessed 8.6.12) 
38.) functional cosmology see Berry 1988, 1999; mystique, Berry 1988: 33-34; we are 
supported, Berry 1988: 211 
39.) anthropocosmic, Tu 1985: 137; Daoist and Confucian see Tucker in Tu and Tucker 
2003: 7; Yü ibid.: 64, 69, 79-80; and in particular see Girardot 1983: 83-82, passim; the 
ongoing results see Roszak, Marwick, Laszlo 1989, and McKenna; there may be no 
necessary relation between psychotropes and shamanism, but there is a legacy of 
speaking plants -- see also Munn in Harner 1973: 88 
40.) in Abraham and Roy: 171, 173; also see Grof  1976; compare the structure of 
Abraham’s thinking about stopped-down attention with the structure of Deacon’s on the 
significance of constraint in emergent coevolutionary processes and aptitudes 
41.) on abduction and analogy see G. Bateson 1979: 139, 142-44, consider also 
abduction/analogy in terms of optimization, satisficing, robust and efficient 
coevolutionary bricolage, etc.;  Aquinas in Berry 1988: 79; on carryover of value, 
authenticity and resonance of analogical discourse and analogical thinking see Hall and 
Ames 1995: 40-46, 129, 139, 199-202, 194-197,  209, 225; see Neville; quite otherwise 
see Pylkkö, Stapledon, Yuasa 2008; see also Primack and Abrams on universe self-
awareness 
42.) G. Bateson 1979: 149, 143, 147, 93; Morin 2008: xxxvi and passim. 
43.) Jungian notions see also, e. g., 
http://books.google.com/books?id=1TNcvSiGUy4C&pg=PA151&lpg=PA151&dq=jung
+consciousness+cosmogonic&source=bl&ots=iOf6Je_BET&sig=fAGBvv74S_df29u5d0

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  475    
rDRq4GyJ8&hl=en&sa=X&ei=2fLtT8m9Laf50gG8u53VDQ&ved=0CEwQ6AEwAA#v
=onepage&q=jung%20consciousness%20cosmogonic&f=false/ (accessed 6.29.12); 
metaverse see Smolin, Greene, DeWitt and Graham, Primack and Abrams; see Tarnas 
2006 on archetypal cosmology; see Tegmark on Metaverse analogies 
44.) on analogy and stereoscopic or binocular models of description, conception and 
existential interaction, especially in transdisciplinary, intercultural or plural ontoepistemic 
veins see G. Bateson 1979: 68-71, and see Gebser, Bachelard; Morin 1999 and 2008: vii, 
4; Tolkien: 15; see again Gleiser, and see again Sideris for helpfully astringent 
perspectives; cf. sobornost 
45.) Hall and Ames 1987 also 1995: xvii-xx, 178, 226, 184; see Ames and Hall 2001; we 
can conceive of productive ambiguity in thought, language and in experience; Abraham 
and Roy: 3, 64, 178; again, see Tegmark on ontomathematics 
46.) Zhuangzi, Graham trans. 1981: 118, 129; Laozi, Ames and Hall trans. 2003: 77, 181; 
see Burneko 2003 
47.)  ontohermeneutic context  guan, see Cheng 1995, Burneko 2010; Berry 1999: 3; the 
pattern is the thing, Williams: 385 original emphasis, see also G. Bateson 1979: 8, 11, 29, 
48; see Hall and Ames 1995: 116-17, 138; ibid. see aesthetic order 116-19, ars 
contextualis 273 
48.) the great work, Berry 1999: 3; Ecozoic, ibid.: 8; the universe is the only, ibid.: 190 
49.) Tu 1979a: 242 
50.) deceleration, Morin 1999: 116, 121; calmness must develop, Tu 1979a: 243; see 
Csikzentmihalyi; see Pieper; see also Sanford, Gallagher 
51.) Maruyama 1976: 198, 202; see Deacon; see Stapp 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  476    
52.) see Burneko 2003; see Berman 1984 
53.) Berry 1988: 215; Snyder 1969; again, see Latour for another construction 
54.) intimacy producing, Berry 1999: 81, 84; see Hershock; Tucker in Tu and Tucker 
2003: 1; con-sidera ~ with the stars, see Partridge 
55.) Berry 1999: 161, 48 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  477    
 
14.0 Illuminating Variants and Analogues 
 
In considering a little further some of the intercultural ways in which a non-
impositional, or a more eco-resonant conduct of life has been and may yet be expressed 
throughout disciplines and polities, keep in mind further implications of a potential for 
cogrowthful resonance shared not only among humankind and between humanity and the 
natural environment, but also with/in the very heart of the universe itself. For according 
to at least one contemplative physicist today, as with the earlier alchemists, “the true 
artist, monk, and scientist are not searching to grasp knowledge as object, but rather as 
event”; and such “epiphanous knowing presupposes organs for insight. . . .but only if we 
have the patience to educate ourselves in light, to make ourselves concentric with its 
nature.”1 Light, it seems, as probabilistic cosmogonic event, as illuminating metaphor and 
as enlightening metaphysical inspiration is closely entwined with mind in 
anthropocosmic self-realization and, as an expression of energy, in cosmogenesis. 
In Confucian terms, the contemplative act of knowing was, as we’ve seen, a 
transitive one; that is to say, knowing as guan and zhi was to enact and embody, to real-
ize the whole of a situation or insight. Sage-like knowing was spontaneous participant 
conduct “in light of” the mutual benefit of all persons involved, and it expressed, it 
manifested or accorded with the wave-length, we might say, of the luminous 
psychophysical qi that was experienced, dense, or clear, as all phenomena. Today we 
could hypothesize by intercultural analogy that undivided sage conduct-and-
consciousness is an illuminating real-ization of beneficial ecological and reciprocal 
relations among human and nonhuman persons. To some extent, with some spontaneous 
conscious or unconscious imaginal entent, the contemplative sage performs sustainability 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  478    
among all hir relations in, and as enactment of, the radiant qi, or all-connecting quantum 
or zero-point field of interbeing.  
As an alternative to a quantitative utilitarian calculus of greatest good for the 
greatest number – or, more pointedly, for the individual proprietor -- which 
anthropocentrically confuses (eco)human rights with property and ownership rights by 
abstracting persons from the cosmic event and heart/mind from nature, my emphasis here 
is on the sustaining mutuality among all forms of being in reciprocal field-and-focus, or 
the centrality-and-commonality, that Chinese sages have called zhongyong, Keats 
negative capability, and Berry “the intimacy that originally we had with the larger 
community of life. . . . in wonder, admiration, and emotional sympathy. . . .[O]ur 
reduction of the entire universe to subservience to the human has led to our present 
situation.” Sustainability hereby is premised on reciprocally beneficial Earth-human 
interactions and on common wellbeing experienced as sustainingly resonant interbeing 
rather than on anthropocentric maximizations and schemes. In terms of an analogy 
offered by Harding, this comes with converting our predatory relationship to Earth into 
an endosymbiotic one.  This conversion is evoked and effected in terms of scientific 
research, imaginal characterizations and traditional lore and mythopoeia as well as in 
analogies among them. A contemplative analogical ecology of heartmind performs and 
sustains the informing ecology of living systems in and with cosmogenesis. 2 
The contemplative orientation I speak of is attentiveness that is self-rewardingly 
transparent to the universe in being a reflexive performance of the universe, of the field, 
and in being, to borrow the terms of Jahn and Dunne, the ententional anthropocosmic 
“self-reflexive creative organization of random sources.”  In contemplatively resonant 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  479    
anthropocosmic structural coupling is the sustaining ontohermeneutic play of 
cosmogenesis to the extent ego is self-forgetful. It extends beyond, dissolves or 
recontextualizes, without naively ignoring or denying, the utilitarianism conventionally 
understood as seeking increased privative gains from an externalized universe. Especially 
scientific cosmology, and not alone poetry or arcane ancient lore, can show us a way to 
the sustaining “hidden heart of the cosmos” through: 
. . .a new mind and a new story. . . .to experience directly the more subtle 
complexities of the seamless whole that is nature or cosmos, which 
includes the events of our moments as well as the great events of the past 
and the unformed events following from our moment now. When we learn 
to experience our world in such a manner, we will have crossed into a new 
way of being humans just as the primates crossed into a new way of being 
mammals.3  
 And as sage-mind was the clearest, least turbid form of the inherent 
psychophysical radiance of being called qi by the Chinese, the universe “breath-energy” 
that manifested as and that animated all things, so might we by interculturally mixed 
analogy today reconsider our clarities of attention and our ententions for sustainability as 
ways of more immediately communicating (with) and of reflecting or re-spiring (as) the 
self-organizing processes of the luminous field/flow of existence. In this sense, the 
“transcultural and translinguistic vocation for philosophy” is actually a performance of 
sustainable planetary econoetic respiration – in literal etymology, a conspiracy – of en-
lightenment.4  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  480    
Conspiring in the ever alternating inflow and outflow of things, unfixed in either 
or in any project or cultural worldview, especially those of unilateral control or of inertia, 
we might find ourselves better corresponding with, and expressing in dynamically 
emergent forms, the nourishing vitality of cosmogenesis itself as we in clarifying 
ourselves of ego-investments “communicate directly (‘transparently’Ψ with the pure (fullΨ 
regime of natural ‘processivity,’. . . which consequently remains continually present. This 
is the key point. . . .By methodically abandoning all [our] external and particular 
investments and concentrations that consume and dissipate vitality. . .[We] become one 
with its common source.” In this context, contemplatively reciprocal ententionality as 
contrasted with privative and exclusively instrumental anthropocentric intentionality 
would be interpretable as spontaneous (two-way) communication with the field. This 
field may be conceived philosophically and religiously as the field of being(s) and as that 
of qi, or parousia and also scientifically as its intercultural symmetry approximations in 
the quantum field, superposed humanocosmic wavefunction comprobabilities, Ȍ, and the 
field/process of compresent cosmogenesis -- the psychophysical universe of interminate 
extent.5  
Harding is again helpful in articulating and connecting some of the issues of 
importance first in reminding us that the autopoiesis of the self-organizing systems of the 
universe is also its “self-poetry” – the self-singing poetry of living systems and beings as 
well as our own emergent narrative participation with them as a voicing of Earth. He 
also, in underlining Gregory Bateson’s views of “nature [a]s a vast interconnected 
‘mind’” and an “ecological community [a]s a coherent being with its own emergent 
‘mental’ state,” one with which our own mentality coinheres, makes a bridge to the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  481    
contemplative sensibility that allows us more “entense” and more consciously alert 
participation in this “mind” in noting that Bateson understood that our rational thought 
often interferes with “our ability to intuitively perceive  the ‘pattern that connects’ – a 
deeper reality that we can only reach through the appreciation of beauty,” or something 
more luminously akin to what I have alluded to as contemplative and participant 
ontopoietics and ontohermeneutics, i. e., the “self-poetry” of anthropocosmogenesis 
which was for Leopold,  as well, “beauty [understood as] a guide to right relationship 
with nature.”6  
Correspondingly, Harding affirms, we need to integrate reason and (perhaps even 
what Gebser speaks of as deficient, overly divisive and quantitative) ratio, with sensuous 
and embodied knowing, body-knowledge, and with the lived appreciation of ecogenic 
values, by developing our intuition; “Only then are we capable of perceiving the beauty 
of the living world around us.” Akin to enacting Berry’s “functional cosmology,” this is 
also a planetary-scale analogue of the personal individuative integration of psychological 
functionality -- thinking, feeling, sensing and intuiting -- discussed by Jung. And 
ecogenic values are more likely to clarify themselves through an ecohumane, Earth-
human analogizing, postanthropocentric, contemplative and aesthetic manner of life than 
an excessively instrumental and aggressively avaricious one.7  
This, I think, is a restatement of the idea of the (self)sustaining ars contextualis of 
an aesthetic and an axiogenic, a “two-way” anthropo-cosmogenic and contemplative 
attentiveness performing (the self-)awareness of and relatively disegoed participation in 
the mutual and reciprocal articulation of the self-poetry or autopoiesis of things: their 
self-organization, our self-rewardingly attentive participation in and as this, and the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  482    
spontaneously celebratory ecopoiesis that nondualizingly expresses itself as natural 
systems (and as our) singing the universe/story. This is the music of an ecohumanism 
premised not on persistent resolute compulsions to subdue and to control the world but 
“to keep pace with life’s constant growth. . . .’to evolve in concert with the world,’ as the 
seasons do, so that through all its vicissitudes (and owing to the very constancy of 
change) we maintain our vitality as fresh as it was in its inception – springtime” proposes 
Jullien in echo of Zhuangzi. This results not so much from a rational policy or program of 
external resource management and development as from our own physical, emotional and 
mental e/cocultivation and contemplative, mindful, upkeep; it obliges us to modify our 
consciousness and behavior.8  
“If we are ever to develop a worldview that has any chance of bringing about a 
genuine ecological sustainability, we will need to move away from valuing everything 
around us only in terms of what we can get out of it.”9 And I will add that the matter is 
not just of de-emphasizing our approach to Earth-human relations from the point of view 
of what serves us, but of radically re-emphasizing an autotelic contemplation-like 
attentiveness for its own sake in all relations and interactions, whatever their nature – to 
the degree that self-rewarding contemplation sustainingly outgrows, and profoundly 
relativizes an ego-utilitarian, egocentric mode of existence. Harding assesses: 
Now that our best science has informed us of the huge ecological and 
social crises we are unleashing upon the world, we can choose whether to 
remain in the narrow, objectivist mode of consciousness that has 
contributed to the crises, or to act from a deeper, wider mode of 
consciousness in which we experience our unity with the whole of Gaia 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  483    
and hence understand the importance of radically changing our way of 
being in the world.10  
Such a choice is both an ecohumane ethical event, and it is also, given our 
coinherence in the life of Earth, the sustaining spontaneous and nonmanipulative 
attunement of our consciousness and conduct with the universe as what the earlier 
Chinese might have called the creative and re-creative resonance of Heaven, Earth and 
Humankind, tian ren he yi, or the ecology of cosmos, nature and humanity. 
In the different but nonetheless still analogous terms of complexity theorist Stuart 
Kauffman, we’re reminded that coevolutionary sustainability is most likely to occur 
neither in a rote, coercive, controlled regime nor in a regime of complete randomness and 
mutual neglect but amid variety at the margins of order and chaos. This is presumably 
where organisms are most flexibly corresponsive with their environment and one another. 
As embodiments of the environment that they simultaneously shape and are influenced 
by, this is to say that living, self-organizing and dynamically emergent, systems thrive in 
a realm of sustainably mixed order and chaos, diversity or unpredictable novelty. 
Analogues for such realms are ecological and ecopolitical settings of considerable variety 
and of the difference-that-makes-a-difference, or différance, as the case may be. Deep 
Ecology calls for “radical pluralism” of other kinds of persons’ deep experiences of 
nature, no matter how different, as well as for different ways of life, for the generous 
diversity of species in ecosystems. And White responds with the sustaining affirmations 
of  a “weak ontology” for bearing our diverse basic commitments. Yin and Yang produce 
one another.11 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  484    
A supple pivoting contemplative aptitude or Dao Shu on the threshold of novelty 
and fixation in our lives would express itself in ecologically appropriate responsiveness 
as well as in a fluently uncluttered and uneclipsed consciousness of reciprocity and 
mutual cocreation. The chaos or luan of hyperutilitarian civilization would be placed in 
sustainingly coproductive feedback relations with the natural ziran order of unforced, wu 
wei, creative, cocreative and recreative self-organizing Earth systems.12 
 
The experience of “flow” in play and other contexts found to be self-rewarding 
seems to be similarly structured. Csikzentmihalyi’s article “Play and Intrinsic Rewards” 
describes the flow experience as a nondual merging of interaction and awareness with an 
often accompanying contemplation-like loss or diminution of ego or self-consciousness, 
sometimes a “fusion with the world.” More generally, and similar to the sustainable 
evolutionary optimization models of Kauffman, he also observes that flow tends to 
manifest when the activity involved is neither too structured and rote nor intolerably 
punctuated by excessive novelty, threat or imposition. Flow is autotelic; it has itself as its 
end; like play, it is spontaneous and authentic engagement. In the language of myth, play 
or Lila is the characterization of the divine ever-ongoing transformation of the universe 
often depicted as Shiva Nataraja. The preceding pages have suggested that our 
contemplative flow as expressed in narrative, aesthetic and ecoethical forms of this play 
is a cosmomorphic analogue with and a participation of what might be poetically called 
the self-cultivating yoga practice of sustainably ever-ongoing cosmogenesis, or 
intrinsically rewarding autopoietic cosmopoiesis.13  
 
And in further liberating the intimacies of a mature contemplative’s ecosocial 
virtuosity in Earth-human sustainability, we may adapt Hershock’s discussion of Ch’an 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  485    
or Zen Buddhism. Understanding awakening or enlightenment here is seeing it not as 
private “but as irreducibly and intimately social.” Expanding our circle of attentive, 
ententional and compassionate or sustaining relationship in ecosocial mindfulness to 
include all organic, living, sentient (and other emergently dynamic) forms of coexistence, 
we can express this awakening in our spontaneous performance of the natural flow of 
eco-anthropo-cosmo-genesis. For the Daoist, to take one example, acting naturally is, as 
Hershock relates, “conduct without precedent (wu-wei) – conduct that is spontaneous and 
complete” or ziran. It is “uncontaminated by the calculated divisiveness of ends and 
means. . . .The person of profound te [de, naturalness or ease] expresses the tao with 
unselfconscious virtuosity, freely improvising [satisficing] – and hence becoming 
inseparable from – whatever comes his or her way. To summarize. . . manifesting te 
entails an active extension of our naturalness and responsibility. . . .a ‘silent bond’. . . . 
refus[ing] to say: ‘That belongs to your story. . .is your doing, your problem and not 
mine.’” The mature contemplative ecosocial entention “quietly and unprecedentedly” 
performs the sustaining and sustainable “interdependence and intimacy of all things. . . . 
No matter what happens, it is entirely oneself. . .(literally ‘one’s own family’Ψ” or what 
Gary Snyder has celebrated in the same ecopoietic vein as “Earth House Hold.”14  
Activities of self-rewarding ziran or ecosocial flow are demonstrably more 
satisfying and less eco-intolerant in their im-mediacy than are those whose 
instrumentalism by definition displaces reward outside authentic engagement into ulterior 
zones of gain, prestige or domination. Flow at this point might be described as the 
inherently self(lessness)-satisfying experience of macro-cosmogenesis realizing itself in 
our sustaining contemplative micro-cosmogonic relations. A pertinent Aquarian pun with 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  486    
Rumi would be, “you are not a drop in the ocean; you are the entire ocean in a drop.” 
This is a variant expression of a mystical or a nondual and processual view with robust 
ecopolitical and eco-egological implications. And a functional contemplative cosmogony 
expressed in our thinking, our languaging, our choices and our conduct would amount to 
a “functional” or an “operational mysticism,” an appropriate nondual existential 
ontohermeneutic of spontaneous celebratory authenticity. Emphasized another way, our 
“choosing” in the experience of flow may be understood as our being drawn to or attuned 
in and with authenticity (cheng, Gelassenheit) -- openness to being(s’Ψ self-organizingly 
sustaining ongoing-wholing -- and thus as an emergent ecohumane mode of 
improvisational metasystemic self-cultivation.15 
From a dualistic theological perspective, it might also be added here that even 
where there is no human consciousness present effectively to real-ize cosmogenesis, God 
still hears the trees falling. But then again, as systems theorist Erich Jantsch has offered, 
the entirety of cosmogenesis is coconscious throughout in some way yet unclear to us: 
The God-idea does not stand above and outside of evolution as an ethical 
norm, but in true mysticism is placed into the unfolding and self-
realization of evolution. . . .Since we have called the self-organizing 
dynamics of a system its mind, we may now say that God is not the 
creator, but the mind of the universe.16  
 
Rather than dwell expressly on the ontological status of God, I will temporarily 
table the question with the cosmologist Sir James Jeans who proposed in his book The 
Mysterious Universe the recursive and uroboric notion that, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  487    
[T]he universe begins to look more like a great thought than like a great 
machine. Mind no longer appears as an accidental intruder into the realm 
of matter. . .[but as] the mind in which the atoms out of which our 
individual minds have grown exist as thoughts.17  
Jeans was writing in an earlier generation, and contemporary cosmology has 
changed since.18 But throughout, from its Big Bang to its Great Flaring Forth to its 
Metaverse, Singular and Quantum Vacuum Fluctuation variations, scientific cosmology 
has played the themes of ever-present luminosity and diaphaneity and of the evolutionary 
genealogy that connects ecohuman creativity with creatio continua. Haisch told us light 
is what sustains all things, and Zhuangzi that “the transparency of morning” is the fullest 
expression of their vitality in and through us. 
Revisiting metaphors of en-light-enment and luminosity as illuminations or 
releasements of the opacity of a restrictive egocentrism, of hyperpurposive 
anthropocentrism, of densifications in the field, and as the diaphaneity of two-way 
communication, of imparting/receiving resonance, with/in/as the field, I return to the 
astrophysicist Bernard Haisch, who proposed in The God Theory the Kabbalistically 
informed view that light, as the radiance of the all-subtending and all-pervading quantum 
vacuum or zero-point field is “progenitor of an apparent universe of matter” and that light 
creates space, time and matter. Our genuinely realizational “knowing” of the ever-
presently originative light-field would by his formulations not be instrumental or 
objective. But it would instead be the self-realizing, the enlightenment or lighting-up, the 
awakening, of a universe reducible, decomposable, neither to subjects nor to objects. This 
is the imagery of a universe coming to conscious and unlimiting self-realization or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  488    
ongoing-wholing-real-izing. And in the trend of his thinking, Haisch repeats the 
additional contribution to the dialogue between religion and the natural sciences that, 
“there may be a spiritual substance to science as well as a scientific substance to spirit, 
with light as the key link. The time has come to reintegrate the two.”19  
You may recall that he, with his colleagues Puthoff, Rueda and others has 
speculated that our entire universe – and notably the physical inertia of bodies -- may not 
be a fundamental but a derivative, a fluctuation in the zero-point sea of quantum 
luminosity. My analogous speculation has been linked with the early Chinese experience 
of qi.  Qi  is the rarefied all pervading “psychocosmic” vitalism which, pure, subtle, 
pliant and uncluttered by impositional design is primal Heaven; and it is the self-
luminous mind of the sage. Qi as it becomes progressively more turbid, murky, opaque or 
dense is what we experience as our discursive, conventional and habituated thoughts, our 
ego-aggrandizing intentions and, eventually, as the inertia of matter. These, quantum 
inertia and opacity and dense or static Qi, may be taken as analogous cross-cultural 
expressions of inertia, of drag or habituation in, or of, the otherwise pliantly fluid 
psychocosm and of what Gebser calls the diaphaneity and transparency of “ever-present 
origin” in his book by that title.20  
 
It’s not necessary literally to equate Qi with the zero-point energy or with an 
akashic field or either of these with the ever-present origin of which Gebser wrote. That 
would contribute, in Gebser’s outlook, to mistaking a part, the cultural formulation, or an 
idea, for experience of/as a diaphanous and ever-ongoing wholing. It would also in its 
mental/rational totalism imitate and magnify or exacerbate the ego-sensibility that is in 
question. Taken together, however, these analogues (of one another) do also connote 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  489    
something meaningful of the interminate and emergently dynamic ongoing-wholing 
whose (co-self) real-ization and ecohumane forms of sustainability I think are associated 
with a considerably more contemplation-like conduct and consciousness than prevail in 
most quarters today. I do mean, as I’ve indicated throughout, to offer evocative 
intercultural and transdisciplinary analogies for ways we can come to resonant 
cosmogonic, cosmomorphic or cosmogenic functioning having a scope beyond 
sustainability. And if, as Berry has proposed, the universe is the only self-referential 
experience, that by which all others are rendered meaningful in their wholeness, I must 
note again with Hall and Ames in their Thinking Through Confucius the aptness of a 
multivocal existential/analogical ars contextualis (as contrasted with a univocal, 
positivistic scientism or with ontologia generalis. i. e., science of the essence of things), 
for understanding and directly experiencing/performing the more-than-sustaining eco-
value of celebratory, contemplative cosmos-referential co-consciousness and conduct. I 
take heart, and tutelage, from Primack and Abrams where they counsel: “We have to 
learn how to juggle multiple universe images. Seeing really takes a lot of imagination – 
but it takes disciplined imagination, which is sensitive to scientific knowledge, humble 
before it, and committed to consistency with it.” But we are not obliged to defer to it 
unalloyed or to exalt it. Science too, like religion and philosophy, begins in wonder and 
in imaginals; and, according to Blake, “What is now proved was once, only imagin’d.” 
We have not seen a finale to this cycle.  We have to feel and to imagine what we know 
before, and even more after the (f)act. The imagined offers the hyothesized; and 
verification and falsification are as much antecedent as consequent choices. The play of 
anthropocosmogenesis is en-chantment. 21 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  490    
Analogy is a most rewarding “tropism” and helpful tactic in accommodating 
ourselves with, and in expressing or in more-than-sustainably performing, a processual 
and nondual universe experience that can only fragmentally be reduced to separated 
concepts, essences and entities having only external or mechanical relations with one 
another. And in a universe that seems increasingly to be one of plural or indeterminate 
dimensions and orders, (not least because of our own cosmogonic consciousness 
participation, as Jung thought of it, and what I spoke of as its now anthropocosmic 
contemplative self-cultivation) analogy appears to be a more apt manner by which 
simultaneously to negotiate and cultivate nondual ambiguity, uncertainty, plurality and 
incompleteness. For if, per Gödel, no mode or algorithm of the universe, of 
anthropocosm itself, is rationally self-verifying, we must, per Wilden and Gebser and the 
lineage of poets, apply to and, ultimately, embody another kind of meaningfulness – the 
moreso if the question is one of ecohumane survival and not of abstract reasoning alone. 
In an intuitive or holonomic understanding, we are invited to what Wu Kuang-ming calls 
the evocative, rather than a positivistic or apodictic, hermeneutics. This will be an 
analogical ontohermeneutics of resonance and compenetration that experientially 
understands the singularity of events, meanings and things as their unique and multiform 
compresencing of a discursively polythetic and existentially interminate wholing.22  
Such a nondualizing and aperspectival, as Gebser used the term, metamethod in 
its supersession of only from-to or subjective-objective dichotomizations and fragmented 
knowing would approximate a nondirective contemplative wu wei or accommodating and 
nonassertive, noncoercive yet not arbitrary associative and interexistential interaction 
without impositional effort, i. e., a pliantly resonant existential ontohermeneutic premised 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  491    
not on deliberate principles, agenda and programs (wu nian, wu zhi) but circumstantially 
and unfixedly expressive of the nondualizing ententionality, co-tentionality and the 
autotelic and celebratory attentionality of engaged e-co-flowing responsiveness with/as 
the world. With respect to the natural scape, it would probably feel more like the 
whitewater kayaking religious experience described by Sanford than it would the 
establishment of another gainful trade doctrine, petrochemical plant or administrative 
protocol.23  
Sounding a similar note, Jullien reports in the language of Zhuang Zhou that our 
“capacity for ‘voiding’ and ‘evacuation’” of our hang-ups and ego-fixations through 
procedures of concentration and contemplative attentiveness would “reestablish complete 
processivity throughout one’s being” in restoring a nondualizing experience of the 
organic and the mental modes of life and ongoing worlding. “This continues” he 
emphasizes, “until the ‘transparency of morning’ is attained, at which point life is 
cleansed of its opacity and everything is once again part of a process of development.” 
Jullien notes further that terms like “meditation” are probably inadequate to designate this 
kind of ecohumane “harmonization” and “nourishment,” and suggests that 
“integralization” better expresses the development and cultivation of full ecoresonant 
vitality of the kind I encourage.24  
 
By another Chinese trope, thinking and authentically, ontohermeneutically 
knowing, guan, zhi, or real-izing by analogy and comparative, stereoscopic ge yi, is a 
way of hiding, lodging or etho-placing the (self-referent) universe in the universe, as 
Zhuangzi said – that way you can’t lose it. Only the ongoing universing is big enough to 
hold the polytropic universe; it has no lesser algorithm. By evoking through analogy (shu, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  492    
existential reciprocity, poetic metaphor, synecdoche, etc.) as contrasted with de-finition 
the diversified communion among meanings, as also among beings and things, we will 
not lose them or misuse ourselves. They symbiotically echo, holonically evoke and 
fractally sustain one another in polyphonic meaning as they do in their ecological 
interbeing. The diversified complementarity of their (our) mutuality carries all together 
optimally beyond where (the lesser algorithm of) sustainability alone can in a mutual 
resonance of beings and meanings in the omnicentrizing “continuum of Being.”25  
Recounts Jullien, “Wisdom consists in expanding the range of things. . .so that the 
whole world appears as a process ‘involving countless transformations that have no end’” 
the real-ization of which evokes “incalculable joy” and has “no trace of a world behind” 
or external to the world. It is enough to find the world and the fullness of the vitality and 
meaning of worlding in fully attending and resonantly participating as a mode of its 
realization rather than in unsustainably accosting it for external prizes or ego-picked-out 
attachments. Therefore, the sage finds the World in our daily coworlding and restores to 
realities their “common vocation of ‘communicating’ and ‘passing’”; sήhe joins with 
them in sustainable transitions which are “processive rather than ephemeral. The 
transitional is thus not impermanent but a useful [sustaining] element in the vast 
[co]’operation’ of things (daoΨ. . . .The sage welcomes but does not cling.” Utilitarian, 
objectivistic or manipulative externalization algorithms are recreationally in-determined 
and enlivened by ecopoetic narratives which as they approximate its contemplative 
resonance spontaneously perform and sustain the auto- and ecopoietic mutualities of 
functional and celebratory anthropocosmogenesis. Extend things in all directions to make 
not-two.26 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  493    
But mutuality is not dissolution. On one hand, this interminate process/continuum 
is expressed anew by the classical dictum of Zhang Zai that in contemplative integral 
maturity we realize that we form “one body with Heaven, Earth and myriad things.” On 
the other, points out Tu in his essay “The Ecological Turn in New Confucian 
Humanism,” “forming one body is not a romantic idea about unity but a highly 
differentiated sense of interconnectedness.” More pointedly, suggests the “contemplative 
science” of Wallace, continuity of being might be better thought of as discerning 
solidarity with the emergently conscious ongoing, not as immersion in it: “the reified 
division between material and immaterial seems to melt away. . . . Since physicists have 
jettisoned matter as some metaphysical stuff whose mechanisms account for all natural 
phenomena, it is time to consider alternatives to the naive assumptions of both monistic 
materialism and Cartesian dualism.” Indeed, the existential analogy of shu, of likening 
oneself with other beings, with the minute uniqueness of others, like a literary analogy, 
encourages us, as Confucians say, to form one body in human kindness (ren) with all 
others and all things. Therefore, the Daoist sage makes excursions into what cannot be 
lost. Once again, “Where neither It nor Other finds its opposite is called the axis of the 
way [Dao Shu or pivot of the Dao]. . . . there is no limit to responding with either. . . . 
Therefore I say: ‘The best means is Illumination.’” 27  
 
This illumination may come in diverse ways and yet sustainingly congregate the 
many dimensions of the “interbeing of cosmology and community.” One of these ways is 
found in immediate appreciation of the obvious (often used to translate ming, or 
illumination) shining as or shining-through of the sheer beauty of the naturalness, of 
natural phenomena – the coursing current, Earthquake, the gambols and ruminations of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  494    
wildlife, feral intensity, the play of children, the unaffected spontaneity of anyone at 
home in the universe. This quality of the natural in Chinese tradition is ziran or, once  
again, “that-which-is-of-itself-what it-is.” This is the nonformulaic “self-soing” that rings 
true in our experience of natural, wild and aesthetic settings as much as in our response to 
true friends, children, animals and rare political candidates. In such cases, the words of 
Theodore Roethke apply when he says in his poem “Infirmity,” “A mind too active is no 
mind at all; ή The deep eye sees the shimmer on the stone.”28  
Yet another version of clarifying naturalness is expressed in Heidegger’s notion 
of Gelassenheit or the releasement of our spontaneously ongoing worlding from the 
captivation of unrelievedly instrumental thinking. Still another is the “negative 
capability” about which Keats wrote in a letter, 1κ1ι – the wu wei aptitude to rest easy 
amid mysteries, uncertainties and doubts without irritably reaching after fact, reason and 
apodictic result as if these were the only tools for every job. And yet again, Gödel’s 
Theorem offers a variant illuminative resource, the recognition that any time we think we 
have a complete mathematical or philosophical system or even a national/economic 
ideology, we discover there is something unsystematized, externalized, on which it is 
dependent for its meaning. We reach out to conscript that into our plan, and find the same 
finally unsystematizable result. Our ordered thought world is opacity in a dance with 
some version of luminosity. Chants the zaddik Leonard Cohen, “There is a crack in 
everything. ή That’s how the light gets in.” 29  
As Hall puts the matter, and simultaneously opens light on what Zhuangzi had to 
say above and on what Confucian tradition has said elsewhere, the Eros of our purposeful 
desire for wholeness and the ordering or systematization of experience is inevitably 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  495    
counterpoised with the Irony of minute particulars in their self-soing. His words strike me 
as important for an understanding of the possibility of contemplative conduct as more-
than-sustainably self-organizing resonance among always unique living beings and of 
beings in symphony with the multiform processes of cosmogenesis. What he says might 
well have been written in ancient Chinese (or coevolutionary systems theory). For 
example: 
 
 
. . .[I]n order meaningfully to assert the possibility of an indefinite number 
 
 
of self-creative events, self-creativity must be interpreted as cocreativity.  
This may be done only if the polar [yinyang] character of each event is 
seen as the paradigm instance of the relations among events. To claim that 
events may be cocreative is but to say that the primary basis of 
relationships among entities is that of deference.30  
 
I offer a transposition of his words into the key of this essay and retain the 
Chinese inflection. In order meaningfully and enrichingly to sustain the variety of life in 
resonance with Earth (and whatever other worlds we meet), the heterogeneous lifeways 
of each of the ten thousand kinds of things must be understood as unique, mutual and 
analogous. Each form of life -- organelles within organisms, creatures among species, 
diverse species within biota within landscapes and seascapes within and beyond the 
consciousness and craft of humankind -- all are wheels moving within wheels the weal of 
whose overall symbiotic mutuality in the sustainability zone of the ecohumane is the 
performance of mutual deference, empathy, compassion, or reciprocity or, in the 
emergent teleodynamics of which Deacon has written, “the superposition of the present 
and the absent in our functions, meanings, experiences, and values.”31  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  496    
Shu in Confucian and Daoist China connoted very much this reciprocity and 
deference. The marriage of reciprocity and ententionality is self-rewarding flow in all 
circumstances. Irreducible to a rational program, algorithm or rule and minutely varying 
with time and circumstance (e. g., sensitive to present effects on future generations) the 
combined feedback and ecohumanistic self-cultivation of shu in fruitfully sustaining the 
Earth-human intersystem of life can hardly be captured in rational or utilitarian 
propositions alone. These will inevitably participate, but the advent of contemplatively 
synergizing intuitive and aesthetic experience as well as inherently ecocultural ethics, 
ecoresonant conduct and related narratives will be even more the pivot on which turns the 
future of Earth. We emergently participate in and be-speak sustainable behavior and 
meaning, ecosemiosis, to the extent we are reciprocally and sustainingly in-formed by the 
spontaneities of geobionoogenesis. This appears less as a matter of any plans for 
sustaining the world than as the self-rewarding presencing of contemplatively 
defragmented ongoing-worlding in our hearts, minds and conduct.32 
 
Shu as we’ve seen earlier entails multiple implications and meanings – including 
reciprocity, self-analogy, yielding, self-likeness, deference, deferential transaction, 
sympathetic concern, altruizing, co-growthing, etc. We might now add “co-operating,” 
“symbiotizing,” and mutually “ecologizing” as we return (fan, guiΨ to Zhuangzi’s now 
ecosocial proposition that 
the subject embody the Pivot of the Way [dao shu] of things’ mutualities. 
The subject must fit himself in the Pivot, fit the Pivot ‘in the center of the 
Circle’ of the world, and thereby respond endlessly and freely to things by 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  497    
‘following along’. . .and ‘walking both’ . . . ways – the way of things and 
the way of the subject.33  
In this nonimpositional way of (non)doing the world, we ecopoietically do what 
needs doing and yet we avoid damagingly thinging the things in our environment and 
exaggeratedly making marketable objects of them, much less of ourselves, in the process: 
Through spontaneous correspondences with the natural and ecosocial world not designed 
primarily for individual control and acquisition – because monopolar and monophasic 
individuality or control is not the species specific of our sustaining interbeing. For that 
matter, as noted above, being does not require the essentialist-foundationalist categories 
of substance or entity for its adequate verition or integral mode of realization any more 
than life and consciousness, proposed Gebser, require a foundation in ego. 
And again Zhuangzi’s ancient aphorisms invite the systems science of Erich 
Jantsch on cycles of “autocatalytic self-reproduction” and of Stuart Kauffman on self-
organizing “networks” that “need not be built one component at a time [but] can spring 
full-grown from a primordial soup,” to celebrate that all ecosocial things are 
endosymbiotically “mutually involving and arranging. . . themselves in wheels and 
wheels.” “Such a wheeling is always beginning (always [as Zhuangzi says] ‘yet to begin 
to begin. . .Ψ’ and so without definite beginning or end.’” We’re reminded once more that, 
“Things mutually wait on one another, and are waited on by one another. . . .All this 
illustrates a radical interdependence among things. . . .ontological interdependence.” And 
we are brought back to Laszlo’s Connectivity Hypothesis about a “coherent universe, 
where all things are intrinsically connected” and Haisch’s idea that in the not-twoness of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  498    
the zero-point field, there is a “principle of complementarity. . . between reality as a 
scientific experiment and reality as a spiritual experience.”  
In Thomas Berry’s words, 
. . .[T]he universe from the beginning must be a psychic-producing 
process. . . .If the unity of the universe is one aspect of the wisdom of 
science, another aspect is the emergent nature of the universe. The third is 
the existence of human intelligence as an integral component of the 
universe. The story of the universe becomes the epic story of our times.  
And he writes of the world concert of insights offered from the entirety of 
nondual and beyond-sustainability understanding that, “. . .no one of these traditions is 
sufficient. We need all of the traditions”;  or what I have elsewhere described as the  
nondual “global noetic repertoire.” 34  
Endnotes: Illuminating Variants and Analogues 
1.) the true artist, Zajonc 1993: 342-43 passim; Primack and Abrams: 140-41 speak of 
ourselves being concentric with the nature of light and the universe in telling us of “the 
lightcone” and that “Runners are coming from all over the universe with news of their 
eras, in every form of radiation and the strangest languages anyone’s ever heard; the 
cosmological revolution is human beings finally beginning to understand and put the 
whole story together” 
2.) zhongyong see field and focus, Ames and Hall 2001, centrality and commonality, Tu 
1989; Keats see N. Scott; Berry 2006: 35, and see Rifkin; Harding: 165, 226-27 
3.Ψ Jahn and Dunne 2ί11: 1κ9, these authors add (191Ψ that “the consistent appearance in 
our small-scale studies of anomalous signal-to-noise ratios on the order of 1 part in 104 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  499    
across numerous devices, operators, and types of experiment. . . .[a]lthough derided even 
in some parapsychological research quarters as an uninstructive focus on ‘itsy-bitsy bias 
in contrast to dogged searches for larger effect sizes from ‘gifted’ subjects. . . . [shows] 
that this scale of anomalous experience is much more routinely available to a large 
portion of human culture, and to a wide range of technical, social, and personal 
applications”; also see McTaggart, Radin, Elgin, Stapp; a new mind and a new story, 
Swimme 1996: 26; see Abram 2011 
4.) transcultural and translinguistic vocation for philosophy, Jullien 2007: 77, 159 
5.) communicate directly, Jullien 2007: 18; communication with the field see Laughlin 
1996, and see Laughlin and Throop 
6.) self-poetry in Harding: 153, G. Bateson, Leopold in Harding: 216; Primack and 
Abrams: 29κ chime in, “Artists, take heed: realistic art is considered old-fashioned, but 
art that portrays the new universe realistically could be the most subversive art in  
history” 
7.) Harding: 216; on integration also see Roszak 1979; for alternative scenarios see in 
Shepard: 153 “The hot-rodders have had enough. . .’of contemplation, and of the old 
sublimities. . . .’” It is time for “travel as participation in movement, the sensation of 
acceleration” through which, he quotes John B. Jackson, we will “eventually enrich our 
understanding of ourselves with a new poetry and a new nature mysticism”; also see 
Shepard’s critique (155Ψ of Pieper’s idea of contemplative leisure; see also Sheets-
Johnstone The Primacy of Movement 
8.) to keep pace, Jullien 2007: 148; see Scott, J. C., and Morin 2008  
9.) if we are ever to develop, Harding: 222 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  500    
1ί.Ψ now that our best science, Harding: 225; another reading of Harding’s premise is 
something like: The pattern of cosmogenesis elucidated by science appears to be one of 
mutual co-production among non-self-subsisting modes or events nonlocally 
interconnected and compenetrating in complex emergent processes of self-aware mutual 
evocation. The closest analogue to this pattern is the ecopo(i)etic sage – the entire ocean 
in a drop; the Earth/universe in a grain of sand; Heaven in the wildflowers; also see Odin: 
11.); difference that makes a difference, G. Bateson 1979: 99; différance, Derrida 1978; 
deep ecology see Devall and Sessions; it is not amiss to think of nonhuman beings as 
nonhuman persons, see Wendell Berry in The Hedgehog Review (2012): 65, for that 
matter see Matthew Hall, Plants as Persons, or see Narby or, again, Abram (2011); on 
meaning emergent in mixed order and chaos see Jeremy Campbell 
12.) dao shu (tao shu) as conceptual and existential pivot of the dao, see Wu 1990: 175, 
242, 256, 178, passim; luan, ibid.: 1ι2 and,  “Since dynamic self-arrangements among 
things make up the world, their being-arranged unmakes the world in confusion (luanΨ” 
which we experience as civilization, program, ego-agenda for gain, improvement, etc. 
13.) Csikzentmihalyi, also see Maslow; S. Kauffman 1993, 1995; lila see also Guenther 
1989: 223 on the mature contemplative awakening experience of and as “pure 
experience. . . felt as the whole’s (Being’sΨ creativity. . . which through its imaginative 
play. . .effect[s] its own adornment. . .which thus serve[s] to heighten the beauty of its 
background. The implication is that even the low-level cognitive intensity that 
characterizes a human being has nothing ugly about it. It is one of the many possible 
manifestations of an awe-inspiring mystery forever engaged in virtual and actual 
symmetry-breaking processes” such as individual mind and subjectivity, including 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  501    
passionήaddiction, conceitήarrogance. . . . (ibid.: 224Ψ “[L]ow-level cognitive intensity is 
meant to describe Being’s holomovement in what is said to be its errancy mode, which is 
primarily a self-fragmentizing movement” (ibid.,225Ψ; autopoietic cosmopoiesis see 
Maturana and Varela; see also Mazzotta 
14.) irreducibly and intimately social, Hershock: x;  conduct without precedent, ibid.: 129 
passim. 
15.) operational mysticism, Burneko 1981a, 1986, 1988, 1992, 1997, 2003; metasystemic 
self-cultivation see Morin 2008: 28-29; see also Hessel and Morin 
16.) Jantsch 1980: 308; see S. Kauffman 2008; see also Deacon 
17.) Jeans 1931: 58; see S. Kauffman 1995, 2008; see Deacon; also see Elgin, Stapp, 
Harding; see Cosmic Uroboros in Primack and Abrams passim 
18.) contemporary cosmology, e. g., Swimme 1984, Swimme and Tucker 2011, 
Chaisson, Greene, Hawking, Smolin, Laszlo 2003, Gleiser, Primack and Abrams; and 
this just in: “’God Particle’ Rumors Strengthened by Tevatron Data” 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/large-hadron-collider/9370677/God-Particle-
rumours-strengthened-by-Tevatron-databr.html/ (accessed 7.2.12) 
19.) progenitor, Haisch 2006: 119; spiritual substance to science, ibid.: 152 
20.) has speculated that our entire universe, Haisch 2006: 76; see Abraham and Roy; see 
Laszlo 2003, 2004 
21.) not necessary literally to equate, and I am also sensible of the issues raised by 
Whitehead and others about misplaced concreteness; Berry1999: 170, 190; Hall and 
Ames 199-200, 248, 246-249, 288-90, 296-304; Primack and Abrams: 280; Blake 1970: 
36; see Hodgson Theology and Modern Physics; see also Margenau and Varghese; and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  502    
see von Franz 1992: 259, 257-266, on “disciplined imagination,” “arbitrary association,” 
and mathematical and mythical logics; see von Franz 1980 and Hadamard; in  the 
singular universe argument of Unger and Smolin, different/multiple universe images may 
refer to the one universe in different phases or modes of development—there need not be 
one set of eternal laws or interpretive strategies for an evolving, self-interpreting 
anthropocosmogenesis 
22.) can only fragmentally be reduced, Burneko 1997; and see Guenther 1989, note #13 
above, on the Tibetan Buddhist interpretation of the “errancy” mode; Gödel in 
Hofstadter; analogical ontohermeneutics see Wu 1990; and see Cheng 1995; see also 
Neville for experiential understanding and the conduct or performance of sustaining 
value; discursively only ambiguously “effable” 
23.) another gainful trade doctrine see J. Scott; and see also White on the sustaining value 
of weak ontology amid a sea of completing ontological commitments 
24.) Jullien 2007: 158; integralization see Jung, Gebser 1985, also see Esbjörn-Hargens 
and Zimmerman; Zhuang Zhou = Zhuangzi; cf. the “integral ecology” of Pope Francis 
25.Ψ that way you can’t lose it see Cook; has no lesser algorithm see S. Kauffman 1995; 
omnicentrizing, Swimme 1996; continuum of being, Tu 1985 
26.) wisdom consists in expanding the range of things. . . .common vocation, etc. see 
Jullien: 116-17; see Burneko 1991, 1992.  They approximate its contemplative resonance 
in that ecohumanely eventuated narratives, contemplatively disabled of anthropo-ego 
hypertrophy, enact the self-organizational ongoing-wholing of a cosmogenesis ever 
expressive of coevolutionary eco/semiosis (see Corrington, see Swimme and Berry) 
which emergently performed in human and recursively anthropocosmic tropes, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  503    
imaginaries and forms of conduct loosens the vise of instrumental grasping and whose 
un-twoed reach (in reciprocity, dialogical and coconstitutive intimacy, ecosocial 
harmony) self-rewardingly performs (our) spontaneous singing of the universe as singing 
by the universe; writing of “omnicentric  holism” scholar of Chinese philosophy Brook 
Ziporyn (in Cook: 35) repeatworthily says in terms we may appropriate for a 
wholesomely sustaining ecohumane songήfuture: “each point in any whol[ing] is a center 
of that whole, such that each one adequately represents, perceives, includes the whole. . . 
.any part is the whole itself, and all the parts inherently include each other”; compare the 
mathematical cosmologist Brian Swimme writing in his similarly worthy The Hidden 
Heart of the Cosmos (112Ψ that “The consciousness that learns it is at the origin point of 
the universe is itself an origin of the universe. . . .We are all of us [and all our relations] 
arising together at the center of the cosmos”; see also the meditatively holistic physics of 
David Bohm and the contemplative cosmology of Primack and Abrams; see Tu, trans., 
Zhongyong, or “Centrality and Commonality” 
27.) Tu in Tu and Tucker, eds., 2004: 482, 493; Wallace: 40; existential analogy, Selover 
in Tu and Tucker 2004: 60; axis or pivot of the way, Zhuangzi, Graham, trans.: 53; 
forming one body with all others and all things is reminiscent of the Catholic (from 
Greek kata holos, concerning the whole) Church doctrine of the mystical body of Christ, 
see also http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/400846/mystical-body-of-Christ/ 
(accessed 7.3.12); axis of the way also see Wu 1990: 140-41; on the relation between 
ourselves, stuff, metaphysical stuff and mathematical structures see Tegmark 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  504    
28.) interbeing of cosmology and community see Grim; ming see Raphals chap. 4; ziran 
see Wagner; Roethke http://www.inspirationalstories.com/poems/infirmity-theodore-
roethke-poems/ (accessed 7.1.12) 
29.) negative capability see N. Scott; Gödel see Hofstadter 
30.) Hall: 248 
31.) Deacon: 545 
32.) see Berry 1999: 50-51; n. b. noogenesis in Teilhard de Chardin 
33.) Wu 1990: 175 
34.) Jantsch: 101;  S. Kauffman 1995: 45; for a relevant discussion of Zhuangzi see Wu 
1990: 179, 180, 173 original emphasis; see Laszlo 2003:101; see Haisch 2006: 150; 
Berry 1999: 192-193, 194; Burneko 2003: 107; once again Sideris offers a valuable 
critique 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  505    
 
15.0 Sustaining Ecosocial Mindfulness: Syllogism, 
Synchronicity & Yijing 
 
When I first consulted the Yijing about this essay and my understanding of 
engagement with the classic as a (model for) performance of more-than-sustainable 
humanocosmogenesis – the mutual cogrowthing of Heaven, Earth and Humankind in our 
lived experience – it temperately replied to my wet-behind-the-ears enthusiasm with 
Meng,  gua #4, translated “Juvenile Ignorance,” (by Lynn, and also called “Youthful 
Folly,” “Immaturity,” and “Uncultivated Growth,” by othersΨ that “it is fitting to practice 
rectitude here” because cultivating rectitude in one’s ignorance “is the meritorious task of 
the sage.”1  
And Mengzi from long before our own time of excess and environmental 
uncertainty has often reassured us that anyone can indeed mature to become sage-like. 
Yet although we are as old as coevolving Heaven and Earth, in the practical conduct of 
our daily individual and international environmental affairs we are still maturing – as 
differentiating foci of existential uniqueness learning and sharing the interexistential 
relations of the ten thousand kinds of cosmic, Earthly and ecosocial things. Here, our 
excessive ignorance, or related anthropocentric arrogance, can threaten the sustainability 
of what Thomas Berry has often called mutually beneficial Earth-human relations. Thus, 
sagely rectitude in our environmental conduct might today be reinterpreted in the 
language of the “Earth Charter” where it states, “when knowledge is limited, apply a 
precautionary approach” or what I have elsewhere called a “precautionary ethos of wu 
wei” or nonimposition in our relations with the natural environment. I think modeling our 
conduct on the synchronicity or universe/human analogy performed with Yijing – yet not 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  506    
mindlessly following it at every turn – may afford us such an ethos and serve as a mature 
complement, if not also as a whole-some context, for unchecked anthropocentrizing ego 
and its instrumental ratio. The value of Yijing in this context is not foremost in its 
potential situational guidance or feedback, though that is not incidental, nor even in the 
possible focus it gives on incipient changes in the natural or the ecosocial environment, 
but in its alternative and complementary relation both to discursive rationalism and to the 
heavy-handed egocentrism so often deploying it. By inviting us to pronounced 
attentiveness without expectation of gain or loss in our engagement with it, and thus with 
ongoing-worlding, it offers a site and a way and a placing of self-rewarding inter-play 
with and as cosmogenesis on Earth. We could similarly look at synchronicity as a kind of 
embodied intuition, a way of constellating all the dimensions of an ecosocial issue 
unreduced to person, nature, mind or feeling. In a larger sense, synchronicity in a given 
context may also be analogized as a concrete nondual presencing of cosmogenesis, or of 
the unus mundus field/ententionality/disposition/aptitude.2  
Perhaps it would be better to speak at this historical point of a non-divisive 
rationality, of a non-mereological ontoepistemology that is apophatic as to essences and 
holistic, integral and nondualistic as to the relation of perceiver and perceived. Just as 
Gebser speaks of the deficiency of our dominating hyper-rational and quantitative 
mentality, so may we speak of the sustaining functional efficiency of an integral and 
contemplative cosmogenic attentiveness that is analogical and complex. In Morin’s  
pregnant expression: 
Complexity is not a recipe for knowing the unexpected, but it does make 
us prudent and attentive. It does not let us fall asleep in the apparently 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  507    
mechanical and trivial determinism. . . .To shake off this laziness of mind 
is a lesson of complex thought. Complex thought does not at all reject 
clarity, order, or determinism. It knows they are insufficient, it knows that 
we cannot program discovery, knowledge, or action.3  
It’s the unbalanced compulsion to manipulate persons and other living systems 
(especially for private gain) that needs moderation and context more than the fact of 
doing it or the reasoning itself that we use in the process.  The unsustainability resides 
more in our intentionality than our method. Nevertheless, the convenience and societal 
approval of calculative means and agenda allow them to bleed (into) all facets of life: 
How much is a kidney? What is just compensation for grief and sorrow? What are the 
costs of war, peace of mind, a wild river, clean water? A functional cosmology is not 
obliged to be an always rational or a quantitative one, as Berry has already shown us in 
The Dream of the Earth. And in comparison, ego-intentionality and supposedly rational 
method often disastrously reinforce one another for familiar historical, psychological and 
philosophical reasons. Another way of alluding to this is to recognize that of course we 
need to grow vegetables, but sustainability is as much if not much more in attentiveness 
to the gardening than to the external payoff. This becomes more evidently a concern 
when we begin dealing in agribusiness on a huge corporate scale. The issue is not any 
presumed unselfishness in deeply attentive interactions, that is just a valuable eco-ethical 
byproduct, so to speak; the active ingredient is self-rewarding conduct that neutralizes 
compulsions to external gain (otherwise purchased at the cost of ecosocial and 
environmental abuse). 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  508    
Ideas of a universe that is divisible into atoms, parts and pieces along 
mereological  lines  led us to notions of mechanism and the only-external relations of 
force, push-and-pull, among mechanical parts, that justified, explained and enhanced our 
control of things. Bodies were externalized from souls, persons from nature, and we 
became parts externalized from one another as well as from cosmogenesis, over which 
we claimed dominion even as we opacified and contracted ourselves into standardized 
“units of economic duty” like those by which Joule first quantified work and dollars 
became the metric for everything including time.  Blake captured much of this process in 
his critique of  the “single vision and Newton’s sleep” he beheld at the very onset of the 
Industrial Revolution: 
. . .the Loom of Locke whose Woof rages dire Washd by the Water-wheels 
of Newton. black the cloth In heavy wreathes folds over every Nation: 
cruel Works Of many Wheels I view, wheel without wheel, with cogs 
tyrannic Moving by compulsion each other. . . .4  
The next phase of this increasingly immoderate epistemo-physiosocial (and 
physiocratic) paradigm of parts and pieces, exported by European Colonialism in the 
gradual equation of human rights with private property rights (later the Citizens United 
conflation of fiscal and corporate personhood with human or natural persons) flowered in 
the Social Darwinism of  evolutionary competitiveness. Here, all life, like all the physical 
universe, was construed as external parts (complicated or simple) acting by force or 
impulsion or otherwise in conflict and competition upon others. This became the basis 
and legitimation of unchecked capitalist as well as socialist forms of ecosocial 
exploitation and the extraction of reward from experience inattentive to autotelic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  509    
participation with/in the flow of experience itself or what Blake Romantically envisioned 
as “Wheel within Wheel in freedom revolv[ing] in harmony & peace.”5  
To the degree syllogistic and discursive rationalisms depend foremost on isolable 
premises, on separable data, univocal propositions, concepts and points of view or 
sectorizations of meaning that have their counterparts in the sectorizations of space and 
time and matter and money, self and other, mind and nature, cause and effect, etc., they 
exaggerate, perpetuate and  enforce the unsustainingly cloven-minded atomic/competitive 
external-to-external ontoepistemological “outlook” now in question. Yet the integrality of 
consciousness/experience, as Gebser speaks of it, in order to be sustainable and as a basis 
for mutually sustaining Earth-human common “whealth,” calls for a symphony of noetic 
"insights" and aptitudes (arational as well as rational) in order to supersede and maturely 
to contextualize or forestall the forced appetitive march to external gains mobilized today 
to the drum roll combinations of piecemeal rationalist-economic premises and deals 
pertaining to similarly partitioned nature and humankind. We need relearning what 
Wordsworth understood, that all we behold is half created and half perceived. This is the 
necessary untwoing of the ecology of mind and/as nature.6  
There are “terminally” separate anythings only provisionally and to the degree we 
collaborate in making them so, (first by so making ourselves separated from others in a 
stunted form of individuation). Even Planck units seem to be probabilistically 
conditioned. The first step in mereology is the separation of the observer from the 
observed, the fractioning and decomposition of what is otherwise holonic and fractal 
cosmogenesis – compresent and self-similar in all its so-called parts. Correlatively, to the 
degree life and cosmos are irreducibly inner-connected, the precautionary rectitude of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  510    
something like Yijing in the conduct of ecosocial affairs is simply a practical 
acknowledgement/phronesis that there is more to worlding than we (can?) think – 
especially if by thinking we mean the re-presentation and cognitive instrumentalization of 
(our) noetic and natural endowments rather than the dwelling poetically we find in 
Heidegger or the embodying of the spontaneities of the Earth in Berry or in the Chinese 
and many indigenous traditions.  And whether or not severable into parts called atoms 
and you and me, or nature, mind, spirit, etc., there is just too much universing going on 
all around all the time to fit and fix in one conceptually complete off-the-shelf ToE 
package. Sustainability is the self-rewarding instantiating or performing more than it is in 
the instrumental re-presenting and cognicentric schematizing of the Earth-human 
intersystem. That intersystem no more fits into a solely utilo-rational box than does 
arithmetic explain itself. And an occasional interpretive dalliance in synchronistic or 
REG-like interactions bespeaks, at minimum, both an entention of openness to diverse 
and unpredictable insights and a basic trust (as well as identification or bond) with and as 
an anthropocosm knowing, real-izing (guan, zhiΨ what it’s doing.7  
We need (un?)thinking creatively like the universe thinks – and even to narrate 
that overmuch reifies, dualizes, essentializes and ontologizes the We and the It of the 
ontopremise; we are already modes of universing. Each time we refocus (on) ourselves or 
something else in the ongoing fielding, the event-meaning topology or distribution 
changes. Time might incidentally be defined as the corresponding array or distribution of 
attending(s). With a fluent refreshment and a contemplative dehabituation of our 
conventional sensibility, supposedly absolute spacetime itself begins to feel more like the 
(co)varying distribution or array (into tenses and intensities) of an attentiveness reducible 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  511    
neither to self nor to some other than it does like an independent constant. Even more, it 
may begin to “relativize” into a music of qualitative intensities neither reduced to nor 
decomposed into separable categories of space, time, matter or mind, self/other. And, 
intimated Gebser, it becomes light, i. e., (inter)personally and cosmologically diaphanous, 
transparent or porous. At “the same time” the creative temporics in daily life of future or 
not-yet ententionality, individual and cultural history, archetypes of the collective 
unconscious, ever-present origin, ongoing Big Bang, quantum vacuum field, Ȍ, etc. are 
(and not only locally) going on. So (our) attentive participant ententionality as some kind 
of feedback or recycling of that which finally reduces neither to self nor other, to futurity 
or the present, reflexively and performatively engages/enacts the nondual mundus, the 
unitas multiplex, (in/as) the ever-self-ongoing-re-enwholing of our unique daily (also not 
necessarily only localΨ situation or “placing” ofήasήin anthropocosmogenesis. The active 
meaning of the universe is inherently compossible in each grain of sand, uniquely 
eventuating according to the circumstances of (our) always-relational attention and 
ententionality. It helps to recall that Deacon invented the term ententionality, 
distinguished from individualistic intentionality, to highlight that entention--values, 
purposes, functions, meanings, interpretations, mind, etc.-- dynamically emerge in the 
interplay of cosmogenesis. Not just anthropocentric evolutionary ego-add-ons, 
ententional phenomena are inherently emergent (and, I suggest, cosmomorphic about to 
the degree of contemplative de-selfing or un-minding) in complex, self-organizing, 
autogenic and teleodynamic systems regardless of their composition – and these systems 
are found in, and as fractal performances of, ontohermeneutic cosmogenesis. . . as far as 
the first person eye can see. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  512    
As an achronic and acausal complement, compensation, and contextualization of 
the rationalist-egoist episteme, a synchronistic reason of sustaining ontohermeneutic 
analogy might find provisional voice in Gebser’s thinking where he writes (with echoes 
of the acausal connectedness of synchronistic and nonlocal quantum events, Big Bang, 
and non-equilibrium teleodynamicsΨ of an emerging “integral” structure of 
consciousness: 
In creativity origin is present. Creativity is not bound to space and time, 
and its truest effect can be found in mutation, the course of which is not 
continuous in time but rather spontaneous, acausal, and discontinuous. 
Creativity is a visibly emerging impulse of origin which ‘is’ in turn 
timeless, or more accurately, before or ‘above’ time and timelessness. And 
creativity is something that ‘happens’ to us, that fully effects or fulfills 
itself in us. . . .Through creativity preconscious origin becomes the 
conscious present. . . .it cannot be grasped systematically. . . .origin is 
luminescing in the present,  disarraying, transforming, and liberating it.8  
 
Gebser then goes on to say of Yijing, as it says of itself, the individual 
cocreatively interacting with it comes to share in shaping the course of fate. By attuning 
hirself with its performance of the incipience and process of events s/he is increasingly 
able to understand the germinal phase of events and ententionally or reciprocally (rather 
than impositionally) to con-duct hirself accordingly – or in the terms of this essay, 
sustainingly and sustainably. “For anyone who ‘draws this oracle, it means success will 
come to hi[r] from the depth of the universe.’” Gebser recognizes of course that the Yijing 
originated in a period of what he  calls magical consciousness, just as I understand that 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  513    
today we are disinclined to give ourselves over wholesale to séances, geomancy, 
divination or the reading of entrails.9  
My project is not forgoing the meritable and hard-won achievements of keen 
reasoning in science, ecopolity or elsewhere, but complementing its resources with 
arational and genuinely contemplative attentiveness – functionally to integrate the various 
structures and aptitudes of human and of Earth-human co-consciousness in a resonant 
expression and performance of, and not simply in conceptual representation of, the more-
than-sustaining spontaneities of cosmogenesis. I think that in attending to interactions 
with Yijing and, for another example, to the circumstances that accompany notably 
nonrandom group and individual resonance in the presence of random event generators 
(REGs) and event-specific FieldREGs, we may gradually learn spontaneously to perform 
in our lives the sustaining life of the all-connected-ongoing-flowing. Conventionally 
rational, dualistic, objectivistic and ego-specific thinking is not our only or, by itself, our 
most sustaining and sustainable natural (or as Latour might say, “compositionist”Ψ  
resource. 
The courage to be and to thrive in sustaining commonweal is found more in the 
oxymoron of cocultivating radical authenticity than in the straightforward enforcement of 
an anthropocentric mission civilisatrice. And whether by the synchronistic idoneism of 
Yijing-like participation in the all-connecting movements of a quantum, psychoid, 
autohermeneutic cosmogenesis or by local knowledge of the minutely varying particulars 
of “placing” and dwelling together,  the Dao of a sustaining future is as much, if not 
more, likely to inhere in the sometimes passive, openly receptive contemplative 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  514    
cerebration highlighted by Obeyesekere as in aggressively clenched anthropocentric and 
unilateral ratio-centrism.10  
Another way of putting this is to propose that sustainable attentiveness with/in 
world-ing, with the process of humanocosmic unfolding we participate, a process that 
cannot finally be reduced to mind or to nature alone, is effectively co-tentiveness among 
one another and with or as the naturans that we find and probabilistically participate and 
co-create everywhere – most evidently where our narratives attend and nurture it: where 
they enact its self-attending nurture and celebration. To attend, to wait or to await with no 
undue interference or agenda, is to attend, to give heed and thus respect to and in the 
inherent and coinherent value/practice or phronesis or upaya of functional Earth-human 
inter-relating. In one culture’s phrasing, this kind of sustainingly accordant action-
without-effort is wu wei. In others’, it may also be simultaneously attending and 
performing the absential, the empty or self-emptying in kenosis, Zimzum or the ongoingly 
emergent teleogenesis of humanocosmogenesis. Still again, it is courtesy and deference. 
Not inaction, not asceticism, it is spontaneously respectful, authentic 
collaboration/collusion in and as the contemplative work/play of cosmogenesis as Earth-
Human renaissance. 
A corresponding ecohermeneutic modesty, then, entails the “recognition that there 
is no one method for solving [the environmental] problems” we have initiated, and it 
offers a different kind of knowledge than quantitative, manipulative, imperial ratio alone. 
In its combination of reason, ontohermeneutic analogy, polysemous image and intuition 
and in its associatively intelligent ge yi integrating diverse dynamics and paradigms in the 
practice of what Zhu Xi called ge wu, investigating things – observing attentively within 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  515    
and without, imagining loosely, comparing like to unlike and like to like to find 
harmonies and rhythms in the unfolding of events – it forbears from premature and 
exaggerated demands on nature by being nature-like or wu wei, ziran in its approach. 
This is the kind of cocreative interaction that sustainingly evokes and integrates the 
particular de of human aptitudes, potencies and virtues with/in the dao of humanocosmic 
emergence in forgoing or allaying ego-self as the precondition for integrative natural 
action and the concomitant extension of the de of Earth-human coevolution.11  
In this polytropic context, the “[person] of humanity,” we are reminded by Wang 
Yangming, “regards all things as one body.” And the one ecosocial body we 
ontohermeneutically participate in meaningfully sustaining on Earth is never a 
completely finished and single-ordered totum, a concluded event, project, value or 
presence amenable to a single or total interpretive ontomethodology. We live (in), as 
contemporary quantum process physicists and coevolutionary systems ecologians 
suggest, a nonlocally all-connected ongoing-wholing and an open self-organizingly 
cocreative processual flow also characterizable as the unitas multiplex of the complexity 
theorist Edgar Morin and the yiduobufen of the New Confucian Tang Junyi. At the same 
time, we and our coworlding abide as much in the narratives, paradigms and ententional 
meanings we share as we do among the elements and forces of nature that are to some 
uroboric Ȍ wavefunction extent both coconstituted in and (in the evolving teleodynamic 
awareness of complex systems) self-reflexively explored by our emergent expressions 
and our evocations of, and interactions with/as, their potentials.12  
Each apparently individual event, being or system is a unique holon, fractal or 
participating and focusing microcosm of the vast, many-ordered and interminate 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  516    
ongoing-wholing, field coincidentia oppositorum or taiji (or better, taijiwu, supreme 
ultimatelessness) sustaining our life as we perform it(s).  (Our) attentiveness is a mode of 
the re-self-contextualizing of ongoing anthropocosmogenesis. By emulating, or 
resonating with the dao of this in our conduct and choices we noncoercively, wu wei, 
participate in sustaining Earthlife and mutually beneficial or co-self-sustaining Earth-
human relations. As the quantum physicist Henry Stapp has told us, our choices are 
constituent in the ordering and expression of the universe. “We do live in a world in 
which far-apart aspects are linked in ways quite contrary to the mechanistic [or causal] 
conception of nature. . . . .[It is] a nonlocal reality in which our streams of  consciousness 
are naturally and efficaciously embedded.” And as G. Bateson, Deacon, Primack and 
Abrams cosmomorphically remind us, mind and nature irreducibly emerge through 
nondual evolutionary self-organization as a relational, reciprocal and reflexively self-
aware intersystem of co-creating yinyang differentials and analogies (or abductions) now 
capable, through (our) ententional choices and values, of participating in, degrading or 
“enflourishing” ecosocial sustainability.13 
Our sustaining ecohumane onto-phronesis may therefore rely on an ecology of 
many diverse ancient and contemporary aptitudes and resources for fruitful participation 
in this intercosm, not just on those most culturally familiar, instrumentally useful or 
rationalistically approved in (often financially) measuring and exploiting life on Earth. In 
cultivating skillful and appropriate means to living beyond sustainability in actual 
resonance or ganying with and as Earth and the dao of natural systems, ziran, we might 
well look beyond rationalized expedients alone as found in their familiar forms of 
syllogistic logics premised on anthropocentrism, external gain, dualism, objectivistic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  517    
atomism and linear cause-effect mechanism.  In the succinct terms of an attentively 
coevolutionary ontohermeneutic, “The organism receives from reality as much as it puts 
into it.”14  
Yijing and the kind of spontaneous, nonimposing (wu wei) existential resonance 
(ganying) we come to learn through it in forming a third with Heaven and Earth is an 
exemplar of the sustainingly self-renewing potentials of a universe that does not fully 
reduce to any single category of existence, ontomethodology or ontoepistemology. 
Likewise, in an undivided cosmogenesis of interminate orders and values, we half create 
and half perceive the events, meaningful analogies and narratives by which we 
sustainably live; these are not merely imposed on passive minds by authoritative canons 
of empirical or theoretical inquiry. Even such canons are (eco)culturally embedded 
narratives, nonabsolute ways of framing and (re)focusing the ongoing-flowing-wholing 
of which we are both emergents and contextualizations. 
My effort here is as much to try polythetically to invite us to the value of 
integrating ancient wisdom and modern science as it is to evoke interculturally and 
transdisciplinarily diverse notions of how we may cocultivate spontaneous, lived 
resonance with the patterns of life and affairs, li and wen, in ways that are ecosocially 
mature in sustaining thriving, mutually beneficial, Earth-human relations in the life of the 
innerconnected universe.  Playful and self-rewardingly flowful ecosocial mindfulness is 
expressed hereby in complementing (or disequilibrating) familiar or fixed habits of 
language, reason, thought, behavior and social conditioning with creatively spontaneous 
ones relativizing exclusively dis-cursive, propositional closure and instrumentalist agenda 
with a measure, and a chant, of appositional, analogical and correlational thinking – in 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  518    
the kind of circumstantial coconsciousness and conduct (even rectitude) which, as is said 
of the sage, acts according to the need of the moment and not by relying overmuch on the 
template of a system, program and policy.15 
Whereas our analytic rationalism is objectifyingly piecemeal and linear, the 
singularity of synchronistic experience is holistic and dynamically emergent as a 
presentiation, in Gebser’s terms, not as a representation or abstraction, of ever-present 
origin in life events. Its all-at-once performance of the multiply entangled psycho-
environmental relations of any circumstance including ourselves is existentially, 
sometimes surprisingly, unique rather than objectifyingly generalized in articulating (our) 
connections with and embodiment of the processes of cosmogenesis. In the practice of a 
correspondingly matured state of de-instrumentalized consciousness, argues Yuasa, we 
learn to outgrow our ego demands in functioning in resonance with the world and cosmos 
– and thus may coevolve a new kind of ecohumane interbeing. Or as he concludes in his 
book on synchronicity, “At the base of human existence is concealed the activity 
connected to the eternal cosmos that synthesizes the past and the future.”16  This may be 
another coding of the triad Heaven, Earth and Humankind in NeoConfucian lore and the 
communion/consubstantiation of the logoi/persons of interbeing in the Orthodox 
Christian tradition. 
Yuasa’s translator pertinently comments that the mature contemplative 
experiencing nondual satori realizes that this here-and-now experience is “mutually 
illuminated by the ‘mountains, rivers, blades of grass, trees, and lands’”; it falls not into 
the mutually exclusive categories of subject or object. The whole of cosmogenesis is 
implicated in every bit of itself. And in ably introducing the work of the Japanese Neo-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  519    
Confucian Kaibara Ekken, Mary Evelyn Tucker advances his related insights into (what I 
think of as humanocosmic) self-cultivation by noting that its purpose was removing 
separations “so that one’s heart could embrace all things. . . .and resonate with the 
processes of  growth and transformation in nature.” We thus come to “celebrate” the 
creativity of the universe, of “ever-present origin” as Berry and Gebser respectively say, 
as continuous with the cocreative play of our contemplative ecohumane participation.17  
In the process, whether characterized by synchronicity and satori or by the 
experiences of biophilia, of ecohumane ren, or of the co-growthful shu or sustainingly 
inclusive reciprocality with all things, we learn -- as proposed Einstein -- to widen our 
circles of compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its 
beauty. And in the self-rewarding conduct of this team play/work, we may learn not to 
stamp too deep a footprint on the natural environment. This is heart-mind or xin 
experiencing itself as the ecology of all things. As the Chan adept Mazi put it, 
“Everything is your own body. Were it not so what kind of person could there be?”18  
We might say, in this ecosocial context, that practicing Yijing and the kind of 
spontaneous, nonimposing (wu wei) interexistential resonance (guan, xiangtong, huitong, 
ganying) we come to learn through it in sharing living resonance with Heaven and Earth 
is performing and playing, is enacting and not solely interpreting or representing, the 
sustainingly self-renewing (sheng-sheng) potentials of a nondualized universe fully 
reducible or decomposable to no single category of existence or ontomethodology. With 
the help of terms offered by Cheng, we see that in our relations with Yijing the so-called 
forms or images, xiang, are simultaneously presentations, representations, discoveries 
and inventions of undivided anthropocosmogenesis. And xiang connotes precisely what 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  520    
is capable and worthy of being attended to. Additionally, we’re reminded, contemplative 
guan (or ontohermeneutically comprehensive, i. e. irreducible, participant/observation) 
“gives rise to establishing the forms as images. . .so that forms are inventions as well. In 
this sense, “guan-xiang can be said to be a [nondualizing participant/observer] process in 
which the forms of things and forms of seeing things coincide and in which the object 
and subject co-determine what look a thing has or how [a] thing presents itself.”19  
And in our nondualizing, arational and, according to Jung and Pauli, acausal 
experience of the guan xiang synchronicities of Yijing we may find, I think, a measure of 
rectitude, relativization or ecojustice, compensation or correction for the 
hypermechanistic, ego-instrumentalist and excessively anthropocentric and quantitative 
ratio logics of the “regular Western consciousness,”  whose “main task,” Pylkkö 
underscores, is “exactly. . . to suppress the inseparable and superposed aconceptual 
experience” of mind in and as nature “and reduce it to mental objects which [like 
physical ones] are as classic as possible” to manipulate and control for gain. He continues 
further in a transdisciplinary, quantum-theoretically informed vein, noting somewhat 
acerbically that, 
It is characteristic of one aspect of the human consciousness that it is able 
to exercise a kind of reifying and moderating censorship upon the rest of 
the mind, as if the holistically superposed. . .human experience which 
lacks definite space, time, objects and causality would have to be 
disambiguated by the illusion of permanency and relative immutability 
which only the projected structures of consciousness are able to create.20  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  521    
In contemplative guan xiang, however, i. e., in our fully attentive interaction with 
the imagery of the Yi and with the yinyang or Dao (of) life-events it performatively 
bespeaks, we both receive and impart meaning and value inherent in and not externalized 
from the event. We environ and enact even as we are environed, evoked, incited and 
penetrated or attuned by the interactions created and perceived among the lines of the 
hexagrams, and we learn (t)hereby to perform, and sustainingly to embody, the self-
rewarding ecosocial reciprocity, shu, and the sheng-sheng, creativity and recreativity of 
the(irΨ irreducibly subjective + objective ≈ trans-jective or a-jective event.21  
Jullien further captures some of the spirit of this in writing of Chinese poetics in 
general; and we may infer from him the corresponding ontohermeneutics of guan xiang 
in the Yi as being incitative and evocative rather than being merely representative or 
descriptive of our participant resonance with the natural and social universe. He states, 
“The world that characterizes it is that of non-duality; of the totality of possibilities, not 
of the absolute. In other words, the unfolding of the poetic image opens it to all 
perspectives by going beyond their differences; and this complete availability of 
meaning, to which poetic incitement gives access, constitutes its allusiveness.”22  
This polysemous quality of the imagery goes far beyond the dualistic ratio of 
classically mechanical, essentialistically, and univocally defined mental and physical 
parts in awakening us to and in cultivating our awareness and sustaining interaction in, 
with and as the process of ongoing worlding. Further, the interminate totality of 
possibilities Jullien mentions stands in direct analogy with the field of superpositioned 
possibilities expressed by the Ȍ wavefunction in Schrödinger’s hypothesis describing our 
participation in the unfolding of the events of the universe.23 Sounding homophonic 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  522    
variations on the theme we may even say that our contemplative interactions with the ba 
gua (the 8 trigrams of the Yi Jing) are simultaneously incitations to sustaining reciprocity, 
“insitations,” or similarly cocreative sitings, placings, enactings, dwellings and 
cohabitings of anthropocosmic coevolution, and “insightations,” or simultaneously 
inward and outward (self-) be-holdings of the phenomena of life in the senses of guan, of 
the aperspectival structuring of consciousness elaborated by Gebser, and of the Cosmic 
Uroboros in Primack and Abrams. 
Yuasa notes that our nonmanipulative authenticity or sincerity (cheng) in 
sustainably engaging and performing Yijing abides in our realization that we are passive 
beings made to be alive by and are supported by nature. At the same time, we know from 
both evolutionary and ontohermeneutic experience that the “wise passivity” of this 
realization is simultaneously complemented by the realization that we as children and as 
emergents of the self-organizing cosmogonic process also actively participate as (its) 
ententional and self-aware articulators, (re)contextualizers, interpreters and performative 
en-actors and embodiments. Sage-like sustainability and resonance in the Earth-human 
relationship appear, in result, as the “optificing” wu wei integration of anthropocosmic 
yinyang of the kind modeled in Yijing. Our acts and choices both emerge from and enact, 
and they also more-and-less ententionally affect and response-ably contextualize and 
influence the course of the nondualizable Earth-human feedback relation.24  
Zhang Zai reminds us anew, that which fills the universe we may regard as our 
body, and what directs it, as our nature. Likewise, in an all-connected cosmogenesis of 
interminate orders and values, the meaningful images, analogies, paradigms and 
narratives by which we sustainably live are presumably interactive participants and 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  523    
constituents -- are unique modes and more-or-less ententional modifications of the 
quantum-probabilistic and psychophysical, or what Jung calls the “psychoid,” archetypal 
tendencies in cosmogenesis -- and are not merely generalized or objective representations 
impressed on minds by simple causal determinism or by authoritative canons of 
soteriological, instrumental, positivistic or conceptual-theoretical inquiry as Pylkkö and 
William Blake diversely attest. The canons of (eco)culturally embedded  narratives are 
often privileged but nevertheless provisional (even if ententional) ways of framing and 
(re)focusing the ongoing-flowing-wholing of which we are both dynamically autopoietic 
emergents and reflexive contextualizations. Our stories code our universe and our 
relations in and with it; as through us the universe discovers itself anew, the stories 
(record, enable and enact the) change; Thomas Berry as well as Primack and Abrams are 
good examples in this time, Dante and Pico in earlier times.25  
Their metaphysical presumptions influence whether and how ecohumane 
resonance is sustained. An implication of this is that freedom from the mentality of a non-
sustaining personal or global (onto)narrative is found in variants of contemplative or 
aconceptual no mind (zuo wang, wu nian, wu zhi) unobstructed by canonical or 
programmatic methods and premises and therefore minutely alive to and spontaneously 
performative of the incipiencies of changing circumstances in ways most optimally 
accordant and resonant with whole, nondualizing, systems potentials.  Even a fleeting, 
almost random review of the comparatively recent online scene will reveal how the 
contemporary paradigm is shifting.26 
Put another way, we may say that the sustaining value of synchronistic images, 
events, analogies and “choices” inheres foremost in their being natural and nature-like, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  524    
ziran, in their acalculative emergence. Expanding this some, we may conceive that 
synchronicities in our lives fractally enact and display the ziran ententionality of the 
unreduced psychocosm. This is to speak of a self-rewarding coevolutionary process 
having itself, and the celebration of itself, as its end – not unlike Csikzentmihalyi’s 
characterization of play and flow, hitherto lila. This implies that the contemplative and 
unforcing wu wei of (our) sustainable participation in and as cosmogenesis bespeaks, en-
chants and participates the more-than and other-than human dimensions of cosmic (self) 
contemplation. This is no more to anthropomorphize cosmogenesis than it is to 
cosmomorphize anthropogenesis by recognizing the open-ended and even childlike 
playfulness of a universe having no external (rational or ego-interested bottom line) 
obligations. It is of itself what it is. It is, as Berry put it, self-referent. Authentically 
engaging the ziran of Yijing is contemplatively cocultivating spontaneous, lived 
resonance with the images, processes and patterns of life and affairs, of the at-once-
psychic-and-physical unus mundus – interculturally characterizable as qi, li and wen, zhi 
and guan in the holistic Ȍ or nonlocal anthropocosmic quantum wavefunction probability 
field -- in noncoercive self-rewarding ways that are ecosocially mature in sustaining 
mutually beneficial or coevolutionarily optimal Earth-human relations in the life of the 
inner-connected universe. By this formulation, in contemplative ecology is the self-
delighting play of cosmogenesis.27  
Marie-Louise von Franz offers a trope by which to conceive and nuance this at the 
close of her charmingly erudite book On Divination and Synchronicity. Hypothesizing 
that synchronicity performs a coniunctio of and an exchange between psyche and matter 
that is thus “an act of creation” in its union of principles not ordinarily connected in our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  525    
conscious experience, she next turns to intercultural resources. “The attitude in which this 
can be experienced is, according to the Chinese idea. . .an attitude of complete sincerity” 
or what we already know as cheng with the additional connotations of authenticity and of 
completing, real-izing, flourishing, actualizing. I associate with it the contemplative and 
attentive attitude in which we “lose ourself” in what we’re (thus non-Ψ doing. “And 
interestingly enough,” von Franz goes on to say, “for the Chinese this is identical with 
playfulness.” The analogy between the self-rewarding meaning-play in synchronicity and 
that of cosmogenesis itself can be elaborated with von Franz’ continuing reflection that in 
primal culture, as among little children and all persons in noncalculative and 
nondominative relationships with the world, ritual and play are not separated. “A ritual or 
a game needs complete sincerity and complete detachment from desire and wishes. . . .if 
you want to play fair, then play, for only fair play is real play. The ego which wants to 
win must be sacrificed for it seduces you into cheating,” as, I am inclined to add, we have 
long been cheating against nature (see BenyusΨ. “So one has to be completely and 
passionately involved, and at the same time sacrifice any kind of ego desire. This 
attitude” von Franz goes on, “is identical with what I would call a basic religious attitude 
– to be completely involved in life and at the same time ready to lose in fair play.” As 
ritual, game, play, pattern and as (f)acts of life probabilistically conceived  in quantum  
science, events have rules and patterns but also a “certain amount of chance, i. e., of 
freedom” – and (our) consciousness and entention are to some extent participant -- “they 
might go one way or the other, they are not just mechanical events” she asserts. We thus 
might learn from the ancient Chinese who “always identify the idea of lawfulness in 
nature as not being an absolutely determined law. . .but only a probability with a  certain 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  526    
amount of play in it. . . .thus the Chinese say that through a holy, earnest play we can get 
closer to discovering the objective order of the universe,” and I think to the ways of a 
mutually beneficial Earth-Human cosmogony.28 
That these ways may be arational and aconceptual is a benefit to the extent that 
excessive reliance on a dualizing anthropocentric rationality has instrumentally 
contributed to environmental and in many cases social degradation. Or put the other way 
around, the deficient ratio, i. e. the hyperquantitative, manipulative and divisive mode of 
our rational-mental outlook as characterized by Gebser begs for feedback from and 
integration with other resources of imagination, feeling, intuition, value and vital 
experience of the inherent ecosemeity of planet Earth. A provocative reevaluation of the 
imperative to quantification at this point is born with Stapp’s surprising observation that 
“many mathematicians and philosophers now believe that the process of doing 
mathematics rests in the end on mathematical intuitions, which are essentially aesthetic 
evaluations.”29  
Endnotes: Sustaining Ecosocial Mindfulness: Syllogism, Synchronicity & Yijing 
1.) Lynn: 158 
2.) Berry 1988; precautionary ethos Burneko 2004: 190; see also Latour’s 
“postenvironmental” and “compositionist” critique of the precautionary principle; I 
provisionally accept interaction with Yijing as a case of synchronicity through the 
arguments of Jung, von Franz, Peat, Combs and Holland, Jahn and Dunne and others, 
many of whose speculations, (e. g. Benyus) do not expressly mention either. As an 
attentive, contemplative practice of the psychophysical presencing of “ongoing-wholing” 
(itself a deliberately underdefined primitive throughout this essay, Stapp: 116 is a start) 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  527    
having rich provenance and easy popular access, I’ll let it be and defer “its 
ontohermeneutic status” or “legitimation,” for any who want some, to von Franz as this 
chapter comes to an end. But I will add that the proposition that the generalized laws and 
the lawfulness of the universe are not ultimately its meaning – every meaning is unique to 
its circumstance or “placing” which may be expanded or intensified by (ourΨ analogies of 
cosmomimicry or cosmomimesis (see Benyus). 
3.) Morin 2008: 56 
4.) Joule see Deacon: 217; Blake in the poem Jerusalem plate 15: 14-20, see Erdman 
1970: 157; see Burneko 1997 
5.) corporate personhood see Supreme Court decisions Dartmouth College v. Woodward 
(1819), Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad (1886), and Citizens United v. 
Federal Election Commission (2010); both capitalist and socialist forms of ecosocial 
exploitation may be seen as expressions of the industrialist imperative; Wheel within 
wheel Blake see note 4; Blake was not naive about lions and lambs; one of his 
characteristic refrains, from the illuminatingly titled poem The Marriage of Heaven and 
Hell, is that “Without Contraries is no progression. Attraction and Repulsion, Reason and 
Energy, Love and Hate, are necessary to Human Existence”; but he goes on to tell us that 
what we convention as civic good is the “passive that obeys Reason” in contrast with the 
imaginative energy that is eternal delight; (think of Zhuangzi’s critique of civilization as 
actually being a kind luan or chaos). In Blake’s thinking, the genuine problem wasn’t the 
contraries but the negations, i. e., our acquiescence to the attempts by systematic 
rationalism (not least in the interests of profit) conclusively to set up one, or one side, of 
the equations, premises, formulations and dynamic analogies of life and thereby 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  528    
terminally to negate, to annihilate or exclude the Other(s’Ψ. . . As if one were to have only 
yang without yin or an ecology of orthograde without contragrade dynamics. He argued, 
“One Law for the Lion & Ox is Oppression” and that “We impose on one another, & it is 
but lost time to converse with you whose works are only Analytics.” Blake did not take 
his lesson from nature, however, which he thought was a dull round of repeating cycles, 
barren where untouched by the hands and minds of humankind. Yet for him the liberated 
emergent dynamic of imagination -- (we may think here also of analogical 
ontohermeneutics or contemplative guan) brought to touch, to engage with, to inform the 
sensory sources of rationalized data and unlimited by the “cloven fiction” of a dualizing 
consciousness -- can conceive the enwholing of life and/as heart/mind, Heaven, Earth and 
Humankind, tian ren he yi expressed in its “minute particulars.” The anthropocosmic 
hundun, anthropos or purusha, to vary the analogies, eclipsed by our ego-utilitarian 
selfhood, is sustainingly embodied afresh when we no longer separate body from soul 
from mind from the spontaneities of the Earth in anthropocosmogenesis. In this 
contextualization, an attentive and more-or-less selflessly and (because of being) 
intrinsically rewarding contemplation-like cleansing, clarifying and cultivating of “the 
doors of perception” is interpretable as a neoshamanic variant of the Great Work, the 
Great Transformation (da hua) that is acknowledged by Berry and the early Chinese. In 
its comparative “absence” of concluded selfhood and in its interdependence with the 
“efficacity of the not-yet” dimensions of our emergent interbeing, such transformation of 
consciousness and conduct is also acknowledged by Deacon: 484 who, walking on both 
the physical and nonphysical legs of the dynamically emergent coevolutionary way (liang  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  529    
xing), allows us to think of it “as non-material. . .and yet as physical, extended, and 
relevant to the causal scheme of things as is the hole at the hub of a wheel.” 
6.) see G. Bateson; see Deacon; with respect to the relativity of univocal propositions, the 
indeterminacy of natural events, and the prospective value of Yijing and other apparently 
stochastic or random sources of meaningfulness see:  aΨ Benyus: 1κι reflecting that: “The 
problem is, we don’t always recognize nature’s computing styles because they are so 
different from our own. In the vast space of all possible computing styles.. . . .[w]hile 
we’ve been perfecting this one [digital silicon] ascent, nature has already scaled 
numerous peaks in a whole different range,”  bΨ in Jahn and Dunne 2ί11: 246, 
“information or order [may be] introduced into a sensitive nonlinear physical system, not 
by reducing the ambient noise but by increasing it” (original emphasis in this and 
following citations), c) ibid.: 247 divinatory traditions like Yijing submit a clearly defined 
question to “some kind of random process in an effort to access information unavailable 
to the conscious mind. Typically that response comes in imprecise or symbolic form that 
requires translation into meaningful or pertinent terms,”  d) ibid.: 249 citing Jung that     
“. . . events absolutely conforming to specific laws is almost an exception,”  eΨ ibid.: 249-
5ί Jahn and Dunne continue “And just as the concept of complementarity in quantum 
mechanics brings with it an inescapable degree of uncertainty that makes it impossible to 
achieve absolute precision in the two frames [cognitive and physical] of reference 
simultaneously, the complementarity of an ‘objective’ causal picture of reality and a 
‘subjective’ synchronistic one may also necessitate tolerance of a degree of uncertainty in 
both respects”; “whealth” is my doing,  not Gebser’s  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  530    
7.) see Harland and Keepin: 2-1ι; Jahn and Dunne 2ί11; Burneko 1992, 199ι; what it’s 
doing entended here compresently in the nominative, omniperson, subjective+objective, 
and not forcing a (pro)noun-verb distinction; indigenous traditions see, e. g., Primack and 
Abrams, Narby, or the oeuvre of Joseph Campbell 
http://www.jcf.org/new/index.php?categoryid=83&p9999_action=details&p9999_wid=7
01/ (accessed 8.10.12) 
8.) Gebser 1985: 313-14; I did not find a mention of music as a form of or analogue with 
mathematics (pace Pythagoras) in Tegmark despite the scope of his "mathematical 
universe hypothesis" 
9.) ibid.: 314, 315; but a good deal of attention and cash make their way to gaming tables 
and Lotto 
10.) see Burneko 1981b: 18, and passim; mission civilisatrice see Hazareesingh 
11.) no one method, Brooks: 245; see Hall and Ames 1987: 223 
12.) Wang: 226;  never a completely finished see Cheng, Morin, Bohm, G. Bateson, 
Kafatos and Nadeau, Hall and Ames; Gödel in Hofstadter; Morin 1999, 2008; Tang in 
Wen: 105; see Deacon, Teilhard de Chardin, Berry, Laszlo 2003: 68-77 
13.) Stapp: 186 
14.) the organism receives, Skolimowski: 17 
15.) according to the needs of the moment, Wang 227; also see Morin 2008 critiquing 
programmatic thought and policy; see also J. Scott; compare and contrast Latour 
16.) rather than objectifyingly generalized see Pylkkö; Yuasa 1993: 20, 34, 34-35; on 
synchronicity see Yuasa 2008: 207; on the question of religious and cosmological, not 
just synchronistic singularity see the very worthwhile essay by Rubenstein; as for 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  531    
outgrowing our ego demands in functioning in resonance with the world and cosmos in 
coevolving a new kind of ecohumane interbeing, “Watch out for the rise of ‘eco-
asceticism’ – a sub-activity of Inglehart’s postmaterialism that models itself on the 
practices of the Christian desert-fathers and Zen Buddhism and has as its ideal ‘no 
impact’: I leave this planet in the same condition I found it. While Western Europe 
pumps pounds and euros into the flaking foundations of many of its banks, could the days 
of rampant capitalism be over?” This is from Ward: 4κ1, whose article precedes 
Rubenstein’s in the (June 2ί12Ψ issue of JAAR. I am personally less inclined to campaign 
for “a new austere spirituality, disciplined and self-renouncing” than for a practiced 
conduct of self-rewarding attentiveness by which individual ego loses, or lets go of itself 
(or some of itself) and we, in the omniperson, all gain life sustainful, even abundant. But 
if Planet Bountiful is necessarily going to have to be Planet Ashram, and if that takes 
some real self-discipline and co-cultivation, we’re long past due offering basic 
mindfulness education and example to our kids and to one another in school and, more 
broadly, in the skhole of a contemplative leisure conducive to sustainably resonant 
interbeing and hologenesis. This is not the same thing as religiosity and earnest piety, nor 
a question of doctrines. Berry 2006: 48 puts conventional religious outlooks in critical 
context here saying that, “One study done at Yale University found that the more 
extensively people participate in religious activities, the less likely they are to be 
concerned with the natural world. The pathos of the human, described so extensively in 
the prophetic writings, seems to exhaust our religious energies.” I encourage widespread 
report of a further comment by Berry (ibid.: 5ιΨ, “The universe story needs to be 
accepted simultaneously as the human story and the story of every being in the universe.” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  532    
On life sustainable and abundant see again Abrams and Primack: 96 where they speak of 
“sustainable prosperity” 
17.) mutually illuminated in Yuasa 2008: 220; see Tucker in Kaibara 2007: 47; and see 
Tucker in Kaibara: 5ι, “continual celebration of the creativity of the universe 
(originationΨ as comparable to the creativity in humans (humanenessΨ”; see Berry 19κκ, 
Burneko 2ίί4, 2ί1ί; consider Berry’s connaturalizing “celebration” in pun with 
Obeyesekere’s unforcing “cerebration”  
18.) Mazi in Hershock: 106 
19.) terms offered by Cheng 1995: 160 and passim 
20.) Pylkkö: 200, 201 
21.) see Jullien 2000: 142, 152, 228 
22.) Jullien 2000;  incitative and evocative see Wu Kuang-ming 1982, 1990; the world 
that characterizes it Jullien 2ίίί: 192; cf. G. Bateson’s difference-that-makes-a-
difference in the ecology of mind 
23.) wavefunction see Laszlo 1987; see Stapp 
24.) see Yuasa 2008; optificing is a sidestep around a forced choice between S. 
Kauffman’s “optimizing” and Varela et al’s. “satisficing”; see also Burneko 2ίί4 
25.Ψ see also von Franz’ Psyche and Matter: 4 and Morin 2ίίκ on “simple thought”; see 
Neumann on the uroboric character of the connection/interaction between our dominant 
canon and our resulting experience; see likewise Primack and Abrams on the 
ontocosmogonic uroboros; and, again, see John Lilly: “In the province of the mind, what 
one believes to be true either is true or becomes true—within certain limits—to be found 
experientially and experimentally. These limits are further beliefs to be transcended.” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  533    
http://entersection.com/posts/955-john-c-lilly-on-limits/ (accessed 8.10.12); see also 
Bocchi and Ceruti 
26.Ψ “Contemplative Retreat for Educators,” October, 2012 
 
The Center for Contemplative Mind in Society, Garrison Institute, Garrison, NY 
www.contemplativemind.org/; “Contemplative Approaches in the Diverse Academic 
Community: Inquiry, Connection, Creativity, and Insight,” September, 2012  
Amherst College, Amherst, MA, The Association for Contemplative Mind in Higher  
Education www.acmhe.org/; “Toward a Science of Consciousness, Brain, Mind and 
Reality” May 2ί11, Stockholm University - featured presentations including: “Eastern 
philosophy and secular spirituality accommodate quantum physics and cosmology,” 
“Physics and cosmology are approaching the nature of reality, time and the place of 
consciousness in the universe,” “Electromagnetic fields and massively coherent neuronal 
activities correlate with consciousness in the brain,” 
(http://consciousness.arizona.edu/TSC2011AnnouncCALLforABSTRACTS.htm)/; 
Webinar, ”No Time to Think -- The American University and its (Anti)Contemplative 
Roots” May 2ί1ί, sponsored by The  Association for Contemplative Mind in 
Higher  Education www.acmhe.org/; The International Consciousness Research 
Laboratories: “Ultimately, we seek to integrate the subjective and objective dimensions 
of human experience into a self-reflexive Science of the Subjective” 
http://www.icrl.org/home/; Burneko, “Contemplative Ecology: Guan for a More-than-
Sustainable Future” http:ήήonlinelibrary.wiley.comήdoiή1ί.1111ήj.154ί-
6253.2ίί9.ί156κ.xήabstractή; Burneko “Ecohumanism: The Spontaneities of the Earth, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  534    
Ziran, and K = 2” http:ήήonlinelibrary.wiley.comήdoiή1ί.1111ήj.154ί-
6253.2004.00149.x/abstract/ (accessed 8.10.12) 
27.) nature-like see G. Bateson 1979; see also Berry 1988, Elgin, Kafatos and Nadeau, S. 
Kauffman 1995, Burneko 1997, 2005, 2007, 2010; contemplatively replicating in the 
world today the self-rewarding playfulness or flow of (self-less?) cosmogenesis 
evidences the transformation from the Holocene to the Anthropocene or what Berry 1999 
calls the  Ecozoic era. It is the play, the contemplation, that is rewarding in the phrase 
self-rewarding, rather than the supposed self of a player or contemplator who in the (f)act 
becomes increasingly co-, un-, and re- or eco-selfed 
28.) von Franz 1980: 116-1ι original emphasis; what von Franz calls “the objective order 
of the universe” entails by her reflections as well as my own the irreducible and 
nondecomposable subjective/objective, material/mental together -- as in her invocation of 
“the coniunctio of matter and psyche” (116Ψ which is “at the same time an exchange of 
attributes. . .in the hieros gamos” (i. e. sacred marriageΨ (idemΨ; and see too her use of 
unus mundus, “a psycho-physical reality. . .which sporadically manifests in the 
synchronistic event. . .[such] events being the parapsychological equivalent of the unus 
mundus and also pointing to this same oneness of the psychic and physical universe” 
(98). There is a faint note of late colonial noblesse in some of von Franz’ wording. 
29.) Stapp: 156; see von Franz 1980: 13, 15, 17-18, and passim for qualitative 
interpretations of numbers (quantity); she states (17), alluding to the work of the physicist 
Herman Weyl, “because the natural integers have something irrational ([Weyl] called it 
abysmal) the fundamentals of mathematics are not solid. . . .Now precisely because 
numbers are irrational and abysmal – to quote Weyl – they are a good instrument with 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  535    
which to grasp something irrational. . . .and that is the basis of divination.” “Divination 
[Yijing] has to do with synchronicity” (1κΨ. And, further reports von Franz, “in [ancient] 
China. . . they believe[d] that the universe probably has an ultimate basic numerical 
rhythm. . . . everything is outwardly and inwardly a flux of energy [qi], which follows 
certain basic and recurring numerical rhythms.” This corresponds in Yijing practice with 
there being binary yin and yang whose interplay is expressed in eight trigrams ≡ which 
perform a total of sixty-four hexagrams An appealing insight correlating the aesthetic, the 
numerical (or quantitative) and the more generally qualitative dimensions of anthropo-
cosmogenesis comes here with understanding that events and phenomena are 
phenomenologically patterns and rhythms before, or as much as, they are (or are 
amenable to) quantitative units of measure. This is coded in the origins of language; for 
instance, we’ve discerned that the Indo-European roots of arithmetic are also those of 
rhythm, ritmo, rhuthmus, pattern in time (see also rhyme, meter) and rhein to flow (cf. 
the presocratic Heraclitus’ panta rhei, “everything flows,” also see Sanskrit Rta, properly 
joined or patterned motion, cosmic order, etc.). Correlatively, poetry and poetic beat are 
often in early lore called numbers; song and poetry are especially in traditional culture 
covalent with “singing the numbers” (reciting the versesΨ. Saint Bonaventura has already 
integrated the themes saying, in Itinerarium Mentis ad Deum or The Mind’s Road to God: 
(20)  “. . .all things are rhythmical (numerosa). . . .the outstanding trace leading to 
wisdom”; the singing of the liturgy is not far behind; and look for Margaret Wertheim in 
Pythagoras’ Trousers. We may find that some attention in singing, chanting and dancing 
together in contemplative musical step with the universe and one another are effective 
ecopolitical ways both to concelebrate and to sustain our lives and those of all our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  536    
relations sharing Earthlife. In the aesthetic cosmology described by Hall and Ames 1987: 
275-ιι passim, the sage hoped, accordingly,  “having attuned his ear, to tune . . .language 
in such a manner as to evoke and to harmonize appropriate dispositions to act that were 
resident in his communicants. . . . [and] music goes beyond simply transmitting meaning. 
. . .it can give rise to a harmonious and meaningful relationship in the present moment. . . 
.The written word cannot exhaust speech, and speech cannot exhaust thought.” See Pope 
Francis (sects. 199, 215) on the relation of aesthetic awareness to environmental 
sustainability 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  537    
 
 
16.0 Below the Mountain Emerges the Spring 
 
The precautionary, nonimpositional wu wei rectitude or zheng of ecosocial 
mindfulness is performed in conduct according with the eco-ententionality of the 
circumstance and not by relying on formulas, programs and policy suited for an egoicity 
abstracted from its living environment.  Contemplation-like fullness of attentiveness in 
the present moment is life-systems sustaining conduct expressing humanocosmic co-
ententionality, expressing the co-creative aptitudes of humans and the universe together, 
rather than dispersing (our) attention to rewards external to the experience, as if self-
rewarding humanocosmic resonance were not enough. To the extent ego eclipses or is 
deracinated from this resonance, it expresses a dysfunctional or what Berry has called an 
autistic cosmology. 1 
Fully attentive or contemplative experience is unfragmented into subjects seeking 
gains from, or through, objects; hereby coevolutionary interexistence (huitong, 
xiangtong, ganying) flourishes. In (the practice of) this narrative, (our) thinking and 
conduct become lifelike and thus resonantly performative of the creative and recreative 
sheng-sheng of Earth-human interexistence and of cosmogenesis. Stated yet another way, 
our mature contemplative attentiveness in any given situation, disburdened of thought for 
ulterior gain, frees us and our conduct to sustainable shu, to resonant, spontaneous 
reciprocal and sustainable interaction of all its participants, human and not human, 
analogous to the way the acausal synchronicity of Yijing spontaneously expresses and in-
forms the correlated ecophysical, ethical, psychomental and social dimensions of a 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  538    
situation. By this narrative of transformative learning experience, our contemplative 
practice of Yijing is practice in resonantly according with cosmogenesis as expressed in 
Earth-human terms conducive to what Hall and Ames have called aesthetic cosmology.2  
Contemplatively participating in the Yi’s polysemous guan xiang imagery 
likewise (and to an extent not limited to rational propositions and arguments) parents our 
field-and-focus (zhongyong) aptitudes for sustainingly emulating the dao of events in 
spontaneous accord whereby we effectively begin to embody it by ourselves and learn 
therein attentively to participate in engaging, focusing, sculpting or otherwise 
dynamically stabilizing or maintaining the ecohumane psychophysical comprobabilities 
characterized in Schrödinger’s wave function. Emulating in daily experiments the 
ecohumane dao of what Berry calls the spontaneities of the Earth or ziran, we 
demonstrate the spontaneous feedback, the self-adjusting rectitude or reciprocity, shu, 
and the self-organizing resonance of non-dualizing ontohermeneutic ententionality, guan 
– comprehensive, contemplative viewing (gua 20) -- that sustains the productive and 
reproductive life and the axiocosmic ecosemeity of compresencing Heaven, Earth and 
Humankind. Affirms O’Murchu in his evocatively titled Quantum Theology, “the 
breakthroughs of the future are more likely to be in the realms of global contemplation 
than in laboratory experimentation.”3  
In the early Chinese phrase expressing Heaven Earth and Man (or Humankind) – 
tian di ren – Paper understands tiandi as Sky-Earth, tian as sky, and claims Jesuit 
missionaries disconnected the two and mistranslated into Tian their own monotheistic 
and dualistic connotations of Heaven. I’ll still use the word Heaven in the phrase for its 
familiar poetic, astronomical and cosmogonic rather than its “superior numinous entity” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  539    
connotations. I think of the bounty of the starry heavens, emptiness and unbounded, 
spacious daytime clarity.  But the common translation also suggests the important literal 
familiality long-repeated in Zhang Zai’s 11th century inscription, “Heaven is my father 
and [E]arth is my mother” and echoed in the 21st century as “the essence of the universe 
story. . .the stars are our ancestors.” As Paper notes, “Tian primarily means ‘sky’ and all 
that pertains to sky. Chinese cosmology posits an ever-ongoing self-creation.” Similarly, 
he notes, the term Tianming commonly translated as the “mandate” or “decree” of  
Heaven can also mean pattern, and thus the purpose of the Yijing “is to indicate the way 
things are naturally going” and in contemplatively attending to and learning which we 
can, I think, accord in and for sustainability.4 
In the polyphonous practice of the correspondingly evocative and inciting Yijing 
ontohermeneutics of cosmogenesis also sounds a theme offered by Rorty that in images, 
narratives, analogies, poetries and neologisms may be expressed “an edifying discourse 
[that] is supposed to be abnormal, to take us out of our old selves” in the reinvention of 
human culture as what today we may call ecohuman or ecohumane culture. We might 
again borrow from Hershock for this kind of discourse the yet better name of  
“concourse” to compass its symphony of integrated planetary noetic and vital potentials 
for unprecedentedly sustainable ecosocial conduct as well as for our transdisciplinary and 
intercultural attempts to language (the taiji of) an ongoing-worlding that is compresent in 
all its parts – nondualizingly to (let it) center and (re)focus it(self) in individual everyday 
life and thinking and in bioregional and ecosocially mindful development. Either way, we 
are free to rely on resources as varied as Dao(de)jia,  Xinrujia, Yijing, evolutionary 
cosmology, “goblet words” (zhi yan), dynamic emergence and contemporary theory of 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  540    
self-organizing systems. Taken as an edifying practice of ontohermeneutic cosmogenesis 
– living human participation as the sustaining evolution of life on Earth -- this 
presentiates a radical rooting and neo-rhizal ecohumanopoiesis. Says Morin, “a kind of 
radical awareness is required.” Its interpretive “concourse” (as contrasted with analytic 
dis-course) compasses a symphony of integrated planetary noetic potentials for 
unprecedentedly sustainable ecosocial conduct and for our transdisciplinary and 
intercultural attempts to language (the taiji or wuji of) an ongoing-worlding that is 
compresently ententional throughout.5  
And if radical awareness is what is called for, Obeyesekere takes for his model 
“the Buddha who discovered the foundations of his epistemology through meditative 
trance” before reworking them “later in more rational. . .form.” To reiterate his theme, 
“passive cerebration” and “passive intellect” in contrast and in complement with “active 
I-dependent” rational, discursive and manipulative consciousness appear necessary to a 
sustaining form of attentiveness and to the cultivation of visionary or synchronistic 
reason for ecohumane sustainability. He writes that, “The discursive or rational 
reformulation of visionary thought occurs in a specific social and dialogical context” a 
significant aspect of which today involves “a restorative undertaking, bringing back 
forms of knowing. . .from the time that homo became sapiens, if  not before. One  might 
even say that this work is an insurrection of suppressed knowledge. . . .”6 
In other terms, as we’ve heard from such thinkers as Kongzi and Wang 
Yangming, it’s in learning for our (mutualΨ maturation, e/co-cultivation and for the 
sustaining fulfillment of xin, of heart and mind -- rather than for instrumental utility, face, 
power or gain -- that we are most likely to realize the central and common zhong-yong 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  541    
well-being of all participants, human and nonhuman, in any context or situation. For (our) 
authentic (eco)self does not reduce to an ego. And in turning to the Yijing synchronicities 
of inwardly and outwardly expressed experience, as well as to some extent in the actual 
composition of this essay, I’ve demonstrated my understanding that the values, meanings 
and modes of conduct appropriate to a sustainable planetary future are not exclusively 
calculative, cognitive and ratiocinative any more than are the meanings and properties of 
living things reducible or decomposable to atoms in the void. Life does not reduce or 
decompose to matter and energy, and the dynamically emergent self-understanding of a 
coevolving, and of a self-organizing universe, does not reduce to syllogisms alone; 
images and synchronicities also manifest, performatively (re)focus and (re)contextualize 
the many-ordered ongoing-wholing. A still somewhat esoteric way of putting this is to 
suggest that as emergently evolving matter/energy rediscovers itself and its aptitudes 
through the dynamic emergence of our thoughtfulness, so does the universe we’ve long 
externalized revise its contours with/in/as our completely attentive welcome. In unselfing 
attentiveness, especially if we’ve done our homework, we can quite often trust the 
universe to work with us in conceiving itself. 7  
Anthropocosmic synchronicity as an inclusive mode of resonant and self-
rewarding e/co-ententional Earth-human conduct may be taken as a comprehensive, 
inclusive complement to an exclusivistic anthropocentric rationalism of external reward. 
In an inversion of our conventional metaphysical priorities, we may imagine its uniquely 
expressive constellation of quantum and anthropocosmic probabilities as the minutely 
attentive ontohermeneutic performance or living and enlivening event compared to which 
the ratio is a generalized, more classically dualistic and mechanistically convenient, but 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  542    
eco-existentially inert form, like pliers or a wrench. Every living meaning is unique, not 
amenable to a one-size-fits-all kind of mentality. And it’s not like we’re unable deftly to 
interpolate multiple interpretive modes in the practice of sustaining anthropocosmic 
resonance. 
Our spontaneous sustainable attuning with and of circumstantial life-interactions 
is ultimate(less)ly our ever-varying resonance with wuji, with the nonformulizable 
teleodynamic taiji-in-process of each event, and with the field as conceived in both 
quantum and existential terms. The facts and probabilistic tendencies of physis and the 
archetypal tendencies of the (un)conscious psyche merge indistinguishably with cosmic 
nature in psychoid synchronistic and a/rational events. Participating and embodying the 
comprehensive vision or guan of Yijing, we experiment with allowing the diversity of our 
intellectual life and the ecology of structures of consciousness to be as extensive as the 
biocosmic systems that compenetrate (xiangtong, huitong) our ecosocial one(s). This is 
the rectitude, modesty and courtesy of tempering, wu wei, our insistently univocal ego-
instrumentalist demands by effectively embodying and sustainingly thinking-like-a-
universe from within the minute particulars of interbeing. Just the point made by Berry as 
well as by, for instances, David Hall, Benyus and by Primack and Abrams, this is 
invoking rational, imaginal, analogical, sensuous, narrative, contemplative and arational 
or aconceptual modes of consciousness and language as complements in the project of 
Earth-human sustainability. It is the reflective and contemplatively ententional thinking 
of and by indivisibly eco-social mind andήas nature. It doesn’t require or even imply that 
we stop doing physics and the humanities in order to take up navel-gazing in caves. But it 
might mean -- hear the gleeful tocsin -- undoing,  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  543    
. . .the dire shortcomings of an educational system that fences off bodies of 
knowledge in such as way that it becomes impossible to deal with the 
fundamental and global challenges of our lives as individuals and as 
citizens in any organic matter. . . .[and undoing] a blind form of political 
thought. . .in thrall to a generalized economic idiocy that subordinates all 
political problems to market issues. 
 
And it will mean that, I am confident in repeating: 
Our survival, the vitality of the planet depends on mental flexibility and 
emotional acuity. Hands raised, Hands put to work. We can improvise. We 
can create without a map. And we don’t have to live in [gated] isolation. 
The gift of an attentive life is the ability to recognize patterns and find our 
way toward a unity built on empathy. Empathy becomes the path that 
leads us from the margins to the center of concern. The pattern is the 
thing. . . . It is the work of daring contemplation that inspires action.8 
In the complex ecology of interbeing, in a universe whose central place, meaning 
and whose commonweal are nonlocalizable in space and time but abide in (e)co-varying 
relations, values, ideas, images, imaginaries and choices, there is no one privileged mode 
of existence, only coexistence: “Huge understanding  widens. . .small understanding is 
picky” teases Zhuangzi. And any discourse, doctrine, method or episteme that asserts its 
totalism, univocity and methodical certainty disproves itself in the very act, for we have 
learned our minds, languages and bodies continuously emerge not alone or entirely 
autonomously but only in deep, interminately expansive,  recursive and long-at-work 
coevolutionary processes and ecocultural matrices.9  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  544    
As Dean Elgin puts it, “The scope and quality of our collective attention is the 
most precious resource we have as a human community.” And the journey-of-the-
universe story we are coming to tell is the autograph of self-aware Earth-human 
cosmogenesis in whose holograph, reports Elgin (alluding to the physicist David Bohm) 
“At every moment, every part of the universe contains information about the whole.” 
Correlatively, the early NeoConfucian Cheng I is interpreted as saying “. . .everything we 
think, as much as everything we do, resonates throughout [H]eaven-and-[E]arth. . . .there 
is only one [H]eaven-and-[E]arth. Thus. . .there is only one knowing”; and authentically 
attentive ecopoietic knowing, as Jullien allows us to have it, “incites” us to act 
appropriately.10  
In Hershock’s reading of Chinese Buddhism as well, enlightenment, or 
awakening, is given directly in what we may call the ecosociality of our conduct; for in 
the ecosocial context, inner-connected with all our relations in life/cosmos/narration there 
is only the continual unfolding of  “the one or whole-mind”  yi  xin. He in turn quotes 
Joanna Macy, scholar of Buddhism and systems theory, emphasizing that, “In the web of 
relationships which form what we call the self there are no clear lines of demarcation 
whereby it can be asserted, ‘This is I.’” Once we attentively know (or guan, in 
diminishing ego prepossession) and cocreatively embody the self-organizing pattern that 
connects, as Gregory Bateson expresses it, or the patterns and processes of cosmogenesis 
which we both impart and receive, in Gebser’s language, understandable also as the 
pattern that is so-of-itself or ziran, Cheng I emphasizes that it’s not that we control it; 
because the pattern is spontaneously “so-by-itself, it cannot be manipulated for selfish 
ends,” and this for reasons similar to those explained by Gödel forfending complete 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  545    
propositional closure. Seeing and performing it “requires complete attention”; and seeing 
(the ever-varyingΨ patterns of life is “transformative knowing,” and “such knowledge 
makes according with the pattern” in which we ourselves participate, wu wei, “effortless 
and pleasurable” and thus playsomely self-rewarding to the point of damping, exceeding 
and extinguishing addictions to external rewards extracted (by an ego self-abstracted) 
from the natural and the social environment. According ourselves in spontaneous 
resonance with e/co-self-(re)-organizing cosmogenesis is transformative learning of a far 
reaching and interminate -- because reflexive, recursive and self-referential --
psychocosmic order. The (self-Ψ “seeing” of (theΨ pattern is playfully nontotalizable, 
interminate, nonconclusive, as the seer-and-the-seen intersystem are nondually and 
recursively coconstitutive and dynamically (co)emergent and processual or indeterminate 
– we know and feel more than we can tell or formulize in any way external to the event. 
And simultaneously, the field-focusing each event instantiates as a mode or fractal of 
ongoing-wholing tacitly and nonlocally embodies, holarchically or fractally enacts, the 
interminate ongoing-wholing of all field/focus compossibilities whether coded in terms of 
Ȍ wavefunction, taiji/wuji, nondual guan or in the autotelic ontohermeneutic singing of 
the hidden heart of the cosmos that “the actual origin of the universe is where you live 
your life.” 11  
Taking synchronistic experience as an expression of the one or whole mind of 
natural cosmic and human interpenetration, of the psychoid coevolution of human and 
(other) natural comprobabilities in the universe, we may also see it as an entrance to an 
unexpected form of critical self-reflection central to transformative learning. We may see 
it as a mode of the transformative self-learning, self-knowing and sustaining self-

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  546    
cultivation of the mind/universe intersystem expressed in ways other than our ego-
complement of self-aggrandizing instrumental and rational skills. It provides alternatives 
to our exclusivistically anthropocentric and our dualistic conceptual and positivist 
framings of experience. It is experiential and not just cognicentrically abstracted from 
lived events, imageries, and personal circumstances; in this, it opens us to different and to 
unprecedented or nonutilitarian activity in relation to our circumstances – unprecedented 
conduct being the definition, Hershock reminds us, of the term wu wei. It is even 
possible, to speculate with one who thinks of God as “serendipitous creativity,” that with 
some experience of a synchronistic curriculum vitae based in “our growing ecological 
sensitivity and consciousness. . .we no longer can live basically concerned with only the 
human project. . . .Thus our creativity will be serving, rather than blocking. . .the forward 
movement into the open future (on planet Earth) of the cosmic serendipitous creativity to 
which we seek to be ultimately responsible.”12  
Additionally, synchronistic experience when it does occur – and clearly it cannot 
be forced, though it may be nurtured – allows us new forms of self-evaluation. This with 
radical attentiveness and experiments in post-ego critical consciousness also characterizes 
transformative learning. In connecting and relativizing our deliberate ego-intentionality 
with un(fore)seen transformative processes, synchronistic reason opens us to more 
potentially sustaining modes of conduct and entending consciousness than those to which 
we have become habituated, addicted or limited and to new relations and forms of 
relation in our social and natural or ecosocial environs. We may want in the early 21st 
century to cocreate a network of sanctuaries for experiments in transformative 
ecohumane learning and anthropocosmic self-understanding. In terms we may borrow to 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  547    
make a transformative ecopolitical point, (and to qualify the univocity of many preceding 
declarative sentences) Lange cites Freire in stating, “there are no guarantees of 
‘certainties of the find, but [a] movement in search’ which is ultimately mysterious and. . 
.a cause for deep  humility.”13  
In an omnicentric universe whose events are infused with interminate ongoing-
wholing, and whose “placings,” meanings and commonweal are not entirely localizable 
but include compenetrative and (e)co-varying relations, as well as values, there is no one 
privileged path or performance of coexistence. Again Zhuangzi smiles, “Huge 
understanding  widens. . .small understanding is picky.” And as mentioned before, any 
conclusive discourse undoes and belies itself not only because any such discourse effects 
itself only in an environment of coconstituting elements and themes but as well because 
the nature of propositional assertion is to exclude (what is not said, is unsayable or is 
contradictoryΨ. And, asks Yuasa, “may not nature conceal an important ‘meaning’ in 
what appears to be contingent, accidental, and coincidental?”14 
The images and insights of ancient tradition and postmodern quantum and 
evolutionary systems research as well as philosophical (onto)hermeneutics appear to 
demonstrate that life and meaning matrices abide in the part-as-the-whole to such an 
extent that we will find sustaining meaning and efficacy in nondualizingly coordinating 
our experience with and as these events, forming, as Zhang Zai has intimated, one body 
and one heart/mind (xin) with Heaven and Earth. Beyond objectifyingly re-presenting 
humanocosmogenesis in ways only conducive to using and dominating it, here is the 
ontohermeneutic of experiencing both ourselves and the living systems we embody, 
inhabit, engage and co-(re)-contextualize as real time instantiations of everywhere 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  548    
ongoing ecosemiosis in ways, like Yijing, that do not reduce to only rational, sequential, 
causal or instrumental abstractions or separations from nature and that do perform the 
ziran of Earth systems without excessive externalization, manipulation, calculation and 
imposition.  We can invoke one interpreter saying that any “authentic understanding of 
Being must be passive. . .because intuition cannot occur when ego-consciousness is 
posited as the active agent in cognition. Generally speaking, this mode of thinking 
assumes a panpsychic stance in viewing nature.” But we need not cling to a permanently 
passive, a panpsychic, a panphysic or any fixed method and mode of ecological 
awareness. It is emergently amid the ecotones and uniquenesses of diverse things, 
conduct and ways of thinking that sustainability will inhere rather than in the eminence of 
any one. They co-imply one another – some at times more skillfully than others. 
Synchronistic reason is here offered as a complement to and as a creative 
recontextualization of, but not as a complete replacement for, the theory and practice of 
ego-cognicentrism. To put it another way, ego may be evolutionarily deselected if we 
don’t learn objectively to reassess our anthropocentric-objectivist stance.15 
The originary complementarities of phenomena – once imaged as wu xing, the 
“five goings” or “transformations” or elemental “phases” -- are expressed by 
evolutionary cosmology as “infolded into all subsequent events” just as, according to 
Chung-ying Cheng (following Zhu XiΨ, “everything is a taiji” in the sense that it 
expresses primordial creativity, and in the sense it sustains itself and other beings and 
things by the “rectitude” of  its dynamic equilibrium, the zhongyong of its self-
organizing, self-correcting and ever-(e)co-varying “link and identification with the 
ultimate source of being and becoming.” This is a variant of the “functional cosmology” 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  549    
which Thomas Berry affirms is the seminal performance of sustainable life on Earth 
expressed by our real-ization, in guan, that “The universe is a communion and a 
community. We ourselves are that communion become conscious of itself.” Such 
complexly interconscious interbeing is existentially cocreative, not merely abstractly 
probabilistic or simplifyingly re-presentational, in cosmogenesis. For that matter, What is 
participant/observer/observed (com)probability, both in the wave-function and in Yijing, 
if not an expression of the whole in the part?  Is it that the hypothesized unus mundus (qi, 
Seinfeld, Source, quantum vacuum or Ȍ-field, etc.) of irreducible and indeterminately 
decomposable observing/observed, mind/matter acausally manifests and performs itself 
as an event that/who is also our e-co-selfing – i. e., self and/as other, mind and/as 
world(ingΨ? “From this perspective,” we are returned to the view of Jahn and Dunne, “all 
of reality may be viewed as the product of a holistic and fully complementary dialog 
between consciousness and the environment. . . .”16  
In such a context, and by such a narrative, mature, nurturant and contemplative 
rectitude finds that synchronicity and syllogism both have value in nonimpositionally 
expressing and elucidating the ziran/dao of our Earth-human headings. The greater 
wisdom is in (sensing, intuiting, embodying, entending, waring, resonating, timing and 
placing/embodying/instantiating) the integration, the compenetrative huitong, and the 
reciprocal shu, among diverse kinds of understandings, placings, and beings and in 
analogous practices of the rhythms of sustainable environmental coexistence. A 
spontaneous (yet as seen after the fact) precautionary environmental rectitude or wu wei 
is the sustainingly bio- and cosmocentric tuning of ecosocial well-being, not the entirely 
cognicentric maximization of anthropocentric gain. Stated in rather unexpected terms, 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  550    
this suggests the relevant “so-called activity of conscience emerges from a tangential 
point between consciousness and the unconscious” or the intuitive, the psychoid, the 
anthropocosmic experience “where the divination of the Yijing stands. . . . a classic 
common to the study of [both] nature and ethics,” i. e. ethos, ethology,  reciprocal 
“placing” and embodied, attentively enactive ongoing-wholing-re-contextualizing.17 
In this sense, once again, Yijing or the FieldREG may be taken as an incitement, 
an enactment, a constituent and a contextualization of sustained Earth-human 
coevolution. We are invited hereby coconsciously to perform in our language, thinking 
and conduct what the ecology of Yijing performs in the six lines of any situation. The 
differential ecology of the lines instances the self-organizing ecology of the participant-
in-environment, mind and/as nature, that G. Bateson suggests. The more maturely 
sensitive our intuitive resonance with the incipiencies of change, with the spontaneities of 
the Earth, the more we re-member and embody the Yi becoming what we presence, 
behold or guan through it (guan xiang, xiangtong, ganying). Guan’s rectitude or zheng, 
which now might better be seen as contemplative e/co-self-cultivation, coinheres with our 
improvisationally sustaining dynamically complementary interrelations amid the field 
including ourselves, Earth’s life systems of plants, animals, skies and seas and sidereal 
rhythms through the ever-uniquely emergent resonance/centrality (zhong) of what Morin 
will call the “self-eco-re-organizing” of our continuous ontohermeneutical (reΨfocusings, 
i. e., ongoing-wholings. These may be bidirectionally and stereoscopically 
anthropomorphic as well as cosmomorphic without being altogether anthropocentric.  
Among the complex ecosocial processes, these diverse complementarities comprise: both 
appositional and propositional modes of consciousness, rationalism and Yijing or 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  551    
serendipity, action and/as intuition, mind and/as nature, the particle and wave, observer 
and observed complementarities of quantum theory, and the interminately many dynamic 
variants of yin and yang that coconstitute the ever autorecycling ontohermeneutic 
circle(s) of interbeing. 18   
In this compenetrating ecology of mind and nature, of the (eco)humane and the 
(axioΨcosmic, it will be the “open,” “ontohermeneutical” and “ontocosmological” event 
of guan or “comprehensive, contemplative and creative [participantή]observation” that 
sustainingly and sustainably expresses and performs the emerging pattern that connects 
nature, life and mind in self-organizing reciprocity among biocosmic systems. And it 
does so through a similarly self-satisficing performance of the auto-organizational 
diversity of our biocognitive and intercultural sensibilities, in the ge yi, or concept-
analogizing (auto)investigation of things, expressed not only intellectually, but also 
imaginally, synchronistically, analogically and, ultimately, performatively, ecopoietically 
and interexistentially (shu). This is the case in that our understanding and our conduct are 
at once autopoietic emergents of self-organizing Cosmos/Earth/InterHuman coevolution; 
and also, in narrative, myth, theoretical paradigm and (re)enchantment, they are the 
sustainingly ententional meaning and (re-self)contextualization of the Earth-Human 
intersystem unless they contract and opacify into reiteratively imposed technocratic 
policy and self-limiting ego or profit/extraction compulsions.19  
(Our) mature meanings and sagely practices are to an indefinable extent covalent 
and coterminous with the ecosemiosis of the Earth and the Heavens.  The sustaining 
rectitude, or what I also prefer to think of as the (co)attunement, of self-organizing 
natural and human systems abides in the ziran of their nonimpositionally fruitful wu wei 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  552    
hybridizing of emergent resonance, ganying, across ecocultural and coevolutionary 
diversity. My interest is in how we may sustainably live the spontaneities of the Earth, 
and how we may unselfconsciously enact, embody and entend ecohumane coworlding in 
complementary, healing/wholing, a/cognicentric, and polythetically open ways optimally 
expressive (and in emulation) of the communion of all things in their covarying 
circumstances. Contemplative intercultural, transdisciplinary and interexistential 
analogies are one way. Bateson’s “abduction” or multiple description is a good example, 
the ge yi complementarity of rational and arational Yijing synchronicity, another.20 
Ours may be narratized as an evolutionarily self-aware, incipiently guanful 
moment of evolution. In this, as Cheng says of such a possibility among ourselves and 
with the natural world. . . 
there is an exchange, not a fixation, of yin and yang roles because of the  
dynamical nature of. . .process. The achieved state of viewing is therefore 
one of total presentation of a situation in which the viewer becomes 
enhanced and enriched in hi[r] ability to reach for the dao and for a more 
cultivated self toward making better judgement and action in life.21  
Since this is the one life, one mind and one body we share with all natural 
systems, this opportunity for action and judgment understood in a sustainable ecosocial 
context is the opportunity, as Berry has put it, for the Great Transformation, the da hua, 
of “reinventing the human” through resonantly according our conduct and our 
consciousness with the spontaneities of the Earth and the Universe. Less a totalistic than 
an open, holistically many-ordered and polythetic occasion for resonating ganying among 
ourselves and with the ziran of the natural universe, it evokes the broad and deep 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  553    
potentials of what we now understand to be in some real sense a coconsciously evolving 
universe of yi xin and the shengsheng rixin zhi hexie which Linyu Gu highlights is the 
“creative and recreative creativity” underlying the structure of Yijing.22 
Again, as quantum cosmological, archetypal psychological, and eco-evolutionary-
religious thinkers have proposed, consciousness in an all-connected universe bespeaks a 
(coΨconscious universe. We are not just cosmic byproducts, we are “at home in the 
universe”; we belong here. And as a student of Wang Bi writes, “If one conforms to 
things with which he belongs, it will mean good fortune, but if one goes against things 
with which he belongs, misfortune will result.” We learn further,  
As [a sage] resembles Heaven and Earth, he does not go against them. . . 
.  Such a one extends himself in all directions yet does not allow himself to 
be swept away. . . .He perfectly emulates the transformations of Heaven 
and Earth. . . keeping up with their changes and not being tied to them. . .23  
Sustainable navigation in this context is not just a positivistic matter of 
objectifyingly dualistic mappings and ostensive reference, nor one of fixed, ascertainable 
conditions and corresponding predictions: our acts, influence, choice, entention and 
consciousness always turn up in the experiments -- we cannot perfectly measure by just 
how much -- no matter how objectively we think we arrange them. Quanta are too jittery; 
and it’s hard to separate field from focus(ingΨ; there is no way to specify initial conditions 
with sufficient accuracy, or to sever observer from observed; things have nonlocal 
interactions; and compossibilities pile up in waves that would drown Schrödinger’s cat; 
everything is connected; everything is enfolded. And in all our doings, as Wang 
Yangming’s avant la lettre rendition of systems theory emphasizes, even an infinitesimal 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  554    
mistake at the outset of our programs can lead by repeated iterations to infinite error at 
the end.24  
Yet, in the “complex thinking” of Morin, recognition of incipient error or folly in 
our sensibility can itself become feedback which self-rectifyingly (zhongyong, zheng) 
obliges us in cultivating our out-look to in-tegrate the knower with/in the known, in the 
ontohermeneutic universe process, and to abate our classical notions of subject/object, 
psyche/matter dualism, linear cause and effect, cognicentrism, and of simplistic ego-
instrumentalistically manipulative reductionism. This is to abate anthropocentrism and 
the dominance of programmatic “architectural” thought-contrivance for something much 
more in the way of playing, of existentially re-sounding, a sustainingly polyphonous 
improv and self-rewarding flow of “musical” and concelebratory ontohermeneutics.25  
The life of our universe is immense, endlessly varied, relationally complex and 
too changeful for only rationalistically programmatic and simplifyingly abstract and 
either/or thinking alone to be sustainably adequate. We need contemplative headings and 
resources that are guanlike in their strategically pliant, plurepistemic, coevolutionary, 
nondual, processual and nonreductionistic eco/ontoepistemology. Taking cues from 
(interaction with) Yijing and Yijing-like resources, e. g. FieldREGs, complements and 
compensates our normative ego-consciousness and conduct in making im-mediate the 
multiple currents of life unforced, unreduced, nonessentialized and, as Morin says, no 
longer simplified into habituated dichotomizations and unsustainable abstractions.26  
And while I emphasize that I don’t propose forgoing proven and useful 
conventionally logical and empirical constructions of value and praxis in our future 
science and environmentalism, I do propose that maturely outgrowing, complementing 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  555    
and recontextualizing their almost exclusively mental-rational positivist and ego-
instrumentalist episteme with the upaya of something more integrally holistic, connatural, 
spontaneous and existentially nuanced in its supple contemplative complexity is the 
forthcoming source of value/entent beyond mere sustainability alone and of something 
more like actual nondualized interexistential resonance and (meta)conscious participation 
in/as the life of (now axiological) humanocosmogenesis expressed in the particular 
circumstances of our choices and ecohumane interactions. Anthroplanet Earth is 
awakening.  
And if you’ve read this far, you know I think the workήplay of our coworlding is 
less for some Bess Myerson improvements in our ways of doing food, shelter, education, 
etc. in the name of sustainability or profit and more for the sheer fun of it – the It, as 
Obeyesekere says, following Nietzsche, having analogy with a contemplative “form of 
thinking, seemingly without agency.” This is also thinkingήbeing (asΨ interminate 
ongoing-wholing not-a-what (irreducible to quiddity, seity, essence, qualia, one or 
(an)other) whose playful and childlike laughter is the body and soul of autotelically 
attentive interbeing.27  
As embodiments, members and participants, not just add-ons, parts and 
(by)products of cosmogenesis, of the kosmos of interpenetrating Heaven, Earth and 
Humanity, we and our ententions, choices and narratives are constituent. Sageliness is the 
knack of spontaneously sustaining guanful conduct in and as self-organizing 
cosmogenesis just as Yijing-ing may be considered an auto-ontohermeneutic of 
anthropocosmogenesis’ self-organizing ecology of mind and/as nature. This may also be 
again characterized as a manifestation what Gebser calls integral “diaphaneity,” the 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  556    
“transparency of the whol[ing]” or as a trope of what Berry calls “the new story” of  “the 
dream of the Earth.” 
Morin’s systems theorization speaks of such a prospect of “complex thinking” in 
terms Laozi and Zhuangzi would use of a “path laid down in walking.” This way of being 
is, like the guan of Yijing, complex, not simplistic. It abstains from fixed categorizations 
and the dichotomous firewall separations, oppositions and reductions that “mutilate” life 
and understanding. As Montuori speaks of it, complex thinking “allows us to live. . .more 
fully by being more present to [life’s] complexities” not in a disembodied and abstract 
manner but one. . . 
rich in feeling, intuition, and connection to the larger [eco]social and 
historical context. A thought that is holographic and contextual, showing 
us how we are embedded in time and space. But a thought that is also 
transformative, self-eco-re-organizing, by including all of who we are and 
indeed stretching our understanding of who we are and pointing us toward 
new possibilities.28  
     
Speaking of how the programmatically totalizing mentality of contemporary 
industrial/bureaucratic, econocratic or technocratic reduction and disjunction adds to 
errors of oversimplification and, not incidentally, to authoritarianism in its dualistic 
eliminations of anomalies and idiosyncrasies and its externalizations of inconvenient and 
undesirable variables while separating knowers from the known and from experiences of 
interbeing, Morin also shows how complex thought is critical and entails rigorous self-
inquiry. For if all knowing is knowing by somebody, then that somebody can be tuned, 
cultivated, (selfΨstudied and can, as Wang long before proposed to us, learn to “practice 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  557    
the attitude” of a kind of contemplative wu wei ecosocial and  humanocosmic resonance 
analogous to the classical Confucian “extension of [self] knowledge” in “the 
investigation of things.” In today’s intercultural and coevolutionary perspective, the 
extension of knowledge is implicitly a sustainingly humanocosmic self-knowing and self-
real-izing. Or in Deacon’s dramatic and quietly extrapolative speculation,   
[T]here could be emergent levels of sentience above the human subjective 
level, in the higher-order dynamics of collective human communications. . 
. .[F]unction is not created by natural selection but is rather preserved and 
tested by it. Function emerges instantaneously as an alignment. . .with the 
teleodynamic tendencies of the whole system of which it is a component.  
We may take from this the prospect that Yijing evokes our aptitude sustainably to perform 
yi xin, the interpenetratively (tongΨ “one-mind” of functional ecocosmic and 
humanocosmic ongoing-wholing. 29 
     
Wang, Morin’s (and here, also Deacon’sΨ hidden friend from the past, emphasized 
in his own early work in strategic complex thinking that, “the human mind and the 
principle of nature [yi-yin-yi-yang] are undifferentiated.” And in the Instructions for 
Practical Living, he is further recorded as saying that the improvisationally attentive 
“sage does a thing when the time comes. . . .at the time of response” and “do[es]n’t insist 
on a particular one-sided way” because “otherwise,” as we have already learned in a 
season of environmental crises, even “an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning will lead 
to an infinite error at the end.”30  
The mature contemplative, sagely kind of attentive participation in the 
“incipience” of eventuations, without one-sidedly imposing imperial dualist programs 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  558    
and anthropocentric, utilitarian, absolutist or reductive ontoepistemes engenders 
sustainable “lived solidarity” and a spontaneous, nonformalized responsiveness with the 
movements of nature. For, repeats Morin in the contemporary accents of taiji, “Complex 
vision says that not only is the part in the whole: the whole is in the part that is inside the 
whole.” Replies Wang Yangming, “all things are contained in its functioning and 
operation.”31  
We can only begin to live sustainably with, in and as anthropocosming; there is 
no external, terminally objective or dominative point d’appui. And anyway, cajoles 
Zhuangzi, When is there ever a “not yet having begun having a beginning” of this?32  
From this we infer once more that all the planetary resources of guan xiang, image, 
language, intuition, mysticism, reason, movement, conation, analogy, narrative, rhetoric, 
humor, chant, reflection, reverie, feeling, thinking, self-forgetting contemplation, 
sensation, song, play, dream or science, silliness, syllogism, synchronicity and 
imagination are immediately relevant to the sustainable self-organizing/self-
understanding of a metasystem of no externally verifiable single center of meaning or 
primum notum ontology. This is it; and It and We are cocreative. 
The youth of language reminds us of the dialect(ic) of sustaining humano/cosmic 
mindfulness. Consider (con sidera, thinking with-the-stars): The Indo-European root of 
homo bears traces of the ground, of Earth and land, and of being Earth-born, of humus 
and soil, humility and, through assonance, of humidity -- of the water that is some 70% of 
life on Earth – and with this the juicy humor of finding we are all still wet behind the 
ears. The Aquarian Commentary on the Image (gua #4) with which Yijing prefaced this 
presentation is: “Below the mountain emerges the spring.”33  

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  559    
Releasing 
Endnotes: Below the Mountain Emerges the Spring 
1.Ψ The problem is also the rational ego’s attempt to abstract living beings and systems 
from their environment, and from the one we share together with them; see Wang 227; 
Morin 2008; Berry 1988: 16, 215 
2.)  Hall and Ames 1987: 200-249 passim 
3.) field and focus, Ames and Hall 2001; stabilizing, wavefunction see Stapp: 33, 37,61 
116, 128, 134; Berry 1988; ontohermeneutic ententionality see Cheng 1995; see Gebser 
19κ5: 261 and passim on relevant notions of the “waring” and “verition” that 
simultaneously impart and receive meaning, truth, or in this context, sustaining 
ecosemeity; O’Murchu: 196; again see Tegmark on arguments for the non-collapse of the 
wavefunction 
4.) Paper: 519 and tianming, ibid.: 520-521; Zhang Zai’s “Western Inscription” in 
DeBary et al.: 469; the essence of the universe story Swimme and Tucker: 29; cf. the 
classical tian ren he yi expressive of the inseparability and harmony of humankind and 
the heavens 
5.) Rorty: 360 and see Burtt: 307;  ecohumane culture, Burneko 2004; Hershock: 55; see 
Cheng 1995; Morin 2008:2;  see Burneko 1986, 1988, 2004, 2010 
6.) Obeyesekere: 4, 41,43 
7.) Kongzi see Analects XIV: 25; Wang: 156, 226; synchronicities, see Combs and 
Holland, see Harding; also see also the International Consciousness Research 
Laboratories and the Global Consciousness Project at www.icrl.org and 
http://noosphere.princeton.edu/ (accessed 8.14.12); trust the universe. . .in conceiving 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  560    
itself is another conduct or form of humanocosmic midwifing, maieusis, i. e.,  in les 
vacances of ego fully attending in-,  Earth-,  and cosmos-ward and thereby letting the 
not-yet, the eclipsed, the unfractioned or absential wholing con-ceive (itself) among and 
through our (in the process de-/re-/co- and eco-selfing) selves, we in the wu wei act birth, 
make or re-member (our) cosmomorphic presence, we allow cosmogenesis to come 
“alive to” (itself inΨ us as we open, expand and release ourselves in its (now nondually 
first person Our) self-rewarding and playful likeness. This is a kind of homecoming, 
homemaking, eco- and oiko-poiesis and it has some ecohermeneutic variants in the 
Chinese myth of Hundun (see GirardotΨ, Blake’s Albion  (see FryeΨ, Lovelock’s Gaia, the 
Partnership Ethic of Carolyn Merchant’s Earthcare and the Compassionate Intelligence 
of Edith Cobb’s Ecology of Imagination in Childhood; in a more playfully esoteric sense, 
we let ourselves become mirror neurons of the universe 
8.) merge indistinguishably with cosmic nature, see Jung, Jung and Pauli, von Franz, Jahn 
and Dunne; the dire shortcomings, Hessel and Morin: 16; our survival, Williams: 385; cf. 
zhongyong on the centering of concern; anticipating a frequent objection that deeply 
nondual experience will somehow extinguish human being, I’m reminded of someone’s 
observation that no organism with a nervous system can be completely anarchic; or, to 
put it the way Tu does, contemplative anthropocosmic mutuality does not mean 
dissolution – if anything, it is an expanded form of ecosocial individuation and 
participation of what Thomas Berry has called differentiation, (inter)subjectivity and 
communion 
9.) nonlocalizable (solely) in space and time see Swimme, notably 1996, and see also 
Primack and Abrams; huge understanding in Wu 1990: 136; continuously emerge see G. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  561    
Bateson; Morin; Gödel in Hofstadter, Deacon; in the cosmological perspectives given by  
Swimme and by Primack and Abrams as well as in the poetic vision expressed by 
William Blake, heaven is in every wild flower in that each minute particular can justly be 
called the center of the universe; yet since none of these abides alone or is self-subsistent, 
all participate(s) at all scales and in indefinitely many modes, including that of ourselves, 
in the local ongoing-wholings’ and nonlocal ongoing-wholing’s sustainingly 
contemplative (self) celebrating 
10.) Elgin: 181, 37; Cheng I in Smith et al.: 165-66; Jullien 2000 passim.; see also 
Swimme and Tucker’s Journey of the Universe book/film/DVD, 
http://www.journeyoftheuniverse.org/ (accessed 8.14.12); on one knowing see also 
Hershock one mind, i-hsin / yi xin, and see note 11 below 
11.) Hershock: 19ι;  Macy in Hershock: 43, Hershock’s emphasis; it’s not that we control 
see Smith et al: 167; Gödel see Hofstadter; requires complete attention in Smith et al.: 
164;  according ourselves see Morin,  O’Sullivan, et al.; the actual origin of the universe, 
Swimme 1996: 112; playfully nontotalizable see the part of the clown, heyoka in Lakota 
Sioux tradition described in Harland and Keepin: 78-79, also Hermes the Trickster and 
Hermes Stropheus in Kerényi: 77, 84, and in Combs and Holland; think also of lila in 
south Asian traditions and see too Alan Watts’ 19ι3 interpretation of God as the game of 
hide-and-seek – “God also likes to play hide-and-seek, but because there is nothing 
outside God, he has no one but himself to play with. But he gets over this difficulty by 
pretending that he is not himself,” 
http://www.wedietorememberwhatwelivetoforget.com/AlanWatts.html/ (accessed 
7.12.12); ontohermeneutic interminacy also has a precedent in Nicholas of Cusa 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  562    
(Cusanus) whose docta ignorantia taught a universe interminatum, without strict 
determination, i. e., without outward bound and without termination in its constituents 
either in Koyré: κ, cf. Bohm’s implicate order, see Odin on Huayan Buddhism and 
Whitehead’s process metaphysics; of the universe understood as a contracted mode of the 
interminate, also see Haisch 2006 and Kabbalistic Zimzum, Cusa: 4κ, 51 “would ask you 
especially to note” “how all theology is circular. . . .[think of God] Maximum as a Being 
to whom nothing stands in opposition because all beings in whatsoever way they be are 
in Him and He in them,” and Parmenides is invoked by Cusa, “God is the Being in 
Whom being anything means being everything”; also see Burneko 2ίί3: 1ι3-76; on 
playsomeness and performance in the present essay see Victor Turner’s The 
Anthropology of Performance 19κκ: 1κ where Richard Schechner comments, “Turner 
feels that play plays ‘a similar role in the social construction of  reality as mutation and 
variation in organic evolution’. . . .enabling ‘it to perform the liminal functions of ludic 
recombination of familiar elements in unfamiliar and often quite arbitrary patterns.’ Some 
of these patterns might prove adaptive, culturally speaking.” 
12.) Hershock:19, 57; serendipitous creativity, Gordon Kauffman: 418, though unlike me, 
Kauffman parenthesizes this creativity as only earthly arguing that “we humans can exist 
only. . .on the particular trajectory. . .in which we have appeared” and neglecting that the 
emergent aptitudes for sentient and intelligent life are not restricted either to the human or 
to the earthly modes, as Deacon suggests and do Shklovskii and Sagan and S. Kauffman; 
unlike G. Kauffman: 424 I am nonanthropocentrically content for “we humans. . . to be 
confused with the creativity manifest throughout the cosmos, in all its complexity, order, 
and beauty,”  and clearly, in any event, I am deliberately conflating serendipity with 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  563    
synchronicity here to make a rhetorical point, though offhand it’s not clear they are 
mutually exclusive constructions; I will take serendipity as expressive of an all-
connectedness of ongoing-wholing that is not necessarily caused by a source and that is 
as much atemporal (past and future) as present tense in character; on being responsible to 
serendipitous creativity or to truth otherwise conceived see Neville; “The problem here” 
notes Yuasa 2ίίκ: ι with respect to synchronistic events “ is that empirical phenomena 
are time-bound, whereas logic and mathematics are not. What is the philosophical reason 
for superimposing that which is not time-bound onto that which is?” The theme of "one" 
or "whole mind" (yi xin) in humanocosmic interexistence does not necessarily equal a 
single-ordered metaphysic or cosmology – see Hall, Hall and Ames, Tegmark 
13.) it may be nurtured, Jahn and Dunne 2011; transformative learning see Mezirow and 
Taylor; providing a sanctuary, Lange in Mezirow and Taylor: 194; Lange cites Freire: 
idem; all in all, Lange’s essay “Fostering a Learning Sanctuary for Transformation in  
Sustainability Education” (chap. 1ι in Mezirow, Taylor and AssociatesΨ is invaluable for 
conceiving and experimenting what she calls (idemΨ “a deliberative pedagogy. . . 
recognizing the ultimate indeterminacy of educational work.” 
14.) not entirely localizable see Swimme, also see Odin; Zhuangzi in Wu 1990: 136; any 
discourse see Sells; This is so with what I write and also with work that may be more 
systematic and concise. It’s in any case a pleasure to find that the word assertion shares 
etymological cousins with  both sermon and sortilege according to Partridge; in Yuasa 
2008: 7 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  564    
15.) part and the whole see Kafatos and Nadeau, see also Yuasa 2009: 11; Zhang Zai see 
DeBary et al.; authentic understanding of Being in Yuasa 2008: 10; anthropocentric-
objectivist stance see Benyus 
16.)  five goings in Yuasa 2008: 10; infolded, Kafatos and Nadeau 1990: 166-67;  just  
as. . ., Cheng 1995: 191-92, and see Morin 2008: xxxv; Berry 1988: 91; see Kosko: 59; 
see Burneko 1997: 95-96; the whole in the part, von Franz 1980, 1992; unus mundus, von 
Franz 1992: 3ί9; Jahn and Dunne 2ί11: 264; in Yuasa 2ίίκ: 19 we read of  the “’natural 
collective unconscious’ which defines the human being as ‘a being which resonates with 
the activity of animals, plants and physical nature,’” cf. qi; and consider the irreducibility 
of contemplative experience walking a labyrinth, say, to either setting or to mindset; f. 
Nesteruk, The Universe as Communion 
17.) so-called activity of conscience in Yuasa 2008: 31 
18.) G. Bateson 1979; guan see Cheng 1995: 156, 190-91; improvisationally sustaining 
see Burneko 2010; Morin 2008; appositional and propositional see Bogen, Gebser, 
Bachelard; rationalism and Yijing see Combs and Holland, Peat, von Franz, G. Kauffman; 
action and/as intuition see Nishida in Yuasa 1993: 28; mind and/as nature see as 
characterized by Bateson, Kafatos and Nadeau; complementarities see Laszlo, Greene, 
Jahn and Dunne; the ever autorecycling ontohermeneutic circle(s) of interbeing see Hoy, 
see again Jahn and Dunne; see also the Cosmic Uroboros of Primack and Abrams 
19.) comprehensive, contemplative, Cheng 1995: 170 and see also 159, 163, 166, 175, 
197; nature, life and mind see Bateson 1979; ecopoietically and interexistentially see 
Morin, S. Kauffman, Bocchi and Ceruti, Berry, Bateson 1979, Yuasa 2008; our 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  565    
understanding and our conduct see Morin; Deacon;  S. Kauffman; Bocchi and Ceruti; 
Berry 
20.) ecosemiosis see Corrington 1994, 1997; see Deacon, Berry, Swimme and Tucker; 
hybridizing of emergent resonance see Burneko 2004; G. Bateson 1979: 143 and see Jahn 
and Dunne 2011: 189, 246, 247 
21.) Cheng 1995: 187 
22.) Berry 1999: 159, 1988: 82, 194-215 passim; see in Yuasa 2ίίκ: 33 “the 
synchronistic experience manifests the ‘face’ of nature prior to its distinction between 
mind and matter”; better to maintain the not-two than to assert the oneness of life, mind 
and body see Adi Da 
23.) quantum cosmological see Kafatos and Nadeau, Laszlo, Elgin, Swimme, Jantsch, see 
especially Primack and Abrams; archetypal psychological see Jung, von Franz, Tarnas; 
eco-evolutionary-religious see Berry, Teilhard, Obeyesekere; we belong here see S. 
Kauffman, see Deacon; student of Wang Bi in Lynn: 47; we learn further in Lynn: 52; cf. 
theme of priests of creation (e. g. Zizioulas, 
http://www.rsesymposia.org/themedia/File/1151679350-Pergamon.pdf / (accessed 
2.15.16) 
24.Ψ sustainable navigation, Zhuangzi: 3ι in Burton’s trans. “The torch of chaos and  
doubt – this is what the sage steers by,” Burton adds a footnote that the sage “accepts 
things as they are, though to the ordinary person attempting to establish values they 
appear chaotic and doubtful and in need of clarification”;  also see Burneko 2003; quanta 
are too jittery see Laszlo, Bohm, Zukav: 108-09; Wang: 9, 77, and passim, see D. 
Kauffman 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  566    
25.) Morin 2008, vii; polyphonous improv, Wu; playing see Brown, Csikzentmihalyi; 
concelebratory see Berry 1988: 69 
26.) Burneko 1988, 2003, 2010,  2011; again see Tegmark, Smolin on metaverse; see also 
Unger and Smolin on the singular universe 
27.) Obeyesekere: 36; see John Scotus Eriugena on not-a-what, i. e. sans objectifiable 
quiddity or seity, also in Weinberg 
28.) Montuori in Morin 2008: xxiv; on firewall separations Deacon: 198-203 does a good 
job explaining that systems and dynamics may be “in protected states” or differently 
zoned and scaled while still effectually nested and interactive with or in smaller and 
larger wholes – again to suggest that compenetration, reciprocity and mutuality do not 
necessitate a complete blurring of modal aptitudes in natural, human or anthropocosmic 
functionality, Primack and Abrams: 166-75 likewise helpfully critique scale models, 
“scale chauvinism,” and scale confusion 
29.) Morin 2008: xxxix, xl, 22-27; Wang: 71, 254, and also 128, 220; the extension of 
(self) knowledge analogous with guan, zhi; see also the theme of “world-verition” in 
Gebser 1985: 263; Deacon: 565-66; functional ecocosmic and humanocosmic ongoing-
wholing see Hershock: 19 and passim, Burneko 2ίί4, 2ί1ί, O’Sullivan et al., Berry 19κκ 
and see Primack and Abrams: 174-ι6 on “the meaning of Midgard” 
30.) Wang: 26, 35, 9; this is prelude to ideas like Morin’s of a coherent but differentiated 
complex systems unitas multiplex or those of Deacon (see note 28) about protected states 
whose dynamics where insulated from one another remain yet functionally and 
sustainingly integrated and interactive, and it is also in analogy with the musical 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  567    
hermeneutics of Wu 1990 whose polyphony does not dissolve into monophony any more 
than polythetic sensibility is nonsense 
31.) sagely kind, Wang: 225, 230; lived solidarity, Morin 2008: 66; the whole is in the 
part, ibid.: 62; see Burneko 2010; also see Wang: 220 
32.) Zhuangzi, Graham’s translation: 55 
33.) consider, Partridge: 116-17, 293, 299;  below the mountain, Lynn’s translation: 159. 
In Reflections on Things at Hand (140), Zhu Xi reminds us: “Things in the universe 
always pass on because the perfect sincerity of Heaven and Earth is unceasing. Affected 
by this unceasing process, the mind of the Sage is pure and is  unceasingly so. . . . 
completely identified with the Principle of Nature without any interruption by selfish 
desires. This is the character of Heaven. . . .Without the character of Heaven, there will 
be selfish thoughts and calculation.” 
 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  568    
 
17.0 References 
 
Abraham, Ralph. Chaos, Gaia, Eros: A Chaos Pioneer Uncovers the Three Great 
Streams of History. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 
 
Abraham, Ralph and Sisir Roy. Demystifying the Akasha: Consciousness and the 
Quantum Vacuum. Rhinebeck, NY: Epigraph Books, 2010. 
 
Abram, David. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than 
Human World. New York: Pantheon, 1996. 
 
Abram, David. Becoming Animal: An Earthly Cosmology. New York: Vintage, 2011 
 
Abrams, Nancy Ellen and Joel R. Primack. The New Universe and the Human Future: 
How a Shared Cosmology Could Transform the World. New Haven: Yale UP, 2011 
 
Adams, Hazard and Leroy Searle, eds. Critical Theory Since 1965. Tallahassee: UP of 
Florida, 1986. 
 
Adler, Joseph A. “Chu Hsi and Divination” chap. 6 in Sung Dynasty Uses of the I Ching. 
Princeton: Princeton UP, 1990. 
 
Alexander, Christopher. The Luminous Ground, book 4 of The Nature of Order. 
Berkeley: The Center for Environmental Structure, 2004. 
 
Ames, Roger T. and David L. Hall, trans. from the Chinese. Focusing the Familiar: A 
Translation and Philosophical Interpretation of the Zhongyong. Honolulu:University of 
Hawai’i Press, 2ίί1. 
 
 Ames, Roger T. and David L. Hall, trans. from the Chinese. Dao De Jing, Making this 
Life Significant: A Philosophical Translation. New York: Ballantine, 2003. 
 
Armstrong, Karen. The Great Transformation: The Beginning of Our Religious 
Traditions. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006. 
 
Ault, Donald D. Visionary Physics: Blake’s Response to Newton. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1974. 
 
Sri Aurobindo. The Future Evolution of Man: The Divine Life Upon Earth 2nd ed. 
Wheaton, IL:  Theosophical Publishing, 1971. 
 
Avens, Roberts. Imagination is  Reality: Western Nirvana in Jung, Hillman, Barfield and 
Cassirer. Dallas: Spring, 1980. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  569    
Bachelard, Gaston. The Philosophy of No: A Philosophy of the New Scientific Mind. 
trans. G. C. Waterston. New York: Orion Press, 1940/1968. 
 
Barash, David P. Buddhist Biology: Ancient Eastern Wisdom meets Modern Western 
Science. New York: Oxford UP, 2014 
 
Barrow, John D., Paul C. W. Davies, and Charles L. Harper, Jr., eds. Science and 
Ultimate Reality: Quantum Theory, Cosmology and Complexity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
UP, 2004. 
 
Basso, Keith. Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language among the Western 
Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1996. 
 
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine Books, 1972. 
 
Bateson, Gregory. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979. 
 
Bateson, Gregory and Mary Catherine Bateson. Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology 
of the Sacred. New York: Bantam, 1988. 
 
Belenky, Mary Field and B. M. Clinchy, N. R. Goldberger and J. M. Tarule. Women’s 
Ways of Knowing: The Development of Self, Voice, and Mind. New York: Basic Books, 
1986. 
 
Belo, Jane. Trance in Bali. New York: Columbia UP, 1960. 
 
Benyus, Janine M. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature. New York: Harper 
Perennial, 2002. 
 
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. trans. from the French by Arthur Mitchell. New 
York: Modern Library, 1907/1944. 
 
Berman, Morris. The Reenchantment of the World. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1981; New York: 
Bantam Books, 1984. 
 
Berman, Morris.  Coming to our Senses: Body and Spirit in the Hidden History of the 
West. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989. 
 
Berman, Morris.  Wandering God: A Study in Nomadic Spirituality. Albany: SUNY, 
2000. 
 
Berry, Thomas. The Dream of the Earth. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1988. 
 
Berry, Thomas.  The Great Work: Our Way into the Future. New York: Bell Tower, 
1999. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  570    
Berry, Thomas.  “Affectivity in Classical Confucian Tradition” in Tu Weiming and Mary 
Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 1. New York: Crossroad, 2003: 96-
112. 
 
Berry, Thomas. “Individualism and Holism in Chinese Tradition: The Religious Cultural 
Context” in Tu Weiming and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 1. 
New York: Crossroad, 2003: 39-55. 
 
Berry, Thomas.  Evening Thoughts: Reflecting on Earth as Sacred Community. Mary 
Evelyn  Tucker, ed. San Francisco: Sierra Club, 2006. 
 
Berry, Thomas.  The Sacred Universe: Earth, Spirituality, and Religion in the  Twenty 
First Century. Mary Evelyn Tucker, ed. New York: Columbia UP, 2009. 
 
Berry, Wendell. Life is a Miracle: An Essay Against Modern Superstition. New York: 
Counterpoint, 2001. 
 
Bett, Henry. Johannes Scotus Erigena. London: Cambridge UP, 1925. 
 
Blake, William. The Poetry and Prose of William Blake. rev. David V. Erdman, ed. 
Garden City: Doubleday, 1965/1970. 
 
Blofeld, John. trans. from the Chinese, ed. I Ching. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1965. 
 
Blofeld, John. The Secret and Sublime: Taoist Mysteries and Magic. London: George 
Allen and Unwin, 1973. 
 
Bloom, Irene. “On the Matter of the Mind: The Metaphysical  Basis of the Expanded 
Self” in Donald J. Munro, ed. Individualism and Holism: Studies in Confucian and Taoist 
Values. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies,      University of 
Michigan, 1985: 293-
330. 
 
Bocchi, Gianluca and Mauro Ceruti. The Narrative Universe. trans. from the Italian By 
Lucca Pellegrini and Alfonso Montuori. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton, 2002. 
 
Bogen, Joseph E. “The Other Side of the Brain: An Appositional Mind” in Robert E. 
Ornstein, ed. The Nature of Human Consciousness: A Book of Readings. San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman, 1973: 101-125. 
 
Bohm, David. Fragmentation and Wholeness. Jerusalem: van Leer Jerusalem 
Foundation, 1976. 
 
Bohm, David. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1980, repr. 1981. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  571    
Bohm, David.  “David Bohm Interview (3 of 5Ψ.” 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JZernj1zl4U/. 
 
Bohm, David and F. David Peat. Science, Order, and Creativity. New York: Bantam, 
1987. 
 
Saint Bonaventura. The Mind’s Road to God: Itinerarium Mentis ad Deum. trans. From 
the Latin by George Boas. New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1953. 
 
Bookchin, Murray. The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of 
Hierarchy. Palo Alto: Cheshire, 1982. 
 
Bordeianu, Radu. "Maximus and Ecology: The Relevance of Maximus the Confessor’s 
Theology of Creation for the Present Ecological Crisis." Downside Review 127 (2009): 
103-26. 
 
Brooks, David. The Social Animal: The Hidden Sources of Love, Character, and 
Achievement. New York: Random House, 2011. 
 
Brown, Stuart. Play: How it Shapes the Brain, Opens the Imagination, and Invigorates 
the Soul. New York: Penguin, 2009. 
 
Bucke, Richard Maurice. Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human 
Mind. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1954. 
 
Buddha. The Dhammapada. trans. from the Pali by Irving Babbitt. New York: New 
Directions, 1936. 
 
Buhner, Stephen Harrod. Plant Intelligence and the Imaginal Realm: Beyond the Doors 
of Perception into the Dreaming of Earth. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 2014. 
 
Bunn, James H. Wave Forms: A Natural Syntax for Rhythmic Languages. Stanford: 
Stanford UP, 2002. 
 
Burneko, Guy. “Out and In: A Consideration of the Lyrics of Acid Rock.” M. A. Thesis. 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK: 1971, photocopy. 
 
_____.  “Therapeia and Noogenesis.” The Teilhard Review 14 (Winter 1979): 15-18. 
 
_____. “Guerilla Hermeneutics.” Interdisciplinary Essay, Emory University Graduate 
Institute of the Liberal Arts, Atlanta, GA: (1981a) photocopy. 
 
_____. “Light Conversation, Exchanges of Life.” Ph. D. diss., Emory University 1981b. 
Abstract in Dissertation Abstracts International 42 (1981b): 2192A. 
 
_____. “Global Learning.”  Scholar and Educator 9.2 (Fall 19κ5Ψ: 4ί-46 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  572    
 
_____.  “Chuang Tzu’s Existential Hermeneutics.” Journal of Chinese Philosophy 13 
(1986): 393-409. 
 
_____.  “Interdisciplinary, Transdisciplinary, and Intercultural Education: Postmodern 
Noetics and Guerilla Hermeneutics.” IS Journal/International Synergy 3.1 (No. 
(July 
1988): 64-99. 
 
_____. “It Happens all by Itself: The Tao of Cooperation, Systems Theory and 
Constitutive Hermeneutics,” World Futures: The Journal of General Evolution 31 
(1991): 139-160; and in Cooperation: Beyond the Age of  Competition, Allan Combs, ed., 
World Futures General Evolution Series vol. 4. Philadelphia: Gordon and Breach (1992): 
96-117. 
 
_____. “All That We Are Is The Result Of What We Have Thought: Deficient Magic and 
Child Abuse,” Integrative Explorations: Journal of Culture and Consciousness 3.1 
(January 1996): 18-51. 
 
_____. “Wheels within Wheels, Building the Earth: Intuition, Integral Consciousness, 
and the Pattern that Connects.” Intuition—The Inside Story: Interdisciplinary 
Perspectives. eds. Robbie E. Davis-Floyd and P. Sven Arvidson, New York: Routledge 
(1997): 81-100. 
 
_____. By the Torch of Chaos and Doubt: Consciousness, Culture, Poiesis and Religion 
in the Opening Global Millennium. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2003. 
 
_____. “Ecohumanism: The Spontaneities of the Earth, Ziran, and K=2” in Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy 31. 2 (June 2004): 183-194. 
 
_____. “Creatio Continua” in  World Futures: The Journal of General Evolution. 61. 8 
(December 2005): 622-628 
. 
 
_____. “Contemplative Ecology: Guan for a More-than-Sustainable Future” Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy 37.1 (March 2010): 116-130. 
 
_____. “Contemplative Ecology: An Intercultural Story,” in Designing Ecological 
Habitats: Creating a Sense of Place. E. Christopher Mare and Max Lindegger, eds. East 
Meon, UK: Permanent Publications, (2011): 47-52. 
 
Burnett, Frances Hodgson. The Secret Garden. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1911. 
 
Burtt, E. A. The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1952/1954. 
 
Callicott, J. Baird. Earth’s Insights: A Survey of Ecological Ethics from the 
Mediterranean Basin to the Australian Outback. Berkeley, UC Press, 1994. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  573    
 
Callicott, J. Baird and Roger T. Ames, eds. Nature in Asian Traditions of Thought: 
Essays in Environmental Philosophy. Albany:  SUNY, 1989. 
 
Callicott, J. Baird and James McRae, Eds. Environmental Philosophy in Asian Traditions  
of Thought. Albany: SUNY, 2014. 
 
Campbell, Jeremy. Grammatical Man: Information, Entropy, Language, and Life. New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1982. 
  
Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels between Modern 
Physics and Eastern Mysticism. 2nd ed. Rev. New York:  Bantam, 1975/1984. 
 
Capra, Fritjof. The Turning Point: Science, Society and the Rising Culture. New York: 
Bantam, 1982. 
 
Carrere, Ernest Daniel. Creating a Human World.  Scranton: University of Scranton 
Press, 2006. 
 
Chaisson, Eric. The Life Era: Cosmic Selection & Conscious Evolution. New York: 
Atlantic Monthly Press, 1987. 
 
Chang, Kang-I Sun and Stephen Owen, eds. The Cambridge History of  
ChineseLiterature, vol. 2. New York: Cambridge UP, 2010. 
 
Chapple, Christopher Key, ed. Ecological Prospects: Scientific, Religious, and 
AestheticPerspectives. Albany: SUNY, 1994. 
 
Chatwin, Bruce. The Songlines. New York: Penguin, 1987. 
 
Cheng, Chung-ying. “On the Environmental Ethics of the Tao and the Ch’i” in  
Environmental Ethics 8 (winter 1986): 351-370. 
 
Cheng, Chung-ying New Dimensions of Confucian and Neo-Confucian Philosophy. 
Albany: SUNY, 1991. 
 
Cheng, Chung-ying “Philosophical Significances of Guan (Contemplative Observation): 
On Guan as Onto-Hermeneutical Unity of Methodology and Ontology” in Guo ji yi xue 
yan jiu = International Studies of I Ching Theory 1 (1995): 156-203. 
 
Cheng, Chung-ying “Inquiring into the Primary Model: Yi Jing and the Onto-
Hermeneutical Tradition” in Journal of Chinese Philosophy 30: 3 & 
4(September/December 2003): 289-312. 
 
Chödrön, Pema. The Places that Scare You. Boston: Shambhala, 2002. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  574    
Christie, Douglas E. The Blue Sapphire of the Mind: Notes for a Contemplative Ecology.  
New York: Oxford UP, 2013 
 
Chryssavgis, John and Bruce V. Foltz, Eds. Toward an Ecology of Transfiguration: 
Orthodox Christian Perspectives on Environment, Nature, and Creation. New 
York: 
Fordham UP, 2013 
 
Cleary, Thomas. Entry into the Inconceivable: An Introduction to Hua-Yen [Huayan] 
Buddhism. Honolulu: University of Hawaii, 1983. 
 
Clottes, Jean and David Lewis-Williams. The Shamans of Prehistory: Trance and Magic 
in The Painted Caves. New York: Henry H. Abrams, 1998. 
 
Cobb, Edith. The Ecology of Imagination in Childhood. New York: Columbia University, 
Press, 1977. 
 
Cohen, Leonard. “Anthem” in The Future. New York: SONY Music Entertainment and 
Columbia Records, audiocassette 53226, 1992. 
 
Colie,  Rosalie L. Paradoxia Epidemica. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1966. 
 
Combs, Allan.  The Radiance of Being: Complexity, Chaos and the Evolution of 
Consciousness St. Paul: Paragon House, 1996. 
 
Combs, Allan. Consciousness Explained Better: Towards an Integral Understanding of 
the Multifaceted Nature of Consciousness. St. Paul: Paragon House, 2009. 
 
Combs, Allan and Mark Holland. Synchronicity: Science, Myth, and the Trickster. New 
York: Paragon House, 1990. 
 
Confucius [Kongzi]. The Analects of Confucius. trans. from the Chinese by Roger T. 
Ames and Henry Rosemont, Jr. New York: Ballantine, 1998. 
 
Cook, Scott, ed. Hiding the World in the World: Uneven Discourses on the Zhuangzi. 
Albany: SUNY, 2003. 
 
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K. The Door in the Sky: Coomaraswamy on Myth and 
Meaning. Rama P. Coomaraswamy, ed. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1997. 
 
Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey: "The Electric Boy" – season: 1, episode: 10, presented by 
Fox and National Geographic, http://www.cosmosontv.com/watch/250569283639/ 
(accessed 7.24.14) 
 
Corrington, Robert S. Ecstatic Naturalism: Signs of the World. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1994. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  575    
Corrington, Robert S.  Nature’s Religion. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1997. 
 
Crawford, Matthew B. "How We Lost Our Attention" in The Hedgehog Review: Critical 
Reflections on Contemporary Culture 16:2 (summer 2014): 18-27. 
 
Csikzentmihalyi, Mihalyi. Flow: The Psychology of  Optimal Experience. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1990. 
 
Csikzentmihalyi, Mihalyi.  “Play and Intrinsic Rewards” in Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology 15. 3 (summer 1975): 41-63. 
 
Cusanus, Nicolas. Of Learned Ignorance trans. from the Latin by G. Heron. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1954. 
 
Adi Da. Not-Two Is Peace: The Ordinary People’s Way of Global Cooperative Order, 3rd 
ed., rev. & enl. Middletown, CA: Dawn Horse Press, 2009. 
 
Dalai Lama. The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of  Science and 
Spirituality. New York: Morgan Road, 2005. 
 
Ram Dass [Richard Alpert]. Be Here Now. San Cristobal, NM: Lama Foundation, 1971. 
 
Davis, Wade. One River: Explorations and Discoveries in the Amazon Rain Forest. New 
York: Touchstone, 1996. 
 
Deacon, Terrence W. Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter. New York: 
W. W. Norton,  2012. 
 
DeBary, W. T., Wing-Tsit Chan and Burton Watson, eds. Sources of Chinese Tradition 
v.1. New York: Columbia UP. 1960. 
 
Deikman, Arthur J, “Deautomatization and the Mystic Experience” in Robert E. Ornstein, 
ed., The Nature of Human Consciousness: A Book of Readings. San Francisco: W. H. 
Freeman, 1973: 216-233. 
 
DeLaszlo, Violet S., ed. The Basic Writings of C. G. Jung. New York: Modern Library, 
1938/1959. 
 
Delcourt, Denyse. “La Verité dans La Mort le Roi Artu. Couverture, Détour, et 
Labyrinthe.” Medioevo Romanzo 22.3.3 (1998, fascicolo 1): 16-60. 
 
Deloria, Vine, Jr. Evolution, Creationism, and other Modern Myths: A Critical Inquiry. 
Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 2002. 
 
Derrida, Jacques. Writing and Difference. trans. from the French by Alan Bass. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1978. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  576    
 
Devall, Bill and George Sessions. Deep Ecology. Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith, 1985. 
 
Devereux, Paul. Symbolic Landscapes: The Dreamtime Earth and Avebury’s Open 
Secrets. Glastonbury: Gothic Image, 1992. 
 
_____. Shamanism and the Mystery Lines: Ley Lines, Spirit Paths, Shape-Shifting & Out 
of-Body Travel. St. Paul: Llewellyn, 1994. 
 
DeWitt, Bryce S. and Neill Graham, eds. The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973. 
 
Di Biase, Francisco. “Quantum Information, Self-Organization and Consciousness:  A 
Holoinformational Model of Consciousness.”  Journal of Nonlocality 2.2 (December 
2013): 1-15. 
 
Dirac, Paul. The Development of  Quantum Theory. New York: Gordon & Breach, 1971. 
 
Doob, Penelope. The Idea of the Labyrinth from Classical Antiquity through the Middle 
Ages. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1990. 
 
Eagleton, Terry. Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: U. of Minnesota Press, 
1983. 
 
Earth Charter.  http://www.earthcharterinaction.org/content/pages/Read-the 
Charter.html/. 
 
Eddington, Arthur. The Nature of the Physical World. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1958/1974. 
 
Edinger, Edward F. Ego and Archetype: Individuation and the Religious Function of the 
Psyche. Baltimore: Penguin, 1973. 
 
Ehrenreich, Barbara. Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective Joy. New York: 
Henry Holt, 2006. 
 
Elgin, Duane. The Living Universe. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2009. 
 
Eliade, Mircea. Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. trans. from the French by 
Willard R. Trask. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1964. 
 
Eliade, Mircea.  Yoga: Immortality and Freedom 2nd ed. trans. from the French by 
Willard R. Trask. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1969. 
 
Elkin, A. P. Aboriginal Men of High Degree 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin’s, 19ιι. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  577    
Elvin, Mark. The Retreat of the Elephants: An Environmental History of China. New 
Haven: Yale UP, 2004. 
 
Erasmus, Desiderius. The Praise of Folly. trans. From the Latin by John Wilson. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1958. 
 
Erdman, David V., ed. The Poetry and Prose of William Blake. Garden City, NY:  
Doubleday, 1965/1970. 
 
Esbjörn-Hargens, Sean and Michael E. Zimmerman. Integral Ecology: Uniting Multiple 
Perspectives on the Natural World. Boston: Integral Books, 2009. 
 
Everett, Hugh. The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Bryce S. DeWitt 
and Neill Graham, Eds. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1973. 
 
Explore: The Journal of Science and Healing 3.3 (Special Issue, May/June 2007): 191-
345. 
 
Faure, Bernard. The Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of Chan/Zen Buddhism. 
Princeton: Princeton UP, 1991. 
 
Faure, Bernard.  Chan Insights and Oversights: An Epistemological Critique of the Chan 
Tradition. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1993. 
 
Feynman, Richard. Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman: Adventures of a Curious 
Character. New York: Bantam, 1989. 
 
Fingarette, Herbert. Confucius: The Secular as Sacred. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 
1972. 
 
Foltz, Bruce. V. The Noetics of Nature: Environmental Philosophy and the Holy Beauty 
of the Visible. New York: Fordham UP, 2014. 
 
Fox, Matthew. The Coming of the Cosmic Christ. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1988. 
 
Freire, Paulo. Education for Critical Consciousness. New York: Seabury, 1973. 
 
Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and its Discontents. trans. from the German by James 
Strachey. New York: W. W. Norton, 1961. 
 
Frost, Robert. West-Running Brook. New York: Henry Holt, 1928. 
 
Frye, Northrop. Fearful Symmetry: A Study of William Blake. Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1947/1969. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  578    
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Philosophical Hermeneutics. trans. from the German by David E. 
Linge. Berkeley: University of California, 1976. 
 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg.  Dialogue and Dialectic. trans. from the German by P. Christine 
Smith. New Haven: Yale UP, 1980. 
 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Truth and Method. 2nd rev. edition. trans. from the German by J. 
Weinsheimer and D. G. Marshall. New York: Crossroad, 2004. 
 
Gallagher, Winifred. Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life. New York: Penguin, 2009. 
 
Galt, Alfreda. S. “Trigant Burrow and the Phylobiological Perspective.” Somatics 
(Autumn/Winter 1984-85): 56-61. 
 
Gandhi, Mahatma. All Men Are Brothers. ed., Krishna Kripalani. New York: Columbia 
UP, 1965. 
 
Gast, Alice P. “Boundary Conditions.” Scientific American 306.5 (May 2012): 14. 
 
Gebser, Jean. The Ever-Present Origin. trans. Noel Barstad with Algis Mickunas. Athens, 
Ohio: Ohio UP, 1949/1985. 
 
Gebser, Jean.  “Integral Consciousness.” Main Currents in Modern Thought 30 (Jan.-Feb. 
1974): 107-109. 
 
Girard, René. Violence and the Sacred. trans. from the French by Patrick Gregory. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1972/1977. 
 
Girardot, N. J. Myth and Meaning in Early Taoism: The Theme of Chaos (hun-tun). 
Berkeley: U. California Press, 1983. 
 
Girardot, N. J., James Miller, Liu Xiaogan, Eds. Daoism and Ecology: Ways within a 
Cosmic Landscape. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001 
 
Gleick, James. Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman. New York: Random 
House, 1992. 
 
Gleiser, Marcelo. A Tear at the Edge of Creation: A Radical new Vision for Life in an 
Imperfect Universe. New York: Free Press, 2010. 
 
Goerner, Sally J, Robert G. Dyck, and Dorothy Lagerroos. The New Science of 
Sustainability: Building a Foundation for Great Change. Chapel Hill: Triangle Center for 
Complex Systems, 2008. 
 
Goswami, Amit. The Self-Aware Universe: How Consciousness Creates the Material 
World. New York: Penguin, 1995. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  579    
 
Govinda, Lama Anagarika. “The Concept of Evolution and Mutation in the Philosophy of 
Jean Gebser.” Main Currents in Modern Thought 30 (Jan.-Feb. 1974): 109-111. 
 
Graham, A. C., trans. Chuang-tzu: The Seven Inner Chapters and other Writings from the 
Book Chuang-tzu. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1981. 
 
Graham, A. C. Disputers of the Tao: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China. LaSalle, 
IL: Open Court, 1989. 
 
Greene, Brian. The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of Reality. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004. 
 
Gribbin, John. In Search  of the Multiverse. London: Penguin, 2010. 
 
Grim, John A., ed. Indigenous Traditions and Ecology: The Interbeing of Cosmology and 
Community. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2001. 
 
Grinspoon, Lester and James B. Bakalar. Psychedelic Drugs Reconsidered. New York: 
Lindesmith Center, 1997. 
 
Grof, Stanislav. Realms of the Human Unconscious: Observations from LSD Research. 
New York: E. P.  Dutton, 1976. 
 
Grof, Stanislav. ed. Ancient Wisdom and Modern Science. Albany: SUNY, 1984. 
 
Gu, Linyu. “’Waiting for Godot’? Contemporaneity, Feminism, Creativity,” Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy 36.2 (May 2009): 313-333. 
 
Guerry, Herbert. “A Rational Model for the Via Negativa.” Sophia: A Journal for 
Discussion in Philosophical Theology XVII. I (April 1978): 1-14. 
 
Guenther, Herbert V. Matrix of Mystery: Scientific and Humanistic Aspects of rDzogs-
chen Thought. Boulder: Shambhala, 1984. 
 
Guenther, Herbert V. From Reductionism to Creativity: rDzogs-chen and the New 
Sciences of Mind. Foreword by Jeremy W. Hayward. Boston: Shambhala, 1989. 
 
Gummer, Natalie D. “Listening to the Dharmabhanaka: The Buddhist Preacher in and of 
the Sutra of Utmost Golden Radiance.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 
80.1 (March 2012): 137-160. 
 
Hadamard, Jacques. An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field. 
Princeton: Princeton UP, 1945. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  580    
Hadot, Pierre. What is Ancient Philosophy? trans. from the French by Michael Chase. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2002. 
 
Hafiz [Shams-ud-din Muhammad]. The Gift: Poems by Hafiz. trans. from the Persian by 
Daniel Ladinsky. New York: Penguin, 1999. 
 
Haisch, Bernard. The God Theory: Universes, Zero-Point Fields, and What’s Behind It 
All. San Francisco: Weiser Books, 2006. 
 
Haisch, Bernard. “Brilliant Disguise: Light, Matter and the Zero-Point Field,” (abridgedΨ, 
Science and Spirit, 2001. http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/~sai/zpf_haisch.htm/. 
 
Hall, David L. Eros and Irony: A Prelude to Philosophical Anarchism. Albany: SUNY, 
1982. 
 
Hall, David L. and Roger T. Ames. Thinking Through Confucius. Albany: SUNY, 1987. 
 
Hall, David L. and Roger T. Ames.  Anticipating China: Thinking through the Narratives 
of Chinese and Western Culture. Albany: SUNY, 1995. 
 
Hall, Matthew. Plants as Persons: A Philosophical Botany. Albany:  SUNY, 2011. 
 
Haraway, Donna. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007. 
 
Harding, Stephan. Animate Earth: Science, Intuition, and Gaia. White River Junction, 
VT: Chelsea Green, 2006. 
 
Harland, Maddy and William Keepin, eds. The Song of the Earth: A Synthesis of the 
Scientific & Spiritual Worldviews. East Meon, UK: Permanent Publications, 2012. 
 
Harner, Michael, ed. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. New York: Oxford UP, 1973. 
 
Harner, Michael. The Way of the Shaman 3rd ed. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1990.  
 
Harner, Michael. Cave and Cosmos: Shamanic Encounters with Another Reality. 
Berkeley: North Atlantic, 2013 
 
Hawking, Stephen. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes. New 
York: Bantam Books, 1988. 
 
The Hedgehog Review: Critical Reflections on Contemporary Culture "Sustain-Ability?" 
14.2 (summer 2012): 1-88. 
 
The Hedgehog Review: Critical Reflections on Contemporary Culture "Minding Our 
Minds" 16:2 (summer 2014): 1-128 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  581    
Heidegger, Martin. Poetry, Language, Thought trans. from the German by Albert 
Hofstadter. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.  
 
Hendrix, Jimi. “Are You Experienced” in Are You Experienced. Los Angeles: Reprise 
Records LP 6261, 1967. 
 
Herman, Jonathan. R. I and Tao: Martin Buber’s Encounter with Chuang Tzu. Albany: 
SUNY, 1996. 
 
Hershock, Peter D. Liberating Intimacy: Enlightenment and Social Virtuosity in Ch’an 
Buddhism. Albany: SUNY, 1996. 
 
Hessel, Stéphane, and Edgar Morin. The Path to Hope. trans. from the French by Antony 
Shugaar. New York: Other Press, 2012. 
 
Hill, Ruth Beebe and Chunksa Yuha. Hanta Yo. Garden City: Doubleday, 1979. 
 
Hillman, James. Re-Visioning Psychology. New York: Harper & Row, 1975. 
 
Hodgson, Peter E. Theology and Modern Physics. Farnham, U. K.: Ashgate, 2005 
 
Hoff, Benjamin. The Tao of Pooh. Illus. By Earnest Shephard. New York: E. P. Dutton, 
1982. 
 
Hoffman, Banesh. Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel. New York: Viking, 1972. 
 
Hofstadter, Douglas R. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: Basic 
Books, 1979/1999. 
 
Hoy, David Couzens. The Critical Circle: Literature, History, and Philosophical 
Hermeneutics. Berkeley, UC Press, 1982. 
 
Humphreys, Paul. “How Properties Emerge” in Philosophy of Science (1997a) 64: 1-17. 
 
Humphreys, Paul. “Emergence, not Supervenience” in Philosophy of Science (1997b) 64: 
S337-S345. 
 
Huxley, Aldous. Moksha: Aldous Huxley’s Classic Writings on Psychedelics and the 
Visionary Experience. Michael Horowitz and Cynthia Palmer, eds. Rochester, VT: Park 
Street Press, 1997/1999. 
 
Huxley, Julian. Essays of a Humanist. New York: Harper & Row, 1964. 
 
Inglehart, Ronald. Modernization and Postmodernization: Cultural, Economic and 
Political Change in 43 Societies. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1997. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  582    
International Consciousness Research Laboratories (ICRL). www.icrl.org/. 
 
Jacobi, Jolande. The Way of Individuation. trans. from the German by R. F. C. Hull. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967. 
 
Jahn, Robert G. “The Complementarity of Consciousness.” Explore: The Journal of 
Science and Healing 3.3 (Special Issue May/June 2007): 307-310. 
 
Jahn, Robert G. and Brenda J. Dunne.  Margins of Reality: The Role of Consciousness in 
the Physical World. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1987. Updated edition, Princeton: ICRL 
Press, 2009. 
 
Jahn, Robert G. and Brenda J. Dunne. Consciousness and the Source of Reality. 
Princeton: ICRL Press, 2011. 
 
Jackson, Maggie. Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark Age. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2009 
 
Jantsch, Erich. The Self-Organizing Universe: Scientific and Human Implications of the 
Emerging Paradigm of Evolution. New York: Pergamon Press, 1980. 
 
Jeans, James. The Mysterious Universe. New York: Macmillan, 1931. 
 
Johnson, Don Hanlon. Body, Spirit and Democracy. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 
1994 
 
Johnston, William. Silent Music: The Science of Meditation. New York: Harper & Row, 
1974. 
 
Jones, David and John Culliney. “Confucian Order at the Edge of Chaos: The Science of 
Complexity and Ancient Wisdom.” Zygon 33.3 (September 1998): 395-404. 
 
Jones, David and John Culliney. “The Fractal Self and the Organization of Nature: The 
Daoist Sage and Chaos Theory.” Zygon 34.4 (December 1999): 643-654. 
 
Joyce, James. Finnegans Wake. New York: Penguin, 1999. 
 
Jullien, François. Detour and Access: Strategies of Meaning in China and Greece. trans. 
from the French by Sophie Hawkes. New York: Zone, 2000. 
 
Jullien, François.  Vital Nourishment, Departing from Happiness. trans. from the French 
by Arthur Goldhammer. New York: Zone, 2007. 
 
Jung, Carl Gustav. The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, 2nd ed. trans. From 
the German by R. F. C. Hull. New York: Princeton UP, 1959/1969. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  583    
Jung, Carl Gustav. The Undiscovered Self. trans. from the German by R. F. C. Hull. New 
York: Penguin, 1959. 
 
Jung, Carl Gustav.  The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche. H. Reed, M. Fordham and 
G. Adler, eds. trans. From the German by R. F. C. Hull. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1960. 
 
Jung, Carl Gustav.  Memories, Dreams, and Reflections. trans. from the German by 
Richard and Clara Winston, ed. Aniela Jaffé. New York: Random House, 1961/1963. 
 
Jung, Carl Gustav and Wolfgang Pauli. The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche. 
New York: Pantheon, 1955. 
 
Kafatos, Menas and Robert Nadeau. The Conscious Universe: Part and Whole in Modern 
Physical Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
 
Kafatos, Menas and Robert Nadeau.  The Non-Local Universe: The New Physics and 
Matters of the Mind. New York: Oxford UP, 1999. 
 
Kaibara, Ekken. The Philosophy of Qi: The Record of Great Doubts. trans. from the 
Japanese by Mary  Evelyn Tucker. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007. 
 
Karcher, Stephen. The Elements of the I Ching. Boston: Element, 1995. 
 
Kauffman, Draper. Systems I: An Introduction to Systems Thinking. Minneapolis: S. A. 
Carlton/Future Systems, 1980. 
 
Kauffman, Gordon D. “On Thinking of God as Serendipitous Creativity” in Journal of 
the American Academy of Religion 69.2 (June 2001): 409-425. 
 
Kauffman, Stuart. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1993.  
 
Kauffman, Stuart. At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of Self- 
Organization and Complexity. New York: Oxford UP, 1995. 
 
Kauffman, Stuart.  Reinventing the Sacred: A New View of Science, Reason, and 
Religion. New York: Basic Books, 2008. 
 
Kaza, Stephanie. Mindfully Green: A Personal and Spiritual Guide to Whole Earth 
Thinking. Boston: Shambhala, 2008 
 
Keller, Evelyn Fox. A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara 
McClintock. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1984. 
 
Kerényi, Karl. Hermes, Guide of Souls. trans. from the German by Murray Stein. Dallas: 
Spring, 1986. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  584    
 
Kierkegaard, Søren. Either/Or. vol. 1, trans. from the Danish by D. F. Swenson, L. H. 
Swenson, and H. A. Johnson. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1944. 
 
Klein, Naomi. This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate. New York: Simon 
& Schuster, 2014. 
 
Koestler, Arthur.  The Act of Creation. New York: MacMillan, 1964. 
 
Koestler, Arthur. Janus: A Summing Up. New York: Vintage Books, 1978/1979. 
 
Kohn, Livia. Early Chinese Mysticism: Philosophy and Soteriology in the Taoist 
Tradition. Princeton: Princeton, UP, 1992. 
 
Kolbert, Elizabeth. The Sixth Extinction. An Unnatural History. New York: Henry Holt, 
2014. 
 
Konner, Melvin. The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit. New 
York: Harper & Row, 1982. 
 
Kosko, Bart. Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic. New York: Hyperion, 
1993. 
 
Koyré, Alexandre. From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins UP, 1957. 
 
Kropotkin, P[iotor]. Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution. New York: McClure Phillips, 
1902. 
 
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd ed., Enl. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1970. 
 
Lai, Chi-tim. “The Daoist Concept of Central Harmony in the Scripture of Great Peace: 
Human Responsibility for the Maladies of Nature” in Girardot, N. J., James Miller and 
Liu Xiaogan, eds., Daoism and Ecology: Ways within a Cosmic Landscape. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 2001: 96-97. 
 
Lange, Elizabeth. “Fostering a Learning Sanctuary for Transformation in Sustainability 
Education” in Mezirow, Jack, Edward Taylor, et al. Transformative Learning in Practice: 
Insights from Community, Workplace, and Higher Education. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2009: 193-204. 
 
Laozi [Lao-tzu]. Daodejing: Making this Life Significant, a Philosophical Translation.” 
trans. from the Chinese by Roger T. Ames and David L. Hall. New York: Ballantine, 
2003. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  585    
Lapham, Lewis H. “Democracy 1ί1: Mark Twain’s Farewell Address” Harper’s 
Magazine 322.1931 (April 2011): 30-37. 
 
Larsen, Stephen. The Shaman’s Doorway: Opening the Mythic Imagination to 
Contemporary Consciousness. New York: Harper & Row, 1976. 
 
Laszlo, Ervin. “The Ȍ-Field Hypothesis” in IS Journal/International Synergy 2.1 (June 
1987): 13-28. 
 
Laszlo, Ervin. The Inner Limits of Mankind: Heretical Reflections on Today’s Values, 
Culture and Politics. London: Oneworld, 1989. 
 
Laszlo, Ervin. The Connectivity Hypothesis: Foundations of an Integral Science of 
Quantum, Cosmos, Life, and Consciousness. Albany: SUNY, 2003. 
 
Laszlo, Ervin.  Science and the Akashic Field: An Integral Theory of  Everything. 
Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 2004. 
 
Latour, Bruno. “Love Your Monsters: Why We Must Care for Our Technologies as We 
do Our Children” in  Breakthrough Journal 1.2 (Fall 2011):  
http://breakthroughjournal.org/content/authors/bruno-latour/love-yourmonsters.shtml/ 
 
Laughlin, Charles D. “Archetypes, Neurognosis and the Quantum Sea.” Journal of 
Scientific Exploration 10. 3 (1996): 375-400. 
 
Laughlin, Charles D., John McManus, and Eugene G. d’Aquili. Brain, Symbol & 
Experience: Toward a Neurophenomenology of Human Consciousness. New York: 
Columbia UP, 1990/1992. 
 
Laughlin, Charles D. and C. Jason Throop. “Imagination and Reality: On the Relations 
between Myth, Consciousness, and the Quantum Sea.” Zygon 36. 4 (December 2001): 
709-736. 
 
Leary, Timothy. The Politics of Ecstasy. New York: College Notes & Texts, 1965. 
 
Le Blanc, Charles. Huai-Nan Tzu: The Idea of  Resonance (Kan-Ying) With a Translation 
and Analysis of Chapter Six. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1985. 
 
LeMenager, Stephanie, Teresa Shewry and Ken Hiltner, eds. Environmental Criticism for 
the  Twenty-First Century. New York: Routledge, 2011. 
 
Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac. New York: Ballantine, 1970. 
 
Lessa, William A., and Evon Z. Vogt. Reader in Comparative Religion: An 
Anthropological Approach 4th ed.. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  586    
Levin, David Michael. “Mudra as Thinking: Developing Our Wisdom-of-Being in 
Gesture and Movement” in Heidegger and Asian Thought, Graham Parkes, ed. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press,19κι: 245-69. 
 
Levinas, Emmanuel. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority. trans. from the  
French by Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne UP, 1969. 
 
Levinas, Emmanuel.  Otherwise than Being: Or Beyond Essence. trans. from the French 
by Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne UP, 1981/1998. 
 
Lewis-Williams, David. Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the Origins of Art. 
London: Thames & Hudson, 2004. 
 
Lipson, Carol S. and Roberta A. Binkley, eds. Rhetoric before and beyond the Greeks. 
Albany: SUNY, 2004. 
 
Litfin, Karen T. Ecovillages: Lessons for Sustainable Community. Malden, MA: Polity, 
2014. 
 
Liu Xiaogan. “Non-Action and the Environment Today: A Conceptual and Applied Study 
of Laozi’s Philosophy” in Girardot, N. J., James Miller and Liu Xiaogan, eds., Daoism 
and Ecology: Ways within a Cosmic Landscape. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
2001: 315-39. 
 
Loewenstein, Werner R. Physics in Mind: A Quantum View of the Brain. New York: 
Basic Books, 2013. 
 
Lopez, Barry, Selector. The Future of Nature: Writing on a Human Ecology from Orion 
Magazine. Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions, 2007. 
 
Lynn, Richard John, trans. from the Chinese. The Classic of Changes: A New Translation 
of the I Ching as Interpreted by Wang Bi. New York: Columbia UP, 1994. 
 
Macy, Joanna. Mutual Causality in Buddhism and General Systems Theory: The Dharma 
of Natural Systems. Albany: SUNY, 1991. 
 
Mandelbrot, Benoit B. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. Updated and augmented. New 
York: W. H. Freeman, 1977/1983. 
 
Mare, E. Christopher. “Sustainability.” La Rochelle: Moulin de Bonheur Ecological 
Design School, (spring) 1998, photocopy. 
 
Mare, E. Christopher.  Designing for Consciousness: A Theory of Village Design Using 
Neurophenomenology  as Methodology. Eugene: Village Design Institute, 2016. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  587    
Margenau, Henry and Roy Abraham Varghese, eds. Cosmos, Bios, Theos: Scientists 
Reflect on Science, God, and the Origins of the Universe, Life, and Homo Sapiens. La 
Salle, IL: Open Court,  1992. 
 
Margulis, Lynn. Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: Evidence and Research Implications for a 
Theory of the Origin and Evolution of Microbial, Plant, and Animal Cells on the 
Precambrian Earth. New Haven: Yale UP, 1970. 
 
Margulis, Lynn, and Dorion Sagan. What Is Life? Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1995. 
 
Markely, O. W. and Willis W. Harman, eds. Changing Images of Man. New York: 
Pergamon, 1982. 
 
Maruyama, Magoroh. “Toward Cultural Symbiosis” in Erich Jantsch and Conrad H. 
Waddington, eds. Evolution and Consciousness: Human Systems in Transition. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1976: 198-213. 
 
Marwick, Arthur. The Sixties: Cultural  Revolution in Britain, France, Italy, and the 
United States, c. 1958-1974. New York: Oxford UP, 1998. 
 
Maslow, Arthur. The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York: Viking, 1971. 
 
Maturana, Humberto R. and Francisco J. Varela. The Tree of Knowledge: the Biological 
Roots of Human Understanding. Boston:  Shambhala,  1987. 
 
Mazzotta, Giuseppe. Cosmopoiesis: The Renaissance Experiment. Toronto: University of 
Toronto, 2001. 
 
McClellan, John. “Nondual Ecology: In Praise of Wildness and in Search of Harmony 
with Everything that Moves.” Boulder: n. p., 1993 
http://spot.colorado.edu/~mcclelr/nondualecologylight.htm/; Tricycle 3.2 (winter 1993): 
58-65. 
 
McClintock, Sara L. “Compassionate Trickster: The Buddha as a Literary Character in 
the Narratives of Early Buddhism.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 79.1 
(March 2011): 90-112. 
 
McDonough, William and Michael Braungart. Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We 
Make Things. New York: North Point, 2002. 
 
McKenna, Terence. The Archaic Revival. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1991. 
 
McKenna, Terence and Dennis McKenna. The Invisible Landscape: Mind, 
Hallucinogens, and the I Ching. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1975/1993. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  588    
McLuhan, T. C. Touch the Earth: A Self-Portrait of Indian Existence. New York: 
Promontory, 1971. 
 
McTaggart, Lynne. The Field: The Quest for the Secret Force of the Universe. New 
York: HarperCollins, 2002. 
 
McTaggart, Lynne.  The Bond: Connecting through the Space between Us. New York: 
Free Press, 2011. 
 
Mencius (Mengzi). Mencius. trans. from the Chinese by David Hinton. Washington, D. 
C.: Counterpoint, 1998. 
 
Merchant, Carolyn. Radical Ecology: The Search for a Livable World. 2nd ed. New York: 
Routledge, 2005. 
 
Merchant, Carolyn. Earthcare: Women and the Environment. New York: Routledge, 
1995. 
 
Merton, Thomas. Contemplation in a World of Action. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1998. 
 
Merton, Thomas. New Seeds of Contemplation. New York: New Directions, 1961. 
 
Mezirow, Jack, and Edward Taylor, et al. Transformative Learning in Practice: Insights 
from Community, Workplace, and Higher Education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009. 
 
Miller, Alice. For Your Own Good: Hidden Cruelty in Child-Rearing and the Roots of 
Violence. trans. from the German by Hildegarde and Hunter Hannum. New York: Farrar, 
Straus, and Giroux, 1990. 
 
Miller, James. “Respecting the Environment, or Visualizing Highest Clarity” in Girardot, 
N. J., James Miller, and Liu Xiogan, eds. Daoism and Ecology: Ways Within A Cosmic 
Landscape. Religions of the World and Ecology  Series. Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 2001. 
 
Miller, Peter and Laura Westra, eds. Just Ecological Integrity: The Ethics of Maintaining 
a Planetary Life. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002. 
 
Miyamoto, Yuki. “The Ethics of Commemoration: Religion and Politics in Nanjing, 
Hiroshima, and Yasukuni.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion. 80.1 (March 
2012): 59. 
 
Montuori, Alfonso. “Creative Inquiry: Confronting the Challenges of Scholarship in the 
21st Century.” Futures 44 (2012): 64–70. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  589    
Moore, Kathleen Dean and Michael P. Nelson. Moral Ground: Ethical Action for a 
Planet in Peril. San Antonio, TX: Trinity University Press, 2010. 
 
Morin, Edgar. On Complexity. trans. from the French by Robin Postel. Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press, 2008. 
 
Morin, Edgar, and Anne Brigitte Kern. Homeland Earth: A Manifesto for the New 
Millennium. trans. from the French by Sean M. Kelly and Roger LaPointe. Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press, 1999. 
 
Munro, Donald J., ed. Individualism and Holism: Studies in Confucian and Taoist 
Values. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan, 1985. 
 
Munteanu, Daniel. “The Divine Fire in All Things:  Orthodox Cosmology in Dialogue 
with Science.”  International Journal of Orthodox Theology. 4:2 (2013): 21-42. 
 
Nadeau, Robert L. The Wealth of Nature: How Mainstream Economics has Failed the 
Environment. New York: Columbia UP, 2003. 
 
Nadeau, Robert L. The Environmental Endgame: Mainstream Economics, Ecological 
Disaster, and Human Survival. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers UP, 2006 
 
Nadeau, Robert and Menas Kafatos. The Non-Local Universe: The New Physics and 
Matters of the Mind. New York: Oxford UP, 1999. 
 
Narby, Jeremy. The Cosmic Serpent: DNA and the Origins of Knowledge. New York: 
Tarcher/Putnam, 1998. 
 
Neihardt, John G. [Flaming Rainbow]. Black Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a Holy 
Man of the Oglala Sioux. Lincoln: University of Nebraska, 1961. 
 
Nelson, R. D., G. J. Bradish, Y. H. Dobyns, B. J. Dunne, and R.. G. Jahn. “FieldREG 
Anomalies in Group Situations” Journal of Scientific Exploration 10.1 (1996): 111-141. 
 
Nesteruk, Alexi V. The Universe as Communion: Towards a Neo-Patristic Synthesis of 
Theology and Science. London: T&T Clark, 2008. 
 
Nesteruk, Alexei. The Sense of the Universe: Philosophical Explication of Theoretical 
Commitment in Modern Cosmology. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2015. 
 
Neville, Robert Cummings. Recovery of the Measure: Interpretation and Nature. Albany: 
SUNY Press, 1989. 
 
Neumann, Erich. The Origins and History of Consciousness. trans. from the German by 
R. F. C. Hull. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1970. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  590    
Nicholsen, Shierry Weber. The Love of Nature and the End of the World: The Unspoken 
Dimensions of Environmental Concern. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002. 
 
Noble, Denis. The Music of Life: Biology Beyond the Genome. New York: Oxford UP, 
2006. 
 
Nowak, Martin A. “Why We Help” Scientific American 307.1 (July 2012): 34-39. 
 
Obeyesekere, Gananath. The Awakened Ones: Phenomenology of Visionary Experience. 
New York: Columbia UP, 2012. 
 
Odin, Steve. Process Metaphysics and Hua-Yen Buddhism: A Critical Study of 
Cumulative Penetration vs. Interpenetration. Albany: SUNY, 1982. 
 
O’Murchu, Diarmuid. Quantum Theology: Spiritual Implications of the New Physics. 
Rev. and updated. New York: Crossroad, 2004. 
 
Ornstein, Robert E. The Nature of Human Consciousness: A Book of Readings. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1973. 
 
O’Sullivan, E., Morrell, A. and O’Connor, M. Expanding the Boundaries of 
Transformative Learning. New York: Palgrave, 2002. 
 
Palmer, Parker J. The Promise of Paradox; A Celebration of Contradictions in the 
Christian Life. Notre Dame: Ave Maria Press, 1980. 
 
Palmer, Parker J. and Arthur Zajonc. The Heart of Higher Education: A Call to Renewal. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010. 
 
Pannenberg, Wolfhart. What Is Man?: Contemporary Anthropology in Theological 
Perspective. trans. from the German by Duane A. Priebe. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 
1970. 
 
Paper, Jordan. “Response. . . .” in Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80.2 
(June  2012): 518-21. 
 
Parkes, Graham, ed. Heidegger and Asian Thought. Honolulu: University of Hawai’I 
Press, 1987. 
 
Partridge, Eric. Origins: A Short Etymological Dictionary of Modern English. New York: 
1958/1977. 
 
Paul, Robert A. Mixed Messages: Cultural and Genetic Inheritance in the Constitution of  
Human Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  591    
Pavlus, John. “Machines of the Infinite” in Scientific American 307.3 (September 2012): 
66-71. 
 
Peat, F. David. Synchronicity: The Bridge between Matter and Mind. New York: Bantam, 
1987. 
 
Perkins, John. The World Is as You Dream It:  Shamanic Teachings from the Amazon and 
Andes. Rochester, VT: Destiny, 1994. 
 
Perry, John Weir. The Heart of History: Individuality in Evolution. Albany: SNY, 1987. 
 
Pieper, Josef. Leisure the Basis of Culture. trans. Alexander Dru. London: Collins, 1965. 
 
Plotkin, Bill. Nature and the Human Soul: Cultivating Wholeness and Community in a 
Fragmented World. Novato, CA: New World Library, 2008. 
 
Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1964. 
 
Pope Francis. Laudato Si': Encyclical Letter On Care for our Common Home. London: 
Catholic Truth Society, 2015. 
 
Price, A. F. and Wong Mou-Lam, trans. from the Chinese and Sanskrit. The Diamond 
Sutra and the Sutra of Hui Neng. Boulder: Shambhala, 1969. 
 
Primack, Joel R. and Nancy Ellen Abrams. The View from the  Center of the Universe: 
Discovering Our Extraordinary Place in the Cosmos. New York: Riverhead, 2006. 
 
Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratories (PEAR). www.pear.org/. 
 
Progoff, Ira. Jung, Synchronicity and Human Destiny. New York: Dell, 1973. 
 
Proust, Marcel. Remembrance of Things Past. Ware, Hertfordshire UK: Wordsworth, 
2006. 
 
Pullman, Philip. The Golden Compass. Book One of His  Dark Materials. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1995. 
 
Purser, Ronald E., Changkil Park, Alfonso Montuori. “Limits to Anthropocentrism: 
Toward an Ecocentric Organization Paradigm?” Academy of Management Review. 20:4 
(October 1995): 1053-1089. 
 
Pylkkanen, Paavo. Mind, Matter and the implicate Order. New York: Springer, 2007. 
 
 
Pylkkö, Pauli. The Aconceptual Mind: Heideggerian Themes in Holistic Naturalism. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1998. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  592    
 
Pynchon, Thomas. Bleeding Edge. New York: Penguin, 2013. 
 
Radin, Dean. The Conscious Universe: The Scientific Truth of Psychic Phenomena. San 
Francisco: HarperCollins, 1997. 
 
Raphals, Lisa. Knowing Words: Wisdom and Cunning in the Classical Traditions of 
China and Greece. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1992. 
 
Rapp, Jennifer R. “A Poetics of Comparison: Euripides, Zhuangzi, and the Human Poise 
of Imaginative Construction.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 78.1 (March 
2010): 163-201. 
 
Rappaport, Roy A. Ritual and Religion in the Making of Humanity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge UP, 1999. 
 
Rasmussen, Larry L. Earth-Honoring Faith: Religious Ethics in a New Key. New York: 
Oxford UP, 2013. 
 
Raymo, Chet. The Soul of the Night: An Astronomical Pilgrimage. St Paul, MN: 
Ruminator Books, 1992. 
 
Rea, Shiva. “Embodying the Flow: The Art of Teaching Vinyasa Flow Yoga.” n. p.: 
photocopy, 2008. 
 
Ricoeur, Paul. Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning. Fort Worth: 
Texas Christian UP, 1976. 
 
Rifkin, Jeremy. The Empathic Civilization: The Race to Global Consciousness in a World 
in Crisis. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin, 2009. 
 
Robbins, Tom. “In Defiance of Gravity: Writing, Wisdom, and the Fabulous Club 
Gemini” Harper’s Magazine 309.1852 (September 2004): 57-61.  
 
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1979. 
 
Roszak, Theodore. The Making of a Counterculture: Reflections on the Technocratic 
Society and its Youthful Opposition. Berkeley, UC Press, 1968. 
 
Roszak, Theodore.  Person/Planet. New York: Doubleday, 1979. 
 
Roszak, Theodore. The Voice of the Earth: An Exploration of Ecopsychology. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1992. 
 
Rubenstein, Mary-Jane. “Cosmic Singularities: On the Nothing and the Sovereign” in 
Journal of the American Academy of  Religion 80.2 (June 2012): 485-517. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  593    
 
Ruether, Rosemary Radford. Gaia & God: An Ecofeminist Theology of  Earth Healing. 
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1992. 
 
 Sahtouris, Elisabet.  “Celebrating Crisis: Towards a Culture of Cooperation,” in A New 
Renaissance: Transforming Science, Spirit & Society. David Lorimer, Oliver Robinson, 
Eds.  London: Floris Books, 2010.  
 
Salinger, J. D. Raise High the Roofbeam, Carpenters; and Seymour. London: 
Heinemann, 1963. 
 
Sanford, A. Whitney. “Pinned on Karma Rock: Whitewater Kayaking as Religious 
Experience” in Journal of the American Academy of Religion 75. 4 (December 2007): 
875-895. 
 
Schlegel, Stuart A. Wisdom from a Rainforest: The Spiritual  Journey  of an 
Anthropologist. Athens: University of Georgia, 1998. 
 
Scholem, Gershom G. Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. 3rd ed. Rev, Repr. Jerusalem: 
Schocken, 1961. 
 
Scholem, Gershom G.  On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism. trans. from the German by 
Ralph Manheim. New York: Schocken, 1965. 
 
Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human 
Condition Have Failed. New Haven: Yale UP, 1998. 
 
Scott, James C. Two Cheers for Anarchism: Six Easy Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and 
Meaningful Work and Play. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2012. 
 
Scott, Nathan A. Negative Capability: Studies in the New Literature and the Religious 
Situation. New Haven: Yale up, 1969. 
 
Scurlock, Charles. Imagine Darkness: The Making of the Simple Universe. Langley, 
WA: Charles Scurlock, 2015, www.enquiriesnw.com 
 
Seattle Area Happiness Initiative (SAHI) www.sustainableseattle.org/sahi/. 
 
Seeley, Thomas D. Honeybee Democracy. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2010. 
 
Sells, Michael A. Mystical Languages of Unsaying. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1994. 
 
Selover, Thomas W. “Forming One Body: The Cheng Brothers and Their Circle” in Tu 
Weiming and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 2. New York: 
Crossroad, 2004: 56-71. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  594    
 
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine. The Primacy of Movement. Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 
1999. 
 
Sheldrake, Rupert. Science Set Free: 10 Paths to New Discovery. New York:  Random 
House, 2012. 
 
Shepard, Paul. Man in the Landscape: A Historic View of the Esthetics of Nature. College 
Station: Texas A&M UP, 1967/1991. 
 
Shklovskii, I. S. and Carl Sagan. Intelligent Life in the Universe. trans. from the Russian 
by Paula Fern. New York: Holden-Day, 1966. 
 
Sideris, Lisa H. Environmental Ethics, Ecological Theology, and Natural Selection. New 
York: Columbia UP, 2003. 
 
Skolimowski, Henryk. The Participatory Mind: A New Theory of Knowledge and of the 
Universe. London: Penguin, 1994. 
 
Smith, Kidder, Peter K. Bol, Joseph A. Adler, and Don J. Wyatt. Sung Dynasty Uses of 
the I  Ching. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1990. 
 
 
Smolin, Lee. The Life of the Cosmos. New York: Oxford UP, 1997. 
 
Snyder, Gary. Earth House Hold: Technical Notes and Queries to Fellow Dharma 
Revolutionaries. New York: New Directions,  1969. 
 
Spengler, Oswald. The Decline of the West. abr. Arthur Helps, trans. from the German by 
Charles Francis Atkinson. New York: Random House, 1926/1962.  
 
Speth, James Gustave. The Bridge at the Edge of the World: Capitalism, the 
Environment, and Crossing from  Crisis to Sustainability. New Haven: Yale, UP, 2008. 
 
Stapledon, Olaf. Last and First Men and Star Maker: Two Science Fiction Novels. New 
York: Dover, 1968. 
 
Stapp, Henry P. Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer. 
New York: Springer, 2007. 
 
Steiner, George. After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford UP, 1998. 
 
Steiner, George. Grammars of Creation. New Haven: Yale UP,  2001. 
 
Steiner, Rudolf. The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity. trans. from the German by R. 
Stebbing. West Nyack, NY: Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1963. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  595    
 
Swimme, Brian. The Universe Is a Green Dragon: A Cosmic Creation Story.  Santa Fe: 
Bear, 1984. 
 
Swimme, Brian. Canticle to the Universe. Audiocassette, Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 
1995, www.soundstrue.com; DVD, San Francisco: Center for the Story of the Universe, 
1990, www.storyoftheuniverse.org/. 
 
Swimme, Brian.  The Hidden Heart of the Cosmos: Humanity and the New Story. 
Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1996. 
 
Swimme, Brian, and Thomas Berry. The Universe  Story: From the Primordial Flaring 
Forth to the Ecozoic Era – A Celebration of the Unfolding of the Cosmos. San Francisco: 
HarperSanFrancisco, 1992. 
 
Swimme, Brian, and Mary Evelyn Tucker. Journey of the Universe. New Haven: Yale 
UP, 2011. 
 
Tarnas, Richard.  The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas That Have 
Shaped Our World View. New York: Ballantine, 1991. 
 
Tarnas, Richard. Cosmos and Psyche: Intimations of a New World View. New York: 
Viking, 2006. 
 
Tart, Charles T. Waking Up: Overcoming the Obstacles to Human Potential. Boston: 
Shambhala, 1986. 
 
Taylor, Bron. Dark Green Religion: Nature, Spirituality and the Planetary Future. 
Berkeley: UC Press, 2010. 
 
Taylor, Rodney L. The Confucian Way of Contemplation: Okada Takehiko and the 
Tradition of Quiet Sitting. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1988. 
 
Tegmark, Max. Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature of  
Reality. New York: Knopf, 2014. 
 
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. The Phenomenon of Man. trans from the French by Bernard 
Wall. New York: Harper & Row, 1938/1959. 
 
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. The Future of Man. trans from the French by Norman 
Denny. New York: Harper & Row, 1959/1964. 
 
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre.  Building the Earth and The Psychological Conditions of 
Human Unification. New York: Avon, 1965. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  596    
Thom, René. Structural Stability and Morphogenesis. trans. from the French by D. H. 
Fowler. Reading, MA: Benjamin, 1975.  
 
Thompson, Evan. Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2007.  
 
Thompson, William Irwin. At the Edge of History. New York: Harper & Row, 1971. 
 
Thunberg, Man and the Cosmos: The Vision of St. Maximus the Confessor. Crestwood, 
NY: St. Vladimir’s Seminary, 19κ5. 
 
Tillich, Paul. The Courage to Be. New Haven: Yale UP, 1952. 
 
Tolkien, J. R. R. T. The Silmarillion. Christopher Tolkien, ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1998. 
 
Trungpa, Chögyam. Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism. eds. John Baker and Marvin 
Caspar. Boulder: Shambhala, 1973. 
 
Trungpa, Chögyam.  Shambhala: The Sacred Path of the Warrior. Carolyn-Rose Gimian, 
ed. Boulder: Shambhala, 1984. 
 
Tu, Weiming. Humanity and Self-Cultivation: Essays in Confucian Thought. Berkeley, 
Asian Humanities Press, 1979. 
 
Tu, Weiming. “Ultimate Self-Transformation as a Communal Act: Comments on Modes 
of Self-Cultivation in Traditional China” in Journal of Chinese Philosophy 6 (1979a): 
237-246. 
 
Tu, Weiming.  Confucian Thought: Selfhood as Creative Transformation. Albany: 
SUNY, 1985. 
 
Tu, Weiming.  Centrality and Commonality: An Essay on Confucian Religiousness. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 1989. 
 
Tu, Weiming. “Epilogue, The Ecological Turn in New Confucian Humanism: 
Implications for China and the World” in Tu Weiming and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. 
Confucian Spirituality, vol. 2. New York: Crossroad, 2004: 480-508. 
 
Tu, Weiming, and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 1. New York: 
Crossroad, 2003. 
 
Tu, Weiming, and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 2. New York: 
Crossroad, 2004. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  597    
Tuan, Yi-Fu. Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and 
Values.Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1974. 
 
Tuan, Yi-Fu.  Passing Strange and Wonderful: Aesthetics, Nature, and Culture. 
Washington, D. C.: Island Press, 1993. 
 
Tucker, Mary Evelyn.  “An Ecological Cosmology” in Christopher Key Chapple, ed. 
Ecological Prospects: Scientific, Religious, and Aesthetic Perspectives. Albany: SUNY, 
1994. 
 
Tucker, Mary Evelyn. “Introduction” in Tu, Weiming and Mary Evelyn Tucker, eds. 
Confucian Spirituality, vol. 1. New York: Crossroad, 2003. 
 
Tucker, Mary Evelyn, and John Berthrong, eds. Confucianism and Ecology: The 
Interrelation of Heaven, Earth, and Humans. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1998. 
 
Tucker, Mary Evelyn, and John A. Grim, eds. Worldviews and Ecology: Religion, 
Philosophy and the Environment. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1994. 
 
Tulku, Tarthang. Dynamics of Time and Space: Transcending Limits on Knowledge. 
Berkeley: Dharma, 1994. 
 
Turner, Victor. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 
1969. 
 
Unger, Roberto Mangabeira. The Religion of the Future. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2014. 
 
Unger, Roberto Mangabeira and Lee Smolin. The Singular Universe and the Reality of 
Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2015. 
 
Vaihinger, Hans. The Philosophy of As If.  2nd ed. trans. from the German by C. K. 
Ogden. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1935. 
 
Varela, Francisco, J., Evan Thompson and Eleanor Rosch. The Embodied Mind: 
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge: MIT, 1991. 
 
Vedral, Vlatko. Decoding Reality: The Universe as  Quantum Information. New York: 
Oxford UP, 2010. 
 
Vico, Giambattista. On the Study Methods of Our Times. Trans. From the Italian by 
Donald P. Verene with Elio Gianturco. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990. 
 
von Balthasar, Hans Urs. The Glory of the Lord: A Theological Aesthetics, vols. 1-7. 
trans. from the German by Erasmo Leiva-Merikakis. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1989. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  598    
von Franz, Marie-Louise. Number and Time: Reflections Leading toward a Unification of 
Depth Psychology and Physics. trans. from the German by Andrea Dykes. Evanston: 
Northwestern UP, 1974. 
 
von Franz, Marie-Louise.  On Divination and Synchronicity: The Psychology of 
Meaningful Chance. Toronto: Inner City, 1980. 
 
von Franz, Marie-Louise. Psyche and Matter. Boston: Shambhala, 1992. 
 
Vonnegut, Kurt. Cat’s Cradle. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963. 
 
Vonnegut, Kurt.  Slaughterhouse Five, Or, The Children’s Crusade, a Duty-Dance with 
Death. New York: Dell, 1969. 
 
Waddington, C. H., ed. Towards a Theoretical Biology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 1969. 
 
Wagner, Rudolf G. A Chinese Reading of the Daodejing: Wang Bi’s Commentary on the 
Laozi with Critical Text and Translation. Albany: SUNY, 2003. 
 
Wallace, B. Alan. Contemplative Science: Where  Buddhism and Neuroscience 
Converge. New York: Columbia UP, 2007. 
 
Wallace, B. Alan. Hidden Dimensions: The Unification of Physics and Consciousness. 
New York:  Columbia UP, 2007. 
 
Wang Bi. The Classic of Changes: A New Translation of the I Ching [Yijing] as 
Interpreted by Wang Bi. trans. from the Chinese by Richard John Lynn. New York: 
Columbia UP, 1994. 
 
Wang Yang-Ming [Shou-jen]. Instructions for Practical Living and Other Neo-Confucian 
Writings by Wang Yang-Ming. trans. from the Chinese by Wing-tsit Chan. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1963. 
 
Ward, Graham. “Theology and Postmodernism: Is it all Over?” in Journal of the 
American Academy of  Religion 80.2 (June 2012): 466-484. 
 
Watts, Alan W. This Is It: And Other Essays on Zen and Spiritual Experience. New York: 
Pantheon, 1960. 
 
Watts, Alan W. The Joyous Cosmology: Adventures in the Chemistry of Consciousness. 
New York: Random House, 1962. 
 
Watts, Alan. The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are. Repr. London: 
Sphere, 1966/1973. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  599    
Weber, Renée. Dialogues with Scientists and Sages: The Search for Unity. New York: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986. 
 
Weinberg, Julius R. A Short History of Medieval Philosophy. Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1964. 
 
Wen, Haiming. “One and Many: Creativity in Whitehead and Chinese Cosmology,” 
Journal of Chinese Philosophy 37.1 (March 2010): 102-115. 
 
Wertheim, Margaret. Pythagoras’ Trousers: God, Physics, and the Gender Wars. 
NewYork: W. W. Norton, 1995. 
 
White, Lynn, Jr.. “The Historical Roots of our  Ecological Crisis” in The  Ecocriticism 
Reader, Cheryl Glotfelty and Harold Fromm, eds. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 
1996. 
 
White, Stephen K. Sustaining Affirmation: The Strengths of Weak Ontology in Political 
Theory. Princeton: Princeton, UP, 2000. 
 
White, Stephen K.  “Weak Ontology: Genealogy and Critical Issues.” The Hedgehog 
Review: Critical Reflections on Contemporary Culture, Special Issue,“Commitments in a 
Post Foundationalist World: Exploring the Possibilities of “Weak Ontology” ι.2(Summer 
2005): 11-25. 
 
Whitehead, Alfred North. Modes of Thought. New York: Macmillan, 1938. 
 
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin 
Lee Whorf. John B. Carroll, ed. Cambridge: MIT, 1956. 
 
Wigner, Eugene. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural 
Sciences” in Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics 13.1 (February 1960): 1-
14. 
 
Wilden, Anthony. System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange 2nd ed. 
London: Tavistock, 1980. 
 
Wilhelm, Richard, trans. from the Chinese and Cary F. Baynes, trans. from the German. 
The I Ching. Princeton: Princeton, UP, 1950/1970. 
 
Williams, Terry Tempest. Finding Beauty in a Broken World. New York: Pantheon, 
2008. 
 
Wilshire, Bruce. Wild Hunger: The Primal Roots of Modern Addiction. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield, 1998. 
 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  600    
Wilshire, Bruce. The Primal Roots of American Philosophy: Pragmatism, 
Phenomenology, and Native American Thought. University Park: Pennsylvania 
State 
UP, 2000. 
 
Wilson, E. O. Biophilia. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1984. 
 
Wilson, E. O. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York: Random House, 1998. 
 
Wu, Kuang-ming. Chuang Tzu: World Philosopher at Play. New York: Crossroad & 
Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1982. 
 
Wu, Kuang-ming.  The Butterfly as Companion: Meditations on the First Three Chapters 
of the Chuang Tzu. Albany: SUNY, 1990. 
 
Wu, Kuangming. “Heretics, Democracy, the Beyond.” Open Journal of Philosophy,  
2014, 4, 360-371. August 2014 in SciRes. http://www.scirp.org/journal/ojpp/   
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ojpp.2014.43039. 
 
Yü, Ying-shih. “Between the Heavenly and the Human” in Tu Weiming and Mary 
Evelyn Tucker, eds. Confucian Spirituality, vol. 1. New York: Crossroad 2003: 62-80. 
 
Yuasa, Yasuo. The Body: Toward an Eastern Mind-Body Theory. ed. T. P. Kasulis, trans. 
from the Japanese by S. Nagatomo & T. P. Kasulis. Albany: SUNY, 1987. 
 
Yuasa, Yasuo.  The Body, Self-Cultivation, and Ki-Energy. trans. from the Japanese by 
Shigenori Nagatomo & Monte S. Hull. Albany: SUNY, 1993.  
 
Yuasa, Yasuo. Overcoming Modernity: Synchronicity and Image-Thinking. trans. From 
the Japanese by S. Nagatomo and J. W. M. Krummel. Albany: SUNY, 2008. 
 
Zajonc, Arthur. Catching the Light: The Entwined History of Light and Mind. New York: 
Bantam Books, 1993. 
 
Zajonc, Arthur, ed. The New Physics and Cosmology: Dialogues with the Dalai Lama. 
New York: Oxford UP, 2004. 
 
Zeitz, James V. Spirituality and Analogia Entis According to Erich Przywara, S. J. 
Washington, D. C.: University Press of America, 1982. 
 
Zhang Zai (Chang TsaiΨ. “The Western Inscription” in DeBary, W. T., Wing-Tsit Chan 
and Burton Watson, eds. Sources of Chinese Tradition v.1. New York: Columbia UP. 
1960: 469-70. 
 
Zhu Xi (Chu Hsi). Reflections on Things at Hand: The Neo-Confucian Anthology. Comp. 
by Chu Hsi and Lü Tsu Ch’ien. trans. from the Chinese by Wing-tsit Chan. New York: 
Columbia UP, 1967. 

Burneko, Reflections on Things at Hand  601    
 
Zhuangzi. Chuang Tzu: Basic Writings. trans. from the Chinese by Burton Watson. New 
York: Columbia UP, 1964. 
 
Zhuangzi. Chuang-tzu: The Inner Chapters. trans. from the Chinese by A. C. Graham. 
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1981. 
 
Zimmerman, Michael E. Eclipse of the Self: The  Development of Heidegger’s Concept of 
Authenticity. rev. ed. Athens: Ohio, 1981 
  
Zoloth, Laurie. “2014 AAR Presidential Address: Interrupting Your Life: An Ethics for 
the Coming Storm” in  Journal of the American Academy of Religion 84:1 (March  
2016): 3-24. 
 
Zukav, Gregory. The Dancing Wu Li Masters. An Overview of the New Physics. New 
York: William Morrow, 1979. 

