NEXT GIENERATION EAR'TH
,SYSTEM PREDICTIIO 
STRATEGIES FOR SUBSEAS01NA1L TO 
SEAS01NAL FORECASTS 
Tlr0 Nalian11-I Arndrmit'S of 
SCIENCES· ENGINEERlNG • MIEDJC1NE 

Committee on Developing a U.S. Research Agenda to 
Advance Subseasonal to Seasonal Forecasting
Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate
Ocean Studies Board
Division on Earth and Life Studies
STRATEGIES FOR SUBSEASONAL TO 
SEASONAL FORECASTS
NEXT GENERATION EARTH 
SYSTEM PREDICTION

THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS • 500 Fifth Street, NW • Washington, DC 20001
This study was supported by the Heising Simons Foundation under contract number 2014-72, 
the Office of Naval Research under contract number N00014-14-1-0194, and the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration under contract number NNX08AB07G, with additional 
support from the National Academy of Sciences’ Arthur L. Day Fund. Any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the 
views of any organization or agency that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:  978-0-309-38880-1
International Standard Book Number-10:  0-309-38880-5
Digital Object Identifier:  10.17226/21873
Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies Press,  
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313;  
http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2016 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016.  
Next Generation Earth System Prediction: Strategies for Subseasonal to Seasonal Forecasts.  
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/21873.

The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, 
signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise 
the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are elected by 
their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the char-
ter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering 
to advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary 
contributions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was 
established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to 
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their 
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 
is president.
The three Academies work together as the National Academies of Sciences, Engi­
neering, and Medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and ­advice to 
the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform 
public policy decisions. The Academies also encourage education and research, 
recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public under-
standing in matters of science, engineering, and medicine.
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi-
cine at www.national-academies.org.


v
COMMITTEE ON DEVELOPING A U.S. RESEARCH AGENDA TO 
ADVANCE SUBSEASONAL TO SEASONAL FORECASTING
RAYMOND J. BAN (Chair), Ban and Associates, LLC, Marietta, GA 
CECILIA M. BITZ, University of Washington, Seattle
ANDY BROWN, UK Met Office, FitzRoy Road, Exeter, UK
ERIC CHASSIGNET, Florida State University, Tallahassee
JOHN A. DUTTON, Prescient Weather Ltd., State College, PA
ROBERT HALLBERG, NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton, NJ 
ANKE KAMRATH, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO
DARYL KLEIST, University of Maryland, College Park
PIERRE F.J. LERMUSIAUX, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
HAI LIN, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Dorval, Quebec
LAURA MYERS, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa
JULIE PULLEN, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ
SCOTT SANDGATHE, University of Washington, Seattle 
MARK SHAFER, University of Oklahoma, Norman
DUANE WALISER, NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
CHIDONG ZHANG, University of Miami, FL
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Staff
EDWARD DUNLEA, Senior Program Officer
CLAUDIA MENGELT, Senior Program Officer
ALISON MACALADY, Associate Program Officer
SHELLY FREELAND, Financial Associate
ROB GREENWAY, Program Associate

vi
BOARD ON ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES AND CLIMATE
A.R. RAVISHANKARA (Chair), Colorado State University, Fort Collins
GERALD A. MEEHL (Vice Chair), National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO
LANCE F. BOSART, University at Albany-SUNY, NY
MARK A. CANE, Columbia University, Palisades, NY
SHUYI S. CHEN, University of Miami, FL
HEIDI CULLEN, Climate Central, Princeton, NJ
PAMELA EMCH, Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems, Redondo Beach, CA
ARLENE FIORE, Columbia University, Palisades, NY
WILLIAM B. GAIL, Global Weather Corporation, Boulder, CO
LISA GODDARD, Columbia University, Palisades, New York
MAURA HAGAN, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO
TERRI S. HOGUE, Colorado School of Mines, Golden
ANTHONY JANETOS, Joint Global Change Research Institute, College Park, MD
EVERETTE JOSEPH, University at Albany-SUNY, NY
RONALD “NICK” KEENER, JR., Duke Energy Corporation, Charlotte, NC
JOHN R. NORDGREN, The Climate Resilience Fund, Bainbridge Island, WA
JONATHAN OVERPECK, University of Arizona, Tucson 
ARISTIDES A.N. PATRINOS, New York University, Brooklyn
S.T. RAO, North Carolina State University, Raleigh
DAVID A. ROBINSON, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway
CLAUDIA TEBALDI, Climate Central, Princeton, NJ
Ocean Studies Board Liaison
DAVID HALPERN, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
Polar Research Board Liaison
JENNIFER FRANCIS, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Marion, MA
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Staff
AMANDA STAUDT, Director
EDWARD DUNLEA, Senior Program Officer
LAURIE GELLER, Program Director
KATHERINE THOMAS, Program Officer 
LAUREN EVERETT, Program Officer

vii
ALISON MACALADY, Associate Program Officer
AMANDA PURCELL, Associate Program Officer
ALEX MORGAN, Christine Mirzayan Fellow
RITA GASKINS, Administrative Coordinator
ROB GREENWAY, Program Associate
SHELLY FREELAND, Financial Associate
MICHAEL HUDSON, Senior Program Assistant
ERIN MARKOVICH, Program Assistant

viii
OCEAN STUDIES BOARD
LARRY A. MAYER (Chair), University of New Hampshire, Durham
E. VIRGINIA ARMBRUST, University of Washington, Seattle
KEVIN R. ARRIGO, Stanford University, CA
CLAUDIA BENITEZ-NELSON, University of South Carolina, Columbia
RITA R. COLWELL, University of Maryland, College Park
SARAH W. COOKSEY, State of Delaware, Dover
CORTIS K. COOPER, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, CA
JAMES A. ESTES, University of California, Santa Cruz
DAVID HALPERN, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
PATRICK HEIMBACH, University of Texas, Austin
SUSAN E. HUMPHRIS, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA
BONNIE J. MCCAY, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ
S. BRADLEY MORAN, University of Alaska, Fairbanks
STEVEN A. MURAWSKI, University of South Florida, St. Petersburg
JOHN A. ORCUTT, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA
H. TUBA ÖZKAN-HALLER, Oregon State University, Corvallis
MARTIN D. SMITH, Duke University, Durham, NC
MARGARET SPRING, Monterey Bay Aquarium, Monterey, CA
DON WALSH, International Maritime Incorporated, Myrtle Point, OR
DOUGLAS WARTZOK, Florida International University, Miami
LISA D. WHITE, University of California, Berkeley and San Francisco State University
ROBERT S. WINOKUR, Michigan Tech Research Institute, Silver Spring, MD
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Staff
SUSAN ROBERTS, Director
CLAUDIA MENGELT, Senior Program Officer
STACEE KARRAS, Associate Program Officer
PAMELA LEWIS, Administrative Coordinator
PAYTON KULINA, Senior Program Assistant
SHUBHA BANSKOTA, Financial Associate
HEATHER COLEMAN, Postdoctoral Fellow

ix
Acknowledgments
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this independent review is to 
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional 
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review 
comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the 
process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Gianpaolo Balsamo, European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting, 
Reading, UK
Julie Demuth, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO
Gregg A. Jacobs, Naval Research Laboratory, Stennis Space Center, MS 
James L. Kinter III, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
Randal Koster, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Greenbelt, MD
Douglas C. Marble, Metron Scientific Solutions, Inc., Reston, VA
Nadia Pinardi, University of Bologna, Italy
James G. Richman, Naval Research Laboratory, Corvallis, OR 97330
Andrew Robertson, Columbia University, Palisades, NY
Frederic Vitart, European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting, Reading, UK
John Wallace, University of Washington, Seattle
Robert Weller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the report’s conclusions or recommenda-
tions, nor did they see the final draft of the report before the release. The review of this 
report was overseen by Robert E. Dickinson, University of Texas at Austin, and Marc 
Levy, Center for International Earth Sciences Information Network, Columbia Univer-
sity; they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this 
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report 
rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
The committee would also like to thank numerous members of the community who 
provided input to the committee throughout the study process, including Robert 
Bertram, Julie Demuth, Lisa Dilling, Stephen Eckermann, Gina Eosco, Fern Gibbons, Sara 
 

x
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
Gonzalez-Rothi Kronenthal, Jennifer Henderson, Paul Higgins, Wayne Higgins, William 
Hooke, Susan Jasko, Christopher R. Johnson, Jeanine Jones, James Kinter III, Benjamin 
Kirtman, Randal Koster, William Lapenta, Richard Loft, Rohit Mathur, Rebecca Morss, 
David Randall, Andrea Ray, Carolyn Reynolds, Suranjana Saha, Richard Stumpf, David 
Titley, and Huug Van den Dool.

xi
Preface
Today, millions of people tune to their favorite TV meteorologist or check the news-
paper or their smart phones to get the latest weather forecast. Knowing what the 
weather will likely be for the next few hours and the next several days has opened 
up incredible opportunities for society as a whole—for individuals making decisions 
about what they will do in their daily lives, for industry undertaking risk management 
activities, and for governments making critical life and property protection decisions.
What if there were similar uses of forecasts for 2 weeks, 3 weeks, or even 3 or 6 months 
from now? It is easy to envision the potential value of high-quality predictions 
2 weeks to 12 months ahead for any number of industries—for example, energy, 
water ­resource management, and agriculture. There are undoubtedly potential ben-
efits for other sectors that we cannot even imagine today. Even if such information 
never matches the level of confidence associated with tomorrow’s weather forecast, 
it could still be used by individuals, businesses, and governments to plan and make a 
large array of important decisions. In this study, the committee puts forward a vision 
that subseasonal to seasonal forecasts (S2S) (i.e., forecasts of environmental condi-
tions made approximately 2 weeks to 12 months in advance) will be as widely used 
a decade from now as weather forecasts are today. The path to realizing this vision 
and its inherent value will require focused effort on S2S processes and predictions by 
both physical and social scientists. Today, this type of commitment largely exists on 
the weather timescale and on the scales in which climate change is expected. S2S falls 
in a “gap” between these two areas, and in general, has not received the same level of 
dedicated effort and support. This report presents research strategies for dealing with 
this “in-between” space over the next decade.
Although the overall quality and use of products in the S2S time frame have been 
growing over the past decade, increasing the predictive skill of coupled Earth system 
models in S2S forecast ranges will be essential to increasing the benefits for and ex-
panding the number of end users of these products. The benefits of S2S forecasts will 
be further enhanced if the scope of operational S2S forecasts were extended beyond 
the traditional weather variables to include more Earth system variables and events. 
Opportunities for improvements and expansions to existing forecasts include, for ex-
ample, enhanced predictions of the ocean state, sea ice fields, aerosols and air quality, 
and water management. A focus on developing better information on the likelihood 
of specific and disruptive environmental events, in addition to improving the skill of 
 

xii
P R E FA C E
currently available forecasts of temperature and precipitation anomalies, has great 
potential to further enhance the value of S2S predictions.
This report presents a research agenda that provides the framework for the physi-
cal and social sciences communities to collaboratively advance the skill, breadth, and 
value of S2S predictions. The committee held five in-person meetings between Octo-
ber 2014 and May 2015, and received broad and diverse input from experts in both 
physical and social sciences as well as from end users of S2S forecasts. We would like 
to thank all of those who provided their time and insight. The contributors are listed in 
the Acknowledgments section above. The committee is also greatly indebted to Study 
Directors Edward Dunlea and Claudia Mengelt and to Associate Program Officer Alison 
Macalady. This report would not have been possible without their tireless efforts and 
expert support. Finally, I would like to thank the committee members for their hard 
work and dedication to excellence. I particularly want to thank the committee for their 
patience with me as I learned so much from them. It was indeed a true pleasure to 
work with this talented group of professionals.
Raymond J. Ban, Chair 
Committee on Developing a U.S. Research Agenda to  
Advance Subseasonal to Seasonal Forecasting

xiii
Contents
SUMMARY	
1
	
Vision and Research Strategies for the Next Decade, 3
	
Recommended Elements of a Research Agenda, 3
	
Conclusion, 14
1	
INTRODUCTION	
17
	
Motivation for This Study, 18
	
The Report Roadmap, 22
2	
HISTORY AND CURRENT STATUS OF S2S FORECASTING	
25
	
Evolution of the Forecast Enterprise, 25
	
Current Status of Activities and Recent Progress, 30
3	
ENHANCING THE VALUE AND BENEFITS OF S2S FORECASTS	
43
	
The Potential Value of S2S Forecasts to Decision-Makers, 44
	
Challenges to the Use of S2S Predictions, 54
	
Improving the Usability and Use of S2S Forecasts, 60
	
Case Studies With Example Applications of S2S Forecasts, 65
	
The Way Forward for Realizing the Potential of S2S Predictions, 78
4	
SOURCES OF SUBSEASONAL TO SEASONAL PREDICTABILITY	
83
	
Introduction, 83
	
Defining Predictability, 86
	
Predictibility Research, 87
	
Sources of Predictibility, 91
	
The Way Forward for Research on Sources of Predictability, 112
5	
S2S FORECAST SYSTEMS: CAPABILITIES, GAPS, AND POTENTIAL	
117
	
Routine Observations and Their Use, 120
	
Data Assimilation, 146
	
Models, 163
	
Combination, Calibration, Verification, and Optimization of S2S Forecast  
	
	
Systems, 194
 

xiv
C O N T E N T S
6	
INTERFACE BETWEEN RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS	
207
	
Current Activities at the Interface of S2S Research and Operations, 208
	
Challenges in Research to Operations and Operations to Research, 212
	
Way Forward for Research to Operations, 214
7	
CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE AND WORKFORCE CAPACITY BUILDING	
223
	
Building Capacity for S2S Cyberinfrastructure, 223
	
Building Capacity in the S2S Modeling and Prediction Workforce, 233
8	
VISION AND WAY FORWARD FOR S2S EARTH SYSTEM PREDICTION	
239
	
Vision for the Next Decade, 239
	
S2S Research Strategies and Recommendations, 241
	
Conclusion, 268
ACRONYM LIST	
279
REFERENCES	
285
APPENDIXES
A	
Committee’s Statement of Task	
317
B	
Details of Seasonal and Subseasonal Forecast Systems	
319
	
	
Examples of Models Used by Operational Centers for Subseasonal and  
	
	
	
Seasonal Forecasting	
319
C	
Past, Current, and Planned Major International Process Studies	
323
	
	
Past Process Studies, 323
	
	
Current and Future Process Studies, 326
D	 Biographical Sketches of Committee Members	
329
	

1
 
Summary
The use of weather forecasts by governments, businesses, and individuals is ubiq-
uitous in the United States: Should a school system be closed due to cold or snowy 
conditions on a given day? How much power should an electric utility plan to produce 
in order to meet demand for air conditioning during a summer week? Is a weather-
sensitive military sortie likely to be effective on a particular afternoon? Making these 
and myriad other decisions across virtually all sectors of the economy has been 
transformed by the availability of skillful forecasts with lead times of a few hours to 
a few days. The value and importance of weather and other environ­mental forecasts 
will increase as the nation’s economic activities, security concerns, and steward­ship of 
natural resources become increasingly complex, globally interrelated, and affected by 
longer-term climate changes.
Although short-term forecasts already play a vital role in shaping societal decision-
making, many critical decisions must be made several weeks to months in advance of 
potentially favorable or disruptive environmental conditions. For example, it can take 
weeks or months to move emergency and disaster-relief supplies, but pre-staging re-
sources to areas that are likely to experience extreme weather or an infectious disease 
outbreak could save lives and stretch the efficacy of limited resources. Similarly, emer-
gency managers responding to unanticipated events such as nuclear power plant 
accidents or large oil spills face the task of communicating the ramifications of such 
events on timescales that stretch well beyond a few days. There are many more such 
examples: naval and commercial shipping planners designate shipping routes weeks 
in advance, seeking to stage assets strategically, avoid hazards, and/or take advantage 
of favorable conditions; with improved knowledge of the likelihood of precipitation or 
drought, farmers can purchase seed varieties that are most likely to increase yields and 
reduce costs; and depending on the year, water resource managers can face a multi-
tude of decisions about reservoir levels in the weeks, months, and seasons ahead of 
eventual water consumption.
A frontier in forecasting involves extending the capability to skillfully predict envi-
ronmental conditions and disruptive weather events to several weeks and months in 
advance, filling what has long been a gap between today’s short-term weather and 
ocean forecasting capabilities (within the next 14 days) and a growing ability to ­project 
the longer-term climate (on scales of years to decades or more). Seasonal—and more 
recently subseasonal—predictions (defined in Box S.1) have improved over the past 

2
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX S.1 
DEFINITION OF SUBSEASONAL TO SEASONAL (S2S) FORECASTS
Seasonal forecasts often refer to outlooks of oceanic and atmospheric conditions averaged 
over a season, or about 3 months, issued with lead times ranging from a month to multiple 
seasons. Subseasonal forecasts often project average conditions over a week or more, often 
with lead times of 2-6 weeks or more. In this report, “subseasonal to seasonal” or “S2S” includes 
environmental predictions with forecast ranges from 2 weeks to 12 months (see also Box 1.1). 
decade, but there is great opportunity to further improve the skill of sub­seasonal to 
seasonal (S2S) forecasts, as well as the breadth of forecasted variables and routinely 
available forecast products. Doing so could dramatically increase the benefits of the 
environmental prediction enterprise: saving lives, protecting property, increas­ing eco-
nomic vitality, protecting the environment, and informing policy choices. 
Despite their large potential, Earth system predictions on S2S timescales remain chal-
lenging for researchers, modelers, and forecasters. Although it is increasingly recog-
nized that many sources of predictability exist in the Earth system on S2S timescales, 
representing these sources of predictability in Earth system models is challenging. 
Models must adequately capture the initial states of the atmosphere, ocean, land sur-
face and cryosphere, as well as the interactions, or coupling, of these different compo-
nents. Furthermore, the longer lead times associated with S2S predictions make the 
representation of uncertainty and the verification process more challenging and more 
computationally intensive than numerical weather prediction. Nonetheless, potential 
advances both in technology—satellites, computing, etc.—and in science—model 
parameterizations, data assimilation techniques, etc.—make advances in S2S forecast-
ing feasible within the next decade. 
Another key challenge is making S2S forecasts more applicable to users. S2S forecasts 
are generally less skillful than shorter-term predictions, are issued at lower spatial and 
temporal resolutions, and may involve the communication of probabilistic informa-
tion that is unfamiliar to many users. These barriers have the potential to be overcome 
through research about and engagement with users. 
Given the opportunities associated with improved S2S forecasts, but also the many 
challenges associated with developing them, the Office of Naval Research (ONR), the 
National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA), and the Heising-Simons Foundation 
asked the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to undertake a 
study to develop a 10-year U.S. research agenda to increase S2S research and model-

3
Summary
ing capability, advance S2S forecasting, and aid in decision-making at medium and 
extended lead times (see Appendix A for the study’s Statement of Task). The Acad-
emies convened the Committee on Developing a U.S. Research Agenda to Advance 
Subseasonal to Seasonal Forecasting to meet this request. 
VISION AND RESEARCH STRATEGIES FOR THE NEXT DECADE
The committee believes that there is great potential to advance S2S forecasting capa-
bility and rapidly increase the benefits of S2S predictions to many sectors in society. 
However, overcoming the challenges to developing S2S forecasting will take sustained 
effort and investment.
Encouraged by its sponsors to be bold, the committee puts forward a vision that 
S2S forecasts will be as widely used a decade from now as weather forecasts 
are ­today and identifies four research strategies and 16 recommendations to guide 
­progress toward that vision. The research strategies for improving the use of S2S fore-
casts in the next decade (see Figure S.1) are as follows:
1.	 Engage Users in the Process of Developing S2S Forecast Products
2.	 Increase S2S Forecast Skill
3.	 Improve Prediction of Extreme and Disruptive Events and Consequences 
of Unanticipated Forcing Events
4.	 Include More Components of the Earth System in S2S Forecast Models 
RECOMMENDED ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA
Implementing the four strategies above will require research in the physical and social 
sciences, as well as improved coordination among user, research, and operational 
forecast communities. The committee’s recommendations collectively constitute an 
S2S research agenda for the nation. Given the fluid technological, political, and finan-
cial environment in which the research agenda will be implemented, the committee 
decided it was more important to identify the most important areas where progress 
can be made without overly prescribing the sequence or priority in which they should 
be addressed. Although most recommendations support more than one research 
strategy, they are described in the following sections under the primary strategy with 
which they are associated. 
To help agencies and others within the weather/climate enterprise select specific 
parts of the research agenda to pursue, Table S.1 and Table 8.1 provide additional 

4
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE S.1  Schematic of the relationship between the committee’s vision, strategies, and recommenda-
tions for advancing subseasonal to seasonal forecasting. NOTES: The committee’s vision (center) serves as 
the target for the research agenda. Four research strategies are intended to organize actions to advance 
toward the vision, but are not mutually exclusive (indicated by the white arrows). The outermost layer of 
the circle contains paraphrases of the individual recommendations for more research activities, aligned 
with the strategy that they most closely support (although recommendations can support more than one 
strategy—see Table S.1). The base of the circle shows activities necessary to support the research agenda.
VISION
S2S Forecasts Will
Be as Widely Used
a Decade from Now as 
Weather Forecasts 
Are Today
Include
More
Earth 
System
Components
Improve
Prediction
of
Disruptive
Events
Engage
Users
Increase 
S2S Forecast
Skill
Build Cyberinfrastructure
and Workforce
Create a National Plan
for Cyberinfrastructure
Address S2S Workforce
Development
Develop
Next Generation
Model
Components
Develop a
National Capability
for Unanticipated
Forcing Events
Focus Attention on
Disruptive and
Extreme Events
Research Use of
S2S Forecasts
Characterize Natural
Modes of Variability
Maintain and Expand
Observations
Prioritize Observations
through Sensitivity Studies
Advance Strongly Coupled
Data Assimilation
Improve Model
Parameterizations
Pursue Feature-based
Veriﬁcation
Explore S2S System
Conﬁgurations
Create Operational
Multi-Model Ensemble
Promote Collaboration
Between Research and
Operational Communities
Establish an Iterative
Process to Engage Users

5
Summary
TABLE S.1  These 16 recommendations—lettered in the order that they appear in the 
report—comprise the committee’s research agenda (a similar table that also contains 
the more specific recommendations from the chapters is in Table 8.1). The second 
column indicates the research strategy that each recommendation primarily supports 
(colors are the same as in Figure S.1). Additional research strategies (1-4) supported 
by each recommendation are indicated by numbers. The committee specifically did 
not prioritize these recommendations. However, this table presents the committee’s 
opinion on whether each activity will involve mainly basic or applied research/
operational activities, or both; whether a short-term return on investment is likely 
(≤ 5 years); and whether a new initiative or program, or a significant expansion of a 
program, may be necessary to implement each recommendation. The last column 
indicates recommendations for which the Committee believes that international 
collaboration and coordination is particularly important. 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied
Research/
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in
the Short 
Term
May Need
New
Initiative
Intern- 
ational
Collab.
Critical
Chapter 3
A: Develop a body of social science research 
that leads to more comprehensive and systematic 
understanding of the use and barriers to use of 
seasonal and subseasonal Earth system predictions.
1, 4
¡__________¡
¡
B: Establish an ongoing and iterative process 
in which stakeholders, social and behavioral 
scientists, and physical scientists codesign S2S 
forecast products, verification metrics, and decision-
making tools.
1, 4
¡__________¡
¡
Chapter 4
C: Identify and characterize sources of S2S 
predictability, including natural modes of variability 
(e.g., ENSO, MJO, QBO), slowly varying processes 
(e.g., sea ice, soil moisture, and ocean eddies), 
and external forcing (e.g., aerosols), and correctly 
represent these sources of predictability, including 
their interactions, in S2S forecast systems.
2, 3
¡
¡
¡
D: Focus predictability studies, process exploration, 
model development, and forecast skill advancements 
on high-impact S2S “forecasts of opportunity” that in 
particular target disruptive and extreme events.
3, 2
¡
¡
¡
Chapter 5
E: Maintain continuity of critical observations, and 
expand the temporal and spatial coverage of in situ 
and remotely sensed observations for Earth system 
variables that are beneficial for operational S2S 
prediction and for discovering and modeling new 
sources of S2S predictability.
2, 3, 4
¡__________¡
¡
¡
¡
continued

6
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied
Research/
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in
the Short 
Term
May Need
New
Initiative
Intern- 
ational
Collab.
Critical
Chapter 5 (cont.)
F: Determine priorities for observational systems 
and networks by developing and implementing 
observing system simulation experiments, observing 
system experiments, and other sensitivity studies 
using S2S forecast systems. 
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
G: Invest in research that advances the development 
of strongly coupled data assimilation and quantifies 
the impact of such advances on operational S2S 
forecast systems.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
H: Accelerate research to improve parameterization 
of unresolved (e.g., subgrid scale) processes, 
both within S2S system submodels and holistically 
across models, to better represent coupling in the 
Earth system.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
¡
I: Pursue next generation ocean, sea ice, wave, 
biogeochemistry, and land surface/hydrologic as 
well as atmospheric model capability in fully coupled 
Earth system models used in S2S forecast systems.
4, 2, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
J: Pursue feature-based verification techniques to 
more readily capture limited predictability at S2S 
timescales as part of a larger effort to improve S2S 
forecast verification.
2, 1, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
K: Explore systematically the impact of various S2S 
forecast system design elements on S2S forecast 
skill. This includes examining the value of model 
diversity, as well as the impact of various selections 
and combinations of model resolution, number of 
ensemble perturbations, length of lead, averaging 
period, length of retrospective forecasts, and options 
for coupled sub-models.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
Chapter 6
L: Accelerate efforts to carefully design and create 
robust operational multi-model ensemble S2S 
forecast systems. 
2, 3
¡
¡
¡
M: Provide mechanisms for research and operations 
communities to collaborate, and aid in transitioning 
components and parameterizations from the 
research community into operational centers, by 
increasing researcher access to operational or 
operational mirror systems. 
2, 1, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
N: Develop a national capability to forecast the 
consequences of unanticipated forcing events. 
3, 1
¡
¡
TABLE S.1  Continued

7
Summary
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied
Research/
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in
the Short 
Term
May Need
New
Initiative
Intern- 
ational
Collab.
Critical
Chapter 7
O: Develop a national plan and investment strategy 
for S2S prediction to take better advantage of current 
hardware and software and to meet the challenges 
in the evolution of new hardware and software for 
all stages of the prediction process, including data 
assimilation, operation of high-resolution coupled 
Earth system models, and storage and management 
of results. 
Supporting
¡__________¡
¡
¡
P: Pursue a collection of actions to address 
workforce development that removes barriers that 
exist across the entire workforce pipeline and 
increases the diversity of scientists and engineers 
involved in advancing S2S forecasting and the 
component and coupled systems.
Supporting
¡
¡
¡
TABLE S.1  Continued
detail about the recommendations: whether they involve basic or applied research; 
which are expected to have short-term benefits; which might require a new initiative; 
and which have a scope that calls for international collaboration. The chapters contain 
additional recommended activities that fall under each main recommendation, which 
add further specificity and breadth to the research agenda. Although it might not be 
possible to pursue all of these actions simultaneously, the more that is done to imple-
ment these recommendations, the more advances in S2S forecasting can be made.
Research Strategy 1:  
Engage Users in the Process of Developing S2S Forecast Products
Many barriers hinder the use of existing S2S forecast information, including ­increasing 
demand for a wider variety of forecast variables and formats that are not readily avail-
able. An important first step in providing more actionable S2S forecast information 
is to develop a body of social and behavioral sciences research that leads to more 
comprehensive understanding of the current use and barriers to use of S2S predic-
tions (Recommendation A). This will involve research to uncover the specific aspects of 
products—forecast variables, spatial and temporal resolutions, necessary levels of skill, 
etc.—that make S2S products more useful to decision-makers across multiple sectors. 

8
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Beyond such assessments, engaging the S2S research and operational prediction 
community in an iterative dialogue with user communities is necessary to help ensure 
that forecast systems, forecast products, and other model output, are designed from 
the outset to be useful for decision-making (Recommendation B). Ongoing efforts will 
be needed to match what is scientifically predictable and technologically feasible at 
S2S timescales with what users find actionable, as both scientific skill and user needs 
continually evolve. Launching such a dialogue requires bringing decision-makers into 
the research and development process sooner rather than later. Private industry and 
“boundary organizations” within academia and the public sector (such as the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency’s [NOAA] Regional Integrated Sciences and Assess-
ments program and the International Research Institute for Climate and Society at 
Columbia University, and many others) have already started such discussions. Lever-
aging the entire weather and climate enterprise—not just the public sector—will be 
necessary for further developing such an iterative approach to the development of 
S2S products and services.
Research Strategy 2: Increase S2S Forecast Skill 
The skill (i.e., the quality) of S2S forecasts has been increasing, but is still limited, even 
for traditional weather and climate variables (e.g., temperature, precipitation). Im-
proving the skill of S2S forecasts is fundamental to increasing their value to society. 
Enhancing skill begins with understanding sources of and limits to S2S predictability 
within the Earth system. Current research indicates that a large portion of S2S predict-
ability originates from
• 
Natural modes of variability (e.g., El Niño-Southern Oscillation [ENSO], the 
Madden-Julian Oscillation [MJO], and the Quasi Biennial Oscillation [QBO]—
see Box 1.3); 
• 
Slowly-varying processes (e.g., involving soil moisture, snow pack and other 
aspects of the land surface, ocean heat content, currents and eddy positions, 
and sea ice); and 
• 
Elements of external forcing (e.g., aerosols, greenhouse gasses) that can result 
in a systematic and predictable evolution of the Earth system.
Basic research on these phenomena and their interactions is fundamental to identify-
ing and understanding the processes that must be included in Earth system models in 
order to increase S2S forecast skill (Recommendation C). 
In addition to extending knowledge about sources of S2S predictability, efforts are 
needed across every part of the forecast system, including improved observations and 

9
Summary
data assimilation methods, advances in Earth system models, and improved methods 
for uncertainty quantification, calibration, and verification. 
Observations
Routine observations are essential for accurately initializing models, validating model 
output, and improving understanding of the physical system and its predictability. The 
ocean, land surface, and cryosphere remain significantly under-observed compared to 
the atmosphere, despite being major sources of S2S predictability. Maintaining and in 
some cases bolstering the network of observations across all components of the Earth 
system is critical to advancing S2S prediction skill (Recommendation E).
Although it would be beneficial to expand the geographic coverage and resolution of 
many types of observations, cost and logistics will continue to demand an identifica-
tion of the most critical priorities. Observing system simulation experiments ­(OSSEs) 
and other sensitivity studies are powerful tools for exploring the importance of 
specific observations on estimation of the state of the Earth system and overall model 
performance, and could be better used to prioritize improvements to observation 
networks for S2S prediction systems (Recommendation F). 
Data Assimilation
Data assimilation is the process of initializing and updating Earth system models with 
observations and is important for uncertainty quantification, calibration, and valida-
tion of forecasts. Integration of tens of millions of observations into the different 
components of an Earth system model presents many challenges, including ensuring 
that initializations are dynamically consistent and minimize the growth of errors. Given 
that coupling between the multiple, dynamic components of the Earth system (e.g., 
atmosphere, ocean, ice, land) is central to S2S prediction, developing and implement-
ing coupled data assimilation methods is at the forefront of S2S model development. 
“Weakly coupled” data assimilation is one existing method that is increasingly imple-
mented in weather prediction and holds promise for improving S2S prediction sys-
tems. “Strongly coupled” data assimilation allows observations within one component 
of the Earth system to affect state estimates in other components (with constraints). 
This technique is still in its infancy but has the potential to spur a more dramatic leap 
forward. Realizing the method’s potential will require significant research and testing 
that should be explored while continuing to pursue weakly coupled methods (Recom-
mendation G). 

10
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Models
Systematic errors are numerous within the Earth system models used for S2S 
­forecasting—many global models produce an unrealistically strong Pacific ­equatorial 
cold tongue, a spurious double Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), wet or dry 
biases in rainfall in many parts of the world, among other issues. These model errors 
can be large compared to the predictable signals targeted by S2S forecasts. Thus tak-
ing steps to reduce systematic errors within coupled Earth system models is one of the 
most important steps in improving the skill of S2S predictions. 
Modest increases in model resolutions hold potential for reducing model errors, and 
such improvements should continue to be studied. However, given the computational 
costs of increasing model resolution, many critical Earth system processes will need to 
be parameterized (i.e., represented using simplified physics schemes rather than be-
ing explicitly resolved in models) for the foreseeable future. Thus improving physical 
parameterizations will remain fundamental to reducing model errors and increasing 
S2S forecast skill, even as the capability to resolve more and more processes expands 
(Recommendation H). Coordinated, coupled field campaigns, process-targeted satel-
lite missions, and long-term collaborations between research and operational scien-
tists are essential for developing the understanding required to improve models and 
model parameterizations. 
Calibration, Combination, Verification, and Optimization of S2S forecasts
Some model errors will remain even with major improvements in models and in-
creased resolution. Using multi-model ensembles (MMEs) is likely to remain critical 
for S2S prediction as one of the most promising ways to account for errors associated 
with Earth system model formulation. However, current MMEs are largely systems of 
opportunity (i.e., basing the MME design on expediency). Research is required to more 
systematically develop MME forecast systems. Careful optimization of the configura-
tions of a multi-model prediction system will include systematic exploration of the 
benefits and costs of adding unique models to an MME and evaluation of other S2S 
forecast system design elements (“trade space”), including calibration methods, model 
resolution, number of ensemble members, averaging period, lengths of lead and retro-
spective forecasts, and options for coupled sub-models (Recommendation K). Exploring 
this trade space will be a complicated and expensive endeavor, but determining how 
performance depends on system configuration is a key task in the S2S research agenda.

11
Summary
Verification metrics are important for tracking and comparing model improvements, 
and are a critical part of building user trust in S2S forecasts. Improving verification 
should be done in collaboration with user groups, along with research on feature-
based and two-step verification methods and consideration of how the design of 
­retrospective forecasts and reanalyses can influence the ability of some users to 
directly evaluate the consequences of acting on forecasts at various predicted prob-
abilities (Recommendation J).
Moving Research to Operations
Finally, transitioning new ideas, tools, and other technology between the S2S research 
community and operational centers is challenging but essential to translating re-
search discoveries into better informed decision-making. The use of MMEs in research 
and demonstration settings, for example the North American Multi-model Ensemble 
(NMME) program, has demonstrated the potential for improving the skill of S2S fore-
casts and has produced many lessons for developing an operational MME. Fully opera-
tionalizing the current NMME, which relies on nonoperational institutions supported 
by research funding, may be challenging. However, there would be great value in the 
development of a fully operational MME forecast system that includes the operational 
centers of the United States (Recommendation L). 
To make the rapid improvements to operational S2S prediction systems that the 
committee envisions, it will be generally important to speed the flow of information 
between scientists with research and operational foci (Recommendation M). This 
includes promoting and expanding existing mechanisms to facilitate knowledge 
transfer—such as NOAA’s Climate Process Teams—and developing new mechanisms 
to enhance researcher access to operational forecast data, including access to archives 
of ensemble forecasts, retrospective forecasts, and initialization data. Additionally, al-
lowing researchers to conduct or request specific experiments on operational systems 
would provide an additional boost to the flow of discoveries and technical advances.
Research Strategy 3:  
Improve Prediction of Extreme and Disruptive Events and of 
the Consequences of Unanticipated Forcing Events
To improve the overall skill of S2S forecasts and provide more actionable information 
to users, the committee identifies two areas that deserve special attention and pro-
motes them to the third and fourth Research Strategies. Research Strategy 3 involves 

12
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
an increased focus on discrete events and includes two sets of recommendations. The 
first is to emphasize the prediction of weather, climate, and other Earth system events 
that disrupt society’s normal functioning (e.g., major winter storms, ­excessive rainfall 
events, monsoon onset and breaks, tropical storms, heat waves). Thus, in contrast to 
the forecasts of specific weather events on a scale of days, improved S2S forecasts 
would identify situations with high probabilities of disruptive consequences, espe-
cially for subseasonal forecast ranges (approximately 2-12 weeks). A coordinated 
effort to improve the forecasting of these events could allow communities more time 
to plan for these events and mitigate damages. Improved forecasting of disruptive 
events may also involve developing “forecasts of opportunity”—identifying windows 
in time when expected skill is higher than usual at a particular place because of the 
presence of certain features in the Earth system, certain phases of large-scale climate 
patterns (e.g., seasonal cycle, ENSO, or MJO), or certain interactions of these modes, 
slowly varying processes, and external forcing. Studying these interactions and ensur-
ing they are represented in models will be important for S2S prediction and for identi-
fying forecasts of opportunity (Recommendation D).
The second part of this research strategy involves using S2S forecast systems to 
predict the consequences of disruptive events caused by outside forces. Such outside 
forces include volcanoes, meteor impacts, and human actions (e.g., aerosols, wide-
spread fires, large oil spills, certain acts of war, or climate intervention). Even though 
these events themselves are not predictable, their consequences may be—in particu-
lar the consequences on S2S timescales. A national system for projecting the conse-
quences from these unanticipated events on S2S timescales would aid emergency 
response and disaster planning (Recommendation N). With improved coordination be-
tween government agencies and academics, it would be possible to assist in recovery 
efforts by quickly generating S2S forecasts of the consequences of such unanticipated 
events shortly after they take place. 
Research Strategy 4:  
Include More Components of the Earth System in S2S Forecast Models 
The other area that the committee believes needs more focused attention is the 
utilization and further development of advanced Earth system model components 
beyond the troposphere, which has been the traditional focus of numerical weather 
prediction. The S2S prediction problem is inherently a problem of capturing the 
coupled processes operating at the interface between various components of the 
Earth system, including the troposphere, stratosphere, ocean, cryosphere, biosphere, 
and land surface. 

13
Summary
Progress in recent decades has extended the coupling of more model components and 
more comprehensive representation of processes within these components in opera-
tional S2S forecast systems (see also Research Strategy 2). However, there is an increas-
ing need to accelerate the development of model components outside the tropo-
sphere and to improve their coupling within S2S forecast systems. In particular, it will be 
important to rapidly advance toward next generation ocean, sea ice, and land surface 
modeling capability within coupled Earth system models, in addition to preparing for 
cloud-resolving capability in atmospheric models. This will include moving toward 
eddy-resolving resolutions in the ocean, inclusion of ocean surface wave effects, and 
developing better representation of sea ice, land surface, and surface hydrological pro-
cesses. Other strong candidates for improvements to existing practices for operational 
S2S forecasting systems include advancing prediction capabilities of aerosols and air 
quality, soil-state and seasonal vegetation growth, and aquatic and marine ecosystems. 
Research is also required to better understand which added components have signifi-
cant interactions with the weather and climate system as a whole, pointing to the need 
for dynamic integration into operational forecasting systems (Recommendation I). 
Improving these model components may also be important for better predicting a 
wider array of Earth system variables on S2S timescales (e.g., sea ice, ocean productiv-
ity, hydrology, air quality), even if they do not feedback strongly to the coupled system. 
Iterative interaction with forecast users (Research Strategy 1) can help determine 
what processes and variables are most important to include in coupled S2S systems as 
these systems evolve. 
Supporting the S2S Forecasting Enterprise
The research strategies outlined in the report will require advances in computational 
infrastructure to support S2S forecasting, and the development and maintenance of a 
workforce ready to realize potential advances in S2S forecasting. These challenges are 
not unique to the S2S enterprise—they are also important in the weather prediction 
and climate modeling communities, among other technical enterprises. 
Similar to weather forecasting and climate modeling, S2S prediction systems test 
the limits of current cyber-infrastructure. The volume of observational data, data as-
similation steps, model outputs, and reanalysis and retrospective forecasts involved 
in S2S forecasting means that the S2S modeling process is extremely data intensive. 
Advances in S2S forecast models (such as higher resolutions, increased complexity, 
the generation and retention of long retrospective forecasts) will require dramatic 
increases (likely 1,000-fold) in computing capacities, together with similar expansions 

14
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
in storage and data transport. Earth system models are not taking full advantage of 
the complexity of current computing architectures, and improving their performance 
will likely require new algorithms that process more data locally and new algorithms 
to exploit even more parallelism. The transition over the next decade to new comput-
ing hardware and software that is not necessarily faster, but is more complex, will be 
highly disruptive. Future storage technology will also be more complex and varied 
than it is today, and leveraging these innovations will require fundamental software 
changes. Facing these challenges and uncertainties about the future, the United States 
would benefit from developing a national plan and investment strategy to take better 
advantage of current hardware and software and to meet the challenges in the evolu-
tion of new hardware and software for all stages of the prediction process (Recom-
mendation O).
There are numerous barriers to training and retaining talented workers in the S2S 
enterprise. S2S is complex and involves working across computing and traditional 
Earth science disciplinary boundaries to develop and improve S2S models, and across 
science-user decision boundaries to better design and communicate forecast prod-
ucts. From the limited workforce data available, the Committee surmises that the 
pipeline of workers for the S2S enterprise is not growing robustly in the United States 
and is not keeping pace with this rapidly evolving field. Given the importance of S2S 
predictions to the nation, a concerted effort is needed to entrain, develop, and retain 
S2S professionals. This involves gathering quantitative information about workforce 
requirements and the expertise base to support S2S forecasting, improving incen-
tives and funding to support existing professionals and attract new professionals, and 
expanding interdisciplinary programs to train a more robust and diverse workforce 
to employ in boundary organizations that fill the space between S2S modelers and 
forecast user communities (Recommendation P).
CONCLUSION
This report envisions a substantial improvement in S2S prediction capability, and the 
committee expects valuable benefits to flow from these improvements to a wide 
range of public and private activities. It sets forth a research agenda that describes 
what must be done—observations, basic research, data management, and interactions 
with users—to advance prediction capability and improve societal benefits. ­Despite 
the specificity in recommending what should be done, the report does not address 
the challenging issues of how the agenda should actually be pursued—who will do 
what and how the work will be supported financially. Because this research agenda 
significantly expands the scope of the current S2S efforts, the committee ­believes 

15
Summary
that some progress can be made with current levels of support and within current 
organizational structures, but achieving even a considerable fraction of the S2S vision 
will likely require additional resources for basic and applied research, observations, 
forecast operations, and user engagement. The scope of the research agenda will also 
require closer collaboration between federal agencies and international partners, bet-
ter flow of ideas and data between the research and operational forecasting commu-
nities, and engagement of the entire weather and climate enterprise. 
Again, the committee acknowledges that addressing the challenge of dramatically 
improving the skill and use of S2S forecasts will require many different actions, but 
the committee reiterates that these are the actions that will need to be pursued to 
achieve the full potential for S2S forecasting. The more that can be pursued within this 
research agenda, the closer the nation can be toward realizing the full potential of S2S 
forecasting and the more benefits can be produced for a wide range of users and the 
nation as a whole.


17
C H A P T E R  O N E
Introduction
As the nation’s economic activities, security concerns, and stewardship of natural 
resources become increasingly complex and globally interrelated, they become ever 
more sensitive to environmental conditions. For the past several decades, forecasts of 
weather, ocean, and other environmental phenomena made a few days ahead have 
yielded invaluable information to improve decision-making across all sectors of soci-
ety (Lazo et al., 2011). Enhancing the capability to forecast environmental conditions 
outside the well-developed weather timescale—for example, extending predictions 
out to several weeks and months in advance—could dramatically increase the soci-
etal value of environmental predictions, saving lives, protecting property, increasing 
economic vitality, protecting the environment, and informing policy choices. Indeed, 
forecasts in the subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) time range (defined in this report as 2 
weeks to 12 months; see Box 1.1) have the potential to inform activities across a wide 
variety of sectors as many important decisions are made weeks to months in advance.
The potential of S2S forecasting has advanced substantially over recent decades, as 
improvements in numerical modeling, the Earth observing network, and understand-
ing of sources of Earth system predictability in the so-called “gap” between short-
range weather and climate timescales (see below) have enabled the development of 
extended-range weather and seasonal climate forecasts. As the availability and skill of 
seasonal climate forecasts—and more recently subseasonal predictions—has im-
proved, S2S forecasts are increasingly being used in sectors such as agriculture, energy, 
and water resources management. However, there is enormous potential to further 
increase the benefits of S2S predictions. Many sectors have yet to exploit even the 
S2S information that is currently available. The user base could expand dramatically 
if the skill of S2S forecasts improves, more variables of the Earth system are explicitly 
forecast (e.g., a wider range of conditions of the ocean, cryosphere, and land surface), 
and users’ awareness of and ability to apply S2S information to important decisions 
and actions increases. Because so many critical planning and management decisions 
are made in the S2S time frame, it might be argued that the benefits of the longer 
range predictions have the opportunity to meet or exceed the current value of 0- to 
14-day weather predictions if the quality, scope, and utilization of the forecasts can 
improve from their current state. S2S predictions may become even more valuable 
under anthropogenic climate change, because improved S2S forecasts could allow for 
the development of early warning systems that are becoming even more of a societal 
imperative in a warming world.

18
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX 1.1 
DEFINITIONS OF SUBSEASONAL AND SEASONAL FORECASTS 
This committee’s charge was to develop a research agenda for improving forecasting on 
subseasonal and seasonal timescales, and for the purposes of this report, the committee defined 
“subseasonal to seasonal” as a forecast range from 2 weeks to 12 months. There is no consensus 
on the precise meaning of a given forecast time. Often the forecast “range” is a combination of a 
lead time and an averaging period, where lead time refers to the period between when a forecast 
is initialized and when the forecast is first valid, while the averaging period is the time window in 
which the forecast is applicable. Similarly, terminologies and definitions of forecast times related 
to S2S forecasting vary across research groups and initiatives. 
The committee’s S2S definition reflects common usage in the community, but it differs 
slightly from the definition of “intraseasonal to interannual (ISI)” used in the 2010 NRC report 
Assess­ment of Intraseasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction and Predictability, which covers 
similar scientific topics. ISI predictions are defined as ranging from 2 weeks to several years. 
Thus the terms intraseasonal and subseasonal are virtually interchangeable both literally and in 
practice. However, the terms “seasonal” and “interannual” do have literal differences. “Interannual” 
implies forecasts of year-to-year variability and thus brings to mind a forecast of an annual mean 
1 or 2 years in the future or perhaps a seasonal mean 1 year in advance, whereas “seasonal” in a 
forecasting context usually refers to a forecast of a seasonal mean one or more seasons in the 
future, or a monthly mean one season in advance. 
This committee’s definition of “subseasonal to seasonal” and the accompanying acronym “S2S” 
also differs from the World Climate Research Programme/World Weather Research Programme 
(WCRP/WWRP) S2S Project (Box 2.3), which defines S2S as ranging from 2 weeks out to a single 
season (e.g., approximately 2-12 weeks). The committee made a conscious choice to avoid intro-
ducing a new acronym and terminology to cover the time period from 2 weeks to 12 months, 
and chose to use the S2S acronym to refer more broadly to subseasonal and seasonal forecasts. 
This is because the acronym S2S is now used rather loosely across the community to refer to both 
subseasonal and seasonal timescales. 
MOTIVATION FOR THIS STUDY
This report develops a vision for realizing the potential benefits of S2S Earth system 
predictions within the next decade. It identifies key strategies and proposes a research 
agenda with specific recommendations to guide progress toward that vision. There 
were four main motivations for initiating this study: 
• 
The need to develop a research agenda to close the “gap” between efforts to 
improve numerical weather prediction (NWP) and climate modeling; 

19
Introduction
• 
The need to expand and improve S2S forecast capabilities beyond dynamical 
predictions of the atmosphere (i.e., to improve or develop S2S predictions of 
the oceans, land surface and cryosphere, as well as predictions of atmospheric 
variables such as aerosols);
• 
A desire to develop a more global S2S forecasting capacity, especially to meet 
needs related to national security and humanitarian response; and
• 
A changing computing environment that may open up both new opportuni-
ties and challenges for Earth system prediction.
As noted above and in the 2010 NRC report, Assessment of Intraseasonal to Interannual 
Climate Prediction and Predictability (hereafter NRC, 2010b; or ISI Report; see Box 1.2), 
S2S forecasting falls in a “gap” between the current modeling capabilities used for 
short- and medium-term prediction and those used in climate projections. Because of 
the short lead times involved with numerical weather prediction, efforts to improve 
weather forecasting have been focused on enhancing the accuracy of atmospheric 
and surface data for specifying initial conditions and on representing the short-term 
evolution of the atmosphere from this initial state. Earth system models that were 
first developed for making long-term climate projections have focused, in contrast, 
on representing Earth system processes that evolve more slowly (such as large-scale 
atmosphere and ocean circulation, the cryosphere, the state of land surface, and 
feedbacks between components) and how these processes are influenced by external 
climate drivers (e.g., greenhouse gas emissions, volcanic activity, other aerosols, and 
solar variability). 
Although there is a traditional separation between research on weather and climate 
timescales, the boundaries between short-term and climate prediction are largely 
artificial (Shapiro et al., 2010). Because both fast- and slower evolving aspects of the 
climate system are important to conditions that develop in the 2-week to 12-month 
forecast range, S2S forecasting systems require close attention to initial conditions and 
high-fidelity representation of coupling and feedbacks between more slowly vary-
ing aspects of the Earth system. The potential to close this “gap” is now supported by 
a body of research indicating predictability in the Earth system at all timescales (e.g., 
Hoskins, 2013). In the S2S time range, this predictability arises in part from coupled 
ocean-atmospheric phenomena such as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and 
the Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO), and in stratosphere-troposphere interactions 
associated with the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO) (see Box 1.3). Further S2S predict-
ability may exist in other climate oscillations and their teleconnections, and in the 
Earth system response to slowly varying conditions in the ocean, land, and cryosphere, 
among other phenomena. Efforts are already under way in the United States and inter-
nationally to exploit these sources of S2S predictability, stretching the lead time of 

20
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX 1.2 
PROGRESS SINCE THE NRC 2010 IRI REPORT 
The NRC report Assessment of Intraseasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction and Predictability 
(NRC, 2010b) and this report address much of the same phenomena and timescales, with the in-
tent of improving ISI/S2S forecasts. However, this report provides an important update on the sci-
ence and potential of S2S forecasts, especially on the subseasonal timescale, and the two reports 
further differ in areas of emphasis. The 2010 report focused attention on the sources and gaps 
in our understanding of ISI predictability, “building blocks” in the development and evolution 
of ISI forecast systems, an assessment of the performance of (then) current ISI forecast systems, 
and recommendations for strategies and best practices for future improvements to ISI forecasts. 
Three case studies—El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), and 
soil moisture—were presented to highlight end-to-end considerations of intra­seasonal to inter-
annual (ISI) forecast systems. For each case study, the report described the scientific basis for the 
variability and predictability, the manner in which forecast “building blocks” were developed and 
implemented to realize the forecast potential, and the gaps in understanding and treatment of 
each phenomenon. Considerable attention was given to “best practices” for ISI forecasts, focusing 
on four important aspects, including the production, reproduction, evaluation, and dissemination 
of prediction information. 
This report addresses all of these same areas but does not address predictions beyond 
12 months, and it focuses significantly more attention on widening the consideration of S2S-
relevant phenomena and associated Earth system processes—and by extension on Earth system 
modeling and prediction. The aim of this expansion is to consider a wider range of sources of 
predictability, impacted quantities, and processes, including extreme weather and other disrup-
tive events. The latter dovetails with another significant focus of this report, which is the need 
to highlight the value proposition of S2S forecasts, in part through better engagement with the 
potential stakeholder community. Finally, in its targeted effort to develop a U.S. research agenda 
to advance S2S forecasting, this report considers the infrastructure and programmatic elements 
required for advancement, including workforce, cyberinfrastructure, and interactions between 
the research and operational forecasting communities. 
weather timescale models forward and climate models backward, in part through the 
development of improved and more highly coupled Earth system models.
The continued development of coupled Earth system models also presents an oppor-
tunity to expand and improve S2S forecasts of environmental conditions well beyond 
the traditional weather variables, which represents a second major motivation for 
this report. There is a strong desire to develop more reliable S2S forecasts of condi-
tions in the ocean and cryosphere and on the land surface, and meeting these needs 
is becoming more important as the financial and societal implications of managing 
environmental risk become more evident and larger in magnitude. Reliable ocean 

21
Introduction
BOX 1.3 
EXAMPLES OF MODES OF VARIABILITY
A number of natural modes of variability have widespread effects on the weather and cli-
mate, including the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Madden–Julian Oscillation (MJO), 
and the Quasi Biennial Oscillation (QBO), among others. ENSO and MJO are prime examples of 
modes of variability that provide predictability at S2S lead times. ENSO is a coupled atmosphere-
ocean mode of variability that involves slow variations in the equatorial Pacific that impact sea 
surface temperatures in the central and eastern Pacific, and associated changes in surface pres-
sure and wind in the atmosphere that extend over most of the tropical regions. MJO exhibits 
planetary-scale features along the equator in pressure, winds, clouds, rainfall, and many other 
variables, with the strongest anomalies in precipitation propagating from the Indian to central 
Pacific Oceans over a period of about 30 to 50 days. The MJO has traditionally been described 
as primarily an atmospheric phenomenon, but recent research highlights the importance of 
interactions with the upper ocean in its propagation.
forecasts on S2S timescales, for example, could improve the safety and effectiveness of 
commercial, military, and humanitarian operations at sea, in part by improving plan-
ning and ship routing by indicating ice-free and freeze-up likelihood as well as other 
ice and ocean eddy hazards. The desire for this type of S2S forecast highlights the im-
portance of high-fidelity representation of ocean, sea ice, and land surface conditions 
in S2S forecast systems, in many cases for reasons beyond whether they feed back to 
influence the atmosphere.
A third major motivation for this report is the increasing desire for an enhanced 
forecasting capability globally. In particular, the Departments of Defense and State  
desire S2S forecasting capability that can best support U.S. engagement anywhere in 
the world. In addition, commerce, agriculture, and civilian hazard warnings currently 
at the national level could be expanded to cover more of the world. Developing a 
comprehensive and skillful global forecasting capability poses an additional challenge 
because, in many areas, only limited in situ weather data are publicly available for use 
in evaluating and improving forecasts.
Finally, accelerating computer and software capabilities could allow S2S prediction 
systems to operate with greater spatial and temporal resolution, more complete 
representation of interacting components of the Earth system, and more ensemble 
members for calculating uncertainties. Together with improved understanding of the 
physical process governing the Earth system’s dynamics and potential advances in the 

22
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ability to assimilate data into more sophisticated models, new computing capabilities 
could allow for significant gains in S2S predictions over the next decade.
Despite these needs and opportunities for enhanced Earth system forecasts in the S2S 
time range, a coordinated national research agenda aimed at strengthening the con-
tributions of S2S forecasts to public and private activities has not yet emerged. For all 
of these reasons, the Heising-Simons Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space 
Agency (NASA), and the Office of Naval Research (ONR) asked the National Academies 
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to undertake a study aimed at outlining a 
10-year research plan to advance the nation’s capacity to provide more skillful, com-
prehensive, and useful S2S predictions. The statement of task that guided the study 
(see Appendix A) asked the authoring committee to develop a strategy to accelerate 
progress on extending prediction skill for weather, ocean, and other Earth system fore-
casts from meso/synoptic scales to higher spatial resolutions and longer lead times, 
thereby increasing the nation’s research capability and supporting decision-making at 
medium and extended lead times. 
In order to meet this request, the current study reviews present S2S forecasting capa-
bilities and recommends a national research agenda to advance Earth system predic-
tions at lead times of 2 weeks to 12 months. The study builds on previous reports that 
have described a grand vision to significantly advance forecasting accuracy, lead time, 
and prediction of nontraditional environmental variables (NRC, 1991b, 2008), as well 
as reports that have discussed opportunities and best practices for intraseasonal-to-­
interannual prediction (NRC, 2010b). In the years to come, the research agenda pro-
posed here and the efforts that follow could produce increasingly accurate numerical 
models of the Earth system by describing its coupled interactions and future evolu-
tion, thus enhancing the value of weather, climate, and other Earth system forecasts 
to society. 
THE REPORT ROADMAP
This report addresses the committee’s charge in seven subsequent chapters. Chapter 2 
provides context for discussions in the remainder of the report by presenting an over-
view of the history and recent evolution of the field of S2S forecasting, descriptions of 
recent and ongoing research activities, and a summary of the current status and skill 
of operational S2S forecasting systems. 
Chapter 3 covers decision-making contexts, applications for S2S forecasts, potential 
benefits of S2S predictions, attributes of effective forecasts, and user sensitivity to fore-
casting accuracy. The chapter also contains case studies, including western U.S. water 

23
Introduction
management, public health, and national security and defense, that provide more in-
depth discussions of needs for and applications of S2S predictions. 
Chapter 4 introduces sources of S2S predictability from natural modes of variability 
and teleconnections, as well as from the ocean, soil moisture, terrestrial snow, and sea 
ice and external forcing. The chapter includes recommendations to further predictabil-
ity research in the S2S context.
Chapter 5 discusses in detail recent advances and activities needed to accelerate the 
improvement of S2S prediction systems, including discussions of gaps and research 
needs related to routine observations, data assimilation, and models, as well as calibra-
tion, combination, validation, and assessment of S2S forecast skill. 
Chapter 6 covers research-to-operations in the context of current operational and 
research S2S prediction systems. 
Chapter 7 presents findings and recommendations on infrastructure for computing, 
storage, programming models, shared software, and data cyberinfrastructure. The 
chapter also discusses institutional and workforce capacity building for S2S forecast-
ing and decision support. 
Chapter 8 concludes the report by presenting the committee’s vision for the future of 
S2S forecasts, as well as a summary of the committee’s proposed research strategies 
and agenda to advance S2S forecasting over the next decade.


25
C H A P T E R  T W O
History and Current Status of 
S2S Forecasting 
Providing useful weather and ocean forecasts, as well as predicting other ­aspects of 
the Earth system, have significantly improved national capabilities for ­decision-making 
in sectors including energy, agriculture, transportation, ­insurance and finance, de-
fense, emergency preparedness and response, and public security including health, 
water, and food. As discussed in Chapters 1 and 3, the ability to foresee environmental 
changes and disruptive events weeks and months in advance could have tremendous 
additional value because of the broad range of decisions that are made weeks to 
months in advance. As a prelude to developing a U.S. research agenda for advancing 
subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) forecasting, this chapter lays out the history and evolu-
tion of the S2S forecast endeavor and briefly summarizes current operational capabili-
ties and research activities. 
EVOLUTION OF THE FORECAST ENTERPRISE
Short- to Medium-Range Forecasts (Up to 14 Days)
Modern weather prediction evolved from the global weather observations obtained 
during World War II, the computers that followed in the wake of the war, and a work-
ing knowledge of equations that model the typical variations in the midlatitude 
atmosphere. Earth-sensing satellites, starting with the Television Infrared Observation 
Satellite Program (TIROS) in the 1960s, provided striking views of Earth’s changing 
weather patterns and contributed to the understanding of weather systems and to 
the improvement of routine weather forecasts. 
With these improved data sources and modeling capabilities, purely subjective 
forecasts based on atmospheric synoptic maps, experience, and intuition gave way 
to a combination of computer-generated atmospheric and marine forecasts based 
on physics equations and a statistical interpretation of the forecast information. This 
know-how developed into highly capable systems operated by the civil and defense 
weather services. In the latter part of the 20th century, consumer interests in weather 
and the wide demand for specialized forecasts stimulated a vigorous private sector 

26
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
operating alongside the public weather services (NRC, 2003). Similar trends are also 
occurring for ocean forecasting and applications. 
Moving into the 21st century, the combination of greatly improved atmospheric 
and oceanic observations and accelerating computer power has produced increas-
ingly accu­rate and reliable atmospheric forecasts. Computer-calculated forecasts of 
global and regional weather patterns are now as accurate at 72 hours as they were 
at 36 hours in the 1990s (Figure 2.1). Although this might suggest that lead times for 
useful forecasts could continue to increase indefinitely with further improvements 
FIGURE 2.1  Forecast verification for 36- and 72-hour forecasts for the Global Forecast System (GFS) 
model. NOTES: The skill (S1) is based on the mean error of the 500 mb heights in the forecasts relative to 
radiosonde measurements over North America. This quantity is shown as 100*(1-S1/70). A perfect forecast 
is 100. Dates of computer hardware upgrades are shown with arrows along the x-axis. SOURCE: National 
Center for Environmental Prediction, http://www.nco.ncep.noaa.gov/sib/verification/s1_scores/s1_scores.
pdf, accessed July 20, 2015. 

27
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
in observations, understanding, and computer capability, the discovery of math-
ematical chaos in nonlinear physical systems in the early 1960s by Edward N. Lorenz 
(Lorenz, 1963) challenged this assumption. Instead, Lorenz showed that unavoid-
able small ­errors in initial conditions will amplify during the computation, bringing a 
natural limit to the lead time that the “weather”—or any given natural environmental 
­phenomenon—can be predicted, at least deterministically. Today, the emphasis is on 
improvement and extension of lead times through probability forecasts, created by 
averaging over space and time and running multiple cases to create ensembles of 
forecasts that reflect probabilities of variables or events at future times. Along with 
probabilistic ensemble forecasts, recent advances in weather prediction accuracy have 
come from improved understanding of the underlying processes and more realisti-
cally incorporating them into the forecast models, in part by increasing model ­spatial 
resolution and in part through better parameterization of unresolved processes. 
Further­more, improved measurements and assimilation of those measurements to 
more accurately reflect the initial state of the environment have also greatly advanced 
the skill of weather forecasts.
Following the atmospheric community, short- to medium-range (up to 7 days) ocean 
forecasts have been routinely available for the past 10 years and provide predictions 
of ocean currents, temperature, and salinity (GODAE, 2009). These predictions are used 
by national agencies (e.g., Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
Coast Guard), the oil industry, and fisheries, among others, for various applications 
such as ship and submarine routing, search and rescue, deep ocean drilling, oil spill 
drift application, monitoring of open ocean ecosystems, fisheries management, coastal 
and near-shore resource management (e.g., Jacobs et al., 2009). The development of 
these ocean forecast systems has been critical to the development of high-resolution 
coupled ocean-atmosphere-ice-land prediction systems for improving short- to 
medium-range forecasts, and they are being used by the ocean community to develop 
subseasonal ocean forecasts (Brassington et al., 2015). With the addition of aerosol 
chemistry and biogeochemistry, such models are often referred to as Earth prediction 
systems. Advances in coupled model systems are central to extending lead times and 
furthering accuracy of short- and medium-term forecasting capabilities in the ocean 
and atmosphere, are the basis for advancing S2S forecasts, and are critical for develop-
ing a more expansive set of routinely forecast Earth system variables. 
Seasonal Forecasts (3 to 12 Months)
Long-range and seasonal forecasts began in the mid-1950s as Weather Bureau fore-
casters noticed some identifiable large-scale patterns and relations between atmo-

28
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
spheric and ocean temperature anomalies in various locations (Hoskins and Karoly, 
1981; Namias, 1953; Roads, 1999; Walker, 1924; Wallace and Gutzler, 1981). These early 
seasonal forecasts were made based on statistical methods. Dynamical seasonal pre-
dictions started in the early 1980s (Reeves and Gemmill, 2004), using atmosphere-only 
models with prescribed surface conditions. Often, the latest observed ocean anoma-
lies persisted during the forecast, but other surface conditions, such as sea ice, snow 
cover, and soil moisture, were proscribed from climatology (e.g., average historical 
conditions). Such systems treated the surface as a fixed boundary condition and gen-
erally ignored the coupled dynamics with the surface that evolved over the forecast 
period (two-tier system). Focused on El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO; see Box 1.3) 
prediction, the first coupled atmosphere-ocean forecasts were generated with simple 
dynamical or statistical models of tropical surface temperatures (Cane et al., 1986; 
Graham et al., 1987; NRC, 1986, 1991a, 1994; Shukla, 1998).
In contemporary seasonal forecast systems, many aspects of the Earth system are 
predicted in a coupled model involving the atmosphere, ocean, land, and cryosphere. 
These seasonal forecast systems seek to better exploit ENSO as a source of predict-
ability, while also representing more recently discovered predictability sources origi-
nating from other natural modes of variability of the coupled ocean-atmosphere 
system; stratosphere-troposphere interactions; the slow evolution of the ocean, ice, 
land hydrology and biosphere; and radiative forcing from greenhouse gas (GHG) and 
aerosols and land use changes (see Chapter 4). In dynamic seasonal prediction sys-
tems, modeled Earth system components (i.e., atmosphere, land, ocean, and sea ice) 
are increasingly coupled numerically to represent the rapidly varying atmosphere ex-
changes of energy, water, and momentum, which give the system much of its predict-
ability on timescales longer than a few days. Additional progress could be made: some 
components, such as the ocean, are more realistically coupled with the atmosphere, 
while aspects of coupling to the cryosphere and land are widely recognized to be 
oversimplified in today’s forecast systems (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). Recent research 
indicates that much of the seasonal predictability in some parts of the world derives 
from trends associated with GHG warming superimposed on natural variability, thus 
more realistic representation of atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemistry (e.g., 
GHG forcing, land use changes, aerosols) in seasonal prediction systems is also increas-
ingly common (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2006). 
Seasonal forecasting has improved over the past decade with efforts to reduce sys-
tematic model errors and with better understanding and representation of sources of 
predictability within the coupled Earth system. There are two other notable strategies 
for advancing the skill and utility of seasonal forecasts. One is the inclusion of quan-
titative information regarding uncertainty (i.e., probabilistic prediction) in forecasts 

29
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
and probabilistic measures of forecast quality in the verifications (e.g., Dewitt, 2005; 
­Doblas-Reyes et al., 2005; Goddard et al., 2001; Hagedorn et al., 2005; Kirtman, 2003; 
Palmer et al., 2000, 2004; Saha et al., 2006, among many others). This change in predic-
tion strategy naturally follows from the fact that Earth system variability includes a 
chaotic or irregular component, and, because of this, forecasts must include a quan-
titative assessment of this uncertainty. More importantly, the prediction community 
now understands that the potential utility of forecasts is based on end-user decision 
support (Challinor et al., 2005; Morse et al., 2005; Palmer et al., 2000; Chapter 3), which 
requires probabilistic forecasts that include quantitative information regarding fore-
cast uncertainty or reliability. 
The use of perturbed parameter ensembles represents a second strategy that is now 
commonly used to quantify uncertainty in the initial conditions of seasonal prediction 
systems, though the number of such ensembles in both the forecast and the retro-
spective forecast vary widely across different operational centers (Appendix B). Other 
techniques have been implemented to account for uncertainty in model formulation. 
Most prominent among these is the development of multi-model ensembles (MMEs). 
By combining the predictions from more than one model, MMEs quantify some of the 
uncertainty associated with individual model formulations and also tend to improve 
the forecast, probably because errors in one model may not appear in the others. With 
a few caveats, MMEs that include multiple operational and/or research models appear 
to achieve a better skill than individual models, by combining different approaches to 
data analysis, data assimilation, model parameterizations and resolutions ( Kirtman, 
2014; Kirtman et al., 2014; Weigel et al., 2008). Other techniques, such as perturbed 
physics ensembles or stochastic physics (e.g., Berner et al., 2008, 2011) have also been 
developed and appear to be quite promising for representing some aspects of model 
uncertainty (e.g., Weisheimer et al., 2011). Chapter 5 covers these developments in 
more detail.
Subseasonal Forecasts (2-12 Weeks)
A prevailing expectation is that subseasonal prediction in the 2- to 12-week range 
between short- and medium-range prediction and seasonal prediction poses serious 
challenges. This expectation arose from the perception that the subseasonal atmo-
spheric forecast problem does not fit neatly into the simplistic paradigms of an initial-
value weather forecast problem (because the lead times are too large and initial-value 
information can be lost) or the so-called “boundary-value climate prediction problem,” 
terminology associated with the early seasonal climate forecast systems that were 
driven by prescribed surface temperature anomalies. However, recent work indicates 

30
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
the potential for predictability across all timescales (Hoskins, 2013; WMO, 2015a). There 
is evidence to indicate that the existing coupled ocean-atmosphere-ice-land Earth 
system forecast models, mentioned above, integrate the information from the initial 
conditions across the coupled system, including the slowly varying components (e.g., 
ocean, sea ice, and land hydrology), to produce subseasonal forecasts with realized 
skill in traditional weather variables often comparable to that of the seasonal forecasts 
(Dutton et al., 2013, 2015).
Predictability and prediction studies on intraseasonal tropical variability and the 
Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO; see Box 1.3) have further advanced the prospects of 
subseasonal forecasting (e.g., Lin et al., 2008; Vitart et al., 2007b; Waliser et al., 2006). 
However, it is important to note that within the subseasonal timescale, predictability 
and prediction in sub-monthly timescale is still relatively underexplored and under-
developed compared to forecasts with lead times of a month to a season (Doblas-
Reyes et al., 2013; Vitart et al., 2012). An important goal for subseasonal (and seasonal) 
forecasting is to move beyond multi-day averages of typical meteorological variables 
to prediction of the likelihood of important and disruptive events in all components of 
the Earth system, such as heat and cold waves, unusual storminess, ice cover, sea level, 
Gulf of Mexico Loop current position, etc.
CURRENT STATUS OF ACTIVITIES AND RECENT PROGRESS
This section provides a brief survey of current capabilities and ongoing activities in 
both seasonal and subseasonal prediction, along with recent progress at operational 
centers. This is a prelude to establishing a U.S. research agenda that will lead to im-
proved S2S forecasts and better-informed decisions in both the public and private 
sectors.
Seasonal
Most operational centers have produced routine dynamical seasonal predictions for 
more than a decade. A majority of the centers utilize global atmosphere, ocean, land, 
and sea ice coupled models (one-tier systems) to predict climate anomalies out to 
lead times of 6-12 months. A few centers, such as the International Research Institute 
for Climate and Society (IRI1), use so-called two-tier systems, in which the ocean com-
ponent is predicted first, and then those predicted sea surface temperatures are used 
1  http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/clips/outlooks/climate_forecasts.html, accessed Janu-
ary 27, 2016.

31
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
as boundary conditions for an atmospheric forecast with lead times out to 3-4 months. 
IRI has been issuing seasonal climate forecasts from this system since 1997 (Barnston 
et al., 2010). Examples of one-tier systems include the U.S. National Weather Service’s 
Climate Forecast System (Saha et al., 2006, 2010), which produces operational predic-
tions with lead times of up to 9 months, and the European Centre for Medium-Range 
Weather Forecasts’ (ECMWF) seasonal climate prediction system, which is soon to be in 
its fourth generation.2 Other nations have similarly developed seasonal prediction sys-
tems that include models developed specifically for this purpose, and the WMO Lead 
Centre for Long-Range Forecast Multi-Model Ensemble,3 coordinated by the Korea 
Meteorological Administration and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration (NOAA), collects seasonal forecasts from 12 such seasonal prediction systems 
(Global Producing Centers) and combines them into multi-model seasonal forecasts 
that are used by regional and local climate centers around the world (see Box 2.1).
Seasonal prediction has been increasingly prominent at national and international op-
erational centers for several decades. Almost all operational centers produce seasonal 
predictions at least once per month. Usually, deterministic and probabilistic forecasts 
of seasonal mean anomalies of surface temperature (atmosphere and ocean) and pre-
cipitation are issued for above, below, and near normal values. Seasonal outlooks and 
ENSO index predictions are also issued based on a combination of dynamical predic-
tions, statistical models, and expert knowledge of teleconnection patterns. 
In addition to the ensemble of model integrations into the future, seasonal forecasts 
require a historical series of model integrations over past decades (these are also 
called retrospective forecasts, reforecasts, or hindcasts). To create retrospective fore-
casts, the model configuration is integrating over a large sample of historical cases (i.e., 
forecasts with known outcomes). These are then used to calibrate future forecasts for 
biases and reliability as well as to evaluate model skill. An average (or another statistic 
such as an anomaly) over time is also required for the forecast to be meaningful. For 
seasonal prediction, this averaging period is usually a season (3 months). A common 
practice is to produce categorical (e.g., above normal, below normal, or near normal) 
probabilistic forecasts of seasonal mean anomalies of some basic variables such as 
surface air temperature and precipitation at monthly lead times (see Figure 3.2).
In addition to seasonal forecasts from operational centers throughout the world, 
collaborative international efforts aimed specifically at improving seasonal predic-
tions have been critical for advancing forecasting capabilities. Many of these efforts 
2  http://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/documentation-and-support/evolution-ifs/cycles/technical-
description-seasonal, accessed February 3, 2016.
3  https://www.wmolc.org/, accessed January 27, 2016.

32
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX 2.1 
THE ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION CLIMATE CENTER CLIMATE OUTLOOK 
The Asia-Pacific Climate Center (APCC)a is a joint activity of Asia-Pacific Economic Coopera-
tion (APEC) involving 17 operational and research centers from nine APEC member countries, 
including the United States. Along with Climate Prediction and its Application to Society (CliPAS)b 
the aim of the APCC is to produce a well-validated multi-model seasonal prediction system to 
support the Asia-Pacific region. APCC has been collecting dynamic ensemble seasonal predic-
tion data from affiliated centers since 2006, and it produces 1-month and 3-month forecasts 
of precipitation, temperature at 850hPa, and geopotential height at 500hPa with lead times 
ranging from 1 month to 6 months. These forecasts are disseminated to APEC members, and 
verification is conducted in compliance with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
guideline on verification of long-range forecasts. APCC also produces routine forecasts of several 
climate modes including ENSO and Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) on seasonal timescales, as well as 
the Boreal Summer Intraseasonal Oscillation (BSISO), which is an important modulator of Asian 
monsoon onset and breaks on subseasonal timescales. APCC also provides multi-model output-
based statistical downscaling results for Taiwan, Philippines, Thailand, South Korea, and Japan. As 
examples, the output of these forecasts has been useful for predicting the electricity demand 
in Japan, and the local-level forecasts in South Korea and Taiwan are being applied to drought 
forecasting to manage water resources. As part of the research activities of the APCC, CliPAS 
assembled a database of retrospective forecasts (1980-2004) to gain a better understanding of 
the factors that limit seasonal prediction (e.g., Wang et al., 2008, 2009a) and to foster research 
on improving MME methodologies (e.g., Kug et al., 2008; Min et al., 2014).
a http://www.apcc21.org/, accessed January 27, 2016.
b http://iprc.soest.hawaii.edu/users/jylee/clipas/, accessed January 27, 2016.
have a focus on studying predictability and improving forecast skill via multi-model 
approaches. In addition to the MME seasonal forecasts issued by IRI, the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Corporation (APEC) Climate Center (APCC) provides routine seasonal MME 
forecasts to member countries, and the aligned Climate Prediction and its Application 
to Society (CliPAS) developed a database of retrospective forecasts for prediction and 
predictability research (Box 2.1). The North American Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME) 
is an S2S prediction and research effort involving universities and laboratories in the 
United States, the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), and the Cana-
dian Meteorological Center (CMC). NMME started producing seasonal multi-model en-
semble forecasts in 2011 (Kirtman et al., 2014). The NMME-2 is now quasi-operational, 
with seasonal forecasts from the system issued in real time and used as part of NCEP’s 
operational prediction suite (Box 2.2).

33
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
BOX 2.2 
THE NORTH AMERICAN MULTI-MODEL ENSEMBLE (NMME)
The North American Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME) is an S2S research and prediction effort 
involving universities and laboratories in the United States, NOAA National Centers for Envi-
ronmental Prediction (NCEP), and the Canadian Meteorological Center (Kirtman, 2014). NMME 
started as a research and demonstration project with multiagency support from the NOAA, the 
National Science Foundation (NSF), National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and 
the Depart­ment of Energy (DOE). The Phase 1 experimental real-time system started issuing 
seasonal forecasts in August 2011 (Kirtman, 2014). The Phase 2 system (NMME-2), with a slightly 
different suite of models, began in August 2012 and was used in a demonstration mode as part 
of the NOAA NCEP Climate Prediction Center (CPC) seasonal forecast system.
As of Spring 2016,a NMME-2’s real-time forecasts are officially incorporated as part of NOAA’s 
operational prediction suite. The NMME-2 currently includes three models that are run by gov-
ernment centers with responsibility for operational forecasting and additional models from 
universities and research laboratories. If one or more of the research models fail to deliver on 
time, the NMME-2 forecast can be produced based on the models received. Because of this mix 
of operational and research models, the committee refers to the NMME-2 as ‘quasi-operational’.
NMME-2 participating centers, climate projection systems, and ensemble members are 
described in more detail on the project’s websites.b Real-time data are provided to users on an 
NCEP server system, while retrospective forecast data are provided by IRI and archival data are 
passed to the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) as time and funding allow for 
research access.
The first phase of NMME focused on seasonal-to-interannual timescales and only monthly 
data were collected. Due to the growing interest in forecast information, there is a strong em-
phasis in NMME-2 to provide daily data for the seasonal forecasts. Importantly, plans are evolv-
ing to develop protocols and requirements for the subseasonal timescale. The requirements 
for operational S2S prediction are used to define the parameters of a rigorous retrospective 
forecast experiment and evaluation regime. An additional focus of NMME-2 is the hydrology of 
various regions in the United States and elsewhere in order to address drought and extreme 
event prediction.
a After the pre-publication version of the report was released (March 29, 2016) the committee became 
aware of this program change and updated the information regarding NMME-2 accordingly.
b More information on the National Multi-Model Ensemble is available at http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.
gov/products/NMME/NMME_description.html; http://cpo.noaa.gov/ClimatePrograms/ModelingAnalysis 
PredictionsandProjections/NMME.aspx; https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/nmme/ (all accessed 
April 14, 2016).

34
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
In Europe, the Development of a European MME system for seasonal to interannual 
predictions (DEMETER) produced a comprehensive set of seasonal retrospective 
forecasts in order to evaluate MME skill (Palmer et al., 2004). The ENSEMBLES ­Program4 
has built on DEMETER to assess how advances in individual seasonal forecast sys-
tems translate into reductions in ensemble mean error (Weisheimer et al., 2009). 
­ENSEMBLES has attempted to objectively evaluate uncertainty in MME and other en-
semble predictions at seasonal through decadal and longer timescales, including the 
relative benefits of different model and system configurations. Several model inter-
comparison efforts, including the WCRP Seasonal Prediction Model Intercomparison 
Project (SMIP-2),5 have also provided valuable insights into model predictive skill and 
predictability.
Subseasonal
Building on a number of research and experimental efforts over the past decade, sub-
seasonal predictions began in earnest with the establishment of an MJO prediction 
metric and its uptake by a number of forecast centers (e.g., Gottschalck et al., 2010; 
Vitart and Molteni, 2010; Waliser, 2011). As of 2009, the outputs from 10 operational 
centers have been used in an operational manner to provide ensemble predictions 
of the phase and magnitude of the MJO.6 These systems all produce daily ensemble 
forecasts (sizes range from 4 to 51) with a lead time of 7 to 40 days. Some centers also 
produce single deterministic forecasts using high-resolution versions of their models. 
NCEP CPC receives the daily forecasts of zonal wind and outgoing longwave radia-
tion (OLR) from these centers and calculates the predicted MJO index. The forecast 
products are delivered as plume phase diagrams of the predicted MJO index for each 
center. APEC’s BSISO forecasts are produced similarly (see Box 2.1).
Many operational numerical weather prediction centers have also recently imple-
mented extended-range (10-30 day) prediction systems that provide building blocks 
for more useful subseasonal prediction systems (Brassington et al., 2015). Such fore-
casts are developed in three basic ways: (1) by using forecasting systems designed for 
seasonal climate predictions, but utilizing only the first 30 to 60 days of the forecast, 
and paying more attention to the daily or weekly variations rather than the mean 
monthly or seasonal variations within the forecast; (2) by running an air-sea-ice-land 
coupled model with a higher resolution than the seasonal system; and (3) by extend-
4  http://www.ecmwf.int/en/research/projects/ensembles, accessed January 27, 2016.
5  Seasonal Prediction Model Intercomparison Project-2.
6  http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/precip/CWlink/MJO/CLIVAR/clivar_wh.shtml, accessed Janu-
ary 27, 2016.

35
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
ing the lead times of an ensemble medium-range weather forecast using a ­numerical 
weather prediction (NWP) model out to lead times of 30 days or more. Methods 2 
and 3 produce systems that are independent of the seasonal system. Current opera-
tional systems include a 4-times-per-day, 4-member, 45-day lead ensemble from the 
U.S. ­National Weather Service (NWS), a 2-times-per-week, 51-member, 46-day lead 
­ensemble from the European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), 
a once-per-week, 21-member, 32-day lead ensemble from Environment Canada, and 
at least eight others. See Appendix B, Table B.2 for more detail on forecasts and the 
configuration of subseasonal forecast systems.
Many of the same statistical considerations and associated trade-offs cited above for 
seasonal forecasting (e.g., forecast lengths and averages, ensemble sizes, MMEs, veri-
fication periods) are relevant for subseasonal forecasting, although the shorter lead 
times for subseasonal prediction allow for increased verification instances for a given 
size observation period. A number of operational centers now compute retrospective 
forecasts (also known as forecast histories or re-forecasts) as part of the operational 
forecast process and provide them along with the forecast itself. Frequently comput-
ing retrospective forecasts has allowed for continuous improvement of some aspects 
of forecast systems and permits the calibration to take account of recent events in the 
current weather/climate regime. 
As for seasonal forecasts, an important component of subseasonal forecasts is the 
retrospective forecast, which is performed over a few years to decades in order to cali-
brate the real-time forecasts. In contrast to operational medium-range weather predic-
tion, there is a lack of standardization among the centers in producing subseasonal 
forecasts. For example, some centers produce the forecast once a month, some once 
a week, some twice a week, and some every day. Some centers start all the ensemble 
members from the same initial time, whereas others use a time-lagged method where 
they start with different initial times and therefore different initial analyses. The retro­
spective forecasts are also produced very differently, for example, some on-the-fly 
and some with a fixed model version, which may not represent the latest operational 
configuration. These differences can make it difficult for data exchange, performance 
inter-comparison, and research. Further details of current subseasonal forecast sys-
tems’ resolutions, lead times, ensembles, and other considerations can be found in 
Appendix B. 
Common targets for subseasonal prediction beyond intraseasonal tropical variability 
(e.g., the MJO and BSISO forecasts mentioned above) include tropical cyclones and 
extratropical weather. A number of centers provide long-lead information for 1- and 
2-week outlooks depicting the probability of United States–based hazardous weather, 

36
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
as well as tropical cyclone frequency and tropical-midlatitude tele­connection im-
pacts. (e.g., NCEP CPC’s Global Tropical Hazards and Benefits Outlook and U.S. Hazards 
Outlook7). These products are graphically highlighted areas with expected persistent 
above- or below-average rainfall and regions favorable or unfavorable for tropical 
cyclogenesis in weeks 1 and 2. The outlooks are based on expert combination of vari-
ous statistical and dynamical forecasts, including the MJO forecast mentioned above. 
More recently, the private sector has also become active in developing commercial 
subseasonal forecasts; for example, the NWS and ECMWF subseasonal forecasts have 
been combined in a commercial MME by the World Climate Service (Dutton et al., 
2013,  2015). Many centers produce forecasts at various lead times of the mean values 
and probabilities of anomalies averaged over periods of a week or a month. Research 
efforts to support the further development of subseasonal forecasts are also begin-
ning to develop. The World Meteorological Organization’s (WMO) World Climate 
Research Program (WCRP) and World Weather Research Program (WWRP) have jointly 
developed a new initiative on S2S prediction (the S2S Project) (Robertson et al., 2015; 
Vitart et al., 2012; see Box 2.3 and Chapter 6 for additional information). The thrust 
of the S2S Project is on improving the subseasonal prediction of extreme weather, 
such as droughts, heat waves, tropical cyclone development, monsoon precipitation, 
and subseasonal prediction in polar areas. To do so, the project collects forecasts and 
retrospective forecasts from a number of operational modeling centers into a com-
mon database and disseminates them in delayed mode for research purposes to the 
science and applications communities.
In addition to the seasonal forecasts discussed in the previous section, NMME-2 (Box 
2.2) is beginning to focus on further developing subseasonal forecasts and retrospec-
tive forecast databases for the purposes of predictability research and model and 
forecast system improvement (see Chapter 6 for more details). 
Recent Progress in Advancing S2S Forecast Skill
There has been substantial progress in improving the skill of both subseasonal and 
seasonal forecasts in recent years. Generally, forecast skill for traditional atmospheric 
variables is still low (see discussion below), but the skill of forecasts of indices of 
coupled ocean-atmosphere modes of variability is often higher. For seasonal predic-
tion, the Niño 3.4 index, a major indicator of the ENSO, shows useful skill up to 1 year 
in some models (e.g., Jin et al., 2008; Stockdale et al., 2011). ECMWF System 4 and NCEP 
7  http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/predictions/threats/threats.php and http://www.cpc.ncep.
noaa.gov/products/precip/CWlink/ghazards/index.php, both accessed January 27, 2016.

37
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
BOX 2.3 
THE SUBSEASONAL TO SEASONAL PREDICTION PROJECT
The World Weather Research Program (WWRP) and World Climate Research Program (WCRP) 
started a joint research project, S2S Project,a in January 2013. The S2S Project has three primary 
objectives: (1) to improve forecast skill and understanding on the S2S timescale; (2) to promote 
its uptake by operational centers and exploitation by the applications community; and (3) to 
capitalize on the expertise of the weather and climate research communities to address issues 
of importance to the Global Framework for Climate Services. Specific attention will be paid to 
the risk of extreme weather, including tropical cyclones, droughts, floods, heat waves, and the 
waxing and waning of monsoon precipitation.
The central activity of the S2S Project is the establishment of a multi-model database 
consisting of ensembles of subseasonal (up to 60 days) forecasts and supplemented with an 
extensive set of retrospective forecasts following THORPEX Interactive Grand Global Ensemble 
(TIGGE) protocols. As of January 2016, nine operational centers (i.e., BoM, CMA, ECMWF, HMCR, 
JMA, Météo-France, UKMO, CNR-ISAC, and NCEP) have begun to send retrospective forecast and 
forecast data to the S2S Project archive (see Appendix B for details on these centers), with a total 
of 11 centers expected to be contributing by the end of 2016. Although this project leverages 
opera­tional systems, the forecasts are disseminated with a 3-week delay, and thus at present 
there is a focus on leveraging operational model output for research that can improve sub­
sequent forecast systems, rather than on issuing MME forecasts in demonstration mode. However, 
there are plans to provide the forecasts in near real time to the WMO Lead Center for Extended 
Range Prediction (WMO, 2015b). 
A major research topic will be evaluating the predictability of subseasonal events, including 
identifying windows of opportunity for increased forecast skill with a special emphasis on events 
that have high societal or economic impacts. Attention will also be given to the prediction of 
intraseasonal characteristics of the rainy season that are relevant to agriculture and food secu-
rity in developing countries. The Project’s research implementation plan (WMO, 2013) calls for 
six subprojects that focus on key S2S research and application areas, including the MJO, Africa, 
extreme weather, verification, stratospheric link, and teleconnections. The project will last 5 years, 
after which the opportunity for a 5-year extension will be considered. 
a Details of the S2S Project, including the database, contributing centers/forecast systems, descriptions 
of the subprojects, and project organization can be found at s2sprediction.net.
CFSv2 also capture the year-to-year ENSO variability with fair accuracy, as well as the 
main ENSO teleconnection pattern in the tropical and extratropical regions (e.g., Kim 
et al., 2012). 
Prediction skill of extratropical modes and patterns such as the North Atlantic Oscilla-
tion (NAO) has also recently improved. Scaife et al. (2014a) show good prediction skill 

38
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 2.2  Predictability of the winter (December-February) NAO in the UKMO seasonal forecast system. 
NOTES: Time series of the NAO in observations (black line), ensemble mean forecasts (gray line), and indi-
vidual ensemble members (gray dots) in winter retrospective forecasts are shown. The correlation score 
of 0.62 is significant at the 99 percent confidence level according to a t test and allowing for the small 
lagged autocorrelation in forecasts and observations. SOURCE: Figure and caption modified from Scaife et 
al. (2014a).
of the winter NAO from the United Kingdom Met Office (UKMO) system, with a correla-
tion in excess 0.6 between ensemble mean and observed NAO index for December-
February for forecasts from the start of November (Figure 2.2). They also show that the 
model is capable of capturing at least qualitatively the observed influence of ENSO on 
the NAO, as well as the influence of Atlantic heat content, sea ice from the Kara Sea, 
and the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO) on NAO seasonal predictability. The perfor-
mance of this model relative to what was possible a few years ago was likely achieved 
primarily through reducing biases in the model atmosphere and ocean, leading to an 
improved model climate (Scaife et al., 2011). Increases in model resolution were also 
likely important.
Similar progress in forecasting indices has also been made on subseasonal timescales. 
About 15 years ago, dynamical models had some MJO forecast skill out to 7-10 days 
(Waliser, 2011), but they performed worse than empirical models that use statistical 
methods to predict MJO (e.g., Hendon et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2000). Recently, skillful 
MJO forecasts have been achieved beyond 20 days (e.g., Kang and Kim, 2010; Rashid 
et al., 2010; Vitart and Molteni, 2010), and the ECMWF in particular has made substan-
tial strides in its MJO forecast (particularly at longer lead times) (Figure 2.3). These 
advances are due largely to improvements in the representation of physical processes 
and coupling in the models, better initial conditions, and the availability of better 

39
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
FIGURE 2.3  Evolution of the MJO skill scores since 2002, calculated as bivariate correlations applied to 
the Real-time Multivariate MJO (RMM) index of Wheeler and Hendon (2004). NOTES: The MJO skill scores 
are computed on the ensemble mean of the ECMWF retrospective forecasts produced during a complete 
year. The blue, red, and brown lines indicate respectively the day when the MJO bivariate correlation skill 
drops to 0.5, 0.6, and 0.8. SOURCE: Modified from Vitart (2014).
quality and longer periods of retrospective forecast data to calibrate the forecast 
(e.g., Vitart, 2014; Vitart et al., 2014). Through better model representation of the tele­
connections (i.e., vertical profile of tropical heating and better stratospheric processes 
and stratosphere/troposphere interactions), improvements in the prediction of tropi-
cal phenomena such as MJO and ENSO have also led to some increase in prediction 
skill in the extratropics and also of ocean variables and phenomena such as tropical 
cyclone counts (e.g., Vitart et al., 2007a). 
Despite this progress, traditional measures of S2S forecast skill such as anomaly cor-
relation and root mean square error when applied to systems such as NCEP’s CFSv2 

40
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 2.4  Correlation of the ensemble mean of 1-month lead surface air temperature (top row) and 
precipitation (bottom row) from the ENSEMBLES multi-model seasonal predictions in boreal summer 
(June to August, left column) and winter (December to February, right column). NOTES: The predictions 
have been performed over the period 1980-2005 with five different forecast systems, each one running 
nine-member ensembles. The reference data are taken from ERAInterim79 for temperature and GPCP116 
for precipitation. SOURCE: Figure and caption from Doblas-Reyes et al. (2013).
(Climate Forecast System) or GEFS (Global Ensemble Forecast System) indicate little 
skill from week 2 and beyond, even with the application of temporal averaging. As 
mentioned above, MME forecasts have improved forecast skill of such traditional 
atmospheric variables in some cases, but even for seasonal forecasts, large gaps persist 
across specific regions and seasons, especially for precipitation. For example, skill of 
ENSEMBLES multi-model forecasts of boreal winter conditions is good in the ­tropics 
and over oceans, particularly for temperature; however, skill over land, especially 
outside of the tropics, is limited (Figure 2.4). Although the quality is slightly better over 
land areas with strong ENSO teleconnections (e.g., North America in boreal winter), 
skill is still low in certain areas, for example, over most of Europe during the winter 
(Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). 
Enhanced forecast skill is sometimes possible during specific windows of time in spe-
cific regions. Skill to 20 days is possible, for example, during specific MJO phases (Lin 
et al., 2010; Rodney et al., 2013). Such contingent improvements in forecast skill, along 

41
History and Current Status of S2S Forecasting
with generally low skill for traditional atmospheric forecast variables over large areas 
and time windows, highlights the importance and promise of so-called forecasts of 
opportunity (see Chapter 4). 
The recent extreme low sea ice extent in summer in the Arctic prompted the Sea Ice 
Outlook8 to begin gathering seasonal forecasts in 2008. The first published skill of a 
retrospective forecast of sea ice extent appeared soon after, in 2013 (Merryfield et 
al., 2013b; Sigmond et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013a). Dynamical models exhibit skill at 
these lead times, but their skill is still substantially below estimates of perfect-model 
forecast skill (see also Figure 4.2). Furthermore, no study has yet published an evalu-
ation of S2S forecast skill at the regional or local scale for sea ice variables such as 
concentration, thickness, or ice-type, which are likely to be useful to forecast users. 
In summary, over the past two decades substantial progress has been made under-
standing some of the physical drivers for S2S prediction, and operational centers have 
made some progress in improving S2S forecast skill. While prediction skill for indices 
of climate modes such as the MJO and ENSO has improved more dramatically, cur-
rent operational skill is low for many traditional weather and climate variables. S2S 
forecasts for Earth system variables outside traditional weather and climate forecasts 
are less well developed, but have also been advanced by the development of coupled 
Earth system prediction systems.
The growing interest by the science community and operational forecast centers to 
develop and implement many of the projects and experiments described above, in 
addition to recent progress in S2S predictability research and operational predictions, 
illustrates the research priority and expectations associated with S2S timescales. How-
ever, an associated U.S. national research agenda aimed at strengthening the contribu-
tions of S2S forecasts to public and private activities has not yet emerged. 
Finding 2.1: Although there has been considerable progress in S2S forecasting over 
the past several decades, many opportunities for improvements in S2S forecast skill 
remain.
8  http://www.arcus.org/sipn/sea-ice-outlook, accessed January 27, 2016.


43
C H A P T E R  T H R E E
Enhancing the Value and 
Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Determining the economic value of climate and weather forecast information remains 
challenging (Dutton, 2002; Lazo et al., 2011; Letson et al., 2007; Morss et al., 2008; U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 2014). Some work indicates that a significant portion of 
annual U.S. gross domestic product (tens of billions or even trillions of dollars) may be 
sensitive to the weather (Dutton, 2002). Regardless of forecasts’ exact economic value, 
there is growing recognition that subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) predictions could play 
an important role in reducing society’s exposure to weather, ­climate, and other envi-
ronmental variability, both in the United States and globally (e.g., Thiaw and Kumar, 
2015; World Bank, 2013).
Realizing potential benefits of S2S predictions will require physical science research 
to advance understanding of the many complex interactions at play within the Earth 
system and to overcome the many technical hurdles associated with translating such 
research into improved S2S forecast systems (see Chapters 4 through 7). However, a 
crucial aspect of realizing the value of S2S forecasts involves generating and apply-
ing knowledge about the many social and behavioral dynamics, as well as the legal 
and equity issues that are associated with using such forecasts to improve decision-
making (NRC, 1999, 2010a, 2010c). Although addressing the latter set of issues in their 
entirety is beyond the scope of this report, the committee believes that it is important 
to highlight in more detail the value proposition of S2S forecasts and to outline criti-
cal steps that the S2S research community can take to ensure that investments made 
in current and future S2S forecast systems are leveraged to maximize the ability to 
inform choice, action, and social and economic benefit. 
This chapter presents the context in which S2S forecasts are or could be used by a 
diverse set of decision-makers, highlights some barriers to use, and presents findings 
and recommendations to help ensure that future S2S forecast systems and forecast 
products realize their potential to benefit society. 

44
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
THE POTENTIAL VALUE OF S2S FORECASTS TO DECISION-MAKERS
A number of federal, state, and private users presented information to the committee 
about how they make decisions for which S2S Earth system information is or has the 
potential to be a factor. Building on these presentations, the committee developed in-
formation on a large set of sectors and decisions for which S2S forecasts are or have the 
potential to inform decisions (Figure 3.1 and Table 3.1). Case studies later in this chapter 
expand upon some of these examples, including applications to water management, 
public health, emergency response, and national defense. As the case ­studies make 
clear, some of the potential value of S2S forecasts lies in their ability to inform decision 
processes that begin months or even years in advance of a potential event.  
FIGURE 3.1  S2S forecasts (shown in blue and green) fill a gap between short-term weather and ocean 
forecasts (shown in red) and longer-term Earth system projections (shown in black). NOTES: They inform 
critical decisions (also shown in blue and green) across many different sectors by providing information 
about likely conditions in between these more established prediction times. SOURCE: Modified from the 
Earth System Prediction Capability Office.

45
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
TABLE 3.1  Example Decisions from a Range of Sectors That Can Be Informed by S2S 
and Longer Forecasts 
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Water 
Resources 
Management 
(see case study 
for more detail)
Water supply 
management 
(including flood 
control and 
drought)
Probability of 
heavy rainfall or 
runoff; probability 
of unusually 
high demand 
(precipitation; 
temperature; 
snowpack; runoff; 
likelihood of 
atmospheric river 
events)
Allocation of 
water supply; 
water transfer 
requests; assuring 
minimum flows 
for endangered 
species 
(accumulation of 
winter snowpack; 
timing of seasonal 
snowmelt; summer 
water demands; 
precipitation; 
temperature; 
snowfall; 
evapotranspiration)
Storage capacity and 
sources; conservation 
programs (changes 
in mean annual 
temperatures, 
precipitation, 
snowfall 
accumulation, runoff, 
evapotranspiration)
Hydropower 
scheduling
Available 
water supply 
in reservoirs; 
anticipated 
demand (lake 
levels; stream 
flow; evaporation; 
temperatures 
for demand 
estimates)
Probability of 
reaching target 
elevation levels 
in reservoir 
(snowmelt/inflow; 
evaporative loss)
Changes in demand 
and supply (changes 
in mean seasonal and 
annual temperature 
across basin and 
service area; changes 
in snowmelt 
patterns; changes 
in precipitation; 
changes in 
evapotranspiration)
continued

46
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Water 
Resources 
Management 
(continued)
Recreation 
budgeting
Reservoir/
lake levels and 
temperature—e.g., 
high temperatures 
may increase 
probability of 
algal blooms or 
fish kills (inflow; 
evaporative loss; 
temperature 
departures)
Probability of 
reaching target 
elevation levels 
in reservoir/lake 
(snowmelt/inflow; 
evaporative loss)
Probability of 
maintaining seasonal 
target elevation 
levels (net water 
supply to reservoir/
lake; changes in 
evaporative loss)
National 
Security
 (see case study 
for more detail)
Anticipating 
disruptive events 
/ deployment 
of resources 
(aid, security, 
evacuation)
Pre-deploy 
resources to areas 
that are at greatest 
risk of high-
intensity events 
(probability of 
disruptive events, 
especially flooding 
and drought)
Anticipate staffing 
and resource 
needs; identify 
timing of Arctic 
shipping lanes 
open (sea ice; 
probability of 
disruptive events 
including flooding 
and famine)
Identifying areas 
that may become 
at-risk from natural 
disasters—e.g., 
climate change, 
famine (regional 
changes in 
temperature and 
precipitation 
patterns; sea-level 
rise)
Food and water 
security
Emerging areas 
of food or water 
shortage that 
may require 
transport of large 
quantities of food 
(precipitation 
departures; 
monsoon)
Areas at risk of 
famine or flood 
during coming 
months to 
year (monthly 
to seasonal 
precipitation; 
drought forecasts; 
temperatures 
exceeding critical 
thresholds for 
major crop areas)
Areas undergoing 
desertification or 
decline in water 
quantity and/or 
quality (changes 
in precipitation 
patterns; salinity; 
changes in jet 
stream, monsoon, 
or Inter Tropical 
Convergence Zone 
[ITCZ])
TABLE 3.1  Continued

47
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Tactical planning
Shipping routes 
and operations 
planning (wind; 
wave height; 
sea ice; ocean 
currents)
Projected dates of 
Arctic ice breakup 
and thawing 
permafrost 
rendering ice 
roads and runways 
unusable (sea 
ice; monthly 
temperatures) 
Inundation of coastal 
facilities from sea-
level rise and storm 
surge (sea-level rise; 
changes in hurricane 
intensity)
Energy
Energy generation, 
trading, and 
hedging
Potential spikes 
in demand; 
availability of 
renewable energy 
(heat waves/
cold outbreaks; 
mean daily wind 
speed; daily solar 
radiation; adverse 
weather impacts 
such as ice storms, 
wind storms, 
hurricanes)
Seasonal supplies 
of natural gas 
and renewable 
energy sources; 
trading with 
other producers, 
hedging in futures 
markets and over-
the-counter trades; 
fuel adjustment 
clauses (winter 
and summer 
temperatures; 
probability of 
heat waves or 
cold outbreaks; 
projected runoff 
from snowmelt)
Operations and 
maintenance 
scheduling
Potential 
disruptive events/
damage to 
infrastructure 
or supply chain 
(severe storms; 
hurricanes; floods; 
heat waves; wind)
Taking units off-
line (probability of 
heat waves or cold 
outbreaks leading 
to unusually high 
demand) 
Building, upgrading, 
and relocating 
new facilities 
(summer and winter 
temperatures; sea-
level rise; changes 
in snowpack/spring 
runoff)
TABLE 3.1  Continued
continued

48
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Agriculture
Crop production
Susceptibility 
to disease; 
application 
of nutrients, 
pesticides, and 
herbicides 
(temperature; 
precipitation; wind 
speed; relative 
humidity; soil 
temperature)
Projected yields; 
food production 
and distribution 
(precipitation; 
soil moisture; 
temperature; 
projected dates 
of first/last freeze; 
probability 
of disruptive 
events—flood, 
drought, heat 
waves, freeze)
Types of crops that 
can be grown in a 
changing climate; 
trees and vine 
varieties (changing 
ecoregions; 
changes in monthly 
and seasonal 
precipitation; 
evapotranspiration; 
length of growing 
season)
Commodity 
trading in grains 
and other high-
value crops
Protect profit; 
anticipate market 
movement
Protect profit; 
anticipate market 
movement
Ranching
Forage 
management 
strategies; altering 
stocking rates 
(probability 
of abnormally 
wet or dry 
weeks; extreme 
temperatures; 
abrupt changes in 
temperatures)
Herd size, pasture 
availability (total 
rainfall; vegetation 
health)
Long-term changes 
in viability of 
operations in 
semi-arid areas 
(precipitation; 
evapotranspiration; 
frequency of 
drought)
Fisheries
Stocking, fish 
kills (water 
temperatures; 
stream flow; 
salinity)
Migratory 
patterns, e.g., 
salmon (snowpack; 
streamflow)
Viability of species-
appropriate habitats 
in lakes and rivers 
(temperature; 
water temperature; 
streamflow; 
snowpack)
TABLE 3.1  Continued

49
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Severe 
Weather/ 
Event 
Management
Event 
management
Pre-deploy 
resources to 
areas most likely 
to be impacted 
(probability 
of disruptive 
events—storms, 
hurricanes, floods, 
fire)
Seasonal outlooks 
for number 
and intensity of 
hurricanes, storm 
outbreaks, or 
flooding (weekly 
to monthly 
precipitation 
accumulation; 
patterns favorable 
for development 
of storms; El 
Niño-Southern 
Oscillation 
(ENSO) phase and 
intensity)
Areas likely to 
become more 
or less at-risk 
from disruptive 
events (changes in 
wildfire frequency 
or magnitude; 
changes in extreme 
precipitation; 
changes in drought; 
changes in storm 
tracks; changes in 
hurricane frequency 
or intensity)
Risk awareness
Encouraging 
people to stock 
sufficient supplies 
(probability of 
disruptive events)
Initiate public 
awareness and 
preparedness 
campaigns 
(probability of an 
active season—
hurricane, storm, 
flood)
Changes in patterns 
or timing of severe 
weather (changes 
in frequency or 
magnitude of 
disruptive events)
Wildfire 
management
Pre-deploying 
resources, wildfire 
management 
(temperature; 
wind; humidity)
Seasonal outlooks 
(precipitation; 
temperature; wind; 
fuel load)
Changes to fire 
susceptibility 
(expansion of 
pine bark beetle 
habitat; changes 
in seasonal water 
balance; changes in 
temperature)
Environmental 
Impacts
Oil spill 
Loop currents (e.g., 
tracking where oil 
is likely to go)
Dispersion and 
dilution; impacts 
on fisheries
Changes in natural 
habitats
TABLE 3.1  Continued
continued

50
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Environmental 
Impacts 
(continued)
Coastal zone 
management
Hurricane / wave 
impacts
Beach erosion and 
re-nourishment
Loss of wetland 
habitat due to sea-
level rise; Changes 
in shoreline habitat 
and wildlife (e.g., 
conversion of 
salt marshes to 
mangroves)
Transportation
Shipping and 
navigation
Disruptions 
to surface 
transportation 
systems; preparing 
evacuation routes 
for hurricanes 
(probability of 
flooding; periods 
of active tropical 
activity)
Timing of opening 
shipping lanes 
in the Arctic 
(sea ice; summer 
temperatures; 
streamflow on 
major waterways)
Susceptibility of 
ports to inundation; 
transit routes (sea-
level rise; storm 
surge; ice-free Arctic)
Maintenance 
of highways, 
railroads, 
waterways, 
airports
Positioning 
equipment and 
assets, e.g., salt 
for roads, barges 
and railcars for 
transportation, de-
icing equipment 
and supplies 
for airports 
(probability of 
adverse weather, 
including snowfall 
or ice, heavy 
rainfall, drought)
Positioning 
equipment and 
assets for repairs 
of infrastructure 
and equipment; 
seasonal supplies 
of road salt, de-
icing supplies, fuel; 
(probability of 
favorable, adverse, 
or severe weather; 
number of freeze/
thaw cycles; first 
and last frost; 
seasonal snowfall; 
ice storms)
Resizing of bridges 
and culverts to 
handle flood flows; 
selection of materials 
to handle extreme 
temperatures 
(projected number 
of days exceeding 
critical temperature 
thresholds; 
changes in 
maximum probable 
precipitation)
TABLE 3.1  Continued

51
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Maintenance
Positioning 
equipment and 
assets, e.g., salt for 
roads (probability 
of winter weather 
including snowfall 
or ice)
Planning for 
pothole repairs; 
seasonal supplies 
of road salt; 
possible repair of 
flooded roadways 
and bridges 
(probability of 
extreme rainfall; 
number of freeze/
thaw cycles; first 
and last frost; 
seasonal snowfall; 
ice storms)
Resizing of bridges 
and culverts to 
handle flood flows; 
selection of materials 
to handle extreme 
temperatures 
(projected number 
of days exceeding 
critical temperature 
thresholds; 
changes in 
maximum probable 
precipitation)
Construction
Probability of 
weather-related 
delays, e.g., staffing 
(precipitation; 
temperature; 
snowfall; humidity; 
wind)
Timing of 
materials delivery; 
contract incentives 
and penalties 
(probability of 
disruptive events; 
consecutive days 
of hot/cold or wet 
weather)
Annual number of 
days with suitable 
work conditions 
(changes in 
temperature and 
precipitation 
patterns; length of 
frost-free season)
Business
Retail
Supply chain 
decisions, e.g., 
promoting 
products in 
response to 
weather events 
(probability of 
heavy rainfall; 
extreme 
temperatures; 
snowfall)
Production and 
purchase of 
seasonal items, 
e.g., umbrellas, 
outdoor activities, 
snow sports; 
possible disruption 
of supply chains 
(seasonal snowfall, 
number of rainy 
days, extreme 
temperatures; 
probability of 
disruptive events)
Probability of 
disruptive events
TABLE 3.1  Continued
continued

52
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Business 
(continued)
Insurance 
and financial 
management
Hedging/risk 
management; 
shifting funds in 
anticipation of 
large payouts from 
widespread events 
such as flooding 
or active period 
of extreme events 
such as hurricanes 
(probability of 
disruptive events)
Potential demand 
for energy; 
potential crop 
yields; contracts 
for insurance 
or reinsurance; 
setting premiums 
(above or below 
normal number of 
hurricanes; large-
scale patterns 
favoring flooding 
or drought; 
extended periods 
of abnormally 
hot or cold 
temperatures)
Insurability of coastal 
property; changes 
in regional patterns 
of risk (sea-level rise; 
storm surge; storm 
patterns; frequency 
and intensity of 
hurricanes and 
droughts; changes 
in maximum daily 
rainfall events)
Public Health 
(see case study 
for more detail)
Potential disease 
outbreaks
Conditions 
conducive to 
development of 
disease vectors 
(temperature; 
precipitation; 
easterly waves; 
extratropical 
cyclones)
Seasons that may 
have above-
average number 
of cases, e.g., 
meningitis, malaria 
(sea-surface 
temperatures; 
cumulative rainfall; 
temperature 
variability; 
strength of Indian 
Monsoon)
Changes in regions 
susceptible to spread 
of disease, e.g., areas 
where viruses and 
bacteria can survive 
due to warming 
temperatures 
(changes in regional 
temperature and 
precipitation 
patterns)
Extreme 
temperatures, heat 
waves, cold spells
Likelihood of a 
significant event 
(maximum and 
minimum daily 
temperatures; 
humidity)
Likely number of 
events during a 
season (probability 
of occurrence of 
consecutive days 
with temperatures 
above or below 
critical thresholds)
Changes in the 
frequency of 
extended periods of 
abnormally hot or 
cold weather (daily 
temperature)
TABLE 3.1  Continued

53
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Sector
Decision Process
Weeks-Months
Seasonal-Annual
Longer-Term
Heat waves
Likelihood of a 
significant event 
(maximum and 
minimum daily 
temperatures; 
humidity)
Likely number 
of events during 
a summer 
(probability of 
occurrence of 
consecutive 
days above 
temperature 
thresholds)
Changes in the 
frequency of 
extended periods 
of abnormally hot 
weather (daily 
temperature)
Algal blooms/
release of 
neurotoxins in 
water
High temperatures 
with relatively 
stagnant water 
and abundant 
sunshine (air 
and water 
temperature; 
precipitation; 
cloud cover)
Probability of 
extended periods 
(weeks) of hot, 
dry weather 
(temperature; 
precipitation; 
runoff)
Changes in 
conditions conducive 
to algal blooms 
(summer water and 
air temperatures; 
changes in cloud 
cover; changes in 
frequency of drought 
and runoff)
NOTES: Variables needed to make these decisions are shown in parentheses. The examples are based upon 
presentations to the committee, examples of use solicited from the state climatologists and other climate 
services providers, and from published research.
TABLE 3.1  Continued
Often, the long-term average or climatology of a particular phenomenon—such as 
assumptions for the seasonal volume of water held in a reservoir—are incorporated 
into decision-making as a first step. As the decision point draws nearer, adjustments are 
made as additional information becomes available. In this context, S2S forecasts can 
inform the process of adjusting decision-making between the timescale of long-term 
planning and short-term response to events across a wide range of sectors within the 
economy (Table 3.1).
Finding 3.1: S2S forecasts provide value or have great potential to provide value to 
society for a broad range of sectors and decision-making contexts.

54
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
CHALLENGES TO THE USE OF S2S PREDICTIONS
Despite the wide range of potential sectors in which S2S forecasts are or have the 
potential be valuable, there are many challenges and barriers to their uptake by deci-
sion-makers. For example, many water managers can see the potential application of 
S2S forecasts to their work, and in some cases such information has provided valuable 
context for planning (see case water management case study below). However, the out-
comes of forecast use have not always been positive; currently available products do 
not always fit easily into institutional decision-making frameworks, and managers are 
eager for forecasts of variables and at resolutions that are more directly relevant to their 
contexts. These points are broadly consistent with published research on appli­cations 
of S2S predictions to decision-making, which to date focuses on the use of seasonal 
predictions in the agricultural, energy, or water management sectors (e.g., Breuer et al., 
2010; Hansen et al., 2006; Lemos, 2008; Mase and Prokopy, 2014; Pagano et al., 2002). For 
example, Patt et al. (2007) document how use of a seasonal forecast in Ethiopia enabled 
an emergency management team to identify specific relief actions with months of lead 
time, alleviating food shortages in 2002. In contrast, seasonal forecasts prompted the 
restriction of credit for seed in Zimbabwe in 1997, which prevented planting and led to 
food shortages even though seasonal rainfall ended up at near-normal levels. 
Beyond the experience of negative consequences of seasonal forecast use, one 
important set of documented barriers to the use of S2S forecast products relates to 
mismatches between currently available products and the stated needs of end users. 
Forecast products currently available from organizations such as the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) Climate Prediction Center (CPC) or the 
seasonal multi-modal ensemble (MME) forecasts from the Asia-Pacific Climate Center 
(APCC) (see Chapter 2), for example, are issued in the form of low-resolution depic-
tions of the probabilities of departure from mean temperature and precipitation over 
a 3-month period (Figure 3.2), or as forecasts of climate indices such as the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO). 
These forecasts, and text discussions that accompany them, provide general guidance 
on future temperature and precipitation, but they do not readily translate into opera-
tional decision support for many applications. In agriculture, S2S information could be 
used to assist in determining planting dates, irrigation needs, crop types, fertilization, 
expected market conditions, pests and disease, livestock management, and the need 
for insurance (Breuer et al., 2010; Mase and Prokopy, 2014). However, these decisions 
are dependent on the timing, magnitude, frequency, and duration of weather events 
within the 3-month forecast window, not departures from seasonal average condi-
tions (Srinivasan et al., 2011; Vitart et al., 2012).

55
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
FIGURE 3.2  Three-month outlooks issued by the NOAA CPC for June-July-August 2015, issued May 2015 
(0.5-month lead time). NOTES: Contours indicate probability of above (A) or below (B) normal precipita-
tion (left) and temperature (right). EC indicates equal chances, where probability is evenly distributed 
across the three categories (above, normal, or below). SOURCE: NOAA.
Mase and Prokopy (2014) studied seasonal forecast use in the agricultural sector and 
identified four barriers to the uptake of current seasonal forecasts, including mis-
matches between desired and available products: 
1.	 Decision contexts rarely involve direct use of information about temperature 
and precipitation anomalies or climate indices. Instead, tailored, sometimes 
derived forecast variables, have proven to be much more useful. It is not im-
mediately clear what actions a farmer can make with the information that 
there is a 40 percent probability of above-normal precipitation (compared to 
a climatological probability of 33 percent). Variables such as the date of first 
or last frost might better inform the agricultural sector with specific decisions, 
such as determining when resources are needed to inform decisions related to 
harvesting or planting. 
2.	 Forecasts of average conditions or anomalies from average conditions are not 
always immediately useful for many types of decisions. Decision-makers often 
must respond to conditions that are out of the normal realm of climate vari-
ability, such as extremes of heat waves, drought, or floods, or the impacts of a 
volcanic eruption. A forecast of “above normal” conditions does not necessarily 
describe whether critical thresholds such as reservoir capacity may be ex-

56
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ceeded or plant die-off may occur. For these types of decisions, the probability 
of exceeding critical thresholds is more important than the departure from the 
mean (see Pulwarty and Redmond, 1997; Vitart et al., 2012). 
3.	 Spatial and temporal forecast scales are often mismatched to decision-making. 
Decisions are rarely made for a 3-month period across a large spatial domain; 
rather, decisions are based on discrete events occurring within a specific time 
frame and often for a very specific location. A product providing only above- 
or below-normal or normal conditions over a very large domain may not be 
immediately useful to a water manager trying to regulate water usage or flow 
for several watersheds contained within that large domain or spanning several 
different forecast domains (see also water management case study; Robertson 
et al., 2014; Srinivasan et al., 2011). For example, seasonal forecast skill is en-
hanced by a strong ENSO signal, but by the time forecasters have confidence 
of likely impacts from the event, many decisions on crops, water storage, or 
other resources have already been made. Furthermore, different combinations 
of forecast lead times and averaging period may be more or less useful in dif-
ferent contexts (see also Chapter 5).
4.	 There is often a lack of understanding of and trust in forecasts. Many users do 
not understand the process by which forecasters reach their conclusions, and 
existing forecast verification metrics are often not directly relevant to users’ 
contexts (Morss et al., 2008). Consequently, users often have little confidence in 
the forecast (Mase and Prokopy, 2014). Familiarizing users with the processes 
by which forecasts are produced often requires direct interaction over a sus-
tained time period. Such interactions are expensive, resulting in fewer commu-
nication pathways between the producers and users. Thus a lack of resources 
issue often exacerbates this issue and hampers delivery of information to end 
users (see also Hansen et al., 2011; Klopper et al., 2006; Lemos and Morehouse, 
2005). 
Such examples extend beyond agriculture. For example, forecasting events such as 
heat waves for the public health sector, or environmentally caused anomalous electro-
magnetic propagation and mirages for ocean communications applications, have the 
potential to provide much greater value to decision-makers than information about 
departures from average temperature and precipitation across a wide region (see also 
case studies below). Contextual factors, such as lack of trust or inflexible personal or 
institutional operations, also impede forecast use in water management and public 
health sectors. In water management in the United States, for example, some institu-
tions may even have policies that designate certain sources as official information, 
posing a barrier to the use of new products (Lemos, 2008; Pagano et al., 2002; J. Jones, 

57
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
personal communication, January 2015). Differences in perceptions of risk and bias 
and fear of bearing personal responsibility for making decisions based on probabilistic 
forecasts that are still less familiar to the public are also barriers to use in some cases 
(e.g., Suarez and Tall, 2010). Lack of resources can also influence the ability to access 
decision support. Although some private companies and research laboratories pro-
duce higher temporal or spatial resolution and tailored forecasts for their clients (e.g., 
International Research Institute for Climate and Society [IRI] tailored products, and see 
case study on national security and defense), these are not necessarily widely available 
to the public. Beyond specific barriers to use, many decision-makers (and even entire 
sectors) may not be fully aware of S2S forecasting efforts and the potential to apply 
such information to decision-making (Buontempo et al., 2014; see case study on public 
health below). 
To summarize, the current use of S2S forecasts at present is primarily limited to gen-
eral guidance, although there are emerging sectors and businesses that make more in-
depth use of forecasts. Reasons for the slow adoption of and demand for S2S forecasts 
into operational environments include (1) a poor fit between aspects of the forecast 
(skill, scale, and lead time—e.g., salience and credibility [Hansen et al., 2011; Klopper 
et al., 2006]); (2) contextual factors such as lack of trust, inflexible operations, market 
fluctuations, and lack of resources; and (3) lack of awareness. 
That said, the number of studies that address the role of S2S forecasts in decision-­
making across important sectors, including transportation, infrastructure, or health 
and humanitarian crises, is still limited (though studies within humanitarian and 
health contexts are growing—see Braman et al., 2013, and Coughlan de Perez and 
Mason, 2014). The relative paucity of analysis about the use (or lack of use) of S2S 
forecasts—particularly subseasonal forecasts—across multiple sectors and regions 
inhibits the understanding of the potential value of S2S predictions and the develop-
ment of strategies to maximize the benefits of S2S predictions to society.
Finding 3.2: Research about the demand for and utilization of S2S predictions 
across multiple sectors is still limited. Studies that have been conducted often indi-
cate significant barriers to using S2S forecasts in decision-making, including mis-
matches between available and desired forecast products, barriers associated with 
policy and practice, and lack of understanding of what could be provided. 
Finding 3.3: Decision-makers generally express a need for a wider range of skillful 
model and forecast variables—particularly information about the likelihood of 
disruptive or extreme events—that are valid at finer spatial and temporal scales to 
inform management practices.

58
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Some of the issues highlighted above are not new or unique to S2S forecasts. The 
weather forecast community, for example, faces many similar challenges, and a devel-
oping body of social and behavioral sciences research on forecast use is beginning to 
increase understanding about how to overcome challenges associated with increas-
ing forecast use in decision-making (Brunet et al., 2010; NRC, 2010c). Learning from 
experiences on both the shorter-term weather forecasts, as well as leveraging existing 
knowledge about the use of seasonal forecasts, can provide guidance to maximize 
the use of S2S forecasts across many more sectors of society. As an example, find-
ings about the barriers to use of seasonal forecasts above are broadly consistent with 
previous research on the use of weather forecasts, which identified similar types of 
information that users generally consider to be the most relevant to decision-making 
(Pielke and Carbone, 2002):
• 
Extreme events, including droughts, hurricanes, floods, blizzards, tornadoes, 
and thunderstorms (including hail);
• 
The benefits of good weather, meaning favorable conditions for a particular 
activity;
• 
Routinely disruptive weather, defined as not extreme, but significant enough 
to warrant behavioral adjustments; and 
• 
Forecast impacts, particularly associated with misses and false alarms (includ-
ing over-warning).
Finding 3.4: Building on experience related to increasing the usability and use of 
weather and seasonal forecasts will be important for rapid broadening of the role 
of S2S forecasts in decision-making. 
Uncertainty and Lead Times
In addition to user-relevant forecast output variables and scales, key attributes of fore-
casts must exist before a prediction can make a value-added contribution to decision 
processes. Forecasts must be available in a timely manner, provided in a readily under-
standable format with known accuracy, and accepted as an available tool by the users 
and policy makers (Hartmann et al., 2002; Pagano et al., 2002).
Different users have different tolerances for how accurate a forecast must be before 
it becomes useful to them. Some users need high confidence before they can take 
action, while others may be more tolerant of incorrect forecasts (Lemos and Rood, 
2010; Mase and Prokopy, 2014). According to a cost-loss model, if the probability of 
occurrence of an event exceeds the ratio of the cost of mitigation action to the losses 
that would be expected to occur without mitigation, then the mitigation actions are 

59
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
considered worthwhile. Consequently, if the costs of action are high, then the user 
would require a higher level of certainty that the forecasted event will occur (Murphy, 
1977). Such specific probability thresholds are usually unknown to forecasters, how-
ever, because they are situationally and geographically dependent.
Decision-makers always operate under uncertainty; even a 24-hour forecast has 
uncertainties. Such uncertainty is now frequently and more appropriately presented 
in terms of probabilistic forecasts. However, as has been shown by notable errors in 
weather forecasts, such as predictions of winter precipitation, when decisions have 
significant associated costs, people are more critical of forecast errors (Joslyn and 
Savelli, 2010; Roulston and Smith, 2004; Savelli and Joslyn, 2012). Furthermore, seasonal 
forecast information, when presented at finer spatial and temporal scales, increasingly 
has larger bounds of uncertainty. Thus, there may be a higher likelihood of an out-
come that is different from the forecast at the particular location where the decision 
is made. When presented on a value or cost/loss basis, this may make decision-makers 
reluctant to invest in actions based upon generally lower-skill, highly probabilistic S2S 
forecasts. For example, a 53 percent probability of greater than normal snowfall may 
not justify contracting for additional snow removal availability. However, in order to 
make valid value decisions and actions, decision-makers need established reliability 
measures. If preventive action requires steep costs, and reliability measures are not 
well developed, then policymakers are less likely to adopt (especially experimental or 
new) forecast products and are more likely to resort to a wait-and-see position (Lemos 
and Rood, 2010). When confronted by crisis, however, such as reservoirs operating 
above or below their capacities, the willingness to use S2S forecast information may 
increase significantly (Lemos, 2008).
Thus creating more skillful forecasts does not necessarily guarantee that the forecasts 
will be usable or used. To be useful, a user must also have confidence in the prediction. 
Confidence is typically established by evaluating the success of the forecast against 
a large number of previous occurrences. However, S2S predictions have a number 
of major challenges in establishing such confidence. For example, because forecasts 
are typically averaged over weekly or longer time intervals, there are fewer data 
points against which to verify the forecasts. Furthermore, if users are interested in a 
prediction of a weather-driven event such as severe flooding, then multiple forecast 
variables are involved, including precipitation amount and intensity, soil moisture, 
snow pack, and temperature. Errors in any one of these variables will lead to errors in 
the projected outcome. The issue of developing confidence in forecasts is of central 
importance to users, but also links centrally to S2S forecast systems, and is therefore 
covered in greater detail in Chapter 5 (see the section on Calibration, Combination, 
Verification, and Optimization).

60
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 3.5: Assessing tolerance for uncertainty and developing user-oriented 
verification metrics are important to building confidence in the use of forecasts 
among decision-makers. At the S2S timescales this aspect has been generally 
underdeveloped. 
IMPROVING THE USABILITY AND USE OF S2S FORECASTS
Given the current barriers to use highlighted in the section above, this section high-
lights potential avenues for increasing forecast uptake into decision-making. Decision-
makers have a range of capabilities, from those able to apply statistical techniques 
to extract useful information from forecasts, to those with less ability to modify or 
interpret probabilistic forecasts. Tailored and interpreted forecast information has 
the potential to increase the value of S2S forecasts by expanding the range of fore-
cast variables and outputs that are available to specific users. Some tailored product 
variables may be obtained through the development of statistical models or correla-
tion fields for relating existing forecast variables and spatial scales, such as regional 
temperature and precipitation averages, to other, more useful variables (Mase and 
Prokopy, 2014). For example, extension agents in the agricultural sector prefer deriva-
tive information over simple climate predictions (i.e., forecasting impacts instead of 
seasonal departures of temperature and precipitation). Here, forecasts of the probabil-
ity of receiving sufficient precipitation during crop maturation or sufficient soil mois-
ture for seed germination can help the agricultural sector anticipate the amount and 
timing of irrigation needs.
Creating some tailored products is possible using currently available forecast output. 
Developing other tailored forecast variables will require advances in the S2S forecast-
ing system itself, particularly through an expansion of the capabilities of coupled Earth 
system models that enable, for example, new forecast variables such as the occurrence 
of unusual surf or extreme waves, mean cloud cover, and likelihood of harmful algal 
blooms. Similarly, some progress on predicting the less probable but high-impact 
events, so-called extreme events, can be made through tailoring existing forecasts. 
Such events may include a very hot week in an otherwise near-normal summer. 
Because these are part of a continuous distribution, there is potential to predict the 
probability of such events occurring within a forecast period. However, improvements 
in coupled model forecast systems are likely also needed to meet user demands for 
predictions of such extreme or disruptive events, especially since the noteworthy 
­nature of extremes is typically sector specific. For example, uncharacteristically low 
winds might not represent a problem for water, transportation, or agriculture sectors, 
but would be significant for the wind energy and air quality sectors. 

61
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Qualitative interpretation of forecasts can also increase their uptake and value. For ex-
ample, simplified forecast discussions that accompany National Hurricane Center pub-
lic advisories provide the explanations behind the forecast that increases many users’ 
trust of such forecasts. Thus increasing the use of such simplified forecast discussions 
in other routinely issued forecasts could yield almost immediate benefits. However, 
careful thought needs to be given to how such information is integrated into decision-
making processes (NRC, 2009).
The multitude of potential applications, driven by a multitude of different decision- 
makers with different needs requiring different formats, increases the complexity of 
production and dissemination of forecast information. To some extent, private-sector 
providers may develop products that meet this need, but on a large, advisory scale it is 
likely that the producers of information will need to consider multiple formats, along 
with broader scale efforts to develop tailored, sector-specific products.
Finding 3.6: Many forecast products that have the potential to provide greater 
benefit to society could be developed from existing modeling technology. Develop-
ing other important forecast variables and uses will require advances in modeling 
technology. These variables are likely to be sector or decision-specific and their 
provision is likely to involve derivative products and/or other decision support.
The Need for Social and Behavioral Sciences
As highlighted in the paragraphs above, developing a system that supports use of 
S2S information requires more than increased understanding of sources of predict-
ability and improved prediction skill. Advances in use and value require consideration 
of the decision-making context, which often requires complementary research in the 
social and behavioral sciences. Specifically, social science research can help to address 
many of the barriers to use previously highlighted in this chapter, including increasing 
understanding of users’ confidence in the accuracy of forecasts, users’ decision-making 
contexts and how to best integrate forecast information, and decision-making in con-
texts of high uncertainty and limited skill (see also NRC, 2010c). This includes research 
into how users react to false alarms and the costs associated with incorrect forecasts, 
and how probabilistic information can be better communicated to fit into users’ op-
erations (R. Morss, G. Eosco, S. Jasko, J. Demuth, personal communication, March 2015). 
Social science research on perceptions of quality—for example, at which point users 
will make an investment of time and resources to integrate forecasts in their opera-
tional contexts and what types of products are needed to mesh into existing decision-
making infrastructures—will also be important to understanding the potential value 

62
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
of S2S forecasts. As much of S2S information is probabilistic, research will be needed 
on the interface between probabilistic forecasts and decision-maker applications to 
determine new ways of translating forecasts to mesh with common usage of other 
Earth system information. This may involve setting more nuanced decision limits, par-
ticularly around low probability predictions (e.g., 51-55 percent). Additional research is 
also needed on the role that social networks may play in the dissemination of informa-
tion and practice (e.g., Mase and Prokopy, 2014).
Finding 3.7: Understanding decision contexts for a wide array of users in both 
sectoral applications and technical capacities is essential for increasing use of S2S 
forecasts. Such understanding cannot be advanced without social and behavioral 
sciences research. 
Integrating Users into the Process of Developing Forecast Products
Perhaps even more critical than improving forecast products and access is building 
trust in the S2S forecast process. Scientists and operational forecasters who create the 
information are often disconnected from how that information is being applied, at least 
outside of agency operations (Lemos et al., 2012). Broader use of S2S forecasts will be 
encouraged by creating systems of integrated actors and organizations that initiate, 
modify, import, and diffuse science and technology, identifying information pathways, 
relating new information to prior experience of the users, and creating toolkits to en-
able application of information to various decision contexts (Lemos et al., 2012; Vitart 
et al., 2012). This requires integration of users in decisions relating to the research and 
development process, from defining relevant research questions to the process of 
production and dissemination of products (Lemos and Morehouse, 2005). Develop-
ing a mechanism for integration may be informed by existing mechanisms used for 
integration of numerical weather prediction (NWP) forecasts with a variety of users, but 
will need to be adjusted for different circumstances related to the production of S2S 
forecasts. Model developers and operations in NWP interact with a variety of forecast 
centers around the country and with the media in annual meetings and routine cor-
respondence. To the extent practical, expanding this existing stakeholder network 
to ­include mechanisms for collaboration with S2S model developers and operations 
would be beneficial as compared to developing a separate network from scratch. 
The discussion of opportunities and limitations involved in producing S2S forecasts 
highlights potential trade-offs and risk of using the products that enhances the 
users’ confidence in adopting new products or practices (Lemos et al., 2012). Such 
discussions are facilitated, in many cases, by boundary organizations, such as NOAA’s 

63
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISA) Program and IRI. These orga-
nizations conduct interdisciplinary research on decision-making processes with the 
goal of better coupling the production and use of climate information (Goddard et al., 
2014; Lemos and Rood, 2010; Pulwarty et al., 2009). The growing experience of these 
organizations points to the considerable effort and long-term relationships that are 
needed to help users understand what types of forecasts are available and the process 
of producing the forecasts, and to engage them in the design of forecast products and 
aligned decision-making frameworks to take advantage of currently available forecast 
technology. For example, IRI has found that seasonal climate forecasts of relatively 
low skill can still be successfully applied to water management problems in Brazil 
and Chile, but only through coupling climate forecasts with streamflow projections 
and working with managers to explicitly link such tailored forecasts to their reservoir 
management decision-making process (Robertson et al., 2014). Similarly, malaria early 
warning systems based on S2S forecasts have been successful through extensive ef-
forts to forge relationships between end users and physical and social scientists who 
manage the technical aspects of designing forecast products (see case studies below). 
Growing experience among interdisciplinary researchers has resulted in a similar set 
of conclusions relating to the benefit of “co-producing” forecast products and informa-
tion together with the end users of such information (Meadow et al., 2015). 
Finding 3.8: An ongoing, iterative process between the developers, providers, and 
potential users facilitated by the relevant social science researchers improves the 
use and value of S2S predictions.
Ongoing engagement between decision-makers and scientists involved with produc-
ing forecasts can facilitate the development of iterative or multi-step decision-making 
processes, such as the “ready, set, go” framework. Here, warnings, preparation, and 
action are keyed to increasing probabilities of adverse events (e.g., Coughlan de Perez 
and Mason, 2014). Preliminary planning may be initiated when an extended S2S pre-
diction indicates the possibility, perhaps at a small probability, of a significant event. 
This would be followed by preparatory actions (such as pre-positioning emergency 
supplies) if subseasonal predictions indicated increasing probabilities of the event. 
Finally, action (such as evacuation) would be initiated based on a deterministic or 
short-range ensemble prediction with a high level of certainty. This scenario assumes a 
reliable transition of the predicted probabilities between the seasonal climate system, 
the subseasonal system, and the short-range deterministic or ensemble systems—all 
with their own statistical characteristics and skill levels. Blending the probabilities on 
these diverse timescales (and possibly spatial scales as resolution improves) into a 
coherent chain of predictions for a user is a difficult post-processing challenge. 

64
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
As mentioned above, the decision-makers will be concerned with some measure 
of risk and consequence based on a combination of the evolving probability of the 
­adverse event and the costs of mitigating compared to those of not mitigating. The 
more quantitative the model of risk and consequence, the more meaningful will be 
the estimates derived from the evolving probabilities of the adverse event. Not all 
organizations will necessarily participate in all three stages. Certain organizations may 
enter the process at different points and levels of certainty.
The set of actions taken and the probability thresholds that act as triggers are ­usually 
dependent upon users’ unique circumstances and institutional landscapes. Devel-
oping models for applying S2S information in these types of scenarios represents 
an opportunity for growth in the private sector. For example, applications requiring 
acquisition of resources, such as power poles in advance of an expected ice storm, may 
require more lead time than others for which resources are already available, such as 
frost protection for an orchard. Such decisions are not static; they are revised as new 
information becomes available, including reduced uncertainty as the forecast lead 
time shortens. Decision processes on weather timescales could be instructive, such 
as how public safety officials change their decisions from the timescale of outlooks 
issued several days before an event, to watches issued hours before an event, and then 
warnings issued minutes before an event.
Finding 3.9: Successfully aiding users with a multi-step decision model for mitigat-
ing the effects of adverse events is a difficult challenge and one not yet considered 
carefully in the S2S prediction community.
Resources Required to Encourage Use
Developing interactive, transparent processes is a time-consuming and expensive pro-
cess. It is constrained by limited resources of research, forecasting and many user com-
munities. As forecasting capabilities improve, the demands users place upon ­providers 
of forecast information will only increase. Forecasters and researchers need to be 
careful not to overpromise the capabilities of improved systems. Especially if they are 
unable to also address the translation process, the demand for services and interpreta-
tion of products may exceed the level that can be met, resulting in disenchantment 
and abandonment of forecasts (Meinke et al., 2006). 
As mentioned above, boundary organizations can play an important role in facilitating 
transparent dialogs and processes that can help overcome many barriers to forecast 
use. Many existing structures are engaged as boundary organizations at the weather 

65
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
and climate change scales, including the NOAA RISA Program, IRI, National Weather 
Service Forecast Offices, the Department of Interior’s Climate Science Centers, the 
Department of Defense Climate Services, the emergent U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) Climate Hubs, and other programs within academia. All of these programs and 
offices engage with decision-makers and possess expertise in social science method-
ology coupled with a physical understanding of weather or climate. They often work 
in interdisciplinary teams and with those intermediaries who ultimately reach the 
individual decision-makers.
Finding 3.10: Growth in the use of S2S products will place more demands upon 
operational agencies and boundary organizations to explain reasoning employed 
in producing forecasts, and in developing a suite of products that meet the needs of 
a diverse user community.
CASE STUDIES WITH EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF S2S FORECASTS
Water Management in the Western United States
Improved forecasting capability on S2S timescales is an oft-stated goal of water 
managers, especially in the drought-prone basins of the western United States (e.g., 
NIDIS Program Implementation Team, 2007; WGA, 2008). Federal, state, and local water 
managers in California, for example, seek improved forecasts in order to stretch their 
ability to balance the needs of 38 million residents (representing 12 percent of the U.S. 
population), the needs of an agriculture sector that farms more than 9 million irrigated 
acres and leads the nation in production, and demands for hydroelectricity from the 
state’s 13,765 MW of capacity.1 The state’s recent, severe drought (e.g., Griffin and 
Anchukaitis, 2014) has only heightened awareness of the challenges associated with 
meeting these needs (Figure 3.3).
In California, winter precipitation makes up the majority of the annual water budget, 
and estimates of spring run-off from winter snowpack are currently used to help 
manage and coordinate the in- and outflow from the state’s vast system of reservoirs, 
aqueducts, and groundwater storage facilities. A primary tool used for making deci-
sions about reservoir levels, water allocations, and water transfers is the California 
Department of Water Resource’s forecast of total April-July river runoff. These forecasts 
are issued beginning in February and are updated monthly through May. Water-year-
based (i.e., September-August) indices are also issued based on historical analogs. 
1  http://www.energy.ca.gov/hydroelectric/, accessed January 27, 2016.

66
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 3.3  Recent drought has a severe impact on water availability in California, and water levels are 
exceedingly low in many CA reservoirs. NOTES: Here, water levels over a section of Lake Oroville near 
the Bidwell Marina are shown on July 20, 2011 (left) versus on January 16, 2014 (right). Such scarcity has 
heightened the desire for more skillful and usable S2S forecasts. SOURCE: California Department of Water 
Resources. 
In other western states, similar forecasts are issued by the USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service in partnership with NOAA/National Weather Service (NWS). The 
skill of these forecasts is currently derived entirely from a sparse network of snowpack 
measurements, which means they are not readily disaggregated by month.
In contrast to forecasts derived from observations of the winter snowpack, water 
managers have not relied heavily on the current array of operational S2S weather and 
climate forecast products. When used, the forecasts tend to be assessed qualitatively 
and used as a “tie-breaker” in higher stakes, scarcity situations (M. Crimmins, personal 
communication, March 2015). There are a number of barriers to use of currently avail-
able S2S forecast products. First, users may not be aware of times when forecast prod-
ucts have higher skill, such as during a strong ENSO event. This potential variability 
of skill from month to month is critically important in the California context. Second, 
the spatial resolution of current S2S forecasts is often inadequate for quantitative use. 
Finally, institutional barriers can sometimes limit the use of experimental information. 
For example, state and federal water managers are sometimes restricted to using only 
forecasts that are operationally issued by federal agencies in their decision-making 
process (J. Jones, personal communication, January 2015).
Water managers are in broad agreement that better S2S forecasting could improve 
the basis for a number of their decisions. On the subseasonal timescale, efforts to 
incorporate quantitative precipitation and temperature forecasts from existing 
­numerical weather and climate predictions may help improve the temporal resolu-

67
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
tion of river run-off forecasts and allow for better decisions about, for example, flood 
control. For example, anticipating atmospheric river events with several weeks’ notice 
would allow managers to assure capacity to contain excess run-off. During dry winters, 
the likelihood that drought will persist into late winter and spring is information that is 
also consistently sought, but is not yet reliably available. This might again be achieved 
through better anticipation of the likelihood of extreme precipitation events associ-
ated with atmospheric rivers arriving from the Pacific (e.g., Dettinger, 2013), which 
have recently been shown to contribute the majority of annual precipitation and 
snowpack in California (Dettinger et al., 2011; Guan et al., 2010). Such capacity is likely 
to occur through improving advance knowledge about the state of the Madden-Julian 
Oscillation (MJO), Pacific/North American teleconnection pattern (PNA), or Arctic Oscil-
lation (AO) (e.g., Guan et al., 2012, 2013).
More accurate seasonal forecasts of winter precipitation, issued in the previous 
­summer and fall, could substantially improve decision-making about allocations to 
water project contractors, planning for reservoir water and power operations, anticipa-
tion of the number of water transfer requests, and planning for emergency flows for 
endangered species management. Developing more accurate seasonal forecasts may 
also spur the development and implementation of novel economic instruments such 
as reliability contracts to spread risk and improve allocation choices during drought 
(e.g., Hartmann, 2005; O’Donnell and Colby, 2009). 
On seasonal to longer lead times, information about the likelihood of drought continu-
ing for multiple years is needed to inform funding decisions for drought response, con-
servation programs, and the initiation of programs such as water banking. Improved 
understanding of natural climate variability could improve analog year analysis. A focus 
on producing forecasts at the scale of California and Colorado River Basin through sta-
tistical or dynamical MME could be particularly useful. More generally, there is a desire 
for tailored forecasts that fit individual water project/agency location and timing needs. 
Managers would benefit most from focused research driven by policy that is aligned 
with their specific needs (e.g., Hartmann et al., 2002). 
Public Health
It has long been recognized that variability in weather, climate, oceanic conditions, 
and vegetation can influence the emergence of epidemic diseases (e.g., Kelly-Hope 
and Thomson, 2008; Kuhn et al., 2005). Yet the use of climate information to inform 
decision-making in the public health sector remains relatively limited (Jancloes et al., 
2014). Currently, barriers to unlocking the potential of climate-inclusive frameworks for 

68
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
disease prevention and control relate less to a lack of climate information and more to 
a need for sustained, multidisciplinary research efforts and institutional collaborations 
between climate information providers and the public health community (Jancloes 
et al., 2014; Thomson et al., 2014; Roger Nasci, personal communication, March 2015). 
However, a few emerging efforts provide a glimpse into how improvements in Earth 
system forecasting could enable important advancement in the management of dis-
ease and other public health risks.
Meningitis 
Improved subseasonal (in particular for 2-4 weeks) forecasts of relative humidity 
have the potential to improve response to meningococcal meningitis epidemics, 
particularly those in the so-called meningitis belt of central Africa (Pandya et al., 2015; 
Thomson et al., 2006b). Meningitis, a bacterial infection, has a history of devastating 
impact in this region, with large outbreaks affecting hundreds of thousands of people. 
Untreated infections lead to death 50 percent of the time (WHO, 2012). Epidemics in 
the Sahel region emerge during the dry season, and correlations between low humid-
ity and meningitis cases were first noted more than 30 years ago (Greenwood et al., 
1984). Further research revealed strong relationships between meningitis and dusty, 
dry conditions (Sultan et al., 2005; Thomson et al., 2006b) and abrupt cessations of epi-
demics with increases in humidity (Molesworth et al., 2003). However, environ­mental 
conditions are only one of many factors, including demographic, behavioral, and 
ecological conditions, which can precipitate infection. Specifically, in many regions, 
lack of disease surveillance limits the potential to develop accurate disease transmis-
sion models of any kind. This can make translating correlations between disease and 
environmental conditions into actionable information very challenging (Pandya et al., 
2015; M. Hayden, personal communication, March 2015).
The MERIT (Meningitis Environmental Research Information Technologies) ­initiative 
was launched in 2007 by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a multi-sector 
partnership between climate and environmental scientists, social scientists, and the 
public health community to encourage collaboration and the development of in-
novative solutions for controlling meningitis epidemics (García-Pando et al., 2014; 
Thomson et al., 2013). Years of subsequent data collection, climate data and forecast 
output analysis, and collaboration with public health officials in Ghana has led to the 
development of relative humidity thresholds that can readily be incorporated into 
existing public health frameworks. Forecasts of relative humidity and storminess up to 
2 weeks in advance, coupled with the observed 2-week lagged relationship between 
humidity and meningitis, have led to a prototype decision-support tool that issues 

69
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
meningitis predictions at lead times of up to 1 month—enough time to influence 
positioning of vaccines ­(Pandya et al., 2015). The end of the dry season is paced by the 
annual northward migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, but rainfall events 
can modulate the timing of seasonal change on local-to-regional scales (Figure 3.4). 
Knowledge generated in developing the prototype early warning system is now 
driving research into the dynamics of west African monsoon onset and retreat that 
is specific to meningitis-prone regions (e.g., Broman et al., 2014). Rainfall events are 
usually associated with African easterly waves, equatorial Kelvin Waves and Rossby 
Waves, extratropical cyclones, and/or the MJO (Mera et al., 2014). Better representation 
of these ­phenomena in forecasts may thus increase predictability of the end of the dry 
season and of meningitis risk.
Malaria
Malaria is the most widespread parasitic infection in humans, with approximately 500 
million cases and more than 1 million deaths yearly (Greenwood et al., 2005). A sub-
stantial subset of these cases is linked to malaria epidemics (as opposed to endemic 
infections), and development of early warning systems to reduce the incidence and 
impact of these epidemics is a key goal of the world health community (WHO, 2001, 
2015). In vulnerable semi-arid and highland areas of Africa, malaria prevention pro-
grams target the control of malarial mosquitoes through spraying of pesticides during 
epidemics, prophylactic drug therapy for target groups during malaria season, and 
FIGURE 3.4  S2S forecasts of the end of windy, dusty conditions, such those conditions depicted at the 
height of the dry season in Naimey, Niger (left), can be used to help direct vaccination campaigns for men-
ingitis across the Meningitis belt in Africa (right). SOURCE: Francesco Fiondella/IRI and Gabe Bienczycki.

70
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
positioning of resources to ensure timely and effective medical care for infected indi-
viduals. Current early warning systems of epidemic malaria rely primarily on disease 
surveillance, with epidemic alerts issued and repositioning of resources triggered by 
thresholds in weekly caseloads. There is the possibility for developing more advanced 
warnings through increased knowledge of climate and oceanic conditions ahead of 
the malaria season. 
Transmission and infection rates of malaria have been linked to rainfall and tempera-
ture variation. In Botswana, for example, epidemics usually emerge in the 2 months 
after the November-February rainy season, and research linking emergence of epi-
demics to December-February seasonally averaged rainfall and sea surface tempera-
tures has allowed for forecasts of epidemic risk with 1-month lead time (Thomson et 
al., 2005). Although this represents a potentially large improvement in time available 
for public health officials to mount a response, early warning systems may be most 
useful when case numbers can be predicted 2 to 6 months ahead of risk—enough 
time to allow for tactical positioning of resources (Myers et al., 2000). A growing body 
of research suggests that integrating monthly to seasonal forecasts of sea surface 
temperatures, cumulative rainfall, and temperature variability—especially from MMEs 
shown to have skill in regions of interest—will likely allow for the development of 
malaria early warnings at longer (4-6 month) lead times (Jones and Morse, 2010, 2012; 
Lauderdale et al., 2014; MacLeod et al., 2015; Thomson et al., 2006a; Tompkins and Di 
Giuseppe, 2015). In the short term, skill and geographic reach of such malaria predic-
tions would increase with improved representation of ocean-atmosphere processes 
associated with the West African and Indian Monsoons, along with the better rep-
resentation of the Indian Ocean Dipole and ENSO, both of which influence rainfall 
amounts and temperature variation in critical areas.
Other Diseases
Sixteen additional climate-sensitive diseases have been identified as targets for 
research and other investments to promote the development of climate-inclusive 
early warning systems (Kuhn et al., 2005). This list contains some of the world’s most 
devastating diseases, such as cholera, dengue fever, and West Nile virus. In many cases, 
nontraditional forecast output variables, such as ocean nutrient forecasts in addition 
to ocean temperature information for cholera (e.g., Jutla et al., 2011), daily temperature 
fluctuations instead of average temperature for dengue virus and malaria (Lambrechts 
et al., 2011; Paaijmans et al., 2010), and extreme rainfall and temperature events in-
stead of average conditions for a variety of other public health disasters (Coughlan de 
Perez and Mason, 2014), are likely to be important. Close collaboration between the 

71
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
forecasting and applications communities is critical to develop research agendas that 
will support the identification and development of new forecast products that maxi-
mize benefits to the public health sector (Buontempo et al., 2014; Morse et al., 2005). 
National Security and Defense
One specific area where S2S forecasting could prove particularly beneficial on a 
routine basis is global ocean and ice predictions, particularly as the Arctic warms. In 
addition, disaster preparations in advance of catastrophic tropical cyclones and other 
severe events where the military may be called to respond could benefit from pre-
staging of relief efforts around the world. Food and water security will be important 
areas where S2S prediction can contribute key information to national security, and 
having insight into possible famine due to drought or flood conditions will be crucial 
to economic and stability concerns in the future.
The important decisions made by the defense sector regarding military operations 
that  involve advance warning of environmental conditions on S2S timescales include 
vessel routing, military exercise planning, war games, tactical planning, disaster relief, 
and search-and-rescue advance planning (e.g., in the Arctic). In addition, there are seri-
ous threats posed by extreme events to military facilities in vulnerable locations. For 
example, military facilities on the remote Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia house 
the Air Force Satellite Control Network, which serves as an essential global positioning 
system (GPS) command and control hub (Vedda, 2011). Other installations vulnerable 
to extreme weather and ocean events include Bahrain, Guam, Eglin Air Force Base, 
Florida, and Norfolk, Virginia.
The Department of Defense (DOD) currently uses standard public climate data sets, 
forecast model products, and specialized data sets, models, and methods developed 
by DOD (i.e., Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center [FNMOC], Naval 
Oceanographic Office [NAVO], Air Force Weather Agency [AFWA]). DOD has, and 
continues to develop, advanced and tailored products to aid decision-making. These 
include predictions about performance of equipment and people/organizations given 
environmental conditions. DOD has many downstream decision-support tools into 
which the predictions feed. For example:
1.	 Commander Third Fleet ship operation planning in the eastern North Pacific 
utilizes seasonal forecasts of northeast Pacific winds and waves, by month 
based on both standard climatologies and statistical predictions derived 
from multiyear model reanalyses as a basis to revise/update the timing of the 
operations. 

72
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
2.	 For tropical cyclone/hurricane predictions, 2- to 4-week timescales and below 
are essential for avoiding adverse impacts to sea operations before, during, and 
after cyclone passage. Military exercises, supply chains, and ship movements are 
vulnerable to tropical cyclones. DOD currently issues monthly tropical cyclone 
formation probability forecasts based on dynamical-statistical ensemble fore-
casts (Navy statistical module attached to the NOAA dynamical model output 
Climate Forecast System version 2 (CFSv2), which are 1- to 2-week CPC-issued 
forecasts of above- and below-average probability of cyclogenesis and rainfall).
3.	 Piracy activity predictions (Figure 3.5) are based on forecasts of wave height 
and surface winds in the Indian Ocean, and a statistical module relating 
­operations/behavior to environmental conditions and similar models for 
­disaster relief operations. Versions of this methodology are also used by agen-
cies involved in migrant and drug interdictions.
4.	 Forecasts of beach and amphibious landing conditions for planning are based 
on high-resolution air, ocean, wave, and surf model predictions from historical 
reanalyses and statistical/analog techniques.
To summarize, for this type of decision-making, DOD has a well-developed capacity 
to utilize and ingest the type of tools/specialized forecasts that users often demand. 
However, areas for improvement abound. In the short term, improvements in observa-
tions for setting initial conditions (especially in areas with insufficient observations 
such as oceans and geographic regions including Africa and the Western Pacific) and 
in forecast skill covering the global oceans are especially needed (see Chapter 5). On 
slightly longer time horizons, improvements in S2S predictions will be vital for future 
tactical and operational planning under climate change. For example, there is great 
need for better-integrated predictions of sea ice in a changing Arctic. The Navy and 
Coast Guard have focused attention on the Arctic via their 2014 Roadmap and 2013 
Strategy, respectively (U.S. Navy Task Force Climate Change, 2014; USCG, 2013). Indeed, 
Arctic installations are some of the most vulnerable. 
The combination of thawing permafrost, decreasing sea ice, and rising sea level on the Alaskan 
coast have led to an increase in coastal erosion at several Air Force radar early warning and 
communication installations. According to installation officials, this erosion has damaged roads, 
utility infrastructure, seawalls, and runways. . . .  As a result, only small planes or helicopters are 
able to land in this location, as opposed to larger planes that could land on the runway when it 
is fully functional.
Daily operations at these types of remote radar installations are at risk due to potential loss of 
runways, and such installations located close to the coastline could be at risk of radar failure 
if erosion of the coastline continues. Air Force headquarters officials noted that if one or more 
of these sites is not operational, there is a risk that the Department of Defense early warning 
system will operate with diminished functionality. (GAO, 2014)

73
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
For the Coast Guard, there is an acute need to engage in medium-range (subseasonal) 
response planning in the event of an accident in Arctic seas (e.g., an oil spill or a cruise 
ship evacuation). Navy forces are also much more likely to be engaged in the Arctic to 
assist Coast Guard search and rescue and other civil support operations (U.S. Navy Task 
Force Climate Change, 2014). Within this context, there is a need for better forecasts 
now, but the need will be particularly great as climate change begins to initiate ice 
free passage through the Arctic Ocean and activity related to shipping/tourism and 
energy extraction begins to increase.
FIGURE 3.5  A piracy threat-level forecast issued by Naval Oceanographic Office, Warfighting Support 
Center. NOTES: Real-time parameters—including intelligence information, shipping information, and 
forecasts of ocean currents, waves, and wind—are combined with historical correlative analysis between 
environmental conditions and pirate attacks to provide a forecast of pirate threat levels. Warm colors indi-
cate a higher probability of attack. SOURCE: Naval Oceanographic Office, Warfighting Support Center.

74
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
The Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
On April 20, 2010, an explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon (DWH) drilling rig killed 
11 workers and triggered a massive spill of oil and natural gas into the deep waters of 
the Gulf of Mexico that lasted for 87 days before it was finally capped off (Graham et 
al., 2011; Lubchenco et al., 2012). For the purposes of this report, DWH provides an in-
structive case study regarding the response on S2S timescales to a large, unexpected 
forcing event.
Oil spill trajectory forecasting systems in 2010 were well-suited for responding to sur-
face spills, even beyond the scale of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill, and worked well for 
predicting where surface slicks moved for the 72 hours after the event, during which 
time weather forecasts were sufficiently accurate. However, the vast volume and depth 
of spilled hydrocarbons associated with the DWH, the extended duration of the spill, 
and the spatial extent of its impacts presented unique challenges for projecting the 
consequences of the spill to an alarmed public.
To help meet this challenge, the relevant scientific community mobilized to document 
the event observationally and understand its consequences (e.g., Lubchenco et al., 
2012). This response included model forecasts and predictions, with three additional 
near-term ocean forecast systems being added to the initial three-member ensemble 
used for 72-hour surface slick predictions (Lubchenco et al., 2012). For S2S timescales, 
the ­National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)/Los Alamos National Laboratory 
(LANL) (Maltrud et al., 2010) and the NOAA/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
(GFDL; Adcroft et al., 2010) adapted existing regionally eddy-permitting (1/10° and 1/8° 
horizontal resolution, respectively) global Earth system models to explore the long-term 
transport and dilution of hydrocarbons or the resulting oxygen drawdown from the spill. 
Despite the mobilization of the climate and ocean modeling community to address 
the consequences of the DWH, a frenzy of popular media activity during the spill cre-
ated a particularly challenging environment for clearly communicating credible scien-
tific guidance regarding what could be expected on S2S timescales. There was at times 
a particular focus by the official sources on defending the government’s scientific 
integrity, especially after the first official estimates placed the flow rate at a minimum 
of 5,000 barrels per day based on observed surface slicks, but subsequent analysis 
by academics revealed the true rate to be an order of magnitude larger (McNutt et 
al., 2011). During the event, scientists from a wide range of backgrounds speculated 
about the implications of the spill, often going directly to the media without first pass-
ing through peer review. For example, one widely covered NCAR press release on June 
3, 2010, with vivid animations (Figure 3.6A) was based on scientifically correct ocean 

75
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
FIGURE 3.6  (A) A frame from a June 3, 2010, animation depicting the dilution and transport after 132 
days of a dye released at the location of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. This animation was widely shown 
on national television (Maltrud et al., 2010). SOURCE: https://www2.ucar.edu/atmosnews/news/2154/
ocean-currents-likely-carry-oil-along-atlantic-coast, accessed January 27, 2016. (B) A frame from a NOAA 
animation of dissolved oil concentrations that include (left) or omit (right) the biological consumption 
of oil and only contour the oil concentrations that exceed U.S. Environmental Agency limits in drinking 
water to avoid creating misleading interpretations (Adcroft et al., 2010). Although this animation was 
available in June 2010, while the DWH was near its peak flow, NOAA only released it publicly after the 
paper describing it had gone through peer review and had been accepted for publication in early August 
2010, 2 weeks after the well was capped off. SOURCE: NOAA.
A
B

76
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
model simulations, but was widely misinterpreted in the popular press as suggesting 
the impending arrival of harmful concentrations of oil along the entire East coast of 
the United States (McNutt et al., 2011). About the same time, NOAA scientists devel-
oped projections of the regional spreading and dilution of dissolved oil and the possi-
bility of significant oxygen drawdown in the deeply submerged plumes of oil that ac-
counted for the estimated spill rates and the biological consumption of oil (Adcroft et 
al., 2010). These projections were based on a prototype high-resolution climate model 
and extensive input from NOAA’s oil-spill projection team. An animation from this 
study (Figure 3.6B) correctly depicted the localization of dissolved oil from the spill to 
the northern Gulf of Mexico, but as a new government product, it was only released to 
the public by NOAA after it appeared in a peer-reviewed journal, about 2 weeks after 
the well was capped. 
These two early studies illustrate some of the specific challenges of using innovative 
modeling tools to provide insights during an emergency. The particular challenges of 
communicating across scientific disciplines and using scientific expertise to inform the 
public during a high-profile incident such as DWH has led to calls for the development 
of a “community of disaster science” (McNutt, 2015), with expertise that can be applied 
to responses to a wide range of high-profile events.
Sufficiently accurate and well-validated S2S forecasting of the weather and ocean 
currents could have helped to better target the response to DWH. For example, the 
likelihood of DWH oil impacting the beaches along the west coast of Florida and in 
the Florida Keys was unclear using the climate models described above. Specifically, 
these projections did not account for the position and strength of the Loop Current, 
which exerts strong control on the direction of ocean waters. As a result, the projec-
tions overestimated the geographic extent of impacted shoreline. Had there been a 
skillful and validated forecast of the Loop Current structure on S2S timescales dur-
ing the summer of 2010, it may have been deemed unnecessary to deploy as many 
Local Incident Command Posts and as much oil response equipment to Florida. Some 
of these resources were never used and, with more skillful S2S forecasts, could have 
been sent to alternate locations where they would have been of much greater value 
(D. Payton, personal communication, June 2015). 
There is a high cost to incorrect projections of the direction of an oil spill, and in an 
emergency there is little time to identify the sources of incorrect current directions or 
other model biases. For use in official government guidance, therefore, it is important 
that models are observationally validated or their quality otherwise established. For an 
unprecedented forcing event, observational validation may be impossible, and scien-
tific journals’ peer-review and embargo may be inconsistent with the time constraints 

77
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
of the situation. Thus alternate approaches may be required for establishing legally 
required quality assurance.
As result of the challenges in coordinating the broad participation of the scientific 
community to DWH, several of the leaders in the response to DWH founded the 
­Scientific Partnerships Enabling Rapid Response (SPERR) to promote rapid communi-
cation and coordination of efforts and sharing of expertise during disasters. This 1-year 
pilot project ended in 2015, but such efforts provide a forum for developing the exper-
tise and frameworks necessary to build capacity on forecasting the consequences of 
unanticipated events. This is an important step toward developing a “community for 
disaster science” in advance of an incident (McNutt, 2015).
Nuclear Events
Catastrophic/unprecedented (unusual/infrequent) events include nuclear power plant 
accidents that could distribute radioactive material over wide areas and affect many 
nations (e.g., Chernobyl and Fukushima) and intentional nuclear detonations that 
could affect large populations (e.g., Nagasaki and Hiroshima). Accidental radiological 
release events have the potential to impact the air/sea over S2S timescales. Linked 
modeling systems encompassing the Earth system components can provide impor-
tant benefits in forecasting the scope of impacts (Pullen et al., 2013). 
Nuclear weapon scenarios in the current geopolitical context include limited nuclear 
exchanges. The range of possible scenarios transcends the “mutually assured destruc-
tion” envisioned during the Cold War where nuclear winter was an assured outcome 
(NRC, 1985). Recent simulations of a regional nuclear exchange (100 15-kt yield) with a 
comprehensive Earth system model including atmospheric chemistry, ocean dynam-
ics, and interactive sea ice and land components have revealed significant impacts at 
S2S timescales (Mills et al., 2014). Under this scenario, black carbon injected into the 
stratosphere would deliver global ozone losses of 20-50 percent, reduced sunlight, and 
catastrophic effects on global crop yields.
In the immediate aftermath of such rare events, emergency response–focused simu-
lations would be conducted through the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC) utilizing the DOD 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) for national consequences. (Separately, the 
Department of Energy [DOE] National Atmospheric Release Advisory Center [NARAC] 
and DOD DTRA consequence assessment assets can be mobilized for international 
events, as in Fukushima.) However, these simulation tools were not designed to pro-
vide forecast information on S2S timescales. 

78
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
The DHS National Exercise Division engages in major emergency exercises every 
year—gaming out the response to such events as pandemics and earthquakes. It 
utilizes the National Infrastructure Simulation and Analysis Center (NISAC) at Sandia 
National Laboratory as an extensive tool set to examine the impacts from catastrophic 
events. However, these tools do not encapsulate real-time prediction out to S2S 
timescales. The nation needs to be prepared to anticipate, prepare, and react to such 
impactful events at the appropriate timescales. A framework that could encompass 
multiple temporal scales of impacts, while exercising state-of-the-science models, 
could prepare agencies to collaborate and respond to a catastrophic/unprecedented 
incident. Incidents that could produce sustained regional-to-global impacts beyond 
several weeks’ duration include volcano eruptions and forest fires/biomass burning.
THE WAY FORWARD FOR REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF S2S PREDICTIONS
Although user needs are not fully articulated at this point and reside mostly in case 
studies and anecdotal information, the potential value in developing S2S forecasts is 
clear. However, decision-makers need a wider range of model and forecast variables 
than what is generally available at present. Producing forecast products that are valid 
at finer spatial and temporal scales, and generating event- and impact-based infor-
mation, are some of the most commonly expressed needs. For example, knowing the 
probability of receiving an abnormally high number of heat events during a summer 
can help local and state emergency management officials prepare resources to mini-
mize impacts. 
Advances in S2S predictions, which will be described in Chapters 4 and 5, will provide 
opportunities to advance from basic products and provide finer spatial and tempo-
ral resolution and additional variables that are not presently available to most end 
­users. Some of these specialized products will continue to be created off line, through 
techniques such as downscaling of S2S forecasts, coupling S2S forecasts with sector-
specific dynamic or decision models, such as in the case of predictions of piracy activ-
ity (Figure 3.5), or seasonal hydrology forecasts to inform water management. Such 
specialized products already provide some of the needed capabilities, but access to 
such products is limited, because development of derived products can be costly.
Decision-makers may also benefit from an ability to run on-demand simulations to 
respond to unanticipated events. These could be useful in responding to an event or 
in generating scenarios to be used in a planning context. The capability to use models 
similar to those used to make operational predictions can provide decision-makers 
with the flexibility of generating a range of scenarios. For example, forecasts of a range 

79
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
of ocean currents and surface winds can help decision-makers anticipate where to de-
ploy resources to contain an oil spill or the possible outcomes of a volcanic eruption.
However, advancing effective use of S2S information requires both “knowledge of” 
and “knowledge in” the process (c.f., Lasswell [1971] discussion of the policy process). 
Knowledge in the process focuses on mechanisms that promote the use of S2S infor-
mation, including understanding of product requirements as described above, evalu-
ation metrics, and integration into operational systems. Knowledge of the process 
includes research on decision-making processes and contexts that promote or inhibit 
the use of information. These can roughly be thought of as a need to understand use 
and a need to promote use.
An essential first step is improving understanding of what stakeholders view as action-
able information. S2S information has transformative potential, but the path toward 
application of such information is unclear because of a lack of study and synthesis of 
existing information. More generalized information on what end users want, which is 
important to help inform advances in S2S forecasts, requires more than ad hoc case 
studies of particular decision contexts, such as water managers’ use of information 
in a particular basin. Case studies should be broadened to include more sectors, the 
interaction between sectors, and more regions of the country, in order to develop a 
more systematic assessment of user needs across sectors. Such an assessment will be 
particularly important for developing forecasts of variables such as sea ice or harmful 
algal blooms that are not as readily available at the present time. Furthermore, quan-
tification of the value of use of seasonal forecasts is needed to establish a baseline 
against which improvements in use can be measured.
In addition, the S2S community should learn more about decision-makers’ tolerances 
for use of products with limited skill. Under what conditions are decision-makers will-
ing to accept limited skill and still use the products? Are they more willing to accept 
limited skill in the context of general guidance as compared to concrete decisions? 
How do they respond to failed forecasts? A more thorough examination of decision 
makers’ tolerance for forecasts with lower skill will reveal some sectors or applications 
that can make effective use of present and near-term products, as well as longer-term 
opportunities and targets for new products as skill improves.
S2S information may be used to consult, consider, incorporate, or engage in dialog 
about risks (A. Ray, personal communication, March 2015). Examining the decision pro-
cesses in each of these applications will enable development of new products, as well 
as drive improvements to the dissemination of such products by both the public and 
private sectors. It is likely that targeted products will need to be developed for a range 
of different sectors and decision-making contexts.

80
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation A: Develop a body of social science research that leads to more 
comprehensive and systematic understanding of the use and barriers to use of sea-
sonal and subseasonal Earth system predictions.
Specifically:
• 
Characterize current and potential users of S2S forecasts and their decision-
making contexts, and identify key commonalities and differences in needs 
(e.g., variables, temporal and spatial scale, lead times, and forecast skill) across 
multiple sectors. 
• 
Promote social and behavioral sciences research on the use of probabilistic 
forecast information.
• 
Create opportunities to share knowledge and practices among researchers 
working to improve the use of predictions across weather, subseasonal, and 
seasonal timescales.
Realization of the full value of improvements in S2S predictions will also require en-
gagement of end users throughout the process of developing and disseminating fore-
cast products. Just as the retail sector places consumers at the center of its research 
and development, decision-makers who are the likely consumers of S2S information 
should be integrated into the research and development process. Integrating develop-
ers, providers, and users in the context of strategic planning for the S2S enterprise as-
sures the growth of S2S applications and helps to push the boundaries of the science 
of S2S prediction. An iterative engagement with users is required in part because the 
diversity of applications of S2S forecasts is large, and the science of S2S forecasting is 
rapidly advancing. Ongoing work will be necessary to continually match and integrate 
what is technologically feasible with what is most actionable for decision-makers. In 
particular, it will be important to (1) understand what variables and timescales provide 
the most value and opportunities; (2) understand how decision-makers might operate 
within the context of limited skill or high uncertainty predictions; and (3) determine 
the formats and message content for products in partnership with those using those 
products. Such iterative engagement will also provide guidance to the operational 
community on the critical research challenges, such as forecasting extreme events, 
and the way in which information can be most effectively delivered.
As with weather forecasts, most decision-makers are likely to acquire information via an 
intermediary (Breuer et al., 2010; Lemos and Rood, 2010; Mase and Prokopy, 2014; Pagano 
et al., 2002). There are opportunities to utilize existing programs, such as ­NOAA’s Regional 
Integrated Sciences and Assessments, which actively engage decision-makers in co-pro-
duction of knowledge related to needs for climate information and services. Numerous 
academic programs promote interdisciplinary research related to the use of climate and 

81
Enhancing the Value and Benefits of S2S Forecasts
scientific information in societal applications. These present existing avenues that should 
be built upon to examine decision-making, generate decision-support tools, and provide 
guidance on future S2S research priorities, operational forecast products, and services. 
As demand for S2S products grows, there will be new opportunities for research and 
applications, necessitating changes in the workforce. Blended research between the 
physical and social sciences will facilitate the transfer of knowledge between forecasts, 
outlooks and predictions of the physical environment, and their social applications. 
Growing the number of “extension agents” or other boundary roles and institutions 
should also be considered to improve the outcomes of S2S forecast use, and to better 
integrate decision-makers into the process of developing S2S forecasts. Changes in 
the structure of the workforce are discussed further in Chapter 7. 
Although it is important to bolster the capabilities of operational centers to produce 
useful forecasts, it is also important to not neglect the private sector’s role in deliv-
ering new products. S2S forecasts offer an obvious opportunity for private-sector 
providers to transform forecasts of conventional variables into new, value-added 
products focused on user needs and preferences. An emerging private sector is 
already providing detailed analyses needed for specialized applications. Thus private-
sector providers should be closely involved in any program for engaging stakeholders 
and should be informed of the results and conclusions of such efforts. The U.S. Small 
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program is one such  mechanism for the weather 
and climate research agencies to engage the private sector in improving operational 
commercial offerings and to more effectively target specific user groups. Continued 
growth of both the private sector and the array of products in the public sector are 
thus required to meet the growing demand for services. 
Recommendation B: Establish an ongoing and iterative process in which stakehold-
ers, social and behavioral scientists, and physical scientists codesign S2S forecast 
products, verification metrics, and decision-making tools.
Specifically:
• 
Engage users with physical, social, and behavioral scientists to develop re-
quirements for new products as advances are made in modeling technology 
and forecast skill, including forecasts for additional environmental variables.
• 
In direct collaboration with users, develop ready-set-go scenarios that incor-
porate S2S predictions and weather forecasts to enable advance preparation 
for potential hazards as timelines shorten and uncertainty decreases.
• 
Support boundary organizations and private sector enterprises that act as 
interfaces between forecast producers and users.


83
C H A P T E R  F O U R
Sources of Subseasonal to 
Seasonal Predictability
INTRODUCTION
This chapter will 
• 
Outline important concepts in the consideration of predictability and its rela-
tion to practical aspects of prediction and prediction skill; 
• 
Identify important sources of subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) predictability and 
highlight recent progress in understanding and modeling these sources; and 
• 
Recommend research in these areas that will further our understanding of 
sources of predictability and allow us to better exploit them to extend and 
improve S2S forecast skill.
During the early developments of seasonal to interannual climate prediction, weather 
prediction was often described as an “initial-value” problem and seasonal or longer-
term climate prediction as a “boundary-value” problem (Box 4.1). However, as our 
aspira­tions and capabilities for providing skillful predictions across timescales and 
Earth system components has increased, the value of such distinctions has become 
limited. 
The schematics in Figure 4.1 are meant to further illustrate the above considerations 
and the complexities in estimating predictability across a range of timescales and 
­phenomena (e.g., S2S) and implementing them in a forecasting system. The top 
­schematic shows time series depicting variations in an arbitrary quantity (e.g., temper-
ature, precipitation) that are typical of weather, subseasonal, and seasonal variability 
over a roughly 6-month period, with an indication of what processes might be associ-
ated with the given variation and timescale (e.g., green colors are associated with the 
Madden-Julian Oscillation [MJO], soil moisture). The bottom schematic is similar but 
for longer timescale variations. For weather forecasts, the forecast proceeds from an 
observed initial state (solid blue circle) out to lead times of a few days. For subseasonal 
or seasonal forecasts, the same is true out to a few weeks or months, respectively. 
Along the lines of the discussion above, the influence on weather or S2S forecasts 

84
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX 4.1 
“INITIAL VALUE” VERSUS “BOUNDARY VALUE” MODELING PROBLEMS 
The distinction in the application of these two terms—”initial value” and “boundary ­value”—
does not arise from the inherent nature of the weather/climate phenomena, but rather from the 
practicalities of the prediction framework. Put another way, virtually every prediction problem 
of the natural weather/climate system is, in its purest and most comprehensive form, an initial-
value problem. However, the practicalities of producing a forecast nearly always also include 
the application of the boundary-value paradigm in one form or another, which arises from 
one of three practical reasons. In one case, an incomplete knowledge or model of the state or 
evolution of a given process necessitates that the representation of that component/process 
be specified (or approximated) as a fixed boundary condition to the part of the system that is 
being modeled and forecasted. An example of this might be how sea ice was treated in the first 
global weather forecasts. Although there was reason to believe that sea ice could evolve and 
influence weather patterns over the course of the forecast, the process knowledge, associated 
models, and observations did not exist to accurately include it in a manner that would improve 
the forecast. Thus, it was of necessity in that case to provide a fixed specification (i.e., a bound-
ary value) for the distribution of sea ice and not explicitly include its interaction in the forecast. 
The influence/interactions of vegetation in today’s weather forecasts are often treated similarly, 
that is, there is reason to believe that they influence key water and energy processes relevant to 
the weather and climate, but the process models and associated observations for initialization 
are too incomplete to include in an operational forecast setting. The above considerations are 
important because as long as a process is relegated to a boundary condition, the estimate of the 
predictability of that phenomenon is incomplete or at least compromised, even though it might 
be key to the fidelity of a modeled or forecast phenomenon.
In the second case, there may be a skillful and efficient model of a process relevant to a fore-
cast and even observations that could be utilized to initialize the relevant quantities. However, 
because of a relatively slower evolution of that component of the system, it is both feasible and 
advisable to simply specify the values for that part of the system from observations, leaving them 
as constant boundary values for the forecast period. Examples of this case might be the specifica-
from the sorts of (long timescale) phenomena indicated in the lower schematic could 
feasibly be provided as a fixed boundary value. However, this practical separation be-
tween processes and timescales is not always possible or straightforward, particularly 
as the different timescales become closer. In fact, filling the forecast capability gap 
between the weather (initial value) and the seasonal (previously referred to as bound-
ary value) problems with subseasonal capabilities has served to strongly blur the 
perception that they are separate sorts of forecast “problems” and helped to instigate 
the desire for “seamless” forecasting systems (e.g., Palmer et al., 2008, see Box 5.2).

85
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
tion of the solar forcing, greenhouse gas concentrations, aerosols, and ice sheet and glacier cover-
age. A skillful prediction of any of these quantities is in itself an initial-value problem. But when 
it comes to a shorter timescale forecast (e.g., weather or S2S forecasts) or an associated estimate 
of predictability, it is an excellent approximation to simply consider them as boundary values. 
The third case is a hybrid of the first two. For cases where the coupled interaction between 
two Earth system components or processes is weak, the knowledge of the coupling between 
the two is incomplete, or technical challenges are yet to be overcome in fully coupling the two 
working component models, it is often the case that a forecast model for one of the components 
will be produced and the values from it supplied as boundary values to the forecast model of the 
other component. The most salient example of this was the use of dynamical seasonal forecasts 
first developed from the growing knowledge that El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)–related 
tropical sea surface temperature (SST) variations. The SST variations had a substantive impact 
on the seasonal climate anomalies in the tropics and some midlatitude regions. In this case, our 
early dynamical ocean model forecasts of tropical SSTs were initialized and run to lead times of 
3-12 months to produce future estimates of tropical SST anomalies. These SSTs—forecast as an 
initial value problem—were in turn used as the SST boundary conditions to global atmospheric 
forecast models run over the same lead times to produce a seasonal climate forecast. In this case, 
the atmospheric initial condition information that strongly influences 5-day weather forecast 
outcomes become irrelevant after the first month and only the SSTs, provided as boundary values, 
dictated the climate forecast outcome. This particular example is when/where the short-term 
climate prediction problem became strongly equated to a boundary-value problem, whereas in 
actuality the underlying and evolving tropical SST (i.e., ENSO) portion of the forecast is an initial-
value problem of an ocean model (e.g., a “two-tier” forecast system—see Chapter 2). A related 
example is air quality forecasting, which often utilizes the temperature, humidity, pressure, and 
flow fields from a weather forecast to drive an atmospheric chemistry model. The desired forecast 
comes from the atmospheric chemistry model with the weather forecast model, and surface 
emission specifications, providing evolving, yet uncoupled, boundary information.
Even when considering only the timescales associated with the S2S forecast range, 
a spectrum of phenomena and processes contribute to the observed variations. This 
is schematically indicated in Figure 4.1 by the rainbow of colors equated from high 
(purple) to low (red) frequency phenomena. Within this spectrum of phenomena/
processes are some, highlighted by the individual colored lines, that dominate the 
variability and provide valued sources of predictability. The study of predictability is 
to answer the question of whether a prediction of a phenomenon is possible given all 
antecedent observations.

86
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 4.1  Schematic illustration of time series depicting variations in an arbitrary quantity relevant to 
weather/climate. The top panel shows variations typical of weather (blue), subseasonal variability (green), 
and seasonal variability (red) over a 6-month period starting from t=0. The bottom panel is similar to the 
top, but for interannual, decadal, and longer-term century-scale variations. The line colors and spectrum of 
colors from which they are drawn are meant to illustrate the continuum of phenomena/processes across 
these indicated timescales (i.e., frequencies) with notable peaks in the spectrum highlighting a subset of 
the continuum that typically are found to be sources of predictability.
DEFINING PREDICTABILITY
In this report, predictability refers to a phenomenon’s potential, that is, its upper limit, 
for being predicted. Theoretically, this is inherent to the phenomenon itself and its limit 
results from inevitable errors in initial conditions, which are amplified through nonlinear 
processes in a perfect model. Practically, predictability can only be estimated through 
various means using empirical or numerical models that are not perfect (NRC, 2010b). 

87
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
Such models can lead to over- or underestimates of predictability. For example, by not 
adequately accounting for “noise” relative to the specific phenomenon (i.e., the “signal”), 
models will often overestimate predictability. Similarly, if the specific phenomenon is 
only weakly represented, then models will often underestimate its predictability. A firm 
estimate of the lower bound of predictability is the upper limit on the observed forecast 
skill of operational systems. Achieving the upper limit of predictability with a prediction 
system is hindered by practical factors. In addition to a lack of accurate specification of 
the initial conditions (typically due to inadequate observation sampling in space, time, 
and physical quantity), there are shortcomings in forecast systems (typically limited by 
models with too coarse spatial resolution and incomplete or inaccurate physical process 
representations) and shortcomings in the data assimilation systems (see Chapter 5). For 
the purposes of this report and the asso­ciated research agenda, it is critical to explore 
and quantify the predictability of various components of the Earth system, especially 
weather and climate. The estimated upper bounds of predictability for the various 
­phenomena and processes discussed in this chapter are key to identifying unexploited 
or underexploited prediction capabilities and providing a quantified means to measure 
our progress in practical forecast skill against our predictability (i.e., upper limit) esti-
mates (e.g., Figure 4.2). Together these help to prioritize areas of research and model 
development across the range of sources of predictability to pursue. 
PREDICTIBILITY RESEARCH
Research on predictability and its sources is a central part of carving a path to new 
and improved forecast capabilities (e.g., S2S). Advancements in this research critically 
hinge on observations, a variety of models, forecast system analogs, and ensemble 
retrospective forecast data sets. Such research typically begins with theoretical con-
siderations or empirical analysis based on observations (Figure 4.3, Facet I; e.g., a 
lagged correlation analysis between two or more variables) that point to a process or 
phenomenon that exhibits predictability. From this perspective, it is essential to have 
long records of multivariate observations for both the predicted and the potential 
predictor(s). Often predictability of a particular observed phenomenon is investi-
gated through process-oriented studies using a hierarchy of models (Figure 4.3, Facet 
II). Models used for this purpose may be reduced order or idealized. In other cases 
researchers may create a series of sensitivity experiments in complete Earth system 
models or make intercomparisons across models. 
Further advancement (Figure 4.3, Facet III) is made by the development of robust 
models that incorporate the physical relationships underlying the phenomena or 
­coupled interactions that yield the predictability, as demonstrated by simulation or 

88
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 4.2  Prediction skill values versus estimates of predictability—that is, an estimate of practical 
present-day skill versus estimates of the potential upper limits of skill—for the MJO (upper) and Arctic 
September sea ice extent at 2-month lead times (lower). NOTES: For the MJO, predictability is measured 
in terms of lead time in days. Each bar is based on one of eight ensemble-prediction systems with vary-
ing numbers of members depending on the forecast system, or calculated from approximately 20 years 
of retrospective forecasts. The black bars denote retrospective forecast skill based on single-member 
forecasts, while the hatched bar shows the improvement based on the ensemble forecast system—that is, 
using the ensemble mean of all the forecast system’s members. The tan and gray bars show two differ-
ent estimates of predictability using the “perfect model” (sometimes called “idealized twin experiment”) 
approach. For the predictability estimates, one member is designated to represent the “observed” case, 
and other single members (tan bars) or the mean of the remaining members (gray bars) is used to predict 
it. The sea ice panel is similar, except error increases with height of the bars, and the dark-blue bars are 
estimates of predictability and light-blue bars are retrospective forecast skill. SOURCE: Top panel adapted 
from Neena et al. (2014). Bottom panel based on results in Blanchard-Wrigglesworth (2015).

89
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
Facet
Requirements
Predictability Research
I.
Exploratory research based on empirical 
and/or theorecal relaons of observed 
variability
Long records of mulvariate 
observaons
II.
Process-oriented studies using a hierarchy of 
models ranging from low-order models to 
Earth system models and including 
“ensembles of opportunity”
Development of low-order and 
Earth system models and archives of 
model output
III.
Studies to assess reliability of forecasts and 
retrospecve simulaons to capture 
empirical and/or theorecal relaonships, 
including exploring the number of ensembles 
needed to represent probability
Development and/or coupling of 
accurate models and observaons 
to use for inial condions and 
validaon
IV.
Predictability experiments to esmate upper 
limits of predicve skill and explore coupled 
inﬂuences, scale interacon, and idenfy 
regimes of high/low expected skill
Development and/or coupling of 
accurate models 
FIGURE 4.3  Four facets of, and associated requirements for, predictability research.
retrospective forecast experiments that are evaluated against observations. Such 
model development generally requires additional targeted process observations, 
research and analysis in order to properly understand the underlying processes, and 
significant effort to encapsulate and validate them in the models. Because S2S fore-
casts are inherently probabilistic, an ensemble of simulations is usually needed to tests 
whether relationships that give rise to predictability are accurately simulated. The 
number of ensemble members needed to capture the probability is a research ques-
tion that can be explored either theoretically or practically. 
With the dynamical/coupled models developed in Facets II and III, carefully designed 
experiments can be performed to estimate the predictability and assess sources of 
skill (Figure 4.3, Facet IV). To identify the contribution of a process to forecast skill, 
numerical retrospective forecasts are usually performed and compared using model 
configurations with and without the process. In an example with such an approach, 

90
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
it was found that seasonal forecast skill is enhanced following stratospheric sudden 
warmings (Sigmond et al., 2013). Roff et al. (2011) assessed the effect of stratospheric 
resolution on extended-range forecast skill. 
Another approach involving relaxation retrospective forecast experiments—where, 
for example, atmospheric fields in one region are relaxed toward analysis fields—has 
been used to assess the impact of teleconnections and to identify the origin of skill. 
With this approach, Ferranti et al. (1990) found an important contribution of tropical 
subseasonal variability on the forecast skill in the North Hemisphere middle latitudes. 
Vitart and Jung (2010) assessed the influence of the Northern Hemisphere extratropics 
on the skill in predicting the MJO.
In summary, research on predictability and its sources is critical for helping to iden-
tify and prioritize advancements between the various phenomena and Earth system 
components that might impact/offer S2S predictability. Such research is also critical 
to guiding model and forecast system development and helping to identify observing 
systems for sustained observations. 
A useful technique to estimate predictability is the analysis of variance (ANOVA). An 
­atmospheric variable, such as air temperature or precipitation, may be decomposed 
into a predictable component (signal) and an unpredictable component (noise), 
Z = Zs + Zn. The predictable signal comes from sources of predictability such as those 
discussed in the next section, and the unpredictable noise comes from chaotic pro-
cesses with respect to S2S, such as high-frequency eddies. The total variance is then the 
sum of the signal variance and the noise variance, that is, Var(Z)=Var(Zs)+Var(Zn). The 
extent to which the signal variance, Var(Zs), exceeds the noise variance, Var(Zn), deter-
mines the potential predictability. Thus potential predictability can be defined as the 
ratio of signal variance to the total variance, Var(Zs)/Var(Z), or the ratio of signal to noise, 
Var(Zs)/Var(Zn). In S2S, forecasts averaged over a period of a week, a month, or a season, 
are usually produced. Such time averaging can increase the signal-to-noise ratio, be-
cause it reduces high-frequency noise variance while keeping most of the slow-varying 
signal variance, and thus improve predictability. Estimates of predictability with ANOVA 
can be performed using observational data (Facet I of Figure 4.3) or with ensemble 
model integrations (or retrospective forecasts) (Facet II of Figure 4.3). For example, 
­Madden (1976) estimated weather noise variance of seasonal means by extrapolating 
the power spectrum derived from observed daily time series in a season. In the case of 
a dynamical ensemble retrospective forecast, the ensemble mean represents the “pre-
dictable signal component,” because it is independent of the uncertainties (in initial 
condition or model parameter). On the other hand, the difference among the members 
of the ensemble retrospective forecast (spread) represents the “unpredictable noise 

91
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
component.” This ANOVA approach has been applied in many previous studies to 
­assess predictability (e.g., Quan et al., 2004; Straus et al., 2003; Zwiers, 1996). 
Estimates of predictability of a given process or phenomenon when accounting for 
(unavoidable) uncertainties in the initial conditions and model configurations can 
also be done from “twin experiments” or an ensemble of experiments where one of 
the ensemble members is considered truth (or the “observed” state) and the other 
member(s)—which only differ by some small perturbation in the initial conditions 
and/or model parameters—are used to predict it. These predictability estimates can 
then be put into the same context as retrospective forecast experiments that instead 
compare the same predictions to observations in order to quantify forecast skill. 
This is the type of prediction skill and predictability experimentation that is shown 
in Figure 4.2. One of the main messages from this figure is that the practical forecast 
capabilities are still far from what might be achieved given the associated estimates 
of predictability (i.e., at least 2-3 weeks of additional lead time might be possible). An 
additional message is that predictability estimates are model dependent, as stated 
earlier. Further research and exploration can be performed with this type of system 
of experimentation through categorizing results by season or the conditions of other 
portions of the climate system (e.g., warm or cold El Niño-Southern Oscillation [ENSO] 
state). In summary, predictability research is critical for helping to identify and priori-
tize advancements between the various phenomena and Earth system components 
that might impact/offer S2S predictability, as well as guiding model and forecast sys-
tem development and helping identify observing systems for sustained observations. 
Finding 4.1: Predictability research is critical for identifying predictable phenomena 
and providing lead-time-dependent upper limits on prediction skill. These serve 
to guide model and forecast system developments with practical targets for fore-
cast skill. Further research on predictability is needed to more completely identify 
sources and quantify levels of predictability, including interactions across scales 
and phenomena and how these impact predictability of extreme events.
SOURCES OF PREDICTIBILITY
As illustrated in Figure 4.1, predictability derives from a number of processes and 
phenomena that exhibit a wide range of timescales. For the purpose of this discus-
sion, these sources will be generalized into three types.1 The first occurs in the form of 
1  Using an analog from basic physics, these three types can very loosely be equated to a harmonic 
oscillator, a strongly damped harmonic oscillator, and a forced harmonic oscillator.

92
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
recurring and/or quasi-oscillatory patterns of variability—often referred to as “modes” 
of variability—that vary with S2S timescales. When a space-time pattern of variabil-
ity tends to reoccur in the observed record, particularly when it includes positive 
and negative phases and/or space-time propagation of the given pattern, it is often 
referred to as a natural “mode” of variability. Attempts are made to understand the 
­physics behind the pattern(s) and the evolution of a typical event life cycle for such 
modes. Examples include ENSO, MJO, Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO), and Indian 
Ocean Dipole (IOD). Referring to Figure 4.1, this type of S2S predictability would be ex-
hibited as a quasi-oscillatory phenomena with a period ranging somewhere between 
about 2 weeks to 1 year (based on this report’s definition of S2S).
The second source of predictability occurs from an anomaly in the initial state of one 
of the components of the Earth system whose typical timescale of evolution (i.e., 
persistence time) is similar to the target forecast. For the S2S timescale, this might be 
large-scale anomalies in upper ocean heat content, sea ice, snowpack, soil moisture, 
etc. Given their relatively slow variation compared to weather, such anomalies are said 
to retain “memory” of the initial state and impart “inertia” to the system’s sub­sequent 
evolution. They typically have a systematic or recurring manner of evolving on 
­timescales much longer than the forecast. For the purposes of this discussion, we refer 
to these as “slowly varying processes.”
The third type of predictability stems from anomalous external forcing that is exten-
sive or strong enough to have an impact globally or regionally for weeks to months 
(such as cyclic or anomalous solar output, anthropogenic factors, and events such as 
volcanoes). In this case, its predictability in relation to S2S is derived from a combina-
tion of being able to specify the anomalous external forcing and the forcing evolving 
relatively slowly or in a well-defined way over the forecast lead times (e.g., the annual 
cycle of solar radiation). 
Understanding and being able to model the dynamics of each of these three types of 
predictability sources, as well as their interactions and teleconnections, is essential to 
generating S2S forecasts. Although much progress has been made in recent years in 
furthering understanding of how some of these sources of predictability, such as the 
MJO or soil moisture, influence environmental conditions or events that forecasters 
would like to be able to predict (e.g., precipitation anomalies, heat waves, or tropical 
cyclones), more work is needed and continued progress in this area remains funda-
mental to advancing S2S predictions (e.g., NRC, 2010b; Vitart et al., 2014). Indeed large 
gaps remain in our understanding of the sources of predictability and how they may 
interact, and discoveries of new sources of predictability for forecasts of different 
­phenomena remain likely. Each of the subsections below describes progress and gaps 

93
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
in understanding the three types of predictability important for S2S prediction—­
natural modes of variability, slowly varying processes, and external forcing.
Predictability from Natural Modes of Variability
Natural modes of variability display distinct and organized patterns that are typically 
oscillatory or cyclic in some fashion, or at least bimodal with the given “mode” ­having 
a tendency to occur with an anomaly pattern of one sign or its opposite (e.g., see 
Figure 4.4). The modes are typically identified in a given field (e.g., sea surface tem-
perature [SST], 500 hPa heights, 200 hPa zonal winds) but are correlated to impacts on, 
or interactions with, other features in the Earth system, such as temperature, precipi-
tation, drought, bio-productivity, and ozone. These modes of natural variability are 
characterized by dynamical interactions within or across Earth system components. A 
­canonical example of a coupled mode of variability is ENSO. When these modes have 
life cycle lengths similar to S2S forecasts (e.g., 2 weeks to 12 months), their charac-
teristic evolution offers a source of S2S predictability (Figure 4.1). For such cases, it 
is imperative that the forecast system be able to accurately represent the mode of 
variability and its life cycle. If the life cycle is much longer than the S2S timescale, then 
practically speaking for the purpose of the S2S forecast, the mode’s variation would 
likely be considered a “slowly varying process.” Natural modes of variability are often 
associated with teleconnection properties that relate variability at one location to con-
ditions in another. For example, the mechanisms that produce ENSO occur and evolve 
in the tropical Pacific Ocean, yet influence midlatitude variability through atmospheric 
­dynamics. As a result, the sign, strength, and frequency of occurrence of known pat-
terns of extratropical atmospheric circulation (such as the Pacific North American 
[PNA] pattern) partly depend on ENSO (e.g., Zhang et al., 1997). Atmospheric patterns 
are in turn important drivers of winter weather and climate over North America. Some 
of the more well recognized natural modes of variability already found to be or ex-
pected to be important for S2S predictability are discussed in more detail below, with 
specific attention to areas that are ripe for or in need of further research. 
A large part of the signal for S2S weather and climate predictions have tropical origins 
(NRC, 2010b). Through relatively long-lived SST anomalies (e.g., ENSO, IOD) and/or 
systematic dynamic flows (e.g., wavelike motions, MJO, Kelvin waves), large-scale storm 
systems become highly organized and produce systematic variations in atmospheric 
heating. This excites circulation anomalies that have local impacts on rainfall and tem-
perature in the tropics but that also “propagate” to the extratropics via sequences of 
circulation anomalies of alternate sign, often referred to as “waves” (Horel and Wallace, 

94
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
1981; Trenberth et al., 1998). The remote impact is referred to as a teleconnection, in 
this case connecting variability in the tropics to middle- and high-latitude weather. 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
ENSO, treated in detail in the NRC (2010b) report Assessment of Intraseasonal to Inter-
annual Climate Prediction and Predictability, is a coupled atmosphere-ocean mode of 
variability that involves slow equatorial waves in the ocean that impact SST, particu-
larly in the central and eastern Pacific, and associated changes in surface pressure 
and wind variations in the atmosphere that extend over most of the tropical regions. 
The SST variations in the Pacific and associated circulation changes result in strong 
modulations of organized convection and precipitation in this region, which in turn 
influence the extra-tropical circulation via teleconnections as described above. For 
seasonal prediction, ENSO’s coupled dynamics provides a major source of skill (e.g., 
NRC, 2010b; Shukla et al., 2000), while for subseasonal predictions, the relatively slowly 
varying SST anomalies provide a relatively persistent tropically forced atmospheric cir-
culation anomaly. Because the evolution of ENSO is anchored to the seasonal cycle, it 
is often described as an event, with terms El Niño for warm events and La Niña for cold 
events (e.g., Figure 4.4). The signature of an ENSO event first emerges during boreal 
spring or summer, and the associated SST anomalies peak the following fall or winter 
and then typically decay in spring. 
The normal progression of ENSO and its impacts on the tropics and elsewhere 
through teleconnections are relatively well studied (e.g., Hoerling and Kumar, 2000; 
Latif et al., 1998; Rasmusson and Mo, 1993). Recent work has advanced our under-
standing of ENSO’s impact on predictability, the impacts of a number of distinct types 
of ENSO events, and ENSO’s decadal and longer timescale change. For example, there 
are lagged impacts of ENSO on predictability of the Indian Ocean in summer. In the 
summer after a positive ENSO first emerges, the tropical Pacific SST returns to normal, 
but the Indian Ocean SST is anomalously high, with a strong suppression of tropical 
cyclones and impacts on temperature and precipitation across Southeast Asia and 
­Japan (Chowdary et al., 2011; Kosaka et al., 2013). Despite the large body of existing 
work on ENSO, there are important gaps related to understanding both ENSO and its 
influence on S2S predictability (McPhaden, 2015). For example, there is neither con-
sensus on a theory nor agreement on the predictability limit of ENSO. Recent work 
shows that variations in the structures and seasonal timing of ENSO strongly affect 
the persistence and predictability (Lee et al., 2014), as well as ENSO teleconnections 
(Capotondi et al., 2014). In recent decades, the SST anomalies in El Niño events have 

95
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
FIGURE 4.4  Two examples of common and impactful “natural modes of variability.” NOTES: Top panels 
illustrate the atmospheric circulation anomalies associated with the PNA pattern in its positive (left) and 
negative (right) phases. Bottom panels illustrate the SST anomalies associated with the ENSO phenom-
enon, showing both El Niño (left) and La Niña (right) phases. SOURCE: Top panel from njweatherblogs.
com, other panels from NOAA.

96
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
often peaked in the central Pacific rather than the more typical location of the past 
in the eastern Pacific. Whether such ENSO diversity is a consequence of greenhouse 
warming, and hence the recent shift can be expected in the future, is also unclear (Cai 
et al., 2015; Capotondi et al., 2014). 
Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
The MJO, also discussed in detail in the NRC (2010b) ISI report, is the dominant mode 
of intraseasonal variability in tropical convection, precipitation, and circulation. 
Through its local influences in the tropics and its teleconnections to higher latitudes, 
it represents a primary source of predictability at the subseasonal timescale (e.g., 
Waliser, 2011). The MJO is mainly an atmospheric phenomenon, but it also exhibits 
some ­modest interactions with the upper ocean—both in forcing and responding to 
coupled SST anomalies and exciting ocean currents and waves. It exhibits planetary-
scale structures along the equator in pressure, winds, clouds, rainfall, and many other 
variables, with its strongest anomalies in precipitation propagating from the Indian 
to central Pacific Oceans over a period of about 30-50 days. An eight-phase index 
for MJO, referred to as the Real-time Multivariate MJO (RMM1 and RMM2) indices of 
Wheeler and Hendon, are usually used to describe the east-west location and ampli-
tude of the MJO (Wheeler and Hendon, 2004). See NRC (2010b), Lau and Waliser (2011), 
and Zhang (2005) for further description. 
The MJO has been shown to have significant connections to a number of important 
global weather and climate phenomena, including high-impact events (e.g., see 
reviews in Lau and Waliser, 2011; Zhang, 2005, 2013). This includes a strong influence 
on the onset and breaks of the Asian and Australian summer monsoons and on the 
modulation of synoptic variability—including tropical cyclones—and even the trig-
gering of ENSO variations. Improving representation of the MJO in global models has 
led to better prediction on S2S timescales at high latitudes as well as in the tropics 
(e.g., Ferranti et al., 1990; Vitart, 2014). For example, North American wintertime surface 
temperatures are found to be anomalously warm 10-20 days after MJO-related con-
vection occurs in the Indian Ocean (Lin and Brunet, 2009) (Figure 4.5). Such a lagged 
relationship implies predictability of North American temperature anomalies up to 
about 3 weeks given knowledge of the initial state of the MJO. Forecasts using statisti-
cal models have demonstrated that it may be possible to extend the forecast range 
of North American temperature anomalies beyond 20 days, especially for strong MJO 
cases (Johnson et al., 2014; Rodney et al., 2013; Yao et al., 2011).

97
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
FIGURE 4.5  Lagged regressions of surface air temperature (SAT) in the North American region onto 
−RMM2. NOTES: Lag n means that the SAT anomaly lags −RMM2 by n pentads (5 days). The sign of RMM2 
is reversed so that it represents enhanced convection in the Indian Ocean and corresponds to MJO 
phases 2-3. The magnitude corresponds to one standard deviation of the RMM2. Yellow (orange) areas 
represent those where the regression is statistically significant at a 0.05 (0.01) level according to a Student 
t-test. Contour interval is 0.2°K. The zero contour is not plotted, and contours with positive and negative 
values are in solid red and dashed blue, respectively. RMM2 is the second component of RMM, which cor-
responds to anomalous convection activity in the tropical Indian Ocean. SOURCE: Figure courtesy of Hai 
Lin.
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation 
The stratosphere is a potential source of S2S predictability because of its persistent 
and slowly varying circulation anomalies (NRC, 2010b). In boreal winter, such persistent 
circulation anomalies in the lowest part of the stratosphere interact vigorously with 
the upper troposphere and influence prediction of tropospheric circulation (Baldwin 
et al., 2003; Gerber et al., 2012). The QBO is an easterly-to-westerly reversal of tropical 
stratospheric winds driven by stratospheric waves originating from the troposphere. 
The QBO has a mean period of about 28 months, and its phase is predictable a few 
years ahead. The QBO influences the strength of the mid-to-high latitude westerly 
winds in the stratosphere, or the polar vortex. Prominent strengthening or weakening 
of the wintertime stratospheric polar vortex tends to be followed, with a lag of about 
1 month, by similar variations in the large-scale tropospheric circulation patterns 
known as the annular modes (Baldwin and Dunkerton, 2001; Thompson and Wallace, 

98
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
2000). Variability in the annular modes has in turn been associated with episodes of 
extratropical surface air temperature anomalies (warm spells or cold surges) and sea 
ice anomalies (Rigor et al., 2002; Thompson et al., 2002) (see below).
Extratropical Modes
Extratropical weather is frequently dominated by recurring circulation patterns, often 
referred to as weather regimes or extratropical modes of variability. Because of their 
large-scale and low-frequency nature, these circulation patterns can contribute to 
atmospheric S2S predictability. For example, it has long been recognized that the PNA 
pattern (PNA), has a significant impact on the North American surface air temperature 
and precipitation (e.g., Wallace and Gutzler, 1981). Although the state of the PNA and 
its predictability on S2S timescales is influenced by ENSO (Zhang et al., 1997) and MJO 
(Mori and Watanabe, 2008) variability, it is unclear how interactions between these 
coupled modes and/or additional drivers may influence PNA variability and its associ-
ated weather patterns.
The North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) is another major circulation pattern that influ-
ences weather from eastern North America to Europe, and it is highly correlated with 
the Northern Annular Mode (NAM). The NAO/NAM exhibits predictability on S2S 
­timescales because its variability is linked to other components of the Earth system 
that are more predictable, such as the stratospheric polar vortex. Observational studies 
also show a robust lagged connection between the MJO and NAO (Cassou, 2008; Lin 
et al., 2009), and indeed a higher level of skill in predicting the NAO on a subseasonal 
timescale can be achieved when a strong MJO signal occurs in the initial condition 
(Lin et al., 2010). Similarly, skillful seasonal NAO predictions have been made by im-
proving the initialization procedure to more realistically capture the initial state of the 
QBO and ocean and sea ice conditions (Scaife et al., 2014b). It follows that forecasts of 
the NAM have also been found to be skillful on a seasonal timescale and that this skill 
was improved through more realistic initialization (Riddle et al., 2013).
Understanding and correctly representing phenomena such as the NAO/NAM, the 
PNA and the Southern Annual Mode (SAM) in the Southern Hemisphere are addi-
tionally important for S2S predictions because their state can influence the develop-
ment of strong and persistent anomalies in midlatitude atmospheric circulations 
that are sometimes caused by blocking events. Blocking can be exploited as a source 
of predictability (Hoskins and Woollings, 2015) and has been linked to high-impact 
weather such as severe cold spells in winter and droughts in summer. Variability in 
the NAO has been related to blocking episodes (Woollings et al., 2008) and, as the 

99
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
NAO has proved to be more predictable than previously thought, so has blocking 
(­Athanasiadis et al., 2014). 
Future Directions on How Modes of Variability Influence Predictability
Natural modes of variability represent key sources of S2S predictability. Although 
much progress has been made in understanding these modes, in particular ENSO and 
MJO, less is known about how the interactions between coupled modes and slowly 
varying processes influence the development of specific environmental conditions. 
Continued research into variability in coupled modes, and their interactions across 
timescales, is necessary to fully exploit their predictability for S2S forecasting. Impor-
tant questions that need to be addressed include How does the MJO influence rainfall 
over southeast Asia during El Niño vs. La Niña, or in different phases of the IOD? How 
do tropical Kelvin and other atmospheric waves influence the initiation, amplitude, or 
decay of the MJO? Under what conditions can the various modes of tropical variability 
ensure the high or low occurrence probability of tropical cyclones in a given region? 
These sorts of investigations fall under Facet I in Figure 4.3. Moreover, as correlations 
between these modes and impactful weather/climate are discovered, it is essential 
that our models can re-create such variability and its impact in simulations and retro­
spective forecast experiments (i.e., Facet II and III in Figure 4.3). For example, some 
models do quite well at representing intraseasonal variability in the eastern Pacific—
which has a strong impact on tropical cyclones in that area—while others perform 
relatively poorly (Jiang et al., 2012a, 2012b). Many such examples are evident from the 
literature where empirical analysis has indicated potential relationships that can be 
exploited for S2S predictability, yet models still struggle to represent the variability 
and relationships correctly. These include IOD and boreal summer monsoon interac-
tions (Ajayamohan et al., 2009), Kelvin wave and MJO interactions (Guo et al., 2015), 
and many others. Of particular challenge are those modes of variability that stem from 
coupled processes, including ENSO, but that could also include land-atmosphere or 
cryosphere-atmosphere coupling. 
Finally, as our models become more capable of representing these processes, it is criti-
cal to carry out the predictability experimentation described above and highlighted as 
Facet IV in Figure 4.3. Such experimentation can point to forecasting system research 
and development avenues that would yield the greatest benefits and help to identify 
and/or characterize forecasts of opportunity based on specific modes of variability be-
ing in a particular phase (e.g., when the MJO is in phase 4-5, there is a strong enhance-
ment of tropical cyclones to the west of the maritime continent and a suppression of 
them to the east). 

100
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 4.2: Natural modes of variability represent key sources of S2S predictability, 
and it is essential that S2S models accurately represent them. Further research is 
needed especially to understand the interaction of natural modes across timescales, 
associated impacts on teleconnection patterns, and the formation of extreme envi-
ronmental conditions. Long and sustained observational records are essential for 
such research. 
Predictability from Slowly Varying Processes
As discussed briefly above, S2S predictability can stem from persistence in the initial 
state of various components of the Earth system. For example, anomalous conditions 
in the stratosphere or ocean can persist for several months owing to their vertical 
stability and slowly overturning circulation. In addition, persistence in anomalous envi­
ronmental conditions often stems from storage of anomalous energy, typically in the 
form of heat or water in a given phase, such as in snow, sea ice, soil moisture, or ocean 
heat content. For example, the heat capacity of the entire atmosphere column is about 
the same as just the top 2.5 m of the ocean, and the melting of a global 25 cm shell 
of ice would take as much energy as warming the entire atmosphere by 10°C. When 
these anomalous stores of heat occur on large spatial scales (e.g., greater than ~1,000s 
of kilometers), their evolution/dissipation typically occurs on timescales of several 
days, weeks, or months and thus provides predictability to the Earth system. Smaller 
anomalies may also provide predictability for important ocean and coastal properties 
that are of interest to predict in their own right. Similarly, anomalies in momentum 
(e.g., ocean currents or atmospheric circulation patterns), aerosols and chemical spe-
cies, and phytoplankton can also instill slow and anomalous variations on the coupled 
Earth system, impacting the ability to make skillful S2S forecasts.
Sometimes persistence is used as a threshold for predictive skill, which does not 
preclude considering persistence as a source of predictability. By the committee’s 
definition, a phenomenon can exhibit predictability even if it can be predicted with an 
idealized model or theoretical means. Furthermore, the threshold for predictive skill 
must itself have a source of predictability. Even so, the probability of a phenomenon 
occurring due to persistence in a system with many interacting processes may not 
be possible to predict with an idealized model or theoretical means, and may require 
a predictive system, even though the mechanism for predictability at some level 
­appears basic and might not be considered “dynamical.” Additional details of a num-
ber of slowly varying processes within the coupled Earth system that provide predict-
ability on S2S timescales are provided below.

101
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
Ocean 
Given the ocean’s relatively larger heat capacity compared to other components of 
the Earth system and the persistence of its temperature, salinity, and currents, the 
ocean represents a key source of predictability on S2S timescales in a number of ways 
(NRC, 2010b). Here we focus on mechanisms involving the ocean surface conditions 
owing to their relevance for humans (e.g., fisheries, harmful algal blooms, controls on 
the atmosphere and sea ice), rather than those that primarily affect the deep ocean. 
These mechanisms include large- and small-scale ocean dynamics in the tropics (e.g., 
­Alexander, 1992) and the extratropics (e.g., Hartmann, 2015), as well as ocean interac-
tions with the atmosphere and sea ice through surface exchange of energy, moisture, 
and momentum, yielding both one-way influences and coupled feedbacks.
The persistence of surface anomalies depends primarily on the depth of the ­upper 
ocean mixed layer. Other secondary factors include the net surface energy and fresh-
water fluxes, upwelling rates (via Ekman pumping and entrainment), and the prop-
erties of upwelling subsurface waters. Anomalous upwelling driven by persistent 
wind regimes associated with atmospheric modes of variability can lead to predict-
able anomalous surface conditions because subsurface waters generally also have 
longer-lived properties, including concentrations of nutrients that can drive biological 
productivity (e.g., Waliser et al., 2005). Subsurface anomalies may even lie “dormant” 
(unrelated to the mixed-layer properties) until one or more storms with high winds 
mixes the upper ocean, transporting the anomaly vertically to the surface (Alexander 
et al., 1999).
Small-scale (10s-100s of kilometers) surface ocean features, such as circular motions 
known as eddies and regions of strong gradients known as fronts, can also exhibit per-
sistence for months to years (Chelton and Xie, 2010; Chelton et al., 2004. These small-
scale variations in sea surface temperature (SST) cause divergence and convergence 
in the surface wind and vertical motions that link the small-scale ocean features to 
cloud properties and other atmospheric features (e.g., Chelton and Xie, 2010). Ocean 
eddies also have an association with ocean biogeochemistry through their influence 
on upwelling or downwelling, horizontal advection, and isolation of nutrients and 
ecosystems (Gaube et al., 2014). Because of their persistence and coupling with the 
atmosphere (20 percent of the heat flux between the atmosphere and ocean is related 
to the ocean eddy field [Boas et al., 2015]), these eddies represent a potential source of 
S2S predictability for the ocean and even the entire Earth system if feedbacks to the 
atmosphere are prominent.

102
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Soil Moisture and Vegetation
Soils have the capacity to hold substantial amounts of water relatively close to the 
surface (e.g., centimeters to meters), depending on soil texture, structure, and vegeta-
tion. This water-holding capacity lends predictability to the atmosphere for several 
weeks or months by influencing surface energy budgets (e.g., heat and moisture 
fluxes to the atmosphere) (Koster et al., 2010; NRC, 2010a). For example, given soil 
­moisture’s influence on heat flux, the number of hot days over land in many regions 
has been found to correlate highly with precipitation summed over a preceding 
period (Figure 4.6 and Mueller and Seneviratne, 2012). Soil moisture’s influence on 
surface temperature is coupled with a direct impact on the surface moisture flux to 
the lower atmosphere, which together influence subsequent precipitation anomalies 
(e.g., Guo et al., 2012; Koster et al., 2011; Roundy et al., 2014). It follows that soil mois-
FIGURE 4.6  Correlation between number of hot days in the hottest month of each year and preceding 3 
months’ precipitation deficits. NOTE: Red areas indicate where dry periods from preceding 3 months cor-
respond with more hot days. SOURCE: Mueller and Seneviratne (2012).

103
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
ture is also strongly asso­ciated with drought predictability (e.g., Kumar et al., 2014; 
Roundy and Wood, 2015; Thomas et al., 2015). This predictability may be especially 
pronounced during boreal spring and summer, when coupled Earth system models 
often exhibit lower predictive skill due to weaker links between midlatitude climate 
systems and the oceans and an increase in land-atmosphere interactions. Along with 
its coupling to atmospheric conditions, the slow variations of soil moisture are also im-
portant for predicting quantities such as runoff to rivers, lakes, and the ocean, as well 
as plant growth—and thus land cover, albedo, and flood potential. For example, there 
is increasing evidence that vegetation states and anomalies can be sources of weather 
and climate predictability on S2S timescales (Koster and Walker, 2015).
Terrestrial Snow 
Snow also contributes to predictability of atmospheric and land conditions due to its 
storage of surface water and its influence on surface energy budgets. The latter occurs 
because of its high albedo relative to snow-free areas; it acts as a significant surface 
heat sink via the latent heat required to melt the snow, and in changing the inter-
face conditions it influences the fluxes of heat and moisture between the land and 
atmosphere. Knowledge of anomalous snow conditions, particularly the snow water 
equivalent as opposed to just snow cover, can improve forecasts of air temperature 
and humidity, runoff, and soil moisture during the winter and spring seasons (Jeong et 
al., 2013; NRC, 2010b; Peings et al., 2011; Thomas et al., 2015). For large-scale anomalies 
in snow conditions, there is also some evidence that snow can influence remote atmo-
spheric conditions by altering large-scale atmospheric circulation features (e.g., Rossby 
waves) (also see section below on Sea Ice and Polar Land Surface). For example, corre-
lations have been documented between autumn anomalies in Eurasian snow and the 
large-scale Northern Hemisphere atmospheric circulation a few weeks to months later 
through the influence of snow cover on the vertical propagation of wave energy into 
the stratosphere and the NAO (Brands et al., 2012; Fletcher et al., 2007; Orsolini et al., 
2013, 2015). Snow cover and snow water can have a profound influence on the evolu-
tion of the local, regional, and even large-scale weather patterns as well as a number 
of Earth system components. This influence places a high priority on ensuring obser-
vations of snow are available for process understanding and forecast initialization 
(e.g., Orsolini et al., 2013) and that our terrestrial hydrology and atmospheric models 
properly represent snow and related processes (see Chapter 5). 

104
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Sea Ice and Polar Land Surface
Sea ice lends predictability to the Earth system because its presence strongly reduces 
heat and moisture fluxes from the ocean to the atmosphere, it serves as a significant 
reservoir of freshwater within the upper ocean, and it is an excellent reflector of solar 
radiation. The persistence of sea ice anomalies has several important timescales (Fig-
ure 4.7). There is an initial persistence of anomalies in the sea ice cover that varies from 
2-4 months (Lemke et al., 1980), depending on the season (Blanchard-Wrigglesworth 
et al., 2011a; Day et al., 2014) and location (Bushuk and Giannakis, 2015). After this 
initial period of persistence, there is a reemergence that occurs in some seasons owing 
to sea ice internal dynamic and coupled interactions between sea ice and SST. Model-
ing studies suggest anomalies of sea ice thickness are far more persistent and about 
as important as SST in controlling the persistence characteristics of the sea ice cover 
(Bitz et al., 1996; Blanchard-Wrigglesworth and Bitz, 2014; Blanchard-Wrigglesworth 
et al., 2011b; Chevallier and Salas-Melia, 2012; Holland et al., 2013; Lindsay et al., 2008). 
The lack of long-term sea ice thickness measurements forces researchers and forecast-
ers to turn to models to estimate these quantities. When models factor in transport, 
sea ice thickness anomalies can persist for almost two years and exhibit typical length 
scales of about 500-1,000 km (Blanchard-Wrigglesworth and Bitz, 2014).
Through coupling to the atmosphere, the presence and persistence of sea ice affects 
the trajectories of atmospheric storms and ocean circulation (Balmaseda et al., 2010; 
Bitz et al., 2006; Screen et al., 2011) and has considerable impacts on coastal erosion 
(Barnhart et al., 2014), marine and terrestrial biology (Post et al., 2013), and shipping 
(Khon et al., 2010). Researchers are actively exploring the extent to which sea ice 
anomalies and polar conditions in general can influence the lower latitudes, with 
­longer lasting cold air outbreaks in years with an anomalously warm Arctic surface as 
one possibility (Francis and Vavrus, 2012). A proposed mechanism stems from ­polar 
controls on atmospheric meridional temperature gradients and the subsequent 
coupled interactions among temperature gradients, the midlatitude jet stream, and 
storms. However, the multitude of interactions involving the midlatitude jets has 
made it difficult to find conclusive evidence of Arctic-midlatitude weather linkages 
(Figure 4.8; Cohen et al., 2014). Although the mechanisms remain obscure, when 
global forecast models include more realistic Arctic sea ice and other Arctic variables, 
forecasts improve in lower latitudes (Jung et al., 2014; Scaife et al., 2014a). Because of 
the persistence of sea ice and arctic snow cover, it is important to improve our under­
standing of sea ice and related processes and the mechanisms linking Arctic and mid-
latitude conditions, as well as to incorporate these processes and mechanisms into 
models used for S2S predictions.

105
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
FIGURE 4.7  Monthly lagged correlation of Arctic sea ice area in an ensemble of early 21st century simu-
lations with the Community System Model Version 3 (blue lines are ensemble members and black lines 
are ensemble mean) and observations from passive-microwave satellites (red lines). NOTES: For the first 
panel, the autocorrelation for January is shown at lag 0, the correlation of January with February is shown 
at lag 1, and so forth. The figure shows that sea ice extent anomalies initially persist for 2-4 months and 
then, after a period of low correlation, anomalies reemergence at lags of about 6-12 months, depending 
on the season. The data were de-trended by removing the ensemble mean from the model and a linear fit 
to the observations. SOURCE: Blanchard-Wrigglesworth et al. (2011a).

106
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 4.8  Schematic of ways to influence Northern Hemisphere midlatitude weather. NOTES: Three 
major dynamical features for changing Northern Hemisphere midlatitude weather—changes in the storm 
tracks, position and structure of the jet stream, and planetary wave activity—can be altered in several 
ways. Arctic amplification directly (by changing the meridional temperature gradient) and/or indirectly 
(through feedbacks with changes in the cryosphere) alters tropospheric wave activity and the jet stream 
in the mid- and high latitudes. Two other causes of changes in the storm tracks, jet stream and wave activ-
ity that do not involve Arctic amplification, are also presented: (1) natural modes of variability and (2) the 
direct influence of global climate change (i.e., including influences outside the Arctic) on the general 
circulation. The last two causes together present the current null hypothesis in the state of the science 
against which the influence of Arctic amplification on midlatitude weather is tested in both observational 
and modeling studies. Bidirectional arrows in the figure denote feedbacks (positive or negative) between 
adjacent elements. Stratospheric polar vortex is represented by ‘L’ with anticlockwise flow. SOURCE: Figure 
and caption from Cohen et al. (2014).
Sudden Stratospheric Warmings
Occasions of rapid slowdown of the stratospheric Arctic vortex are usually accompa-
nied by sudden stratospheric warmings (SSWs) and a subsequent negative phase of 
the NAM. However, experimentation with models that have adequate resolution in 
the stratosphere to capture the relevant dynamics is a relatively new endeavor. Recent 
studies show that SSWs can be predicted only 1 or 2 weeks in advance (Gerber et al., 
2009; Marshall and Scaife, 2010). Yet for several months following an SSW, enhanced 
forecast skill has been found in extratropical surface temperatures and sea level pres-
sure (Sigmond et al., 2013). More recent work has found multiscale/mode interactions 
between the MJO, SSWs, and the QBO (Liu et al., 2014). 

107
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
Finding 4.3: A number of slowly varying processes impart predictability to the Earth 
system in the S2S time range, including processes and interactions related to sea ice, 
the thermal and dynamic evolution of the upper ocean, and soil moisture, surface 
water, snow and vegetation on the land surface. 
Finding 4.4: It is essential to maintain and increase observations of the slowly vary-
ing components of the Earth system relevant to S2S (e.g., snow, soil moisture, sea 
ice, and near-surface ocean) in order to improve process understanding, advance 
model development, and improve the initial conditions of the forecast system. Fur-
ther studies are needed to understand the relative importance of these components 
as sources of S2S predictability.
Predictability from External Forcing
Variability on S2S timescales may also be driven by external forcing, such as from 
anomalies in solar forcing, anthropogenic emissions of pollution or aerosols, or the 
episodic input of aerosols from volcanoes. Advanced knowledge of changes in the 
radiative, thermal, biogeochemical, or hydrological forcing of some part of the Earth 
system can lead to skillful predictions of other quantities of interest such as surface 
temperature or precipitation. Two leading cycles in the Earth system, the diurnal cycle 
and seasonal cycle, are very predictable precisely because they are driven by highly 
repeating patterns in the incoming shortwave radiation at the top of the atmosphere. 
Although these timescales are very relevant to S2S variations, particularly when con-
sidering interactions across scales, it has not been a trivial matter to represent their 
impacts in global weather/climate forecast models. 
Over the past decade or so, numerical weather and climate models have started to be 
able to better reproduce credible seasonal variability through careful representation 
of the relevant processes. However, significant shortcomings remain in representing 
the effects from these very well defined external forcings that are highly relevant to 
S2S prediction, such as the diurnal cycle. For example, the diurnal cycle over the mari-
time continent could influence the MJO as it propagates eastward from the Indian 
Ocean into the western Pacific Ocean. Observations exhibit a relative minimum in the 
MJO-driven subseasonal variability over the maritime continent, possibly because of 
the relatively stronger diurnal cycle in this region relative to the open ocean to the 
east and west. Representing this scale interaction in models has been challenging 
and has represented a barrier to producing accurate forecasts of MJO amplitude and 
propagation in this region (e.g., Weaver et al., 2011).

108
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Aerosol variability in a number of forms holds the potential to influence variability 
on S2S timescales and represents an important source of S2S predictability in some 
cases.2 A volcanic eruption has the potential to loft significant ash and dust into the 
troposphere and stratosphere, which can result in substantial anomalies in incoming 
solar radiation and outgoing infrared radiation. Depending on the magnitude of the 
mass injection and its altitude, the anomalous aerosol forcing can last for days to a 
couple of weeks in the troposphere and months to a year in the slow, stable circulation 
of the stratosphere. Accurate representation of the aerosol content, types, and interac-
tions with clouds and radiation provides a potential source of predictability. Demand 
for realizing this forecast potential stems from the needs to better represent and fore-
cast its influence on weather and short-term climate as well as to better understand 
and predict the lifetime of the aerosol anomaly itself and its societal impacts (e.g., how 
long will the ash plume last, and will it affect air traffic?). 
In some cases, ash, dust, and other aerosols can influence the Earth system even after 
they are removed from the atmosphere, most notably when they are deposited on 
ice or snowpack. In this case, they can have a substantial influence on the subsequent 
evolution of the surface, producing considerably faster melting than would otherwise 
be the case. This has both hydrological implications (Qian et al., 2009) via the change 
in the runoff and implications for the evolution of the snow pack and the manner 
it influences weather and short-term climate (see section above on Slowly Varying 
Processes). Aerosols can also impart predictability on near-surface ocean biology by 
providing input of key nutrients, namely iron, that can facilitate the development of 
widespread phytoplankton blooms (Langmann et al., 2010), which have life cycles of 
days to weeks. Such blooms influence the vertical profile of solar absorption in the 
upper ocean, typically leading to greater warming of SST and a more stable surface 
mixed-layer than would otherwise occur (Siegel et al., 1995). The latter can have con-
siderable implications for large-scale variations and spatial structure of SST anomalies, 
which in turn can influence weather and short-term climate.
Although the lifetimes of other atmospheric constituents can be much longer, it is still 
critical that they be accounted for in S2S forecast systems. Notable examples of these 
are the concentration of anthropogenic greenhouse gases (GHGs, e.g., carbon dioxide, 
methane). The typical lifetime of anthropogenic GHG anomalies is on the order of a 
decade to centuries, and fluctuations and trends in the emissions of GHGs also tend 
to occur on timescales that are long relative to the S2S forecast. These long timescales 
2  Aerosols also play a key role in cloud formation and the development of precipitation. Accurate under-
standing and modeling of this process are critical to producing high-fidelity models of the atmosphere for 
nearly all forecast timescales. Given its place as a key physical process, rather than a source of predictability, 
aerosol-cloud interaction is treated in Chapter 5. 

109
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
imply that, for a given forecast, the GHG concentration can be specified to be a con-
stant. However, because multi-decade retrospective forecast data sets are a crucial 
component of an S2S forecast system for bias correction (see Chapter 5), it is impera-
tive that the values of impactful constituents be specified to the forecast system as 
varying boundary conditions over the time period of the retrospective forecasts. This 
type of slowly varying forced signal can lead to systematic shifts in the probability 
distributions of variables (e.g., temperature and precipitation) that can be predicted 
given the known value of the forcing. Furthermore, such external forcing has caused 
the seasonal minimum of Arctic sea ice extent to decline by greater than 40 percent, 
radically changing the probability of where the sea ice edge lies at the end of sum-
mer in recent years compared to the beginning of the satellite record in 1979. As S2S 
forecast systems encompass more Earth system components and coupled processes 
that are influenced by such external forcing, it is important to have an accurate repre-
sentation of GHG forcing and other slowly varying external forcing (e.g., solar constant, 
surface albedo). 
Finding 4.5: Given the requirement that S2S forecasts have multi-decade retrospec-
tive forecast data sets for the purposes of bias correction, is it imperative that the 
model forecast system account for all slowly varying external forcings that influ-
ence the frequency, spatial distributions, and temporal distributions of S2S forecast 
quantities (e.g., temperature, precipitation). Such external forcing includes the 
influences from natural and anthropogenic aerosol emissions, GHG concentrations, 
variations in the solar constant, and surface albedo, where the latter may derive 
from snow/ice cover or land use/land cover changes. 
Prediction of Disruptive and Extreme Events and “Forecasts of Opportunity”
A strong motivation for developing and improving S2S forecasts is to provide 
guidance on the likelihood, magnitude, and impacts of disruptive events (see also 
Chapter 3), which could be severe rain or wind storms (e.g., tropical or extra­tropical 
­cyclones, large mesoscale convective systems, tornado outbreaks), Santa Ana or 
­Chinook wind conditions, severe rain or snow events, drought, prolonged cold surge 
or heat wave conditions, and other events. These types of events may exhibit predict-
ability, but usually only when they are associated with other phenomena that are pre-
dictable, such as the MJO and ENSO (e.g., Pepler et al., 2015). For example, Figure 4.9 
illustrates the impacts, typically felt through one or a series of extreme weather events, 
from El Niño conditions (or “warm episodes”). Similarly, Figure 4.10 illustrates the im-
pact of the MJO on the frequency and spatial variability of tropical cyclones.

110
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 4.9  Global climate impacts associated with warm ENSO conditions (i.e., El Niño) during boreal 
winter (top) and summer (bottom). NOTES: “Wet” areas indicate a higher likelihood of floods, particularly 
when occurring in a given region’s normal wet season (e.g., winter for California or summer in Argentina), 
and “dry” areas may be subject to a greater likelihood of drought conditions. SOURCE: Climate Prediction 
Center, National Centers for Environmental Prediction, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(CPC/NCEP/NOAA). 

111
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
FIGURE 4.10  Composite of tracks of tropical cyclones (1975-2011) and rainfall anomalies (colors) based 
on Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) data (1998-2011) for different phases of the MJO repre-
sented by the Wheeler and Hendon (2004) Real-time Multi-Variate MJO (RMM) index. NOTE: Total number 
of tropical cyclone days in each composite is given at the lower right corners. SOURCE: Zhang (2013).
Indeed ENSO and the MJO have remarkable impacts on the modulation of the fre-
quency, spatial distribution, and types of extreme environmental events that occur in a 
number of regions around the globe. Other sources of variability discussed above can 
similarly impact the occurrence of extreme or disruptive events. Particularly important 
for disruptive events is the additive effect of the various sources of predictability. As 
a simple consideration of this effect, both the cool phase of ENSO (i.e., La Niña) and 
phases 4-6 of the MJO increase the likelihood of precipitating conditions over the 
Maritime continent region. These two phenomena then work in concert to facilitate 

112
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
the development of more frequent, longer, and/or more severe precipitating events, 
one operating on a timescale of months (i.e., ENSO) and the other weeks (i.e., MJO; also 
see Figure 4.1). Similarly, an El Niño condition along with MJO phases 8 and 1 will pro-
duce subsidence and thus dry conditions over the same region. On top of modes of 
variability, other processes lending predictability can act on the given anomaly to fur-
ther exacerbate the condition. For example, wet conditions will produce positive soil 
moisture anomalies, which can in turn positively influence the further development 
of precipitation in the given region. Such timescale and process interactions, in terms 
of their additive or in some cases counteracting influences, can occur in a number of 
places around the globe depending on the phenomena, region, and season. These 
multiscale interactions of an inherent, albeit intermittent, source of S2S predictability, 
represent “forecasts of opportunity”—a foundational consideration in S2S forecasting. 
Better understanding these interactions will make it possible to develop more fore-
casts of opportunity, for example, forecasts that take advantage of windows of time 
in which higher predictability is possible. This will be particularly important for the 
prediction of events that are of interest to decision-makers.
Finding 4.6: The nature of sources of S2S predictability, namely intermittent natural 
modes of variability, wide and often disaggregated variations in anomalous condi-
tions in a number of slowly varying processes/quantities, and varied natural and 
anthropogenic external forcings, liken the S2S prediction challenge to the identifi-
cation and successful prediction of a series of “forecasts of opportunity.” Identify-
ing such windows of predictability will be particularly important for forecasts of 
extreme and disruptive events.
THE WAY FORWARD FOR RESEARCH ON SOURCES OF PREDICTABILITY
The relative value of predictability sources is dependent on location of the forecast 
and time of the year. Although some processes have a stronger local impact, others 
influence the climate through teleconnections and have a far-reaching effect. For 
example, initial anomalies in soil moisture can influence the local forecast precipita-
tion and surface air temperature through changes in surface energy budget associ-
ated with evaporation. Anomalies of tropical convection associated with ENSO and 
the MJO influence the midlatitude climate through teleconnections related to Rossby 
wave energy propagation, and thus a large impact is usually observed along the 
path of Rossby wave train. In the Northern Hemisphere extratropics, the wintertime 
westerlies provide a more favorable background for Rossby wave propagation than 
in summer, thus the teleconnection contribution is stronger in winter. On the other 

113
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
hand, the influence of soil moisture becomes relatively more important in summer 
than in winter.
Our understanding of the source of S2S predictability is still lacking. The relative value 
of predictability sources has not yet been established. The approaches that have been 
used in predictability study may not be appropriate to separate the contributions of 
different sources. For example, the specification of soil moisture in the initial condition 
in the retrospective forecast experiment that is designed to identify the contribution 
of soil moisture may contain information of ENSO or other sources of predictability. 
In the relaxation experiment that is designed to identify the origin of skill source, the 
analysis fields that are relaxed in a given region may already contain variability propa-
gating from other regions. The combined effect of several different sources of predict-
ability may not be a simple sum of individual processes. More studies are needed to 
understand how different sources of predictability interact. 
Climate models that are used for retrospective forecasts are imperfect, and different 
models have different model errors, leading to inaccurate, incomplete, and model-
dependent estimates of signal and noise variability in ANOVA analysis, as well as false 
representation of the “truth” in the twin experiments used to estimate the upper 
predictability limit. The assessment of impact of a particular process on forecast skill 
is also model-dependent. Encouraging future studies to use a multi-model framework 
would help to reduce the uncertainty related to model configurations. In addition, 
innovative methodologies to estimate predictability need to be explored in order to 
better understand the nature of S2S forecast.
It is essential to maintain and increase observational records for different components 
of the Earth system. These observations can be used to explore new sources of predict-
ability and to better initialize S2S models. It is important for S2S models to capture the 
natural modes of variability, slow processes, and externally forced trend and variability.
Recommendation C: Identify and characterize sources of S2S predictability, includ-
ing natural modes of variability (e.g., ENSO, MJO, QBO), slowly varying processes 
(e.g., sea ice, soil moisture, and ocean eddies), and external forcing (e.g., aerosols), 
and correctly represent these sources of predictability, including their interactions, 
in S2S forecast systems.
Specifically: 
• 
Use long-record and process-level observations and a hierarchy of models 
(e.g., theory, idealized models, high-resolution models, global Earth system 
models) to explore and characterize the physical nature of sources of predict-

114
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ability and their interdependencies and dependencies on the background 
environment and external forcing.
• 
 Conduct comparable predictability and skill estimation studies and assess 
the relative importance of different sources of predictability and their interac-
tions, using long-term observations and multi-model approaches (such as the 
World Meteorological Organization-led S2S Project’s database of retrospective 
forecast data).
Decision-makers are particularly interested in guidance on the likelihood, magnitude, 
and impacts of disruptive events (see also Chapter 3). Prediction of these types of 
events will rely on identifying multiscale interactions of inherent, albeit intermittent 
sources of S2S predictability. Thus prediction of such features will require developing 
“forecasts of opportunity”—a foundational consideration in S2S prediction. Although 
any given extreme event (e.g., storm) is typically not predictable more than a few days 
in advance, understanding interactions between sources of S2S predictability offer the 
means to infer changes in the likelihoods of extreme events—including their spatial 
distribution, occurrence frequency, magnitude, and type. More specifically, this means 
that an accurate S2S forecast system will provide quantitative forecast ­information—
likelihoods and uncertainties—on extreme events with lead times from weeks to 
months. However, it is critical that all of the important and impactful phenomena be 
represented faithfully in order to yield accurate forecasts. For example, based on the 
discussion above, if the ENSO modulation is accurately depicted by the forecast sys-
tem but there are temporal, spatial, and/or amplitude biases in the representation of 
the MJO, then the forecast accuracy of precipitation amounts and extreme events will 
be heavily compromised.
In summary, accurate prediction of extreme weather/environmental events hinges 
critically on the accurate representation of all of the dominant modes of variability 
and slowly varying processes that operate and yield predictability on S2S timescales. 
Forecast models must represent these processes individually as well as collectively, 
with specific attention to their multiscale interactions and influences on the develop-
ment of extreme events. Thus all four facets of predictability research highlighted in 
Figure 4.3 need to be undertaken to improve the prediction of disruptive, high-impact, 
or extreme events. 
Recommendation D: Focus predictability studies, process exploration, model devel-
opment, and forecast skill advancements on high-impact S2S “forecasts of opportu-
nity” that in particular target disruptive and extreme events.

115
Sources of Subseasonal to Seasonal Predictability
Specifically:
• 
Determine how predictability sources (e.g., natural modes of variability, slowly 
varying processes, external forcing) and their multiscale interactions can 
influence the occurrence, evolution, and amplitude of extreme and disruptive 
events using long-record and process-level observations.
• 
Ensure the relationships between disruptive and extreme weather/­
environmental events—or their proxies—and sources of S2S predictability 
(e.g., modes of natural variability and slowly varying processes) are repre-
sented in S2S forecast systems.
• 
Investigate and estimate the predictability and prediction skill of disruptive 
and extreme events through utilization and further development of forecast 
and retrospective forecast databases, such as those from the S2S Project and 
the North American Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME).


117
C H A P T E R  F I V E
S2S Forecast Systems: 
Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Chapter 4 covered the processes of discovering, characterizing, and understanding the 
theoretical limits of various sources of predictability in the weather-climate system. 
After those sources are identified and begin to be understood, they can be incorpo-
rated into Earth system models (ESMs) for subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) prediction. 
This chapter examines the features of such S2S prediction systems and makes recom-
mendations about advancing each component in order to produce more skillful S2S 
forecasts. To begin, the chapter provides an overview of the functioning architecture 
of a typical S2S system. 
The production of probabilistic forecasts on S2S timescales is similar in many ways to 
contemporary numerical weather prediction: observations of the atmosphere, ocean, 
cryosphere, and land provide initial conditions for computing the evolution of these 
Earth system components forward in time. However, there are some important differ-
ences between S2S and shorter-term weather and ocean prediction. First, chaotic as-
pects of the Earth system mandate averaging S2S predictions over long enough periods, 
or over a large enough set of realizations, that stable forecast statistics are produced for 
each place and lead time. Longer and/or larger ensemble averages are generally needed 
for longer lead times. A second difference is that a set of similar forecasts—made in 
retrospect for 20 or more years with the same forecast system—is typically compared 
with verification observations to calibrate the forecasts, with the aim of correcting 
the predicted probability distribution on the basis of how the model reproduces past 
conditions. This is crucial and standard practice at least at seasonal timescales (where 
the desired signals may be small compared to the corrections); similar methods are 
beginning to spread to extended range Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP). Finally, the 
longer-timescale predictions typically include interactive Earth system components (e.g., 
interactive ocean and sea ice), because the evolutions of these components have im-
portant impacts on the atmosphere or provide valuable forecasts in their own right. For 
weather and climate, the distinctions among prediction methods at various time ranges 
are beginning to diminish as even short- to medium-range weather forecast models 
move to encompass interactive ocean and sea ice components.
The basic architecture of S2S prediction systems is depicted in Figure 5.1, which also 
provides an organizational structure for the content in this chapter. Coupled ESMs lie 

118
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 5.1  The production of calibrated S2S forecasts involves three separate processes. NOTES: In the 
first phase, historical observations over a period of two or more decades are combined with data assimila-
tion (DA) and Earth system dynamics in a coupled Earth system computer model (coupled ESM) to pro-
duce a reanalysis that is a detailed history of a wide variety of atmospheric, oceanic, land, and cyrospheric 
variables. In the second phase, the reanalysis data is used as the initial conditions for a set of retrospective 
ESM S2S forecasts over the same two decades or more. The comparison of the retrospective forecasts 
with an appropriate set of verification data (perhaps the reanalysis) is then used to develop quantitative 
information for correcting biases and ensemble variance of the forecasts to be applied subsequently to 
operational forecasts. In the third phase, the current observations processed with data assimilation (which 
may be equivalent to the latest reanalysis if the forecast system is unchanged since the last reanalysis 
was run) serve as the initial conditions for a set of operational forecasts that are then calibrated in the 
S2S probability prediction system and turned into S2S forecast products. Dutton et al. (2013) describe the 
operation and results of this process, as implemented in a commercial S2S system.

119
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
at the core of most of these systems. The ESM itself—a system of partial differential 
equations that describe the evolution of the components of the Earth system and the 
interactions between them—projects state variables forward in time. The separate 
components—atmosphere, ocean, land, sea ice—are discretized on a computational 
grid with specific spatial and temporal resolutions. The components are linked to-
gether at the interfaces via a coupler, which transfers information, such as heat and 
momentum fluxes. Meanwhile, the coupler also transfers model errors from one com-
ponent to another, making the model error growth a coupled process as well. ­Because 
of the finite resolution in space and time, many processes in the models remain 
unresolved and require parameterizations of their effects on the components that are 
resolved. The committee notes that, for certain S2S predictions, integrating a subset 
of an ESM can be sufficient to achieve useful predictive skill. For example, some ocean 
and ice forecasts can be issued on S2S timescales with prescribed atmospheric surface 
conditions without two-way coupling with atmospheric models. When appropriate, 
such scale- or process-separation can be exploited for more efficient forecasting. 
ESMs are initialized by tens of millions of observations of the atmosphere, ocean, land 
surface, and cryosphere. In order to be integrated into the model state space, these 
observations must first be transformed via data assimilation, a process that attempts 
to optimally combine observations with a short-term (usually less than a day) model 
forecast using the error characteristics of each observation type. Thus the goal of data 
assimilation is to produce a state estimate (i.e., initial condition) that is in an appropri-
ate and dynamically consistent format for subsequent forecast computation. Often 
historical observations over multiple decades are also assimilated with a frozen ESM 
and assimilation procedure to produce a reanalysis, suitable for investigating multi-
scale variability in the Earth system with the same ESM and as consistent of observa-
tion data streams as possible. Running the ESM forward from an initial condition, with 
no further data assimilation, produces a forecast. The numerical output from an ESM 
forecast usually consists of an ensemble of 10 or more members, each containing 
some 100 or more physical variables on spatial grids at intervals of hours (or much 
shorter for specific applications). The ensemble is created by running multiple realiza-
tions, perturbing the initial conditions and/or the model formulation, to produce a 
distribution of results that are intended to sample uncertainties in the estimate of the 
initial state, external forcing, and model parameterizations.
For these outputs to be transformed into S2S forecast products, they first must be 
calibrated and verified by comparing forecasts to the subsequent observations. To 
obtain a large enough data set to be statistically meaningful and avoid over-fitting, 

120
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
comprehensive retrospective forecasts or hindcasts1 are performed in which the fore-
cast system is exercised over a historical period of some 10 to 30 years. In this process, 
the reanalysis in Figure 5.1 provides initial conditions, the retrospective forecasts are 
computed with the ESM, and then the forecasts are compared to a reanalysis or some 
other verification data set.
After any part of the forecast system is changed, the retrospective forecasts must be 
re-created to be consistent with the modifications. Today, some forecast centers are 
producing them as part of the model forecast process itself. This permits the ­centers 
to take advantage of model improvements with frequent updates. Thus some retro­
spective forecasts are static and some are produced “on the fly” along with the fore-
casts themselves. Such on-the-fly retrospective forecasts have been employed in 
atmospheric models and ESMs (e.g., MacLachlan et al., 2015; Vitart, 2013) and also 
real-time ocean forecasting (e.g., Lermusiaux et al., 2011; Ramp et al., 2009; Robinson et 
al., 2002). Either way, calibrations derived from the retrospective forecasts are applied 
to improve new forecasts. For example, if August temperature in a specific geographic 
region of the historical forecasts tends to be biased, then the mean temperature of the 
new forecasts is adjusted accordingly. Similarly, if the probability distribution of the 
retrospective forecast is too narrow, then the probability can be made wider in subse-
quent operational forecasts. 
The rest of this chapter examines in more detail the pieces of S2S prediction systems 
that were described in brief above. Aspects of S2S forecast systems—routine obser­
vations, data assimilation, models, and the calibration and production of forecast 
­products—are covered in separate chapter sections. For each of these sections, the 
committee has identified findings and developed a set of research recommendations. 
The implementation of these recommendations will be critical to advancing S2S fore-
cast skill and to better meeting the needs of users as highlighted in Chapter 3. 
ROUTINE OBSERVATIONS AND THEIR USE
Observations are a fundamental building block of any prediction system. They provide 
a basis for understanding the Earth system, guide model development, enable the 
initialization of forecast systems, and provide the foundation for evaluating model 
fidelity and quantifying prediction skill. An expansive network of in situ and remotely 
sensed observing systems is used for S2S forecasting. However, maintaining this 
network to ensure no degradation of present-day nascent S2S forecast skill represents 
1  As noted in Chapter 1, other commonly used terms for retrospective forecasts are “reforecast” and 
“forecast history.” These terms are interchangeable. 

121
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
a significant challenge in and of itself. Improved utilization of other existing obser-
vations, along with new observations to increase geographic coverage, spatial and 
temporal resolution, and the breadth of routinely measured Earth system variables, are 
critical for further advancing S2S model development and operational S2S forecasts. 
This section describes the current state of observations to support S2S forecast systems 
and highlights important gaps and vulnerabilities in the coverage of observational 
networks. The focus is on observations for operational model initialization, calibration, 
evaluation, and routine monitoring, although these types of observations are also gen-
erally useful for studies on sources of predictability (covered in Chapter 4). Generally 
the most basic quantities are needed (e.g., temperature, wind speeds), with continuous 
temporal and broad spatial coverage, and at spatial and temporal resolutions that are 
relevant for S2S processes. Because S2S forecast systems are often driven by observa-
tions of anomalies from a climatological mean, overlapping measurements between 
successive generations of observing systems are particularly valuable so that chang-
ing observation system biases are not aliased into estimated anomalies in the state of 
the real world. Observations of the atmosphere are as important for S2S prediction as 
they are with NWP. However, observations of the ocean, land, and cryosphere represent 
additional critical needs for building, calibrating, initializing, and evaluating the coupled 
ESMs that will be used to generate S2S forecasts in the next decade. This is because, 
although the ocean, land surface, and cryosphere contain important sources of Earth 
system predictability on S2S timescales, observations within these components are 
neither as numerous nor as distributed as observations of the atmosphere. 
Recommendations and priorities for observations to support S2S forecast systems are 
presented at the end of the section. Field observations for process studies designed to 
develop and improve model processes and parameterizations and reduce systematic 
biases are covered in more detail in the modeling section of this chapter.
Observations of the Atmosphere
The current observing system for the atmosphere is among the most comprehen-
sive of all the components of the Earth system. Yet, observations of the atmosphere 
need to be maintained or advanced for continued improvement to S2S prediction 
systems. The current atmospheric observing system includes in situ measurements 
of moisture, temperature, pressure, and wind from radiosondes, aircraft (e.g., Aircraft 
Meteorological Data Relay [AMDAR] and Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data 
Reporting [TAMDAR]), and sensors at the Earth surface (e.g., land, moorings, and ship). 
Satellites provide additional information on ocean surface winds (covered in more 

122
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
detail in the ocean observation section), clouds and precipitation, radiation, surface 
temperature, winds (from feature tracking), and vertical profiles of temperature and 
moisture. These measurements come from a range of sensors including microwave 
radars, ­radiometers and sounders, hyperspectral infrared sounders, visible and infrared 
­imagers, ­scatterometers, and global positioning system (GPS) radio occultation.
The world radiosonde network is extensive (Figure 5.2) and has been a main source 
of three-dimensional input to atmospheric models. These data have historically been 
supplemented by measurements from aircraft-based sensors. However, the radio-
sonde network lacks coverage over the ocean, in the tropics, in uninhabitable areas 
(especially polar regions), and in less developed countries. Measurements from aircraft 
are mostly limited to flight level except near airports. These gaps in spatial coverage 
are a particular concern for S2S prediction because they span regions through which 
signals from phenomena over the tropical ocean (e.g., the Madden–Julian oscillation 
[MJO] and El Niño-Southern Oscillation [ENSO]) are teleconnected and hence propa-
gate poleward and towards land.
There is some potential for the existing radiosonde network to be further exploited 
to support S2S applications for real-time assimilation as well as in model improve-
ment studies. Radiosondes can measure profiles at a vertical resolution of as little as 
5 meters (Hamilton and Vincent, 1995), but at present operational centers routinely 
receive only data at the mandatory pressure levels (with resolution at best of about 
700 m). High-altitude and finer-resolution vertical profiles could be used to help 
resolve troposphere-stratosphere interaction, cumulus convection, and mesoscale 
­atmospheric organization—processes that are particularly important for S2S predic-
tions (see Chapter 4 and Chapter 5, models section). Implementing this type of change 
has remained challenging because of the extensive international coordination and 
data management it requires. 
Gaps in the coverage of radiosonde observations, along with the recent deterioration 
of the radiosonde network (NRC, 2000), have led to increasing reliance on satellite data 
for atmospheric monitoring and modeling. Today, the Advanced Microwave Sounding 
Unit (AMSU) is actually the most important observing system for shorter-term weather 
predictions in a current version of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion (NASA GEOS-5) global NWP model, followed closely by aircraft, radiosondes, 
and hyperspectral infrared sounders such as the Infrared Atmospheric Sounding 
­Interferometer (IASI) and the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) (Figure 5.3). This 
finding is generally representative of other NWP systems such as the National Centers 
for Environmental Protection (NCEP; Ota et al., 2013) and the European Center for 
­Medium range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF; Cardinali, 2009).

123
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
FIGURE 5.2  Spatial distribution for atmospheric observations for the 6-hour window centered at 00 UTC 
on April 15, 2015, including (a) surface, (b) rawinsonde, (c) atmospheric motion vectors (AMVs), (d) aircraft, 
(e) Velocity Azimuth Display (VAD) winds, lidar wind profilers, and pibal balloons, and (f), and Advanced 
Scatterometer (ASCAT) derived surface wind speeds. 

124
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 5.3  Adjoint-estimated daily average impacts of various observation types on the 24-hour global 
forecast error (moist total energy, J/kg) calculated for 00 UTC each day for the period covering February 8, 
2015, through February 7, 2016, for the NASA GEOS-5 modeling system. The shading corresponds to the 
average number of observations of each data type that are assimilated into the GEOS-5 system. SOURCE: 
http://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/forecasts/systems/fp/obs_impact, accessed February 15, 2016.
Given the uncertainties about the future of the radiosonde network and gaps in its 
coverage, continued investment into satellite-based atmospheric observations is 
important for moving forward. The development of platforms and algorithms for the 
retrieval of key variables—including vertical profiles of temperature, humidity, and 
wind—at resolutions that can capture the development and evolution of mesoscale 
systems and more detailed information in the boundary layer are particularly impor-
tant. Advancing S2S predictions will also hinge on the ability to perform DA in cloudy 
and precipitating regions (see section on DA). Such capability will in turn rely on a 
host of routine, global high-resolution observations of radiation, clouds, and precipita-
tion. On a slightly longer time horizon, developing such observations and the ability 
to ­assimilate them will also be important for fully implementing cloud-permitting 

125
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
forecast models (see section on models). Similarly, as models progress to better 
represent ­aerosol-cloud interactions—especially for regions where radiative forcing 
from aerosols (e.g., polluted cities) is substantial—it will become essential to expand 
routine in situ (e.g., Aerosol Robotic Network [AeroNet] and Micro-Pulse Lidar Network 
[MPLNet]) and satellite observations of aerosols and to have the capability to exploit 
these observations via data assimilation.
The United States is a leading contributor to the operational global satellite data 
coverage used in weather and climate prediction. U.S. federal agencies have been 
planning for replacements to aging polar orbiter and geostationary satellites, some 
of which are near or past their expected lifetime. However, the replacement programs 
have been beset with delays and cost overruns, leading to the potential for a gap in 
coverage. In particular, a gap in microwave sounder coverage from polar orbiting satel-
lites could lead to significant degradations in atmospheric monitoring and prediction 
at weather and S2S timescales, a scenario the U.S. Government Accountability Office 
identified as high risk in a 2015 report.2
Two new satellite missions could lead to important improvements in global obser-
vations of three-dimensional winds and precipitation—two of the major gaps in 
the ­atmospheric observing network discussed above. The Atmospheric Dynamics 
(ADM-Aeolus) by the European Space Agency, set to launch in 2016, plans to provide 
clear-sky or above-cloud vertical profiles of wind derived from a space-based lidar.3 A 
different joint satellite mission between NASA and the Japan Aerospace Exploration 
Agency (JAXA), the Global Precipitation Mission (GPM; Hou et al., 2014), was recently 
launched to provide high temporal resolution observations of rain and snow, expand-
ing significantly upon the measurement portfolio and geographic coverage of its 
predecessor, the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM). In particular, GPM could 
enhance capability to monitor and predict extreme events such as tropical cyclones, 
floods, and droughts and may provide global measurements of precipitation micro-
physics and storm structure, enhancing the ability to design and validate the repre-
sentation of precipitation in next generation, higher resolution ESMs. Such measure-
ments could also improve the representation and initialization of soil moisture within 
the land surface component of current S2S prediction systems (see below).
Newer, nonconventional satellite technologies have the potential to improve the 
atmospheric observing network. GPS radio occultation observations, for example, 
have the potential to provide highly accurate, unbiased retrievals of temperature and 
moisture, but at a much lower cost than typical satellite missions. Atmospheric motion 
2  http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-290, accessed January 27, 2016.
3  https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/a/adm-aeolus, accessed January 27, 2016.

126
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
vectors (AMVs)—winds derived by following features from geostationary satellites 
and from polar orbiting satellites near poles—have proven to be an important compo-
nent of the observing system given the lack of wind information from other observa-
tions, particularly in the tropics, over oceans, and in polar areas. However, issues remain 
regarding the assignment of vertical location for these observations. On the very cusp 
of development are small, capable sensors that can be deployed on less expensive 
small satellites (e.g., “cubesats”), which in turn can be implemented into multi-satellite 
constellations providing rapid revisits and a low-cost approach for some operational 
observation needs (Ruf et al., 2013). 
Finding 5.1: The current atmospheric observing system is relatively robust, but com-
ponents of the network are in danger of deteriorating and/or are underutilized and 
spatial coverage is still poor in remote areas such as over the oceans and in polar 
regions. 
Finding 5.2: As S2S prediction systems evolve in complexity and resolution, routine 
broad-coverage and higher resolution atmospheric observations of thermodynamic 
profiles, clouds, precipitation, and aerosols will become essential to better charac-
terize convection and troposphere-stratosphere interactions, as well as to enable 
cloud-permitting models.
Finding 5.3: Space-based satellite observations are likely to be the most efficient 
way to develop the new atmospheric observations that will be required for S2S pre-
dictions, although other cost-effective approaches to obtain the requisite accuracy 
and coverage are worthy of continued investigation.
Ocean Observations
The ocean is significantly under-observed compared with the atmosphere, despite 
being a major source of S2S predictability (Cummings, 2011; Robinson, 2006). Sea 
surface temperature (SST) may be the most important oceanic variable for driving the 
atmosphere in the coupled system. This is due to the strong dependence of air-sea 
heat flux, evaporation, and even the stability of the atmospheric boundary layer on 
SSTs. Accurate initial conditions for SST as well as for ocean currents are not sufficient 
for predicting the time evolution of SST on S2S timescales because the effective ocean 
heat capacity on S2S timescales depends strongly on how deeply surface thermal 
anomalies are mixed by near-surface winds, ocean surface waves, and convective in-
stabilities in the ocean mixed layer. Thus measurements of winds, waves, air-sea fluxes, 

127
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
and near-surface ocean heat content anomalies and density structure (the latter 
determines the depths to which near-surface thermal anomalies can be easily mixed) 
may be just as critical for ocean prediction as SST measurements. Measurements of 
salinity are also important for constraining SST evolution, because both salinity and 
temperature determine the ocean’s density structure. There are many places where a 
layer of relatively fresh water in the top few meters is observed to stabilize an ocean 
water column that would be unstable if only thermal properties were considered. 
Transport of properties by ocean currents and associated eddies as well as vertical 
mixing driven by sheared ocean velocities also play an important role in the evolution 
of the coupled system at S2S and longer timescales. For example, re-stratification by 
finite-amplitude, submesoscale, mixed-layer eddies plays a strong role in the evolution 
of the coupled system (Fox-Kemper et al., 2011), as does the atmospheric response to 
oceanic variability in areas of high SST variability (Kirtman et al., 2012). When averaged 
over timescales of the inertial period and longer, extratropical ocean velocities are 
well approximated by a geostrophic and Ekman balance, which can be determined 
from knowledge of the ocean’s sea surface height or bottom pressure anomalies, 
surface wind stresses, and the ocean’s three-dimensional density structure. Tropical 
currents tend not to be as well constrained by geostrophy, and tidal flows and rectified 
tidal effects can be important, especially in coastal areas. Thus direct measurements 
of ocean velocity (e.g., from moorings with current meters or drifters) or estimates 
of the surface geostrophic and Ekman components estimated via remote sensing 
(Lagerloef et al., 1999) and tides are particularly valuable for constraining the state of 
the ocean in tropical and coastal areas at S2S timescales. Velocity measurements that 
are available in real time can be directly assimilated into S2S forecast systems, while 
delayed velocity data (e.g., data that is only available after instrument recovery) play 
an important role in evaluating the realism of S2S forecast systems. Additional ocean-
related observations that may benefit Earth system forecasts at S2S timescales include 
biogeochemical quantities such as nutrient distributions, oxygen levels, and initial 
plankton distributions. Used as tracers, these quantities may improve the initialization 
of the physical aspects of the system, but as the ocean model grows in sophistication 
to include biogeochemical processes, such quantities will be needed for initialization 
of these components.
Many of the ocean surface processes described above can be well sampled by remote 
sensing. Satellite measurements of SST, sea surface height (SSH), and scatterometer-
derived surface wind stress are routinely used by ocean prediction systems. However 
the value of remotely sensed measurements for S2S forecasting depends critically 
on having enough instruments to provide continuous measurements with adequate 
temporal and spatial coverage. For example, the quality and reliability of forecasts of 

128
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
the ocean mesoscale eddy field depend upon the availability of multiple altimeters for 
coverage and resilience to instrument failures (Jacobs et al., 2014; Le Traon et al., 2003). 
Beyond the above physical variables, remotely sensed ocean color (i.e., visible wave-
length) can be used to constrain biogeochemical ocean model components, which in 
their simplest use are needed to determine the vertical profile of solar heating in the 
near surface layer of the ocean (e.g., Murtugudde et al., 2002). 
The TOPEX/Poseidon and NASA/CNES/NOAA/EUMETSAT Jason missions4 have pro-
vided continuous SSH measurements since 1992. The Jason-3 mission, to be launched 
in January 2016, and the Copernicus European Program,5 which will deliver Earth data 
from a dedicated constellation of satellites known as “Sentinels,” will also provide 
operational SSH measurements into the coming decade. Additional upcoming satel-
lite missions for oceanography and hydrology include the “Surface Water and Ocean 
Topography” (SWOT) mission—a collaboration between the United States and France.6 
With an estimated launch date of 2020, SWOT will continue the TOPEX/Jason record 
of global ocean altimetry but will also complement it by providing unprecedented 
global high-resolution elevations for small-scale ocean eddy features and for lakes 
and rivers over land. SWOT will likely allow for an important improvement in model 
representations of the ocean’s geostrophic eddy fields and will provide an altogether 
new resource for estimating surface-water elevations, both of significant value to S2S 
forecast considerations and applications. However, because SWOT is a research satel-
lite, its 3-year projected mission lifetime is shorter than is desirable for operational use 
as a part of a well-validated S2S forecasting system. Although there is a foundation for 
remotely sensed SSH measurements via Jason and the European Sentinel program, 
there is great concern regarding the continuity of surface wind observations over the 
ocean. Much of the evolution of the ocean circulation on S2S timescales is driven by 
wind stress, and scatterometer wind stress measurements are of particular impor-
tance for constraining the ocean and atmosphere in remote areas of the ocean with 
little other observation coverage for wind. Presently, the only U.S. scatterometry asset 
is RapidScat, a 2-year mission on the International Space Station (ISS). Although this 
implementation comes with some advantages (namely the orbit allows resolving of 
the mean diurnal variability of ocean surface winds and can provide cross-calibration 
of other agency scatterometers such as the European Organisation for the Exploita­
tion of Meteorological Satellites [EUMETSAT] Advanced Scatterometer [ASCAT]), 
its inclined orbit does not provide global observations. An additional experimental 
resource for winds will come from NASA’s upcoming Cyclone Global Navigation 
4  http://sealevel.jpl.nasa.gov/missions/ostmjason2/, accessed January 27, 2016.
5  http://www.copernicus.eu, accessed January 27, 2016.
6  http://swot.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/, accessed January 27, 2016.

129
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Satellite System (CYGNSS) mission, composed of a constellation of eight small satel-
lites that use GPS reflections off the surface to estimate wind speed (direction not 
measured). Although the coverage from this experimental mission will be limited to 
the tropics, it will provide an additional consideration for future observations of ocean 
surface wind speed that are likely to be complementary to the broad swath sampling 
of ­scatterometers that provide vector wind observations. Despite their potential for 
improving ocean wind measurements, RapidScat and CYGNSS are experimental mis-
sions with very limited lifespans. To advance S2S prediction, it is vital to determine a 
longer-term, sustainable plan for providing global, continuous satellite measurements 
of ocean surface winds. 
Satellites also estimate ocean surface salinity (i.e., from the Soil Moisture and Ocean 
Salinity [SMOS]7 and, until recently, Aquarius missions8). The assimilation of such 
data has already improved some aspects of coupled forecasts (e.g., Hackert et al., 
2011, 2014; Tang et al., 2014), but salinity is a challenging measurement to make from 
space, and further advances are needed. Salinity anomalies on the of order 0.1 psu are 
dynamically important on S2S timescales (e.g., Guan et al., 2014), but this is near the 
threshold accuracy of current satellite retrieval capabilities on spatial scales relevant 
to S2S (cf. Tang et al., 2014).9 However, with a combination of a robust in situ network 
(e.g., Argo, buoys, see below) and satellite measurements, a highly complementary set 
of measurements can be provided. In situ data can provide accurate absolute salinity 
values with the benefit of vertical profile information, and satellites can provide global 
coverage of (only the) surface salinity with the benefit of spatial gradient information 
and for measurements in marginal seas (although at a distance of at least one satellite 
footprint away from the coast; ~50-100km) where drifters/buoys are limited.
Remote sensing has the potential to deliver routine observations of the ocean surface 
with coverage (space and time) that cannot be matched by current in situ observa-
tions. However, as illustrated with salinity above, in situ data will continue to be essen-
tial for calibrating remotely sensed ocean observations, and some in situ observations 
are critical for providing routine measurements of variables that are not well-observed 
via satellite platforms. Furthermore, because radiation penetrates only a short distance 
(millimeters to 10s of meters, depending on wavelength) into the ocean, observing the 
7   http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Observing_the_Earth/The_Living_Planet_Programme/Earth_­
Explorers/SMOS/ESA_s_water_mission_SMOS, accessed January 27, 2016.
8  The Argentine Space Agency/CONAE’s satellite, hosting NASA’s Aquarius instrument, failed in June 2015, 
terminating the 4-year record of salinity observations. http://aquarius.nasa.gov/, accessed January 27, 2016.
9  Recent comparisons of satellite to in situ values show root mean square errors on the order of 0.28 
to 0.51 psu for SMOS (Reul et al., 2014) and 0.2 to 0.3 psu for Aquarius (Tang et al., 2014), each for monthly 
timescales and grid averages of ~100km.  

130
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
three-dimensional ocean fields mentioned above (e.g., subsurface temperature, salin-
ity, and ocean velocities) usually calls for in situ data.
Argo—a global drifting sampling array that began deployments in 1999—provides 
the best coverage for global, in situ ocean measurements at depth (Riser et al., 2016; 
Figure 5.4a). Argo has close to 4,000 free-drifting profiling floats that measure tem-
perature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen of the upper 2,000 m of the ocean and trans-
mit the collected measurements in near real-time. The Argo network is quite coarse 
(roughly one float on a 3°x3° grid, but not uniformly distributed) and does not cover 
the deep ocean below 2,000 m. However, deep Argo float prototypes with opera-
tional ranges down to 4,000 m or 6,000 m, depending on the model, are being tested 
(G. Johnson; D. Roemmich, personal communication, December 2014). Other proto-
types of Argo floats are adding sensors for biogeochemically important quantities 
such as pH, nitrate, and chlorophyll fluorescence (K. Johnson, personal communication, 
Decem­ber 2014) and are being designed to improve their performance in seasonally 
sea ice covered regions.
Moored buoys also provide critical real-time observations of condition at the ocean 
surface (Figures 5.4d and 5.2a). Natural modes of variability highlighted in Chapter 4 as 
important sources of S2S predictability are predominantly tropical and are either fun-
damentally coupled ocean-atmosphere phenomena (e.g., ENSO), or at least influenced 
by ocean-atmosphere feedbacks (e.g., MJO). The Tropical Atmosphere Ocean/Triangle 
Trans-Ocean Buoy Network (TAO/TRITON) moored buoy array in the Pacific, the Predic-
tion and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA), and the Research Moored 
Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) array in the 
Indian Ocean provide hourly oceanic observations and surface meteorological obser-
vations, all in real time, in locations that were selected to fill data gaps in monitoring 
the variability of the tropical climate system (NRC, 2010a). In particular, the observations 
from the TAO/TRITON moorings play an important role in the generation of skillful sea-
sonal ENSO forecasts (NRC, 2010b), including the large ongoing 2015-2016 El Niño.
For tropical ocean surface moorings to continue to benefit operational ocean and S2S 
forecasting, they need to deliver consistent and reliable observations. However, tropi-
cal surface moorings are subject to instrument failures due to long-term exposure to 
a difficult environment, and they are also commonly damaged by fishing activities 
and vandalism. Regular and sustained maintenance of these moorings is necessary, 
but limited access to ship-time for missions to refresh moorings has resulted in data 
losses and thus time series breaks. For example, lack of maintenance during the period 
from June 2012 through September 2014 severely degraded the TAO array, causing 
the returned data volume to drop to roughly one-half its historical rate from the 2000s 

131
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
FIGURE 5.4  Ocean data coverage for September through November in 2012 from (a) Argo floats, (b) 
Expendable Bathythermographs (XBTs), (c) sondes (CTDs) and ocean gliders, (d) fixed buoys, (e) drifting 
buoys, and (f) animal borne sensors. SOURCE: Fairall et al. (2013).
(Tollefson, 2014). Although the tropical mooring array can be expensive and logisti-
cally challenging to maintain, allowing it to decay through neglect is unacceptable 
for what has proven to be a vital element in delivering skillful and societally valuable 
ENSO forecasts (NRC, 2010c).
A global array of surface drifters (e.g., Niiler, 2001) provides synergistic information for 
satellite measurements of SST, salinity, and absolute SSH, but its spatial coverage is 
coarser than that of Argo (roughly one float on a 5°x5° grid). For example, the Global 
Drifter Program (GDP10) provides satellite-tracked surface drifting observations of 
currents, SST, atmospheric pressure, winds, and salinity over the world’s oceans. Other 
routine in situ measurements are collected and reported back in real time by volun-
teer observing ships and research vessels and moorings. Sensors on marine mammals 
also provide important subsurface ocean data, and such sensors are currently one of 
the few ways to observe the subsurface ocean in polar regions and beneath sea ice 
(Charrassin et al., 2008; Roquet et al., 2013). Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs, 
10  http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/phod/goos.php, accessed January 27, 2016.

132
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
e.g., gliders or self-propelled vehicles) can also be used to collect routine ocean mea-
surements (see Box 5.1). The range and usage of gliders is increasing, but the range 
of propelled AUVs is often still too limited. They are however, relatively cost effective 
and can be outfitted with many sensors and sent into areas not commonly covered by 
other techniques, making further development of this technology attractive.
BOX 5.1 
AUTONOMOUS UNDERWATER VEHICLES
Most interior properties of the ocean cannot be remotely sensed. In addition to ships and 
other classic in situ infrastructures (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 
2015a), there is a need for inexpensive but efficient ocean sensing capabilities. Because the 
“weather of the sea” (e.g., Robinson, 1983) has timescales relevant for S2S predictions, such ca-
pabilities will likely be most useful. Fortunately for S2S, in the past 10 to 20 years, the increasing 
deployment of autonomous ocean observing systems has started a revolution as imagined by 
Stommel (1989). Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) such as gliders and propelled vehicles 
(including surface crafts) are employed today for scientific exploration, ocean mapping, commer-
cial applications, naval reconnaissance, and security. This is possible due to advances in manufac-
turing (Yuh, 2000), reliability (Bahr et al., 2009; Fiorelli et al., 2006), robotics (Bellingham and Rajan, 
2007), and autonomy (Curtin and Bellingham, 2009; Curtin et al., 1993; Lermusiaux et al., 2015). 
Equipped with physical sensors and even biogeochemical analyzers, AUVs collect observa-
tions useful for ocean estimation and forecasting. Their use in adaptive sampling and exploratory 
missions is now feasible (e.g., Fiorelli et al., 2006; Haley et al., 2009; Leonard et al., 2010; Ramp et al., 
2009; Schofield et al., 2010). Such missions can involve onboard routing (Davis et al., 2009; Wang 
et al., 2009b) as well as coordination, cooperation, and inter-vehicle information exchanges (Bahr 
et al., 2009; Leonard et al., 2007; Paley et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2007). Ocean sensing vehicles are 
now used in groups of heterogeneous type with varied operating speeds. They provide sparse 
but multivariate data, and their motions can be strongly affected by ocean currents (Lermusiaux 
et al., 2015). Optimal path planning toward key sampling locations is thus critical to save time and 
energy (Lolla et al., 2014a, 2014b; Subramani et al., 2015). Because the vehicles provide observa-
tions that are ultimately assimilated into ocean models, their optimal control is thus often linked 
to uncertainty prediction and data assimilation (e.g., Lermusiaux, 2007; Schofield et al., 2010).
Even though the use and deployment of varied types of AUVs for S2S forecasting is not yet 
common, within the next 10 years they are likely to become useful for such predictions. Long-
duration deployment of gliders and other AUVs with sufficient endurance or drifting capabilities 
is now an area of active research. Several major research projects (e.g., Northern Arabian Sea 
Circulation—autonomous research [NASCar]) are under way. In addition, similar efforts are being 
completed in the air domain with autonomous sensing drones and other UAVs. Coordinating ef-
forts among autonomous oceanic and atmospheric sensing research will improve the collection 
of observations for coupled S2S forecasting of the Earth system.

133
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Coastal areas represent a significant challenge for satellite observations. Specifically, 
satellite-based observations of winds and SSH are not yet accurate in coastal regions, 
where the winds can change rapidly over smaller spatial and temporal scales relative 
to coarse microwave footprint sizes (~25km). In addition, the side-lobe contamination 
from the land renders the near-coastal observations unusable. Although the SWOT 
mission will improve the situation for SSH due to its higher resolution (~2km), coastal 
winds and surface current observations will need to rely on the high-frequency shore-
based radar (such as Coastal ocean dynamics applications radar [CODAR] and WavE 
RAdar [WERA]). These radar observations are increasing in availability and are a back-
bone component of NOAA’s Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS), but many 
more of these data sets are needed globally in order to increase predictability near 
the coasts. Finally, it is important to maintain the global tidal network together with 
measurements from submarine cable instruments to ensure accurate tidal prediction. 
Wave predictions and the associated air-sea interactions also require that the wave 
buoy network is sustained to ensure availability of wave data.
In summary, although progress continues to be made in advancing in situ and remote 
sensing measurements of the ocean, including expanding temporal and spatial cover-
age and capabilities, the ocean continues to be under-observed relative to its impor-
tance in the coupled Earth system. Coverage and continuity of existing SST, SSH, and 
surface wind observations are important to maintain in order to produce S2S fore-
casts that are skillful. Further advances in observing technology and coverage could 
have tremendous value for characterizing important S2S ocean processes, improving 
­models, and providing information for forecast initial conditions. Effective integration 
of the increasing ocean observations and platforms with S2S ocean modeling systems 
is also necessary, including data-model comparisons for improving ocean model for-
mulations and advanced data assimilation for better S2S forecasts.
Finding 5.4: Continued investment into routine space-based observations of sea 
surface height, sea surface temperature, and surface winds—which represent key 
inputs to estimates of air-sea fluxes of water, heat, and momentum—are critical 
to support S2S prediction systems. Developing satellite-based estimates of ocean 
surface salinity, currents, mixed-layer, and biogeochemical properties may further 
advance S2S forecasts.
Finding 5.5: In situ measurements of sea surface height and winds in coastal areas 
continue to be critical for S2S forecasting, as do surface meteorological observa-
tions from tropical moored arrays. Routine, in situ measurements of temperature 
and salinity structure at depth, as well as of coastal and equatorial currents, are 

134
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
also particularly important. Expanded use of new and improved drifters, buoys, and 
autonomous instruments could facilitate cost-effective expansion of the observing 
network below the surface.
Observations of the Cryosphere and Polar Regions
More than anywhere else on Earth, the polar regions depend on unique observing 
methods to confront the challenges of taking measurements in extreme and harsh 
envi­ronments. Much of the important phenomena for S2S polar prediction contain 
small spatial scales, such as the high degree of spatial variability associated with melt 
ponds, openings in sea ice, patchiness of snow cover, and eddies in the ocean. The 
high reflectivity of ice and snow surfaces on land and ocean, lack of strong horizontal 
and vertical temperature gradients, and the extended polar night make atmospheric 
observations difficult from passive radiances, for example, visible measurements 
based on sunlight reflected from clouds or snow, or infrared measurements based on 
­thermal contrasts. Further, sea ice is a barrier to most ocean-observing satellites. As a 
result, routine in situ observations are critical to complement satellite observations 
around the poles, in particular for ocean observations. Traditional field-based measure-
ments are also hindered by the presence of sea ice (e.g., Figure 5.4) and a shortage of 
population centers from which to operate or launch instruments. 
Sea ice concentration is one of the most essential variables for predicting weather 
and climate in the polar regions. Fortunately, sea ice concentration can be measured 
by passive microwave retrievals (the same satellites that observe terrestrial snow 
cover) through clouds and during both day and night. Passive microwave retrievals 
also can be used to distinguish first-year (ice that first grew on open water less than 
1 year ago) and multiyear ice. These observations are available since 1979 and provide 
the only continuous coverage of sea ice longer than a decade. However, there is high 
uncertainty in sea ice concentration measurements when meltwater is present at the 
surface and resolutions are relatively coarse (~10 km).
Sea ice thickness is less well observed than sea ice concentration, but it is at least as 
important for sea ice prediction (Blanchard-Wrigglesworth et al., 2011a; Day et al., 
2014). Sea ice thickness is a key constraint on the timescale of variability (~ months to 
years) for sea ice concentration anomalies. For example, summer sea ice coverage—a 
variable that is often a target for prediction—is strongly influenced by sea ice thick-
ness in spring (Chapter 4). Scattered field-based measurements of sea ice thickness 
are available since the late 1950s (e.g., Lindsay and Schweiger, 2015), and in the past 
two decades a series of satellites and aircraft have provided good but not continu-

135
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
ous spatial coverage; in some cases instruments were turned off to extend the life 
of the mission (ICESat11) and in others melt water on the surface obscured the mea-
surements in late spring and summer (IceBridge,12 CryoSat-213). At present, the only 
thickness-observing satellite is CryoSat-2, operated by the European Space Agency, 
which has been in orbit since 2010. Because remote sensing actually measures the 
freeboard (height of sea ice and snow above sea level), the accuracy of estimates of 
sea ice thickness depends critically on the availability and quality of measurements 
of snow depth on top of the sea ice. The lack of simultaneous measurements of snow 
depths and freeboard leads to significant uncertainty in the estimate of thickness, but 
even more problematic for S2S forecasting is the impossibility of retrieving data from 
the radar altimeter instrument on CryoSat-2 (and CryoSat) in the presence of surface 
meltwater, or roughly May-September in the Arctic. Nonetheless, CryoSat thickness 
measurements have been used for sea ice data assimilation to initialize forecasts in 
spring of the ensuing summer season (see section on data assimilation).
NASA’s IceBridge aircraft mission offers one of the best opportunities to measure 
simultaneous freeboard and snow depth, although the measurements are limited to 
about a dozen flight tracks each year over a few weeks in spring since 2007. Even in 
these opportune conditions, the uncertainty in IceBridge sea ice thickness is estimated 
to still be 40 cm (Kurtz et al., 2013). Less accurate snow depths have been estimated 
for the purpose of computing sea ice thickness from satellite-based measurements of 
freeboard in a variety of ways, including from climatological measurements (Kwok et 
al., 2004), accumulation of snowfall from reanalysis (Kwok and Cunningham, 2008), and 
an empirical method based on ice type and climatological measurements (Laxon et al., 
2013). However, the accuracy of resulting sea ice thickness was not reported in these 
studies. Recently, snow depths have also been estimated from the SMOS satellite mis-
sion to be nearly as accurate as the IceBridge measurements (Maaß et al., 2013), which 
is very encouraging.
NASA plans to launch a satellite known as the second-generation Ice Cloud and Land 
Elevation Satellite (ICESat2) in 2017 that can measure sea ice thickness year round, but 
accurate and simultaneous snow depth measurement are still necessary to fully utilize 
these observations. Furthermore, the data need to be processed within a day or so of 
the observation to be useful as input for prediction of the sea ice edge at shorter lead 
times in S2S forecasts.
11  http://icesat.gsfc.nasa.gov/, accessed January 27, 2016.
12  http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/icebridge/index.html, accessed January 27, 2016.
13  http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Observing_the_Earth/The_Living_Planet_Programme/Earth_­
Explorers/CryoSat-2, accessed January 27, 2016.

136
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 5.6: Reliable and accurate year-round sea ice thickness measurements are 
the greatest need for sea ice prediction, and continued satellite missions will en-
able this key objective. However, accurate and simultaneous in situ measurements 
of snow depths on sea ice are needed to translate signals observable from satellite 
into dependable and timely sea ice thickness estimates. 
Land Surface Observations
As discussed in Chapter 4, land surface characteristics are important for Earth system 
prediction on S2S timescales and may be particularly important for predicting ex-
treme events, such as heat waves and droughts, as well as for characterizing the water 
cycle. This may be especially true during boreal spring and summer, when coupled 
ESMs often exhibit lower predictive skill due to weaker links between midlatitude 
climate systems and the oceans and an increase in land-atmosphere interactions (NRC, 
2010b; Roundy et al., 2014). Soil moisture, snow depth, vegetation, water table depth, 
and land heat content all influence the fluxes of heat and moisture between the land 
surface and atmosphere, sometimes with important feedbacks to large-scale weather 
and climate and events such as heat waves (e.g., Guo et al., 2011; Roundy and Wood, 
2015; Roundy et al., 2014). As also mentioned in Chapter 4, a number of recent studies 
have found that more realistic initialization of precipitation and land surface variables, 
such as soil moisture, snow cover, and vegetation in coupled ESMs and multi-model 
forecast systems improves the predictability of atmosphere and hydrologic variables 
on S2S timescales (Koster and Walker, 2015; Koster et al., 2004, 2010, 2011; Kumar et 
al., 2014; Peings et al., 2011; Prodhomme et al., 2015; Roundy and Wood, 2015; Thomas 
et al., 2015). The regions and time periods for which such land-atmosphere coupling 
is important for weather and climate prediction are also likely to expand with global 
warming (Dirmeyer et al., 2013, 2014).
The ability to measure land surface and hydrological variables, particularly on a global 
scale, is currently limited, hindering realistic model initialization and representation 
of important land processes and land-atmosphere coupling. For example, critical data 
input into land data assimilation systems comes from in situ measurements of precipi-
tation (from rain gauges) and snow and snow depth (from weather stations and snow 
courses), but prediction skill has been shown to be limited in the many areas where 
such measurements are sparse (Koster et al., 2010). Networks such as CoCoRaHS14, the 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail, and Snow Network, have improved the density 
of rain gauge data in the United States for research and monitoring purposes, and 
14  http://www.cocorahs.org/.

137
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
such networks might be leveraged for improving real-time modeling. However, there 
are still vast areas in less populated parts of the country and especially abroad where 
there is little to no gauge data. 
Although in situ networks need to be maintained and in some cases expanded in the 
near term to enhance S2S forecasting (see below), measurements from satellites may 
hold the most promise for improving the global characterization of many land surface 
variables. A few recent and planned satellite missions have the potential to rapidly 
accelerate progress toward the goal of improved surface soil moisture estimates. The 
European Space Agency launched SMOS in 2009 to monitor surface soil moisture 
(~ < 10 cm) using an L-Band microwave radiometer (Kerr et al., 2010; Mecklenburg et 
al., 2012). In January of 2015, NASA launched the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) 
satellite,15 which is designed to monitor the freeze-thaw state as well as surface soil 
moisture using an L-Band microwave radiometer and radar (Entekhabi et al., 2010). 
Despite these recent and planned developments, a number of critical gaps remain. The 
current failure of SMAP’s radar has (at best) delayed the full potential of SMAP data 
until a stand-in radar onboard another satellite can be used in tandem with SMAP’s 
­radiometer. Observations (or better estimates) of soil moisture into the root zone will 
be key to exploiting the longer-term predictability associated with soil moisture and 
to constraining hydrologic predictions. Root zone soil moisture provides the atmo-
sphere with a source of moisture through plant transpiration, with this deeper layer 
typically exhibiting longer timescales of variability than soil moisture near the surface. 
Remote sensing observations of root zone soil moisture are typically based on ­longer 
(i.e., P-band) microwave wavelengths. Recently, airborne radar implementations have 
shown skill in estimating root zone soil moisture, with an indication that satellite 
implementations may be possible (Konings et al., 2014; Tabatabaeenejad et al., 2015). 
Observations of snow cover, multi-spectral albedo, and depth are also particularly 
important for improving S2S forecasts of the atmosphere and the hydrological cycle. 
Highly accurate global-scale observations of snow cover are currently now available 
from satellite platforms (e.g., the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
[MODIS]). Snow water equivalent (SWE) can also be estimated from space-based pas-
sive microwave radiometers, such as the special sensor microwave imager (SSM/I) 
and advanced microwave scanning radiometer (AMSR-E). However, these estimates 
contain significant caveats and uncertainties (Byun and Choi, 2014; NRC, 2010b), and 
the ability to retrieve snow depth and/or SWE remains a significant challenge. Con­
tinued improvement to SWE remote sensing technologies and retrieval algorithms 
are needed. However, given the importance of snow measurements, more networks 
15  http://smap.jpl.nasa.gov/, accessed January 27, 2016.

138
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
such as SNOTEL (Snowpack Telemetry), which provides real-time in situ measurements 
of snow depth from the 600-plus stations across the western United States, are likely 
needed, particularly in areas where accumulated snow pack is a large portion of the 
annual water cycle (e.g., for California—see case study in Chapter 3).
In addition to improved precipitation, soil moisture, and snow measurements for ini-
tializing S2S prediction systems, a number of other land surface measurements are im-
portant for advancing S2S model calibration and development and for initializing next 
generation operational systems. For example, the NASA SWOT mission mentioned 
above will provide new constraints on surface hydrology via surface water elevations 
and stream flow estimates. Such data will be useful for hydrology model develop-
ment and land surface model calibration; similar data may be important in the longer 
term for initializing hydrology and river components of future S2S forecast systems. 
Similarly, littoral observations are useful for monitoring and modeling the effects of 
coupled ocean-atmosphere processes in coastal areas. For example, characterizations 
and fine-scale observations of land elevation, roughness, cover, soil content, vegeta-
tion, man-made structures, and anthropogenic heating would be useful for improving 
models of wetting-drying, as well as for risk models for storm surges from hurricanes 
and typhoons making landfall and for heat wave prediction. These littoral processes 
are directly linked to a general need to increase and automate ocean observing sys-
tems for S2S predictions, as discussed above.
Satellite measurements that can generate better estimates of evapotranspiration are 
sorely needed to better constrain the terrestrial water budget and its influence on sur-
face fluxes of heat and moisture to the atmosphere. The NASA ECOsystem Spaceborne 
Thermal Radiometer Experiment on Space Station (ECOSTRESS) mission is an experi-
mental multi-spectral infrared spectrometer that will provide high-resolution observa-
tions of surface temperature, which will be used to explore their value for estimating 
evapotranspiration and plant water stress and consumptive use. The implementation 
of ECOSTRESS on the International Space Station (ISS) provides for characterizing the 
mean diurnal cycle (which the current 16-day LandSat repeat does not offer), but it 
does not provide global coverage. Further, the ISS arrangement only provides for a 
2-year hosting provision, and considerations of continuity should be undertaken in 
conjunction with the determined need and value of such measurements.
The global network of flux towers are also an important source of data in this regard, 
because flux towers provide critical measurements of land-atmosphere fluxes of heat, 
moisture, and carbon dioxide (Figure 5.5). Such flux measurements are particularly 
useful for developing and validating the components of dynamic models that account 
for processes associated with surface energy balance. To maximize improvement in 

139
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
FIGURE 5.5  Distribution of 517 active flux tower sites within global Fluxnet network, as of October 
2015. NOTES: These towers measure exchanges of carbon dioxide, water vapor, and energy between the 
atmosphere and terrestrial ecosystem. SOURCE: Oak Ridge National Laboratory Distributed Active Archive 
Center (ORNL DAAC). 2013. FLUXNET Maps & Graphics webpage. Available at http://fluxnet.ornl.gov/
maps-graphics, accessed February 22, 2016.
the characterization of land surfaces fluxes within S2S predictions systems, these types 
of observations are needed with larger spatial coverage, higher density, and in a timely 
enough fashion to be useful in real-time operational data assimilation. 
Finding 5.7: Land observations are critical for modeling large-scale land surface-
atmosphere feedbacks and for making predictions of the terrestrial water cycle. 
Networks of in situ measurements of precipitation, snow depth, and root-zone 
soil moisture are likely to remain important, but the poor spatial coverage of such 
networks currently limits S2S prediction. In addition to expanding in situ networks, 
significant research is needed to evaluate the quality and potential use of remotely 
sensed measurements of precipitation, soil moisture, snow water equivalent, and 
evapotranspiration.

140
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Prioritizing Investment in Observations
Although a general expansion of the existing observational network will be important 
to improving S2S predictions, prioritizing investments is likely to be essential. One way 
to develop such a prioritization is through sensitivity and denial experiments using 
S2S forecast systems. Here, various components of the initial condition are perturbed 
or removed and then forecast skill impacts are assessed. As also mentioned above, a 
number of recent sensitivity studies have explored the importance of soil moisture 
initializations and associated feedbacks for S2S predictions (e.g., Fennessy and Shukla, 
1999; Guo et al., 2011; Koster et al., 2004). Koster et al. (2014) further found that with 
certain initial perturbations, a land-atmosphere interaction resulted in a downstream 
phase-locking and amplification of a planetary atmospheric wave. In the weeks and 
months that followed, this phase-locking resulted in changes to atmospheric condi-
tions far away from the initial perturbations. The identification of a phase-locking 
mechanism in a historical reanalysis data set corroborated this finding. The ability to 
identify the sensitivity of remote (spatially and temporally) conditions to initial soil 
moisture highlights the importance of soil moisture observations for S2S predictions 
and also identifies regions for which accurate observations may be most important. 
Similarly, sensitivity studies have been carried out to explore the role of snow cover on 
the evolution of the winter hemisphere climate (Allen and Zender, 2010; Klingaman et 
al., 2008; Sobolowski et al., 2010). These types of sensitivity studies can help determine 
sources of predictability while also emphasizing the importance of initialization by 
certain variables and quantities in order to realize predictability. An alternative ap-
proach to perturbing the initial conditions explicitly is to perform data denial studies 
(observing system experiments, OSEs) using S2S prediction models. This has become 
common, regular practice for operational NWP and their partners in order to accu-
rately assess the utility of various observing platforms in reducing forecast errors in 
real systems with real errors. Similar efforts are also done within academic and opera-
tional ocean forecasting.
Observing system simulation experiments (OSSEs) (e.g., Arnold and Dey, 1986; Dickey, 
2003; Masutani et al., 2007, 2010) provide another means of exploring the potential 
impact of future observing systems on S2S predictions. In an OSSE, a reference run, 
typically at the highest resolution possible, is generated from a free run of an ESM 
without data assimilation. This so-called “nature run” is considered to be the true state. 
Sampled values, considered as “observations,” from this nature run are then used to 
initialize a forecast system. The simulated observations from the nature run are thus 
analogous to the traditional observations used in an actual forecast and can be used 
by an ESM with data assimilation to assess the impact of various observations on the 

141
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
analysis and forecast accuracy. Because the true state is known, analysis error can be 
computed explicitly. Using this methodology, a perturbation experiment is then run in 
which hypothetical observations are evaluated in the context of data assimilation and 
hypothetical forecasts. Such OSSE experiments have been used in the design and deci-
sion phases for the Aeolus Doppler wind lidar instrument for NWP (Baker et al., 2014; 
Stoffelen et al., 2006). OSSEs have also been proposed as a tool to design optimal air 
quality observations (Timmermans et al., 2015).
OSSEs are powerful tools because they allow for the exploration of hypothetical ob-
servations. However, they need to be designed and executed carefully to ensure that 
the results are meaningful and applicable to the real Earth system. “Perfect model” 
OSSEs (such as the experiments described above) measure the impact of hypothetical 
observations on a forecast system in which model and forecast errors are assumed to 
be nonexistent. To address the more realistic scenario in which models are assumed to 
have errors, two or more (significantly) different models are required to evaluate the 
impact of observations within prediction systems. The first model provides the refer-
ence/nature run and generates the “true states” from which simulated observations 
are extracted. The other models are then used to assimilate the simulated observa-
tions and generate forecasts that are then compared with the states generated in the 
first model. If the same or largely similar models are utilized, then model error goes 
unaccounted for, resulting in a system that is too predictable. 
To assess and prioritize new observations specific to the S2S problem, either type of 
OSSE would need to be designed and carried out using Earth system forecast models, 
with the generation of the nature run performed with a high-fidelity, state-of-the-art 
ESM. This can be computationally expensive, especially when it comes to the storage 
and distribution of the nature run data. Coordination among the parties interested in 
such a nature run is critical. Once available, further coordination on the simulation of 
the observations that already exist in the current observing system will be required, 
paying special attention to the generation and calibration of realistic observation 
errors. Once these pieces are available, any hypothetical observation network could 
be explored for assessing its potential importance. This is one of the more promising 
avenues available for prioritizing what new observing systems will provide the largest 
benefit for S2S prediction systems.
Finding 5.8: Cost-benefit analyses will be necessary to prioritize what new observa-
tions (of current variables at higher spatial or temporal resolution and/or of new 
variables) will most benefit S2S prediction systems. Observing system simulation 
experiments, and sensitivity studies more generally, are powerful tools for explor-
ing the benefits of specific observations on state estimation and overall model 

142
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
performance and could be better used to prioritize improvements to observing 
networks as well as S2S model parameterizations.
The Way Forward for Observations 
Observations form the foundation of S2S prediction systems, allowing the character-
ization of physical processes, model initialization, and the calibration and verification 
of model outputs. Relatively robust observing networks exist for the atmosphere over 
land (outside the polar regions), but current observations networks for the ocean, 
cryosphere, and land surface will require more attention in order to advance S2S 
forecasts over the next decade. The ocean in particular does not have the necessary 
coverage despite its very clear importance for S2S prediction. Furthermore, even for 
the ­atmosphere, some critical networks are in danger of deteriorating or of suffering 
breaks in continuity within the next decade. These observing systems must be main-
tained or replaced to prevent an erosion of S2S forecasting skill. Beyond maintaining 
the current observing network, development of new observing technologies and 
expansion of existing observing networks will present opportunities to drive improve-
ments in models and model initializations, especially as more components are added 
to ESMs and forecast system capability expands, growing the need for routine obser-
vations of new variables within the Earth system (e.g., aerosols, biogeochemistry).
As described above, special effort is needed to improve observations in many parts of 
the world where unique physical processes take place but few routine measurements 
are available. These include polar regions, where sea ice, land surface, and atmospheric 
processes can feed back to high- and midlatitude weather and ocean conditions; 
tropical areas characterized by convection centers that strongly influence global cir-
culation (e.g., Africa, South America, Indian and western Pacific warm pool); and highly 
dynamic coastal areas. Developing observational networks specific to capturing the 
fluxes of matter and energy within the Earth system also need attention, because the 
improper treatment of these quantities in models can result in substantial biases in 
water and energy budgets that compromise S2S forecast skill. 
Both remotely sensed and in situ measurements will be important to maintain and 
expand. Satellite-based measurements are an increasingly important component 
of air, ice, land, and water observing systems and are critical for initializing ESMs. For 
atmospheric variables, it will be particularly important to maintain remotely sensed 
measurements of the vertical profiles of key atmospheric variables (e.g., temperature, 
moisture, wind) and to continue to develop measurements likely to become more im-
portant to S2S in the next decade (e.g., precipitation, cloud liquid/ice, aerosol concen-

143
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
tration and composition). For the ocean, remotely sensed observations of SST, SSH, and 
ocean surface winds are vital globally, and preferably at resolutions fine enough to re-
solve mesoscale currents and eddies. Coverage in some cases is currently provided by 
short-term research missions, but these must be converted to long-term missions in 
order to remain valuable for operational S2S forecasting in the next decade. Advances 
in satellite observations of salinity, mixed-layer depth, and near-surface ocean currents 
also have potential to benefit S2S forecasting and should be pursued.
In coastal areas, targeted and sustained in situ measurements using moorings, ships, 
AUVs (including gliders), and other autonomous sensing platforms (see Box 5.1) 
should be better coordinated and more rapidly utilized for varied S2S research and 
applications. The S2S needs include critical data assimilation for land-ocean coastal 
predictions and also the evaluation of satellite products. Further advances in ocean 
observing technology and coverage could have tremendous value for characterizing 
important S2S processes, for improving models, and for providing information for fore-
cast initial conditions. Effective integration of the increasing ocean observations and 
platforms with S2S ocean modeling systems is also necessary, including data-model 
comparisons for improving ocean model formulations and advanced data-assimilation 
for better S2S forecasts.
For the cryosphere, continued investment into generating year-round, remotely 
sensed sea ice thickness measurements, including snow depth on top of the sea ice, 
are critical, though in situ measurements may continue to be needed in order to 
translate these measurements into dependable and timely routine estimates. For the 
land surface, new and/or planned missions for surface soil moisture, surface water, 
and evapotranspiration may add considerable value to S2S forecasting, especially 
for model development, but again many of these are research missions with limited 
lifespans. Quantities for which there would be a great benefit to develop new or better 
satellite measurements include snow water equivalent and root zone soil moisture.
For many remotely sensed variables, continued work to develop better retrieval 
algorithms will be necessary to realize the full potential of the observations. Looking 
further ahead, the development of more capable and cost-effective satellite observ-
ing systems should continue to be investigated, including constellations that provide 
multi-sensor observations, small satellite deployments (e.g., CubeSat16) that reduce 
costs and increase sampling rates and coverage, and new, expanded, and/or more 
economical sensor designs that provide routine measurements for operational fore-
casts. Investment in in situ and high-resolution observations, especially from remote 
16  http://www.cubesat.org/, accessed January 27, 2016.

144
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
or uninhabitable regions and other regions with poor coverage remains important, in 
many cases even with current and planned advances in the remotely sensed observa-
tion network. These include measurements from radiosondes, precipitation gauges 
(particularly in mountainous areas where TRMM is compromised), snow courses, flux 
towers, and subsurface ocean measurements of salinity, temperature, and ocean veloc-
ity at depth from drifters. More broadly distributed coastal radar networks for surface 
current measurement are also a key need.
Measurements from moored tropical arrays, which are critical for S2S forecasts of 
ENSO, also need to be maintained. The design of the tropical moored arrays predates 
modern S2S forecast systems or the Argo drifter network. If the agencies that have 
been sustaining the tropical mooring network now find it to be fiscally unsustainable, 
then its optimal and sustainable design should be revisited using OSSEs with mod-
ern S2S forecasts systems to assess their value for ENSO and other S2S forecasts and 
an analysis that deliberately accounts for the relative maintenance costs, historical 
instrument attrition rates, and/or issues (e.g., international political considerations and 
cost-sharing) of the various mooring locations. However, it is the view of the commit-
tee that until such deliberate analysis and redesign have been carried out, every effort 
should be made to maintain the current operational tropical mooring network with its 
current configuration.
The committee recognizes that establishing and maintaining in situ networks pose 
unique challenges, especially in remote locales not suitable for staffed observations 
and difficult climates. Looking ahead, developing automated and semi-automated 
instruments that can operate to a year or longer with minimum or no maintenance 
would allow for large increases in spatial coverage. Technology for automated instru-
ments (e.g., automated radiosonde launchers and ocean gliders and floats) exists but 
needs to mature (see Box 5.1). On the ocean side, power consumption typically limits 
the range or lifetime of floats and gliders, and the ongoing development of smaller 
and more energy-efficient sensors would be beneficial for a diverse range of autono-
mous observing platforms. Cost-benefit analyses are necessary to justify the financial 
and logistical burden.
Recommendation E: Maintain continuity of critical observations, and expand the 
temporal and spatial coverage of in situ and remotely sensed observations for Earth 
system variables that are beneficial for operational S2S prediction and for discover-
ing and modeling new sources of S2S predictability.

145
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Specifically:
• 
Maintain continuous satellite measurement records of vertical profiles of 
­atmospheric temperature and humidity without gaps in the data collection 
and with increasing vertical resolution and accuracy.
• 
Optimize and advance observations of clouds, precipitation, wind profiles, and 
mesoscale storm and boundary layer structure and evolution. In particular, 
higher resolution observations of these quantities are needed for developing 
and advancing cloud-permitting components of future S2S forecast systems.
• 
Maintain and advance satellite and other observational capabilities (e.g., 
radars, drifters, and gliders) to provide continuity and better spatial coverage, 
resolution, and quality of key surface ocean observations (e.g., SSH, SST, and 
winds), particularly near the coasts, where predictions of oceanic conditions 
are of the greatest societal importance in their own right. 
• 
Maintain and expand the network of in situ instruments providing routine 
real-time measurements of subsurface ocean properties, such as temperature, 
salinity, and currents, with increasing resolutions and accuracy. Appropriate 
platforms for these instruments will include arrays of moored buoys (espe-
cially in the tropics), AUVs, marine mammals, and profiling floats. 
• 
Develop accurate and timely year-round sea ice thickness measurements; 
if from remote sensing of sea ice freeboard, then simultaneous snow depth 
measurements are needed to translate the observation of freeboard into sea 
ice thickness. 
• 
Expand in situ measurements of precipitation, snow depth, soil moisture, and 
land surface fluxes, and improve and/or better exploit remotely sensed soil 
moisture, snow water equivalent, and evapotranspiration measurements. 
• 
Continue to invest in observations (both in situ and remotely sensed) that are 
important for informing fluxes between the component interfaces, including 
but not limited to land surface observations of temperature, moisture, and 
snow depth; marine surface observations from tropical moored buoys; and 
ocean observations of near-surface currents, temperature, salinity, ocean heat 
content, mixed-layer depth, and sea ice conditions. 
• 
Apply autonomous and other new observing technologies to expand the 
spatial and temporal coverage of observation networks, and support the con­
tinued development of these observational methodologies.
Although it would be beneficial to expand the geographic coverage and resolution 
of many types of observations, cost and logistics demand that priorities be deter-
mined. Beyond the general need for more routine observations of the ocean, land, and 
cryosphere to support coupled S2S prediction systems, it is not always clear a priori 

146
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
what measurements will be most beneficial. Determining where to add measurements 
of existing variables or which new variables to add can be planned more effectively 
through the use of OSSEs, OSEs, and other types of sensitivity studies that specifically 
utilize S2S forecast systems in their design and execution. For the case of satellite 
observations, a recent NRC study also provides a value and decision framework that 
allows prioritization of new versus continuous measurements (National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2015b). 
Recommendation F: Determine priorities for observational systems and networks 
by developing and implementing observing system simulation experiments, observ-
ing system experiments, and other sensitivity studies using S2S forecast systems.
DATA ASSIMILATION
Data assimilation (DA) is the process of quantitatively estimating dynamically evolving 
fields by combining information from observations with the predictive equations of 
models. A key purpose of DA is to create initial conditions, which are used to produce 
operational forecasts as well as retrospective forecasts and reanalysis (see Figure 5.1). 
DA is also used to control error growth within the model due to limits in predictive 
capability. Most assimilation schemes are derived from estimation theory (Gelb, 1974; 
Jazwinski, 1970), information theory (Cover and Thomas, 2012; Sobczyk, 2001), control 
theory (LeDimet and Talagrand, 1986; Lions, 1971), and optimization and inverse prob-
lem theory (Tarantola, 2005). 
In operational weather and ocean forecasting centers today, approximations are com-
monly made to assimilate observations into the model state and parameter spaces. 
Some common assumptions include assuming normal, Gaussian error distributions for 
the observations and for the model state (which are often not normally distributed); 
using small ensemble sizes to characterize the uncertainties in a high-dimensional 
space (i.e., rank deficiency); assuming uncorrelated observation errors; and using 
linearized operators for transforming the model state to observation space or using 
a linearized version of the S2S model itself. These assumptions can have significant 
impacts on the quality of the analysis (Daley, 1991; Evensen, 2009; Kalnay, 2003), and 
research is needed to develop data assimilation techniques that help overcome these 
challenges. 
Although traditionally grounded in linear theory and the Gaussian approximation 
(Kalman, 1960), recent research progress has focused on the development of more 
efficient assimilation methods that account for nonlinear dynamics and utilize non-

147
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Gaussian probabilistic features. Even though several of these schemes would be chal-
lenging to employ in large, realistic S2S systems, some of the recent progress is prom-
ising for probabilistic S2S predictions and for the reduction of inherent uncertainties. 
Enhancing the coupling between components of ESMs is an important challenge in 
S2S prediction, and recent research on coupled DA is also promising. Accounting for 
the accurate and possibly non-Gaussian transfer of observed information from one 
component of the Earth system to another is very important for enhancing the capa-
bilities of strongly coupled S2S forecasting systems.
In this section, the committee provides details on the status of DA efforts in major 
components of S2S ESMs and then highlights opportunities for advancing S2S fore-
cast systems through coupled DA, hybrid assimilation methods, Bayesian DA, reduced 
order stochastic modeling, and the estimation of parameter values and parameteriza-
tions. Recommendations for priority research in these topics conclude the section.
State Estimation in Earth System Model Components
State estimation in Earth system components has generally been performed using DA 
techniques from one of two classes of estimation approaches: (1) maximum likelihood 
estimates or (2) minimum error variance estimates. In geophysical applications, the for-
mer can be associated with the so-called variational methods (Courtier and Talagrand, 
1987) and the latter to Kalman Filters/Smoothers (Kalman, 1960) and ensemble-based 
schemes (Evensen, 2009). 
As pointed out in the 2010 NRC report on improving intraseasonal to interannual 
(ISI) climate prediction, improving the assimilation of atmospheric observations has 
yielded significant gains in numerical weather prediction skill (Figure 5.6). For op-
erational atmospheric NWP applications, incremental variational assimilation has 
become the method of choice, including 3D-Var (Kleist et al., 2009; Lorenc et al., 2000) 
and 4D-Var (Courtier et al., 1994; Rabier et al., 2000). More recently, hybrid assimilation 
algorithms that combine ensemble and variational methods have led to some further 
success (Bonavita et al., 2015; Clayton et al., 2013; Kuhl et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013b). 
Some operational centers are pursuing hybrid four-dimensional ensemble-variational 
(4D-EnVar) techniques either as a first implementation of a 4D scheme (NCEP, Kleist 
and Ide, 2015), as a replacement (Environment Canada; Buehner et al. 2013), or poten-
tial replacement (United Kingdom Met Office [UKMO], Lorenc et al., 2015) for 4D-Var. 
The hybrid ensemble-variational algorithms have potential computational savings and 
scalability. This is because tangent linear and adjoint (transpose of the tangent linear 
to propagate sensitivities backward in time) versions of the prediction model are not 

148
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 5.6  ECMWF 500-hPa geopotential height anomaly correlations from two different reanalysis 
systems. NOTES: Gray: ERA-40 (Uppala et al., 2005) with 3D-Var (ca. 1998); Colors: ERA-Interim (Dee et al., 
2011), which uses 4D-Var (ca. 2005). “D+3” corresponds to the 3-day forecast, “D+5” the 5-day forecast, 
and “D+7” the 7-day forecast. In each case the top line is the anomaly correlation of the forecasts started 
from the reanalysis for the Northern Hemisphere, and the bottom line is the corresponding forecast for 
the Southern Hemisphere. Note the improvement brought about by the improvement of the DA system, 
which is especially important in the Southern Hemisphere. SOURCE: NRC (2010b) and ECMWF.
needed as direct components of the assimilation solver itself. Such scalability has 
implications for coupled DA (see below) given that strong coupling can be achieved 
without the need for the adjoint of the coupled models (Bishop and Martin, 2012).
Ocean DA has led to substantial improvements in ocean forecasting capabilities and 
scientific understanding of ocean processes (Bennett, 1992; DeMey, 1997; Evensen, 
2009; Lermusiaux, 2006; Malanotte-Rizzoli, 1996; Rienecker, 2003; Robinson et al., 
1998; Wunsch, 1996). Ocean DA is frequently employed for reanalyses that optimally 
combine model simulations with observations and so allow for quantitative scientific 
studies of ocean phenomena from the small to the global ocean scales. Operational 
ocean forecasting has also been enhanced by DA from estuaries and regional seas to 
the global ocean (e.g., Chassignet and Verron, 2006; Fox et al., 2002; Pinardi and Woods, 
2002; Schiller and Brassington, 2011). The research in DA and uncertainty prediction 
methods has also been very active in ocean studies (Cummings et al., 2009; Evensen, 
2004; Evensen, 2009; Lermusiaux et al., 2006), in part because of the lack of legacy sys-
tems (as is the case in atmospheric models), which allow for direct implementations of 

149
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
new methods for real-time forecasting (e.g., Lermusiaux, 1999; Oke et al., 2008) and for 
optimized reanalysis (Moore, 2013; Wunsch and Heimbach, 2013).
Assimilating data in sea ice models has also been done successfully (e.g., Kauker et al., 
2008; Lindsay and Zhang, 2006; Stark et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2013b) but usually only 
for sea ice concentration using nudging or adjoint methods. Equally often, sea ice 
forecasts have been made in models that assimilate observations in the atmosphere 
and/or ocean only (e.g., Chevallier et al., 2013; Guemas et al., 2014; Merryfield et al., 
2013a; Msadek et al., 2014; Wunsch and Heimbach, 2013), with mixed results in the sea 
ice cover. Improvements in sea ice model DA are on the horizon: The Ensemble ­Kalman 
Filter (EnKF) has been used to assimilate sea ice concentration and ice freeboard 
(height above sea level) by a Belgian university research group (Mathiot et al., 2012) 
and either sea ice concentrations alone (Lisæter et al., 2003) or with sea ice drift and a 
suite of upper ocean variables by a Norwegian center (Sakov et al., 2012). 
Among the myriad of variables in modern land models, soil moisture and SWE are 
thought to be the most important sources of predictability for the Earth system, high-
lighting their importance within the initialization step (e.g., Koster et al., 2011, Chapter 4, 
and the observations section above). However, until recently, soil moisture monitoring 
from satellites has been too shallow (at only a few millimeters depth) to be useful for DA 
directly, and SWE has not been available with sufficient accuracy or coverage. 
Often, land surface state estimates are generated offline using Land Data Assimilation 
Systems (LDAS) that incorporate near real-time information about meteorological 
forcing such as wind, temperature, and precipitation from both models and observa-
tions (NRC, 2010b). The global land data assimilation system (GLDAS; Rodell et al., 
2004), developed jointly by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), makes use of both 
ground- and space-based observational information to constrain modeled land states 
in addition to the meteorological forcing from a separate atmospheric DA system. The 
GLDAS is a mixture of traditional DA for parameters such as surface temperature and 
snow cover, with constraining offline land model-integration that produces estimates 
of other variables such as soil moisture, snow depth, soil temperature, and surface 
water storage. Thus for some land surface variables, LDAS systems are not necessarily 
DA systems in the same sense as described for atmospheric and oceanic components, 
but instead constrain integrations of offline land surface models.
There is progress within LDAS algorithms and within the Land Information System (LIS; 
Kumar et al., 2006) to use more traditional assimilative techniques such as a ­simplified 
Extended Kalman Filter for other variables such as soil moisture (de Rosnay et al., 
2013). This will become more viable as new instruments for measuring soil moisture 

150
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
from the SMOS and SMAP satellite missions come on line and are directly assimilated 
into LDAS (e.g., LIS User’s Manual). Although difficulties with monitoring SWE remain, 
assimilation of the related variables of snow cover fraction from MODIS (Zhang et 
al., 2014) and terrestrial water storage from GRACE (Su et al., 2010) in an ensemble 
­Kalman filter scheme has improved the simulation of SWE indirectly. However, prog-
ress has been slow as the application of traditional (atmospheric) DA techniques for 
the land surface is complicated by the spatial variability and heterogeneities of surface 
parameters and because of the aforementioned issues with observations (Balsamo et 
al., 2014).
In summary, although not as advanced as DA in operational atmospheric models, 
DA systems in other Earth system components are beginning to embrace ensemble-
based or hybrid assimilation algorithms as a way forward. Results so far indicate that 
this is a promising direction because it allows for a combination of the advantages of 
the different approaches. Xu et al. (2014) show one such example for a land surface 
application, where a hybrid assimilation scheme is used to improve the assimilation 
of snow fraction information. Extending schemes such as this to generate coupled 
ensembles could help forecast the uncertainties and then be used to perform the DA 
accordingly, either within a weakly or strongly coupled update step (see below). The 
use of an ensemble from coupled models would also significantly simplify the design 
and implementation of coupled background error covariances, which are needed 
for coupled assimilation. In other words, the data in one field can update the state in 
another field directly based on these coupled error covariance estimates. 
As a final note, it is important to keep in mind that although advanced data tech-
niques are generally able to extract information from observations, the process of data 
assimilation is fundamentally dependent on the observing system. A system that is 
under-observed will not yield accurate state estimates, further highlighting the need 
to maintain and enhance the observing system (Recommendation E) and to utilize 
quantitative methods (e.g., OSSEs) to do so.
Finding 5.9: In operational centers, the most advanced data assimilation techniques 
are usually implemented in atmospheric data assimilation. Other Earth system 
components are also moving toward ensemble Kalman filter-based or hybrid data 
assimilation algorithms, allowing for the possibility of seamless assimilation and/or 
synergy within a framework of coupled data assimilation.
Finding 5.10: Research activities in data assimilation schemes are occurring uni-
formly across fields, including for land, ocean, and ice applications, but also for 
engineering, applied mathematics, and other sciences. The potential of all of these 

151
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
multidisciplinary advances cannot be underestimated, and several of these new 
schemes have potential for S2S applications. 
Coupled Data Assimilation
Historically, many centers performed the assimilation of each of the Earth system com-
ponents—atmosphere, ocean, land, sea ice—independently. But because the systems 
coevolve, such disconnected assimilations can compromise forecast skill. Although 
this may not pose a problem for very long forecasts (annual to decadal), it can be a 
significant issue for S2S timescales, where initial conditions are still quite important. 
Advances include implementing a so-called “weakly coupled” assimilation, in which 
the background state (Figure 5.7) is computed from a freely evolving coupled model 
and then subsequently broken into parts that are needed for each component. Next, 
assimilation is done component by component (i.e., ocean, atmosphere, sea ice, and 
land analyses are quasi-independent). The various analyses are then stitched back 
together to initialize the coupled model and run the forecast. This is in contrast to the 
aforementioned uncoupled analyses, in which all steps in Figure 5.7 are integrated 
component wise. NCEP’s Climate Forecast System (v2) has already developed a weakly 
coupled system for both reanalysis (necessary for retrospective forecasts and calibra-
tion) and the generation of initial conditions for the real-time operational seasonal 
forecasts (Saha et al., 2010). Most other operational centers are moving in a similar 
direction, and many centers are adopting such a philosophy even for weather predic-
tion (Hendrik Tolman, personal communication, April 22, 2015).
Weakly coupled assimilation also allows each possible Earth system component 
to deter­mine its most appropriate assimilation scheme. The ECMWF OOPS (Object 
­Oriented Programming System17) project and the United States JEDI (Joint Effort for 
Data Assimilation Integration; Tom Auligné, personal communication, February 5, 
2016) project are examples of methods to potentially achieve such coupling in a con-
venient, efficient manner. Specific assimilation schemes for each component can also 
be employed in a strongly coupled framework, assuming connections across com-
ponents are maintained within the assimilation step (this is discussed in more detail 
below). 
A challenge for coupled assimilation is that the spatial and temporal scales of phe-
nomena and errors are quite different among the various Earth system components. A 
direct practical effect of these scale mismatches is different assimilation update cycles 
17  http://www.data-assimilation.net/Events/Year3/OOPS.pdf, accessed February 5, 2016.

152
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
employed in today’s single-component assimilation systems (e.g., the time step in Fig-
ure 5.7). The scale mismatches are in large part a consequence of when and how often 
observations are available. For example, because of insufficient satellite coverage, most 
global ocean DA systems utilize daily or weekly assimilation windows on the order of 
days. This is infrequent relative to global atmospheric DA systems in which more ob-
servations are available. These often use a 3-hour, 6-hour, or 12-hour window and up-
date cycle. Regional and coastal DA, as well as submesoscale weather assimilation, can 
have even shorter windows (e.g., minutes to an hour) when observations are available. 
Considering all of these scales, some of the key questions are What is the best way to 
combine the separate components into a single, streamlined algorithm? How can the 
error characteristics of the multiple scales and dynamics be efficiently represented for 
FIGURE 5.7  Schematic diagram illustrating 4D-Var data assimilation. NOTES: Over the period of the as-
similation window, 4D-Var is performed to assimilate the most recent observations (obs, marked as blue 
stars), using a segment of the previous forecast as the background (black dotted line—the background 
state, Xb). This updates the initial model trajectory for the subsequent forecast (red dotted line), using 
the analysis Xa as the initial condition. The yellow dotted box to the left identifies the special case of 
3D-Var. Jo represents the misfit of the observations to the analysis trajectory, and Jb represents the misfit 
between the analysis and original background at the initial time t0. SOURCE: Figure and caption adapted 
from Lahoz and Schneider (2014).

153
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
use in DA? What are the most pressing needs within the context of future nonlinear, 
coupled DA schemes?
A promising long-term solution is so-called “strongly coupled” DA (e.g., Lu et al., 2015; 
Sluka et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2015b; Tardif et al., 2014). In strongly coupled DA, obser-
vations within one component are allowed to directly and instantaneously impact the 
state estimate in other components (with constraints). Early attempts at performing 
strongly coupled DA using an OSSE for a relatively simple coupled-atmosphere-ocean 
system have shown promise (Sluka et al., 2015). The first set of experiments assimilated 
only atmospheric observations into the coupled model using weakly and strongly 
coupled assimilation configurations. Not too surprisingly for a configuration without 
assimilation of oceanic observations, the strongly coupled configuration reduces the 
oceanic analysis root mean square error (RMSE). Perhaps more intriguing is the fact 
that the atmospheric analysis RMSE is also reduced within the strongly coupled con-
figuration (Figure 5.8).
Given that weakly coupled assimilation systems have been successful thus far (Climate 
Forecast System Reanalysis/Climate Forecast System version 2 (CFSR/CFSv2), Saha et 
al., 2010, 2014) and that there are many computational complications to implement-
FIGURE 5.8  RMSE improvement of the atmosphere averaged over the past 5 years. NOTES: Positive 
values (red) indicate STRONG performing better than WEAK. Fields shown are the temperature (a) and 
humidity (b) at the lowest model level, and zonal wind speed (c) throughout the troposphere. SOURCE: 
Sluka et al. (2015). 

154
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ing strong coupling in today’s operational systems, more research is needed to explore 
potential benefits of strongly coupled systems for operational S2S forecasting. First, tech-
niques need to be developed to estimate and test coupled (e.g., cross-dynamics, cross-
media, and cross-component) interactions (e.g., covariances) for Gaussian assimilation 
updates and their generalizations (e.g., mutual information) for nonlinear updates. Such 
estimation and verification of interactions are needed to avoid erroneous updates. Given 
the different spatial and temporal scales associated with observations in various com-
ponents, it may not always be practical to allow some observations in one component 
to directly alter the fields in another component during each assimilation update: If the 
coupled covariances used in the direct coupled update are not accurate, then observa-
tions of the ocean (perhaps observing a slow process) could, for example, erroneously 
update the lower atmosphere (faster processes). Theoretically, in the Gaussian assimila-
tion update, if the covariances across components are represented with enough accu-
racy, then such strong coupling will be successful. In nonlinear and non-Gaussian assimi-
lation updates, covariances can be generalized to the mutual information between the 
field variables of the Earth system. A successful strong coupling would then require an 
accurate representation of such mutual information across the entire modeling system. 
Multiscale and multi-dynamic DA also require more research to advance coupled DA 
in S2S forecast systems. Ideally, observed information should be transferred across 
component boundaries in accordance with multiple dynamics and scales, respecting 
dynamical causality and avoiding spurious correlations, for example due to ensemble-
rank deficiencies or too approximate adjoint models. To address this issue, ensemble 
sizes would need to be increased or efficient reduced-order uncertainty prediction 
schemes employed (see below). Attention is especially needed for variational ap-
proaches, because adjoint equations derived for the coupled systems are not always 
the same as each component’s adjoints stitched together, particularly when across-
component fluxes (e.g., air-sea fluxes) are nonlinear. Similar issues apply to hybrid DA 
schemes, because complex multiple dynamics (even within a single component of the 
Earth system) also need to be represented accurately in the coupled updates. Obser-
vations collected by the diverse observing system, which contain multiple dynamics 
and temporal and spatial scales, may also require special treatment. This might include 
the filtering of dynamics or scale so as to remove the risk of spurious coupling before 
assimilation into S2S prediction systems. For example, in the ocean, short tidal scales 
are challenging to handle in global models, and internal tides and waves should not 
be assimilated as eddies. In conclusion, to be successful, strongly coupled DA for S2S 
systems requires research in efficient methods, multiscale and coupled-dynamics 
assimilation updates, non-Gaussian nonlinear updates, and reduced-order stochastic 
schemes for efficient forecasting of coupled statistics.

155
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Finding 5.11: Although so-called weakly coupled assimilation has been successful 
for generating initial conditions for S2S prediction systems, there is potential for 
so-called strongly coupled assimilation to substantially improve state estimates 
for coupled systems. More research is needed to determine the benefits of strongly 
coupled systems. 
Bayesian Data Assimilation, Reduced-order Uncertainty 
Quantification and Probabilistic Forecasting
As mentioned above, many DA algorithms used in operational systems today are 
linear, based on linearizations, or based on varied heuristic hypotheses and ad hoc 
approximations. Most of these assumptions are related to the probability densities of 
the model state and its errors, and of the observations and their errors. For highly non-
linear dynamics or non-Gaussian relations, these assumptions may prove difficult to 
overcome. S2S dynamics are prime examples of multiscale, nonlinear dynamics, from 
turbulence to large-scale dynamics, across the multiple physical processes occurring 
in the Earth system. As a result, the field variables that describe the S2S dynamics (e.g., 
temperature, winds, currents, ice cover) can have complex intermittent behavior, with 
multiple scales and nonstationary heterogeneous statistics. Furthermore, S2S predic-
tion requires accurate forecasts of both the likelihood of specific events and of overall 
expected conditions over longer S2S lead times. Efficient reduced-order stochastic 
methods and Bayesian techniques can help address these issues of non-Gaussian 
relations, the former for the accurate forecast of probability densities (uncertainty 
quantification) and the latter for the rigorous combination of observations with these 
forecasts (Bayesian DA). 
The importance of accounting for nonlinearities in geophysical DA has been known 
for some time (e.g., Miller et al., 1994). Nonlinearities affect the dynamical evolution 
and, as a result, geophysical fields can be characterized by complex, far-from-Gaussian 
statistics (Dee and Da Silva, 2003; Lermusiaux et al., 2006; NRC, 1993). With the intro-
duction of the ensemble Kalman filter (Evensen, 1994; Houtekamer and Mitchell, 1998), 
error subspace schemes (Lermusiaux and Robinson, 1999), square root filters (Tippett 
et al., 2003; Whitaker and Hamill, 2002), and Monte Carlo methods (Doucet et al., 2001) 
have grown rapidly within the atmospheric and oceanic DA community. In addition to 
utilizing the inherent nonlinearities of the governing equations, stochastic methods 
allow exploration and exploitation of probabilistic structures. Nonlinearities in general 
lead to non-Gaussian structures, which need to be used in the assimilation updates 
(Bocquet et al., 2010). This allows the use of mutual information in the coupled DA.

156
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Nonlinear Non-Gaussian Data Assimilation
One class of non-Gaussian DA methods is particle filters (e.g., Ades and van Leeuwen, 
2015; Pham, 2001; van Leeuwen, 2009), which evolve probability density functions 
(pdfs) using a discrete set of models states or particles. A related interest has been 
the approximation of distributions by Gaussian Mixture Models (e.g., Alspach and 
­Sorenson, 1972; Anderson and Anderson, 1999; Bengtsson et al., 2003; Sondergaard 
and Lermusiaux, 2013b). An advantage of Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) is that 
they become equivalent to Gaussian schemes when a single component is found 
sufficient to describe the forecast pdfs but can represent more complex multi-modal 
pdfs by increasing and optimizing the number of components in the mixture. Such 
Bayesian DA methods could be further developed for the S2S system components and 
for strongly coupled DA. A critical need, then, is the efficient and accurate prediction of 
coupled pdfs, which is in the realm of uncertainty quantification.
Uncertainty Quantification and Probabilistic Forecasting 
Probabilistic forecasting and the quantification of uncertainties are critical when 
systems are nonlinear and have uncertain terms in their governing equations or in 
their initial and boundary conditions (see also section below on Calibration, Verifica-
tion, and Combination of S2S Forecasts). Ensemble predictions provide uncertainty 
estimates, but so far using only a relatively small number of forecasts. To address the 
resulting rank-deficiency, various localization approximations (Bengtsson et al., 2003; 
Lermusiaux, 2007) and useful heuristic arguments (Anderson and Anderson, 1999) 
have been used. However, just as the adjoint equations allow variational DA based on 
linearized partial differential equations (PDEs),  uncertainty propagation schemes now 
allow Bayesian DA using pdfs predicted based on nonlinear PDEs. 
Stochastic model forecasts are feasible with numerical methods for stochastic PDEs 
(Kloeden and Platen, 1999; Xiu, 2010) including direct methods (Doucet et al., 2001) 
and polynomial chaos expansion and spectral methods (Ghanem and Spanos, 1991; 
Le Maître and Knio, 2010; Najm, 2009). These approaches can be categorized as either 
intrusive or nonintrusive, depending on whether or not they require modification 
within the numerical model itself. The nonintrusive Monte Carlo method (i.e., run-
ning an ensemble of simulations with or without random forcing) can provide the full 
statistics of the problem. However, such ensemble simulations have convergence rates 
usually proportional to the square root of the number of samples. The polynomial 
chaos expansion (Ghanem and Spanos, 1991; Li and Ghanem, 1998; Nouy, 2007; Xiu 
and Karniadakis, 2002) based on the theory by Wiener (e.g. Wiener, 1958) can represent 

157
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
and propagate large uncertainties through complex models. (For useful ocean appli-
cations, see Mattern et al. [2012] and Thacker et al. [2012, 2015]).
To account for the time dependence of both the uncertainty and dynamics, general­
ized Karhunen-Loève expansion with time varying coefficients and basis functions 
have also been used (Lermusiaux, 2001; Lermusiaux and Robinson, 1999). ­Recently, 
dynamically orthogonal stochastic PDEs (Sapsis and Lermusiaux, 2009, 2012; 
­Ueckermann et al., 2013) have been obtained. These reduced PDEs allow efficient 
probabilistic forecasts. Sondergaard and Lermusiaux (2013a, 2013b) developed a 
Bayesian nonlinear filtering scheme that combines these reduced PDEs with Gaussian 
Mixture Models, showing advantages of respecting nonlinear ocean dynamics and 
preserving non-Gaussian statistics.
In summary, Bayesian DA and uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods have shown 
significant promise to advance coupled DA and UQ, but continued research is needed 
to yield significant impacts within the context of realistic S2S coupled ocean, atmo-
sphere, land, and ice applications. If new numerical modeling systems were to be 
developed or augmented, then it would be essential to consider stochastic forcing, un-
certainty quantification, observation models, and coupled DA schemes as part of their 
development for physical and numerical consistency. The advent of the uncertainty 
forecasting and Bayesian inference methods described above, which directly utilize 
the original coupled governing equations and their numerical schemes, would thus be 
directly relevant to S2S applications, because they imply the integration and coupling 
of the S2S modeling components (e.g., atmosphere, land, sea, and ice) from the start.
Finding 5.12: Research on Bayesian data assimilation and uncertainty quantifica-
tion has grown substantially in atmospheric and oceanic sciences and also across 
disciplines such as applied mathematics and engineering. These methods, which 
allow for the optimal use of the full probabilistic information and utilize rigorous 
­reduced-order differential equations, hold promise for integrating components of 
S2S prediction systems and for coupled data assimilation. Needs include ­research 
on hybrid methods, multiscale and coupled-dynamics assimilation updates, 
­Bayesian data assimilation, and rigorous reduced-order stochastic methods.
Importance of Reanalysis for Retrospective Forecasts, 
Validation, and Parameterization
Retrospective DA with frozen variables, so-called “reanalysis,” plays a crucial role in 
providing initial conditions for retrospective forecasts and as validation data sets 

158
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
from which to perform verification and calibration (see also Combination, ­Calibration, 
Verification, and Optimization section below). Reanalyses also provide insights into 
model process shortcomings (see Models section below). Indeed for more than 
40 years, reanalysis data sets have led to improved understanding of the Earth system, 
prediction at longer lead times, and diagnosis of extreme events and long-term trends. 
Having physically consistent data sets across Earth system components is vital for 
diag­nosing, initializing, and validating S2S prediction systems, which are dependent on 
representing coupling in order to realize forecast skill. Despite their importance, global 
­reanalyses are a huge undertaking, requiring a massive amount of staff time, computa-
tion time, and data. 
A variety of global reanalysis efforts have been carried out at many different predic-
tion centers (e.g., www.reanalyses.org, accessed January 27, 2016). These reanalyses 
have different motivations and goals (Dee et al., 2011; Ebita et al., 2011; Rienecker et 
al., 2011; Saha et al., 2010; Uppala et al., 2005). However, the advancement of modeling 
capabilities, coupled DA techniques, and harvesting of additional historical observa-
tions continue to have potential to vastly improve reanalysis data sets, especially 
coupled reanalysis for S2S prediction. As an example, NCEP is planning for its next 
generation coupled reanalysis capability as part of the development of version 3 of its 
Climate Forecast System. The plan includes significant developments to aspects of the 
reanalysis system, including observations, modeling, assimilation (including coupled 
DA), and the addition of new components such as aerosols and waves. There are simi-
lar efforts elsewhere in the international community (Dee et al., 2014). Although some 
of these efforts involve performing reanalyses through the satellite era, other efforts 
are re-creating data sets for much longer time periods, such as the NOAA 20th century 
reanalysis (Compo et al., 2011), ERA CLIM (Stickler et al., 2014), and CLIM-2,18 which will 
utilize the coupled DA for climate reanalysis (Laloyaux et al., 2016). 
Although these reanalyses will provide physically consistent state estimates for the 
Earth system components that are part of the S2S systems, there is a disconnect be-
tween the retrospective initialization from these reanalysis data sets and the initial-
ization of real-time forecasts. The real-time initializations generally evolve away from 
the frozen reanalysis systems because of the addition of new observations and/or 
improvements in the DA itself. In other words, the real-time initialization evolves with 
advancements to avoid significant deterioration that could occur if the assimilation 
were to be kept frozen (i.e., instruments eventually disappear and are replaced with 
new observing platforms). 
18  http://www.ecmwf.int/en/research/projects/era-clim2, accessed February 5, 2016.

159
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Finding 5.13: Reanalyses are critical for generating retrospective forecasts, study-
ing predictability, and validating S2S forecasts. Continued investment in global 
reanalysis research and operational production will be important for advancing 
S2S predictive capabilities. Improving the temporal continuity and the frequency of 
reanalysis may be particularly beneficial. 
Data Assimilation to Improve Cloud Representation
One difficult problem in atmospheric DA involves the use of cloudy and precipitation-
affected satellite radiances (Bauer et al., 2011; Errico et al., 2007). Currently, many 
centers ignore fields of view that are affected by clouds and precipitation (particularly 
for infrared radiances), only utilize the partially clear scenes, or assimilate so-called 
“cloud-cleared” radiances. Cloudy and precipitating radiances are particularly impor-
tant because they help prescribe the state in areas of the globe undergoing disturbed 
conditions. Ignoring these observations leaves gaps in the most dynamic parts of the 
atmosphere, areas that are likely to have the largest error growth. Improving the use 
of observations in cloudy areas is a very active area of research among the operational 
NWP centers, with some progress being made over the past several years (ECMWF, 
UKMO, NCEP; Geer et al., 2014). Further advancing the use of such observations may be 
especially critical in the tropics, for example, in initializing the state of the MJO.
Along similar lines, only a tiny fraction of available satellite observations of the at-
mosphere (particularly infrared and radar observations) are actually assimilated into 
NWP models. Although the assimilation of rain rate and precipitable water from TRMM 
and SSM/I has been successful for NWP (Benedetti et al., 2005; Treadon, 1996; Tsuyuki, 
1997), data from space-based precipitation radars remain underutilized. Similar to 
cloud and precipitation-affected radiances, space-based radar is problematic for pres-
ent DA schemes because of nonlinearity and difficulty in forward simulation. Gauss-
ian variable transform has the potential to improve the assimilation of precipitation 
data into NWP models (Lien et al., 2015), and further improvements may be possible 
through direct assimilation of dual-polarization reflectivities from the Global Precipita-
tion Mission core (e.g., Hou et al., 2014, see also Observations section). 
In summary, better atmospheric initializations in cloudy and precipitating areas is 
important for predicting the evolution of important S2S phenomena such as the MJO 
(e.g., Benedetti et al., 2005; Hou et al., 2014; Lien et al., 2015; Treadon, 1996; Tsuyuki, 1997; 
Vintzileos and Behringer, 2008), along with the potential for benefits in predicting soil 
moisture. Such improvements might also lead to better reanalyses, better cloud clima-
tologies, and thus greater potential for exploration of sources of predictability.

160
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 5.14: Observations continue to be underutilized in atmospheric data 
assimila­tion, particularly satellite-based microwave and infrared radiances over 
land and in cloudy/precipitating fields of view. Better utilization is important for 
filling in some of the data gaps over dynamically active regions, and also for char-
acterizing the states and properties of cloud and precipitation-related processes, 
which will be essential to preparing for cloud-resolving capability.
Fully Exploiting Data Sets to Estimate Parameters and Parameterizations
In addition to being important for initializing models, DA is a sophisticated means of 
using observational information for the estimation of uncertain model parameters 
(Bell et al., 2004; Evensen, 2009; Navon, 1998; Ruiz and Pulido, 2015; Smedstad and 
Obrien, 1991; Smith et al., 2013; Trudinger et al., 2008). Two particularly relevant re-
cent studies have explored the use of DA-based parameter estimation for coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models (Kondrashov et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2015). Here, using 
inline parameter estimates significantly reduced model biases, even for variables 
such as deep ocean temperature and zonal ocean currents that had no observations 
assimilated to the model to constrain them directly. Parameter estimation has also 
been shown to be feasible for intermediate ESMs (Annan et al., 2005). However, the 
challenges mentioned above for state estimation are similar or even more relevant 
for parameter estimation, because of intrinsic nonlinearity. More research is needed 
to extend the usefulness of DA for parameter estimation (e.g., Bocquet, 2012; Bocquet 
and Sakov, 2013). DA has also been used to estimate variables in the Earth system that 
are not well observed and/or may not have any a priori information, such as surface 
carbon fluxes (Kang et al., 2012). Thus a bright research area is the use of DA to rigor-
ously discriminate among model formulations and parameterizations, which is critical 
for both scientific understanding and applications.
Finding 5.15: In addition to being useful for optimal state estimation, data assimila-
tion can be an extremely powerful tool for performing parameter estimation and 
optimizing model performance, which may become critical for S2S applications. 
It is important that reanalysis data sets and diagnostics therein, such as analysis 
increment and innovation statistics, continue to be publicly disseminated to assist 
in parameterization development and parameter estimation. 

161
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
The Way Forward for Data Assimilation
DA is an essential part of S2S prediction systems and is critical for generating real-time 
initial conditions as well as the initial conditions for the retrospective forecasts (in the 
form of reanalysis). However, a number of issues in current DA need to be resolved 
to improve S2S forecast systems. First, parts of the varied observing systems remain 
underutilized by current DA techniques. Examples include the lack of assimilation of 
satellite information in cloudy and precipitation regions and the limited use of ocean 
observations collected by the increasing number of autonomous ocean platforms. 
More research is needed to comprehensively and effectively assimilate such measure-
ments for S2S applications. Some of the challenges originate from the multiple spatial 
and temporal scales occurring within and across the components of the Earth system. 
Ideally, the multiscale and multi-dynamic information contained in the observations 
could be fully assimilated. Multiscale hybrid methods, coupled-covariance update 
algorithms, and nonlinear non-Gaussian schemes show promise for addressing these 
challenges, but need research to mature.
Second, given that S2S predictions will continue to rely on coupled ESMs, coupled DA 
will remain at the forefront of S2S research and operational innovations. However, S2S-
specific challenges for coupled DA originate from practical, computational, method-
ological, and dynamical hurdles, all of which need to be overcome. For example, most 
operational centers continue to face inconsistencies that result from independent or 
quasi-independent state estimates being pieced together in uncoupled or weakly 
coupled assimilation systems. Overcoming such limitations will become ever more 
important as S2S prediction systems become more complex (i.e., adding new compo-
nents such as aerosols and surface waves). Instead of being ignored, the complex but 
known dynamical interconnections and the corresponding coupled covariances or 
mutual information should be exploited. If the coupling is correct, then it is likely to in-
crease accuracy of S2S forecasts. To allow such immediate impact of observations from 
one component to another, and across varied dynamics, efficient strongly coupled 
­assimilation schemes are needed. The potential of the first strongly coupled algo-
rithms has already recently been demonstrated for simple coupled models with 4D-
Var (Smith et al., 2015a) and EnKF schemes (e.g., Sluka et al., 2015). However, strongly 
coupled assimilation schemes are in their infancy and have not yet been tested on 
more complex S2S coupled systems. Thus practical and computational research is 
needed, in part to assess the potential value added by moving to strongly coupled DA 
schemes and to establish whether implementing strong coupling is worth the added 
cost and complexity to operational S2S systems. Methodological and dynamical 

162
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
research is also needed, especially to employ and improve assimilation methods that 
exploit the coupled dynamics to perform multiscale and coupled assimilation updates. 
Third, DA, uncertainty quantification, and probabilistic prediction methods are critical 
for S2S forecasting, but are today often characterized by heuristics and approxima-
tions that are employed for computational expedience more than accuracy. Needs in 
this area include efficient stochastic schemes to forecast the coupled statistics and 
coupled Bayesian DA updates to fully utilize the coupled statistics. Novel uncertainty 
quantification schemes and reduced-order stochastic methods that efficiently in-
tegrate the governing stochastic partial differential equations are being developed 
and may in the future represent possible further avenues for improvement of S2S 
forecast systems. These could replace computationally expensive direct Monte Carlo 
S2S ensemble predictions (i.e., the integration of a number of model simulations with 
different initial conditions, boundary conditions, and stochastic forcing). Research on 
Bayesian DA has also grown recently in atmospheric and oceanic sciences, as well 
as across disciplines such as applied mathematics and engineering. These methods, 
which allow the optimal use of the full probabilistic information and utilize rigorous 
reduced-order differential equations, should also be considered for implementation in 
the components of S2S prediction systems. 
Finally, as the complexity of coupled ESMs grows, an increasing number of model and 
coupling parameters will need to be explored and specified. At present, this is done 
too often through trial and error. This could eventually become unsustainable because 
of the ever-growing complexity and computational cost. Hence, the most sensitive 
and important model parameters should be identified for the next generation of 
­coupled prediction models. Being informed by observations from all components, DA 
can identify and optimize these parameters and also discriminate among and learn 
the better parameterizations. As a whole, novel parameter estimation and model 
learning schemes are promising and critical for S2S applications.
Recommendation G: Invest in research that advances the development of strongly 
coupled data assimilation and quantifies the impact of such advances on opera-
tional S2S forecast systems. 
Specifically: 
• 
Continue to test and develop weakly coupled systems as operationally viable 
systems and as benchmarks for strongly coupled implementations.
• 
Further develop and evaluate hybrid assimilation methods, multiscale- and 
coupled-covariance update algorithms, non-Gaussian nonlinear assimilation, 
and rigorous reduced-order stochastic modeling.

163
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
• 
Optimize the use of observations collected for the ocean, land surface, and sea 
ice components, in part through coupled covariances and mutual ­information 
algorithms and through autonomous adaptive sampling and observation 
targeting schemes.
• 
Further develop the joint estimation of coupled states and parameters, as well 
as quantitative methods that discriminate among, and learn, parameterizations.
• 
Develop methods and systems to fully utilize relevant satellite and in situ 
atmospheric information, especially for cloudy and precipitating conditions.
• 
Foster interactions among the growing number of science and engineering 
communities involved in DA, Bayesian inference, and uncertainty quantification.
MODELS 
Central to improving S2S predictions is improving the quality of the models that are at 
the core of modern state-of-the-art prediction systems. In this section, the committee 
provides evidence to support the conclusion that reducing errors and biases in ESMs 
must be a top priority for improving coupled S2S prediction systems. We first discuss 
in general terms model errors and the steps that need to be taken to reduce them. For 
convenience, issues more specific to advancing models of the atmosphere, ocean, land 
surface, and sea ice are discussed in separate subsections, although, of course, the full 
problem is inherently a coupled one. Another subsection highlights the importance of 
process studies for model improvement. The committee concludes with a subsection 
that contains recommendations for priority research to reduce model errors in order 
to increase the skill of S2S predictions.
Model Errors
One of the key challenges for S2S prediction is the reduction of model errors. Model 
errors include two types of deviations from observations, both of which contribute to 
the deterioration of S2S forecast skill: 
1.	 Deviations that are highly variable in time, which make the predicted variabil-
ity unrealistic;
2.	 Deviations from observations that are persistent in time, which make the pre-
dicted mean state unrealistic—these are often referred to as model biases.
Improving model skill through techniques such as statistical correction using retro-
spective forecasts, and combining outputs of different models to create multi-model 
ensemble products (see section below on Combination, Calibration, Verification, and 

164
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Optimization), clearly enhance forecast skill and will remain an important part of 
the S2S prediction process for the foreseeable future. However, model errors can be 
large compared to the predictable signals of variability targeted by S2S forecasts, and 
they can also combine nonlinearly, making statistical post-processing very difficult. 
Furthermore, without reduction of model errors, all other steps taken to improve S2S 
prediction systems can only shorten the distance between the current skill and the 
model-estimated limit of predictability (see Chapter 4), whereas reducing model errors 
can bring the skill of S2S forecast systems substantially closer to fundamental limits of 
predictability within the Earth system.
Known errors in ESMs are numerous. For example, many global models produce an 
unrealistically strong Pacific equatorial cold tongue, a spurious double Inter ­Tropical 
­Convergence Zone (ITCZ), erroneously high Indian Ocean and tropical South ­Atlantic 
SSTs, low SSTs in the tropical North Atlantic, and wet or dry biases in rainfall in 
many parts of the world (e.g., Hirota et al., 2011; Li and Xie, 2014; Richter et al., 2012; 
­Roehrig et al., 2013; Toniazzo and Woolnough, 2014). Many climate models also have 
a large bias in MJO variance (Hung et al., 2013). Improving models’ ability to repre-
sent processes such as the MJO and ENSO—critical sources of S2S predictability (see 
Chapter 4)—includes improving not only the representation of means and variances 
of such phenomena, but also their evolution and associated global teleconnection 
patterns. For example, it is possible for a model to have little bias in the mean and 
variance of both conditions in the tropics and middle latitudes, yet the variability in 
these two regions may not be correctly linked. Such a connection contributes to sub­
seasonal forecast skill in both regions (e.g., Lin et al., 2010; Vitart and Jung, 2010).
Many of the same modeling errors relevant to S2S predictions are relevant to shorter 
and longer range forecasts. Figure 5.9 shows an example of the growth of SST errors 
in coupled model simulations. It is clear that many features of climate model errors 
are seen in forecasts of only a few weeks or even days in length (e.g., cold ­equatorial 
­Pacific, generally warm Indian Ocean, and cold Arabian Sea) and that some of the 
errors are quite substantial on S2S timescales. Efforts targeted at understanding 
and alleviating these errors are thus relevant for improving predictions on multiple 
­timescales (NRC, 2012b). The use of observational and short-term error information 
has been used to identify biases in climate models, for example through the Depart-
ment of Energy Cloud-Associated Parameterizations Testbed Program.19 Similarly, 
many issues are common across multiple modeling systems. For example, the strength 
of MJO-NAO teleconnections is deficient in subseasonal and seasonal simulations of 
many different operational models (Scaife et al., 2014a; Vitart et al., 2014).
19  http://www-pcmdi.llnl.gov/projects/capt, accessed January 27, 2016.

165
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
FIGURE 5.9  The drift in coupled model SST as a function of forecast lead time out to 30 days. The bias 
in a 20-year run from a version (GA2.0) of HadGEM3-AO climate coupled model is shown in the bottom 
panel. SOURCE: Brown et al. (2012).

166
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Model errors often have no single cause but arise from combined deficiencies in model 
representations of many important processes (e.g., clouds, microphysics, radiation, 
boundary-layer processes, surface fluxes, and ocean mixing). Reducing these ­errors will 
require improving the representation of processes that are, for the most part, already 
included in models used for S2S prediction (e.g., increasing model resolution to ex-
plicitly represent critical processes and improving parameterization schemes to better 
represent subgrid processes—see discussions below for more details). In some cases, 
extra complexity needs to be added to better represent feedbacks between different 
components of the Earth system (e.g., coupled ocean-atmosphere, ice-atmosphere, and 
land-atmosphere processes—discussed in more detail below). As described elsewhere 
in this report, an improved representation of additional variables (e.g., algal blooms, 
river levels) may also be crucial because these variables are important to decision-
makers, whether or not their evolution feeds back on other components of the Earth 
system.
Finding 5.16: Errors in current modeling systems are a major limiting factor in the 
skill of S2S predictions. Many of the issues are common across different modeling 
systems and a broad range of timescales (days to centuries). These errors are the 
result of multiple deficiencies in model representations of key processes that are 
currently parameterized.
Atmospheric Models
Several steps are essential to improve the atmospheric component of S2S forecast 
systems. These include increasing model resolution to explicitly represent important 
atmospheric processes, improving parameterizations of processes that remain un-
resolved, improving the representation of tropical convection, and enabling global 
cloud-permitting models. Each is discussed in detail below.
Increasing Model Resolution
Increasing model resolution (horizontal and vertical) can reduce model errors, as more 
processes are explicitly resolved, and there is accordingly less reliance on uncertain 
physical parametrizations (Kinter et al., 2013). Later in this chapter, the committee 
discusses the extreme case where the resolution is increased so significantly that deep 
convection becomes resolved. However, as discussed there and in Chapter 7, although 
an exciting research avenue, it is unknown whether this approach will be operation-
ally viable in the coming decade because of the large computational costs involved. 

167
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Recent work has shown that more modest increases in atmospheric model ­resolution 
may bring significant benefits. Examples include increasing horizontal resolutions 
to better resolve the land-sea distribution in the Maritime Continent (Crueger et 
al., 2013), where the MJO in models exhibits more difficulty propagating eastward 
than over the open oceans (Inness and Slingo, 2006; Weaver et al., 2011) ; increasing 
­vertical resolution in the atmosphere to better represent the stratosphere (e.g., Roff 
et al., 2011; Scaife et al, 2011), which is increasingly recognized as a source of predict-
ability on S2S timescales (see Chapter 4); increasing vertical resolution of the upper 
ocean to better resolve the diurnal cycle of the mixed layer that interacts with the 
atmosphere, leading to improved MJO simulations (Tseng et al., 2015); and increasing 
horizontal resolution to improve representation of blocking and the Annular Modes 
(Jung et al., 2012; Kinter et al., 2013; Palipane et al., 2013; Scaife et al., 2011). Further 
work to investigate what can be achieved by increasing resolution in the atmosphere 
is important, and coordinating such work with research on benefits of simultaneous 
increases in resolution across other components in a coupled model framework may 
be particularly important for S2S prediction (NOAA, 2015). However, it is already clear 
from existing work that increasing resolution in atmospheric models alone is not a 
­panacea for increasing forecast skill in the current generation of models. Improvement 
of parameteriza­tions will still be needed for substantial enhancement of S2S forecast 
skill (e.g., Jung et al., 2012; Vitart 2014). 
Finding 5.17: There is evidence that increasing the resolution of atmospheric 
models (while still at resolutions that need deep convection parameterization) may 
improve the representation of processes that are key sources of S2S predictability. 
However increasing resolution is far from a panacea without also improving physi-
cal parameterizations.
Improving Parameterizations
There are very significant uncertainties with parameterizations of many physical 
processes in the atmosphere that are not currently resolved by models (e.g., boundary 
layer, convection, clouds and microphysics, radiation, surface fluxes, land surface and 
watershed scale processes, gravity wave drag). These uncertainties are in large part 
responsible for the model errors, which (as previously discussed) are a major limiting 
factor in the quality of S2S predictions. For example, leading NWP centers are taking 
very different approaches to the parameterization of drag on unresolved mountains 
(Figure 5.10). Although in practice there is considerable compensation such that 
parameterizations with weak mountain drag tend to have higher boundary layer drag 

168
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
FIGURE 5.10  Zonally averaged subgrid orographic torque from a number of global NWP models for 
January 2012. SOURCE: Ayrton Zadra.
(and vice versa), these different balances cannot all be correct. Such differences matter 
with regard to the representation of large-scale circulation, and this situation is illus-
trative of the general uncertainties in the field of parameterization. 
Recent experience at many operational centers has indicated that improvement in 
physical parameterization typically leads to improvements in features more obviously 
of relevance for S2S (Vitart, 2014). As an example, improved entrainment in the cumu-
lus parameterization of the ECMWF model has led to better representation of the MJO 
(Hirons et al., 2013). Improving parameterization requires advanced understanding of 
the physical processes at play, which involves research on theory, targeted field obser-
vations, and the use of cloud-resolving or cloud-permitting models as tools. Further 
examples of such efforts and additional steps needed to improve parameterizations 

169
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
across atmosphere, ocean, land surface, and sea ice models are provided below in the 
subsection on Process Studies for Model Advancement.
Finding 5.18: Improving physical parameterizations is essential to reducing model 
errors. The primary barriers are incomplete understanding of real physical pro-
cesses and the challenges associated with encapsulating new knowledge of how the 
real atmosphere works in multiple and interacting model parameterizations.
Improving the Representation of Tropical Convection
There are important challenges associated with almost all aspects of atmospheric 
model physics, as described above. However, one particular issue of great importance 
for the quality of S2S predictions (both in the tropics and beyond) is fidelity of the 
representation of tropical convection in the atmosphere (e.g., Holloway et al., 2014; 
Sherwood et al., 2014). Tropical convection is crucial to propagating tele­connections 
between the tropics and midlatitudes—associated with ENSO on the seasonal 
­timescale and with the MJO on the subseasonal timescale (Chapter 4). 
One important approach to improving the representation of tropical convection is 
to continue to develop and improve upon traditional parameterizations. Progress in 
recent years includes increasing the sensitivity of models to environmental moisture, 
including convective momentum transport, incorporating at least some representa-
tion of convective organization (particularly at the mesoscale), treating convection 
as a stochastic process, and including nonlocal effects in cumulus parameterization. 
Work to improve upon traditional parameterizations needs to continue; however, a 
more focused effort to develop completely new schemes may be especially valuable 
­(Holloway et al., 2013). The time may be ripe for such efforts, as results from recent field 
campaigns continue to increase the understanding of convection and its interaction 
with other processes, and scientists are beginning to have access to high-resolution 
cloud-permitting simulations across large (e.g., Marsham et al., 2013) and even global 
domains (Satoh et al., 2012). Such high-resolution numerical simulations were, for ex-
ample, used as part of the recent international Year of Tropical Convection (YOTC—see 
Appendix C for more detail) program (Moncrieff et al., 2012; Waliser et al., 2012) and 
provide an invaluable testbed for developing understanding and approaches to be 
used in coarser resolution models, while also spearheading efforts to demonstrate a 
prototype of future, cloud-resolving S2S model systems (see also discussion below).
One intermediate step to improve cumulus parameterization within the limit of 
available computing capability is “super-parameterization” or multiscale modeling 

170
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
(Khairoutdinov and Randall, 2001; Randall et al., 2013). In this approach, a 2-D cloud-
resolving model at each grid point of the host model replaces a traditional parameter-
ization in order to explicitly represent deep convection. This approach demands much 
less computational resources than a full 3-D global cloud-permitting model, although 
it still suffers (as do many traditional parameterizations) from the fact that it is local, for 
example, without direct interaction between convection at neighboring host model 
grid cells. Sensitivities to other parameterizations (e.g., turbulence and microphysics) 
also remain. Nevertheless, there is evidence that the super-parameterization approach, 
by virtue of representing tropical convection more accurately than conventional 
parameterizations, produces superior simulations and predictions when coupled to an 
active ocean model (DeMott et al., 2011; Stan et al., 2010). The approach has led to im-
portant improvements, notably, in simulations of the MJO (Benedict and Randall, 2009) 
and diurnal cycle in rainfall (Pritchard and Somerville, 2009). Its feasibility to incorpo-
rate into operational models is worthy of further investigation.
Finding 5.19: Improving the representation of tropical convection is a particularly 
important challenge for S2S. Continued efforts to develop new convection parameter­
iza­tions and to build on recent progress in multiscale modeling and scale-aware 
parameterization are needed.
Enabling Global Cloud-Permitting Models
In a cloud-permitting model, the grid spacing is fine enough (a few kilometers or less) 
that deep convection is explicitly calculated without the need of parameterization. 
Work to move atmospheric models toward cloud-permitting capacity is motivated 
by the notion that behavior of deep convection can be adequately determined only 
when mesoscale dynamics governing convective structure and evolution are explic-
itly represented. Simulations by the first global cloud-permitting model have led to 
improved representation of important S2S processes such as the MJO (Miura et al., 
2007), tropical cyclones (Fudeyasu et al., 2008), Asian summer monsoon (Oouchi et 
al., 2009), and the diurnal cycle of rainfall (Sato et al., 2009), among other phenomena. 
Although such improvements suggest that the development and use of global cloud-
permitting models in operational settings should continue to be pursued, a number of 
important caveats to this approach need to be noted. The first is that while parameter-
ization of deep convection would no longer be needed, parameterization of shallow 
convection, turbulence, radiation, cloud microphysics, and surface fluxes would all 
still be required. Without deep convection parameterization, deficiencies in schemes 
for those processes would still lead to model errors (which might be different from 

171
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
those in coarser resolution models). Hence research to further improve parameteriza-
tion schemes will remain crucial, even with global cloud-permitting capacity. Also, the 
huge computational demand that would be required to make global cloud-permitting 
models operational for S2S is a currently a crucial limitation. For example, upgrading a 
model from a resolution of 60 km to 2 km would require the computational power to 
increase by well over a factor of ~1,000 (i.e., 30x30) for the horizontal resolution alone. 
A further factor of around 30 would be required to allow for desired decreases in time 
step and finer vertical resolution. Overall, this means increasing computation power 
by at least four orders of magnitude. Realistically, this will not be achieved in the next 
decade, based on the current trajectory of advancement in computing technology 
(see Chapter 7).
Caveats aside, there are many good reasons to pursue global cloud-permitting model-
ing in research mode. Such research will show the way for operational developments 
beyond the 10-year horizon and could yield significant insights and improvements to 
operational models with parameterized convection within 10 years. For example, pre-
dictability studies with cloud-permitting models might give different indications from 
coarse-resolution models of what improvements in S2S forecast skill could be possible. 
Furthermore, as mentioned above, detailed high-resolution synthetic data sets from 
these cloud-permitting research models (global, or at least, large domain) will con-
tinue to provide critical insights into real atmospheric processes, as well as a testbed 
against which new parameterizations for operational systems can be developed and 
evaluated. Lastly, even if it is unlikely that global cloud-permitting models would be-
come operational in the next decade, it could be of great benefit for the S2S research 
community to develop cloud-permitting research models if an unexpected revolution 
in computing industry allowed operational cloud-permitting models to move forward.
An alternative hybrid approach worthy of consideration is adaptive meshes, which 
focus high resolutions only in some areas (e.g., Chen et al., 2013, for hurricanes). Its jus-
tification comes from the fact that in many areas of the world, cloud-permitting reso-
lution is not needed (e.g., in deserts, subtropical highs, and polar areas where deep 
convection is very unlikely to occur). Utilizing cloud-permitting meshes only when and 
where deep convection occurs would benefit computational efficiency, and this ap-
proach is becoming more feasible as scale-aware cumulus parameterization schemes 
are also being developed (e.g., Arakawa and Wu, 2013; Grell and Freitas, 2014).
Finding 5.20: Continued development of global cloud-permitting models is needed 
to provide insights for improving coarser-resolution operational models, to offer 
research testbeds for understanding many issues relevant to S2S prediction, and 
to advance prototypes for future cloud-permitting S2S model systems. Improved 

172
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
model equations as well as improved numerics with adaptive meshes and higher-
order schemes could serve as an important alternative or an intermediate approach 
before global cloud-permitting models become feasible for operations. 
Ocean Models
The ocean is often described as the flywheel of the Earth’s climate (Visbeck et al., 
2003), where the ocean’s large heat capacity (2.5 m of water contains as much thermal 
energy as the entire atmospheric column) acts as stabilizer. Outside of the tropics, the 
ocean has traditionally been described as reacting to high-frequency changes of the 
atmospheric forcing and that its influence back to the atmosphere is weak on short 
timescales (Kushnir et al., 2002). However, one needs to distinguish between applica-
tions that are sensitive to slowly evolving boundary conditions (e.g., NAO, ENSO) and 
ones that are sensitive to rapidly evolving boundary conditions (e.g., diurnal cycle 
impact on MJOs, convection, severe weather). Ocean numerical models are often de-
signed to be optimal for a specific application (e.g., global, coastal, ENSO) and do not 
perform equally everywhere. It is therefore important to fully understand the impli-
cations of the numerical and physical choices that were made when the model was 
developed in order to correctly interpret the model outputs (e.g., Griffies et al., 2000). 
In this section, ocean models, their application to S2S forecast systems, and their 
current strengths and limitations are described. Broadly speaking, many of the issues 
are similar to those outlined above in the atmospheric models section, including the 
importance of improving parameterizations of subgrid processes, while also exploring 
the benefits and trade-offs of increasing ocean model resolutions.
Established Ocean Models
Most existing ocean models are community models and are used extensively for a 
wide range of global, basin-scale, and regional simulations, with timescales ­ranging 
from hours to millennia for both operational forecasting (see GODAE, 2015, for a 
review) and research (e.g., Hecht and Hasumi, 2013). Most models solve similar geo­
physical fluid equations and use related finite-difference or structured mesh finite-­
volume numerics. These have all evolved from the pioneering work of Bryan (1969) 
and others (e.g., Bryan and Cox, 1968; Semtner, 1995).
Substantial improvements that are typical of more modern models include the use 
of higher order and monotonic tracer advection schemes, the replacement of a rigid 
lid with a split time-stepping scheme that directly models the adjustment of the free 

173
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
surface via external gravity waves, and more accurate representations of ­bathymetry. 
Significant effort has also gone into the selection of the vertical coordinate. This 
can have a large impact on the quality of a simulation, with geopotential-height, 
terrain-­following, or density-coordinates, or hybrids between these options, being 
common choices (Griffies et al., 2000). Algorithmic simplicity, interactions between 
the ocean flow and topography, water mass preservation, and the representation of 
dense gravity currents are all factors that have been used in choosing the right verti-
cal coordinate for a particular ocean modeling application. Such mature, horizontally 
structured–mesh ocean models will be the basis for global operational S2S forecast-
ing systems for the foreseeable future, even as they continue to be incrementally 
improved. But it is clear that unstructured-mesh ocean models with higher order 
­numerics have a lot of potential for S2S forecasts as discussed below.
Finding 5.21: Horizontally structured–mesh ocean models will continue to be the 
basis for most operational coupled S2S forecasting systems for the foreseeable 
future.
Ocean Eddies, Model Resolution, and Subgrid Processes
The current resolution of horizontally structured–mesh ocean models ranges from 
coarser-mesh, non-eddying (e.g., below the resolution required to resolve large-scale 
eddies) resolutions for climate simulations (~1º), to finer-mesh, eddying models 
(~1/10º or 7 km at midlatitudes). Most of the impetus for integrating high-resolution 
eddying models in global numerical simulations comes from the need by navies 
throughout the world for advanced global ocean nowcasting/forecasting systems 
(in the United States, the resolution will be increased in 2017 to 1/25º (~3.5 km at 
mid­latitudes); Chassignet et al., 2014; Metzger et al., 2014). Of course, for many ocean-
related applications on S2S timescales, such as oil spill modeling (e.g., Deep Water 
­Horizon) and fisheries/algal bloom prediction, higher resolution ocean models are nec-
essary. Although there is a demonstrated need for fine-resolution systems for predict-
ing oceanic variables outside the naval context (GODAE, 2009), the question arises as 
to whether explicitly resolving ocean eddies matters to coupling with the atmosphere 
and therefore to S2S atmospheric forecasts. In a recent comparison of coupled simula-
tions with high- and low-resolution ocean numerical models, the correlation between 
SST anomalies and the surface heat flux was found to be small outside the tropics for 
the low-resolution experiments, indicating that the atmospheric forcing of SST vari-
ability is predominant at that resolution (Kirtman et al., 2012). On the other hand, the 
high-resolution (1/10º horizontal resolution, i.e., eddying regime) simulation showed 

174
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
high correlations in regions of enhanced SST variability, such as western boundary cur-
rents and the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. This suggests that the atmosphere actu-
ally responds to the oceanic variability in areas of high SST variability and that higher 
model resolution is needed to improve atmospheric as well as ocean predictions.
There is also evidence that small-scale heat-content anomalies are more strongly 
and extensively correlated with precipitation in coupled model simulations with an 
eddy-resolving ocean, suggesting a mechanism whereby internally driven ocean 
variability may influence the deep atmosphere. For example, Bryan et al. (2010) show 
that characteristics of frontal-scale ocean-atmosphere interaction, such as the positive 
correlation between SST and surface wind stress, are realistically captured only when 
the ocean model component explicitly resolves the ocean eddies. Griffies et al. (2015) 
further show the importance of transient mesoscale eddies on the ocean heat budget, 
providing an additional argument for either explicitly including eddies in coupled 
model simulations, or for employing parameterizations that faithfully reflect the role 
of eddies in both lateral and vertical heat transport. Submesoscale SST gradients may 
also be important loci for coupling to the atmosphere (Back and Bretherton, 2009; Li 
and Carbone, 2012; Smith, 2013).
Oceanic eddies exhibit a wide range of spatial scales, from large rings that detach from 
western boundary currents via mixed barotropic and baroclinic instabilities (e.g., Gulf 
Stream, Kuroshio, Agulhas, North Brazil, Gulf of Mexico Loop Current); to baroclinic 
eddies whose slumping effects need to be accounted for in order to correctly model 
the transports of water masses (e.g., Gent, 2011) and the dynamics and structure of 
major current systems such as the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (e.g., Farneti et al., 
2010; Hallberg and Gnanadesikan, 2006); to the submesoscale eddies with ­horizontal 
scales on order of a kilometer that drive the frontal restratification of the surface 
mixed layer (e.g., Fox-Kemper et al., 2008). All of these oceanic eddies have effects that 
must be represented in skillful ocean forecast systems, either by explicit resolution or 
through parameterization. The large meanders and rings are readily captured in ocean 
models with resolutions on the order of 1/4° or finer, while submesoscale eddies are 
characterized by spatial scales of less than a kilometer and need to be parameter-
ized in essentially all large-scale ocean models (Fox-Kemper et al., 2011). Baroclinic 
­eddies pose a particular challenge, because the dominant length-scale of these eddies 
(the first baroclinic deformation radius) varies greatly with latitude, stratification, and 
ocean depth. As shown in Figure 5.9, global numerical ocean models with spatial 
resolutions ranging from 1° to just a few kilometers include both regions where the 
dominant baroclinic eddy scales are well resolved and regions where the model’s 
resolution is too coarse for the eddies to form. Because of the relative spatial scales of 
these ­eddies and the mean state upon which they operate, commonly used baroclinic 

175
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
eddy parameteriza­tions (e.g., Gent et al., 1995) are more effective at suppressing eddy 
variability than they are at replicating their effects on the mean state (Hallberg, 2013). 
Consequently, it is usually preferable to allow a model to explicitly simulate oceanic 
eddies rather than parameterize them, wherever the resolution permits this. Essen-
tially all global ocean forecast models for the next 10 years and beyond will be operat-
ing within the resolution range where baroclinic eddies can be explicitly represented 
in most of the domain, but still have to be parameterized on the shelf and at high 
latitudes (Figure 5.11). Additional research is thus required to determine how best to 
parameterize the effects of ocean eddies where they are not resolved and how to tran-
sition between areas where eddies are resolved and where they are parameterized 
(see the CLIVAR Exchanges (2014) Special issue on “High Resolution Ocean Climate 
Modeling” for a discussion). Other subgrid processes also must be taken into account 
for S2S prediction. Several National Science Foundation (NSF)/NOAA-sponsored 
Climate Process Teams (CPTs)20—for example, groups of scientists who have worked 
20  http://www.usclivar.org/climate-process-teams, accessed January 27, 2016.
FIGURE 5.11  The horizontal resolution needed to resolve the ocean’s first baroclinic deformation radius 
with two grid points, based on a 1/8° global ocean model on a Mercator grid with a bipolar Arctic cap 
north of 65°N. SOURCE: Adapted from Hallberg, 2013.

176
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
together to improve parameterizations of particular processes—have developed 
parameterizations of internal tides and surface wave–induced mixing, but these need 
to be evaluated. 
Finding 5.22: Subgrid ocean processes, including eddies, internal tides, and surface 
wave–induced mixing, need to be more explicitly resolved or better parameterized 
in ocean models used in S2S forecast systems, and their impact on S2S forecasts 
need to be better evaluated.
Multiscale Ocean Modeling
For improved S2S applications, instead of a uniform increase in resolution, one ap-
proach that may be more affordable computationally would be to increase the ocean 
horizontal resolution in targeted geographical areas that have a strong dynamical 
impact on the system (for example, the tropics or coastal regions). Such targeted 
increases in resolution would improve the representation of energetic motions and 
exchanges that occur in regions with complex geometry and/or dynamics and that 
have been found significant for larger scale regional and global ocean dynamics. 
Two approaches may allow for optimized refinements in areas with larger dynamical 
gradients, near steep topography, or around complex coastlines. Nesting uses finer 
modeling grids in targeted regions, while unstructured grids increase the mesh resolu-
tion progressively where needed within the same modeling framework. New tech-
niques that use different equations depending on the space and timescales are also 
very promising and would allow for the explicit representation of, for example, small 
rivers, surface waves, internal waves/tides, nonhydrostatic effects, ecosystem struc-
ture, localized hypoxia, or leads in sea ice. All of these approaches are areas of active 
research in the multiscale ocean modeling community, but for the most part they are 
not yet ready for immediate deployment in operational S2S forecasting systems.
However, these approaches are already starting to play an important role in targeted 
regional applications (e.g., Chen et al., 2011). Research into these and related ap-
proaches for improving fundamental and operational ocean modeling are a crucial 
part of the S2S decadal research agenda. Because development of robust numerical 
modeling systems takes time, strengthening research in the United States now will be 
required to reap potential operational benefits in the next decade and further.
Finding 5.23: There is potential benefit for including multi-resolution approaches 
(e.g., adaptive mesh refinement, seamless two-way nesting, multi-dynamics, 

177
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
adaptive super-parameterizations) in the ocean components of S2S coupled pre-
diction models. 
Parameterization of Surface Waves Effects
There is a growing recognition that accurate modeling of the upper ocean boundary 
layer needs to account for the impact of surface gravity waves. Surface waves induce 
Stokes drift, radiation stresses due to horizontal gradients of the momentum flux, 
enhanced vertical mixing due to Langmuir turbulence, and enhancement of ­bottom 
drag in shallow water. Most ocean models do not have the vertical resolution to take 
these effects into account and therefore must  be parameterized for an accurate 
representation of these effects. In particular, Langmuir turbulence can reach the base 
of the mixed layer and drive entrainment (Harcourt, 2015; Li et al., 1995). Wave-driven 
parameterizations have been implemented and tested for use in climate modeling 
(see Li et al., 2015, for an example) and have been shown to improve mixed-layer rep-
resentation. Furthermore, because air-sea fluxes depend on not only the conditions in 
the atmosphere, but also the processes in the upper boundary layer and mixed layer 
as well as the sea state (Chen et al., 2007), surface wave effects must be taken into ac-
count for S2S prediction, as do tidal effects on mixing. Although this air-wave-ocean 
coupling has been implemented in some operational models (e.g., ECMWF, COAMPS) it 
has not been in others (e.g., NCEP).
Finding 5.24: Including surface wave effects in S2S Earth system models could lead 
to a more accurate representation of the upper boundary layer and sea state.
Higher-Order Numerics
Although the existing horizontally structured–mesh ocean models described above 
have excellent computational efficiency per degree of freedom, most are based on 
conservative but relatively low-order staggered discretizations (e.g., Griffies et al., 2000, 
2010). There is a growing body of research on the use of unstructured-grid, adaptive-
mesh, or higher-order methods (Beck, 2009; Deleersnijder et al., 2010; Mavriplis, 2011; 
Slingo et al., 2009) that aim to increase models’ accuracy without a concomitant in-
crease in computational cost. A specific advantage of unstructured meshes is their geo-
metric flexibility, which allows for more accurate solutions, but a significant drawback is 
a reduced efficiency per degree of freedom. As a result, many unstructured-grid models 
have focused on shallow water regions with complex geometries (e.g., estuaries) and/
or continuous schemes for finite volume or finite elements. In addition, unstructured 

178
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
finite-volume schemes are usually limited to second-order ­numerics in space. For 
higher-order spatial discretizations with significant advection, finite elements are pos-
sibly more versatile. Discontinuous Galerkin schemes also appear promising and are 
being developed for open baroclinic ocean modeling (e.g., Blaise et al., 2010; Karna et 
al., 2012, 2013; Maddison et al., 2011a, 2011b; Ueckermann and ­Lermusiaux, 2016). Simi-
lar efforts are occurring for atmospheric modeling at varied scales and resolutions, and 
for different purposes (e.g., Giraldo and Restelli, 2008; ­Marras et al., 2015; Nair et al., 2009; 
Palmer, 2012; Pielke, 2013). For example, the Naval Research Laboratory is developing a 
Discontinuous Galerkin dynamical core for its Navy Environmental Prediction sysTem 
Utilizing the NUMA corE (NEPTUNE) atmospheric model (NUMA is the Nonhydrostatic 
Unified Model of the Atmosphere DG core). It is currently being tested for accuracy, 
scalability, and computational cost (Gabersek et al., 2012). Other next generation atmo-
spheric models are under development, including community ESMs with probabilistic 
capabilities (e.g., Hurrell et al., 2013; Palmer, 2012).
Finding 5.25: Inspired from computational fluid dynamics and related fields, new 
numerical methods and higher-order schemes are being developed for ocean 
model­ing. The resulting higher-order accuracy and enhanced refinement capabili-
ties can reduce numerical errors in ocean models, which is a promising development 
for the longer-term prediction needs of S2S applications.
In summary, priorities for ocean model improvements for S2S forecasting include both 
fundamental numerical capabilities and improved depictions of important oceanic 
phenomena. An example of an important new numerical capability would be the 
ability to focus resolution in particular regions of phenomenological (e.g., straights 
that constrain flows) or forecast interest (e.g., harbors) in global ocean models. Many 
important oceanic phenomena are simply omitted from most S2S forecasting systems, 
such as tides and their interactions with storm surges. Oceanic mixing of nutrients is 
important for biological productivity on S2S timescales, but in models it is the result of 
both numerical artifacts and deliberate parameterizations, motivating improvements 
on both sides. The dynamics of the near surface ocean are of particular importance for 
the coupled ocean at S2S timescales, so the representation of ocean boundary layer 
turbulence and its interactions with waves and sea ice are a promising subject of study 
for improving S2S forecasts. But the most important limitation on oceanic S2S fore-
casts arises from the global influence of the ocean at these timescales, along with the 
need to accurately represent many important oceanic phenomena at relatively small 
scales to capture this influence. This need to model the global ocean with fine-scale 
detail places a premium on computational capacity available for S2S forecasts and on 
utilizing numerical techniques that maximize the value of the available resources.

179
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Sea Ice Models
As discussed in Chapter 4, sea ice is an important source of predictability to the Earth 
system because sea ice anomalies can persist for up to a few years, during which time 
the anomalies can influence ocean and atmospheric conditions. Furthermore, predict-
ing sea ice itself is valuable for its impact on transportation and coastal erosion vulner-
ability, among other things. Sea ice models need to capture the physical processes that 
give rise to the high degree of heterogeneity in sea ice thickness, melt-pond coverage, 
and other characteristics that influence shortwave radiation, clouds, atmospheric sta-
bility, and ocean freshwater exchange. Many NWP models do not include interactive 
sea ice components, and the local sea ice concentration and thickness in these models 
is prescribed and constant with only the surface temperature and (sometimes) the 
snow depths allowed to vary (see, e.g., specifications of NOAA’s GFS21). To predict the 
evolution of the ice and snow thickness, and heat transfer within the ice and snow and 
with other components, the sea ice component in coupled ESMs must be interactive 
and at a minimum include sea ice thermodynamics. Adding explicit modeling of sea 
ice dynamics—such as the sea ice motion and deformation that redistributes the ice 
thickness locally and produces openings, known as leads—can, along with modeling 
thermodynamics, allow for predictions of sea ice concentration. 
Sea ice components in climate models and ESMs have evolved significantly over the 
past two decades because of recognition that sea ice strongly influences radiative 
and ocean feedbacks and because observations have offered improved constraints on 
sea ice processes and parameterizations (e.g., Bitz et al., 2012; Notz, 2012). Many sea 
ice models account for an ice-thickness distribution, which treats a distribution of sea 
ice thicknesses in an individual model grid cell, to improve the fidelity of processes 
that strongly depend on sea ice thickness, such as sea ice growth and compressive 
strength. Models are also beginning to treat brine cycling (Hunke et al., 2011) to simu-
late biogeochemistry within the ice and model the process of melt pond formation 
and drainage. However, most of the sea ice components in models used for S2S ap-
plications are much simpler, with bare-minimum dynamics and thermodynamics (e.g., 
Merryfield et al., 2013b; Msadek et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2013a). 
The small-scale features at the floe scale and below suggest that model resolution 
may be important to improving predictions. The frequency of grid cells with very low 
sea ice concentration and very high net heat flux to the atmosphere has been found 
to increase at higher resolution (Newsom et al., 2015). New sea ice dynamical schemes 
that account for anisotropy of sea ice properties (e.g., preferred orientation of frac-
21  http://www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/GFS/doc.php#seaice, accessed January 27, 2016.

180
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
tures and faults within the horizontal plane) over tens of kilometers, and much more 
while treating the sea ice as a continuum, may be a promising alternative to explicitly 
resolving fine scales (e.g., Tsamados et al., 2013). However, such methods are not yet 
well tested, and little research has been done to investigate their potential for S2S 
applications.
Several potentially important processes are as yet missing or untested in nearly all 
ESMs including (1) blowing snow and the redistribution of snow on sea ice, (2) floe size 
distribution influence on ice growth and deformation, (3) waves breaking floes, and 
(4) ice microstructure (i.e., porosity and/or defects) influence on compressive strength. 
Inclusion of these processes into S2S systems may offer opportunities to predict new 
sea ice properties with societal value.
In summary, priorities for sea ice model improvements for S2S prediction include 
parameterizing the subgrid-scale distribution of sea ice thickness and floe sizes and 
treating the evolution of albedo, heat, and liquid water of melt ponds. These aspects 
of sea ice strongly influence the seasonal cycle of sea ice concentration and thickness. 
Modeling the anisotropy of deformation offers the potential of predicting the orien-
tation of leads, which could be an advantage for planning shipping routes. The more 
advanced models have these capabilities already, but they are not routinely used nor 
have they been investigated for the purposes of S2S prediction.
Finding 5.26: Sea ice models used for S2S often use bare-minimum thermo­dynamics 
and dynamics. However, sea ice models have been developed with sophisticated 
physics that account for phenomena such as the ice-thickness distribution, melt 
ponds, biogeochemistry, and divergence/convergence processes. New methods 
are being developed to account for wave-floe interactions, blowing snow, and ice 
microstructure.
Finding 5.27: The fidelity of sea ice simulations appears to improve with resolution. 
New promising sea ice dynamic parameterization schemes may preclude the need 
for high resolution in some situations, but little research has been done to investi-
gate their potential for S2S applications.
Land Surface and Biogeochemical Models
The land surface model (LSM) accounts for the land-atmosphere interactive processes, 
such as the exchange of heat, moisture, and momentum at the surface. As described 
in the Observations section of this chapter and in Chapter 4, such fluxes influence the 

181
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
likelihood of heat waves, droughts, storm formation, and monsoons and may become 
increasingly important to climate and weather prediction as the global climate warms 
(e.g., Dirmeyer et al., 2013, 2014). Despite the ever-growing number of dynamic LSMs, a 
recent intercomparison has highlighted that the performance of dynamic LSMs is still 
in some cases inferior to much simpler statistical models for sensible heat flux (Best et 
al., 2015)
Another important purpose of LSMs is to model surface hydrology, where ground­
water and streamflow are included to connect terrestrial water (e.g., soil moisture, sur-
face water, and snowpack) with rivers, lakes, and oceans to complete the water cycle. 
LSMs are often deeply rooted in biogeochemical processes (e.g., carbon and nitrogen 
cycling and other ecosystem processes) because of the fundamental interactions of 
vegetation and soil systems with surface hydrology. Coupling between land surface 
hydrology and the ocean can be important for determining near shore currents and 
salinity and for ocean biogeochemical cycles. Indeed, coastal ocean salinity can be 
strongly determined by river discharges, particularly during flood events and seasonal 
flooding (Milliman and Farnsworth, 2013). 
The LSMs in NWP systems typically focus on dynamically representing snow cover and 
soil moisture, while prescribing vegetation cover to vary seasonally based on satel-
lite observations.22 LSMs in ESMs today usually also predict vegetation at some level 
(Bonan, 2008, and see below), which permits a greater degree of interaction with the 
hydrologic cycle and biogeochemical cycling—both of which have significant societal 
impacts on S2S timescales (Chapter 3). 
Representation of surface hydrology is still often relatively simplistic in ESMs used for 
S2S forecasting, with water runoff not collected and moved through rivers to coastal 
areas. Many more complex hydrologic modeling systems exist with river routing and 
drainage basin models layered atop land surface models, but they are typically run 
“off line” and are driven by climate and weather forecasts from coupled models. These 
models incorporate the influence of human water management and use on surface 
and groundwater storage and river streamflow. Systems are being actively developed 
and used for operational hydrologic forecasting (e.g., within NOAA’s NWS and Office 
of Hydrologic Development, see also Yuan et al., 2015). Although further research is 
needed to understand the extent to which inclusion of such hydrological models 
within coupled S2S forecast systems would benefit S2S forecasts across the system 
(e.g., by explicitly informing coastal salinity and currents), such coupling would en-
able more direct, dynamical S2S predictions of stream and river flow as well as coastal 
22  See for example, specifications associated with the LSM used in NOAA’s Global Forecast system: http://
www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/GFS/doc.php#lansurproc, accessed January 27, 2016.

182
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
flooding and hypoxia. Furthermore, the potential user base for such S2S hydrologic 
predictions is large (Chapter 3). Enabling and supporting the coupling of hydrologic 
and river routing models to climate and weather models is a strategic science goal of 
NOAA’s Office of Hydrologic Development (NOAA, 2010).
Whether or not they include hydrologic processes such as river routing, LSMs in 
coupled S2S forecast systems must continue to be improved through higher fidelity 
and increased complexity in order to represent important coupled processes in S2S 
forecast systems and also to meet increasing user needs for hydrologic, ecological, 
littoral, and coastal ocean S2S predictions. This includes (but is not limited to) improv-
ing the parameterization of surface energy partitioning into sensible, latent, soil, and 
outgoing longwave radiation through improved plant and soil processes, snow/soil-
ice physics, and inclusion of biogeochemical cycles. Land-atmosphere interactions (see 
Figure 5.12) also must be carefully evaluated and considered, in particular feedbacks 
with surface and boundary-layer physics, convection, and water and energy ­budgets 
(Chapter 4). This needed progress in land and hydrological model development is 
slowed by lack of reliable observations and climatology estimates. Process-level 
­studies and significant efforts in model optimization (including parameter estimation) 
will be necessary to continue to improve the LSM component of coupled S2S predic-
tion systems.
Land surface models used for S2S prediction also need to improve treatment of the 
hydrological cycle and aspects of the land surface that are coupled to hydrology. Effort 
is needed to incorporate surface and underground water storage and river routing 
in models, including the role of human water management and use. These important 
aspects of the land system have been implemented in off-line hydrologic forecast 
systems, but they are usually oversimplified or neglected altogether in fully coupled 
S2S forecast systems.
Finding 5.28: Advancements in modeling and parameterization of land processes 
and feedbacks is important for improving S2S prediction model skill, especially for 
events such as droughts, heat waves, floods, monsoons, and storm formation, as 
well as for improved hydrological predictions. 
Biogeochemical processes in ESMs extend beyond the land surface to include eco-
systems in the ocean and sea ice, and geophysically important reactive chemistry, 
aerosols, and aerosol-cloud interactions in the larger Earth system. As highlighted in 
Chapter 3, biogeochemical-related events that are modeled in LSMs and ESMs that 
are desirable to predict on S2S timescales include ocean and large-lake hypoxia, fish 
stocks, marine productivity, harmful algae blooms, crop yields, disease epidemics, 

183
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
FIGURE 5.12  Schematic showing the many interactive processes in the land surface and atmospheric 
boundary layer (ABL). SOURCE: Mike Ek, adapted from Ek and Holtslag (2004).
and fire occurrence. For S2S prediction, it can be desirable to predict, as opposed to 
prescribe, certain parts of biogeochemical cycles that influence predictability and/
or involve societally relevant impacts. A volcanic eruption is an example of a biogeo-
chemically relevant event that influences both chemical and physical systems, via the 
formation of volcanically derived aerosols, which in turn force an atmospheric and/or 
ecosystem response. A volcanic eruption is an unanticipated event with consequences 
on regional to global scales whose evolution and outcomes on S2S timescales are ad-
dressed as a key prediction need in Chapter 6.
Coupling biogeochemical dynamics to other ESM components may also be important 
for S2S predictions of the atmosphere because biogeochemical dynamics can influ-
ence albedo, moisture availability, and temperature profiles on S2S timescales. For 

184
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
example, it is increasingly recognized that initializing and representing vegetation 
can also impact S2S predictability of the atmosphere (e.g., Koster and Walker, 2015). 
Whether physical and biogeochemical models should be coupled or uncoupled—
with the biogeochemical model run offline and on demand due to the vast input data 
requirements of accurate biogeochemical modeling in a turbulent fluid—depends on 
the timescale on which land and ocean biota feedback to the physical models. 
Global climate models began to include a wide array of biogeochemical cycles in the 
past two decades, and model terminology has evolved to reflect this new capability. 
Today, a global climate model that includes biogeochemical cycles is often called an 
ESM. Carbon vegetation modeling usually involves predicting the leaf area and treat-
ing leaf processes that influence photosynthesis at a minimum and may also allow 
vegetation growth and decay, competition, and soil carbon pools. The current capabil-
ity in atmospheric components includes the formation of aerosols, aerosol-cloud inter-
actions, and the evolution of atmospheric composition (e.g., greenhouse gases, ozone, 
and other pollutants). Biogeochemical modeling in the ocean involves both uptake 
and release of gases, chemical reactions, and biology from the single-celled (algae and 
bacteria) to multicellular phytoplankton, zooplankton, and sometimes even seaweed 
and fish. ESMs have generally not yet incorporated biogeochemical cycling in sea ice. 
However, there is active development in a few models to include sea ice algae, gas 
exchange, chemical cycling, and soot deposition on sea ice (e.g., Holland et al., 2012; 
Vancoppenolle et al., 2013).
Finding 5.29: Incorporating biogeochemical cycles into S2S prediction systems has 
the potential to improve S2S forecasts because biogeochemical cycles often feed-
back to other components of the physical system and influence societally important 
concerns such as ocean and large-lake hypoxia, fish stocks, marine productivity, 
harmful algae blooms, crop yields, disease epidemics, and fire occurrence.
Coupling Between Model Components
As highlighted above, S2S prediction is inherently a coupled problem. Information 
transfer between the atmosphere, ocean, ice, wave, and land provides fundamental 
sources of predictability on the S2S timescales. Meanwhile, model errors are also 
passed between different components, and this error growth represents a conse-
quential limitation to S2S prediction skill. The importance of air-sea coupling, land-air 
coupling, and sea ice coupling has been fully recognized, but representations of such 
coupling in models still need substantial improvement. 

185
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Several types of coupling are priorities for implementation or improvement in S2S 
operational systems. Ocean surface waves are needed as a buffer between atmospheric 
momentum and ocean currents. Precipitation arriving at a catchment basin and deliv-
ered to the coastal ocean via an estuary through river routing requires hydrological and 
land surface models that are coupled to atmospheric and ocean models. Other exam-
ples include biogeochemistry models coupled with ocean and land and atmospheric 
models that include biogeochemical feedback on S2S timescales. Reliable ­couplers 
need to be designed based on advanced knowledge of coupled processes with an aim 
to matching observed fluxes where measurements are available. These processes are 
often not resolved explicitly in S2S models and need to be parameterized. 
Because changes in parameterization in one component can lead to increased model 
errors in another part of the coupled system, coordination and collaboration among 
different communities of researchers focused on different parts of the Earth system is 
important in this context.
Finding 5.30: Because of the coupled nature of S2S variability and prediction, pa-
rameterization for either interactive processes within individual components of the 
Earth system or coupled processes between them must be improved in a cohesive 
manner instead of in isolation. 
Process Studies for Model Advancement 
As discussed earlier, reducing model errors is among the highest priorities for advanc-
ing S2S forecast systems. Major sources of model errors are parameterization schemes 
for unresolved, poorly understood, or computationally burdensome processes across 
all model components (i.e., atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, and land surface). Developing 
and refining parameterization schemes can be achieved through three closely con-
nected steps: observing physical processes in the real world, improving understand-
ing of these physical processes, and translating that new knowledge into improved 
models. 
Field Observations
As model resolution continues to increase toward cloud- and eddy-permitting or 
-resolving scales (similarly for resolving sea ice floes and fracture heterogeneity, 
watersheds, mesoscale and stand scales in hydrology and land ecosystem modeling), 
more detailed information of physical processes is needed to develop a new breed 

186
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
of parameterization. It is important to recognize that field observations for process 
­studies are different from sustained observations for climate and applications moni-
toring (e.g., Observations section of this Chapter), although some data sets may meet 
both purposes. Observations for improving parameterizations are most often taken 
from special field experiments that include ground-based, seaborne, and airborne in 
situ, along with space-based remote measurements.
In situ measurements are the most reliable sources of information for many ­physical 
processes central to model parameterization (e.g., cloud, precipitation, radiation, 
turbulence, aerosol, soil moisture, vegetation, surface waves, and surface fluxes of land, 
ocean, and ice) and the only sources of information for subsurface oceanic processes 
(e.g., mixing and currents). Modern technology affords observations of these processes 
with ever-increasing details and accuracy to meet the need of developing parameter-
ization schemes. Moreover, in situ observations provide the most accurate descriptions 
of coupling or interaction among the multiple processes that must be adequately rep-
resented in models to advance S2S prediction. Processes-level observations must take 
the full advantage of the most advanced technology, including seaborne, airborne, 
and land-based autonomous devices.
Space-based data provide global and routine coverage, augmenting the limits of tem-
poral and spatial coverage inherent in field observations. Products with reliable verti-
cal profiling of the atmosphere, information of ocean and land surfaces, and higher 
sampling rates by multiple sensors are the best complements to in situ observations 
for process studies. More specifically, there are key physical processes for which ex-
perimental satellite observations are sorely needed to characterize processes critical 
to modeling S2S phenomena (e.g., deep convection, soil moisture, ocean mixed-layer 
depth). Key among these are information on vertical motion within storm systems, 
increased thermodynamic and wind information within the boundary layer, and simul-
taneous measurements of aerosol, clouds, and precipitation to better describe cloud/
precipitation growth. In this regard, and with the expected increases in resolution of 
models in mind, it is essential that these types of space-based measurements are able 
to resolve mesoscale features of the atmosphere. 
Field experiments targeting a single process (e.g., cloud ice, ocean mixing) with single 
observing platform (e.g., an airplane, a ship) have effectively improved many individual 
parameterizations and should continue. S2S prediction systems include coupled com-
ponents of Earth, and their skill can be dramatically improved only when all model 
components and their coupling are advanced. Indeed global models have evolved 
to a stage that errors are unlikely due to deficiencies in representing a single process. 
Such coupled processes can be adequately observed through field experiments with 

187
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
sufficient breadth to cover multiple processes across more than one component of 
the Earth system. Past success stories of coupled experiments with lasting and broad 
impact all involve multiple observing platforms and international participations. Ex-
amples are the GARP (Global Atmosphere Research Program) Atlantic Tropical Experi-
ment (GATE; Houze and Betts, 1981), the Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Coupled 
Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment (TOGA COARE; Webster and Lukas, 1992), 
Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic Ocean (SHEBA; Uttal et al., 2002), the African Mon-
soon Multidisciplinary Analysis (AMMA; Lebel et al., 2010), and the VAMOS (Variability 
of the American Monsoon Systems) Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study Regional 
Experiment (VOCALS-REX; Wood et al., 2011) (see Appendix C for more details on past 
and current major coupled field campaigns). Common to these and other success-
ful process studies is that they all address coupling or interaction between various 
processes within the same components of the Earth system and interactive processes 
between different components of the Earth system (i.e., land, ice, atmosphere, and 
ocean). Field experiments of that scale are expensive and logistically challenging, but 
their data are singularly beneficial to model development (e.g., Fairall et al., 2003; Park 
and Bretherton, 2009). 
Finding 5.31: Specialized and comprehensive field observations are necessary to 
inform and improve representations of unresolved processes, including coupled 
processes in and between various components of S2S prediction models. New 
observing technology, both remote sensing and in situ, and international collabora-
tion/coordination could enhance the ability to meet the demand for more detailed 
information on interactive and coupled processes within S2S models.
Transforming Understanding of Physical Processes to Model Improvement
Field observations provide the foundation for new knowledge of interactive processes 
key to S2S prediction. However, the tremendous knowledge gained from many field 
observations has helped more to diagnose sources of model errors than to actually 
reduce these errors. One reason for this is the distance between what model develop-
ers need and what can be observed. For example, many cumulus parameterization 
schemes depend on vertical mass fluxes in clouds, and as mentioned above, these are 
very difficult to observe. In this case and in many others, advancing observing technol-
ogy is critical to shorten the distance between what is needed and what is currently 
observable. Meanwhile, fully tapping the rich information from existing field observa-
tions for model development requires knowledge of observing technology by model-
ers and of modeling by observation experts. Thus transforming new knowledge from 

188
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
observations into model improvement requires collaborative and persistent efforts 
by teams that include observationalists, data analysts, and modelers. For the longer 
(climate) timescales, the NSF/NOAA CPTs have been highly successful in developing 
improved parameterizations. Further support for this and similar efforts, including staff 
and computing time, is critical for transferring knowledge gained through process 
studies into actual improvements in parameterizations (see also Chapters 6 and 7).
Given the nature of field observations—namely limited coverage in space and time—
it is naïve to expect a single field experiment to lead to a breakthrough in model de-
velopment and S2S prediction. Each field experiment fills a gap in the in situ observa-
tional database, but it is the totality of all field experiments together that provides the 
needed information for overall improvement for S2S systems. Because it is impossible 
to have detailed process observations at all desired locations and time, an approach 
of integrating field observations and high-resolution modeling is essential to bridge 
the gap between field data and improvement of model parameterization. As dis-
cussed earlier, global and large-domain cloud-permitting and non-hydrostatic ocean 
models that are well calibrated and validated by field observations serve as vital tools 
for transforming knowledge gained from field observations to model improvement. 
Large-eddy simulation (LES) models provide additional details, such as shallow clouds 
and ocean internal waves. 
Finding 5.32: Transforming field observations to model improvement requires per-
sistent collaborations among experts with knowledge of observations, data analy-
sis, and modeling who can effectively integrate field observations and modeling for 
model improvement. 
The Way Forward for Advancing S2S Models
In current forecast systems, model errors are one of the most limiting factors in achiev-
ing the skill that might be afforded by S2S Earth system predictability. Many of the 
issues that lead to model errors are common across different modeling systems and 
a broad range of timescales covering days to centuries, that is, across weather fore-
casts, S2S forecasts, and long-term climate simulations. These model errors are likely 
the result of multiple deficiencies in model representations of key processes that are 
currently parameterized. Investment in research aimed at understanding and reducing 
model errors is absolutely essential in improving S2S predictions. Because of the com-
monality across timescales of many Earth system model errors, a seamless framework 
for reducing such errors and developing new parameterizations may be useful (see 
Box 5.2 for a description of seamless prediction).

189
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
BOX 5.2 
SEAMLESS PREDICTION
The goal of “seamless prediction” is to use the same prediction system software at all time-
scales (i.e., weather, subseasonal, seasonal, and climate) and also at all needed resolutions.a The 
motivations for this concept are that weather and climate prediction models are built upon the 
same physical principles, and cross-scale interactions in the Earth system provide predictive 
power and predictability limits across these scales and thus need to be adequately represented 
in all models (Hoskins, 2013). Indeed, although numerical weather prediction (NWP) and climate 
prediction sometimes have different requirements (e.g., model resolution and complexity, inte-
gration length), they share many commonalities. They are both based on the same set of equa-
tions of motion. They both need parameterization to represent unresolved processes, and many 
of their biases can be traced to the same deficiencies in parameterization of phenomena such 
as tropical convection. They both rely on observed states of the Earth system to initialize their 
integrations and to verify and calibrate their predictions. 
A seamless framework for weather and climate models has been advocated by many (Hurrell 
et al., 2009; Palmer et al., 2008; Shapiro et al., 2010; WMO, 2015a). Seamless prediction systems may 
offer numerous advantages for S2S forecasting and for related decision-making frameworks such 
as “ready-set-go” (Brunet et al., 2010; Robertson et al., 2015; Chapter 3). As discussed elsewhere 
in this report, an adequate S2S prediction system needs to embrace aspects that are common 
in conventional NWP—including high resolutions and adequate representation of complex, 
mesoscale storm systems—and those that are essential to climate prediction—complexity and 
coupling of Earth system components. For example, important sources of S2S predictability such 
as the MJO depend on (and feed back onto) climate modes such as ENSO and also interact with 
higher frequency weather perturbations. Other cross-timescale interactions may be important 
for developing so-called “forecasts of opportunity” (Chapter 4), and exploiting the conditional 
skill in such forecasts is especially important to S2S prediction. Seamless prediction systems 
also require common central elements including dynamic cores and parameterization systems, 
expanded computational infrastructure, dedicated manpower, and coordination between re-
search communities to test developments such as new parameterization schemes on different 
timescales. These are many of the same issues that are advocated elsewhere in this report as 
ways to advance S2S forecasting. Thus S2S forecasting serves as both a motivation and an ideal 
testbed for seamless prediction systems. 
In operational settings, seamless prediction has the potential to reduce labor costs of main-
taining several models to produce operational forecasts with various lead times, and the practice 
and benefit of seamless prediction systems have been demonstrated by several successful efforts 
(Brown et al., 2012; Hazeleger et al., 2010; Vitart et al., 2008). The UK Met Office uses its main at-
mospheric model at all timescales, the Navy is developing NEPTUNE, a possible next-generation, 
unified, global-regional prediction system, and NCEP has proposed a similar path with the selec-
tion of its next operational atmospheric model. Recent advancement in modeling has helped to 
meet some challenges to building seamless prediction systems (Brown et al., 2012). For example, 
the issue of scale dependence of parameterization is being tackled using new schemes that are 
continued

190
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
scale aware or independent (see above). Across multiple U.S. agencies, the Earth System Predic-
tion Suite (Theurich et al., 2015) is working to develop a common modeling infrastructure and 
component interface standards for a suite of national weather and climate models, which, while 
not providing seamless prediction, will facilitate greater use of common components and more 
rapid transition of new technology.
a Note that “seamless forecasts” discussed in Chapter 3 refers to creating products that are consistent 
across short range, subseasonal, seasonal, and climate timescales.
BOX 5.2 CONTINUED
More efficient computational schemes would benefit S2S forecasts as well as weather, 
ocean, and climate forecasts. Advances in S2S systems can benefit tremendously from 
the experience of weather, ocean, and climate model developers, and vice versa. New 
high-order computational schemes and implementations that minimize numerical 
diffusion on S2S timescales are needed for multiresolution ocean and atmospheric 
modeling. Developing these computational schemes jointly with new uncertainty 
quantification and DA capabilities would be an efficient path forward: It would directly 
integrate three critical components of S2S forecasting systems from the start. 
Several crucial steps need to be taken in parallel to reduce model errors. First, research 
to systematically quantify and understand the improvements that can be made 
through modest increases in resolution (e.g., horizontal, vertical, and multi-resolution, 
and across coupled components) is needed to help determine the optimal design of 
operational systems (e.g., trade-offs between costs and benefits of increased reso-
lution, ensembles, parameterizations, and multi-models—see Recommendation J 
described in the next section). For ocean models in particular, there may be benefit for 
including robust, advanced, and highly conservative multi-resolution approaches (e.g., 
adaptive mesh refinement, seamless two-way nesting, multi-dynamics, adaptive super-
parameterizations) for operational global S2S forecasting over the next decade. Some 
emerging research further suggests that there may be important gains from concur-
rent increases in resolution up to the point of resolving mesoscale processes across 
the atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, and land surface. However, research into how increased 
resolution can reduce model biases, especially in coupled ESM models, is just begin-
ning and requires further support (e.g., NOAA, 2015). Ideally, continued research on 
the topic of model resolution should be carried out with more than one S2S forecast 
system to ensure that the lessons learned are generic.

191
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Second and perhaps most importantly, it is clear that uncertainties in parameter-
izations of unresolved processes—both processes internal to a given Earth system 
component and in the representation of coupled processes between them—are and 
will continue to be major sources of model errors. Thus efforts to improve parameter-
ization of many processes must be one of the highest priorities for improving S2S 
prediction systems. The difficulties in improving parameterization arise from both 
incomplete process understanding and failure to properly encapsulate process knowl-
edge into parameterization schemes of operational S2S systems. Acceleration of both 
process understanding and the transfer of knowledge into model development are 
thus essential.
New field observations are critical to improving process understanding and the devel-
opment of subgrid-scale parameterizations. Given the complexity of S2S models, which 
involve multiple, interacting components of the Earth system, it is critical to under­stand 
coupling processes between different components as well as interactive processes 
within components. Particular foci for new field campaigns and process studies should 
include tropical convection, ocean turbulence, sea ice, stratospheric and land surface 
processes, and coupling among different Earth system components (i.e., land, ice, ocean, 
and atmosphere). Observations of coupled processes between components are partic-
ularly useful for monitoring and initializing S2S prediction systems. They are also essen-
tial for model validation and the identification of bias/error sources in coupled ESMs. 
Spatial coverage of this type of observation (e.g., tropical mooring arrays, land surface 
flux towers) remains inadequate and faces deterioration. To maximize impact, research 
and operation communities need as far as possible to collaborate in the design of 
future field observations and to take full advantage of new observing technology and 
opportunities for international collaborations and coordination.
Transforming new knowledge gained from field observations and process studies to 
model improvement requires close collaboration among experts on observations, 
data analysis, and modeling. Persistent and painstaking efforts among two genera-
tions of scientists has been necessary to advance ESMs and operational forecast 
systems to the point at which they are today, and it will take no less to reach our goals 
for S2S forecasting. Teams that allow scientists with diverse expertise to collaborate 
effectively are necessary to accelerate this transformation (such as NSF/NOAA CPTs), 
and it is crucial to further develop an enhanced, sustainable community of scientists 
spanning academic, research, and operational centers to develop, test, and optimize 
new parameterization schemes (see also Chapter 6).
Finally, improving subgrid-scale parameterization needs to be supported by research 
that explores the benefits of extremely fine resolutions (meters to a few kilometers), 

192
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
even though these are unlikely to be affordable or computationally feasible operation-
ally in the next 10 years. For atmosphere models, this would involve global or large-­
domain cloud-permitting grid spacing without the need of deep cumulus parameteriza­
tion and regional LES models without the need of shallow cumulus parameterization. 
For ocean models, this would include explicitly representing sub­mesocale features and 
possibly nonhydrostatic processes such as wave-induced circulation and mixing. The 
development and exploitation of such extremely high-resolution model systems should 
be encouraged, and they should be used to advance the study of S2S predictability 
(Chapter 4), generate high-resolution data sets for process studies, and provide testbeds 
to improve, develop, and evaluate parameterization schemes, as well as demonstrate 
possible future S2S prediction systems (see also Recommendation I).
Recommendation H: Accelerate research to improve parameterization of unresolved 
(e.g., subgrid-scale) processes, both within S2S system submodels and holistically 
across models, to better represent coupling in the Earth system. 
Specifically: 
• 
Foster long-term collaborations among scientists across academia and re-
search and operational modeling centers, and across ocean, sea ice, land, and 
atmospheric observation and modeling communities, to identify root causes 
of error in parameterization schemes, to correct these errors, and to develop, 
test, and optimize new (especially scale-aware or independent) parameteriza-
tion schemes in a holistic manner.
• 
Continue to investigate the potential for reducing model errors through 
increases in horizontal and vertical resolutions in the atmosphere and other 
model components, ideally in a coupled model framework (see also Recom-
mendation L).
• 
Encourage field observations targeted at increasing knowledge of poorly 
understood or poorly represented processes in S2S models, including tropical 
convection, ocean mixing, polar, sea ice and stratospheric processes, and cou-
pling among different Earth system components (e.g., air-sea-ice-wave-land, 
troposphere-stratosphere, dynamics-biogeochemistry).
• 
Develop extremely high-resolution (or multi-resolution) modeling systems 
(e.g., that permit atmospheric deep convection and nonhydrostatic ocean pro-
cesses) to advance process understanding and to promote the development 
of high-resolution operational prototypes (see also Recommendation I).
Representing oceans, sea ice, land surface and hydrology, and biogeochemical cycles 
(including aerosol and air quality) in coupled ESMs is more important for S2S predic-

193
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
tions than for traditional weather prediction because much of the predictability of 
the Earth system on these timescales arises from conditions outside the troposphere 
or from interactions between Earth system components. However, the representation 
of processes outside the troposphere has generally been less well developed in ESMs 
used for making S2S forecasts. Thus improving model representation of land surface 
and terrestrial hydrology, ocean, sea ice, and upper atmosphere—including fluxes and 
feedbacks between these components and the troposphere—should be central to the 
S2S research agenda. For example, improving the representation of land surface pro-
cesses such as soil moisture storage and snow may be important for predicting events 
such as heat waves, cold surges, storm formation, and predicting runoff may help to 
enable S2S forecasts of flooding and lake and coastal hypoxia. Similarly, connecting 
advances in cutting-edge sea ice models (including sophisticated physics represen-
tations of ice-thickness distribution, melt ponds, biogeochemistry, and divergence/­
convergence, as well as new methods to account for wave-floe interactions, blowing 
snow, and ice microstructure) with sea ice models used in an S2S forecast system 
could advance S2S predictions of the atmosphere through improved representa-
tion of radiative and ocean feedbacks, as well as advancing S2S prediction of sea ice 
and polar ocean conditions. As demand grows for forecasts of phenomena that are 
predictable on S2S timescales but that do not feed back strongly to the atmosphere, 
improving the dynamical representation of many of these Earth system processes in 
S2S prediction systems may also become important in its own right.
As coupled systems become increasingly complex and the linkages between variables 
expand, the uncertainty in coupled model output increases, particularly for down-
stream products. Understanding the nonlinear ways in which these uncertainties can 
interact should be a key area of focus. Utilizing recently developed reduced-order 
methods described above, which predict and quantify uncertainty across models 
directly using model equations themselves, would thus be useful (Smith et al., 2014).
Beyond advancing the representation of the land surface, hydrology, stratosphere, 
sea ice, ocean, and biogeochemical models and translating these advancements to 
the Earth system models used for S2S forecasting, efforts are needed to pave the way 
toward global cloud-/eddy-resolving atmosphere-ocean-land-sea ice coupled ­models, 
which will one day become operational for S2S prediction. Although this goal is 
unlikely to be reached in the next decade, revolutions in the computing industry may 
shorten the distance between now and the otherwise long way to go, and the S2S 
research community needs to be proactive and poised if/when that happens. Substan-
tial research is needed in several specific areas to ready global cloud-/eddy-resolving 
models for operation. First, models’ dynamic cores must be made more efficient to 
take advantage of new computer technology (Chapter 7). Second, new parameter-

194
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ization schemes needed at cloud-/eddy-resolving resolutions must be advanced. 
Third, probabilistic predictability on cloud-/eddy-resolving scales would be different 
from that based on models of coarse resolutions, especially for some extreme events, 
which require additional studies. Finally, cloud-/eddy-resolving (or permitting) models 
will not replace the need for multi-model ensembles (MMEs). Considering the huge 
demand on computing capability, cloud-/eddy-resolving MMEs must be approached 
through international collaboration and coordination. 
Recommendation I: Pursue next-generation ocean, sea ice, wave, biogeochemistry, 
and land surface/hydrologic as well as atmospheric model capability in fully ­coupled 
Earth system models used in S2S forecast systems.
Specifically: 
• 
Build a robust research program to explore potential benefits (to S2S predic-
tive skill and to forecast users) from adding more advanced Earth system 
components in forecast systems.
• 
Initiate new efficient partnerships between academics and operational centers 
to create the next generation model components that can be easily integrated 
into coupled S2S ESMs.
• 
Support and expand model coupling frameworks to interoperably link ocean-
atmosphere-land-wave-ice models for rapid and easy exchange of flux and 
variable information.
• 
Develop a strategy to transition high-resolution (cloud-/eddy-resolving) atmo-
sphere-ocean-land-sea ice coupled models to operations, including strategies 
for new parameterization schemes, DA procedures, and MMEs.
COMBINATION, CALIBRATION, VERIFICATION, AND 
OPTIMIZATION OF S2S FORECAST SYSTEMS
As discussed in previous sections, there will always be uncertainties in observations 
that are used to initialize S2S systems and in the parameters and equations used to 
represent processes. The net result is bias and errors in the forecast. Significant effort 
has gone into reducing systematic model errors and biases in Earth system prediction 
systems, and these efforts must continue in order for S2S forecasts to advance. How-
ever, uncertainties in initial conditions and model formulations are certain to remain 
for the foreseeable future. This necessitates the careful assessment of uncertainties 
and efforts to account for them (e.g., ensemble prediction and other methods of 
uncertainty quantification) and statistical post-processing to adjust forecasts so that 

195
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
systematic biases are reduced (calibration). Both are essential for improving the reli-
ability and skill of S2S forecasts, and along with efforts to improve forecast verification, 
are critical to advance.
This section highlights some recent advances and challenges in improving forecast 
skill through ensemble forecasting and calibration. It also covers technical aspects of 
forecast verification—the process of comparing forecasts with observations in order 
to test forecasts’ reliability, measure their skill, assess their value, and develop bias 
corrections. Given the range of possible methods and options for improving forecast 
skill through such techniques, this section also discusses the optimization of fore-
cast systems through an exploration of costs and benefits of various forecast system 
configurations.
Accounting for Uncertainty to Improve Probabilistic 
S2S Forecast Reliability and Skill
As briefly discussed in Chapter 2, a notable strategy for advancing the skill and utility 
of S2S forecasts in the past few decades, apart from efforts to reduce model errors, has 
been the inclusion of quantitative information regarding uncertainty (i.e., probabilistic 
prediction) (e.g., Dewitt, 2005; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2005; Goddard et al., 2001; ­Hagedorn 
et al., 2005; Kirtman, 2003; Palmer et al., 2000, 2004; Saha et al., 2006, among many 
others). This change in prediction strategy naturally follows from the fact that climate 
variability includes a chaotic or irregular component and therefore forecasts must 
include a quantitative assessment of this uncertainty. More importantly, the prediction 
community now understands that the potential utility of forecasts is based on end-
user decision uptake and utilization (Challinor et al., 2005; Morse et al., 2005; Palmer et 
al., 2000), which requires probabilistic forecasts that include quantitative information 
regarding forecast uncertainty or reliability.
Ensembles of perturbed initial observational values are now commonly used to 
represent uncertainty associated with model initial conditions; however, the number 
of ensembles and the method of ensemble creation vary widely across operational 
systems (Appendix B, Tables B.1 and B.2). Little systematic work has been done to 
evaluate the costs and benefits of different ensemble sizes and methods in relation to 
other investments. 
In addition to uncertainty in initialization, uncertainty quantification is also necessary 
to account for uncertainty associated with model formulation. A number of methods 
exist or are under development to attempt to account for this type of uncertainty. 
Perturbed physics ensembles (currently in use at the Met Office for their operational 

196
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
system) or stochastic physics (e.g., Berner et al., 2008, 2011) appear to be quite promis-
ing for representing some aspects of model uncertainty (e.g., Weisheimer et al., 2011, 
and see section above on Data Assimilation). 
The MME approach, in which forecasts are made from an ensemble of separate 
­models, has been the most widely tested and implemented of such methods. As also 
discussed in Chapter 2, a number of routine MME S2S forecasts are currently issued: 
The Canadian Meteorological Centre has been producing operational MME seasonal 
forecasts using two coupled models since 2011.23 Seasonal MME forecasts are also 
being produced at the Asia-Pacific Economic Corporation (APEC) Climate Center 
(APCC) every month based on data collected from 17 operational centers and research 
institutions (see Box 2.1). The North American Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME-2) is 
quasi-operational on the seasonal scale, and planning for subseasonal capabilities is 
beginning (see Box 2.2). Forecasts from these and other MMEs, which include multiple 
operational and/or research models, generally achieve a better skill and reliability 
than do individual models (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2009; Kharin and Zwiers, 2002; Kirtman, 
2014; Kirtman et al., 2014; Krishnamurti et al., 2000; Min et al., 2014; Palmer et al., 2004; 
Wang et al., 2009c; Weigel et al., 2008; Weisheimer et al., 2009), although in some cases, 
only marginal skill improvement has been achieved when verifying the ensemble 
mean (e.g., Doblas-Reyes et al., 2000, 2009; Weisheimer et al., 2009). 
The precise reasons for these improvements in skill are not totally clear, but when 
separate prediction systems are combined into a single prediction system of systems, 
model-and data-induced errors or uncertainty tend to cancel out, which improves 
the overall probabilistic distribution of likely outcomes (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2005; 
Hagedorn et al., 2005; Palmer et al., 2004, 2008). Different model configurations, along 
with different parameterizations and physics likely both play a role in this reduction 
of error: forecast models in different operational centers and institutions have differ-
ent configurations (e.g., resolutions, physics parameterization schemes, strategies for 
initialization, ensemble, coupling, and retrospective forecasts). MME forecasts likely 
cover a more complete probability distribution than a single model because of these 
different configurations and also because different models tend to have their own 
strengths in capturing different sources of predictability. Thus forecast skill improve-
ment may also come from combination of different signals. 
Despite their current value and future promise for further improving S2S forecasts, 
there are a number of important gaps in our understanding of MMEs and how to 
assemble them strategically. Currently, MMEs are largely systems of opportunity, not 
23  http://weather.gc.ca/saisons/index_e.html, accessed January 27, 2016.

197
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
systems made through careful design (Sandgathe et al., 2013). Furthermore, tradeoffs 
exist between developing independent multiple models and focusing resources on 
one system, including focusing on other methods of capturing uncertainty associated 
with model formulation. A further challenge for MMEs is how to combine models with 
unequal skill (Sandgathe et al., 2013). Different methods have been used to combine 
MMEs for deterministic and probabilistic forecasts, including simple averaged MMEs 
where the contribution of each model is equally weighted and empirically weighted 
MMEs using multiple linear regressions. The relative skill of forecast models can also be 
used to weight the contributions of each model to the multi-ensemble, either point by 
point or over larger regions. The choice of method may depend on parameters, loca-
tions, and applications. For example, Kharin and Zwiers (2003) found that for 500-hPa 
geopotential height forecasts, the simple ensemble mean produces the most skillful 
forecasts in the tropics, whereas the regression-improved ensemble mean performs 
best in the extratropics, and the MME forecast that is obtained by optimally weight-
ing the individual ensemble members does not perform as well as either the simple 
ensemble mean or the regression-improved ensemble mean. In the case of the APCC 
MME (Box 2.1), products are generated using a number of methods, including simple 
equal weight for all members, empirically weighted coefficients, and probabilistic fore-
cast. In this case, simple averaged MMEs generally outperform MMEs of other weight-
ing methods over most latitudinal zones for all variables and seasons (Min et al., 2014). 
Finding 5.33: Although perturbed physics and other methods continue to be studied 
and implemented, given current modeling capabilities, a multi-model strategy is a 
practical and relatively simple approach for quantifying forecast uncertainty due to 
errors in model formulation, although optimal methods for combining models are 
not always clear, and MMEs will not fully account for forecast uncertainty.
Calibration of S2S Probability Forecasts
Calibration is a post-process that uses statistical methods based on discrepancies 
between past forecasts and observations to adjust ensemble forecasts and improve 
forecast skill. Today, all operational S2S models include a number of ensemble mem-
bers whose individual forecasts can be arranged to estimate probability distributions 
for the predicted variables, point by point across the forecast grid. However, in their 
original form, the statistical characteristics of S2S forecasts often differ from those of 
the environmental features they attempt to predict. The aim of calibration or post-
processing of model output is to remove these systematic errors and to reshape the 

198
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
predicted probability distribution so that it resembles as closely as possible the distri-
butions that will be found when the forecasts are verified. 
Calibration processes are developed by comparing forecasts made with the current 
prediction model to actual observations for as many cases as possible over a historical 
period (retrospective forecasts or “reforecasts”), usually 10 to 30 years for S2S forecasts. 
The comparison produces statistical information that is used in calibration algorithms 
to ensure that the long-term statistical moments (e.g., mean, variance, spread) of the 
forecast at any given lead time match the long-term observed statistical variability. 
Some calibration methods are based on the Bayesian model averaging approach pro-
posed by Raftery et al. (2005), including those described by Dutton et al. (2013). Other 
methods focus on more direct adjustment of variances, including those of Doblas-
Reyes et al. (2005) and Johnson and Bowler (2009). S2S ensembles are often under-dis-
persive, and the calibration methods usually amplify the variance to correspond more 
closely to the observed variance.
Statistical-dynamical (S-D) techniques, for example, model output statistics (MOS), can 
be very beneficial for improving model calibrations where the models cannot capture 
all the processes that are occurring. For example, the tropical cyclone forecast commu-
nity has used S-D techniques for a number of years, where the dynamics involved in 
hurricane track and intensity are not completely understood. Analog techniques have 
shown fewer uses but may have value in helping to capture uncertainty, potentially 
reducing model retrospective forecast requirements and reducing or eliminating the 
need for additional models (Hamill et al., 2006).
In practice, the calibration of S2S forecasts is not a well-organized process, and no sin-
gle approach works best for all applications. The forecast centers provide the forecasts 
and corresponding retrospective or historical forecast sets and frequently provide 
some calibration. Commercial providers or other users also often compute and apply 
their own calibrations in order to enhance skill or target specific applications. 
Looking forward, as more of the components of the Earth system are included in the 
models, the challenges of model calibration will intensify—due at least in part to the 
need for more comprehensive and long-record observations across components of 
the Earth system. The atmospheric, ocean, land, and ice models evolve toward their 
own model climate and do not necessarily combine and converge on the actual 
Earth system climate. For example, as mentioned earlier in this chapter (Figure 5.7), 
SST ­errors in coupled model simulations with the UK Met Office model grow rapidly. 
Identify­ing model error and compensating for model tendencies will continue to be a 
key activity in S2S model development and operation.

199
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Finding 5.34: Calibration of S2S probability forecasts is a critical process in prepar-
ing the forecasts to serve users. Forecast centers, private-sector users, and value-
added providers use various calibration methods, but there has been no compre-
hensive effort to compare methods or to find optimum approaches for the variables 
of most interest. Ascertaining whether some methods offer clear advantage over 
others would be useful.
Verification of Forecasts and Metrics of Model Skill 
Proper verification of forecasts is critical to all aspects of model improvement, system 
design, ensemble configuration, and the determination of use and value by decision-
makers. A variety of options exist for verifying and estimating the skill of S2S prob-
ability forecasts. Some are related to atmospheric or oceanic phenomena and some to 
quantities of interest to users such as the financial consequences of hedging when ad-
verse conditions are predicted. A standard approach is to estimate model skill through 
anomaly correlations or root-mean-square errors of common meteorological variables 
such as temperature and precipitation (see Figure 2.4). Although such metrics have 
been used for decades, they provide only a limited view of forecast skill. They are tradi-
tionally carried out on a grid-point-by-grid-point, variable-by-variable basis and do not 
provide a comprehensive picture of model or forecast skill (Brown et al., 2002, 2004).
Significant recent research has been devoted to improved verification techniques, tar-
geted mainly at very high resolution mesoscale predictions and also at ensemble pre-
dictions (Gilleland et al., 2010), yet significant research opportunities exist for improving 
verification beneficial to S2S prediction. For S2S prediction, as in mesoscale prediction 
where predictability limits are an issue (e.g., thunderstorms or tornadoes), the oppor-
tunity exists for feature-based prediction in which skill is measured not on a grid-point 
by grid-point basis, but on the basis of predicting larger features (e.g., ENSO, MJO, NAO, 
warm SST pools, sea ice extent) within the Earth system (Cornuelle et al., 2014). In other 
words, although model skill in predicting surface wind 1 to 3 months in advance may 
be lacking, as discussed in Chapter 2, certain structures and indices are predictable at 
these timescales and have verifiable attributes using newer object-oriented, feature 
verification techniques (Gilleland et al., 2010). These techniques have only recently been 
extended to ensemble prediction (Gallus, 2010; Johnson et al., 2013) and potentially 
provide a means for credible verification of feature skill for S2S predictions. 
Successful prediction and verification of S2S “features” also leads to a two-step pro-
cess of prediction and verification where successful prediction of a “feature” can be 
correlated to a likely environmental event for a user, for example, strong ENSO leads 

200
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
to increased rainfall in California by shifting the location of the subtropical jet and 
tropical flow of moisture further east (WMO, 2015a). However, location, areal extent, 
and intensity of the SST anomaly determine the location and intensity of rainfall. Po-
tentially, using feature-based verification as an example (Box 5.3), this could be refined 
to correlate intensity and location of ENSO anomalous SST to more refined watershed 
regions of rainfall. Clearly, predictability limits are a factor here; however, there is signif-
icant user value if, through proper verification, accurate probabilities can be assigned 
to user-critical events or thresholds. 
More challenging is the verification of forecasts of rare events at S2S timescales 
(Hitchens et al., 2013). Credible reanalysis or retrospective forecast history is limited to 
approximately 40 years, providing a small sample for verification of long-range predic-
tions of extreme or rare events. Techniques for verifying ensemble predictions of rare 
events are being explored (Gneiting and Ranjan, 2011); however, longer data records 
are required to provide credible validation and verification. 
Finding 5.35: Aggregating observations into features or indices provides added S2S 
predictability. Feature-based or object-oriented verification, especially ensemble 
BOX 5.3 
FEATURE-BASED VERIFICATION
Feature-based verification as proposed by Brown et al. (2002) has been heavily researched 
for mesoscale prediction over the past decade with several developed methodologies, includ-
ing wavelet techniques, empirical orthogonal functions, and clustering (Gilleland et al., 2010). 
A “feature” for mesoscale prediction can represent both temporal and spatial features that are 
recognizable and that have societally relevant consequences, such as a mesoscale cloud cluster, 
an area of heavy precipitation, or duration of extreme winds, or it may be a combination of these 
attributes. Conceptually, we understand a “hurricane” as a feature, but it can be defined as an area 
of cloud cover, rainfall, a radius of winds exceeding a threshold, or a moving point of maximum 
wind. For S2S, a feature might be an area of SST anomalies that exists in both time and space 
(e.g., ENSO), an area of severe drought defined by rainfall, temperature, area, and temporal extent, 
or an area of sea ice coverage. Many indices discussed in the preceding chapters, such as ENSO, 
PDO, and MJO, are roughly based on features. Feature-based verification has the advantage that 
it can “recognize” and verify a feature that may, for example, occur slightly earlier or later, cover a 
smaller or larger area, be more or less intense, or be of shorter or longer duration, than predicted. 
This enables more accurate quantitative evaluation of model performance in “near miss” situa-
tions and better refinement of model skill and reliability. Feature-based verification also has the 
advantage of being an aggregation of model variables in space and time and therefore having 
greater predictability than a single variable at a single grid-point (see also Chapter 2).

201
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
feature-based verification, should be pursued for S2S to support Earth system 
model development and forecast calibration and validation.
Finding 5.36: Two-step verification correlating a feature, index, or object to a user-
valued event shows promise for extracting useful signal at the limits of predictability.
Research to develop feature-based verification techniques will be important, but it is 
important to not forget that verification metrics are a critical part of building trust in 
the use of forecasts and that the effective design of metrics can help to direct model 
development toward enhancements in skill that are most beneficial to decision-
makers (Hartmann et al., 2002; Morss et al., 2008; Pagano et al., 2002). There is a need 
to develop verification metrics that are more closely associated with user needs and 
desired forecast products, such as quantities that may be more directly used by the 
energy, transportation, hazard, water, and agriculture sectors, among others. There 
is also a need to develop common S2S-specific forecast skill metrics to target core 
physical characteristics of the forecast that are particularly relevant to S2S processes 
and timescales (e.g., SST, sea ice thickness, upper-level atmospheric flow, soil moisture, 
upper ocean heat content, in addition to indices of S2S relevant modes of variability). 
A community-wide effort will thus be needed to develop skill and verification ­metrics 
that will build user trust while driving the development of S2S forecast systems in 
directions that are most beneficial to society. An understanding of the different ways 
in which users interpret forecasts and what they consider to be skillful is clearly nec-
essary to inform the types of evaluation metrics that will influence use of forecasts 
(see Chapter 3). When developing such common skill and verification metrics, atten-
tion must also be paid to ensuring that such metrics reflect appropriate and optimal 
combinations of spatial and temporal averaging as the lead time increases from weeks 
to seasons. Thus, developing this range of verification metrics/diagnostics targeting 
S2S forecast skill improvements, dissemination, and monitoring will require input 
from, and dialogue among, the operational, research, and stakeholder communities 
(see also Chapters 3 and 6). In some cases, forums for such a dialogue already exist. For 
subseasonal prediction, for example, the S2S Project has begun a process to develop 
common and community-accepted verification and process-oriented skill metrics for 
forecast systems.
Finding 5.37: Increasing the skill of S2S forecasts through improved and expanded 
representation of the physical system and expanding the utility of S2S forecasts will 
require collaboration among operational, research, and stakeholder communities 
to develop common S2S forecast skill and verification metrics, as well as process-
oriented diagnostics that target S2S processes and phenomena.

202
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Often decision-makers simply want to know whether they can have confidence in a 
particular forecast. Should I act on the basis of this forecast? What are the expected 
consequences if I do? In these cases, effective use of the forecast in decision-making 
requires quantitative knowledge of historical performance of the forecast system to 
link predictions with expected outcomes, that is, “If I act on this forecast, then I can 
­expect…” In these cases, a quantitative business model or decision process model 
based on predicted probabilities will then dictate the appropriate measure of model 
skill. For example, a simple business model for characterizing the effect of warm or 
cold seasons on electric utilities demonstrates that the critical model performance 
statistics for analyzing the impact of forecasts (to mitigate such predicted adverse 
events) are the climatological and predicted frequencies of such events, along with 
the fraction of adverse forecasts that are correct (Dutton et al., 2015). 
Verification metrics are most useful when decision-makers are involved in their design 
(see also Chapter 3 and Recommendation B), and for many users the success of the 
S2S forecasts is directly proportional to the favorable results achieved by acting on 
the forecast at various predicted probabilities. Knowing whether to act on a forecast 
requires detailed and reliable statistics about forecast performance that must be 
obtained from retrospective forecasts. These retrospective forecasts, then, can be as 
important to effective user decisions as the forecasts themselves.
In most current operational S2S systems, however, there is inconsistency between 
real-time forecasts and retrospective forecasts in initialization as well as ensemble 
size (Appendix B, Tables B.1 and B.2). Furthermore, retrospective forecasts are usually 
initialized from reanalysis, which can be inconsistent with the state-of-art operational 
analysis used to initialize the real-time forecasts. This is particularly true for the land 
surface (e.g., soil moisture and snow). Such inconsistency, particularly in initialization 
and model configuration for real-time forecasts and retrospective forecasts, can gener-
ate anomalies with amplitude as large as the signal we want to predict.
Finally, the full probabilistic information contained in the ensemble forecast is essen-
tial to decision-making, as emphasized by Dutton et al. (2013, 2015). Anomaly correla-
tions or root-mean-square errors use only one or two statistical moments and may 
or may not be relevant to decisions to act. The critical question is the extent to which 
predicted probabilities model the frequencies of occurrence in the verification data.
Thus, in S2S forecasts it is important to convey the associated forecast skill to users 
along with the forecast itself. In addition to providing data for calibration, retrospec-
tive forecasts are used to evaluate forecast skill of the S2S system. It is easier to assess 
the skill of the forecast system when retrospective forecasts are made with the same 
fixed version of model and same ensemble number as the forecast. For those systems 

203
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
performing retrospective forecasts on the fly, the assessment of forecast skill can be 
more challenging. In these cases, conducting retrospective forecasts with a full set of 
ensemble members and evaluating the skill once a month could be beneficial. This is 
true for most of the current operational subseasonal forecast systems.
Finding 5.38: Retrospective forecasts using the current version of the forecast sys-
tem and up- to-date reanalyses are important for advancing calibration and valida-
tion efforts of ensemble prediction.
The Way Forward for Model Calibration, Combination, 
Verification, and Optimization of User-Focused Skill
A key conclusion of this section is that the value of S2S forecasts is proportional to the 
success of the users in acting on the forecasts to take advantage of opportunity or to 
mitigate risk. Thus, the two key components are the forecasts that look to the future 
and the retrospective forecasts, which inform users what to expect if they act on the 
forecast. The forecasts’ value also depends on the calibration processes that shape 
predicted probability distributions to improve the likelihood they will match the veri-
fication data. Underpinning this is the need for a credible verification methodology 
that reflects the aggregation of observations to extend predictability, the spatial and 
temporal variability of predictability at S2S timescales, and the unique characteristics 
of MMEs.
The opportunity exists for feature-based predictions with S2S lead times. The com-
munity is gaining the ability to predict certain features, structures, or indices (e.g., MJO, 
ENSO, sea ice extent) at S2S timescales and to have verifiable attributes using newer 
object-oriented verification techniques, with extensions to ensemble prediction. There 
is the potential to provide credible verification of feature skill for S2S predictions, 
which the committee believes is an important direction to pursue. 
Recommendation J: Pursue feature-based verification techniques to more readily 
capture limited predictability at S2S timescales as part of a larger effort to improve 
S2S forecast verification.
Specifically:
• 
Investigate methodologies for ensemble feature verification including two-
step processes linking features to critical user criterion. 
• 
Pursue verification methodologies for rare and extreme events at S2S ­timescales, 
especially those related to MME predictions.

204
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
• 
Consider the benefits of producing more frequent reanalyses using coupled 
S2S forecast systems to make the initial conditions of retrospective forecasts 
more consistent with the real-time forecasts, as well as to benefit predictability 
studies.
Optimization of the Configurations of S2S Forecast Systems
As is clear from the supporting paragraphs above, S2S forecast systems, including 
the coupled ESM, the reanalysis, and retrospective forecasts, can be configured in a 
wide variety of ways. Designing and implementing an S2S forecast system to operate 
within finite computing resources always requires trade-offs between spatial resolu-
tion, length of forecast lead times, coupled system complexity, the number of model 
forecast systems for MME approaches, and the number of ensemble members in each 
forecast system. Thus, the specifications can vary widely over a configuration space of 
these parameters.
Today the S2S community has little sense of how forecast performance depends 
on that configuration (Cornuelle et al., 2014; Sandgathe et al., 2013). In addition to 
research on reducing model errors through parameterizations, increases in model 
resolution, and adding complexity in coupled submodels, it would be enormously 
beneficial to ascertain which configurations can produce optimum forecast systems, 
as defined by reliable probability forecasts across a wide spectrum of climate variabil-
ity and Earth system variables and by optimum levels of user-focused skill. Although 
the focus of this report to this point has been on developing dynamical predictions, 
such an assessment should also consider the value of lower-order models and analog 
methods for reducing computational costs while maintaining prediction skill.
This determination of how performance depends on configuration is a central key task 
in any S2S research agenda. Exploring the configuration space (or “trade space”) of S2S 
forecast systems will be a large, complicated, and expensive endeavor, expanding as 
computer and ESM capabilities expand over the next decade or more. Such an experi-
ment would benefit tremendously from a central, coordinating authority, and prefer-
ably central funding as well (see discussion in Chapter 6). 
This work to optimize system configuration is essential to progress today, but it will 
also never be complete. New methods for representing physical processes (Recom-
mendation H), new computer capabilities (Chapter 7), and new calibration strategies 
all will mandate a continued search for trajectories through the model and forecast 
system configuration space that are most advantageous to improving S2S forecast 
skill and use.

205
S2S Forecast Systems: Capabilities, Gaps, and Potential
Exploring the “trade-space” thus represents a major and long-term research effort, 
undoubtedly distributed through the modeling community, which will provide a foun-
dation for the continuing development and improvement of the operational forecast 
systems to be considered in the next chapter. In summary, the committee has defined 
users acting on forecasts as a key metric for measuring S2S success and recommends 
a continuing search for configurations of S2S forecast systems that will optimize the 
probabilistic information required by users. 
Recommendation K: Explore systematically the impact of various S2S forecast 
system design elements on S2S forecast skill. This includes examining the value of 
model diversity, as well as the impact of various selections and combinations of 
model resolution, number of ensemble perturbations, length of lead, averaging 
period, length of retrospective forecasts, and options for coupled sub-models.
Specifically:
• 
Design a coordinated program to assess the costs and benefits of including 
additional processes in S2S systems, and relate those to benefits from other 
investments, for example in higher resolution. In doing so, take advantage of 
the opportunity to leverage experience and codes from the climate modeling 
community. 
• 
Encourage systematic studies of the costs and benefits of increasing the verti-
cal and horizontal resolution of S2S models.
• 
Evaluate calibration methods and ascertain whether some methods offer clear 
advantage for certain applications over others, as part of studies of the opti-
mum configurations of S2S models.
• 
Explore systematically how many unique models in an MME are required to 
predict useful S2S parameters, and whether those models require unique DA, 
physical parameterizations, or atmosphere, ocean, land, and ice components 
(see also Recommendation L).


207
C H A P T E R  S I X
Interface Between Research and 
Operations
The aim of research efforts to make subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) predictions is to 
operationalize forecasts on these timescales to provide consistent and timely informa-
tion that various sectors can rely upon for decision-making. As described in Chapter 
3, there is an increasing demand for easily accessible and comprehensible S2S fore-
casting information that is updated on a regular basis, which provides an increasing 
demand for operational S2S products. As described in Chapter 4, there is an ongoing 
progress to identify and characterize sources of predictability for S2S forecasts. As 
described in Chapter 5, the models that have been developed as research tools to 
study scientific questions regarding the processes responsible for weather and ocean 
variability, climate change, and predictability are being improved at a rapid pace (e.g., 
Delworth et al., 2006; Gent et al., 2011; Kiehl et al., 1998). Any strategy to improve the 
provision of operational S2S products should incorporate the efficient migration of 
advances from the research community into operational forecasts (NRC, 2012b). 
A key part of the interface between research and operations should account for the 
interaction between the research and operations communities. A natural tension 
exists between the two communities. Researchers in the academic community are 
generally rewarded for exploring new concepts, because scientific journals often favor 
publications that are viewed as making major advancements as opposed to incre-
mental changes. Forecasters in the operational community are often under pressure 
to maintain a natural conservatism. Because numerous users depend on operational 
forecasts and invest in using specific outputs, there is pressure on the forecasters to 
maintain consistency in their forecast products. This tension can be healthy, but some 
of these cultural differences can impede dialogue and collaboration. Facilitation of 
the interface between research and operations should start with acknowledgment of 
these cultural differences. 
This chapter describes several ongoing efforts to promote collaboration across the 
research and operations communities in the United States and elsewhere. The topic of 
forging better links between research and operations in climate modeling was cov-
ered comprehensively in a recent NRC report (NRC, 2012b), and the committee builds 
upon rather than repeats that report’s highly relevant but more general findings. Thus, 
in this chapter, the committee makes the case for several recommendations that are 

208
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
more specific to the S2S context. In particular, the committee emphasizes research-
to-operations related to the development of multi-model ensemble (MME) forecast 
systems, because of their importance to reducing uncertainty and increasing the skill 
and reliability of S2S forecasts (Chapter 5).
CURRENT ACTIVITIES AT THE INTERFACE OF S2S RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS
A number of efforts, both nationally and internationally, work at the interface of 
research and operations in S2S forecasting. Many of these efforts were introduced in 
Chapter 2. This section describes in greater detail several prominent efforts, highlight-
ing their importance for bridging research and operations, particularly in the area of 
developing MME forecast systems; it does not, however, provide a comprehensive list 
of all efforts.
Demonstration MME S2S Forecast Systems
As introduced and described in Chapter 2, a number of international efforts are aimed 
at improving MMEs and issuing MME forecasts. The North American Multi-Model 
Ensemble (NMME)1 (Box 2.2) started as a research and demonstration project for S2S 
prediction involving universities and laboratories in the United States, NCEP, and the 
Canadian Meteorological Center (CMC). It is currently supported by NCEP, by CMC 
through a Cooperative Agreement, and through research dollars from NOAA, NASA, 
and DOE. Participating modeling groups include both operational and research 
centers,2 with forecasts from each provided to the NOAA NCEP Climate Prediction 
Center for evaluation and consolidation as part of its operational seasonal prediction 
system.
NMME-2, which started in 2012, initially focused on bridging research and operations, 
and developing requirements for operational seasonal prediction that were then used 
to define the specifications of a rigorous retrospective forecast experiment and evalu-
ation regime. Other more specific goals of the NMME-2 experiment include to:
1  More information on the National Multi-Model Ensemble is available at http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.
gov/products/NMME/NMME_description.html; http://cpo.noaa.gov/ClimatePrograms/ModelingAnalysis 
PredictionsandProjections/NMME.aspx; https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/nmme/ (all accessed 
April 14, 2016).
2  Details of each of the participating models can be found at http://cpo.noaa.gov/ClimatePrograms/
ModelingAnalysisPredictionsandProjections/NMME/AbouttheNMME.aspx (accessed February 10, 2016).

209
Interface Between Research and Operations
i.	
“Build on existing state-of-the-art U.S. climate prediction models and data 
assimilation systems that are already in use in NMME-1 (as well as upgraded 
versions of these forecast systems), introduce a new forecast system, and 
ensure interoperability so that future model developments can be easily 
incorporated.
ii.	
Take into account operational forecast requirements (e.g., forecast frequency, 
lead time, duration, number of ensemble members) and regional/user-specific 
needs. A focus of this aspect of the experiment will be the hydrology of various 
regions in the United States and elsewhere to address drought and extreme 
event prediction. An additional focus of NMME-2 will be to develop and evalu-
ate a protocol for intraseasonal or subseasonal multi-model prediction.
iii.	 Utilize the NMME system experimentally in a near-operational mode to dem-
onstrate the feasibility and advantages of running such a system as part of 
NOAA’s operations.
iv.	 Enable rapid sharing of quality-controlled retrospective forecast data among 
the NMME team members, and develop procedures for timely and open ac-
cess to the data, including documentation of models and forecast procedures, 
by the broader climate research and applications community.” (Kirtman, 2014)
Based on the results of earlier NMME experiments and demonstrations, NOAA officially 
began incorporating NMME-2 output into its seasonal operational prediction suite in 
May 2016.
The Asia-Pacific Climate Center (APCC, see Box 2.1) is a joint activity of the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC) involving 17 operational and research centers from 
nine APEC member countries. It collects dynamic ensemble seasonal prediction data 
from these centers and produces seasonal forecasts and outlooks that are dissemi-
nated to APEC members every month (see Box 2.1). Together with its aligned research 
institute, Climate Prediction and its Application to Society (CliPAS), APCC has estab-
lished protocols and databases for contributing model centers’ forecast data, which 
in turn supports research on predictability. APCC also conducts research on MME 
­methods, which in turn feeds work to issue MME forecasts using the most beneficial 
methodology (Min et al., 2014).
Through these and other MME research and demonstration efforts (e.g., ENSEMBLES, 
DEMETER—see Chapter 2), much has been learned about MME forecast systems. As 
also described in Chapter 5, a primary finding has been that MME forecasts in general 
show improved forecast skill and reliability when compared with the individual model 
forecasts. Thus, first and foremost, these demonstration and aligned research-opera-
tions efforts have shown the potential for operational MMEs. 

210
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 6.1: Multi-modal ensembles have been demonstrated to be a viable mecha-
nism for advancing S2S forecasts.
Although it is not yet a forecast demonstration project, the World Climate Research 
Programme/World Weather Research Programme (WCRP/WWRP) joint research 
­project—the S2S Project—started in January 2013 with a primary goal to advance 
subseasonal forecasting by coordinating prediction and predictability research 
enabled by the establishment of a multi-model database. The database consists of 
ensembles of subseasonal (up to 60 days) forecasts and is supplemented with an 
extensive set of reforecasts following TIGGE—the THORPEX Interactive Grand Global 
Ensemble—protocols (Box 2.3). Although this project leverages operational systems, 
the forecasts are currently disseminated with a 3-week delay, thus emphasizing the 
use of operational forecast system data for use by both the research and operations 
communities. 
One advantage of the S2S Project database is the diversity of operational models. 
However, the models are inconsistent in terms of in forecast start date, frequency, lead 
time, and reforecast strategy, which makes it difficult for data exchange, performance 
inter-comparison, and research. The inconsistencies between models also reflects the 
fact that the subseasonal forecast is still in its infancy stage. 
There are significant opportunities for leveraging the S2S Project, not only the data­
base but also the associated subproject research and activities. Most of the sub­projects 
already strongly link to entities and activities outside the S2S Project (e.g., the MJO 
Subproject links to the WCRP/WWRP Working Group on Numerical Experimentation 
[WGNE] MJO Task Force). During a recent workshop on Subseasonal Prediction hosted 
by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF),3 in concert 
with an S2S Project Steering Group meeting, for example, a working group discussed 
and recommended avenues for broader international collaboration that would more 
fully take advantage of the S2S Project and NMME. These included (1) the establish-
ment of a Task Team on S2S process-oriented diagnostics as well as forecast skill verifi-
cation metrics—keeping in mind both model development and stakeholder interests, 
(2) more routine interaction between the leads of the subseasonal NMME Core Team, 
S2S project co-chairs, S2S Verification subproject leads, and the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) Commission for Basic Systems (CBS) leads, (3) joint workshops 
among NMME, S2S, CBS, etc., (4) coordinated research experimentation, with leader-
ship in part provided by WGNE. Additional recommendations and full details will be 
provided in the final report of the ECWMF workshop expected for release in early 2016. 
3  http://www.ecmwf.int/en/learning/workshops-and-seminars/past-workshops/workshop-­subseasonal-
predictability.

211
Interface Between Research and Operations
There is an opportunity for enhanced collaboration between the operational centers 
contributing to the S2S Project and the WMO Joint CBS/CCl Expert Team on Opera-
tional Predictions from Subseasonal to Longer-time Scales (ET-OPSLS), which oper-
ates through the WMO Lead Centre (LC) in Korea. Building on the existing mechanism 
whereby the LC has access to the same S2S database, but without the 3-week embargo, 
could enable a closer synergy between the research community and operational 
­centers’ research efforts.
Finding 6.2: The S2S Project has begun to archive data from operational forecast 
systems and coordinating research using these databases to accelerate improve-
ments in subseasonal prediction, as well as plays key role in guiding the develop-
ment of decision support projects. 
Example Research to Operations Strategies and Arrangements
ESPC 
The National Earth System Prediction Capability (ESPC) interagency program was 
established in 2010 “to improve coordination and collaboration across the federally 
sponsored environmental research and operational prediction communities for the 
scientific development and operational implementation of improved global predic-
tion at the weather to climate interface.”4 ESPC advocates for a number of things at 
the interface of research and operations, including common coupled modeling archi-
tectures and standardization of data, archives, and forecast skill metrics.
As part of ESPC, NOAA and the U.S. Navy use a number of mechanisms to improve 
the flow of technology into operational weather and ocean systems. These include 
focused workshops, visiting scientist programs, special sessions at professional confer-
ences, testbeds, and focused transition teams such as the Navy’s development- and 
operations-transition teams and the NSF/NOAA Climate Process Teams.
European Efforts
The UK Met Office operates a single science program, covering both weather and 
climate and both research and transition to operations. This approach, with the same 
management responsible for all parts, means that research to operations challenges 
4  http://espc.oar.noaa.gov/.

212
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
are significantly lessened, in part because the entire program can be designed with 
research to operations in mind. In addition, an active science partnerships program 
seeks to entrain developments and expertise from international partners and the aca-
demic community. The latter is facilitated by relationships with a number of key uni-
versities (including jointly funded positions and PhD studentships). The UK Met Office 
also has a crucial strategic relationship with the Natural Environment Research Council 
(which funds much of the academic research in the UK), which enables co-design and 
co-funding of major research programs such as those developing the next generation 
dynamical core and working to improve the representation of convection in weather 
and climate models. This integrated approach—both in the design of the programs 
and the mixture of academic and Met Office scientists carrying them out—is of great 
benefit for research to operations.
ECMWF also has a strongly focused research program, targeted at generating opera­
tional improvements. It hosts a significant number of visiting scientists and holds 
­numerous workshops (involving international experts), seminars, and training 
programs.
Finding 6.3: The United States can learn from international efforts to connect 
­research and operations more closely and can build upon current national efforts to 
coordinate research and operations activities. 
CHALLENGES IN RESEARCH TO OPERATIONS AND OPERATIONS TO RESEARCH
Motivated by the growing expectation for governments to provide S2S services (see, 
e.g., Dr. Jane Lubchenco’s testimony during Congressional hearings to confirm her as 
Undersecretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and Administrator of NOAA 
[Lubchenco, 2009]), there is a desire within the research community to migrate experi-
mental prediction models into operational use, for example, the NOAA Climate Test 
Bed effort to build the NMME (described previously). There is also a desire to improve 
on operational models by transitioning model components and/or parameterization 
schemes from experimental models developed in the broader community. In theory, 
this migration of experimental model components and parameterizations into opera-
tional use has the potential to efficiently leverage the U.S. S2S research community 
and to provide more skillful and comprehensive operational predictions.
However, gaps exist between research goals and operational imperatives, for example,  
changing an operational model requires a more careful and elaborate process than 
that for a research model. In addition, there are mismatches between the resource 

213
Interface Between Research and Operations
requirements needed to maintain an operational model and the current distribution 
of resources between research, development, and operations.
There is also a mismatch between the expectations of the operational numerical 
weather prediction (NWP) and the seasonal prediction community and the model 
research and development community. The principal measure of success of work that 
is supported by a typical short-term (e.g., 3-year) research grant is the number, quality, 
and impact of the research publications that result from the project. Because re-
searchers are not rewarded for developments that become “operational,” they are not 
motivated to perform what they consider to be substantial extra work to transform 
research results into operational methods or procedures. Their view that scholarly 
publications speak for themselves has been described as a “loading dock” approach—
the researchers make their results available to the operational prediction community 
via peer-reviewed publications (i.e., left on the loading dock), who, in turn, are respon-
sible for deciding how to use them (see Chapter 7 for additional discussion of work-
force issues).
From the operational community perspective, the great many constraints imposed by 
operations must be considered by the researchers who seek to improve operational 
predictions. To effect a transition from research to operations, they argue, the research 
community must modify its developments to conform to the constraints of the opera-
tional models and resources. However, for the research community to use operational 
models for research, operational centers must provide infrastructure support for full 
testing of developments in the operational environment. The mismatch between the 
two communities’ expectations has been called the “valley of death,” that is, a com-
munication and interaction gap (NRC, 2012b). There is a need to better align the two 
communities and provide adequate resources so that good ideas can be more rapidly 
and effectively transformed into operational practice.
Operations-to-research faces a similar issue. To make research relevant and focused 
on scientific issues exposed by operations, operational centers must provide access to 
their data and analysis, operational models, and multiyear reanalysis and retrospective 
forecasting runs. In addition, operational and agency development laboratories must 
provide access to key model developers and software engineers to facilitate use of 
code and data by the outside community. These activities are demanding for person-
nel, computational and storage resources, something operational centers have tradi-
tionally lacked (see also Chapter 7).
At the core of the challenges within research to operations for S2S is the question of 
how to expand participation in the development and improvement of the operational 
prediction systems in the operational centers. Currently, the major route to move 

214
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
research results and successes into operations is by diffusion through the professional 
literature and meetings and some focused symposia, such as those of ECMWF, for 
example, Seasonal Prediction in 2012 and Subseasonal Predictability in 2015. Continu-
ation of these efforts is important to continue the transfer of information along the 
research to operations pipeline. However, common access to operational systems and 
data is a requirement for improving the flow of technology and information.
Finding 6.4: There is a clear need to provide the research community with greater 
access to operational systems or mirror systems to aid in transitioning component 
and parameterizations from the research community into operational centers. 
WAY FORWARD FOR RESEARCH TO OPERATIONS
Over the past two decades, substantial progress has been made in understanding 
some of the phenomenological drivers for S2S prediction, and operational centers 
have made progress in improving S2S forecast skill (see Chapters 2 and 5). However, 
there is significant opportunity to  increase operational skill from current levels in sea-
sonal and subseasonal forecasts (Chapter 4). Better connections between the research 
and operations communities are crucial to improving operational skill and advancing 
research and quasi-operational prediction systems into operational mode. Operational 
centers should carefully choose which updates to make because improvements to one 
type of forecast may come at the expense of another, and users who invest heavily in 
developing products rely on the output from operational centers being in a specific 
form. Ensuring that the best research results get into operational use and allowing re-
searchers to contribute and learn from the experiences of the operational centers are 
ongoing challenges for the weather/climate community at large (NRC, 2012b). For S2S 
in particular, a few areas require enhanced attention, including planning and work to 
develop operationalized multi-model S2S forecast systems, providing the S2S research 
community with greater access to the data and models from operational systems, and 
organizing the operational community to be ready to provide S2S forecasts on the 
consequences of large, unanticipated events. 
Operationalizing Multi-Model Ensembles
As described in Chapter 5, MMEs have demonstrated potential for improving the skill 
and uncertainty quantification of S2S forecasts. Although many design considerations 
must be addressed to develop the best operational S2S forecast systems (see Recom-
mendation K), it has been established that an MME outperforms a single model en-

215
Interface Between Research and Operations
semble at extended timescales (Kirtman, 2014; see Chapter 5). The committee believes 
that all evidence points to the necessity of MMEs for enabling more skillful S2S fore-
casts in the next decade. Thus a long term goal of the U.S. operational centers should 
be to develop a fully operational MME that spans the S2S timescales. 
An immediate question to ask is whether the existing North American Multi-Model 
Ensemble (NMME; see above) could be built upon to develop a fully operational S2S 
MME. NMME was originally funded and intended to provide a highly valuable research 
vehicle for advancing S2S prediction and especially for investigations into optimal 
multi-model ensemble configurations. While the NMME-2 is quasi-operational (see 
Box 2.2) and providing data that is incorporated into NCEP operational products, ex-
ternal users, and the research community on a real-time basis, its existence is partially 
dependent on short-term research funding. The CFSv2 is the current NCEP operational 
seasonal prediction system and is supported as such, and output of the Canadian 
Meteorological Center system’s two models are being provided through a Cooperative 
Agreement. All other systems in the NMME-2 are supported through federal research 
funding activities including NOAA Office of Oceanic & Atmospheric Research (OAR), 
NASA, and DOE. In the committee’s view, this quasi-operational approach may be 
misguided in the long run, given the varying levels of operational robustness of all 
of the contributing models. Participants such as universities or research laboratories 
have little motivation or funding to sustain the provision of 99.9% reliable, on-time 
data delivery of forecasts with adherence to rigorous software validation and verifica-
tion or to scheduled software update cycles. Even the more applied laboratories such 
as NASA and NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) do not have the 
mission, funding, or infrastructure to meet the rigorous requirements imposed upon 
operational data providers. 
That said, it will be difficult to create an MME in a true operational environment.  The 
MME’s value lies in the differing data assimilation, dynamics, and physical parameter-
izations of the contributing models, which leads to cancelation of model biases and 
better assessment of predicted probability distributions. This implies that an opera-
tional system of systems should include distinctly different systems. However, each 
individual system requires an expensive host of scientists and software engineers, 
especially as computer systems become more complex (Chapter 5). S2S forecast sys-
tems are also very computationally expensive and would significantly impact a single 
operational center’s computing resources.
A critical challenge for the next decade therefore will be the design and implementa-
tion of an operational multi-model S2S forecast system that operates within finite 
operational resources. Meeting this challenge will require exploration of the entire 

216
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
trade space for S2S prediction systems including using common model components 
(e.g., ocean, wave, land, aerosol, ice), statistical-dynamical prediction such as analogs, 
or stochastic parameterizations to achieve suitable skill with fewer or even a single 
system. Thus, the committee’s related recommendation above (Recommendation K) 
is an important step in the deliberate design of an operational MME system (and one 
that is not based solely on expediency). Exploring the various options in this space, 
with the goal of optimizing skill while reducing the number and uniqueness of system 
members, should lead to a tremendous reduction in the cost of human resources to 
maintain a multi-model operational system. 
This exploration of strategies should take place within the context of the current 
NMME, WWRP/WCRP S2S Project and/or APCC S2S forecast efforts, but further dem-
onstration of benefits in increased skill and reliability will be a key component of the 
national research agenda for S2S prediction. However, it is critical that the broader 
research community be engaged in this effort. As described for climate models 
generally (NRC, 2012b), operational centers would best promote these advances by 
providing operational models, supporting data sets, and a user-friendly environment 
that allows external researchers to test experimental parameterizations and/or model 
components in an operational setting. This requires a “collaborative framework where 
datasets and metrics/targets are standardized for careful intercomparison” (Sandgathe 
et al., 2013). The NOAA Climate Test Bed activity5 provides the potential for such a 
connection. In addition, the Next Generation Global Prediction System (NGGPS6) is an 
effort by the National Weather Service to accelerate research to operations for weather 
forecasting. The current efforts would need significant enhancement to fully address 
the challenges of designing an operational MME. 
As described above and in Chapter 5, systematic design of a robust multi-model S2S 
system will be a large, complicated, and expensive experiment, which would benefit 
tremendously from a central, coordinating authority and preferably central funding 
as well. The various interagency efforts within the U.S. government, for example ESPC, 
could offer this coordination and determine a plan forward with the long-term goal of 
establishing an operational MME. The plan for a fully operational MME could start with 
models from North American operational centers, but could be expanded to include 
models from other countries. 
Recommendation L: Accelerate efforts to carefully design and create robust opera-
tional multi-model ensemble S2S forecast systems. 
5  http://www.nws.noaa.gov/ost/CTB/, accessed January 27, 2016.
6  http://www.nws.noaa.gov/ost/nggps/, accessed January 27, 2016.

217
Interface Between Research and Operations
Specifically:
• 
Use test beds and interagency and international collaborations where feasible 
to systematically explore the impact of various S2S forecast system design ele-
ments on S2S forecast skill, in particular the questions of how many and what 
formulations of unique models are optimum in an operational MME (see also 
Recommendation K).
• 
Assess realistically the available operational resources and centers that are 
able to contribute to an operational MME.
Provide Research Community with Greater Access to Operational Systems
A number of ongoing activities are working at the interface of research and opera-
tions. As such, rather than recommend a wholesale restructuring of the relationship 
between these communities, the committee chooses to make several targeted recom-
mendations to help continue progress in this area. That said, the committee empha-
sizes that these recommendations will take significant time and effort to accomplish 
and that they should be viewed as part of a longer term challenge to address over the 
course of the next decade. 
As the S2S community looks to bridge S2S research into S2S operational predictions, 
a new paradigm is needed for the U.S. research to operations pipeline. At the center of 
the challenges within research to operations for S2S is the participation by researchers 
with new ideas and tools in development and improvement of the prediction systems 
in the operational centers. Closing the gap between research and development and 
operational prediction will require the capability to establish workflow provenance 
and automate analysis where feasible and reasonable, for which research and devel-
opment are needed. The major route for research results and successes to move into 
operations are by diffusion through the professional literature and meetings and 
some focused symposia, like those of ECMWF, for example, Seasonal Prediction in 2012 
and on Subseasonal Prediction in 2015. Continuation of these efforts is important to 
further the transfer of information along the research to operations pipeline.
The section on current activities describes efforts by the U.S. government, ECMWF, 
and the UK Met Office to improve the flow of research to operations. Promoting and 
expanding these mechanisms would help to include more scientists in plowing the 
new ground of S2S. 
Beyond current activities, the committee recommends two additional approaches. 
One is the use of a data archive of operational deterministic and ensemble forecasts 
and retrospective forecasts and their initialization data by the research community 

218
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
outside the operational centers. This would facilitate further analyses of sources of pre-
dictability and identify new sources of predictability, skill diagnostics, and more. Data 
storage will be a challenge for these types of request, although not an insurmountable 
one. These activities could focus on specific periods of time, for example, a field cam-
paign relevant to S2S or a special year of interest such as a given phase of the Quasi-
Biennial Oscillation (QBO), to help minimize the archiving effort required by opera-
tional modeling centers. Alternatively, national data depositories could be established 
for this and other “big data” projects. 
The WWRP/WCRP S2S project and NMME have already started work on making opera-
tional center data available to the research community, including the reforecast and 
forecast data. Overall, there is a pragmatic and near-term opportunity for operational 
centers to help to make such archived data more available—through the S2S Project 
or otherwise—for the research community. This access could potentially be achieved 
via test centers. In addition, there is an opportunity for the research community to take 
better advantage of the operational center data that is now becoming available from 
the S2S Project. 
A second approach of substantial benefit would be to provide researchers with the 
capability to request reruns of operational models or conduct numerical experiments 
using operational models themselves. Some of the visiting scientists programs have 
enabled researcher to insert their diagnostics into operational models, but the abil-
ity for researchers to request reruns of operational models for specific time periods 
or even test new parameterization will be difficult given the resource constraints of 
operational centers. The ability for users to run operational models themselves will be 
a more difficult challenge, one that will involve access to the modeling code as well 
as sufficient computing power to run the code. Some modeling centers have already 
released the codes of previous versions of operational models. However, making 
codes of current operational models available and accessible requires a significant 
effort by the operational centers. To improve the flow of advances between research 
and operations, operational centers should work toward meeting requests for reruns 
and making model codes available for researchers over the course of the next two 
decades.
Lastly, most decision-makers are likely to acquire information via an intermediary. As 
described in Chapter 3, the committee recommends an ongoing process that involves 
those that use forecast products to make decisions and those who produce forecasts 
to work iteratively to develop improved forecast products. The private sector will be a 
key part of that process. Transferring enhancements in private-sector products or per-
formance to improvements at the operational centers presents a significant challenge, 

219
Interface Between Research and Operations
but part of the iterative process of product development could include feedback from 
private industry for identifying and improving system performance.
Recommendation M: Provide mechanisms for research and operations communities 
to collaborate, and aid in transitioning components and parameterizations from 
the research community into operational centers by increasing researcher access to 
operational or operational mirror systems. 
Specifically:
• 
Increase opportunities for S2S researchers to participate in operational centers.
• 
Enhance interactions with the international community (e.g., the S2S Project 
and APCC) and with the WMO LCs.
• 
Provide better access in the near term to archived data from operational sys-
tems, potentially via test centers. 
• 
Develop, in the longer term, the ability for researchers to request reruns or 
perform runs themselves of operational model forecasts. 
• 
Encourage effective partnerships with the private sector through ongoing 
engagement (see also Recommendation B). 
Establish Capability to Respond to Unanticipated Events
Large, unanticipated events that may influence the weather/climate system may be 
natural, accidental, or deliberately caused by humans. Natural events of this scale 
within the past two centuries include major volcanic eruptions (such as Pinotubo, El 
Chichon, and Agung in the 20th century or Krakatoa and Tambora in the 19th cen-
tury). The range of such natural events could also include meteoroid or comet im-
pacts. Prominent and recent accidental events that raised public concern about their 
widespread impact on timescales of weeks and longer include the Deepwater Horizon 
oil spill (NRC, 2013) and the Fukushima Diachi nuclear accident (NRC, 2014; see also 
Chapter 3). Deliberate events have included the 1991 Kuwait oilfield fires or, more be-
nignly, the decision to substantially curtail Chinese industrial emissions to improve air 
quality during the 2008 Olympics. On geological timescales there is strong evidence 
of much larger volcanic eruptions and impacts by extra-planetary bodies. Similarly, 
future human-induced climate forcing events could greatly exceed the magnitude of 
historical events. Of particular note, the 2015 NRC report Climate Intervention: Reflect-
ing Sunlight to Cool Earth finds that large-scale albedo modification to cool the climate 
system is technically feasible with a scope that could be done unilaterally by a single 
nation or even a wealthy non-state actor, but that the consequences of such actions 
would not be evenly distributed and could alter atmospheric circulation and precipita-

220
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
tion patterns. These types of large unanticipated events have the potential to affect 
the weather/climate system (and potentially much of the Earth system depending on 
the event) over S2S timescales. 
The committee recommends that the nation should develop and maintain a system 
for projecting the consequences of any unusual forcing events—in particular over S2S 
timescales—in order to aid emergency response and disaster planning. This system 
should be mobilizabile within 1week (giving time to ascertain the details of the forc-
ing and select the appropriate set of predicted quantities) and return preliminary 
results for timescales from the near-term to seasonal and out to a 1-year forecast 
horizon by the end of a second week. The quality of the system components should be 
established before any such event via documentation of hypothetical test cases in the 
peer-reviewed literature. For timescales longer than 1 year, there is time to mobilize 
the broader scientific community to expand the recommended on-demand predic-
tion system and develop new capabilities tailored to the specifics of the major event in 
question. This system should be initialized using the same data sets and systems as the 
operational S2S prediction, and have configurations that include a full range of physi-
cal and chemical atmospheric, oceanic, cryosphere, and ecosystem processes, draw-
ing upon capabilities from the nation’s operational and research weather and climate 
forecasting systems. Other scientific disciplines should be engaged to prepare com-
ponents for this system that may be appropriate for such events as volcanic eruptions, 
meteor impacts, a limited nuclear war, oil or other chemical spills in large water bodies, 
atmospheric or oceanic releases of radioactivity, or releases of biologically or radia-
tively active gases and aerosols. Although this system will draw upon the expertise of 
the nation’s research community, it will need to be considered an operational system, 
with the same robustness and reliability as is expected from other operational fore-
cast systems. The development of this new capability for projecting the consequences 
of unusual forcing events will leverage many existing research activities or efforts to 
develop longer-term Earth system projection capabilities, but it will still constitute a 
substantial new effort by the nation. As such, the fiscal and computational resources to 
support this new capability should not be drawn from the limited resources currently 
dedicated to improving existing S2S forecasts. 
By their very nature, it is not possible to statistically validate predictions of the conse-
quences of unusual events by examining skill in simulating large numbers of ­observed 
events, or by doing bias corrections in the same way as is done for operational pre-
dictions. Rather, bias control could be done analogously to how it is handled for 
­centennial-scale climate projections: predictions of consequences should be taken 
from the difference between an ensemble of simulations in which a forcing event oc-
curs and an ensemble of identically initialized “control runs” in which the event does 

221
Interface Between Research and Operations
not occur. The credibility of the prediction system can be evaluated by examining its 
ability to simulate well-observed smaller analogous events (e.g., reasonable simulations 
of the 1991 Mt. Pinotubo eruptions are a necessary condition for credibly simulating 
the consequences of a hypothetical Yellowstone Caldera mega-eruption of the mag-
nitude that occurred 640,000 years ago; this is analogous to the use of 20th-­century 
simulations to establish the credibility of coupled climate models for 21st-century 
projections of climate change). In addition, because significant nonlinearities in the 
Earth system are possible, the prediction systems should be used for a diverse series of 
hypothetical forcing event scenarios of sufficiently large magnitude to ascertain that 
they will work sensibly when called upon.
Quality assurance and a critical evaluation of skill are essential for any official forecast 
product. For routinely generated products, these are usually performed by making 
a large number of retrospective forecasts of well-observed previous situations. For 
unprecedented forcing events, this may not be possible. Publication of simulations 
of hypothetical or poorly observed historical events in the peer-reviewed scientific 
literature may provide one adequate path toward providing quality assurance. How-
ever, it is important that protocols for quality assurance be agreed upon and these 
steps toward quality assurance be taken for a wide range of potentially useful projec-
tion ­capabilities. This quality assurance must occur before an unanticipated forcing 
event, so that the capabilities are available to provide timely and useful guidance to 
decision-makers and the public once such an event occurs.
Recommendation N: Develop a national capability to forecast the consequences of 
unanticipated forcing events. 
Specifically:
• 
Improve the coordination of government agencies and academia to enable 
rapid response to unanticipated events and to provide S2S forecasts using the 
unanticipated events as sources of predictability.
• 
Utilize emerging applications of Earth system models for long-range transport 
and dispersion processes (e.g., of aerosols).
• 
Increase research on the generation, validation, and verification of forecasts for 
the aftermath of unanticipated forcing events.


223
C H A P T E R  S E V E N
Cyberinfrastructure and 
Workforce Capacity Building
Previous reports from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
(NRC, 2010b, 2012a, 2012b) highlighted the central role that infrastructural, institu-
tional, and workforce capabilities will play in advancing weather and climate modeling 
and forecasting capacity in the coming decades. Specifically, the reports recognized 
(1) the importance of aligning modeling research and development with trends in 
computing and (2) creating professional incentive structures and workforce pipelines 
to ensure investment in pivotal yet currently underrepresented activities such as 
model development, moving research to operational systems, and meeting decision-
maker needs.
Many of the barriers identified in these previous reports for weather forecasting and 
climate modeling are common to subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) prediction. Thus 
realizing the full potential of Earth system forecasts on S2S timescales will require 
overcoming many similar challenges to weather and climate modeling. This chapter 
describes two core capacity-building elements required for the success of an ad-
vanced S2S forecasting capability, building on, and sometimes reiterating, findings and 
recommendations issued in previous reports (NRC, 2010b, 2012a, 2012b): (1) building 
S2S cyberinfrastructure capacity and (2) building the S2S workforce. 
BUILDING CAPACITY FOR S2S CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE
This section reviews the risks and opportunities posed to the current S2S computa-
tional and data infrastructure by changes in technology as well as the growing cyber­
infrastructure requirements to support S2S forecasting. Although the challenges 
posed by S2S prediction systems are similar to those faced by weather or climate 
modeling systems, the data and processing requirements for S2S prediction systems 
will likely test the current cyberinfrastructure capacity to at least as great an extent as 
those other systems, and an expansion of the cyberinfrastructure and human capital 
will be necessary to realize the potential of S2S forecasting. 
Several factors drive the growing demand for cyberinfrastructure. Data assimilation, 
which integrates observational data with models, will be a major driver in growing 

224
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
computational and storage infrastructure needed to enable significant improvements 
in S2S forecasting. As detailed for climate models generally (NRC, 2012b), future S2S 
models will require increased computational capacity because of the scientific need 
for higher spatial and temporal resolutions (e.g., for resolving clouds, ocean eddies, 
and orographic processes—see Chapter 5). 
Typical data volumes from the output of S2S prediction models are discussed in 
Box 7.1. On the observing side, more than 1 billion scalars will be typical input volumes 
into the data assimilation component (see Chapter 5, sections on routine observations 
and data assimilation). Increases in observations and changes in model configurations 
will drive a greater than 1,000-times increase in data volume and transport from what 
the S2S community sees today. Finally, the analysis phase is multi-purpose and compu-
tationally significant; it needs to produce the first-guess fields for the next prediction 
run, and prepare numerous products for forecasting, decision-making, and research. 
All of these developments are considered to be essential for more accurate, reliable, 
and useful S2S forecasts. Combining these factors into an example, improving model 
resolution from 100 km to 25 km and doubling the number of vertical levels as well 
as model complexity, while running 100 ensemble members, could easily result in a 
1,000-fold increase in computational costs compared to today. Thus, the S2S model-
ing enterprise fundamentally relies on sustained, dramatic improvements in super­
computing capabilities and needs to strategically position itself to fully exploit them.
BOX 7.1 
TYPICAL DATA VOLUMES FROM TODAY’S S2S PREDICTION FORECASTS
Data characteristics for 11 operational forecast systems participating in the WCRP/WWRP 
Subseasonal Prediction Project (see Chapter 6) are shown in Table B.2. Forecast lead times range 
from 32 to 60 days, spatial resolutions range from about 20 to 250 km, frequency ranges from 
monthly to daily, and ensemble sizes range from 4 to 51 members. Conservative estimates for 
these variables 10 years from now in a U.S.-based S2S forecast system would be 90-day lead times, 
20 km spatial resolution, a doubling of the number of vertical levels, 51-member ensemble size, 
and daily frequency for the forecasts—representing about a 300-fold increase in computational 
resources. This would amount to forecast data volumes of more than 1 Terabyte per day, including 
the more typical and basic atmosphere, land, and near surface ocean quantities. Similar consid-
erations can be made for the retrospective forecast requirements, which essentially represent 
a multi-decade, ensemble retrospective forecast calculated daily for calibration and validation 
purposes, could amount to hundreds of Terabytes per day. 

225
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
Finding 7.1: Needed advances in S2S forecast models (e.g., higher resolutions, in-
creased complexity) require dramatically increased computing capacities (perhaps 
1,000x) and similar advances in related storage and data transport capacities.
Computing Infrastructure
The backdrop for this increase in computational requirements is a disruptive time in 
the broader landscape of computing systems and programming models. All indica-
tions are that increases in computing performance through the next decade will 
arrive not in the form of faster chips, but in the form of slightly slower chips holding 
many more computational elements (ASCAC, 2015; NRC, 2012b). Exploiting these new 
many-core chips will require not only refactoring the existing parallelism to effectively 
take advantage of their architectures, but also  finding additional parallelism through-
out S2S applications. As highlighted in NRC (2012a) for climate modeling, these can 
be achieved in three primary ways: (1) add parallelism by scaling out the problem—­
increasing the horizontal resolution does this, but at the expense of shortening the 
model time-step; (2) exploit parallelism that is already there but has not been used, for 
example by introducing task parallelism by overlapping certain physics calculations 
or by finding shared-memory parallelism (e.g., Open Multi-Processing [OpenMP]), or 
finally; (3) develop new algorithms with more inherent parallelism, such as the effort 
to create so-called parallel in time (PinT) algorithms (e.g., Cotter and Shipton, 2012). 
All three efforts will require much higher levels of collaboration between computer 
scientists, software engineers, applied mathematicians, and S2S scientists.
Finding 7.2: The transition to new computing hardware and software through the 
next decade will not involve faster processing elements, but rather more elements 
with considerably more complex embodiments of concurrency. This transition will 
be highly disruptive.
Storage Infrastructure
As with computing infrastructure, the hierarchy of storage devices, including cache, 
memory, disk, and tape, as well as the virtual memory and file-system abstractions that 
overlay them, will also undergo a dramatic, transformative change in the coming years 
(NRC, 2012b). As with climate modeling, these changes will require an assessment of 
most data storage elements (both memory and disk) of S2S applications to fully lever-
age the storage and memory hierarchy of emerging computer architectures. The work 
of identifying the elements of the code that can or should be addressed is in itself a 

226
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
daunting task. Technologies such as solid state devices (SSD), 3-D “stacked” memory, 
and non-volatile memory (NVM) have been, or will soon be, introduced into planned 
compute and storage systems. These and other innovations will augment and blur the 
price points, sizes, and performance characteristics of the traditional storage hierarchy. 
Further out, hybrid devices such as memristors and other processor in memory (PIM) 
technologies will begin to blur even the distinction between memory and computing 
itself. Adapting the modeling systems and managing and optimizing the utilization of 
this increasingly complex storage hierarchy will be fundamental to realizing the full 
potential of supercomputing investments.
To fully realize the potential of these new computing formats and technologies, the 
S2S field will need a new breed of software engineers and modelers, and actual data 
scientists. Training of existing software engineers, along with workforce development 
to produce a pipeline of adequate trained engineers and scientists will be will be re-
quired. Universities will need to play a larger role in developing this next generation of 
computational and data scientists (see section below on Building Capacity in the S2S 
Modeling and Prediction Workforce).
Finding 7.3: Future storage technologies will be more complex and varied than 
today; leveraging these technological innovations will require numerous software 
changes and will likely be highly disruptive.
S2S Application Challenges
For climate models generally, increasing numbers of processing elements combined 
with deep and abstruse memory hierarchies will continue to push the limits of appli-
cation code design and parallel programming standards and will create a challenging 
environment for high-performance-computing (HPC) application programmers (NRC, 
2012b). Current S2S applications are already challenged by the need to take advan-
tage of modern supercomputing systems (with efficiencies typically below 5 percent) 
(Roe and Wilkie, 2015; Wilkie, 2015). S2S applications possess several special character-
istics that make them particularly challenging relative to current and, even more so, 
expected HPC architecture: 
• 
S2S applications require long simulations compared with traditional numerical 
weather prediction simulations. This limits the resolution, the inherent number 
of parallel degrees of freedom, and therefore scalability. Similar concerns ac-
company certain data assimilation algorithms, such as 4D variational methods, 
which have limited scalability relative to ensemble approaches (NRC, 2008).

227
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
• 
S2S applications are large and complex with many component models. Both 
the Community Earth System Model (CESM) and the Climate Forecast System 
(CFS) for example, have more than 1.5 million lines of source code. Character­
istics typical of many algorithms in S2S applications—large numbers of vari-
ables (e.g., from increased model complexity) and/or irregular memory access 
patterns (e.g., unstructured grids and some advection schemes)—do not work 
well on memory systems with deep cache hierarchies, wide cache lines, and 
decreasing amounts of memory per processing element. The introduction 
of vector capabilities into many core processors creates challenges for the 
“branchy” physics codes1 typical of S2S applications.
• 
S2S phenomena are representative of chaotic systems that are sensitive to ini-
tial conditions (see Chapters 4 and 5). For this reason, developers currently re-
quire bit-for-bit reproducibility (i.e., providing the same output when provided 
with the same input across different runs [Arteaga et al., 2014]) for testing and 
verification of model results. This restriction is a limiting factor in fully leverag-
ing the optimization capabilities of compilers and elemental math libraries. 
In the future, this bit-for-bit requirement may become untenable when issues 
of fault resilience, and architectures with extreme levels of concurrency and 
complexity, further erode reproducibility (NRC, 2012b; Palmer, 2015). The pos-
sibility of irreproducible computation presents a fundamental challenge to the 
present methodology for the testing, verification, and validation of S2S model 
results. If architectural or software infrastructure changes, or compiler optimi-
zation nudges the answers, even by a minute amount, then there is no other 
way to prove whether the change has or has not pushed the system into a dif-
ferent climate state other than computing the climatology of long control runs 
(usually 100 years to account for slow climate processes). This requirement is 
restrictive and represents a considerable barrier to the development, testing, 
and optimization cycle. However, given the computation power that will be 
utilized for daily, multimember, long-lead S2S forecasts, that in some cases may 
involve daily reforecasts as well, the computation of a 100-year climatological 
simulation does not seem formidable even in the development cycle. There is 
evolving research into the use of imprecise computing (in which irreproduc-
ibility is not elevated to the level of a requirement) to address some of these 
issues (Palmer, 2015). One alternative being explored to reduce this cost is 
to run statistical tests on single-ensemble members for consistency with the 
parent distribution over much shorter periods (Baker et al., 2015). However, 
1  “Branchy” refers to physics codes that include a lot of if-then statements, thus involving significantly 
more computing time. 

228
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
having a mode where S2S models are able to give bit-by-bit reproducibility 
on computers that are able to support this reproducibility is essential for the 
efficient development and debugging of such models. The S2S modeling com-
munity may very well need to adapt to a world where reruns of experiments 
are only the same in a statistical sense. Similar to climate models, such adapta-
tion would entail profound changes in methodology and would be an impor-
tant research challenge for this decade (NRC, 2012b). A possible resolution of 
this issue is a compromise in which exact reproducibility is available for model 
development and testing but abandoned for large-scale operational computa-
tions that involve many ensemble members and stochastic parameterization 
and forcing.
Finding 7.4: S2S models are not taking full advantage of current computing architec-
tures, and improving their performance will likely require new algorithms with better 
data locality, as well as significant refactoring of existing ones for more parallelism.
Shared Software Infrastructure Components
Similar to the climate modeling community (NRC, 2012a), a renewed and aggressive 
commitment to shared software infrastructure components across the S2S com-
munity could be an efficient way to navigate likely transitions in computing and 
storage infrastructure, and to overcome poor efficiencies from current applications. 
The transition will likely be more disruptive than the transition from shared memory 
vector to distributed memory parallel that started in the late 1990s. Indeed, conven-
tional wisdom in the HPC community (see Zwieflhofer [2008] and Takahara and Parks 
[2008]) is that the next generation conversion will be significantly more complex and 
unpredictable than previous changes, given the absence of a clear technology path, 
programming model, and performance analysis tools.
The S2S modeling community is seeing the natural evolution of software component 
adoption (re-gridding from Earth System Modeling Framework [ESMF] used by CESM, 
the National Centers for Atmospheric Research’s [NCAR’s] Parallel I/O [PIO] library used 
by others). The committee believes that the community is at the point where develop-
ing an integrative modeling environment (across models and organizations) out-
weighs the costs of developing the tools to enable an integrative environment (e.g., 
Common Infrastructure for Modeling the Environment [CIME] at NCAR, ESMF at NOAA 
and Navy) and the cost of moving to them. With the experience, successes, and lessons 
learned in the past decade, the forecasting community is positioned to accelerate the 
development and adoption of an integrative modeling strategy.

229
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
So far, few software components have been broadly adopted as a standard, because 
modeling centers that initially invested in one solution have had insufficient funding 
and incentives to switch to another. The vector to parallel disruption led to widespread 
adoption of coupler technologies at the scale of individual institutions. The forecast 
modeling community can conceive of a common integrative modeling environment 
that includes a set of component elements that could be subscribed to by all major 
U.S. forecast modeling groups, supports a hierarchy of models with component-wise 
interchangeability, and supports development of high-performance implementa-
tions that enable forecast models of unprecedented resolution and complexity to be 
efficiently adapted to new architectural platforms. The U.S. Global Change Research 
­Program’s Interagency Group on Integrative Modeling (IGIM)2 has begun work to 
­better coordinate the country’s climate modeling efforts (USGCRP IGIM, 2015); such 
coordination would likely benefit S2S forecasting efforts as well. Concurrently, the 
­National Earth System Prediction Capability (ESPC)—an agreement between the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Department of Defense 
(DOD), National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA), Department of Energy (DOE), 
and the National Science Foundation (NSF) to work on weather to subseasonal 
­timescales—has adopted a standardized version of ESMF and has proposed common 
standards for implementing physics parameterizations into atmospheric models.3 
ESPC and IGIM are exploring the potential for more commonality as their efforts move 
forward. Adopting joint standards between IGIM and ESPC will be especially important 
as the community moves toward seamless prediction as discussed in Box 5.2.
Finding 7.5: An integrative modeling environment presents an appealing option for 
addressing the large uncertainty about the evolution of hardware and program-
ming models over the next two decades.
Data Storage, Transfer, and Workflow for S2S Prediction
In addition to the supercomputer/storage infrastructure and the forecasting models, 
a key element of the forecasting workflow includes data cyberinfrastructure, includ-
ing the storage, transfer, analysis, and visualization workflows associated with big 
data sets. The data cyberinfrastructure for the end-to-end forecasting workflows may 
ultimately be an even larger challenge than the computing challenges confronting 
S2S prediction. The data elements include several that assimilate the large quantities 
2  http://www.globalchange.gov/about/iwgs/igim-resources, accessed January 27, 2016.
3  ftp://ftp.oar.noaa.gov/ESPC%5CNUOPC%20Douments%5CNUOPC%20%20CMA%20One%20Pager.pdf.

230
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
of operational data with model simulation data and facilitate the data analysis, visual-
ization, and overall workflow for all of these elements. 
Observational Data
Remote sensing systems (e.g., satellites, radars, instrumented aircraft, and drones) along 
with conventional and automated in situ measurements in both the atmosphere and 
ocean will produce more than 1 billion scalars per forecast cycle (see Chapter 5). Trans-
port and preparation of these data for model assimilation is a challenge. Networks must 
have the necessary carrying capacity with minimal latency, and computing and stor-
age must be available for data processing into model ready quantities (e.g., sea surface 
temperature in degrees Kelvin). 
Model Simulation Data
Fundamentally this effort should be operationalized and extended to provide these 
vital functions. The data sharing and management infrastructure benefits from a 
“network effect” (where value grows exponentially as more nodes are added; see, e.g., 
Church and Gandal, 1992; Katz and Shapiro, 1985). It involves development of opera­
tional infrastructure for petabyte-scale (and soon exabyte-scale; see Overpeck et al., 
2011) distributed data stores. The S2S project (described in Chapter 6) has begun 
efforts to archive and share data from multiple operational S2S forecasting systems, 
but this effort is still growing and is underutilized by the research community (see 
­Finding 6.2). 
Finding 7.6: Researchers do not currently have a good solution for processing and 
analyzing S2S data that are federated across many institutions. A dedicated and en-
hanced data-intensive cyberinfrastructure will be required to enable the distributed 
S2S community to access the enormous data sets generated from both simulation 
and observations. 
Data Analysis Workflow 
S2S data-intensive applications and workflows are likely to face data analysis chal-
lenges of scale and scope similar to those faced by the Coupled Model Inter­comparison 
Projects (CMIP). The CMIPs have observed that, because storage systems—as part of an 
integrated data-intensive computing environment—have not kept up with ­advances 

231
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
in computing, they have become a bottleneck and therefore a ripe target for enhance-
ments. These lessons from CMIP efforts serve as a bellwether to what the S2S prediction 
community could expect. In addition, the demand for data storage, analysis, and distri-
bution resources will grow as models move to finer resolutions, incorporate more com-
plexity, and serve the needs of an increasingly diverse and sophisticated set of ­users. In 
response, data-centric workflows, like the applications themselves, must become more 
parallel and use storage infrastructure more efficiently. In addition, the community 
should consider reductions of data volumes that can be achieved through both lossless 
and lossy compression of data sets, as well as a shift away from the paradigm of “store 
now, analyze later” to mechanisms that allow model output to be analyzed on the fly 
and rerun as needed.
There is an increasing need to use, access, and manipulate large volumes of remotely 
stored data, which places new demands on infrastructure and requires systematic 
planning and investment at the national level. 
Finding 7.7: New approaches to data-centric workflow software that incorporate 
parallelism, remote analysis, and data compression will be required to meet the 
demands of the S2S forecasting community. 
Moving Forward with Building Capacity for S2S Cyberinfrastructure
Advances in S2S forecast models will require dramatically increased computing 
­capacities, but the transition to new computing hardware and software during the 
next decade will be highly disruptive with the increasing concurrency of new HPC 
systems. In addition, future storage technologies will become more complex and 
varied. S2S models are not taking full advantage of current computing architectures, 
and improving their performance to leverage the coming technology innovations will 
require numerous software changes and will likely be highly disruptive. 
At this time, the many emerging architectures do not adhere to a common program-
ming model. Although new ways to express parallelism may well hold the key to 
progress, from the point of view of the software developers of large and complex sci-
entific applications, the transition path is not clear (NRC, 2012b). Assessments under-
taken by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the DOE (e.g., 
DOE, 2008; Kogge et al., 2008) indicate profound uncertainty about how one might 
program a future system that may encompass many-core chips, coprocessors and 
accelerators, and unprecedented core counts requiring the management of tens of 
millions of concurrent threads on such hardware. The President’s Council of Advisors 

232
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
on Science and Technology (PCAST) has called for the nation to “undertake a sub-
stantial and sustained program of fundamental research on hardware, architectures, 
algorithms and software with the potential for enabling game-changing advances 
in high-­performance computing” (PCAST, 2010). This challenge will grow to 1 billion 
threads by the end of this decade. The prevalent programming model for parallel 
systems today is based on MPI (Lusk and Yelick, 2007), shared-memory directives (e.g., 
OpenMP [­Chandra et al., 2001]), or a hybrid of both. The adaptation of the Message 
Passing Inter­face (MPI)/OpenMP paradigm to exascale architectures is an area of ac-
tive research investigation. 
The weather and climate forecasting community has never retreated from experi-
menting with leading-edge systems and programming approaches to achieve re-
quired levels of performance. The current HPC architectural landscape, however, is 
particularly challenging because it is not clear what direction future hardware and 
software paradigms may follow. The collaborative nature of system co-design in-
volves end-user/developer community and private-sector involvement (e.g., the Coral 
system4).
It is evident that more resources are needed to make the progress necessary to 
prepare S2S applications for next generation supercomputers. In light of these chal-
lenges, the committee recommends that a national plan and investment strategy be 
developed to take better advantage of current hardware and software and to meet 
the challenges in the evolution of new hardware and software for all components of 
the prediction process. 
Recommendation O: Develop a national plan and investment strategy for S2S pre-
diction to take better advantage of current hardware and software and to meet the 
challenges in the evolution of new hardware and software for all stages of the pre-
diction process, including data assimilation, operation of high-resolution coupled 
Earth system models, and storage and management of results. 
Specifically: 
• 
Redesign and recode S2S models and data assimilation systems so that they 
will be capable of exploiting current and future massively parallel computa-
tional capabilities; this will require a significant and long-term investment in 
computer scientists, software engineers, applied mathematicians, and statistics 
researchers in partnership with the S2S researchers.
4  http://energy.gov/articles/department-energy-awards-425-million-next-generation-­supercomputing-
technologies, accessed January 27, 2016.

233
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
• 
Increase efforts to achieve an integrated modeling environment using the op-
portunity of S2S and seamless prediction to bring operational agency groups 
(e.g., the Earth System Prediction Capability [ESPC]) and integrated modeling 
efforts (e.g., the Interagency Group on Integrative Modeling [IGIM]) together to 
create common software infrastructure and standards for component interfaces.
• 
Provide larger and dedicated supercomputing and storage resources.
• 
Resolve the emerging challenges around S2S big data, including development 
and deployment of integrated data-intensive cyberinfrastructure, utilization of 
efficient data-centric workflows, reduction of stored data volumes, and deploy-
ment of data serving and analysis capabilities for users outside the research/
operational community.
• 
Further develop techniques for high-volume data processing and in-line data 
volume reduction.
• 
Continue to develop dynamic model cores that take the advantage of new 
computer technology.
BUILDING CAPACITY IN THE S2S MODELING AND PREDICTION WORKFORCE
The current workforce of S2S model developers is insufficient to meet the growing 
need for S2S model development (Jakob, 2010). Most modeling centers have only a 
small number of people directly involved in model development. It is difficult to quan-
tify the number of S2S model developers in the United States, because a systematic 
study on the modeling workforce has never been done. Many of the challenges faced 
in maintaining a robust S2S model development workforce are similar to those faced 
in climate model development. As such, much of the work in this section draws heavily 
on previous work on climate modeling (NRC, 2012b). 
Current Challenges in the S2S Model Development Workforce 
The development and use of comprehensive S2S models in the United States require a 
large number of talented individuals in a diverse set of disciplines. The critical point is 
that development of atmospheric and environmental prediction models, for S2S and 
other ranges, must become an interdisciplinary effort involving scientists, software 
engineers, and applied mathematicians (NRC, 2008). As described for climate models, 
these areas of expertise include the following (NRC, 2012b):
• 
scientists engaged in understanding the S2S prediction system, leading to 
the development of new parameterizations and other model improvements 

234
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
(distinct cadres of scientists are often needed for various model components, 
such as the ocean or terrestrial ecosystem models);
• 
scientists engaged in using the models for well-designed numerical experi-
ments and conducting extensive diagnostics of the models to better under-
stand their behavior, ultimately leading to model products and to scientific 
insights that provide the impetus and context for model improvements;
• 
scientists studying the regional details provided by the archived results from 
global model simulations and related downscaling efforts, and how these vary 
across various models;
• 
support scientists and programmers to conduct extensive sets of numerical 
simulations in support of various scientific programs and to ensure their scien-
tific integrity;
• 
software engineers, applied mathematicians, and scientists that straddle these 
areas to explore fundamental new algorithms and approaches that can fully 
utilize new generations of computing and storage architectures;
• 
software engineers to create efficient, parallelizable, and portable underlying 
codes, including the development and use of common software components;
• 
data scientists to understand and manage complex workflows and to facilitate 
easy and open access to model output through modern technologies;
• 
hardware and software engineers to maintain the high-end computing facili-
ties that underpin the modeling enterprise; and
• 
interpreters to translate model output for decision-makers.
From the limited data available (NRC, 2012b), it appears that the level of human 
resources available for S2S modeling has not kept pace with the demands for increas-
ing realism and comprehensiveness of the models. Data on the numbers of students 
involved in S2S model development do not exist, and any proxy data and anecdotal 
evidence (NRC, 2012b) suggest that the pipeline for S2S model developers is not 
growing in a robust fashion.
These considerations suggest that the development of S2S and other predictive 
models must increasingly become a community endeavor involving the operational 
centers and the academic community. To be effective, there must be mechanisms to 
encourage interchange of personnel and talent, either as long-term collaborators or 
as shorter-term visitors. For example, students might well perform their dissertation 
research in an operational center under the collaborative supervision of center scien-
tists and faculty members in their academic institution.
In addition to not having sufficient human resources, many of the skills needed by the 
S2S workforce are yet to be developed (e.g., new algorithms, tight coupling between 

235
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
the understanding of the science and the software requirements), which places an 
even greater imperative on maintaining a robust pipeline of early-career scientists 
who are involved in model development. This will become more critical with the next 
generation of supercomputers (see section above on Building Capacity for S2S Cyber-
infrastructure), and serious efforts will be required to bridge the gap between scien-
tists and the software engineering and numerical algorithms skills needed to utilize 
this new hardware. These gaps in the necessary workforce skills require significant 
attention and could be significant impediments to progress in S2S forecasting. 
Finding 7.8: From the limited data available, it seems that the cadre of trained S2S 
modelers is not growing robustly in the United States and is not keeping pace with 
the needs of this rapidly evolving field.
Current Challenges in the S2S Applications Workforce
Some programs train students to work at the interface of climate science and society 
(e.g., Columbia University’s Master’s program in Climate and Society5), which could be 
a valuable resource to the S2S enterprise. However, as demands for S2S products con-
tinue to grow, there is also likely to be a shortage of the interdisciplinary ­researchers 
needed to improve connectivity between S2S forecasts and use. These include inter-
disciplinary researchers in boundary organizations and other interdisciplinary ­research 
centers, product development specialists in the private sector, and agency operations 
personnel with training or expertise in S2S predictability. These also includes social 
and behavioral researchers capable of examining decision processes to identify barri-
ers to use and improve the flow of information between physical scientists and users.
The challenges of connecting information production to use are discussed in Chap-
ter 3. Here, the focus is on the skills needed to enable those connections. The poten-
tial scale of use dwarfs the current production of people trained in interdisciplinary 
research or research in the social and behavioral sciences focused on using weather 
or climate information in decision-making. Weather and climate information is not 
well integrated into traditional academic disciplines that produce many of the agency 
personnel who may use S2S information, such as staff at water management agencies 
or large agricultural businesses. In addition, relatively few academic institutions offer 
interdisciplinary degrees that include physical, social, and behavioral sciences focused 
on issues related to weather or climate.
5  http://climatesociety.ei.columbia.edu/, accessed January 27, 2016. 

236
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Finding 7.9: Interdisciplinary academic programs and centers lack the capacity to 
meet growing needs for research and applications necessary to maximize the use of 
S2S information. Few academic programs include weather or climate as a compo-
nent of training the future workforce.
Building a More Robust S2S Workforce
S2S model development is a challenging job. It involves synthesizing deep and broad 
knowledge, working across the interface between science and computing, and work-
ing well in a team. Thus it is important to attempt to hire, train, and retain the most 
talented, available people in this field. There are often insufficient incentives to compel 
promising young people to work on S2S model development; this situation applies 
to early-career computer programmers who may have other more lucrative career 
opportunities, and to early-career scientists who may choose to work with S2S model 
output to examine scientific questions or other strategies that allow them to publish 
more journal articles, rather than work on model development. A suggested method 
for combating this bias would be an enhanced recognition and reward system for 
writing S2S model computer code and for producing modeling data sets, including 
the recognition of such effort through stronger requirements for citation and co-­
authorship, both within modeling institutions and by academic users and collabora-
tors. This is a nontrivial challenge as discussed in NRC (2012b). S2S modeling groups 
could also compete by marketing relatively stable career tracks and the opportunity 
for stimulating cross-disciplinary interactions with a variety of scientists.
Modeling centers outside of the United States, such as the European Centre for 
­Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), have attempted to attract and retain 
more people in S2S model development work by appointing model developers to 
5-year terms, which is longer than typical research grant cycles in the United States 
(3 years). ECMWF offers strong incentives to attract top scientists to model develop-
ment, such as access to excellent facilities, excellent tools (e.g., what some regard as 
the most advanced numerical weather prediction model in the world), and high, tax-
free salaries. Furthermore, the inclusion of highly reputed scientists within the limited 
staff (150 staff members and 80 consultants) encourages a stimulating environment 
where delivering end-use forecasting products and conducting cutting-edge scientific 
research are valued and directly coupled.
Beyond the specific model developer needs of the S2S enterprise, there is an addi-
tional need for people who work at the component interfaces. As examined in this 
report, many of the challenges in the S2S realm arise from the linkages of the model 

237
Cyberinfrastructure and Workforce Capacity Building
components. Therefore the overall S2S forecasting endeavor would benefit from pay-
ing particular attention to recruiting and rewarding scientists who can work across 
specific disciplines of Earth science to improve our ability to forecast the behavior of 
the Earth system as a whole.
Attention to workforce development is also needed to ensure that forecasts are as 
useful as possible to decision-makers. As discussed in Chapter 3, similar to weather 
forecasts and climate projections, most decision-makers are likely to acquire S2S infor-
mation via an intermediary. A number of avenues exist for decision makers to interact 
with experts working on S2S forecasting, through so-called “boundary organizations” 
and other interdisciplinary entities. Boundary organizations exist within the public 
sector (e.g., NOAA’s Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments program actively 
engages decision-­makers through tailored products, educational programs, and efforts 
to co-­produce climate products and services), academia (e.g., Columbia University’s 
International Research Institute for Climate and Society), and the private sector. Looking 
forward, continued growth of both the private sector and the array of products and ser-
vices in the public sector are required to meet the growing demand for services on S2S 
timescales. In light of similar trends related to information on climate timescales, a recent 
NRC report (NRC, 2012b) recommended the formation of training programs for climate 
model interpreters—people who are trained in both physical and social sciences related 
to climate, weather, and decision-making, and who can ­facilitate two-way coproduction 
of knowledge. There is a similar need at S2S timescales for such training programs. 
A possible concrete step forward would be a series of workshops to explore how to 
feature S2S in more undergraduate and graduate curriculums, how to identify and 
connect with organizations that can support this effort (e.g., the National Science 
Teachers Association), and how to interact with the private sector to help understand 
what skills are needed. Other entities such as the American Meteorological Society 
(AMS) or NSF may play a role with some of this coordination.
Forecasting work at all of these timescales—weather, S2S, and climate—involves the 
prediction of outcomes that people use to make important decisions and is therefore 
judged in very public ways. Predicted outcomes are validated (or not) on a continuous 
basis. The fact that S2S connects very strongly to managing environmental risks could 
be drawn upon more heavily to entrain talented and mission-driven young people 
into the field.
In looking across the numerous challenges facing the S2S workforce, the committee 
recommends that the nation pursue a collection of actions to examine the S2S work-
force, remove barriers that exist across the entire workforce pipeline, and develop 
mechanisms to improve and sustain the workforce. 

238
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation P: Pursue a collection of actions to address workforce develop-
ment that removes barriers that exist across the entire workforce pipeline and 
increases the diversity of scientists and engineers involved in advancing S2S fore-
casting and the component and coupled systems.
Specifically:	
• 
Gather quantitative information about workforce requirements and expertise 
base to support S2S modeling to more fully develop such a training program 
and workforce pipeline.
• 
Improve incentives and funding to support existing professionals and to at-
tract new professionals to the S2S research community, especially in model 
development and improvement, and for those who bridge scientific disci-
plines and/or work at component interfaces.
• 
Expand interdisciplinary programs to train a more robust workforce to be em-
ployed in boundary organizations that work in between S2S model developers 
and the users of forecasts.
• 
Integrate basic meteorology and climatology into academic disciplines, such 
as business and engineering, to improve the capacity within operational agen-
cies and businesses to create new opportunities for the use of S2S information.
• 
Provide more graduate and postgraduate training opportunities, enhanced 
professional recognition and career advancement, and adequate incentives 
to encourage top students in relevant scientific and computer programming 
disciplines to choose S2S model development and research as a career.

239
C H A P T E R  E I G H T
Vision and Way Forward for S2S 
Earth System Prediction
Previous chapters in this report identified the societal value of predictions of the Earth 
system in the subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) time range; pointed out emerging science 
and technical capabilities that make advances in forecasts at these timescales pos-
sible; and identified areas that need substantial improvement. This chapter draws from 
the text, findings, and recommendations presented in previous chapters to develop a 
vision to serve as an inspirational yet possible target for a desired future state of S2S 
prediction in the next 10 years, and a set of research strategies to guide actions that 
are necessary to move toward that vision. All of the recommendations from previous 
chapters are organized within these strategies and together serve as the committee’s 
comprehensive research agenda for S2S forecasting over the next decade. Implement-
ing the research agenda for improving S2S predictions will require collaboration be-
tween researchers and users to develop more useful forecast products, basic research 
to advance understanding of the processes governing predictability in the Earth 
system, exploiting these new discoveries in models, and melding existing with new 
modeling and computing capabilities. Thus the S2S research agenda should simulta-
neously foster work in areas that are nearing maturity with more ambitious objectives 
that may take a decade or more to fully realize.
VISION FOR THE NEXT DECADE
For the past several decades, weather forecasts on the scale of a few days have yielded 
invaluable information to improve decision-making across all sectors of society. De-
termining the total economic value of this forecasting information is an area of active 
research (Letson et al., 2007; Morss et al., 2008), but previous research indicates that 
a significant portion of annual U.S. gross domestic product (tens of billions or even 
trillions of dollars) is sensitive to fluctuations in weather (Dutton, 2002; Lazo et al., 
2011; U.S. Department of Commerce, 2014). Certainly short-term forecasts play a vital 
role in helping society manage this economic exposure and the associated social risk. 
However, many critical decisions must be made several weeks to months in advance 
of potentially favorable or disruptive environmental conditions. As demonstrated by 
case studies and other information presented in Chapter 3, S2S forecasts have great 

240
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
potential to inform such decisions across a wide variety of sectors. For example, it can 
take weeks or months to move emergency and disaster-relief supplies. Pre-staging 
resources to areas that are likely to experience extreme weather or an infectious 
disease outbreak could save lives and stretch the efficacy of limited resources. Simi-
larly, emergency managers responding to unanticipated events such as nuclear power 
plant accidents or large oil spills are faced with the task of communicating the rami-
fications of such events on timescales that stretch well beyond a few days. There are 
many more such examples: naval and commercial shipping planners designate ship-
ping routes weeks in advance, seeking to stage assets strategically, avoid hazards, and/
or take advantage of favorable conditions; with improved knowledge of the likelihood 
of precipitation or drought, farmers can purchase seed varieties that are most likely to 
increase yields and reduce costs; and depending on the year, water resource man­agers 
can face a multitude of decisions about reservoir levels in the weeks, months, and sea-
sons ahead of eventual water consumption (Table 3.1 lists additional examples).
S2S forecasts are already proving to be of value in making such decisions in sectors 
such as agriculture, energy, water resources management, and public health. However, 
many sectors have yet to exploit even the S2S information that is currently available. 
The Committee believes that the benefits of S2S forecasts to society will only increase 
as the quality of S2S forecasts improves, as more variables are represented in forecast 
products, and as social and computer science research and boundary institutions 
accelerate awareness of, access to, and use of S2S information. This potential of S2S 
forecasts to benefit society is only likely to grow due to the increased exposure to risk 
and increased severity and frequency of hazards expected with climate change and 
continued globalization.
Working iteratively with water resources professionals, emergency managers, military 
planners, and a myriad of other potential users to codesign new S2S forecast products 
and related decision-making tools has the potential to further expand use and enable 
stakeholders to derive much more value from S2S forecasts. Along with an enhanced 
focus on developing predictions of extreme and other disruptive events, such iterative 
engagement with forecast users has the potential to foster a stronger culture of plan-
ning across S2S and longer timescales, including adaptation and resilience to climate 
change. This could provide social and economic benefits that amplify and transcend 
the direct benefits of S2S forecasts themselves. 
This evidence influenced the committee’s finding that more skillful and useful S2S 
forecasts—developed through sustained engagement with users and advances in 
basic knowledge and technological capabilities—could radically improve the basis for 
decision-making on S2S timescales. Emerging science and technical capabilities are 

241
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
making rapid advances in S2S forecasts more likely than envisioned even 5 years ago. 
Advances both in technology (e.g., satellites, computing) and in science (e.g., model 
parameterizations, data assimilation techniques) are now on the horizon that make 
advances in S2S forecasting more feasible. Furthermore, the committee’s recommen-
dations are targeted at areas where efforts are most needed and therefore invest-
ments are most likely to lead to advances. 
Such advances now have the potential to increase the flow of benefits from S2S fore-
casts so that, in the committee’s view, they have high potential to outweigh the costs 
and effort associated with improving S2S forecasts. Thus the committee developed a 
vision to serve as a target for S2S predictions over the next decade: S2S forecasts will 
be as widely used a decade from now as weather forecasts are today. This is ad-
mittedly a bold vision because overcoming the challenges to developing S2S forecast-
ing will take sustained effort and investment. However, the committee believes that 
realizing this vision is now possible within the next decade. 
Achieving the committee’s vision in this report is not incompatible with other visions 
for Earth system prediction systems (such as for the creation of a Virtual Earth System 
(VES)—see Box 8.1), but it has the potential to become reality within a much shorter 
timeframe. The committee’s strategies and research agenda, which are presented next 
in this chapter, provide priority actions for moving toward this desired future state.
S2S RESEARCH STRATEGIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Maximizing benefits of S2S forecasts while minimizing the associated costs will be 
important for rapidly improving S2S forecasting. The committee drew on findings in 
Chapters 3 through 7 to develop four overarching research strategies to help prioritize 
activities in S2S forecasting and to organize activities so that they most directly sup-
port the vision to substantially expand the use of S2S forecast information in the next 
decade:
1.	 Engage Users in the Process of Developing S2S Forecast Products
2.	 Increase S2S Forecast Skill
3.	 Improve Prediction of Extreme and Disruptive Events and Consequences of 
Unanticipated Forcing Events
4.	 Include More Components of the Earth System in S2S Forecast Models 
Fourteen associated recommendations derived from Chapters 3 through 6 describe 
research and aligned activities in the physical and social sciences that the committee 
has determined to have the greatest potential for advancement in each of the four 

242
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
BOX 8.1 
LONG-TERM VISIONS
In 2008, the National Research Council (NRC) Committee on The Potential Impact of High-
End Capability Computing on Illustrative Fields of Science and Engineering foresaw a Virtual 
Earth System (VES) that would maintain “a continuous and dynamically consistent portrait of 
the atmosphere, oceans, and land . . . a digital mirror reflecting events all over the planet.” The 
VES would operate in the cloud on linked petascale machines, assimilating data from tens of 
satellites and myriad other observations. (NRC, 2008). The VES would serve as the foundation for 
a companion Future Earth System that would offer a probabilistic portrait of events and Earth 
states expected over ranges of leads much wider than those available today (e.g., Dutton, 2010). 
Indeed in the conclusion to the 2008 report, the NRC stated:
The new dynamic record of Earth and the predictions of the VES model would bring 
forth an era of enlightened management of weather and climate risk, contributing to 
­national economic vitality and stimulating a strong commitment to environmental 
steward­ship. The creation and operation of an accurate and reliable VES would be a stun-
ning and commanding national achievement—a dramatic demonstration of the benefits 
that can be realized for society by linking Earth and atmospheric science with the most 
advanced computers.
The VES described in the 2008 NRC report thus presented a visionary consideration of the 
future of environmental forecasting and its impacts on decision-making. However, it also identi-
fied the incredible demands and resources that would be required to develop and maintain such 
a system. Along with the 2010 NRC Report on intraseasonal to interannaual climate and weather 
prediction (NRC, 2010b), this report presents a vision and research agenda that takes society a 
step toward grand visions for environmental prediction systems such as a VES—specifically by 
targeting the development of Earth system predictions on S2S lead times, where there is good 
potential for gains to be made in the coming years (NRC, 2010a, the present report). These ad-
vances include improved accuracies, extended lead times, and prediction of other components 
of the environment beyond the traditional weather variables.
strategic directions. In addition, the committee proposes a set of supporting recom-
mendations, derived from findings in Chapter 7, related to cyberinfrastructure and 
workforce. These are necessary for advancing the research strategies and achieving 
the committee’s vision for S2S forecasting. Additional activities envisioned by the 
committee to fall under each of the 16 main recommendations add further specific-
ity and breadth to the research agenda. Although the main recommendations are 
placed under the research strategy or supporting activity that they primarily support, 
implementing each recommendation will often help to advance multiple strategies. 

243
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
FIGURE 8.1  Relationship between the four research strategies and supporting activities outlined in this 
report for advancing subseasonal to seasonal forecasting over the next decade, which all contribute to 
the overarching vision. NOTE: The white arrows indicate that the four research strategies interact and are 
not mutually exclusive.
VISION
S2S Forecasts Will
Be as Widely Used
a Decade from Now as 
Weather Forecasts 
Are Today
Include
More
Earth 
System
Components
Improve
Prediction
of
Disruptive
Events
Engage
Users
Increase 
S2S Forecast
Skill
Build Cyberinfrastructure
and Workforce
Collectively these strategies and recommendations constitute an S2S research agenda 
for the nation.
Figure 8.1 presents a schematic of the relationship between the strategies and sup-
porting activities and the committee’s vision. 

244
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Research Strategy 1:  
Engage Users in the Process of Developing S2S Forecast Products
As highlighted in Chapter 3, providing usable, valuable forecast information involves 
developing S2S forecast products that are more readily integrated into user decision-
making. The committee envisions an S2S prediction system 10 years hence that is 
highly interactive with decision-makers from a wide array of sectors. To achieve this 
level of interaction, the user community must be brought into the research and devel-
opment process sooner rather than later. In fact, a key committee finding is that the 
S2S research and operational prediction community would benefit from engaging in 
an iterative dialogue with the user community, beginning as soon as possible. Such a 
process can help to further prioritize the development of specific forecast variables 
and metrics, and ensure that data and resource-intensive retrospective forecasts, as 
well as the operational forecasts themselves, retain and exploit parameters that are 
most critical to user decision-making. 
In order to maximize benefits of investments into improving S2S forecasts over time, 
there should be an ongoing effort to codesign forecast products on S2S timescales 
that match what is scientifically feasible with what users can make actionable. In many 
cases, this might involve a relatively straightforward extension of existing applications 
that have skill at shorter timescales and for which sophisticated users already exist. 
In other cases, there may be novel, actionable prediction products that can be identi-
fied through more extensive discussions between potential users and the ­developers 
of prediction systems and forecast products. Such discussions will be required to 
identify what operational S2S forecasts will look like, including how the skill of such 
forecasts will be verified. Public- and academic-sector boundary institutions, such as 
the ­National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Regional Integrated 
Sciences and Assessments Program (RISA) programs, the International Research Insti­
tute for Climate and Society (IRI) at Columbia University, and several private-sector 
companies, have already started these discussions. Leveraging the entire weather and 
climate enterprise will be necessary for further development of effective S2S products 
and services that maximize benefit to society. 
Recommendations
Research into the use of S2S forecasts thus far indicates that users desire finer tem-
poral and spatial resolutions, more actionable forecast variables (e.g., extreme, dis-
ruptive, and other important events as well as mean conditions), as well as a better 
understanding of how probabilistic S2S forecast information at varying levels of skill 

245
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
can be integrated directly into decision-making. However, user needs and how they 
match with current forecast capabilities and barriers to use of forecasts have not been 
thoroughly investigated across sectors. An important first step in providing more 
actionable S2S forecast information is to develop a body of social and behavioral sci-
ences research that leads to a more comprehensive understanding of the current use 
and barriers to use of S2S predictions. This includes a better understanding of specific 
aspects of products—for example, forecast variables, spatial and temporal resolutions, 
necessary levels of skill, formats—that would make S2S predictions more useful to 
different communities. This research is necessary to develop a high-level view of how 
S2S forecast systems and outputs might be designed to meet the basic needs of the 
broadest number of potential users. 
Although all weather and climate forecasts are inherently probabilistic, this proba-
bilistic nature becomes more difficult to disregard for forecasts at S2S and longer 
­timescales than at shorter lead times. Probabilistic predictions in particular represent 
a significant hurdle for some forecast users, because there often are substantial differ-
ences between the large-scale probabilistic forecasts that are possible at S2S ­timescales 
and the specific information that decision-makers might currently find actionable. 
­Research on the use of probabilistic forecast information is thus also necessary.
Recommendation A: Develop a body of social science research that leads to more 
comprehensive understanding of the use and barriers to use of seasonal and sub-
seasonal Earth system predictions.
Specifically:
• 
Characterize current and potential users of S2S forecasts and their decision-
making contexts, and identify key commonalities and differences in needs 
(e.g., variables, temporal and spatial scale, lead times, and forecast skill) across 
multiple sectors.
• 
Promote social and behavioral sciences research on the use of probabilistic 
forecast information.
• 
Create opportunities to share knowledge and practices among researchers 
working to improve the use of predictions across weather, subseasonal, and 
seasonal timescales.
Beyond the research recommended above, engaging the S2S research and opera­
tional prediction communities in an iterative dialogue with users is necessary to 
help ensure that forecasts systems, forecast products, other model output, and other 
­decision-making tools maximize their benefit to society. This includes effective proba-
bilistic forecasts products, verification metrics, and communication strategies. ­Ongoing 

246
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
efforts will be needed to match what is scientifically predictable and technologically 
feasible at S2S timescales with what users can make actionable, as scientific skill, user 
needs, and user perspectives continually evolve. Such iterative efforts can also help 
stakeholders develop and implement decision-making strategies, such as “ready-set-go” 
scenarios, that utilize S2S forecasts together with shorter and longer lead information. 
These scenarios help organizations utilize a suite of forecasts with different lead times, 
promoting advance preparation for potential hazards even while forecast uncertainty 
is relatively high, and then adjusting actions as forecast lead times shorten and forecast 
uncertainty decreases. As mentioned above, private industry and “boundary organiza-
tions” within academia and the public sector (NOAA’s RISA program, the IRI at Columbia 
University, and many others) have already started such discussions. Efforts to further 
engage users in the iterative process of making S2S forecasts more actionable and used 
more in decision-making should build on the experience of this boundary workforce 
(see also section on Supporting the S2S Forecasting Enterprise below). 
Recommendation B: Establish an ongoing and iterative process in which stakehold-
ers, social and behavioral scientists, and physical scientists co-design S2S forecast 
products, verification metrics, and decision-making tools.
Specifically:
• 
Engage users with physical, social, and behavioral scientists to develop re-
quirements for new products as advances are made in modeling technology 
and forecast skill, including forecasts for additional environmental variables.
• 
In direct collaboration with users, develop ready-set-go scenarios that incor-
porate S2S predictions and weather forecasts to enable advance preparation 
for potential hazards as timelines shorten and uncertainty decreases.
• 
Support boundary organizations and private-sector enterprises that act as 
interfaces between forecast producers and users.
Research Strategy 2: Increase S2S Forecast Skill 
Operational weather and ocean forecasts have steadily increased in accuracy and lead 
time over the past few decades. However, there is still significant room for improving 
the skill of many S2S forecasts. An important prerequisite for achieving the vision of 
widely used S2S forecasts is to significantly improve the skill of forecasts so that users’ 
confidence in such predictions increases, and so that S2S forecasts can be applied 
to a range of decisions that requires higher forecast skill in order to act. Analogous 
to routine weather forecasting, there should be an emphasis on skillful, routine fore-

247
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
casts of Earth system components 2 weeks to 12 months in advance. Prediction at 
these timescales will necessarily be more probabilistic and less precise as to timing 
and spatial location than shorter-term weather forecasts, but there is strong evidence 
for predictability for many Earth system variables on S2S timescales. As discussed in 
Chapter 4, important sources of predictability on S2S timescales originate from (1) 
modes of variability (e.g., the El Niño Southern Oscillation [ENSO], the Madden-Julian 
Oscillation [MJO], the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation [QBO]), (2) slowly varying processes in 
the ocean and on the land surface (e.g., soil moisture, surface water, snow-pack, ocean 
heat content, ocean currents, eddy positions, and sea ice conditions), and (3) elements 
of external forcing (e.g., aerosols, greenhouse gasses).
Exploiting these sources of predictability to increase forecast skill will require develop-
ing better physical understanding of sources of S2S predictability, as well as improving 
all aspects of S2S forecast systems. This includes sustaining and improving the net-
work of observations used to study predictability and to initialize models, developing 
improved techniques for data assimilation and uncertainty quantification in coupled 
Earth system models, and importantly,  reducing Earth system model errors through a 
combination of increases in model resolution and the development of better model 
parameterizations to represent subgrid processes. Research to spur the development 
of new methods for probabilistic forecasting and probabilistic skill verification and 
calibration are also necessary.
With many possible avenues available for improving the skill of S2S forecasts, efforts 
to optimize the design of S2S forecast systems are also essential. S2S forecast systems 
can be configured in a wide variety of ways, and there are numerous possible selec-
tions and combinations of the design elements (“trade space”) in any forecast system. 
For example, what is the cost-benefit to the skill of S2S forecasts of adding more 
dynamical representation of different Earth system components and increasing the 
complexity of their coupling, versus increasing model resolution, extending retrospec-
tive forecast length or averaging period, increasing ensemble runs, and/or increasing 
the number of models in a multi-model ensemble system? While all may improve fore-
cast skill, finite computing and human resources implies trade-offs in the design and 
implementation of any system. Thus a key part of improving and maximizing the cost-
benefit relationship for producing probabilistic information 2 weeks to 12 months into 
the future will be to undertake a systematic exploration of the optimal use of available 
resources to support the development of more skillful forecast systems. 
The development of a cost-effective and skillful operational multi-model ensemble 
forecast system is important, will require particular care and attention, and will involve 
the use of current operational models along with support for the research community 

248
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
to actively engage in the development and validation of new or updated members of 
these ensemble systems (see discussion below). Similar methods for probabilistic skill 
verification and calibration also need to be employed and developed for the evalua-
tion of the forecasts of probabilities. Such probabilistic skill metrics would characterize, 
and ultimately improve, the capability of forecasting common but also rare S2S events 
(Research Strategy 3).
Recommendations
Making S2S predictions relies on the identification and understanding of sources of 
Earth system predictability in the S2S time range. The 2010 NRC report (NRC, 2010b) 
identified a number of sources of predictability, including inertia in various slow-­varying 
components of the Earth system, modes of variability in the coupled ocean-atmospheric 
system (e.g., ENSO, MJO), and external forcing (from either human or natural sources). 
Chapter 4 further explores current understanding of these sources of S2S predictability 
and emphasizes that much remains to be learned about these sources, especially their 
interactions and teleconnections. Research to advance under­standing of sources and 
limits of predictability for specific Earth system phenomena will be critical to improving 
the fidelity of S2S Earth system models, as well as to improving the ability to forecast 
extreme or other disruptive events with longer lead times (Research Strategy 3).
Recommendation C: Identify and characterize sources of S2S predictability, includ-
ing natural modes of variability (e.g., ENSO, MJO, QBO), slowly varying processes 
(e.g., sea ice, soil moisture, and ocean eddies), and external forcing (e.g., aerosols), 
and correctly represent these sources of predictability, including their interactions, 
in S2S forecast systems.
Specifically: 
• 
Use long-record and process-level observations and a hierarchy of models 
(e.g., theory, idealized models, high-resolution models, global earth system 
models) to explore and characterize the physical nature of sources of predict-
ability and their interdependencies and dependencies on the background 
environment and external forcing.
• 
 Conduct comparable predictability and skill estimation studies and assess the 
relative importance of different sources of predictability and their interactions, 
using long-term observations and multi-model approaches (such as the World 
Meteorological Organization–lead S2S Project’s database of retrospective 
forecast data).

249
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Chapter 5 emphasizes the importance of improving routine observations, develop-
ing more sophisticated data assimilation and uncertainty quantification techniques, 
reducing individual model errors through increased resolution and better parameter-
izations, and developing advanced calibration techniques and model combinations in 
order to develop more skillful S2S forecast systems. Routine observations are essential 
for initializing models to more accurately reflect the state of the Earth system and for 
validating model output; they can also contribute to improved understanding of the 
physical system and its predictability on S2S timescales (Chapter 4). Current observ-
ing networks for the atmosphere are more capable and robust than those for the 
other components of the Earth system. However, sustaining atmospheric observations 
is critical for S2S as well as weather forecasting; research to increase the use of cur-
rently available atmospheric observations, such as assimilation of satellite radiances 
in cloudy and precipitating areas, could unlock a wealth of new information related to 
representing convection and precipitation in models. 
Relative to the atmosphere, the ocean, land surface, and cryosphere remain signifi-
cantly under-observed, despite being major sources of S2S predictability. For the 
oceans, more routine and targeted observations are essential for S2S applications. In 
particular, sustaining and enhancing the capability to provide remotely sensed sea 
surface height (SSH), sea surface temperature (SST), and near-surface winds is critical, 
as is expanding the use of measurement arrays such as Argo floats and moored buoys 
to better measure key ocean properties below the surface (e.g., temperature, ­salinity, 
and current velocity). In addition to improving classic observing capabilities for the 
ocean, smart utilization of novel autonomous platforms could have an important 
impact.
Reliable and accurate year-round sea ice thickness measurements are the greatest 
need for improving the understanding and modeling of sea ice and its influence on 
the coupled system. Current (CryoSat2) and planned (ICESat2) satellite missions will 
help to meet this key objective. Because these satellites measure freeboard (the height 
of sea ice and snow above the sea level), accurate and simultaneous measurements of 
snow depths are also needed to solve for sea ice thickness. The procedure for solving 
for sea ice thickness needs to be efficient enough to be ready in about a day, so such 
measurements can contribute to initialization of S2S forecasts.
Land observations are critical for modeling large-scale land surface-atmosphere 
feedbacks and for predictions of the terrestrial water cycle. Several new satellite mis-
sions (Soil Moisture Active Passive [SMAP] and Surface Water and Ocean Topography 
[SWOT]) are focused on observing near-surface soil moisture and other aspects of sur-
face hydrology that will be useful for improving S2S predictions. However, a number 

250
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
of critical gaps remain. Lack of adequate precipitation measurements currently hinder 
S2S prediction, and measurements of soil moisture in the root zone, as well as mea-
surements of evapotranspiration, are needed globally to better constrain hydrology 
and surface fluxes. Measurements of snow depth or snow water equivalent (SWE) are 
also critical. SWE can be estimated from existing satellite platforms; however retrieval 
algorithms must be improved in order to take full advantage of these observations. 
Because of gaps in the satellite observing network, in situ measurements of variables 
such as precipitation, snow depth, and land surface-atmosphere fluxes are likely to 
remain important and should be expanded to improve their spatial coverage. 
In summary, observations of the atmosphere, ocean, land surface, and cryosphere play 
a critical role in building, calibrating, initializing, and evaluating the coupled Earth sys-
tem models that are used to generate S2S forecasts. Better representing slow-­varying 
processes in the Earth system—such as the ocean, cryosphere, and land surface 
­hydrology—and their coupling to the atmosphere, as well as developing observa-
tions to inform deep convection and storm formation, are important to capturing S2S 
predictability, but they represent the largest gaps in the current observing network. 
Improved observations are also critical for improving the ability to forecast important 
and/or extreme events (Research Strategy 3). Including observations of phenomena 
that remain insufficiently observed, such as the properties of oceans or sea ice, can 
also facilitate the inclusion of more and more complex components of the Earth sys-
tem in S2S prediction systems (Research Strategy 4).
Recommendation E: Maintain continuity of critical observations, and expand the 
temporal and spatial coverage of in situ and remotely sensed observations for Earth 
system variables that are beneficial for operational S2S prediction and for discover-
ing and modeling new sources of S2S predictability.
Specifically:
• 
Maintain continuous satellite measurement records of vertical profiles of at-
mospheric temperature and humidity without gaps in the data collection and 
with increasing vertical resolution and accuracy.
• 
Optimize and advance observations of clouds, precipitation, wind profiles, and 
mesoscale storm and boundary layer structure and evolution. In particular, 
higher resolution observations of these quantities are needed for developing 
and advancing cloud-permitting components of future S2S forecast systems.
• 
Maintain and advance satellite and other observational capabilities (e.g., 
radars, drifters, and gliders) to provide continuity and better spatial coverage, 
resolution, and quality of key surface ocean observations (SSH, SST, and winds), 

251
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
particularly near the coasts, where predictions of oceanic conditions are of the 
greatest societal importance in their own right.
• 
Maintain and expand the network of in situ instruments providing routine 
real-time measurements of subsurface ocean properties, such as temperature, 
salinity, and currents, with increasing resolutions and accuracy. Appropriate 
platforms for these instruments will include arrays of moored buoys (especially 
in the tropics), autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), marine ­mammals, and 
profiling floats. 
• 
Develop accurate and timely year-round sea ice thickness measurements; 
if from remote sensing of sea ice freeboard, then simultaneous snow depth 
measurements are needed to translate the observation of freeboard into sea 
ice thickness.
• 
Expand in situ measurements of precipitation, snow depth, soil moisture, and 
land-surface fluxes, and improve and/or better exploit remotely sensed soil 
moisture, SWE, and evapotranspiration measurements.
• 
Continue to invest in observations (both in situ and remotely sensed) that are 
important for informing fluxes between the component interfaces, including 
but not limited to land surface observations of temperature, moisture, and 
snow depth; marine surface observations from tropical moored buoys; and 
ocean observations of near-surface currents, temperature, salinity, ocean heat 
content, mixed-layer depth, and sea ice conditions.
• 
Apply autonomous and other new observing technologies to expand the 
spatial and temporal coverage of observation networks, and support the con­
tinued development of these observational methodologies.
As the scope of S2S models evolves to include and resolve more physical processes 
and components of the Earth system, there will be an increasing need for observa-
tions of new variables (Research Strategy 4). Furthermore, and as detailed above, 
current routine observations may not have sufficient resolution or coverage for S2S 
applications. Although it would be beneficial to expand the geographic coverage and 
resolution of many types of observations, cost and logistics will continue to demand 
that priorities are determined, and it is not always clear a priori what measurements 
will be most beneficial to support S2S prediction systems. Thus careful study of the 
improvements anticipated in S2S forecasting systems will be needed to quantify the 
cost-benefit ratio for various types of additional observations. Such study requires 
integrating ocean, land, atmosphere and sea ice modeling in the planning of observ-
ing networks. Observing system simulation experiments (OSSEs) and other sensitivity 
studies are powerful tools for exploring the importance of specific observations on 
state estimation and overall model performance, and could be better used to prioritize 

252
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
improvements to observation networks (as well as model parameterizations) for S2S 
prediction systems. 
Recommendation F: Determine priorities for observational systems and networks 
by developing and implementing observing system simulation experiments, observ-
ing system experiments, and other sensitivity studies using S2S forecast systems. 
Many challenges are associated with integrating tens of millions of observations 
into the different components of an Earth system model, including ensuring that 
initializations are dynamically consistent and minimize the growth of errors. Given 
that coupling between the multiple, dynamic components of the Earth system (e.g., 
atmosphere, ocean, ice, land) is central to the S2S prediction problem, developing and 
implementing coupled data assimilation methods is at the forefront of S2S model 
development. 
The implementation of “weakly coupled” assimilation, in which an independently 
coupled Earth system model is integrated forward in time as part of the assimilation 
process, represents an important and ongoing step in improving both weather and 
S2S forecast systems. “Strongly coupled” data assimilation, in which observations 
within one media are allowed to impact the state estimate in other components 
(with constraints), may allow for another important leap forward, especially for 
S2S systems in which the representation of the interaction between Earth system 
components is essential for capturing inherent predictability. However, research into 
the use of strongly coupled data assimilation algorithms is in its infancy, has not yet 
been tested on complex S2S coupled prediction models, and presently faces several 
barriers to implementation. Fundamental research is needed to explore and real-
ize the potential benefits to more advanced but expensive strongly coupled data 
assimilation, while continuing to pursue and implement weakly coupled methods in 
current systems.
Efforts to improve the skill of S2S predictions will also benefit from more realistic 
representation of the uncertainty and statistical properties of observations and model 
output. Research on Bayesian data assimilation and uncertainty quantification has 
grown substantially in atmospheric and oceanic sciences and also in disciplines such 
as applied mathematics and engineering. These methods, which allow the optimal 
prediction and utilization of the full probabilistic information and utilize rigorous 
reduced-order differential equations, are strong candidates for implementation in the 
components of S2S prediction systems, but require more development to be imple-
mented into operational settings. 

253
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation G: Invest in research that advances the development of strongly 
coupled data assimilation and quantifies the impact of such advances on opera-
tional S2S forecast systems. 
Specifically: 
• 
Continue to test and develop weakly coupled systems as operationally viable 
systems and as benchmarks for strongly coupled implementations.
• 
Further develop and evaluate hybrid assimilation methods, multiscale- and 
coupled-covariance update algorithms, non-Gaussian nonlinear assimilation, 
and rigorous reduced-order stochastic modeling.
• 
Optimize the use of observations collected for the ocean, land surface, and sea 
ice components, in part through coupled covariances and mutual information 
algorithms, and through autonomous adaptive sampling and observation 
targeting schemes.
• 
Further develop the joint estimation of coupled states and parameters, as well 
as quantitative methods that discriminate among, and learn, parameterizations.
• 
Develop methods and systems to fully utilize relevant satellite and in situ 
atmospheric information, especially for cloudy and precipitating conditions.
• 
Foster interactions among the growing number of science and engineering 
communities involved in data assimilation, Bayesian inference, and uncertainty 
quantification.
Systematic errors are numerous within the Earth system models used for S2S fore-
casting. For example, many global models produce an unrealistically strong Pacific 
equatorial cold tongue, a spurious double Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), 
erroneously high Indian Ocean and tropical South Atlantic SSTs, low SSTs in the tropi-
cal North Atlantic, wet or dry biases in rainfall in many parts of the world, and a bias 
in MJO variance. These model errors can be large compared to the predictable signals 
targeted by S2S forecasts.
Reducing such model errors represents one of the most important ways to improve 
the skill of S2S predictions (Chapter 5, models subsection). There is evidence that in-
creasing the resolution of modeling systems (while still at resolutions that need deep 
convection parameterization) can reduce model errors. However, resolution is far from 
a panacea. Improving physical parameterizations of unresolved processes remains 
essential to reducing errors, even as the capability to resolve more and more processes 
expands. One important barrier to improving parameterizations is incomplete under-
standing of actual physical processes and the challenges associated with encapsulat-
ing new knowledge of these processes in (multiple, interacting) parameterizations. 
Coordinated, coupled field campaigns, as well as process-targeted satellite missions 

254
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
and other observations, are essential for developing the understanding required to 
improve parameterizations. To maximize impact, field campaigns should, as far as pos-
sible, be codesigned by academics and operational centers and take full advantage of 
opportunities for national and international coordination.
Continuing to develop high-resolution research models will also be important for 
developing better parameterizations that reduce model errors. Model resolution 
encompasses time and space resolution, but also a balance between the order of the 
numerical computation and the refinement of the discretization. Further development 
of high-resolution models will also be extremely beneficial for examining predictabil-
ity on S2S timescales, and will help pave the way for future operational use of global 
cloud and eddy-permitting models or cloud- and eddy-permitting meshes in critical 
areas. This approach is becoming more feasible as scale-aware cumulus parameter-
ization schemes are being developed. Finally, in parallel to spatiotemporal model 
­resolution and parameterizations, incorporating new stochastic statistical methods 
is also important to advance S2S forecasting. In particular, as described in Chapter 5, 
there are now several promising stochastic methods and reduced-order partial dif-
ferential equations that could provide improved probabilistic forecasts for the same 
cost as running the present number of ensemble members. Furthermore, including 
efficient stochastic components in S2S modeling systems has the potential to increase 
the skill of S2S probabilistic forecasts and benefit decision making. For example, sto-
chastic computing and stochastic parameterizations of unresolved processes (Palmer, 
2014) can be used to better represent rare but significant S2S events.
To summarize, investment in research aimed at physical understanding and reducing 
model errors is seen by this committee as a top priority for improving the skill of S2S 
predictions. In addition to contributing to Research Strategy 2, reducing model errors 
also contributes to Strategies 3 and 4.
Recommendation H: Accelerate research to improve parameterization of unresolved 
(e.g., subgrid scale) processes, both within S2S system submodels and holistically 
across models, to better represent coupling in the Earth system.
Specifically: 
• 
Foster long-term collaborations among scientists across academia and ­research 
and operational modeling centers, and across ocean, sea ice, land and atmo-
spheric observation and modeling communities, to identify root causes of 
error in parameterization schemes, to correct these errors, and to develop, test, 
and optimize new (especially scale-aware or independent) parameterization 
schemes in a holistic manner.

255
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
• 
Continue to investigate the potential for reducing model errors through 
increases in horizontal and vertical resolutions in the atmosphere and other 
model components, ideally in a coupled model framework (see also Recom-
mendation L). 
• 
Encourage field campaigns targeted at increasing knowledge of processes 
that are poorly understood or poorly represented in S2S models, including 
tropical convection, ocean mixing, polar, sea ice and stratospheric processes, 
and coupling among different Earth system components (e.g., air-sea-ice-
wave-land; troposphere-stratosphere; dynamics-biogeochemistry).
• 
Develop high-resolution (or multi-resolution) modeling systems (e.g., that 
permit atmospheric deep convection and non-hydrostatic ocean processes) 
to advance process understanding and promote the development of high-
resolution operational prototypes (see also Recommendation I).
Verification metrics are important for tracking and comparing model improvements, 
and are also a critical part of enabling use and building trust in S2S forecasts. Under-
standing the different ways that users interpret forecasts and what they consider 
to be skillful is necessary to inform the development of better verification metrics 
(Recommendation B). Improving verification should also involve continued research 
on feature-based and two-step verification methods, along with consideration of how 
the design of retrospective forecasts and reanalyses can influence the ability of some 
users to directly evaluate the consequences of acting on forecasts at various predicted 
probabilities.
Recommendation J: Pursue feature-based verification techniques to more readily 
capture limited predictability at S2S timescales as part of a larger effort to improve 
S2S forecast verification.
Specifically:
• 
Investigate methodologies for ensemble feature verification including two-
step processes linking features to critical user criterion.
• 
Pursue verification methodologies for rare and extreme events at S2S 
­timescales, especially those related to multi-model ensemble predictions.
• 
Consider the benefits of producing more frequent reanalyses using coupled 
S2S forecast systems in order for the initial conditions of retrospective fore-
casts to be more consistent with the real-time forecasts, as well as for the 
purposes of predictability studies.
Multi-model ensembles (MMEs) are one of the most promising ways to account for 
errors associated with Earth system model formulation, and the use of MMEs is likely 

256
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
to remain critical for S2S prediction. However, current MMEs are largely systems of op-
portunity, and research is required to develop more intentional MME forecast systems. 
S2S forecast systems, including the coupled Earth system model, the reanalysis, and 
retrospective forecasts, can be configured in a wide variety of ways. Careful optimiz-
ing of the configurations of a multi-model prediction system will include systematic 
exploration of the benefits and costs of adding unique models to an MME. 
Today, little information is available about optimum configurations for individual or 
multi-model S2S ensemble forecast systems. It is likely that much can be gained in 
both skill and resource utilization by ascertaining which configurations produce opti-
mum forecast systems, as defined by reliable probability forecasts and optimum levels 
of user-focused skill.
Forecast centers, private-sector users, and value-added providers use various calibration 
methods, but there has not been a comprehensive effort to compare methods or to find 
optimum approaches for the variables of most interest. Studies of the optimum configu-
rations of S2S probability models (mentioned below) should include an attempt to eval-
uate calibration methods and ascertain whether some methods offer clear advantage 
over others, recognizing that some of these methods will likely be application-specific.
Exploring the “trade space,” that is, the configuration of S2S forecast systems, will 
be a large, complicated, and expensive endeavor, expanding as computer and Earth 
system modeling capabilities expand over the next decade or more, but determining 
how performance depends on configuration is a key task in any S2S research agenda. 
As such, this exploration would benefit tremendously from a central, coordinating 
­authority and central funding, as well. Exploring the “trade space” will be important for 
increasing forecast skill, advancing the prediction of events (Research Strategy 3), and 
helping decide how to expand and design new S2S systems to include more complex-
ity in S2S Earth system models (Research Strategy 4).
Recommendation K: Explore systematically the impact of various S2S forecast 
system design elements on S2S forecast skill. This includes examining the value of 
model diversity, as well as the impact of various selections and combinations of 
model resolution, number of ensemble perturbations, length of lead, averaging 
period, length of retrospective forecasts, and options for coupled sub-models.
Specifically:
• 
Design a coordinated program to assess the costs and benefits of including 
additional processes in S2S systems, and relate those to benefits from other 
investments, for example in higher resolution. In doing so, take advantage of 

257
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
the opportunity to leverage experience and codes from the climate modeling 
community.
• 
Encourage systematic studies of the costs and benefits of increasing the verti-
cal and horizontal resolution of S2S models.
• 
Evaluate calibration methods and ascertain whether some methods offer clear 
advantage for certain applications over others, as part of studies of the opti-
mum configurations of S2S models.
• 
Explore systematically how many unique models in an MME are required to 
predict useful S2S parameters, and whether those models require unique data 
assimilation, physical parameterizations, or atmosphere, ocean, land, and ice 
components (see also Recommendation L).
Transitioning new ideas, tools, and other technology between the S2S research com-
munity and operational centers is challenging but essential to translating research 
discoveries into informed decision-making. In the S2S context, one key element of this 
transfer will be to bring the best research to bear on developing a fully operational 
MME S2S forecast system. The use of MMEs in nonoperational, research, and real-time 
settings has demonstrated the potential for advancing S2S forecasts, for example the 
North American Multi-model Ensemble program (NMME) (see Chapter 6). An opera-
tional NMME relying on research institutions for funding and operations may not be a 
viable long-term option, but there would be great value in the development of a fully 
operational MME forecast system that includes the operational centers of the United 
States. 
Developing an operational MME forecasting system will require careful optimizing 
of the configurations of a multi-model prediction system (Recommendation K). Test 
beds, such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Climate 
Test Bed activity, provide the potential for such coordinating activities; however, the 
Test Bed would need significant enhancement if it were to be relied on as the primary 
mechanism for the development of an MME forecasting system. Although feasible, 
interagency and international collaborations could accelerate efforts to create an 
operational MME. Realistic assessment of available operational resources and centers 
that are able to contribute operationally rigorous prediction systems would be a use-
ful starting point for determining the best path forward.
Recommendation L: Accelerate efforts to carefully design and create robust opera-
tional multi-model ensemble S2S forecast systems. 
Specifically:

258
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
• 
Use test beds and interagency and international collaborations where feasible 
to systematically explore the impact of various S2S forecast system design 
elements on S2S forecast skill, in particular the question of how many unique 
models in a MME are required to predict operationally useful S2S parameters 
(see also Recommendation K).
• 
Assess realistically the available operational resources and centers that are 
able to contribute operationally rigorous prediction systems.
To make the kind of rapid improvements to operational S2S prediction systems that 
the committee envisions, it will be more generally important to speed the flow of in-
formation between scientists with research and operational foci. A number of mecha-
nisms exist to improve the flow of technology into operational weather and ocean 
systems, including focused workshops, visiting scientist programs, special sessions at 
professional conferences, testbeds, and focused transition teams such as the Navy’s 
development-and-operations transition teams and the National Science Foundation 
(NSF)/NOAA’s Climate Process Teams. These mechanisms should be promoted and 
expanded to include more scientist involvement for plowing the new ground of S2S.
New mechanisms should also be developed especially to enhance researcher ­access 
to operational forecast data, including access to archives of ensemble forecasts 
themselves, retrospective forecasts, and initialization data. There are data storage chal-
lenges with such an endeavor, but it would facilitate further analyses of sources of S2S 
predictability and efforts to diagnose skill, among other benefits. The World Climate 
Research Programme/World Weather Research Programme (WCRP/WWRP) S2S Project 
described in Chapters 4 and 6 is already making some operational center data avail-
able to the research community to study subseasonal processes, but S2S Project data 
is just beginning to be explored by the research community.
In the longer term, allowing researchers to conduct or request specific experiments 
on operational systems would provide an additional boost to the flow of dis­coveries 
and technical advances between research and operations communities. Allowing 
r­esearchers to run operational models will be a difficult challenge, one that involves 
making the modeling code accessible to the research community as well as ensuring 
access to sufficient computing power to run the code. All of these actions will require 
a significant effort on the part of the operational centers. To improve the flow of 
advances between research and operations, operational centers should work toward 
addressing these challenges over the next two decades.
Recommendation M: Provide mechanisms for research and operations communities 
to collaborate, and aid in transitioning components and parameterizations from 

259
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
the research community into operational centers by increasing researcher access to 
operational or operational mirror systems.
Specifically:
• 
Increase opportunities for S2S researchers to participate in operational 
centers.
• 
Enhance interactions with the international community (e.g., the S2S Project 
and Asia-Pacific Climate Center [APCC]) and with the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) Lead Centers.
• 
Provide better access in the near term to archived data from operational sys-
tems, potentially via test centers. 
• 
Develop, in the longer term, the ability for researchers to request reruns or 
perform runs themselves of operational model forecasts. 
• 
Encourage effective partnerships with the private sector through ongoing 
engagement (see also Recommendation B). 
Research Strategy 3:  
Improve Prediction of Extreme and Disruptive Events and 
Consequences of Unanticipated Forcing Events
Within the efforts to improve the overall skill of S2S forecasts and to provide more 
actionable information to users, there are two areas that the committee believes de-
serve special attention (Research Strategies 3 and 4). Research Strategy 3 involves an 
increased focus on discrete events, and the committee made two recommendations 
to address this focus. The first is to emphasize the prediction of weather, climate, and 
other Earth system events that disrupt society’s normal functioning. Weather extremes 
and other relatively infrequent events can greatly disrupt society’s normal function-
ing and are therefore of significant concern to many users: drought and flood, strong 
storms with excessive precipitation, heat waves, and major wind events are all exam-
ples. A coordinated effort to improve the forecasting of these events could provide the 
huge benefits achieved by allowing communities more time to plan for, and mitigate 
the damages of, these events. Thus it is important to explore the possibilities of using 
model output to suggest the likelihood of such disruptive events. For some of these 
events, a quantitative estimate of probability would provide the opportunity to con-
sider whether specific mitigation actions are cost-effective. However, whether action is 
justified would depend on the skill of the forecasts for extreme events as determined 
by a history of such forecasts.
Improved forecasting of extreme or disruptive events may entail an emphasis on 

260
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
forecasts of opportunity—windows in time when expected skill for predicting specific 
events is high because of the presence of certain features in the Earth system—rather 
than simply predicting average conditions for given time periods, as is done today. 
Skillful extended-range prediction of such events may only be possible for certain 
phases of large-scale climate patterns, such as the seasonal cycle, ENSO, or MJO, or 
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), or may be contingent on interactions between these 
modes and other slowly varying processes. Moreover, skillful prediction of the proba-
bilities of some types of disruptive events will be possible at these timescales, whereas 
others may not. Examples of events for which there is good evidence for predictive 
skill at S2S timescales include regional drought; watershed-scale melt-driven flooding; 
and significant shifts in hurricane tracks or land-falling events in various ocean basins 
(Vecchi et al., 2011). More research is needed to investigate the potential skill for fore-
casts of different types of disruptive events, with a focus on discovering the potential 
for so-called forecasts of opportunity.
In addition to the improved prediction of events within the Earth system, there are 
events driven by outside forces that have major—and potentially predictable—­
consequences on the Earth system. Such outside forces include volcanoes, meteor 
impacts, and human actions (e.g., aerosol emissions, widespread fires, large oil spills, 
certain acts of war, or climate intervention). Over the past 25 years, a number of these 
unusual natural or human-caused events have had, or were initially feared to have, 
the possibility of large-scale consequences to the Earth system (Chapters 3 and 6) and 
accom­panying adverse impacts to a wide range of human activities.
Some consequences of high-impact events are predictable on timescales of weeks 
to a year. These events are unusual because they are of a nature or magnitude not 
represented within the recent past (for example, since the start of observational satel-
lite climate records in about 1979), and hence do not have well-observed analogs 
that can be used to validate prediction systems. Moreover, depending on the nature 
of the event, the operational forecast systems may not be suited for predicting the 
event’s consequences. Although some of these events, such as the 1991 eruption of 
Mt. Pinatubo, had clear consequences for the global system for a year and beyond 
(0.3°C global-mean cooling averaged over the 3 years following the Pinatubo erup-
tion), many other events had much smaller impacts than originally projected. However, 
these were notable in raising significant public concern that might have required 
­action by decision-makers.

261
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendations
The improved prediction of extreme or disruptive events on S2S timescales is an 
extension of improvements in S2S forecasting skill (Research Strategy 2). But given 
the importance of having actionable information about these events for users and 
­decision-makers (Research Strategy 1), the committee believes it is important to 
highlight the prediction of events as a separate strategy. Improving the prediction of 
such events will involve improved understanding of sources of predictability of ex-
treme and disruptive events in the S2S time range. It will also involve ensuring that 
all relevant sources of predictability and their interactions are represented in Earth 
system models (Chapter 4).
Recommendation D: Focus predictability studies, process exploration, model devel-
opment, and forecast skill advancements on high-impact S2S “forecasts of opportu-
nity” that in particular target disruptive and extreme events.
Specifically:
• 
Determine how predictability sources (e.g., natural modes of variability, 
slowly varying processes, external forcing) and their multiscale interac-
tions can influence the occurrence, evolution, and amplitude of extreme 
and disruptive events using long-record and process-level observations.
• 
Ensure the relationships between disruptive and extreme weather/­
environmental events—or their proxies—and sources of S2S predictability 
(e.g., modes of natural variability and slowly varying processes) are repre-
sented in S2S forecast systems.
• 
Investigate and estimate the predictability and prediction skill of disrup-
tive and extreme events through utilization and further development of 
forecast and retrospective forecast databases, such as those from the S2S 
Project and NMME.
The second part of this research strategy involves using S2S forecast systems to pre-
dict the consequences of disruptive events caused by an unusual Earth system event, 
such as a volcanic eruption or a major oil spill. Such an outside event generates an 
immediate demand for scientific guidance for the public and policymakers about po-
tential consequences. A flexible system for estimating Earth system consequences of 
such unusual forcing events would address a national need that has become evident 
several times over the past few decades.
The nation should develop a capability for estimating the range of possible impacts 
and consequences of unexpected but critical events such as volcanic eruptions, 

262
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
nuclear detonations, widespread fires, or large spills of toxic materials (Chapters 3 and 
6). Such a capability would need to be mobilized within 1 week and return preliminary 
results for S2S timescales and beyond as appropriate. 
Performing regular full-scale exercises in collaboration with the response community 
in the spirit of war games would help improve this capability and maintain it for any 
new event. This could serve as a focal point and help to improve the connections of 
advances in the academic sector in modeling unexpected events with operational 
model development.
Recommendation N: Develop a national capability to forecast the consequences of 
unanticipated forcing events. 
Specifically:
• 
Improve the coordination of government agencies and academia to enable 
rapid response to unanticipated events and to provide S2S forecasts using the 
unanticipated events as sources of predictability.
• 
Utilize emerging applications of Earth system models for long-range transport 
and dispersion processes (e.g., of aerosols).
• 
Increase research on the generation, validation, and verification of forecasts for 
the aftermath of unanticipated forcing events.
Research Strategy 4:  
Include More Components of the Earth System in S2S Forecast Models 
The other area that the committee believes requires more focused attention is acceler-
ating the development of Earth system model components outside the ­troposphere—
Research Strategy 4. As mentioned above, representing oceans, sea ice, land surface 
and hydrology, and biogeochemical cycles (including aerosol and air quality) in 
coupled Earth system models is more important for S2S predictions than for tradi-
tional weather prediction, because much of the predictability of the Earth system on 
these timescales arises from conditions outside the troposphere or from interactions 
between Earth system components. Operational S2S forecast systems increasingly uti-
lize coupled Earth system models that include major Earth system components (e.g., 
ocean, atmosphere, ice, land) (Brassington et al., 2015; Brunet et al., 2010). However, 
the representation of processes outside the troposphere has generally been less well 
developed. Improving model representation of land surface and terrestrial hydrology, 
ocean, sea ice, and upper atmosphere—including fluxes and feedbacks between these 
components—will be important for increasing the skill of S2S forecasts. This includes 

263
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
advancing the observations, modeling, data assimilation, and integrated prediction 
capabilities in those components. Those components that have significant interac-
tions with the weather and climate system as a whole will need to be dynamically 
­integrated into the operational forecasting systems. Other fields that do not contrib-
ute substantially to the evolution of the rest of the system could be predicted by post-
processing operations or by independent activities after the primary forecasts have 
been carried out. However, as demand grows for forecasts of ­phenomena that are 
predictable on S2S timescales but that do not feedback strongly to the atmosphere, 
improving the dynamical representation of many of these Earth system processes in 
S2S prediction systems may also become important in its own right.
Representing interactions between the various Earth system components has be-
come increasingly important for climate projections. Comprehensive Earth system 
models, which include composition, aerosols, vegetation, and snow and glaciers, are 
increasingly being used to provide projections on decadal to centennial timescales 
(e.g., Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 [CMIP5]; IPCC, 2013; Taylor et al., 
2012). The extension of operational S2S forecasts toward dynamic predictions of more 
of the Earth system will be carried out most effectively by leveraging these existing 
efforts.
Recommendations
Improving the representation of more components and variables of the Earth system 
in S2S forecasts, including the ocean, sea ice, biogeochemistry, and land surface, will 
produce information applicable to a new and wider range of decisions. Iterative inter-
action with forecast users (Research Strategy 1) can help determine what processes 
and variables are most important to include in coupled S2S systems as these systems 
evolve. Expanding the comprehensiveness of such component models and advancing 
their coupling in Earth system models will also help improve the overall skill of fore-
casts (Research Strategy 2).
Priorities for improving ocean models include both fundamental numerical capabili-
ties and improved depictions of important oceanic phenomena that are currently 
omitted from most S2S forecasting systems, for example, tides and their interactions 
with storm surges, and oceanic mixing of nutrients. The dynamics of the near surface 
ocean are of particular importance for the coupled ocean at S2S timescales, so the 
representation of ocean boundary-layer turbulence and its interactions with waves 
and sea ice are a promising subject of study for improving S2S forecasts. But the most 
important limitation on oceanic S2S forecasts arises from the global influence of the 

264
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ocean at these timescales, along with the need to accurately represent many impor-
tant oceanic phenomena at relatively small scales to capture this influence. Imple-
menting a regionally eddy-resolving ocean component along with additional research 
on parameterizing the effects of unresolved baroclinic and submesoscale oceanic 
eddies would thus help improve S2S coupled prediction models.
Sea ice models used for S2S often contain only rudimentary thermodynamics and 
­dynamics. Connecting advances in cutting-edge sea ice models (including more 
sophisticated physics representations of ice-thickness distribution, melt ponds, bio-
geochemistry, and divergence/convergence, as well as new methods to account for 
wave-floe interactions, blowing snow, and ice microstructure) with sea ice models 
used in S2S forecast system could advance S2S predictions of the atmosphere through 
improved representation of radiative and ocean feedbacks, as well as advancing S2S 
prediction of sea ice and polar ocean conditions.
Similarly, land surface models used for S2S prediction need to improve treatment of 
the hydrological cycle and aspects of the land surface that are coupled to hydrology, 
such as vegetation. Effort is needed to incorporate surface and underground water 
storage and river routing in models, including the role of human water management 
and use. These important aspects of the land system have been implemented in 
“off-line” hydrologic forecast systems, but they are usually oversimplified or neglected 
altogether in fully coupled S2S forecast systems. Improving the representation of 
land surface processes such as soil moisture storage and snow in such fully coupled 
systems will be important for predicting events such as heat waves, cold surges, and 
storm formation. In addition, predicting runoff may also help to enable S2S forecasts 
of flooding and lake and coastal hypoxia.
Additional strong candidates for improvements to existing practice for operational 
S2S forecasting systems include advancing the observations, modeling, data assimila-
tion, and integrated prediction capabilities of aerosols and air quality, and aquatic and 
marine ecosystems.
Beyond advancing the representation of the land surface, hydrology, stratosphere, sea 
ice, ocean, and biogeochemical models and translating these advancements to the 
coupled Earth system models used for S2S forecasting, efforts are needed to pave the 
way toward global cloud-/eddy-resolving atmosphere-ocean-land-sea ice coupled 
models, which will one day become operational for S2S prediction. Although this goal 
is unlikely to be reached in the next decade, revolutions in the computing industry 
may shorten the distance between now and the otherwise long way to go, and the 
S2S research community needs to be proactive and poised if/when that happens.

265
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation I: Pursue next-generation ocean, sea ice, wave, biogeochemistry, 
and land surface/hydrologic as well as atmospheric model capability in fully ­coupled 
Earth system models used in S2S forecast systems.
Specifically: 
• 
Build a robust research program to explore potential benefits (to S2S predic-
tive skill and to forecast users) from adding more advanced Earth system 
components in forecast systems.
• 
Initiate new efficient partnerships between academics and operational centers 
to create the next generation model components that can be easily integrated 
into coupled S2S Earth system models.
• 
Support and expand model coupling frameworks to link ocean-atmosphere-
land-wave-ice models interoperably for rapid and easy exchange of flux and 
variable information.
• 
Develop a strategy to transition high-resolution (cloud-/eddy-resolving) 
­atmosphere-ocean-land-sea ice coupled models to operations, including 
­strategies for new parameterization schemes, data assimilation procedures, 
and multi-model ensembles.
Supporting the S2S Forecasting Enterprise
It is essential to highlight two specific cross-cutting challenges that must be met to 
support the four research strategies for reaching the committee’s vision for S2S predic-
tion. These are (1) ensuring that the computational infrastructure is sufficient to sup-
port the S2S forecasting enterprise and (2) developing and maintaining the workforce 
that will be needed to realize potential advances in S2S forecasting. These challenges 
are not necessarily unique to the S2S enterprise—they are also faced by the numeri-
cal weather prediction and climate modeling communities, and indeed, across many 
other technical enterprises. 
Recommendations
The volume of observational data, data assimilation steps, model outputs, and reanaly-
sis and retrospective forecasts involved in S2S forecasting means that the S2S model-
ing process is extremely data intensive. S2S prediction systems test the limits of cur-
rent cyberinfrastructure, as do weather forecasting and climate modeling. Advances 
in S2S forecast models (e.g., higher resolutions, increased complexity, generation and 
retention of long retrospective forecasts), will require dramatically increased comput-

266
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
ing capacities (perhaps 1,000 times) and similar expansion of related storage and data 
transport capacities.
That said, today’s Earth system models are not taking full advantage of current comput-
ing architectures, and improving their performance will likely require new algorithms 
that do more to work on data locally before transporting it to those analyzing them, 
as well as significant refactoring of existing algorithms to exploit more ­parallelism. To 
compound these challenges, the transition to new computing hardware and software 
through the next decade will be highly disruptive. This transition will not involve faster 
processing elements, but rather more processors with considerably more complex em-
bodiments of concurrency. In addition, future storage technology will be more complex 
and varied than it is today, and leveraging these innovations will require fundamental 
software changes.
An integrative modeling environment presents an appealing future option for facing 
some of the large uncertainty about the evolution of hardware and programming 
models over the next two decades. New approaches to data-centric workflow software 
that incorporates parallelism, remote analysis, and data compression will be required 
to keep up with the demands of the S2S forecasting community.
Recommendation O: Develop a national plan and investment strategy for S2S pre-
diction to take better advantage of current hardware and software and to meet the 
challenges in the evolution of new hardware and software for all stages of the pre-
diction process, including data assimilation, operation of high-resolution coupled 
Earth system models, and storage and management of results. 
Specifically: 
• 
Redesign and recode S2S models and data assimilation systems so that they 
will be capable of exploiting current and future massively parallel computa-
tional capabilities; this will require a significant and long-term investment in 
computer scientists, software engineers, applied mathematicians, and statistics 
researchers in partnership with the S2S researchers.
• 
Increase efforts to achieve an integrated modeling environment using the 
­opportunity of S2S and seamless prediction to bring operational agency 
groups (e.g., the Earth System Prediction Capability [ESPC]) and integrated 
modeling efforts (e.g., the Interagency Group on Integrative Modeling [IGIM]) 
together to create common software infrastructure and standards for compo-
nent interfaces.
• 
Provide larger and dedicated supercomputing and storage resources.
• 
Resolve the emerging challenges around S2S big data, including development 

267
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
and deployment of integrated data-intensive cyberinfrastructure, utilization of 
efficient data-centric workflows, reduction of stored data volumes, and deploy-
ment of data serving and analysis capabilities for users outside the research/
operational community.
• 
Further develop techniques for high-volume data processing and in-line data 
volume reduction.
• 
Continue to develop dynamic model cores that take the advantage of new 
computer technology.
As highlighted in Chapters 3 and 6, the committee believes there are significant 
challenges in maintaining a pipeline of talented workers in the S2S enterprise. S2S is 
complex and involves working across computing–Earth science boundaries to de-
velop and improve S2S models and working across science–user decision boundaries 
to better design and communicate forecast products and decision tools. 
From the limited data available, it appears that the cadre of trained S2S modelers is 
not growing robustly in the United States and is not keeping pace with this rapidly 
evolving field (Chapter 7). Given the importance of S2S predictions to the nation, a 
concerted effort is needed to entrain, develop, and retain a robust S2S workforce. 
Similar to weather forecasting, S2S forecasts are used or have the potential to be used 
by many people to make important decisions. Because S2S connects in a very public 
way to risk management, many opportunities will exist within the S2S enterprise to 
help society better manage risks. These factors can be exploited to entrain more tal-
ented and mission-driven people into the field.
One possible concrete step forward would be a series of workshops to explore how 
to feature S2S in more undergraduate and graduate curriculums, how to identify and 
connect with organizations that can help with this effort (e.g., the National Science 
Teachers Association), and how to interact with the private sector to help understand 
what skills are needed. Other entities such as the American Meteorological Society 
(AMS) or the NSF could also play an important role in coordinating the entrainment of 
talented young people.
Recommendation P: Pursue a collection of actions to address workforce develop-
ment that removes barriers that exist across the entire workforce pipeline and 
increases the diversity of scientists and engineers involved in advancing S2S fore-
casting and the component and coupled systems.
Specifically:
• 
Gather quantitative information about workforce requirements and the 

268
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
expertise base to support S2S modeling to more fully develop such a training 
program and workforce pipeline.
• 
Improve incentives and funding to support existing professionals and to at-
tract new professionals to the S2S research community, especially in model 
development and improvement, and for those who bridge scientific disci-
plines and/or work at component interfaces. 
• 
Expand interdisciplinary programs to train a more robust workforce to be em-
ployed in boundary organizations that work in between S2S model developers 
and the users of forecasts.
• 
Integrate basic meteorology and climatology into academic disciplines, such 
as business and engineering, to improve the capacity within operational agen-
cies and businesses to create new opportunities for the use of S2S information.
• 
Provide more graduate and postgraduate training opportunities, enhanced 
professional recognition and career advancement, and adequate incentives 
to encourage top students in relevant scientific and computer programming 
disciplines to choose S2S model development and research as a career.
CONCLUSION
This report envisions a substantial improvement in S2S prediction capability and 
expects valuable benefits to flow from these improvements to a wide range of pub-
lic and private activities. It sets forth a research agenda that describes what must be 
done—with observations, data management, computer modeling, and interactions 
with users—to advance prediction capability and improve societal benefits. 
Despite the specificity of the report in recommending what should be done, it does 
not address the challenging issues of how the agenda should actually be pursued—
that is, who will do what and how the work will be supported financially. Given that 
this research agenda significantly expands the scope of the current S2S efforts, the 
committee believes that some progress can be made with current levels of support 
and within current organizational structures, but fully achieving the S2S vision will 
likely require additional resources for basic and applied research, observations, and 
forecast operations. The scope of the research agenda will also require closer collabo-
ration between federal agencies and international partners, better flow of ideas and 
data between the research and operational forecasting communities, and engage-
ment of the entire weather and climate enterprise. 
The four research strategies provide broad guidance for how to focus effort, and the 
recommendations under each strategy in and of themselves represent the committee’s 

269
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
view of the most important actions to advance S2S forecasting, presented without any 
prioritization or sequencing. The technological, political, and financial environment 
in which the research agenda will be implemented is constantly changing and will 
continue to be fluid, and multiple pathways to success exist. As such, the committee 
believes it was more important to provide a list of the most important areas where 
progress can be made toward improving S2S forecasts without overly prescribing 
the sequence or priority in which they should be addressed. All of these actions can 
improve S2S forecasting, and the more that is done to implement these recommenda-
tions, the more advances can be made. 
To help agencies and other actors within the weather/climate enterprise select spe-
cific parts of the research agenda to pursue, Table 8.1 provides additional details about 
both the main recommendations and more specific or related activities that the com-
mittee envisions to be part of implementing each main recommendation: whether 
they involve basic or applied research; which are expected to have short-term benefits; 
which might require a new initiative; and which have a scope that calls for interna-
tional collaboration to leverage U.S. effort. Although recognizing that it might not be 
possible to pursue all of these actions simultaneously, the committee hopes that these 
strategies, recommendations, and designations can help to guide progress across the 
span of recommended S2S research and forecasting activities.
The vision for the future of S2S forecasting can be achieved with a national will to 
pursue this research agenda and to convert the results into daily operations. The more 
that can be pursued within this research agenda, the closer the nation can be toward 
realizing the full potential of S2S forecasting and the more benefits that can be pro-
duced for a wide range of users and the nation as a whole.

270
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Chapter 3
A: Develop a body of social science research 
that leads to more comprehensive and systematic 
understanding of the use and barriers to use of 
seasonal and subseasonal Earth system predictions.
1, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Characterize current and potential users of S2S 
forecasts and their decision-making contexts, and 
identify key commonalities and differences in needs 
(e.g., variables, temporal and spatial scale, lead times, 
and forecast skill) across multiple sectors.
1, 4
¡
¡
Promote social and behavioral science research on the 
use of probabilistic forecast information.
1
¡
¡
Create opportunities to share knowledge and practices 
among researchers working to improve the use 
of predictions across weather, subseasonal, and 
seasonal timescales.
1
¡
__________¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  The committee’s 16 main recommendations—lettered in the order 
they appear in the report—are shown in bold typeface along with information to 
help guide their implementation. The committee sometimes recommends more 
specific or related activities that it envisions to be part of implementing each main 
recommendation. These are listed in plain text under each main recommendation. 
The second column indicates the research strategy that each recommendation 
and associated activity primarily supports (colors are the same as in Figure 8.1). 
Additional research strategies (1-4) supported by each recommendation are indicated 
by numbers. The final columns contain the committee’s opinion on whether each 
recommendation will involve mainly basic or applied research/operational activities, 
or both; whether a short-term return on investment is likely (≤ 5 years); and whether a 
new initiative or program, or a significant expansion of a program, may be necessary 
to implement each recommendation. The last column indicates recommendations 
for which the committee believes that international collaboration and coordination is 
particularly important.

271
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
B: Establish an ongoing and iterative process 
in which stakeholders, social and behavioral 
scientists, and physical scientists codesign S2S 
forecast products, verification metrics, and decision-
making tools.
1, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Engage users with physical, social, and behavioral 
scientists to develop requirements for new products 
as advances are made in modeling technology 
and forecast skill, including forecasts for additional 
environmental variables.
1, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
In direct collaboration with users, develop ready-set-
go scenarios that incorporate S2S predictions and 
weather forecasts to enable advance preparation for 
potential hazards as timelines shorten and uncertainty 
decreases.
1
¡
¡
Support boundary organizations and private sector 
enterprises that act as interfaces between forecast 
producers and users.
1
¡
¡
Chapter 4
C: Identify and characterize sources of S2S 
predictability, including natural modes of variability 
(e.g., ENSO, MJO, QBO), slowly varying processes 
(e.g., sea ice, soil moisture, and ocean eddies), 
and external forcing (e.g., aerosols), and correctly 
represent these sources of predictability, including 
their interactions, in S2S forecast systems.
2, 3
¡
¡
¡
Use long-record and process-level observations and 
a hierarchy of models (theory, idealized models, high-
resolution models, global earth system models, etc.) 
to explore and characterize the physical nature of 
sources of predictability and their interdependencies 
and dependencies on the background environment and 
external forcing. 
2, 3
¡
¡
Conduct comparable predictability and skill estimation 
studies and assess the relative importance of different 
sources of predictability and their interactions, using 
long-term observations and multi-model approaches 
(such as the World Meteorological Organization 
[WMO]-lead S2S Project’s database of retrospective 
forecast data).
2, 3
¡
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

272
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
D: Focus predictability studies, process exploration, 
model development, and forecast skill advancements 
on high-impact S2S “forecasts of opportunity” that in 
particular target disruptive and extreme events.
3, 2
¡
¡
¡
Determine how predictability sources (e.g. natural 
modes of variability, slowly varying processes, external 
forcing) and their multi-scale interactions can influence 
the occurrence, evolution and amplitude of extreme and 
disruptive events using long-record and process-level 
observations.
3, 2
¡
¡
Ensure the relationships between disruptive and 
extreme weather/environmental events – or their 
proxies - and sources of S2S predictability (e.g. modes 
of natural variability and slowly varying processes) are 
represented in S2S forecast systems.
3, 2
¡
¡
¡
Investigate and estimate the predictability and 
prediction skill of disruptive and extreme events 
through utilization and further development of forecast 
and retrospective forecast databases, such as those 
from the S2S Project and the NMME.
3, 2
¡
¡
¡
Chapter 5
E: Maintain continuity of critical observations, and 
expand the temporal and spatial coverage of in situ 
and remotely sensed observations for Earth system 
variables that are beneficial for operational S2S 
prediction and for discovering and modeling new 
sources of S2S predictability.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
Maintain continuous satellite measurement records 
of vertical profiles of atmospheric temperature and 
humidity without gaps in the data collection, and with 
increasing vertical resolution and accuracy. 
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
Optimize and advance observations of clouds, 
precipitation, wind profiles and mesoscale storm and 
boundary layer structure and evolution. In particular, 
higher resolution observations of these quantities are 
needed for developing and advancing cloud-permitting 
components of future S2S forecast systems.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Maintain and advance satellite and other observational 
capabilities (e.g., radars, drifters, and gliders) to provide 
continuity and better spatial coverage, resolution, 
and quality of key surface ocean observations (SSH, 
SST, and winds), particularly near the coasts, where 
predictions of oceanic conditions are of the greatest 
societal importance in their own right.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

273
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Maintain and expand the network of in situ instruments 
providing routine real-time measurements of sub-
surface ocean properties, such as temperature, salinity, 
and currents, with increasing resolutions and accuracy. 
Appropriate platforms for these instruments will include 
arrays of moored buoys (especially in the tropics), 
AUVs, marine mammals, and profiling floats.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
¡
Develop accurate and timely year-round sea ice 
thickness measurements; if from remote sensing of sea 
ice freeboard, simultaneous snow depth measurements 
are needed to translate the observation of freeboard 
into sea ice thickness.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
Expand in situ measurements of precipitation, 
snow depth, soil moisture, and land-surface 
fluxes, and improve and/or better exploit remotely 
sensed soil moisture, snow water equivalent, and 
evapotranspiration measurements.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
Continue to invest in observations (both in situ and 
remotely sensed) that are important for informing fluxes 
between the component interfaces, including but not 
limited to land surface observations of temperature, 
moisture, and snow depth; marine surface observations 
from tropical moored buoys; ocean observations of 
near-surface currents, temperature, salinity, ocean heat 
content, mixed-layer depth, and sea ice conditions.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
Apply autonomous and other new observing 
technologies to expand the spatial and temporal 
coverage of observation networks, and support 
the continued development of these observational 
methodologies.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
F: Determine priorities for observational systems 
and networks by developing and implementing 
observing system simulation experiments, observing 
system experiments, and other sensitivity studies 
using S2S forecast systems. 
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
G: Invest in research that advances the development 
of strongly coupled data assimilation and quantifies 
the impact of such advances on operational S2S 
forecast systems.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
Continue to test and develop weakly coupled systems 
as operationally viable systems and as benchmarks for 
strongly coupled implementations.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Further develop and evaluate hybrid assimilation 
methods, multiscale- and coupled-covariance update 
algorithms, non-Gaussian nonlinear assimilation, and 
rigorous reduced-order stochastic modeling.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

274
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Optimize the use of observations collected for the 
ocean, land surface, and sea ice components, in part 
through coupled-covariances and mutual information 
algorithms, and through autonomous adaptive sampling 
and observation targeting schemes.
4, 2, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
Further develop the joint estimation of coupled states 
and parameters, as well as quantitative methods that 
discriminate among, and learn, parameterizations.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Develop methods and systems to fully utilize all relevant 
satellite and in situ atmospheric information, especially 
for cloudy and precipitating conditions.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
Foster interactions among the growing number of 
science and engineering communities involved in data 
assimilation, Bayesian inference, and uncertainty 
quantification.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
H: Accelerate research to improve parameterization 
of unresolved (e.g., subgrid scale) processes, 
both within S2S system submodels and holistically 
across models, to better represent coupling in the 
Earth system.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
¡
Foster long-term collaborations among scientists 
across academia, and research and operational 
modeling centers, and across ocean, sea ice, land and 
atmospheric observation and modeling communities, 
to identify root causes of error in parameterization 
schemes, to correct these errors, and to develop, 
test and optimize new (especially scale-aware or 
independent) parameterization schemes in a holistic 
manner.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
Continue to investigate the potential for reducing 
model errors through increases in horizontal and 
vertical resolutions in the atmosphere and other model 
components, ideally in a coupled model framework (see 
also Recommendation L).
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
Encourage field campaigns targeted at increasing 
knowledge of processes that are poorly understood 
or poorly represented in S2S models, including 
tropical convection, ocean mixing, polar sea-ice and 
stratospheric processes, and coupling among different 
Earth system components (e.g., air-sea-ice-wave-land; 
troposphere-stratosphere; dynamics-biogeochemistry). 
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
¡
Develop high-resolution (or multi-resolution) modeling 
systems (e.g., that permit atmospheric deep convection 
and non-hydrostatic ocean processes) to advance 
process understanding and promote the development 
of high-resolution operational prototypes (see also 
Recommendation I). 
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

275
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
I: Pursue next-generation ocean, sea ice, wave, 
biogeochemistry, and land surface/hydrologic as 
well as atmospheric model capability in fully coupled 
Earth system models used in S2S forecast systems.
4, 2, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
Build a robust research program to explore potential 
benefits (to S2S predictive skill and to forecast users) 
from adding more advanced Earth system components 
in forecast systems.
4, 2, 3
¡
¡
Initiate new efficient partnerships between academics 
and operational centers to create the next generation 
model components that can be easily integrated in 
coupled S2S Earth system models.
4, 2, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
Support and expand model coupling frameworks to link 
ocean/atmosphere/land/wave/ice models interoperably 
for rapidly and easily exchanging flux and variable 
information.
4, 2, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
Develop a strategy to transition very high resolution 
(eddy/cloud-resolving) atmosphere-ocean-land-sea 
ice coupled models to operations, including strategies 
for new parameterization schemes, data assimilation 
procedures, and multi-model ensembles (MME).
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
J: Pursue feature-based verification techniques to 
more readily capture limited predictability at S2S 
timescales as part of a larger effort to improve S2S 
forecast verification.
2, 1, 3
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
Investigate methodologies for ensemble feature 
verification including two-step processes linking 
features to critical user criterion.
2, 1
¡
¡
¡
Pursue verification methodologies for rare and extreme 
events at S2S timescales, especially those related to 
multi-model ensemble predictions.
3, 1, 2
¡
¡
Consider the benefits of producing more frequent 
reanalyses using coupled S2S forecast systems in 
order for the initial conditions of retrospective forecasts 
to be more consistent with the real time forecasts, as 
well as for the purposes of predictability studies.
2, 1
¡
¡
¡
K: Explore systematically the impact of various S2S 
forecast system design elements on S2S forecast 
skill. This includes examining the value of model 
diversity, as well as the impact of various selections 
and combinations of model resolution, number of 
ensemble perturbations, length of lead, averaging 
period, length of retrospective forecasts, and options 
for coupled sub-models.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

276
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Design a coordinated program to assess the costs 
and benefits of including additional processes in 
S2S systems, and relate those to benefits from other 
investments, for example in higher resolution. In doing 
so, take advantage of the opportunity to leverage 
experience and codes from the climate modeling 
community. 
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Encourage systematic studies of the costs and benefits 
of increasing the vertical and horizontal resolution of 
S2S models.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
Evaluate calibration methods and ascertain whether 
some methods offer clear advantage over others for 
certain applications, as part of studies of the optimum 
configurations of S2S models.
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
Explore systematically how many unique models in a 
multi-model ensemble are required to predict useful 
S2S parameters, and whether those models require 
unique data assimilation, physical parameterizations, 
or atmosphere, ocean, land, and ice components (see 
also Recommendation L).
2, 3, 4
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
Chapter 6
L: Accelerate efforts to carefully design and create 
robust operational multi-model ensemble S2S 
forecast systems. 
2, 3
¡
¡
¡
Use test beds and interagency and international 
collaborations where feasible to systematically explore 
the impact of various S2S forecast system design 
elements on S2S forecast skill, in particular the 
question how many unique models in a multi-model 
ensemble are required to predict operationally useful 
S2S parameters (see also Recommendation K).
2, 3
¡
¡
Assess realistically the available operational resources 
and centers that are able to contribute operationally 
rigorous prediction systems.
2, 3
¡
¡
M: Provide mechanisms for research and operations 
communities to collaborate, and aid in transitioning 
components and parameterizations from the 
research community into operational centers, by 
increasing researcher access to operational or 
operational mirror systems. 
2, 1, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
Increase opportunities for S2S researchers to 
participate in operational centers.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
Enhance interactions with the international community, 
e.g., the S2S Project and APCC, and with the WMO 
Lead Centers.
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
¡
Provide better access in the near-term to archived data 
from operational systems, potentially via test centers. 
2, 3, 4
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

277
Vision and Way Forward for S2S Earth System Prediction
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Develop, in the longer term, the ability for researchers 
to request reruns or do runs themselves of operational 
model forecasts. 
2, 3, 4
¡
Encourage effective partnerships with the private 
sector through ongoing engagement (see also 
Recommendation 3B).
2, 1
¡
¡
N: Develop a national capability to forecast the 
consequences of unanticipated forcing events. 
3, 1
¡
¡
Improve the coordination of government agencies and 
academia to enable rapid response to unanticipated 
events and to provide S2S forecasts using the 
unanticipated events as sources of predictability.
3, 1
¡
¡
Utilize emerging applications of Earth system models 
for long-range transport and dispersion processes (e.g., 
of aerosols).
3, 1
¡
Increase research on the generation, validation, 
and verification of forecasts for the aftermath of 
unanticipated forcing events.
3, 1
¡
__________¡
Chapter 7
O: Develop a national plan and investment strategy 
for S2S prediction to take better advantage of current 
hardware and software and to meet the challenges 
in the evolution of new hardware and software for 
all stages of the prediction process, including data 
assimilation, operation of high-resolution coupled 
Earth system models, and storage and management 
of results. 
Supporting
¡
__________¡
¡
¡
Redesign and recode S2S models and data assimilation 
systems so they will be capable of exploiting current 
and future massively parallel computational capabilities; 
this will require a significant and long-term investment 
in computer scientists, software engineers, applied 
mathematicians, and statistics researchers in 
partnership with the S2S researchers.
Supporting
¡
__________¡
¡
Increase efforts to achieve an integrated modeling 
environment using the opportunity of S2S and 
seamless prediction to bring operational agency groups 
(e.g., the Earth System Prediction Capability [ESPC]) 
and integrated modeling efforts (e.g., the Interagency 
Group on Integrative Modeling [IGIM]) together to 
create common software infrastructure and standards 
for component interfaces.
Supporting
¡
__________¡
¡
Provide larger and dedicated supercomputing and 
storage resources.
Supporting
¡
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

278
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Recommendation
Research 
Strategies
Basic 
Research
Applied 
Research / 
Opera-
tional
Benefits 
Likely in 
the Short 
Term
May Need 
New 
Initiative
Inter-
national
Collab. 
Critical
Resolve the emerging challenges around S2S big data, 
including development and deployment of integrated 
data-intensive cyberinfrastructure, utilization of efficient 
data-centric workflows, reduction of stored data 
volumes, and deployment of data serving and analysis 
capabilities for users outside the research/operational 
community.
Supporting
¡
__________¡
Further develop techniques for high volume data 
processing and in-line data volume reduction.
Supporting
¡
__________¡
¡
Continue to develop dynamic model cores that take the 
advantage of new computer technology.
Supporting
¡
__________¡
¡
P: Pursue a collection of actions to address 
workforce development that removes barriers that 
exist across the entire workforce pipeline and 
increases the diversity of scientists and engineers 
involved in advancing S2S forecasting and the 
component and coupled systems.
Supporting
¡
¡
¡
Gather quantitative information about workforce 
requirements and expertise base to support S2S 
modeling in order to more fully develop such a training 
program and workforce pipeline.
Supporting
¡
¡
Improve incentives and funding to support existing 
professionals and to attract new professionals to 
the S2S research community, especially in model 
development and improvement, and for those who 
bridge scientific disciplines and/or work at component 
interfaces.
Supporting
¡
¡
Expand interdisciplinary programs to train a more 
robust workforce to be employed in boundary 
organizations that work in between S2S model 
developers and those who use forecasts.
Supporting
¡
¡
Provide more graduate and postgraduate training 
opportunities, enhanced professional recognition 
and career advancement, and adequate incentives 
to encourage top students in relevant scientific and 
computer programming disciplines to choose S2S 
model development and research as a career.
Supporting
¡
¡
TABLE 8.1  Continued

279
Acronym List 
3D-Var	
Three-Dimensional Variational data assimilation
4D-EnVar 	
Four-Dimensional Ensemble-Variational data assimilation
4D-Var	
Four-Dimensional Variational data assimilation
ABL	
atmospheric boundary layer
ABOM 	
Australian Bureau of Meteorology
AeroNet 	
Aerosol Robotic Network 
AFWA	
Air Force Weather Agency
AIRS 	
Atmospheric Infrared Sounder
AMDAR	
Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay
AMMA	
African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis 
AMS	
American Meteorological Society
AMSR-E 	
advanced microwave scanning radiometer
AMSU 	
Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit 
AMV	
atmospheric motion vector
AMY	
Asian Monsoon Year
ANOVA	
analysis of variance 
AO	
Atlantic Oscillation
APCC	
APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) Climate Center
ASCAT	
Advanced Scatterometer
AUV	
autonomous underwater vehicle
BSISO	
Boreal Summer Intraseasonal Oscillation 
CBS	
Commission for Basic Systems 
CESM	
Community Earth System Model
CFS	
Climate Forecast System
CFSR 	
Climate Forecast System Reanalysis
CFSv2	
Climate Forecast System version 2
CIME	
Common Infrastructure for Modeling the Environment
CliPAS	
Climate Prediction and its Application to Society
CMC 	
Canadian Meteorological Centre
CMIP	
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
COAMPS 	
Coupled Ocean/Atmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System

280
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
CODAR	
Coastal Ocean Dynamics Applications Radar
CPC	
Climate Prediction Center 
CPT	
Climate Process Team
CPTEC 	
Brazil Center for Weather Forecasting and Climate Studies
CrIS	
Crosstrack Infrared Sounder
CYGNSS	
Cyclone Global Navigation Satellite System
DA	
data assimilation
DARPA 	
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DEMETER	
Development of a European Multi-model Ensemble system for 
seasonal to inTERannual predictions
DHS	
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
DO	
Dynamically Orthogonal
DOD	
U.S. Department of Defense
DOE	
U.S. Department of Energy
DTRA	
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
DWH	
Deepwater Horizon
DYNAMO	
Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation
ECMWF	
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
ECOSTRESS 	
ECOsystem Spaceborne Thermal Radiometer Experiment on Space 
Station
EnKF	
Ensemble Kalman Filter data assimilation
ENSEMBLES	
European Commission FP7 project
ENSO	
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
ERA Interim	
ECMWF Interim Reanalysis
ESM	
Earth system model
ESMF	
Earth System Modeling Framework
ESPC	
Earth System Modeling Capability
ET-OPSLS	
Expert Team on Operational Predictions from Subseasonal to 
Longer-time Scales 
EUMETSAT	
European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
FNMOC	
Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center
GATE 	
GARP (Global Atmosphere Research Program) Atlantic Tropical 
Experiment
GDP 	
Global Drifter Program
GEFS	
Global Ensemble Forecast System

281
Acronym List
GFDL	
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
GHG	
greenhouse gas
GLDAS	
Global Land Data Assimilation System 
GMM	
Gaussian Mixture Model
GOES	
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite
GPM	
Global Precipitation Mission 
GPS 	
global positioning system
GPS-RO	
Global Positioning System Radio Occulation 
GTH 	
Global Tropics Hazards and Benefits Assessment 
HadGEM3	
Hadley Centre Global Environment Model version 3
HPC	
high-performance computing
IASI 	
Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer
ICESat2	
Second generation Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite
IFS	
Integrated Forecast System 
IGIM	
Interagency Group on Integrative Modeling 
IMAAC	
Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center
IMD 	
India Meteorology Department
IOD	
Indian Ocean Dipole	
IOOS	
Integrated Ocean Observing System
IOP	
intensive observing period
IPCC	
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRI	
International Research Institute for Climate and Society 
ISI	
intraseasonal to interannual	
ISS	
International Space Station
ITCZ	
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone
JAXA	
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
JEDI	
Joint Effort for Data Assimilation Integration 
JMA 	
Japan Meteorological Agency
JPL	
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
KL 	
Karhunen-Loève
LANL	
Los Alamos National Laboratory
LDAS	
Land Data Assimilation System
LES	
Large-eddy simulation
LIS	
Land Information System 

282
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
LSM	
land-surface model
MCMC 	
Markov chain Monte Carlo 
MERIT	
Meningitis Environmental Research Information Technologies
MIZ	
Marginal Ice Zone
MJO	
Madden-Julian Oscillation
MME	
multi-model ensemble
MODIS	
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
MOS	
model output statistics
MOSAiC	
Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
MPI	
Message Passing Interface 
MPLNet 	
Micro-Pulse Lidar Network
NAM	
Northern Annular Mode
NAO	
North Atlantic Oscillation
NARAC	
National Atmospheric Release Advisory Center
NASA	
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASCar	
Northern Arabian Sea Circulation—autonomous research
NAVGEM 	
NAVy Global Environmental Model
NAVO	
Naval Oceanographic Office
NCAR	
National Center for Atmospheric Research
NCEP 	
National Centers for Environmental Prediction
NEMO 	
Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean
NEPTUNE	
Navy Environmental Prediction sysTem Utilizing the NUMA corE 
NGGPS	
Next Generation Global Prediction System 
NISAC 	
National Infrastructure Simulation and Analysis Center 
NMME	
North American Multi-Model Ensemble
NOAA	
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NRL	
Naval Research Laboratory
NSF	
National Science Foundation
NUMA	
Nonhydrostatic Unified Model of the Atmosphere DG core 
NVM 	
non-volatile memory
NWP	
numerical weather prediction
NWS	
U.S. National Weather Service
OAR	
Office of Oceanic & Atmospheric Research
OLR	
outgoing longwave radiation
ONR	
Office of Naval Research
OOPS	
Object Oriented Programming System 

283
Acronym List
OpenMP	
Open Multi-Processing 
OSSE 	
Observing System Simulation Experiment
PCAST 	
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
PDE	
partial differential equation
PIM	
processor in memory
PinT 	
parallel in time 
PIO	
Parallel I/O
PNA	
Pacific North American teleconnection pattern
QBO	
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
R2O	
research to operations
RISA	
Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments Program
RMM	
Real-time Multivariate MJO index
RMSE 	
root mean square error
S2S	
subseasonal to seasonal 
SAON	
Sustaining Arctic Observing Network
SBIR 	
Small Business Innovation Research
SHEBA 	
Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic Ocean	
SMAP 	
Soil Moisture Active Passive
SMIP-2	
Seasonal Prediction Model Intercomparison Project 
SMOS	
Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity
SNOTEL	
Snowpack Telemetry
SOCRATES	
Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol Transport Experimental Study
SPERR 	
Scientific Partnerships Enabling Rapid Response
SPURS-2	
Salinity Processes in the Upper Ocean Regional Study 2 
SSD	
Solid State Devices
SSH	
sea surface height
SSM/I	
Special Sensor Microwave Imager
SST	
sea surface temperature
SSW	
sudden stratospheric warning
SWE	
snow water equivalent
SWOT	
Surface Water and Ocean Topography
TAMDAR	
Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting
TAO/TRITON	
Tropical Atmosphere Ocean/Triangle Trans-Ocean Buoy Network 
TCWB 	
Taiwan Central Weather Bureau

284
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
THORPEX	
The Observing system Research and Predictability Experiment 
TIGGE	
THORPEX Interactive Grand Global Ensemble 
TIROS	
Television Infrared Observation Satellite
TOGA COARE 	 Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere 
Response Experiment
TPOS	
Tropical Pacific Observing System 
TRMM	
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission
UKMO 	
United Kingdom Met Office
USDA	
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
USGCRP	
U.S. Global Change Research Program 
VAD	
Velocity Azimuth Display
VES	
Virtual Earth System
VOCALS-Rex	
VAMOS (Variability of the American Monsoon Systems) Ocean-Cloud-
Atmosphere-Land Study Regional Experiment
WCRP	
World Climate Research Programme 
WCS 	
World Climate Service
WERA	
WavE RAdar
WGNE	
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation 
WHO	
World Health Organization 
WMO 	
World Meteorological Organization
WWRP	
World Weather Research Programme
XBT 	
Expendable Bathythermograph
YMC	
Years of the Maritime Continent
YOPP	
Year of Polar Prediction
YOTC	
Year of Tropical Convection

285
References
Adcroft, A., R. Hallberg, J. P. Dunne, B. L. Samuels, J. A. Galt, C. H. Barker and D. Payton. 2010. Simulations of underwater plumes 
of dissolved oil in the Gulf of Mexico. Geophysical Research Letters 37. DOI: 10.1029/2010gl044689.
Ades, M. and P. J. van Leeuwen. 2015. The equivalent-weights particle filter in a high-dimensional system. Quarterly Journal 
of the Royal Meteorological Society 141(687):484-503. DOI: 10.1002/Qj.2370.
Ajayamohan, R. S., S. A. Rao, J. J. Luo and T. Yamagata. 2009. Influence of Indian Ocean Dipole on boreal summer intra­
seasonal oscillations in a coupled general circulation model. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 114. 
DOI: 10.1029/2008jd011096.
Alexander, M. A. 1992. Midlatitude Atmosphere Ocean Interaction during El Nino. Part 1: The North Pacific-Ocean. Journal 
of Climate 5(9):944-958. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1992)005<0944:Maiden>2.0.Co;2.
Alexander, M. A., C. Deser and M. S. Timlin. 1999. The reemergence of SST anomalies in the North Pacific Ocean. Journal of 
Climate 12(8):2419-2433. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<2419:Trosai>2.0.Co;2.
Allen, R. J. and C. S. Zender. 2010. Effects of continental-scale snow albedo anomalies on the wintertime Arctic oscillation. 
Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 115. DOI: 10.1029/2010jd014490.
Alspach, D. L. and H. W. Sorenson. 1972. Nonlinear Bayesian estimation using gaussian sum approximations. IEEE Transac-
tions on Automatic Control 17(4):439-448. DOI: 10.1109/Tac.1972.1100034.
Anderson, J. L. and S. L. Anderson. 1999. A Monte Carlo implementation of the nonlinear filtering problem to produce ensemble 
assimilations and forecasts. Monthly Weather Review 127(12):2741-2758. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1999)127<2741:Am-
ciot>2.0.Co;2.
Annan, J. D., J. C. Hargreaves, N. R. Edwards and R. Marsh. 2005. Parameter estimation in an intermediate complexity earth 
system model using an ensemble Kalman filter. Ocean Modelling 8(1-2):135-154. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2003.12.004.
Arakawa, A. and C. M. Wu. 2013. A unified representation of deep moist convection in numerical modeling of the atmo-
sphere. Part I. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 70(7):1977-1992. DOI: 10.1175/Jas-D-12-0330.1.
Arnold, C. P. and C. H. Dey. 1986. Observing-systems simulation experiments—past, present, and future. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society 67(6):687-695. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0477(1986)067<0687:Ossepp>2.0.Co;2.
Arteaga, A., O. Fuhrer and T. Hoefler. 2014. Designing Bit-Reproducible Portable High-Performance Applications. Presented 
at IEEE 28th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, Washington, DC.
ASCAC (Advanced Scientific Computing Advisory Committee). 2015. Exascale Computing Initiative. Washington, DC: US 
DOE.
Athanasiadis, P. J., A. Bellucci, L. Hermanson, A. A. Scaife, C. MacLachlan, A. Arribas, S. Materia, A. Borrelli and S. Gualdi. 2014. 
The representation of atmospheric blocking and the associated low-frequency variability in two seasonal prediction 
systems. Journal of Climate 27(24):9082-9100. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-14-00291.1.
Back, L. E. and C. S. Bretherton. 2009. On the relationship between SST gradients, boundary layer winds, and convergence 
over the tropical oceans. Journal of Climate 22(15):4182-4196. DOI: 10.1175/2009JCLI2392.1.
Bahr, A., J. J. Leonard and M. F. Fallon. 2009. Cooperative localization for autonomous underwater vehicles. International 
Journal of Robotics Research 28(6):714-728. DOI: 10.1177/0278364908100561.
Baker, A. H., D. M. Hammerling, M. N. L. H. Xu, J. M. Dennis, B. E. Eaton, J. Edwards, C. Hannay, S. A. Mickelson, R. B. Neale, D. 
Nychka, J. Shollenberger, J. Tribbia, M. Vertenstein and D. Williamson. 2015. A new ensemble-based consistency test 
for the Community Earth System Model (pyCECT v1.0). Geoscientific Model Development 8:2829-2840. DOI: 10.5194/
gmd-8-2829-2015.
Baker, W. E., R. Atlas, C. Cardinali, A. Clement, G. D. Emmitt, B. M. Gentry, R. M. Hardesty, E. Kallen, M. J. Kavaya, R. Langland, Z. Z. 
Ma, M. Masutani, W. McCarty, R. B. Pierce, Z. X. Pu, L. P. Riishojgaard, J. Ryan, S. Tucker, M. Weissmann and J. G. Yoe. 2014. 
Lidar-measured wind profiles: The missing link in the Global Observing System. Bulletin of the American Meteoro-
logical Society 95(4):543-564. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-12-00164.1.

286
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Baldwin, M. P. and T. J. Dunkerton. 2001. Stratospheric harbingers of anomalous weather regimes. Science 294(5542):581-
584. DOI: 10.1126/science.1063315.
Baldwin, M. P., D. B. Stephenson, D. W. J. Thompson, T. J. Dunkerton, A. J. Charlton and A. ONeill. 2003. Stratospheric memory 
and skill of extended-range weather forecasts. Science 301(5633):636-640. DOI: 10.1126/science.1087143.
Balmaseda, M. A., L. Ferranti, F. Molteni and T. N. Palmer. 2010. Impact of 2007 and 2008 Arctic ice anomalies on the atmo-
spheric circulation: Implications for long-range predictions. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 
136(652):1655-1664. DOI: 10.1002/Qj.661.
Balsamo, G., A. Agustì-Panareda, C. Albergel, A. Beljaars, S. Boussetta, E. Dutra, T. Komori, S. Lang, J. Muñoz-Sabater, F. 
­Pappenberger, P. d. Rosnay, I. Sandu, N. Wedi, A. Weisheimer, F. Wetterhall and E. Zsoter. 2014. Representing the Earth 
surfaces in the Integrated Forecasting System: Recent advances and future challenges. Special topic paper on surface 
processes presented at the 43rd ECMWF Scientific Advisory Committee. Reading, UK: European Centre for Medium 
Range Weather Forecasts.
Barnhart, K. R., I. Overeem and R. S. Anderson. 2014. The effect of changing sea ice on the physical vulnerability of Arctic 
coasts. Cryosphere 8(5):1777-1799. DOI: 10.5194/tc-8-1777-2014.
Barnston, A. G., S. H. Li, S. J. Mason, D. G. DeWitt, L. Goddard and X. F. Gong. 2010. Verification of the first 11 years of IRI’s ­seasonal 
climate forecasts. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 49(3):493-520. DOI: 10.1175/2009JAMC2325.1.
Bauer, P., G. Ohring, C. Kummerow and T. Auligne. 2011. Assimilating satellite observations of clouds and precipitation 
into NWP models. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 92(6):Es25-Es28. DOI: 10.1175/2011bams3182.1.
Beck, M. 2009. Grand Challenges for the Future for Environmental Modeling. White Paper NFS Award# 0630367, NSF’s 
Environmental Observatories Initiatives, Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia, 
Athens, Georgia 30602-2152, Aug. 2009.
Bell, M. J., M. J. Martin and N. K. Nichols. 2004. Assimilation of data into an ocean model with systematic errors near the 
equator. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 130(598):873-893. DOI: 10.1256/Qj.02.109.
Bellingham, J. G., and K. Rajan. 2007. Robotics in remote and hostile environments. Science 318(5853):1098-1102. DOI: 
10.1126/science.1146230.
Benedetti, A., P. Lopez, P. Bauer and E. Moreau. 2005. Experimental use of TRMM precipitation radar observations in 1D+4D-Var 
assimilation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 131(610):2473-2495. DOI: 10.1256/qj.04.89.
Benedict, J. J. and D. A. Randall. 2009. Structure of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in the superparameterized CAM. Journal 
of the Atmospheric Sciences 66(11):3277-3296. DOI: 10.1175/2009jas3030.1.
Bengtsson, T., C. Snyder and D. Nychka. 2003. Toward a nonlinear ensemble filter for high-dimensional systems. Journal of 
Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 108(D24). DOI: 10.1029/2002jd002900.
Bennett, A. F. 1992. Inverse Methods in Physical Oceanography. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Berner, J., F. J. Doblas-Reyes, T. N. Palmer, G. Shutts and A. Weisheimer. 2008. Impact of a quasi-stochastic cellular automaton 
backscatter scheme on the systematic error and seasonal prediction skill of a global climate model. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 366(1875):2561-2579. DOI: 
10.1098/rsta.2008.0033.
Berner, J., S. Y. Ha, J. P. Hacker, A. Fournier and C. Snyder. 2011. Model uncertainty in a mesoscale ensemble predic-
tion system: Stochastic versus multiphysics representations. Monthly Weather Review 139(6):1972-1995. DOI: 
10.1175/2010MWR3595.1.
Best, M. J., G. Abramowitz, H. R. Johnson, A. J. Pitman, G. Balsamo, A. Boone, M. Cuntz, B. Decharme, P. A. Dirmeyer, J. Dong, 
M. Ek, Z. Guo, V. Haverd, B. J. J. Van den Hurk, G. S. Nearing, B. Pak, C. Peters-Lidard, J. A. Santanello, L. Stevens and N. 
­Vuichard. 2015. The plumbing of land surface models: Benchmarking model performance. Journal of Hydrometeorol-
ogy 16(3):1425-1442. DOI: 10.1175/Jhm-D-14-0158.1.
Bishop, C. and M. Martin. 2012. Joint GODAE OceanView—WGNE workshop on Short- to Medium-range coupled prediction 
for the atmosphere-wave-sea-ice-ocean: Status, needs and challenges. Data Assimilation—Whitepaper. Retrieved 
August 21, 2015, from https://www.godae-oceanview.org/files/download.php?m=documents&f=130130121715-
CoupledDAWhitePaperv01November232012.doc.
Bitz, C. M., D. S. Battisti, R. E. Moritz and J. A. Beesley. 1996. Low-frequency variability in the arctic atmosphere, sea ice, and 
­upper-ocean climate system. Journal of Climate 9(2):394-408. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1996)009<0394:Lfvita>2.0.Co;2.

287
References
Bitz, C. M., P. R. Gent, R. A. Woodgate, M. M. Holland and R. Lindsay. 2006. The influence of sea ice on ocean heat uptake in 
response to increasing CO2. Journal of Climate 19(11):2437-2450. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli3756.1.
Bitz, C. M., J. K. Ridley, M. M. Holland and H. Cattle. 2012. 20th and 21st century Arctic Climate in Global Climate Models. In 
Arctic Climate Change: The ACSYS Decade and Beyond. P. Lemke and H.-W. Jacobi, eds. Dordrecht: Springer.
Blaise, S., R. Comblen, V. Legat, J. F. Remacle, E. Deleersnijder and J. Lambrechts. 2010. A discontinuous finite element 
­baroclinic marine model on unstructured prismatic meshes. Part I: space discretization. Ocean Dynamics 60(6):1371-
1393. DOI: 10.1007/s10236-010-0358-3.
Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, E., K. C. Armour, C. M. Bitz and E. DeWeaver. 2011a. Persistence and inherent predictability of 
Arctic sea ice in a GCM ensemble and observations. Journal of Climate 24(1):231-250. DOI: 10.1175/2010jcli3775.1.
Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, E., C. M. Bitz and M. M. Holland. 2011b. Influence of initial conditions and boundary forcing on 
predictability in the Arctic. Geophysical Research Letters 38:L18503. DOI: 10.1029/2011GL048807.
Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, E. and C. M. Bitz. 2014. Characteristics of arctic sea-ice thickness variability in GCMs. Journal of 
Climate 27(21):8244-8258. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-14-00345.1.
Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, E., R. Cullather, W. Wanqiu, J. Zhang and C. M. Bitz. 2015. Model skill and sensitivity to initial 
conditions in a sea-ice prediction system. Geophysical Research Letters (in review). 
Boas, A. B. V., O. T. Sato, A. Chaigneau and G. P. Castelao. 2015. The signature of mesoscale eddies on the air-sea turbulent 
heat fluxes in the South Atlantic Ocean. Geophysical Research Letters 42(6):1856-1862. DOI: 10.1002/2015GL063105.
Bocquet, M. 2012. An introduction to inverse modelling and parameter estimation for atmosphere and ocean sciences. 
Oxford Scholarship Online. DOI: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198723844.003.0020.
Bocquet, M. and P. Sakov. 2013. Joint state and parameter estimation with an iterative ensemble Kalman smoother. Non-
linear Processes in Geophysics 20(5):803-818. DOI: 10.5194/npg-20-803-2013.
Bocquet, M., C. A. Pires and L. Wu. 2010. Beyond Gaussian statistical modeling in geophysical data assimilation. Monthly 
Weather Review 138(8):2997-3023. DOI: 10.1175/2010MWR3164.1.
Bonan, G. B. 2008. Forests and climate change: Forcings, feedbacks, and the climate benefits of forests. Science 
320(5882):1444-1449. DOI: 10.1126/science.1155121.
Bonavita, M., M. Hamrud and L. Isaksen. 2015. EnKF and hybrid gain ensemble data assimilation. Part II: EnKF and hybrid 
gain results. Monthly Weather Review 143(12):4865-4882. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-15-0071.1.
Braman, L. M., M. K. van Aalst, S. J. Mason, P. Suarez, Y. Ait-Chellouche and A. Tall. 2013. Climate forecasts in disaster manage-
ment: Red Cross flood operations in West Africa, 2008. Disasters 37(1):144-164. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7717.2012.01297.x.
Brands, S., R. Manzanas, J. M. Gutierrez and J. Cohen. 2012. Seasonal predictability of wintertime precipitation in Europe 
using the snow advance index. Journal of Climate 25(12):4023-4028. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00083.1.
Brassington, G. B., M. J. Martin, H. L. Tolman, S. Akella, M. Balmeseda, C. R. S. Chambers, E. P. Chassignet, J. A. Cummings, Y. 
Drillet, P. A. E. M. Janssen, P. Laloyaux, D. Lea, A. Mehra, I. Mirouze, H. Ritchie, G. Samson, P. A. Sandery, G. C. Smith, M. 
Suarez and R. Todling. 2015. Progress and challenges in short- to medium-range coupled prediction. Journal of 
Operational Oceanography (in press). 
Breuer, N. E., C. W. Fraisse and V. E. Cabrera. 2010. The Cooperative Extension Service as a boundary organization for diffu-
sion of climate forecasts: A 5-year study. Journal of Extension 48(4). 
Broman, D., B. Rajagopalan and T. Hopson. 2014. Spatiotemporal variability and predictability of relative humidity over 
West African monsoon region. Journal of Climate 27(14):5346-5363. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-13-00414.1.
Brown, A., S. Milton, M. Cullen, B. Golding, J. Mitchell and A. Shelly. 2012. Unified modeling and prediction of weather 
and climate: A 25-year journey. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93(12):1865-1877. DOI: 10.1175/
Bams-D-12-00018.1.
Brown, B. G., J. L. Mahoney, C. A. Davis, R. Bullock and C. K. Mueller. 2002. Improved Approaches for Measuring the Quality 
of Convective Weather Forecasts. Presented at 16th Conference on Probability and Statistics in the Atmospheric 
Sciences, Orlando, FL.
Brown, B. G., R. Bullock, C. A. Davis, J. H. Gotway, M. Chapman, A. Takacs, E. Gilleland, J. L. Mahoney and K. Manning. 2004. 
New Verification Approaches for Convective Weather Forecasts. Presented at 11th Conference on Aviation, Range, 
and Aerospace, Hyannis, MA.

288
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Brunet, G., M. Shapiro, B. Hoskins, M. Moncrieff, R. Dole, G. N. Kiladis, B. Kirtman, A. Lorenc, B. Mills, R. Morss, S. ­Polavarapu, 
D. Rogers, J. Schaake and J. Shukla. 2010. Collaboration of the weather and climate communities to advance 
subseasonal-to-seasonal prediction. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(10):1397-1406. DOI: 
10.1175/2010bams3013.1.
Bryan, F. O., R. Tomas, J. M. Dennis, D. B. Chelton, N. G. Loeb and J. L. McClean. 2010. Frontal scale air-sea interaction in high-
resolution coupled climate models. Journal of Climate 23(23):6277-6291. DOI: 10.1175/2010jcli3665.1.
Bryan, K. 1969. A numerical method for the study of the circulation of the world ocean. Journal of Computational Physics 
4(3):347-376. DOI: 10.1006/jcph.1997.5699.
Bryan, K. and M. D. Cox. 1968. A nonlinear model of an ocean driven by wind and differential heating. I. Description 
of 3-dimensional velocity and density fields. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 25(6):945-978. DOI: Doi 
10.1175/1520-0469(1968)025<0945:Anmoao>2.0.Co;2.
Buehner, M., J. Morneau, and C. Charette. 2013. Four-dimensional ensemble-variational data assimilation for global de-
terministic weather prediction. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics 20(5):669-682. DOI: 10.5194/npg-20-669-2013.
Buontempo, C., C. D. Hewitt, F. J. Doblas-Reyes and S. Dessai. 2014. Climate service development, delivery and use in Europe 
at monthly to inter-annual timescales. Climate Risk Management 6:1-5. DOI: 10.1016/j.crm.2014.10.002.
Bushuk, M. and D. Giannakis. 2015. Sea-ice reemergence in a model hierarchy. Geophysical Research Letters 42(13):5337-
5345. DOI: 10.1002/2015GL063972.
Byun, K. and M. Choi. 2014. Uncertainty of snow water equivalent retrieved from AMSR-E brightness temperature in 
northeast Asia. Hydrological Processes 28(7):3173-3184. DOI: 10.1002/Hyp.9846.
Cai, W. J., A. Santoso, G. J. Wang, S. W. Yeh, S. I. An, K. M. Cobb, M. Collins, E. Guilyardi, F. F. Jin, J. S. Kug, M. Lengaigne, M. J. 
McPhaden, K. Takahashi, A. Timmermann, G. Vecchi, M. Watanabe and L. X. Wu. 2015. ENSO and greenhouse warming. 
Nature Climate Change 5(9):849-859. DOI: 10.1038/Nclimate2743.
Cane, M. A., S. E. Zebiak and S. C. Dolan. 1986. Experimental forecasts of El-Niño. Nature 321(6073):827-832. DOI: 
10.1038/321827a0.
Capotondi, A., A. T. Wittenberg, M. Newman, E. D. Lorenzo, J.-Y. Yu, P. Braconnot, J. Cole, B. Dewitte, B. Giese, E. Guilyardi, F.-F. 
Jin, K. Karnauskas, B. Kirtman, T. Lee, N. Schneider, Y. Xue and S.-W. Yeh. 2014. Understanding ENSO diversity. Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society (e-view). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-13-00117.1.
Cardinali, C. 2009. Monitoring the observation impact on the short-range forecast. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteo-
rological Society 135(638):239-250. DOI: 10.1002/qj.366.
Cassou, C. 2008. Intraseasonal interaction between the Madden-Julian Oscillation and the North Atlantic Oscillation. Nature 
455(7212):523-527. DOI: 10.1038/Nature07286.
Challinor, A. J., J. M. Slingo, T. R. Wheeler and F. J. Doblas-Reyes. 2005. Probabilistic simulations of crop yield over western 
India using the DEMETER seasonal hindcast ensembles. Tellus Series a-Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 
57(3):498-512. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0870.2005.00126.x.
Chandra, R., L. Dagum, D. Kohr, D. Maydan, J. McDonald and R. Menon. 2001. Parallel Programming in OpenMP. San Diego: 
Academic Press.
Charrassin, J. B., M. Hindell, S. R. Rintoul, F. Roquet, S. Sokolov, M. Biuw, D. Costa, L. Boehme, P. Lovell, R. Coleman, R. Timmermann, 
A. Meijers, M. Meredith, Y. H. Park, F. Bailleul, M. Goebel, Y. Tremblay, C. A. Bost, C. R. McMahon, I. C. Field, M. A. Fedak, and C. 
Guinet. 2008. Southern Ocean frontal structure and sea-ice formation rates revealed by elephant seals. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105(33):11634-11639. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0800790105.
Chassignet, E. P. and J. Verron. 2006. Ocean Weather Forecasting: An Integrated View of Oceanography. Dordrecht: Springer.
Chassignet, E. P., J. G. Richman, E. J. Metzger, X. Xu, P. G. Hogan, B. K. Arbic and A. J. Wallcraft. 2014. HYCOM high resolution 
eddying simulations. CLIVAR Exchanges 19(2):22-25. 
Chelton, D. B. and S. P. Xie. 2010. Coupled ocean-atmosphere interaction at oceanic mesoscales. Oceanography 23(4):52-69. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2010.05.
Chelton, D. B., M. G. Schlax, M. H. Freilich and R. F. Milliff. 2004. Satellite measurements reveal persistent small-scale features 
in ocean winds. Science 303(5660):978-983. DOI: 10.1126/science.1091901.

289
References
Chen, C. S., H. S. Huang, R. C. Beardsley, Q. C. Xu, R. Limeburner, G. W. Cowles, Y. F. Sun, J. H. Qi and H. C. Lin. 2011. Tidal ­dynamics 
in the Gulf of Maine and New England Shelf: An application of FVCOM. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 
116. DOI: 10.1029/2011jc007054.
Chen, S. Y. S., J. F. Price, W. Zhao, M. A. Donelan and E. J. Walsh. 2007. The CBLAST-hurricane program and the next-generation 
fully coupled atmosphere-wave-ocean. Models for hurricane research and prediction. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 88(3):311-317. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-88-3-311.
Chen, S. Y. S., W. Zhao, M. A. Donelan and H. L. Tolman. 2013. Directional wind-wave coupling in fully coupled atmosphere-
wave-ocean models: Results from CBLAST-Hurricane. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 70(10):3198-3215. DOI: 
10.1175/Jas-D-12-0157.1.
Chevallier, M. and D. Salas-Melia. 2012. The role of sea ice thickness distribution in the arctic sea ice potential predictability: 
A diagnostic approach with a coupled GCM. Journal of Climate 25(8):3025-3038. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-11-00209.1.
Chevallier, M., D. S. Y. Melia, A. Voldoire, M. Deque and G. Garric. 2013. Seasonal forecasts of the pan-arctic sea ice extent 
using a GCM-based seasonal prediction system. Journal of Climate 26(16):6092-6104. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00612.1.
Chowdary, J. S., S. P. Xie, J. J. Luo, J. Hafner, S. Behera, Y. Masumoto and T. Yamagata. 2011. Predictability of Northwest Pacific 
climate during summer and the role of the tropical Indian Ocean. Climate Dynamics 36(3-4):607-621. DOI: 10.1007/
s00382-009-0686-5.
Church, J. and N. Gandal. 1992. Network effects, software provision, and standardization. Journal of Industrial Economics 
40(1):85-103. DOI: 10.2307/2950628.
Clayton, A. M., A. C. Lorenc and D. M. Barker. 2013. Operational implementation of a hybrid ensemble/4D-Var global data 
assimilation system at the Met Office. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 139(675):1445-1461. 
DOI: 10.1002/qj.2054.
CLIVAR Exchanges. 2014. Special Issue on High Resolution Ocean Climate Modeling. 19(2). 
Cohen, J., J. A. Screen, J. C. Furtado, M. Barlow, D. Whittleston, D. Coumou, J. Francis, K. Dethloff, D. Entekhabi, J. Overland 
and J. Jones. 2014. Recent Arctic amplification and extreme mid-latitude weather. Nature Geoscience 7(9):627-637. 
DOI: 10.1038/NGEO2234.
Compo, G. P., J. S. Whitaker, P. D. Sardeshmukh, N. Matsui, R. J. Allan, X. Yin, B. E. Gleason, R. S. Vose, G. Rutledge, P. Bessemoulin, 
S. Bronnimann, M. Brunet, R. I. Crouthamel, A. N. Grant, P. Y. Groisman, P. D. Jones, M. C. Kruk, A. C. Kruger, G. J. Marshall, 
M. Maugeri, H. Y. Mok, O. Nordli, T. F. Ross, R. M. Trigo, X. L. Wang, S. D. Woodruff and S. J. Worley. 2011. The Twentieth 
Century Reanalysis Project. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 137(654):1-28. DOI: 10.1002/qj.776.
Cornuelle, B., J. Hansen, B. Kirtman, S. Sandgathe and S. Warren. 2014. Issues and challenges with using ensemble-based 
prediction to probe the weather-climate interface. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95(11):213-215. 
DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00235.1.
Cotter, C. J. and J. Shipton. 2012. Mixed finite elements for numerical weather prediction. Journal of Computational Physics 
231(21):7076-7091. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2012.05.020.
Coughlan de Perez, E. and S. J. Mason. 2014. Climate information for humanitarian agencies: Some basic principles. Earth 
Perspectives 1(11). DOI: 10.1186/2194-6434-1-11.
Courtier, P. and O. Talagrand. 1987. Variational assimilation of meteorological observations with the adjoint vorticity 
­equation. 2. Numerical results. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 113(478):1329-1347. DOI: 
10.1256/Smsqj.47812.
Courtier, P., J. N. Thepaut and A. Hollingsworth. 1994. A strategy for operational implementation of 4D-Var, using an 
­incremental approach. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 120(519):1367-1387. DOI: 10.1002/
qj.49712051912.
Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas. 2012. Elements of Information Theory. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Crueger, T., B. Stevens and R. Brokopf. 2013. The Madden-Julian Oscillation in ECHAM6 and the introduction of an objective 
MJO metric. Journal of Climate 26(10):3241-3257. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00413.1.
Cummings, J., L. Bertino, P. Brasseur, I. Fukumori, M. Kamachi, M. J. Martin, K. Mogensen, P. Oke, C. E. Testut, J. Verron and A. 
Weaver. 2009. Ocean data assimilation systems for GODAE. Oceanography 22(3):96-109. 
Cummings, J. A. 2011. Ocean data quality control. In Operational Oceanography in the 21st Century. A. Schiller and G. B. 
Brassington, eds. Dordrecht: Springer.

290
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Curtin, T. B. and J. G. Bellingham. 2009. Progress toward autonomous ocean sampling networks. Deep-Sea Research Part II-
Topical Studies in Oceanography 56(3-5):62-67. DOI: 10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.09.005.
Curtin, T. B., J. G. Bellingham, J. Catipovic and D. Webb. 1993. Autonomous oceanographic sampling networks. ­Oceanography 
6(3):86-94. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.1993.03.
Daley, R. 1991. Atmospheric Data Analysis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, R. E., N. E. Leonard and D. M. Fratantoni. 2009. Routing strategies for underwater gliders. Deep-Sea Research Part II-
Topical Studies in Oceanography 56(3-5):173-187. DOI: 10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.08.005.
Day, J. J., S. Tietsche and E. Hawkins. 2014. Pan-Arctic and regional sea ice predictability: Initialization month dependence. 
Journal of Climate 27(12):4371-4390. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-13-00614.1.
de Rosnay, P., M. Drusch, D. Vasiljevic, G. Balsamo, C. Albergel and L. Isaksen. 2013. A simplified Extended Kalman Filter 
for the global operational soil moisture analysis at ECMWF. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 
139(674):1199-1213. DOI: 10.1002/qj.2023.
Dee, D. P. and A. M. Da Silva. 2003. The choice of variable for atmospheric moisture analysis. Monthly Weather Review 
131(1):155-171. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2003)131<0155:Tcovfa>2.0.Co;2.
Dee, D. P., S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi, U. Andrae, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. 
Bechtold, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. van de Berg, J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes, A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, 
S. B. Healy, H. Hersbach, E. V. Holm, L. Isaksen, P. Kallberg, M. Kohler, M. Matricardi, A. P. McNally, B. M. Monge-Sanz, J. J. 
Morcrette, B. K. Park, C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato, J. N. Thepaut and F. Vitart. 2011. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: 
Configuration and performance of the data assimilation system. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological 
Society 137(656):553-597. DOI: 10.1002/qj.828.
Dee, D. P., M. Balmaseda, G. Balsam, R. Engelen, A. J. Simmons and J. N. Thepaut. 2014. Toward a consistent reanalysis of the 
climate system. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95(8):1235-1248. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00043.1.
Deleersnijder, E., V. Legat and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2010. Multi-scale modelling of coastal, shelf and global ocean dynamics. 
Ocean Dynamics 60(6):1357-1359. DOI: 10.1007/s10236-010-0363-6.
Delworth, T. L., A. J. Broccoli, A. Rosati, R. J. Stouffer, V. Balaji, J. A. Beesley, W. F. Cooke, K. W. Dixon, J. Dunne, K. A. Dunne, J. W. 
Durachta, K. L. Findell, P. Ginoux, A. Gnanadesikan, C. T. Gordon, S. M. Griffies, R. Gudgel, M. J. Harrison, I. M. Held, R. S. 
Hemler, L. W. Horowitz, S. A. Klein, T. R. Knutson, P. J. Kushner, A. R. Langenhorst, H. C. Lee, S. J. Lin, J. Lu, S. L. Malyshev, 
P. C. D. Milly, V. Ramaswamy, J. Russell, M. D. Schwarzkopf, E. Shevliakova, J. J. Sirutis, M. J. Spelman, W. F. Stern, M. Winton, 
A. T. Wittenberg, B. Wyman, F. Zeng and R. Zhang. 2006. GFDL’s CM2 global coupled climate models. Part I: Formulation 
and simulation characteristics. Journal of Climate 19(5):643-674. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli3629.1.
DeMey, P. 1997. Data assimilation at the oceanic mesoscale: A review. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan 
75(1B):415-427. 
DeMott, C. A., C. Stan, D. A. Randall, J. L. Kinter and M. Khairoutdinov. 2011. The Asian monsoon in the superparameterized 
CCSM and its relationship to tropical wave activity. Journal of Climate 24(19):5134-5156. DOI: 10.1175/2011JCLI4202.1.
Dettinger, M. D. 2013. Atmospheric rivers as drought busters on the US West Coast. Journal of Hydrometeorology 
14(6):1721-1732. DOI: 10.1175/Jhm-D-13-02.1.
Dettinger, M. D., F. M. Ralph, T. Das, P. J. Neiman and D. R. Cayan. 2011. Atmospheric rivers, floods and the water resources of 
California. Water 3(2):445-478. DOI: 10.3390/W3020445.
Dewitt, D. G. 2005. Retrospective forecasts of interannual sea surface temperature anomalies from 1982 to present using 
a directly coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation model. Monthly Weather Review 133(10):2972-2995. DOI: 
10.1175/Mwr3016.1.
Dickey, T. D. 2003. Emerging ocean observations for interdisciplinary data assimilation systems. Journal of Marine Systems 
40:5-48. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-7963(03)00011-3.
Dirmeyer, P. A., Y. Jin, B. Singh and X. Q. Yan. 2013. Trends in land-atmosphere interactions from CMIP5 simulations. Journal 
of Hydrometeorology 14(3):829-849. DOI: 10.1175/Jhm-D-12-0107.1.
Dirmeyer, P. A., Z. Y. Wang, M. J. Mbuh and H. E. Norton. 2014. Intensified land surface control on boundary layer growth in 
a changing climate. Geophysical Research Letters 41(4):1290-1294. DOI: 10.1002/2013gl058826.
Doblas-Reyes, F. J., M. Deque and J. P. Piedelievre. 2000. Multi-model spread and probabilistic seasonal forecasts in PROVOST. 
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 126(567):2069-2087. DOI: 10.1256/Smsqj.56704.

291
References
Doblas-Reyes, F. J., R. Hagedorn and T. N. Palmer. 2005. The rationale behind the success of multi-model ensembles in 
seasonal forecasting—II. Calibration and combination. Tellus Series A—Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 
57(3):234-252. DOI: DOI 10.1111/j.1600-0870.2005.00104.x.
Doblas-Reyes, F. J., R. Hagedorn, T. N. Palmer and J. J. Morcrette. 2006. Impact of increasing greenhouse gas concentrations 
in seasonal ensemble forecasts. Geophysical Research Letters 33(7). DOI: 10.1029/2005gl025061.
Doblas-Reyes, F. J., A. Weisheimer, M. Deque, N. Keenlyside, M. McVean, J. M. Murphy, P. Rogel, D. Smith and T. N. Palmer. 2009. 
Addressing model uncertainty in seasonal and annual dynamical ensemble forecasts. Quarterly Journal of the Royal 
Meteorological Society 135(643):1538-1559. DOI: 10.1002/qj.464.
Doblas-Reyes, F. J., J. Garcia-Serrano, F. Lienert, A. P. Biescas and L. R. L. Rodrigues. 2013. Seasonal climate predictability and 
forecasting: Status and prospects. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews—Climate Change 4(4):245-268. DOI: 10.1002/
wcc.217.
DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2008. Report on the DOE/BERAC Workshop. Identifying Outstanding Grand Challenges 
in Climate Change Research: Guiding DOE’s Strategic Planning. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.
Doucet, A., N. De Freitas and N. Gordon. 2001. Sequential Monte-Carlo Methods in Practice. Berlin: Springer.
Dutton, J. A. 2002. Opportunities and priorities in a new era for weather and climate services. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 83(9):1303-1311. 
Dutton, J. A. 2010. Weather, Climate, and the Energy Industry: A Story of Sunlight—Some Old, Some New. In Management 
of Weather and Climate Risk in the Energy Industry. NATO Science for Peace and Security Series. A. Troccoli, ed. 
Dordrecht: Springer.
Dutton, J. A., R. P. James and J. D. Ross. 2013. Calibration and combination of dynamical seasonal forecasts to enhance 
the value of predicted probabilities for managing risk. Climate Dynamics 40(11-12):3089-3105. DOI: 10.1007/
s00382-013-1764-2.
Dutton, J. A., R. P. James and J. D. Ross. 2015. Bridging the Gap Between Seasonal Forecasts and Decisions to Act. Presented 
at American Meteorological Society, Phoenix, AZ.
Ebita, A., S. Kobayashi, Y. Ota, M. Moriya, R. Kumabe, K. Onogi, Y. Harada, S. Yasui, K. Miyaoka, K. Takahashi, H. Kamahori, C. 
Kobayashi, H. Endo, M. Soma, Y. Oikawa and T. Ishimizu. 2011. The Japanese 55-year reanalysis “JRA-55”: An interim 
report. Sola 7:149-152. DOI: 10.2151/sola.2011-038.
Ek, M. B. and A. A. M. Holtslag. 2004. Influence of soil moisture on boundary layer cloud development. Journal of Hydro­
meteorology 5(1):86-99. DOI: 10.1175/1525-7541(2004)005<0086:Iosmob>2.0.Co;2.
Entekhabi, D., E. G. Njoku, P. E. O’Neill, K. H. Kellogg, W. T. Crow, W. N. Edelstein, J. K. Entin, S. D. Goodman, T. J. Jackson, J. ­Johnson, 
J. Kimball, J. R. Piepmeier, R. D. Koster, N. Martin, K. C. McDonald, M. Moghaddam, S. Moran, R. Reichle, J. C. Shi, M. W. 
Spencer, S. W. Thurman, L. Tsang and J. Van Zyl. 2010. The soil moisture active passive (SMAP) mission. Proceedings 
of the IEEE 98(5):704-716. DOI: Doi 10.1109/Jproc.2010.2043918.
Errico, R. M., P. Bauer and J. F. Mahfouf. 2007. Issues regarding the assimilation of cloud and precipitation data. Journal of 
the Atmospheric Sciences 64(11):3785-3798. DOI: 10.1175/2006jas2044.1.
Evensen, G. 1994. Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model using Monte-Carlo methods 
to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 99(C5):10143-10162. DOI: 10.1029/94jc00572.
Evensen, G. 2004. Sampling strategies and square root analysis schemes for the EnKF. Ocean Dynamics 54(6):539-560. DOI: 
10.1007/s10236-004-0099-2.
Evensen, G. 2009. Data assimilation: The ensemble Kalman filter. Dordrecht: Springer Science & Business Media.
Fairall, C., J. Cummings, T. Jung, N. Gordon, P. Bauer, D. Bromwich, G. Smith, F. Doblas-Reyes, K. Hines, M. Holland, T. Iversen, S. 
Klebe, P. Lemke, B. Mills, P. Nurmi, I. Renfrew, G. Svensson and M. Tolstykh. 2013. Observational Aspects of the WWRP 
Polar Prediction Project. Presented at Arctic Observing Summit, April 30-May 2, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Fairall, C. W., E. F. Bradley, J. E. Hare, A. A. Grachev and J. B. Edson. 2003. Bulk parameterization of air-sea fluxes: Updates and 
verification for the COARE algorithm. Journal of Climate 16(4):571-591. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2003)016<0571:Bp
oasf>2.0.Co;2.
Farneti, R., T. L. Delworth, A. J. Rosati, S. M. Griffies and F. R. Zeng. 2010. The role of mesoscale eddies in the rectifica-
tion of the Southern Ocean response to climate change. Journal of Physical Oceanography 40(7):1539-1557. DOI: 
10.1175/2010jpo4353.1.

292
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Fennessy, M. J. and J. Shukla. 1999. Impact of initial soil wetness on seasonal atmospheric prediction. Journal of Climate 
12(11):3167-3180. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<3167:Ioiswo>2.0.Co;2.
Ferranti, L., T. N. Palmer, F. Molteni and E. Klinker. 1990. Tropical extratropical interaction associated with the 30-60 day oscil-
lation and its impact on medium and extended range prediction. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 47(18):2177-
2199. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0469(1990)047<2177:Teiawt>2.0.Co;2.
Fiorelli, E., N. E. Leonard, P. Bhatta, D. A. Paley, R. Bachmayer and D. M. Fratantoni. 2006. Multi-AUV control and adaptive 
sampling in Monterey Bay. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering 31(4):935-948. DOI: 10.1109/Joe.2006.880429.
Fletcher, C. G., P. J. Kushner and J. Cohen. 2007. Stratospheric control of the extratropical circulation response to surface 
forcing. Geophysical Research Letters 34(21). DOI: 10.1029/2007gl031626.
Fox-Kemper, B., R. Ferrari and R. Hallberg. 2008. Parameterization of mixed layer eddies. Part I: Theory and diagnosis. Journal 
of Physical Oceanography 38(6):1145-1165. DOI: 10.1175/2007jpo3792.1.
Fox-Kemper, B., G. Danabasoglu, R. Ferrari, S. M. Griffies, R. W. Hallberg, M. M. Holland, M. E. Maltrud, S. Peacock and B. L. 
Samuels. 2011. Parameterization of mixed layer eddies. Part III: Implementation and impact in global ocean climate 
simulations. Ocean Modelling 39(1-2):61-78. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2010.09.002.
Fox, D. N., W. J. Teague, C. N. Barron, M. R. Carnes and C. M. Lee. 2002. The Modular Ocean Data Assimilation System (MODAS). 
Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology 19(2):240-252. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0426(2002)019<0240:Tmodas
>2.0.Co;2.
Francis, J. A. and S. J. Vavrus. 2012. Evidence linking Arctic amplification to extreme weather events in the mid-latitudes. 
Geophysical Research Letters 39(6). DOI: 10.1029/2012GL051000.
Fudeyasu, H., Y. Q. Wang, M. Satoh, T. Nasuno, H. Miura and W. Yanase. 2008. Global cloud-system-resolving model NICAM 
successfully simulated the lifecycles of two real tropical cyclones. Geophysical Research Letters 35(22). DOI: 
10.1029/2008gl036003.
Gabersek, S., F. X. Giraldo and J. D. Doyle. 2012. Dry and moist idealized experiments with a two-dimensional spectral ele-
ment model. Monthly Weather Review 140(10):3163-3182. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-11-00144.1.
Gallus, W. A. 2010. Application of object-based verification techniques to ensemble precipitation forecasts. Weather and 
Forecasting 25(1):144-158. DOI: 10.1175/2009WAF2222274.1.
GAO (Government Accountability Office). 2014. Climate Change Adaptation: DOD Can Improve Infrastructure Planning 
and Processes to Better Account for Potential Impacts. Washington, DC: GAO.
García-Pando, C. P., M. C. Thomson, M. C. Stanton, P. J. Diggle, T. Hopson, R. Pandya, R. L. Miller, and S. Hugonnet. 2014. Men-
ingitis and climate: from science to practice. Earth Perspectives 1(14). DOI: 10.1186/2194-6434-1-14.
Gaube, P., D. J. McGillicuddy, D. B. Chelton, M. J. Behrenfeld and P. G. Strutton. 2014. Regional variations in the influence of 
mesoscale ocean eddies on near-surface chlorophyll. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 119(12):8195-8220. 
DOI: 10.1002/2014JC010111.
Geer, A. J., F. Baordo, N. Bormann and S. English. 2014. All-sky assimilation of microwave humidity sounders. Technical 
Report 741. Shinfield Park, UK: ECMWF.
Gelb, A. 1974. Applied Optimal Estimation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gent, P. R. 2011. The Gent-McWilliams parameterization: 20/20 hindsight. Ocean Modelling 39(1-2):2-9. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ocemod.2010.08.002.
Gent, P. R., J. Willebrand, T. J. Mcdougall and J. C. Mcwilliams. 1995. Parameterizing eddy-induced tracer transports in ocean 
circulation models. Journal of Physical Oceanography 25(4):463-474. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0485(1995)025<0463:Pei
tti>2.0.Co;2.
Gent, P. R., G. Danabasoglu, L. J. Donner, M. M. Holland, E. C. Hunke, S. R. Jayne, D. M. Lawrence, R. B. Neale, P. J. Rasch, M. 
Vertenstein, P. H. Worley, Z. L. Yang and M. H. Zhang. 2011. The Community Climate System Model Version 4. Journal 
of Climate 24(19):4973-4991. DOI: 10.1175/2011JCLI4083.1.
Gerber, E. P., C. Orbe and L. M. Polvani. 2009. Stratospheric influence on the tropospheric circulation revealed by idealized 
ensemble forecasts. Geophysical Research Letters 36. DOI: 10.1029/2009gl040913.

293
References
Gerber, E. P., A. Butler, N. Calvo, A. Charlton-Perez, M. Giorgetta, E. Manzini, J. Perlwitz, L. M. Polvani, F. Sassi, A. A. Scaife, 
T. A. Shaw, S. W. Son and S. Watanabe. 2012. Assessing and understanding the impact of stratospheric dynamics 
and variability on the earth system. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93(6):845-859. DOI: 10.1175/
Bams-D-11-00145.1.
Ghanem, R. G. and P. D. Spanos. 1991. Stochastic Finite Elements: A Spectral Approach. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Gilleland, E., D. D. A. Ahijevych, B. G. Brown and E. E. Ebert. 2010. Verifying forecasts spatially. Bulletin of the American 
­Meteorological Society 91(10):1365-1373. DOI: 10.1175/2010BAMS2819.1.
Giraldo, F. X. and M. Restelli. 2008. A study of spectral element and discontinuous Galerkin methods for the Navier-Stokes 
equations in nonhydrostatic mesoscale atmospheric modeling: Equation sets and test cases. Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 227(8):3849-3877. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2007.12.009.
Gneiting, T. and R. Ranjan. 2011. Comparing density forecasts using threshold- and quantile-weighted scoring rules. Journal 
of Business & Economic Statistics 29(3):411-422. DOI: 10.1198/jbes.2010.08110.
GODAE (Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment).  2009. Special issue on the revolution in global ocean forecasting—
the Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment: 10 years of achievement. Oceanography 22(3). 
GODAE. 2015. Special Issue: GODAE OceanView Part 1. Journal of Operational Oceanography 8(Supplement 1). 
Goddard, L., S. J. Mason, S. E. Zebiak, C. F. Ropelewski, R. Basher and M. A. Cane. 2001. Current approaches to seasonal-to-
interannual climate predictions. International Journal of Climatology 21(9):1111-1152. DOI: 10.1002/Joc.636.
Goddard, L., W. E. Baethgen, H. Bhojwani and A. W. Robertson. 2014. The International Research Institute for Climate & 
Society: Why, what and how. Earth Perspectives 1(10). DOI: 10.1186/2194-6434-1-10.
Gottschalck, J., M. Wheeler, K. Weickmann, F. Vitart, N. Savage, H. Lin, H. Hendon, D. Waliser, K. Sperber, M. Nakagawa, C. 
Prestrelo, M. Flatau and W. Higgins. 2010. a framework for assessing operational Madden-Julian Oscillation fore-
casts: A CLIVAR MJO Working Group project. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(9):1247-1258. DOI: 
10.1175/2010bams2816.1.
Graham, B., W. K. Reilly, F. Beinecke, D. F. Boesch, T. D. Garcia, C. A. Murray and F. Ulmer. 2011. Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster 
and the Future of Offshore Drilling. Report to the President. National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil 
Spill and Offshore Drilling. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
Graham, N. E., J. Michaelsen and T. P. Barnett. 1987. An investigation of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation cycle with 
­statistical models. 2: Model results. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 92(C13):14271-14289. DOI: 10.1029/
Jc092ic13p14271.
Greenwood, B. M., K. Bojang, C. J. M. Whitty, and G. A. T. Targett. 2005. Malaria. Lancet 365(9469):1487-1498. DOI: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(05)66420-3.
Greenwood, B. M., I. S. Blakebrough, A. K. Bradley, S. Wali, and H. C. Whittle. 1984. Meningococcal Disease and Season in 
Sub-Saharan Africa. Lancet 1(8390):1339-1342. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(84)91830-0.
Grell, G. A. and S. R. Freitas. 2014. A scale and aerosol aware stochastic convective parameterization for weather and air 
quality modeling. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 14(10):5233-5250. DOI: 10.5194/acp-14-5233-2014.
Griffies, S. M., C. Boning, F. O. Bryan, E. P. Chassignet, R. Gerdes, H. Hasumi, A. Hirst, A. M. Treguier and D. Webb. 2000. Develop-
ments in ocean climate modelling. Ocean Modelling 2(3-4):123-192. DOI: 10.1016/S1463-5003(00)00014-7.
Griffies, S. M., A. J. Adcroft, H. Banks, C. W. Böning, E. P. Chassignet, G. Danabasoglu, S. Danilov, E. Deleersnijder, H. Drange, M. 
England, B. Fox-Kemper, R. Gerdes, A. Gnanadesikan, R. J. Greatbatch, R. W. Hallberg, E. Hanert, M. J. Harrison, S. Legg, 
C. M. Little, G. Madec, S. J. Marsland, M. Nikurashin, A. Pirani, H. L. Simmons, J. Schröter, B. L. Samuels, A.-M. Treguier, J. R. 
Toggweiler, H. Tsujino, G. K. Vallis and L. White. 2010. Problems and prospects in large-scale ocean circulation models. 
In OceanObs’ 09 Conference: Sustained Ocean Observations and Information for Society, Vol. 2. Hall, J., D. E. Harrison 
and D. Stammer, eds.
Griffies, S. M., M. Winton, W. G. Anderson, R. Benson, T. L. Delworth, C. O. Dufour, J. P. Dunne, P. Goddard, A. K. Morrison, A. Rosati, 
A. T. Wittenberg, J. Yin and R. Zhang. 2015. Impacts on ocean heat from transient mesoscale eddies in a hierarchy of 
climate models. Journal of Climate 28:952-977. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-14-00353.1.
Griffin, D. and K. J. Anchukaitis. 2014. How unusual is the 2012-2014 California drought? Geophysical Research Letters 
41(24):9017-9023. DOI: 10.1002/2014GL062433.

294
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Guan, B., N. P. Molotch, D. E. Waliser, E. J. Fetzer and P. J. Neiman. 2010. Extreme snowfall events linked to atmospheric rivers 
and surface air temperature via satellite measurements. Geophysical Research Letters 37. DOI: 10.1029/2010gl044696.
Guan, B., D. E. Waliser, N. P. Molotch, E. J. Fetzer and P. J. Neiman. 2012. Does the Madden-Julian Oscillation influence winter-
time atmospheric rivers and snowpack in the Sierra Nevada? Monthly Weather Review 140(2):325-342. DOI: 10.1175/
Mwr-D-11-00087.1.
Guan, B., N. P. Molotch, D. E. Waliser, E. J. Fetzer and P. J. Neiman. 2013. The 2010/2011 snow season in California’s Sierra 
Nevada: Role of atmospheric rivers and modes of large-scale variability. Water Resources Research 49(10):6731-6743. 
DOI: 10.1002/wrcr.20537.
Guan, B., T. Lee, D. J. Halkides and D. E. Waliser. 2014. Aquarius surface salinity and the Madden-Julian Oscillation: The 
role of salinity in surface layer density and potential energy. Geophysical Research Letters 41(8):2858-2869. DOI: 
10.1002/2014GL059704.
Guemas, V., E. Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, M. Chevallier, J. J. Day, M. Déqué, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, N. S. Fučkar, A. Germe, E. Hawkins, 
S. Keeley, T. Koenigk, D. S. y. Mélia and S. Tietsche. 2014. A review on Arctic sea-ice predictability and prediction on sea-
sonal to decadal time-scales. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 141(691). DOI: 10.1002/qj.2401.
Guo, Y., D. E. Waliser and X. Jiang. 2015. A systematic relationship between the representations of convectively coupled 
equatorial wave activity and the Madden-Julian Oscillation in climate model simulations. Journal of Climate 28(1881-
1904). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-14-00485.1.
Guo, Z. C., P. A. Dirmeyer and T. DelSole. 2011. Land surface impacts on subseasonal and seasonal predictability. Geophysical 
Research Letters 38. DOI: 10.1029/2011gl049945.
Guo, Z. C., P. A. Dirmeyer, T. DelSole and R. D. Koster. 2012. Rebound in atmospheric predictability and the role of the land 
surface. Journal of Climate 25(13):4744-4749. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-11-00651.1.
Hackert, E., J. Ballabrera-Poy, A. J. Busalacchi, R. H. Zhang and R. Murtugudde. 2011. Impact of sea surface salinity assimilation 
on coupled forecasts in the tropical Pacific. Journal of Geophysical Research—Oceans 116. DOI: 10.1029/2010jc006708.
Hackert, E., A. J. Busalacchi and J. Ballabrera-Poy. 2014. Impact of Aquarius sea surface salinity observations on coupled 
forecasts for the tropical Indo-Pacific Ocean. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 119(7):4045-4067. DOI: 
10.1002/2013JC009697.
Hagedorn, R., F. J. Doblas-Reyes and T. N. Palmer. 2005. The rationale behind the success of multi-model ensembles in 
seasonal forecasting—I. Basic concept. Tellus Series A—Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 57(3):219-233. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0870.2005.00103.x.
Haley, P. J., P. F. J. Lermusiaux, A. R. Robinson, W. G. Leslie, O. Logoutov, G. Cossarini, X. S. Liang, P. Moreno, S. R. Ramp, J. D. Doyle, 
J. Bellingham, F. Chavez and S. Johnston. 2009. Forecasting and reanalysis in the Monterey Bay/California current 
region for the Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network-II experiment. Deep-Sea Research Part II—Topical Studies in 
Oceanography 56(3-5):127-148. DOI: 10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.08.010.
Hallberg, R. 2013. Using a resolution function to regulate parameterizations of oceanic mesoscale eddy effects. Ocean 
Modelling 72:92-103. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2013.08.007.
Hallberg, R. and A. Gnanadesikan. 2006. The role of eddies in determining the structure and response of the wind-driven 
Southern Hemisphere overturning: Results from the Modeling Eddies in the Southern Ocean (MESO) project. Journal 
of Physical Oceanography 36(12):2232-2252. DOI: 10.1175/Jpo2980.1.
Hamill, T. M., J. S. Whitaker, and S. L. Mullen. 2006. Reforecasts - An important dataset for improving weather predictions. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 87(1):33-46. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-87-1-33.
Hamilton, K. and R. A. Vincent. 1995. High-resolution radiosonde data offer new prospects for research. Eos Transactions 
AGU 76(49). DOI: 10.1029/ 95EO00308.
Hansen, J. W., A. Challinor, A. Ines, T. Wheeler and V. Moron. 2006. Translating climate forecasts into agricultural terms: 
­advances and challenges. Climate Research 33(1):27-41. DOI: 10.3354/Cr033027.
Hansen, J. W., S. J. Mason, L. Q. Sun and A. Tall. 2011. Review of seasonal climate forecasting for agriculture in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Experimental Agriculture 47(2):205-240. DOI: 10.1017/S0014479710000876.
Harcourt, R. R. 2015. An Improved Second-Moment Closure Model of Langmuir Turbulence. Journal of Physical 
­Oceanography 45(1):84-103. DOI: 10.1175/Jpo-D-14-0046.1.

295
References
Hartmann, H. C. 2005. Use of climate information in water resources management. In Encyclopedia of Hydrological 
­Sciences. M. G. Anderson, ed. West Sussex, UK: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Hartmann, D. L. 2015. Pacific sea surface temperature and the winter of 2014. Geophysical Research Letters 42(6): 1894-1902. 
DOI: 10.1002/2015GL063083.
Hartmann, H. C., T. C. Pagano, S. Sorooshian and R. Bales. 2002. Confidence builders—Evaluating seasonal cli-
mate forecasts from user perspectives. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 83(5):683-+. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0477(2002)083<0683:Cbescf>2.3.Co;2.
Hazeleger, W., C. Severijns, T. Semmler, S. Stefanescu, S. T. Yang, X. L. Wang, K. Wyser, E. Dutra, J. M. Baldasano, R. Bintanja, P. 
Bougeault, R. Caballero, A. M. L. Ekman, J. H. Christensen, B. van den Hurk, P. Jimenez, C. Jones, P. Kallberg, T. Koenigk, 
R. McGrath, P. Miranda, T. Van Noije, T. Palmer, J. A. Parodi, T. Schmith, F. Selten, T. Storelvmo, A. Sterl, H. Tapamo, M. 
­Vancoppenolle, P. Viterbo and U. Willen. 2010. EC-Earth: A seamless Earth-system prediction approach in action. 
­Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(10):1357-1363. DOI: 10.1175/2010BAMS2877.1.
Hecht, M. W. and H. Hasumi, ed. 2013. Ocean Modeling in an Eddying Regime. Geophysical Monograph Series, Vol. 177. 
Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union.
Hendon, H. H., B. Liebmann, M. Newman, J. D. Glick and J. E. Schemm. 2000. Medium-range forecast errors associ-
ated with active episodes of the Madden-Julian Oscillation. Monthly Weather Review 128(1):69-86. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0493(2000)128<0069:Mrfeaw>2.0.Co;2.
Hirons, L. C., P. Inness, F. Vitart and P. Bechtold. 2013. Understanding advances in the simulation of intraseasonal variability 
in the ECMWF model. Part I: The representation of the MJO. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 
139(675):1417-1426. DOI: 10.1002/qj.2060.
Hirota, N., Y. N. Takayabu, M. Watanabe and M. Kimoto. 2011. Precipitation reproducibility over tropical oceans and its 
relation­ship to the double ITCZ problem in CMIP3 and MIROC5 Climate Models. Journal of Climate 24(18):4859-4873. 
DOI: 10.1175/2011jcli4156.1.
Hitchens, N. M., H. E. Brooks and M. P. Kay. 2013. Objective limits on forecasting skill of rare events. Weather and Forecasting 
28(2):525-534. DOI: 10.1175/Waf-D-12-00113.1.
Hoerling, M. P. and A. Kumar. 2000. Understanding and predicting extratropical teleconnections related to ENSO. In El Niño 
and the Southern Oscillation: Multi-scale Variations and Global and Regional Impacts. H. F. Diaz and V. Markgraf, eds. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, M. M., D. A. Bailey, B. P. Briegleb, B. Light and E. Hunke. 2012. improved sea ice shortwave radiation physics in 
CCSM4: The impact of melt ponds and aerosols on Arctic sea ice. Journal of Climate 25(5):1413-1430. DOI: 10.1175/
Jcli-D-11-00078.1.
Holland, M. M., E. Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, J. Kay and S. Vavrus. 2013. Initial-value predictability of Antarctic sea ice in 
the Community Climate System Model 3. Geophysical Research Letters 40(10):2121-2124. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50410.
Holloway, C. E., S. J. Woolnough and G. M. S. Lister. 2013. The effects of explicit versus parameterized convection on the 
MJO in a large-domain high-resolution tropical case study. Part I: Characterization of large-scale organization and 
propagation. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 70(5):1342-1369. DOI: 10.1175/Jas-D-12-0227.1.
Holloway, C. E., J. C. Petch, R. J. Beare, P. Bechtold, G. C. Craig, S. H. Derbyshire, L. J. Donner, P. R. Field, S. L. Gray, J. H. Marsham, 
D. J. Parker, R. S. Plant, N. M. Roberts, D. M. Schultz, A. J. Stirling and S. J. Woolnough. 2014. Understanding and repre-
senting atmospheric convection across scales: Recommendations from the meeting held at Dartington Hall, Devon, 
UK, 28-30 January 2013. Atmospheric Science Letters 15(4):348-353. DOI: 10.1002/Asl2.508.
Horel, J. D. and J. M. Wallace. 1981. Planetary-scale atmospheric phenomena associated with the Southern Oscillation. 
Monthly Weather Review 109(4):813-829. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1981)109<0813:Psapaw>2.0.Co;2.
Hoskins, B. 2013. The potential for skill across the range of the seamless weather-climate prediction problem: A stimulus 
for our science. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 139(672):573-584. DOI: 10.1002/qj.1991.
Hoskins, B. and T. Woollings. 2015. Persistent extratropical regimes and climate extremes. Current Climate Change Reports 
1(3):115-124. DOI: 10.1007/s40641-015-0020-8.
Hoskins, B. J. and D. J. Karoly. 1981. The steady linear response of a spherical atmosphere to thermal and orographic ­forcing. 
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 38(6):1179-1196. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0469(1981)038<1179:Tslroa>2.0.Co;2.

296
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Hou, A. Y., R. K. Kakar, S. Neeck, A. A. Azarbarzin, C. D. Kummerow, M. Kojima, R. Oki, K. Nakamura and T. Iguchi. 2014. The Global 
Precipitation Measurement Mission. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95(5):701-+. DOI: 10.1175/
Bams-D-13-00164.1.
Houtekamer, P. L. and H. L. Mitchell. 1998. Data assimilation using an ensemble Kalman filter technique. Monthly Weather 
Review 126(3):796-811. DOI: Doi 10.1175/1520-0493(1998)126<0796:Dauaek>2.0.Co;2.
Houze, R. A. and A. K. Betts. 1981. Convection in GATE. Reviews of Geophysics 19(4):541-576. DOI: 10.1029/Rg019i004p00541.
Hung, M. P., J. L. Lin, W. Q. Wang, D. Kim, T. Shinoda and S. J. Weaver. 2013. MJO and convectively coupled equatorial waves 
simulated by CMIP5 climate models. Journal of Climate 26(17):6185-6214. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00541.1.
Hunke, E. C., D. Notz, A. K. Turner and M. Vancoppenolle. 2011. The multiphase physics of sea ice: A review for model devel-
opers. Cryosphere 5(4):989-1009. DOI: 10.5194/tc-5-989-2011.
Hurrell, J., G. A. Meehl, D. Bader, T. L. Delworth, B. Kirtman and B. Wielicki. 2009. A unified modeling approach to climate sys-
tem prediction. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90(12):1819-1832. DOI: 10.1175/2009BAMS2752.1.
Hurrell, J. W., M. M. Holland, P. R. Gent, S. Ghan, J. E. Kay, P. J. Kushner, J. F. Lamarque, W. G. Large, D. Lawrence, K. Lindsay, W. H. 
Lipscomb, M. C. Long, N. Mahowald, D. R. Marsh, R. B. Neale, P. Rasch, S. Vavrus, M. Vertenstein, D. Bader, W. D. Collins, 
J. J. Hack, J. Kiehl and S. Marshall. 2013. The Community Earth System Model: A framework for collaborative research. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 94(9):1339-1360. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-12-00121.1.
Inness, P. M. and J. M. Slingo. 2006. The interaction of the Madden-Julian Oscillation with the Maritime Continent in a GCM. 
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 132(618):1645-1667. DOI: 10.1256/qj.05.102.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Jacobs, G. A., R. Woodham, D. Jourdan and J. Braithwaite. 2009. GODAE applications useful to navies throughout the world. 
Oceanography 22(3):182-189. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2009.77.
Jacobs, G. A., J. G. Richman, J. D. Doyle, P. L. Spence, B. P. Bartels, C. N. Barron, R. W. Helber and F. L. Bub. 2014. Simulat-
ing conditional deterministic predictability within ocean frontogenesis. Ocean Modelling 78:1-16. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ocemod.2014.02.004.
Jakob, C. 2010. Accelerating progress in global atmospheric model development through improved parameteriza-
tions challenges, opportunities, and strategies. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(7):869-+. DOI: 
10.1175/2009bams2898.1.
Jancloes, M., M. Thomson, M. M. Costa, C. Hewitt, C. Corvalan, T. Dinku, R. Lowe and M. Hayden. 2014. Climate services to 
improve public health. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 11(5):4555-4559. DOI: 
10.3390/ijerph110504555.
Jazwinski, A. H. 1970. Stochastic processes and filtering theory. New York: Academic Press.
Jeong, J. H., H. W. Linderholm, S. H. Woo, C. Folland, B. M. Kim, S. J. Kim and D. L. Chen. 2013. Impacts of snow initialization 
on subseasonal forecasts of surface air temperature for the cold season. Journal of Climate 26(6):1956-1972. DOI: 
10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00159.1.
Jiang, X. A., M. Zhao and D. E. Waliser. 2012a. Modulation of tropical cyclones over the Eastern Pacific by the intraseasonal 
variability simulated in an AGCM. Journal of Climate 25(19):6524-6538. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-11-00531.1.
Jiang, X. N., D. E. Waliser, D. Kim, M. Zhao, K. R. Sperber, W. F. Stern, S. D. Schubert, G. J. Zhang, W. Q. Wang, M. Khairoutdinov, 
R. B. Neale and M. I. Lee. 2012b. Simulation of the intraseasonal variability over the Eastern Pacific ITCZ in climate 
models. Climate Dynamics 39(3-4):617-636. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-011-1098-x.
Jin, E. K., J. L. Kinter, B. Wang, C. K. Park, I. S. Kang, B. P. Kirtman, J. S. Kug, A. Kumar, J. J. Luo, J. Schemm, J. Shukla and T. Yamagata. 
2008. Current status of ENSO prediction skill in coupled ocean-atmosphere models. Climate Dynamics 31(6):647-664. 
DOI: 10.1007/s00382-008-0397-3.
Johnson, A., X. G. Wang, F. Y. Kong and M. Xue. 2013. Object-based evaluation of the impact of horizontal grid spacing 
on convection-allowing forecasts. Monthly Weather Review 141(10):3413-3425. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-13-00027.1.
Johnson, C. and N. Bowler. 2009. On the reliability and calibration of ensemble forecasts. Monthly Weather Review 
137(5):1717-1720. DOI: 10.1175/2009mwr2715.1.

297
References
Johnson, N. C., D. C. Collins, S. B. Feldstein, M. L. L’Heureux and E. E. Riddle. 2014. Skillful wintertime North American tem-
perature forecasts out to 4 weeks based on the state of ENSO and the MJO. Weather and Forecasting 29(1):23-38. 
DOI: 10.1175/Waf-D-13-00102.1.
Jones, A. E. and A. P. Morse. 2010. Application and validation of a seasonal ensemble prediction system using a dynamic 
malaria model. Journal of Climate 23(15):4202-4215. DOI: 10.1175/2010jcli3208.1.
Jones, A. E. and A. P. Morse. 2012. Skill of ENSEMBLES seasonal re-forecasts for malaria prediction in West Africa. Geophysical 
Research Letters 39. DOI: 10.1029/2012gl054040.
Jones, C., D. E. Waliser, J. K. E. Schemm and W. K. M. Lau. 2000. Prediction skill of the Madden and Julian Oscillation in 
­dynamical extended range forecasts. Climate Dynamics 16(4):273-289. DOI: 10.1007/s003820050327.
Joslyn, S. and S. Savelli. 2010. Communicating forecast uncertainty: Public perception of weather forecast uncertainty. 
Meteorological Applications 17(2):180-195. DOI: 10.1002/met.190.
Jung, T., M. J. Miller, T. N. Palmer, P. Towers, N. Wedi, D. Achuthavarier, J. M. Adams, E. L. Altshuler, B. A. Cash, J. L. Kinter, L. Marx, 
C. Stan and K. I. Hodges. 2012. High-resolution global climate simulations with the ECMWF model in Project Athena: 
Experimental design, model climate, and seasonal forecast skill. Journal of Climate 25(9):3155-3172. DOI: 10.1175/
Jcli-D-11-00265.1.
Jung, T., M. A. Kasper, T. Semmler and S. Serrar. 2014. Arctic influence on subseasonal midlatitude prediction. Geophysical 
Research Letters 41(10):3676-3680. DOI: 10.1002/2014gl059961.
Jutla, A. S., A. S. Akanda, J. K. Griffiths, R. Colwell and S. Islam. 2011. Warming oceans, phytoplankton, and river discharge: 
Implications for cholera outbreaks. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 85(2):303-308. DOI: 10.4269/
ajtmh.2011.11-0181.
Kalman, R. E. 1960. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Transactions of the ASME—Journal of 
Basic Engineering 82(Series D):35-45. 
Kalnay, E. 2003. Atmospheric modeling, data assimilation, and predictability. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kang, I. S., and H. M. Kim. 2010. Assessment of MJO Predictability for Boreal Winter with Various Statistical and Dynamical 
Models. Journal of Climate 23(9):2368-2378. DOI: 10.1175/2010JCLI3288.1.
Kang, J. S., E. Kalnay, T. Miyoshi, J. J. Liu and I. Fung. 2012. Estimation of surface carbon fluxes with an advanced data assimila-
tion methodology. Journal of Geophysical Research—Atmospheres 117. DOI: 10.1029/2012jd018259.
Karna, T., V. Legat, E. Deleersnijder and H. Burchard. 2012. Coupling of a discontinuous Galerkin finite element marine model 
with a finite difference turbulence closure model. Ocean Modelling 47:55-64. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.01.001.
Karna, T., V. Legat and E. Deleersnijder. 2013. A baroclinic discontinuous Galerkin finite element model for coastal flows. 
Ocean Modelling 61:1-20. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.09.009.
Katz, M. L. and C. Shapiro. 1985. Network externalities, competition, and compatibility. American Economic Review 
75(3):424-440. 
Kauker, F., C. Koberle, R. Gerdes and M. Karcher. 2008. Modeling the 20th century Arctic Ocean/Sea ice system: Reconstruc-
tion of surface forcing. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 113(C9). DOI: 10.1029/2006jc004023.
Kelly-Hope, L. and M. C. Thomson. 2008. Climate and infectious diseases. In Seasonal Forecasts, Climatic Change and Human 
Health. M. C. Thomson, R. Garcia-Herrera, and M. Beniston, eds. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Kerr, Y. H., P. Waldteufel, J. P. Wigneron, S. Delwart, F. Cabot, J. Boutin, M. J. Escorihuela, J. Font, N. Reul, C. Gruhier, S. E. Juglea, 
M. R. Drinkwater, A. Hahne, M. Martin-Neira and S. Mecklenburg. 2010. The SMOS mission: New tool for monitoring 
key elements of the global water cycle. Proceedings of the IEEE 98(5):666-687. DOI: 10.1109/Jproc.2010.2043032.
Khairoutdinov, M. F. and D. A. Randall. 2001. A cloud resolving model as a cloud parameterization in the NCAR Community 
­Climate System Model: Preliminary results. Geophysical Research Letters 28(18):3617-3620. DOI: 10.1029/2001gl013552.
Kharin, V. V. and F. W. Zwiers. 2002. Climate predictions with multimodel ensembles. Journal of Climate 15(7):793-799. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015<0793:Cpwme>2.0.Co;2.
Kharin, V. V. and F. W. Zwiers. 2003. On the ROC score of probability forecasts. Journal of Climate 16(24):4145-4150. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0442(2003)016<4145:Otrsop>2.0.Co;2.
Khon, V. C., I. I. Mokhov, M. Latif, V. A. Semenov and W. Park. 2010. Perspectives of Northern Sea Route and Northwest Passage 
in the twenty-first century. Climatic Change 100(3-4):757-768. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-009-9683-2.

298
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Kiehl, J. T., J. J. Hack, G. B. Bonan, B. A. Boville, D. L. Williamson and P. J. Rasch. 1998. The National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Community Climate Model: CCM3. Journal of Climate 11(6):1131-1149. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1998)011<1131: 
Tncfar>2.0.Co;2.
Kim, H. M., P. J. Webster and J. A. Curry. 2012. Seasonal prediction skill of ECMWF System 4 and NCEP CFSv2 retrospective 
forecast for the Northern Hemisphere Winter. Climate Dynamics 39(12):2957-2973. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-012-1364-6.
Kinter, J. L., B. Cash, D. Achuthavarier, J. Adams, E. Altshuler, P. Dirmeyer, B. Doty, B. Huang, E. K. Jin, L. Marx, J. Manganello, C. 
Stan, T. Wakefield, T. Palmer, M. Hamrud, T. Jung, M. Miller, P. Towers, N. Wedi, M. Satoh, H. Tomita, C. Kodama, T. Nasuno, 
K. Oouchi, Y. Yamada, H. Taniguchi, P. Andrews, T. Baer, M. Ezell, C. Halloy, D. John, B. Loftis, R. Mohr and K. Wong. 2013. 
Revolutionizing climate modeling with Project Athena: A multi-institutional, international collaboration. Bulletin of 
the American Meteorological Society 94(2):231-245. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-11-00043.1.
Kirtman, B. 2014. Assessment of Intraseasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction and Predictability. Presented to the Com-
mittee on Developing a U.S. Research Agenda to Advance Subseasonal to Seasonal Forecasting, National Research 
Council, October 7, 2014, Washington, DC.
Kirtman, B. P. 2003. The COLA anomaly coupled model: Ensemble ENSO prediction. Monthly Weather Review 131(10):2324-
2341. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2003)131<2324:Tcacme>2.0.Co;2.
Kirtman, B. P., C. Bitz, F. Bryan, W. Collins, J. Dennis, N. Hearn, J. L. Kinter, R. Loft, C. Rousset, L. Siqueira, C. Stan, R. Tomas and M. 
Vertenstein. 2012. Impact of ocean model resolution on CCSM climate simulations. Climate Dynamics 39(6):1303-
1328. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-012-1500-3.
Kirtman, B. P., D. Min, J. M. Infanti, J. L. Kinter, D. A. Paolino, Q. Zhang, H. van den Dool, S. Saha, M. P. Mendez, E. Becker, P. T. Peng, 
P. Tripp, J. Huang, D. G. DeWitt, M. K. Tippett, A. G. Barnston, S. H. Li, A. Rosati, S. D. Schubert, M. Rienecker, M. Suarez, Z. E. Li, 
J. Marshak, Y. K. Lim, J. Tribbia, K. Pegion, W. J. Merryfield, B. Denis and E. F. Wood. 2014. The North American Multimodel 
Ensemble: Phase-1 Seasonal-to-Interannual Prediction; Phase-2 toward Developing Intraseasonal Prediction. Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society 95(4):585-601. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-12-00050.1.
Kleist, D. T., D. F. Parrish, J. C. Derber, R. Treadon, W. S. Wu and S. Lord. 2009. Introduction of the GSI into the NCEP Global Data 
Assimilation System. Weather and Forecasting 24(6):1691-1705. DOI: 10.1175/2009WAF2222201.1.
Kleist, D. T. and K. Ide. 2015. An OSSE-based evaluation of hybrid variational-ensemble data assimilation for the NCEP 
GFS. Part II: 4DEnVar and hybrid variants. Monthly Weather Review 143(2):452-470. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-13-00350.1.
Klingaman, N. P., B. Hanson and D. J. Leathers. 2008. A teleconnection between forced Great Plains snow cover and European 
winter climate. Journal of Climate 21(11):2466-2483. DOI: 10.1175/2007JCLI1672.1.
Kloeden, P. E. and E. Platen. 1999. Numerical solution of stochastic differential equations. Berlin; New York: Springer.
Klopper, E., C. H. Vogel and W. A. Landman. 2006. Seasonal climate forecasts—Potential agricultural-risk management tools? 
Climatic Change 76(1-2):73-90. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-005-9019-9.
Kogge, P., K. Bergman, S. Borkar, D. Campbell, W. Carlson, W. Dally, M. Denneau, P. Franzon, W. Harrod, K. Hill, J. Hiller, S. Karp, 
S. Keckler, D. Klein, R. Lucas, M. Richards, A. Scarpelli, S. Scott, A. Snavely, T. Sterling, R. S. Williams and K. Yelick. 2008. 
ExaScale Computing Study: Technology Challenges in Achieving Exascale Systems. Exascale Study Group, University 
of Notre Dame.
Kondrashov, D., C. J. Sun and M. Ghil. 2008. Data assimilation for a coupled ocean-atmosphere model. Part II: Parameter 
estimation. Monthly Weather Review 136(12):5062-5076. DOI: 10.1175/2008mwr2544.1.
Konings, A. G., D. Entekhabi, M. Moghaddam and S. S. Saatchi. 2014. The effect of variable soil moisture profiles on P-Band 
backscatter. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 52(10):6315-6325. DOI: 10.1109/Tgrs.2013.2296035.
Kosaka, Y., S. P. Xie, N. C. Lau and G. A. Vecchi. 2013. Origin of seasonal predictability for summer climate over the ­Northwestern 
Pacific. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110(19):7574-7579. DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.1215582110.
Koster, R. D., P. A. Dirmeyer, Z. C. Guo, G. Bonan, E. Chan, P. Cox, C. T. Gordon, S. Kanae, E. Kowalczyk, D. Lawrence, P. Liu, C. H. Lu, 
S. Malyshev, B. McAvaney, K. Mitchell, D. Mocko, T. Oki, K. Oleson, A. Pitman, Y. C. Sud, C. M. Taylor, D. Verseghy, R. Vasic, 
Y. K. Xue, T. Yamada and G. Team. 2004. Regions of strong coupling between soil moisture and precipitation. Science 
305(5687):1138-1140. DOI: 10.1126/science.1100217.
Koster, R. D. and G. K. Walker. 2015. Interactive vegetation phenology, soil moisture, and monthly temperature forecasts. 
Journal of Hydrometeorology 16(4):1456-1465. DOI: 10.1175/Jhm-D-14-0205.1.

299
References
Koster, R. D., S. P. P. Mahanama, T. J. Yamada, G. Balsamo, A. A. Berg, M. Boisserie, P. A. Dirmeyer, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, G. Drewitt, C. T. 
Gordon, Z. Guo, J. H. Jeong, D. M. Lawrence, W. S. Lee, Z. Li, L. Luo, S. Malyshev, W. J. Merryfield, S. I. Seneviratne, T. Stanelle, 
B. J. J. M. van den Hurk, F. Vitart and E. F. Wood. 2010. Contribution of land surface initialization to subseasonal forecast 
skill: First results from a multi-model experiment. Geophysical Research Letters 37. DOI: 10.1029/2009gl041677.
Koster, R. D., S. P. P. Mahanama, T. J. Yamada, G. Balsamo, A. A. Berg, M. Boisserie, P. A. Dirmeyer, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, G. ­Drewitt, 
C. T. Gordon, Z. Guo, J. H. Jeong, W. S. Lee, Z. Li, L. Luo, S. Malyshev, W. J. Merryfield, S. I. Seneviratne, T. Stanelle, 
B. J. J. M. van den Hurk, F. Vitart and E. F. Wood. 2011. The second phase of the global land-atmosphere coupling 
experiment: Soil moisture contributions to subseasonal forecast skill. Journal of Hydrometeorology 12(5):805-822. 
DOI: 10.1175/2011JHM1365.1.
Koster, R. D., Y. H. Chang and S. D. Schubert. 2014. A mechanism for land-atmosphere feedback involving planetary wave 
structures. Journal of Climate 27(24):9290-9301. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-14-00315.1.
Krishnamurti, T. N., C. M. Kishtawal, Z. Zhang, T. LaRow, D. Bachiochi, E. Williford, S. Gadgil and S. Surendran. 2000. 
Multi­model ensemble forecasts for weather and seasonal climate. Journal of Climate 13(23):4196-4216. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0442(2000)013<4196:Meffwa>2.0.Co;2.
Kug, J. S., J. Y. Lee, I. S. Kang, B. Wang and C. K. Park. 2008. Optimal multi-model ensemble method in seasonal climate predic-
tion. Asia-Pacific Journal of Atmospheric Sciences 44(3):259-267. 
Kuhl, D. D., T. E. Rosmond, C. H. Bishop, J. McLay and N. L. Baker. 2013. Comparison of Hybrid Ensemble/4DVar and 4DVar 
within the NAVDAS-AR Data Assimilation Framework. Monthly Weather Review 141(8):2740-2758. DOI: 10.1175/
Mwr-D-12-00182.1.
Kuhn, K., D. Campbell-Lendrum, A. Haines and J. Cox. 2005. Using climate to predict infectious disease epidemics. Geneva: 
World Health Organization.
Kumar, S., P. A. Dirmeyer, D. M. Lawrence, T. DelSole, E. L. Altshuler, B. A. Cash, M. J. Fennessy, Z. C. Guo, J. L. Kinter and D. M. 
Straus. 2014. Effects of realistic land surface initializations on subseasonal to seasonal soil moisture and temperature 
predictability in North America and in changing climate simulated by CCSM4. Journal of Geophysical Research—
Atmospheres 119(23):13250-13270. DOI: 10.1002/2014JD022110.
Kumar, S. V., C. D. Peters-Lidard, Y. Tian, P. R. Houser, J. Geiger, S. Olden, L. Lighty, J. L. Eastman, B. Doty, P. Dirmeyer, J. Adams, K. 
Mitchell, E. F. Wood and J. Sheffield. 2006. Land information system: An interoperable framework for high resolution 
land surface modeling. Environmental Modelling & Software 21(10):1402-1415. DOI: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2005.07.004.
Kurtz, N., J. Richter-Menge, S. Farrell, M. Studinger, J. Paden, J. Sonntag and J. Yungel. 2013. IceBridge airborne survey data sup-
port arctic sea ice predictions. Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union 94(4):41. DOI: 10.1002/2013eo040001.
Kushnir, Y., W. A. Robinson, I. Blade, N. M. J. Hall, S. Peng and R. Sutton. 2002. Atmospheric GCM response to extratropical SST 
anomalies: Synthesis and evaluation. Journal of Climate 15(16):2233-2256. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015<2233: 
Agrtes>2.0.Co;2.
Kwok, R. and G. F. Cunningham. 2008. ICESat over Arctic sea ice: Estimation of snow depth and ice thickness. Journal of 
Geophysical Research-Oceans 113(C8). DOI: 10.1029/2008jc004753.
Kwok, R., H. J. Zwally and D. H. Yi. 2004. ICESat observations of Arctic sea ice: A first look. Geophysical Research Letters 
31(16). DOI: 10.1029/2004gl020309.
Lagerloef, G. S. E., G. T. Mitchum, R. B. Lukas and P. P. Niiler. 1999. Tropical Pacific near-surface currents estimated from altimeter, 
wind, and drifter data. Journal of Geophysical Research—Oceans 104(C10):23313-23326. DOI: 10.1029/1999jc900197.
Lahoz, W. A. and P. Schneider. 2014. Data assimilation: Making sense of Earth Observation. Frontiers in Environmental Sci-
ence 2(16). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2014.00016.
Laloyaux, P., M. Balmaseda, D. Dee, K. Mogensen and P. Janssen. 2016. A coupled data assimilation system for climate re-
analysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 142(694):65-78. DOI: 10.1002/qj.2629.
Lambrechts, L., K. P. Paaijmans, T. Fansiri, L. B. Carrington, L. D. Kramer, M. B. Thomas and T. W. Scott. 2011. Impact of daily 
temperature fluctuations on dengue virus transmission by Aedes aegypti. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 108(18):7460-7465. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1101377108.
Langmann, B., K. Zaksek, M. Hort and S. Duggen. 2010. Volcanic ash as fertiliser for the surface ocean. Atmospheric Chem-
istry and Physics 10(8):3891-3899. 
Lasswell, H. D. 1971. A Pre-View of Policy Sciences. New York: American Elsevier. 

300
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Latif, M., D. Anderson, T. Barnett, M. Cane, R. Kleeman, A. Leetmaa, J. O’Brien, A. Rosati and E. Schneider. 1998. A review 
of the predictability and prediction of ENSO. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 103(C7):14375-14393. DOI: 
10.1029/97jc03413.
Lau, W. K.-M. and D. E. Waliser. 2011. Intraseasonal variability in the atmosphere-ocean climate system. Berlin: Springer 
Verlag.
Lauderdale, J. M., C. Caminade, A. E. Heath, A. E. Jones, D. A. MacLeod, K. C. Gouda, U. S. Murty, P. Goswami, S. R. Mutheneni and 
A. P. Morse. 2014. Towards seasonal forecasting of malaria in India. Malaria Journal 13. DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-310.
Laxon, S. W., K. A. Giles, A. L. Ridout, D. J. Wingham, R. Willatt, R. Cullen, R. Kwok, A. Schweiger, J. L. Zhang, C. Haas, S. Hendricks, 
R. Krishfield, N. Kurtz, S. Farrell and M. Davidson. 2013. CryoSat-2 estimates of Arctic sea ice thickness and volume. 
Geophysical Research Letters 40(4):732-737. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50193.
Lazo, J. K., M. Lawson, P. H. Larsen and D. M. Waldman. 2011. US economic sensitivity to weather variability. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society 92(6):709-720. DOI: 10.1175/2011BAMS2928.1.
Le Maître, O. P. and O. M. Knio. 2010. Spectral methods for uncertainty quantification with applications to computational 
fluid dynamics. Dordrecht, Netherlands; New York: Springer.
Le Traon, P. Y., Y. Faugere, F. Hernandez, J. Dorandeu, F. Mertz and M. Ablain. 2003. Can we merge GEOSAT Follow-On with 
­TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-2 for an improved description of the ocean circulation? Journal of Atmospheric and 
­Oceanic Technology 20(6):889-895. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0426(2003)020<0889:Cwmgfw>2.0.Co;2.
Lebel, T., D. J. Parker, C. Flamant, B. Bourles, B. Marticorena, E. Mougin, C. Peugeot, A. Diedhiou, J. M. Haywood, J. B. Ngamini, 
J. Polcher, J. L. Redelsperger and C. D. Thorncroft. 2010. The AMMA field campaigns: Multiscale and multidisciplinary 
observations in the West African region. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 136:8-33. DOI: 10.1002/
qj.486.
LeDimet, F. X. and O. Talagrand. 1986. Variational algorithms for analysis and assimilation of meteorological observations: 
Theoretical aspects. Tellus Series A—Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 38(2):97-110. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-
0870.1986.tb00459.x.
Lee, C. M., S. Cole, M. Doble, L. Freitag, P. Hwang, S. Jayne, M. Jeffries, R. Krishfield, T. Maksym, W. Maslowski, B. Owens, P. Posey, 
L. Rainville, A. Roberts, B. Shaw, T. Stanton, J. Thomson, M.-L. Timmermans, J. Toole, P. Wadhams, J. Wilkinson and Z. 
Zhang. 2012. Marginal ice zone (MIZ) program: Science and experiment plan. Technical Report APL-UW 1201. Seattle, 
WA: Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington.
Lee, S. K., P. N. DiNezio, E. S. Chung, S. W. Yeh, A. T. Wittenberg and C. Z. Wang. 2014. Spring persistence, transition, and resur-
gence of El Niño. Geophysical Research Letters 41(23):8578-8585. DOI: 10.1002/2014gl062484.
Lemke, P., E. W. Trinkl and K. Hasselmann. 1980. Stochastic dynamic analysis of polar sea ice variability. Journal of Physical 
Oceanography 10(12):2100-2120. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0485(1980)010<2100:Sdaops>2.0.Co;2.
Lemos, M. C. 2008. What influences innovation adoption by water managers? Climate information use in Brazil and the United 
States. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 44(6):1388-1396. DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-1688.2008.00231.x.
Lemos, M. C. and B. J. Morehouse. 2005. The co-production of science and policy in integrated climate assessments. Global 
Environmental Change-Human and Policy Dimensions 15(1):57-68. DOI: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.09.004.
Lemos, M. C. and R. B. Rood. 2010. Climate projections and their impact on policy and practice. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews—Climate Change 1(5):670-682. DOI: 10.1002/Wcc.71.
Lemos, M. C., C. J. Kirchhoff and V. Ramprasad. 2012. Narrowing the climate information usability gap. Nature Climate 
Change 2(11):789-794. DOI: 10.1038/Nclimate1614.
Leonard, N. E., D. A. Paley, F. Lekien, R. Sepulchre, D. M. Fratantoni and R. E. Davis. 2007. Collective motion, sensor networks, 
and ocean sampling. Proceedings of the IEEE 95(1):48-74. DOI: 10.1109/Jproc.2006.887295.
Leonard, N. E., D. A. Paley, R. E. Davis, D. M. Fratantoni, F. Lekien and F. M. Zhang. 2010. Coordinated control of an underwater 
glider fleet in an adaptive ocean sampling field experiment in Monterey Bay. Journal of Field Robotics 27(6):718-740. 
DOI: 10.1002/Rob.20366.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J. 1999. Data assimilation via error subspace statistical estimation. Part II: Middle Atlantic 
Bight shelfbreak front simulations and ESSE validation. Monthly Weather Review 127(7):1408-1432. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0493(1999)127<1408:Davess>2.0.Co;2.

301
References
Lermusiaux, P. F. J. 2001. Evolving the subspace of the three-dimensional multiscale ocean variability: Massachusetts Bay. 
Journal of Marine Systems 29(1-4):385-422. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-7963(01)00025-2.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J. 2006. Uncertainty estimation and prediction for interdisciplinary ocean dynamics. Journal of Compu-
tational Physics 217(1):176-199. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2006.02.010.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J. 2007. Adaptive modeling, adaptive data assimilation and adaptive sampling. Physica D—Nonlinear 
Phenomena 230(1-2):172-196. DOI: 10.1016/j.physd.2007.02.014.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J. and A. R. Robinson. 1999. Data assimilation via error subspace statistical estimation. Part I: Theory and 
schemes. Monthly Weather Review 127(7):1385-1407. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1999)127<1385:Davess>2.0.Co;2.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J., C.-S. Chiu, G. G. Gawarkiewicz, P. Abbot, A. R. Robinson, R. N. Miller, P. J. Haley, W. G. Leslie, S. J. Majumdar, A. 
Pang and F. Lekien. 2006. Quantifying uncertainties in ocean predictions. Oceanography 19(1):92-105. DOI: 10.5670/
oceanog.2006.93.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J., P. J. Haley, W. G. Leslie, A. Agarwal, O. G. Logutov and L. J. Burton. 2011. Multiscale Physical and Biological 
Dynamics in the Philippine Archipelago: Predictions and Processes. Oceanography 24(1):70-89. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.5670/oceanog.2011.05.
Lermusiaux, P. F. J., T. Lolla, P. J. Haley Jr., K. Yigit, M. P. Ueckermann, T. Sondergaard and W. G. Leslie. 2015. Science of Autonomy: 
Time-Optimal Path Planning and Adaptive Sampling for Swarms of Ocean Vehicles. In Springer Handbook of Ocean 
Engineering: Autonomous Ocean Vehicles, Subsystems and Control. T. Curtin, ed. New York: Springer (in press).
Letson, D., D. Sutter and J. Lazo. 2007. Economic value of hurricane forecasts: An overview and research needs. Natural 
Hazards Review 8(3):78-86. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)1527-6988(2007)8:3(78).
Li, G. and S. P. Xie. 2014. Tropical biases in CMIP5 multimodel ensemble: The excessive equatorial Pacific cold tongue and 
double ITCZ problems. Journal of Climate 27(4):1765-1780. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-13-00337.1.
Li, M., K. Zahariev and C. Garrett. 1995. Role of Langmuir circulation in the deepening of the ocean surface mixed-layer. 
Science 270(5244):1955-1957. DOI: 10.1126/science.270.5244.1955.
Li, Q., A. Webb, B. Fox-Kemper, A. Craig, G. Danabasoglu, W. G. Large and M. Vertenstein. 2015. Langmuir mixing effects on 
global climate: WAVEWATCH III in CESM. Ocean Modelling. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2015.07.020.
Li, R. and R. Ghanem. 1998. Adaptive polynomial chaos expansions applied to statistics of extremes in nonlinear random 
vibration. Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics 13(2):125-136. DOI: 10.1016/S0266-8920(97)00020-9.
Li, Y. P. and R. E. Carbone. 2012. Excitation of rainfall over the tropical Western Pacific. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 
69(10):2983-2994. DOI: 10.1175/Jas-D-11-0245.1.
Lien, G.-Y., T. Miyoshi and E. Kalnay. 2015. Assimilation of TRMM multi satellite precipitation analysis with a low-resolution 
NCPE global forecast system. Monthly Weather Review. DOI: 10.1175/MWR-D-15-0149.1.
Lin, H. and G. Brunet. 2009. The influence of the Madden-Julian Oscillation on Canadian wintertime surface air temperature. 
Monthly Weather Review 137(7):2250-2262. DOI: 10.1175/2009mwr2831.1.
Lin, H., G. Brunet and J. Derome. 2008. Forecast skill of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in two Canadian atmospheric models. 
Monthly Weather Review 136(11):4130-4149. DOI: 10.1175/2008mwr2459.1.
Lin, H., G. Brunet and J. Derome. 2009. An observed connection between the North Atlantic Oscillation and the Madden-
Julian Oscillation. Journal of Climate 22(2):364-380. DOI: 10.1175/2008jcli2515.1.
Lin, H., G. Brunet and J. S. Fontecilla. 2010. Impact of the Madden-Julian Oscillation on the intraseasonal forecast skill of 
the North Atlantic Oscillation. Geophysical Research Letters 37. DOI: 10.1029/2010gl044315.
Lindsay, R. and A. Schweiger. 2015. Arctic sea ice thickness loss determined using subsurface, aircraft, and satellite observa-
tions. Cryosphere 9(1):269-283. DOI: 10.5194/tc-9-269-2015.
Lindsay, R. W. and J. Zhang. 2006. Assimilation of ice concentration in an ice-ocean model. Journal of Atmospheric and 
Oceanic Technology 23(5):742-749. DOI: 10.1175/Jtech1871.1.
Lindsay, R. W., J. Zhang, A. J. Schweiger and M. A. Steele. 2008. Seasonal predictions of ice extent in the Arctic Ocean. Journal 
of Geophysical Research-Oceans 113(C2). DOI: 10.1029/2007jc004259.
Lions, J. L. 1971. Optimal control of systems governed by partial differential equations. Dordrecht: Springer Verlag.
Lisæter, K. A., J. Rosanova and G. Evensen. 2003. Assimilation of ice concentration in a coupled ice–ocean model, using the 
Ensemble Kalman filter. Ocean Dynamics 53(4):368-388. 

302
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Liu, C. X., B. J. Tian, K. F. Li, G. L. Manney, N. J. Livesey, Y. L. Yung and D. E. Waliser. 2014. Northern Hemisphere mid-­winter 
vortex-displacement and vortex-split stratospheric sudden warmings: Influence of the Madden-Julian Oscil-
lation and Quasi-Biennial Oscillation. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 119(22):12599-12620. DOI: 
10.1002/2014jd021876.
Lolla, T., P. J. Haley and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2014a. Time-optimal path planning in dynamic flows using level set equations: 
Realistic applications. Ocean Dynamics 64(10):1399-1417. DOI: 10.1007/s10236-014-0760-3.
Lolla, T., P. F. J. Lermusiaux, M. P. Ueckermann and P. J. Haley. 2014b. Time-optimal path planning in dynamic flows using level 
set equations: Theory and schemes. Ocean Dynamics 64(10):1373-1397. DOI: 10.1007/s10236-014-0757-y.
Lorenc, A. C., S. P. Ballard, R. S. Bell, N. B. Ingleby, P. L. F. Andrews, D. M. Barker, J. R. Bray, A. M. Clayton, T. Dalby, D. Li, T. J. Payne 
and F. W. Saunders. 2000. The Met. Office global three-dimensional variational data assimilation scheme. Quarterly 
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 126(570):2991-3012. DOI: 10.1256/Smsqj.57001.
Lorenc, A. C., N. E. Bowler, A. M. Clayton, S. R. Pring and D. Fairbairn. 2015. Comparison of hybrid-4DEnVar and hybrid-4DVar 
data assimilation methods for global NWP. Monthly Weather Review 143(1):212-229. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-14-00195.1.
Lorenz, E. N. 1963. Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 20(2):130-141. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0469(1963)020<0130:Dnf>2.0.Co;2.
Lu, F., Z. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Liu. 2015. Strongly coupled data assimilation using leading averaged coupled covariance (LACC). 
Part I: Simple Model Study. Monthly Weather Review (in press). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-14-0322.1.
Lubchenco, J. 2009. Testimony of Dr. Jane Lubchenco before the Senate Commerce Committee, February 12, 2009.
Lubchenco, J., M. K. McNutt, G. Dreyfus, S. A. Murawski, D. M. Kennedy, P. T. Anastas, S. Chu and T. Hunter. 2012. Science in 
support of the Deepwater Horizon response. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 109(50):20212-20221. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204729109.
Lusk, E. and K. Yelick. 2007. Languages for high-productivity computing: The DARPA HPCS language project. Parallel Pro-
cessing Letters 17:89-102. 
Maaß, N., L. Kaleschke, X. Tian-Kunze and M. Drusch. 2013. Snow thickness retrieval over thick Arctic sea ice using SMOS 
satellite data. Cryosphere 7(6):1971-1989. DOI: 10.5194/tc-7-1971-2013.
MacLachlan, C., A. Arribas, K. A. Peterson, A. Maidens, D. Fereday, A. A. Scaife, M. Gordon, M. Vellinga, A. Williams, R. E. Comer, J. 
Camp, P. Xavier and G. Madec. 2015. Global Seasonal forecast system version 5 (GloSea5): A high-resolution seasonal 
forecast system. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 141(689):1072-1084. DOI: 10.1002/qj.2396.
MacLeod, D. A., A. Jones, F. Di Giuseppe, C. Caminade and A. P. Morse. 2015. Demonstration of successful malaria fore-
casts for Botswana using an operational seasonal climate model. Environmental Research Letters 10(4). DOI: 
10.1088/1748-9326/10/4/044005.
Madden, R. A. 1976. Estimates of the natural variability of time-averaged sea-level pressure. Monthly Weather Review 
104(7):942–952. Doi:10.1175/1520-0493(1976)104.
Maddison, J. R., C. J. Cotter and P. E. Farrell. 2011a. Geostrophic balance preserving interpolation in mesh adaptive linearised 
shallow-water ocean modelling. Ocean Modelling 37(1-2):35-48. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2010.12.007.
Maddison, J. R., D. P. Marshall, C. C. Pain and M. D. Piggott. 2011b. Accurate representation of geostrophic and hydrostatic 
balance in unstructured mesh finite element ocean modelling. Ocean Modelling 39(3-4):248-261. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ocemod.2011.04.009.
Malanotte-Rizzoli, P., ed. 1996. Modern Approaches to Data Assimilation in Ocean Modeling. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Maltrud, M., S. Peacock and M. Visbeck. 2010. On the possible long-term fate of oil released in the Deepwater ­Horizon 
incident, estimated using ensembles of dye release simulations. Environmental Research Letters 5(3). DOI: 
10.1088/1748-9326/5/3/035301.
Marras, S., J. F. Kelly, M. Moragues, A. Müller, M. A. Kopera, M. Vázquez, F. X. Giraldo, G. Houzeaux and O. Jorba. 2015. A review 
of element-based Galerkin methods for numerical weather prediction: Finite elements, spectral elements, and dis-
continuous Galerkin. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering:1-50. DOI: 10.1007/s11831-015-9152-1.
Marshall, A. G. and A. A. Scaife. 2010. Improved predictability of stratospheric sudden warming events in an atmospheric 
general circulation model with enhanced stratospheric resolution. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 
115. DOI: 10.1029/2009jd012643.

303
References
Marsham, J. H., N. S. Dixon, L. Garcia-Carreras, G. M. S. Lister, D. J. Parker, P. Knippertz and C. E. Birch. 2013. The role of moist 
convection in the West African monsoon system: Insights from continental-scale convection-permitting simulations. 
Geophysical Research Letters 40(9):1843-1849. DOI: 10.1002/Grl.50347.
Mase, A. S. and L. S. Prokopy. 2014. Unrealized Potential: A review of perceptions and use of weather and climate infor-
mation in agricultural decision making. Weather Climate and Society 6(1):47-61. DOI: 10.1175/Wcas-D-12-00062.1.
Masutani, M., E. Andersson, J. Terry, O. Reale, J. C. Jusem, L. P. Riishojgaard, T. Schlatter, A. Stoffelen, J. Woollen, S. Lord, Z. 
Toth, Y. Song, D. Kleist, Y. Xie, N. Prive, E. Liu, H. Sun, D. Emmitt, S. Greco, S. A. Wood, G.-J. Marseille, R. Errico, R. Yang&, G. 
McConaughy, D. Devenyi, S. Weygandt, A. Tompkins, T. Jung, V. Anantharaj, C. Hill, P. Fitzpatrick, F. Weng, T. Zhu and S. 
Boukabara. 2007. Progress in joint OSSEs: A new nature run and international collaboration. AMS preprint for 18th 
conference on NWP, Park City, UT, June 25-29, 2007. Available at http://ams.confex.com/ams/pdfpapers/124080.pdf, 
accessed July 2, 2015.
Masutani, M., J. S. Woollen, S. J. Lord, G. D. Emmitt, T. J. Kleespies, S. A. Wood, S. Greco, H. B. Sun, J. Terry, V. Kapoor, R. Treadon 
and K. A. Campana. 2010. Observing system simulation experiments at the National Centers for Environmental Pre-
diction. Journal of Geophysical Research—Atmospheres 115. DOI: 10.1029/2009jd012528.
Mathiot, P., C. K. Beatty, T. Fichefet, H. Goosse, F. Massonnet and M. Vancoppenolle. 2012. Better constraints on the sea-
ice state using global sea-ice data assimilation. Geoscientific Model Development 5(6):1501-1515. DOI: 10.5194/
gmd-5-1501-2012.
Mattern, J. P., K. Fennel and M. Dowd. 2012. Estimating time-dependent parameters for a biological ocean model using an 
emulator approach. Journal of Marine Systems 96-97:32-47. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2012.01.015.
Mavriplis, C. 2011. The challenges of high order methods in numerical weather prediction. In Spectral and High ­Order 
­Methods for Partial Differential Equations. Selected papers from the ICOSAHOM ‘09 conference, June 22-26, 
­Trondheim, Norway. J. S. Hesthaven and E. M. Ronquist, eds. Berlin: Springer.
McNutt, M. 2015. A community for disaster science. Science 348(6230):11-11. DOI: 10.1126/science.aab2091.
McNutt, M., R. Cammilli, G. Guthrie, P. Hsieh, V. Labson, B. Lehr, D. Maclay, A. Latzel and M. Sogge. 2011. Assessment of Flow 
Rate Estimates for the Deepwater Horizon/Macondo Well Oil Spill. Flow Rate Technical Group report to the National 
Incident Command, Interagency Solutions Group. Washington, DC: US Department of the Interior.
McPhaden, M. J. 2015. Commentary: Playing hide and seek with El Niño. Nature Climate Change 5(9):791-795. DOI: 10.1038/
nclimate2775.
Meadow, A. M., D. B. Ferguson, Z. Guido, A. Horangic, G. Owen and T. Wall. 2015. Moving toward the Deliberate Co­production 
of Climate Science Knowledge. Weather Climate and Society 7(2):179-191. DOI: 10.1175/Wcas-D-14-00050.1.
Mecklenburg, S., M. Drusch, Y. H. Kerr, J. Font, M. Martin-Neira, S. Delwart, G. Buenadicha, N. Reul, E. Daganzo-Eusebio, R. Oliva 
and R. Crapolicchio. 2012. ESA’s soil moisture and ocean salinity mission: Mission performance and operations. IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 50(5):1354-1366. DOI: 10.1109/Tgrs.2012.2187666.
Meinke, H., R. Nelson, P. Kokic, R. Stone, R. Selvaraju and W. Baethgen. 2006. Actionable climate knowledge: From analysis 
to synthesis. Climate Research 33(1):101-110. DOI: 10.3354/Cr033101.
Mera, R., A. G. Laing and F. Semazzi. 2014. Moisture variability and multiscale interactions during spring in West Africa. 
Monthly Weather Review 142(9):3178-3198. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-13-00175.1.
Merryfield, W. J., W. S. Lee, G. J. Boer, V. V. Kharin, J. F. Scinocca, G. M. Flato, R. S. Ajayamohan, J. C. Fyfe, Y. M. Tang and S. 
­Polavarapu. 2013a. The Canadian seasonal to interannual prediction system. Part I: Models and initialization. Monthly 
Weather Review 141(8):2910-2945. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-12-00216.1.
Merryfield, W. J., W. S. Lee, W. Wang, M. Chen and A. Kumar. 2013b. Multi-system seasonal predictions of Arctic sea ice. 
­Geophysical Research Letters 40(8):1551-1556. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50317.
Metzger, E. J., O. M. Smedstad, P. G. Thoppil, H. E. Hurlburt, J. A. Cummings, A. J. Wallcraft, L. Zamudio, D. S. Franklin, P. G. Posey, 
M. W. Phelps, P. J. Hogan, F. L. Bub and C. J. DeHaan. 2014. US Navy operational global ocean and Arctic ice prediction 
systems. Oceanography 27(3):32-43. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2014.66.
Miller, R. N., M. Ghil and F. Gauthiez. 1994. Advanced data assimilation in strongly nonlinear dynamical systems. Journal of 
the Atmospheric Sciences 51(8):1037-1056. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0469(1994)051<1037:Adaisn>2.0.Co;2.
Milliman, J. D. and K. L. Farnsworth. 2013. River Discharge to the Coastal Ocean: A Global Synthesis. Cambridge, UK: 
­Cambridge University Press.

304
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Mills, M. J., O. B. Toon, J. Lee-Taylor and A. Robock. 2014. Multidecadal global cooling and unprecedented ozone loss follow­
ing a regional nuclear conflict. Earth’s Future 2(161-176). DOI: 10.1002/2013EF000205.
Min, Y. M., V. N. Kryjov and S. M. Oh. 2014. Assessment of APCC multimodel ensemble prediction in seasonal climate forecast-
ing: Retrospective (1983-2003) and real-time forecasts (2008-2013). Journal of Geophysical Research—Atmospheres 
119(21):12132-12150. DOI: 10.1002/2014jd022230.
Miura, H., M. Satoh, T. Nasuno, A. T. Noda and K. Oouchi. 2007. A Madden-Julian Oscillation event realistically simulated by 
a global cloud-resolving model. Science 318(5857):1763-1765. DOI: 10.1126/science.1148443.
Molesworth, A. M., L. E. Cuevas, S. J. Connor, A. P. Morse and M. C. Thomson. 2003. Environmental risk and meningitis 
­epidemics in Africa. Emerging Infectious Diseases 9(10):1287-1293. DOI: 10.3201/eid0910.030182.
Moncrieff, M. W., D. E. Waliser, M. J. Miller, M. A. Shapiro, G. R. Asrar and J. Caughey. 2012. Multiscale convective organization 
and the YOTC virtual global field campaign. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93(8):1171-1187. DOI: 
10.1175/Bams-D-11-00233.1.
Moore, G. W. K. 2013. The Novaya Zemlya Bora and its impact on Barents Sea air-sea interaction. Geophysical Research 
Letters 40(13):3462-3467. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50641.
Mori, M. and M. Watanabe. 2008. Growth and triggering mechanisms of the PNA: A MJO-PNA coherence. Journal of the 
Meteorological Society of Japan 86(1):213-236. DOI: 10.2151/Jmsj.86.213.
Morse, A. P., F. J. Doblas-Reyes, M. B. Hoshen, R. Hagedorn and T. N. Palmer. 2005. A forecast quality assessment of an 
end-to-end probabilistic multi-model seasonal forecast system using a malaria model. Tellus Series A—Dynamic 
­Meteorology and Oceanography 57(3):464-475. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0870.2005.00124.x.
Morss, R. E., J. K. Lazo, B. G. Brown, H. E. Brooks, P. T. Ganderton and B. N. Mills. 2008. Societal and economic research and 
applications for weather forecasts—Priorities for the North American THORPEX program. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 89(3):335-346. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-89-3-335.
Msadek, R., G. A. Vecchi, M. Winton and R. G. Gudgel. 2014. Importance of initial conditions in seasonal predictions of Arctic 
sea ice extent. Geophysical Research Letters 41(14):5208-5215. DOI: 10.1002/2014GL060799.
Mueller, B. and S. I. Seneviratne. 2012. Hot days induced by precipitation deficits at the global scale. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109(31):12398-12403. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204330109.
Murphy, A. H. 1977. The value of climatological, categorical and probabilistic forecasts in the cost-loss ratio situation. 
Monthly Weather Review 105:803-816. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(1977)105<0803:TVOCCA>2.0.CO;2.
Murtugudde, R., J. Beauchamp, C. R. McClain, M. Lewis and A. J. Busalacchi. 2002. Effects of penetrative radiation on 
the upper tropical ocean circulation. Journal of Climate 15(5):470-486. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015<0470: 
Eoprot>2.0.Co;2.
Myers, M. F., D. J. Rogers, J. Cox, A. Flahault and S. I. Hay. 2000. Forecasting disease risk for increased epidemic preparedness 
in public health. Advances in Parasitology 47:309-330. DOI: 10.1016/S0065-308X(00)47013-2.
Nair, R. D., H. W. Choi and H. M. Tufo. 2009. Computational aspects of a scalable high-order discontinuous Galerkin atmo-
spheric dynamical core. Computers & Fluids 38(2):309-319. DOI: 10.1016/j.compfluid.2008.04.006.
Najm, H. N. 2009. Uncertainty quantification and polynomial chaos techniques in computational fluid dynamics. Annual 
Review of Fluid Mechanics 41:35-52. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.fluid.010908.165248.
Namias, J. 1953. Thirty-day forecasting: A review of a ten-year experiment. Meteorological Monograph No. 2. American 
Meteorological Society, Washington, DC.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015a. Sea Change: 2015-2025 Decadal Survey of Ocean 
Sciences Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015b. Continuity of NASA Earth Observations from Space: 
A Value Framework. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Navon, I. M. 1998. Practical and theoretical aspects of adjoint parameter estimation and identifiability in meteorology 
and oceanography. Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans 27(1-4):55-79. DOI: 10.1016/S0377-0265(97)00032-8.
Neena, J. M., J. Y. Lee, D. Waliser, B. Wang and X. N. Jiang. 2014. Predictability of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in the Intra­
seasonal Variability Hindcast Experiment (ISVHE). Journal of Climate 27(12):4531-4543. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-13-00624.1.
Newsom, E., C. M. Bitz, F. Bryan, R. Abernathey and P. Gent. 2015. Sea ice processes control abyssal Southern Ocean heat 
uptake in a fine resolution ocean climate model. Journal of Climate (in press). 

305
References
NIDIS Program Implementation Team. 2007. The National Integrated Drought Information System Implementation Plan: 
A Pathway for National Resilience. Silver Spring, MD: NOAA.
Niiler, P. P. 2001. The world ocean surface circulation. In Ocean Circulation and Climate. G. Siedler, J. Church and J. Gould, 
eds. Kidlington, UK: Academic Press.
NOAA (National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration). 2010. Office of Hydrologic Development Hydrology Laboratory 
Strategic Science Plan. Silver Spring, MD: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NOAA. 2015. Workshop on High-Resolution Coupling and Initialization to Improve Predictability and Pre-
dictions in Climate Models. Retrieved December 8, 2015, from http://cpo.noaa.gov/ClimatePrograms/
ModelingAnalysisPredictionsandProjections/OutreachPublications/MeetingsWorkshops/HighResolutionWorkshop.
Notz, D. 2012. Challenges in simulating sea ice in Earth System Models. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews—Climate Change 
3(6):509-526. DOI: 10.1002/Wcc.189.
Nouy, A. 2007. A generalized spectral decomposition technique to solve a class of linear stochastic partial differential 
equations. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 196(45-48):4521-4537. DOI: 10.1016/j.
cma.2007.05.016.
NRC (National Research Council). 1985. The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press.
NRC. 1986. U.S. Participation in the TOGA Program: A Research Strategy. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 1991a. TOGA: A Review of Progress and Future Opportunities. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 1991b. Toward a New National Weather Service: A First Report. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 1993. Statistics and Physical Oceanography. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 1994. GOALS (Global Ocean-Atmosphere-Land System)—for Predicting Seasonal-to-Interannual Climate. ­Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 1999. Making Climate Forecasts Matter. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 2000. Improving Atmospheric Temperature Monitoring Capabilities: Letter Report. Washington, DC: National ­Academy 
Press.
NRC. 2003. Fair Weather: Effective Partnership in Weather and Climate Services. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2008. The Potential Impact of High-End Capability Computing on Four Illustrative Fields of Science and Engineering. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2009. Informing Decisions in a Changing Climate. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2010a. Facilitating Climate Change Responses: A Report of Two Workshops on Insights from the Social and Behavioral 
Sciences. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2010b. Assessment of Intraseasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction and Predictability. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press.
NRC. 2010c. When Weather Matters: Science and Service to Meet Critical Societal Needs. Washington, DC: National 
­Academies Press.
NRC. 2012a. Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2012b. A National Strategy for Advancing Climate Modeling. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2013. An Ecosystem Services Approach to Assessing the Impacts of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of 
Mexico. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC. 2014. Lessons Learned from the Fukushima Nuclear Accident for Improving Safety of U.S. Nuclear Plants. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press.
O’Donnell, M. and B. Colby. 2009. Dry-Year Water Supply Reliability Contracts: A Tool for Water Managers. Tucson, AZ: 
­University of Arizona, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics.
Oke, P. R., G. B. Brassington, D. A. Griffin and A. Schiller. 2008. The Bluelink ocean data assimilation system (BODAS). Ocean 
Modelling 21(1-2):46-70. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2007.11.002.
Oouchi, K., A. T. Noda, M. Satoh, B. Wang, S. P. Xie, H. G. Takahashi and T. Yasunari. 2009. Asian summer monsoon simulated 
by a global cloud-system-resolving model: Diurnal to intra-seasonal variability. Geophysical Research Letters 36. 
DOI: 10.1029/2009gl038271.

306
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Orsolini, Y. J., R. Senan, G. Balsamo, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, F. Vitart, A. Weisheimer, A. Carrasco and R. E. Benestad. 2013. Impact of 
snow initialization on sub-seasonal forecasts. Climate Dynamics 41(7-8):1969-1982. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-013-1782-0.
Orsolini, Y. J., L. Zhang, D. H. W. Peters, K. Fraedrich, X. H. Zhu, A. Schneidereit and B. van den Hurk. 2015. Extreme precipita-
tion events over north China in August 2010 and their link to eastward-propagating wave-trains across Eurasia: 
observations and monthly forecasting. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 141(693):3097-3105. 
DOI: 10.1002/qj.2594.
Ota, Y., J. C. Derber, E. Kalnay and T. Miyoshi. 2013. Ensemble-based observation impact estimates using the NCEP GFS. Tellus 
Series a-Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 65. DOI: 10.3402/Tellusa.V65i0.20038.
Overpeck, J. T., G. A. Meehl, S. Bony and D. R. Easterling. 2011. Climate data challenges in the 21st century. Science 
331(6018):700-702. DOI: 10.1126/science.1197869.
Paaijmans, K. P., S. Blanford, A. S. Bell, J. I. Blanford, A. F. Read and M. B. Thomas. 2010. Influence of climate on malaria trans-
mission depends on daily temperature variation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 107(34):15135-15139. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1006422107.
Pagano, T. C., H. C. Hartmann and S. Sorooshian. 2002. Factors affecting seasonal forecast use in Arizona water management: 
A case study of the 1997-98 El Nino. Climate Research 21(3):259-269. DOI: 10.3354/Cr021259.
Paley, D. A., F. M. Zhang and N. E. Leonard. 2008. Cooperative control for ocean sampling: The Glider Coordinated Control 
System. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 16(4):735-744. DOI: 10.1109/Tcst.2007.912238.
Palipane, E., J. Lu, G. Chen and J. L. Kinter. 2013. Improved annular mode variability in a global atmospheric general circula-
tion model with 16 km horizontal resolution. Geophysical Research Letters 40(18):4893-4899. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50649.
Palmer, T. 2015. Modelling: Build imprecise supercomputers. Nature 526(7571). DOI: 10.1038/526029a.
Palmer, T. N., C. Brankovic and D. S. Richardson. 2000. A probability and decision-model analysis of PROVOST seasonal 
multi-model ensemble integrations. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 126(567):2013-2033. 
DOI: 10.1256/Smsqj.56702.
Palmer, T. N., A. Alessandri, U. Andersen, P. Cantelaube, M. Davey, P. Delecluse, M. Deque, E. Diez, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, H. 
­Feddersen, R. Graham, S. Gualdi, J. F. Gueremy, R. Hagedorn, M. Hoshen, N. Keenlyside, M. Latif, A. Lazar, E. Maisonnave, 
V. Marletto, A. P. Morse, B. Orfila, P. Rogel, J. M. Terres and M. C. Thomson. 2004. Development of a European multimodel 
ensemble system for seasonal-to-interannual prediction (DEMETER). Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 
85(6):853-872. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-85-6-853.
Palmer, T. N. 2012. Towards the probabilistic Earth-system simulator: A vision for the future of climate and weather predic-
tion. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 138(665):841-861. DOI: 10.1002/qj.1923.
Palmer, T. N. 2014. More reliable forecasts with less precise computations: A fast-track route to cloud-resolved weather 
and climate simulators? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering 
Sciences 372(2018). DOI: 10.1098/Rsta.2013.0391.
Palmer, T. N., F. J. Doblas-Reyes, A. Weisheimer and M. J. Rodwell. 2008. Toward seamless prediction: Calibration of climate 
change projections using seasonal forecasts. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 89(4):459-470. DOI: 
10.1175/Bams-89-4-459.
Pandya, R., A. Hodgson, M. H. Hayden, P. Akweongo, T. Hopson, A. A. Forgor, T. Yoksas, M. A. Dalaba, V. Dukic, R. Mera, A. Dumont, 
K. McCormack, D. Anaseba, T. Awine, J. Boehnert, G. Nyaaba, A. Laing and F. Semazzi. 2015. Using weather forecasts 
to help manage meningitis in the West African Sahel. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 96(1):103-+. 
DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00121.1.
Park, S. and C. S. Bretherton. 2009. The University of Washington shallow convection and moist turbulence schemes and 
their impact on climate simulations with the Community Atmosphere Model. Journal of Climate 22(12):3449-3469. 
DOI: 10.1175/2008jcli2557.1.
Patt, A. G., L. Ogallo and M. Hellmuth. 2007. Sustainability—Learning from 10 years of climate outlook forums in Africa. 
Science 318(5847):49-50. DOI: 10.1126/science.1147909.
PCAST (President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology). 2010. Report to the President and Congress. Design­ing 
a Digital Future: Federally funded research and development in networking and information technology. ­Washington, 
DC: Executive Office of the President, President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology.

307
References
Peings, Y., H. Douville, R. Alkama and B. Decharme. 2011. Snow contribution to springtime atmospheric predictability over 
the second half of the twentieth century. Climate Dynamics 37(5-6):985-1004. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-010-0884-1.
Pepler, A. S., L. B. Díaz, C. Prodhomme, F. J. Doblas-Reyes and A. Kumar. 2015. The ability of a multi-model seasonal forecast-
ing ensemble to forecast the frequency of warm, cold and wet extremes. Weather and Climate Extremes 9:68-77. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.wace.2015.06.005.
Pham, D. T. 2001. Stochastic methods for sequential data assimilation in strongly nonlinear systems. Monthly Weather 
Review 129(5):1194-1207. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2001)129<1194:Smfsda>2.0.Co;2.
Pielke, R. and R. E. Carbone. 2002. Weather impacts, forecasts, and policy—An integrated perspective. Bulletin of the Ameri-
can Meteorological Society 83(3):393-+. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0477(2002)083<0393:Wifap>2.3.Co;2.
Pielke, R. A. 2013. Mesoscale meteorological modeling. 3rd edition. San Diego: Academic Press.
Pinardi, N. and J. Woods, eds. 2002. Ocean Forecasting: Conceptual Basis and Applications. Dordrecht: Springer.
Post, E., U. Bhatt, C. M. Bitz, J. Brodie, T. L. Fulton, M. Hebblewhite, J. Kerby, S. Kutz, I. Stirling and D. A. Walker. 2013. Sea ice as 
driver of ecological responses to climate change in the Polar Regions. Science 341. DOI: 10.1126/science.1235225.
Pritchard, M. S. and R. C. J. Somerville. 2009. Assessing the diurnal cycle of precipitation in a multi-scale climate model. 
Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 1(4). DOI: 10.3894/JAMES.2009.1.12.
Prodhomme, C., F. Doblas-Reyes, O. Bellprat and E. Dutra. 2015. Impact of land-surface initialization on sub-seasonal to 
seasonal forecasts over Europe. Climate Dynamics. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-015-2879-4.
Pullen, J., J. Chang and S. Hanna. 2013. Air-sea transport, dispersion, and fate modeling in the vicinity of the Fukushima 
Nuclear Power Plant: A special conference session summary. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 94:31-
39. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00158.1.
Pulwarty, R. S. and K. T. Redmond. 1997. Climate and salmon restoration in the Columbia River basin: The role 
and usability of seasonal forecasts. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 78(3):381-397. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0477(1997)078<0381:Casrit>2.0.Co;2.
Pulwarty, R. S., C. Simpson and C. R. Nierenberg. 2009. The Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISA) Program: 
Crafting effective assessments for the long haul. In Integrated Regional Assessments of Global Climate Changes. 
C.G. Wright and J. Jaeger, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Qian, Y., W. I. Gustafson, L. R. Leung and S. J. Ghan. 2009. Effects of soot-induced snow albedo change on snowpack and 
hydrological cycle in western United States based on Weather Research and Forecasting chemistry and regional 
climate simulations. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 114. DOI: 10.1029/2008jd011039.
Quan, X. W., P. J. Webster, A. M. Moore and H. R. Chang. 2004. Seasonality in SST-forced atmospheric short-term climate 
predictability. Journal of Climate 17(16):3090-3108. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2004)017<3090:Sisasc>2.0.Co;2.
Rabier, F., H. Jarvinen, E. Klinker, J. F. Mahfouf and A. Simmons. 2000. The ECMWF operational implementation of four-
dimensional variational assimilation. I: Experimental results with simplified physics. Quarterly Journal of the Royal 
Meteorological Society 126(564):1143-1170. DOI: 10.1256/Smsqj.56414.
Raftery, A. E., T. Gneiting, F. Balabdaoui and M. Polakowski. 2005. Using Bayesian model averaging to calibrate forecast 
ensembles. Monthly Weather Review 133(5):1155-1174. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr2906.1.
Ramp, S. R., R. E. Davis, N. E. Leonard, I. Shulman, Y. Chao, A. R. Robinson, J. Marsden, P. F. J. Lermusiaux, D. M. Fratantoni, 
J. D. Paduan, F. P. Chavez, F. L. Bahr, S. Liang, W. Leslie and Z. Li. 2009. Preparing to predict: The Second Autonomous 
Ocean Sampling Network (AOSN-II) experiment in the Monterey Bay. Deep-Sea Research Part II—Topical Studies in 
­Oceanography 56(3-5):68-86. DOI: 10.1016/j.dsr2.2008.08.013.
Randall, D., M. Branson, M. Wang, S. Ghan, C. Craig, A. Gettelman and J. Edwards. 2013. A Community Atmosphere Model 
with superparameterized clouds. Eos Transactions AGU 94(25):221. 
Rashid, H. A., H. H. Hendon, M. C. Wheeler, and O. Alves. 2011. Prediction of the Madden-Julian oscillation with the POAMA 
dynamical prediction system. Climate Dynamics 36(3-4):649-661. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-010-0754-x.
Rasmusson, E. M. and K. T. Mo. 1993. Linkages between 200-Mb tropical and extratropical circulation anomalies during the 
1986-1989 ENSO cycle. Journal of Climate 6(4):595-616. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1993)006<0595:Lbmtae>2.0.Co;2.
Reeves, R. W. and D. D. Gemmill. 2004. Climate Prediction Center: Reflections on 25 Years of Analysis, Diagnosis, and Predic-
tion. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

308
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Reul, N., S. Fournier, J. Boutin, O. Hernandez, C. Maes, B. Chapron, G. Alory, Y. Quilfen, J. Tenerelli, S. Morisset, Y. Kerr, S. 
­Mecklenburg and S. Delwart. 2014. Sea surface salinity observations from space with the SMOS satellite: A new 
means to monitor the marine branch of the water cycle. Surveys in Geophysics 35(3):681-722. DOI: 10.1007/
s10712-013-9244-0.
Richter, I., S.-P. Xie, S. K. Behera, T. Doi and Y. Masumoto. 2012. Equatorial Atlantic variability and its relation to mean state 
biases in CMIP5. Climate Dynamics 42(1-2):171-188. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-012-1624-5.
Riddle, E. E., A. H. Butler, J. C. Furtado, J. L. Cohen and A. Kumar. 2013. CFSv2 ensemble prediction of the wintertime Arctic 
Oscillation. Climate Dynamics 41(3-4):1099-1116. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-013-1850-5.
Rienecker, M. M. 2003. Report of the Coupled Data Assimilation Workshop (NOAA/OGP), Portland, OR, April 21-23.
Rienecker, M. M., M. J. Suarez, R. Gelaro, R. Todling, J. Bacmeister, E. Liu, M. G. Bosilovich, S. D. Schubert, L. Takacs, G. K. Kim, S. 
Bloom, J. Y. Chen, D. Collins, A. Conaty, A. Da Silva, W. Gu, J. Joiner, R. D. Koster, R. Lucchesi, A. Molod, T. Owens, S. Pawson, 
P. Pegion, C. R. Redder, R. Reichle, F. R. Robertson, A. G. Ruddick, M. Sienkiewicz and J. Woollen. 2011. MERRA: NASA’s 
modern-era retrospective analysis for research and applications. Journal of Climate 24(14):3624-3648. DOI: 10.1175/
Jcli-D-11-00015.1.
Rigor, I. G., J. M. Wallace and R. L. Colony. 2002. Response of sea ice to the Arctic oscillation. Journal of Climate 15(18):2648-
2663. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015<2648:Rositt>2.0.Co;2.
Riser, S. C., H. J. Freeland, D. Roemmich, S. Wijffels, Ariel Troisi, M. Belbéoch, D. Gilbert, J. Xu, S. Pouliquen, A. Thresher, P.-Y. L. 
Traon, G. Maze, B. Klein, M. Ravichandran, F. Grant, P.-M. Poulain, T. Suga, B. Lim, A. Sterl, P. Sutton, Kjell-Arne Mork, P. J. 
Vélez-Belchí, I. Ansorge, B. King, J. Turton, M. Baringer and S. R. Jayne. 2016. Fifteen years of ocean observations with 
the global Argo array. Nature Climate Change 6:145-153. DOI: 10.1038/nclimate2872.
Roads, J. O. 1999. Jerome Namias, 1910-1996: A Biographical Memoir. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Robertson, A. W., W. Baethgen, P. Block, U. Lall, A. Sankarasubramanian, F. d. A. d. S. Filho and K. M. J. Verbist. 2014. Climate risk 
management for water in semi-arid regions. Earth Perspectives 1(12). DOI: 10.1186/2194-6434-1-12.
Robertson, A. W., A. Kumar, M. Pena and F. Vitart. 2015. Improving and promoting subseasonal to seasonal prediction. 
­Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 96(3):Es49-Es53. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-14-00139.1.
Robinson, A. R., ed. 1983 Eddies in Marine Science. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Robinson, A. R., P. F. J. Lermusiaux and N. Q. Sloan. 1998. Data Assimilation. In The Sea: The Global Coastal Ocean, Vol. 10: 
Processes and Methods. K. H. Brink and A. R. Robinson, eds. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Robinson, A. R., P. J. Haley, P. F. J. Lermusiaux and W. G. Leslie. 2002. Predictive Skill, Predictive Capability and Predictability 
in Ocean Forecasting. In Proceedings of the OCEANS 2002 MTS/IEEE conference, ed. Biloxi, MS: Holland Publications.
Robinson, I. 2006. Satellite Measurements for Operational Ocean Models. In Ocean Weather Forecasting: An Integrated 
View of Oceanography. E. P. Chassignet and J. Verron, eds. Dordrecht: Springer.
Rodell, M., P. R. Houser, U. Jambor, J. Gottschalck, K. Mitchell, C. J. Meng, K. Arsenault, B. Cosgrove, J. Radakovich, M. Bosilovich, 
J. K. Entin, J. P. Walker, D. Lohmann and D. Toll. 2004. The global land data assimilation system. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 85(3):381-394. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-85-3-381.
Rodney, M., H. Lin and J. Derome. 2013. subseasonal prediction of wintertime North American surface air temperature 
during strong MJO events. Monthly Weather Review 141(8):2897-2909. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-12-00221.1.
Roe, R. and T. Wilkie. 2015. The new realism: Software runs slowly on supercomputers. Scientific Computing World(143). 
Roehrig, R., D. Bouniol, F. Guichard, F. Hourdin and J.-L. Redelsperger. 2013. The present and future of the West African 
­monsoon: A process-oriented assessment of CMIP5 simulations along the AMMA transect. Journal of Climate 
26:6471-6505. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00505.1.
Roff, G., D. W. J. Thompson and H. Hendon. 2011. Does increasing model stratospheric resolution improve extended-range 
forecast skill? Geophysical Research Letters 38. DOI: 10.1029/2010gl046515.
Roquet, F., C. Wunsch, G. Forget, P. Heimbach, C. Guinet, G. Reverdin, J. B. Charrassin, F. Bailleul, D. P. Costa, L. A. Huckstadt, K. T. 
Goetz, K. M. Kovacs, C. Lydersen, M. Biuw, O. A. Nost, H. Bornemann, J. Ploetz, M. N. Bester, T. McIntyre, M. C. Muelbert, 
M. A. Hindell, C. R. McMahon, G. Williams, R. Harcourt, I. C. Field, L. Chafik, K. W. Nicholls, L. Boehme, and M. A. Fedak. 2013. 
Estimates of the Southern Ocean general circulation improved by animal-borne instruments. Geophysical Research 
Letters 40(23):6176-6180. DOI: 10.1002/2013GL058304.

309
References
Roulston, M. S. and L. A. Smith. 2004. The Boy who Cried Wolf revisited: The impact of false alarm intolerance on cost-loss 
scenarios. Weather and Forecasting 19(2):391-397. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0434(2004)019<0391:Tbwcwr>2.0.Co;2.
Roundy, J. K. and E. F. Wood. 2015. The attribution of land-atmosphere interactions on the seasonal predictability of drought. 
Journal of Hydrometeorology 16(2):793-810. DOI: 10.1175/Jhm-D-14-0121.1.
Roundy, J. K., C. R. Ferguson and E. F. Wood. 2014. Impact of land-atmospheric coupling in CFSv2 on drought prediction. 
Climate Dynamics 43(1-2):421-434. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-013-1982-7.
Ruf, C., A. Lyons, M. Unwin, J. Dickinson, R. Rose, D. Rose and M. Vincent. 2013. CYGNSS: Enabling the future of hurricane 
prediction. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 1(2):52-67. DOI: 10.1109/MGRS.2013.2260911.
Ruiz, J. and M. Pulido. 2015. Parameter estimation using ensemble-based data assimilation in the presence of model error. 
Monthly Weather Review 143(5):1568-1582. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr-D-14-00017.1.
Saha, S., S. Nadiga, C. Thiaw, J. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. M. Van den Dool, H. L. Pan, S. Moorthi, D. Behringer, D. Stokes, M. 
Pena, S. Lord, G. White, W. Ebisuzaki, P. Peng and P. Xie. 2006. The NCEP Climate Forecast System. Journal of Climate 
19(15):3483-3517. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli3812.1.
Saha, S., S. Moorthi, H. L. Pan, X. R. Wu, J. D. Wang, S. Nadiga, P. Tripp, R. Kistler, J. Woollen, D. Behringer, H. X. Liu, D. Stokes, R. 
Grumbine, G. Gayno, J. Wang, Y. T. Hou, H. Y. Chuang, H. M. H. Juang, J. Sela, M. Iredell, R. Treadon, D. Kleist, P. Van Delst, D. 
Keyser, J. Derber, M. Ek, J. Meng, H. L. Wei, R. Q. Yang, S. Lord, H. Van den Dool, A. Kumar, W. Q. Wang, C. Long, M. Chelliah, 
Y. Xue, B. Y. Huang, J. K. Schemm, W. Ebisuzaki, R. Lin, P. P. Xie, M. Y. Chen, S. T. Zhou, W. Higgins, C. Z. Zou, Q. H. Liu, Y. Chen, 
Y. Han, L. Cucurull, R. W. Reynolds, G. Rutledge and M. Goldberg. 2010. The NCEP climate forecast system reanalysis. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(8):1015-1057. DOI: 10.1175/2010bams3001.1.
Saha, S., S. Moorthi, X. R. Wu, J. Wang, S. Nadiga, P. Tripp, D. Behringer, Y. T. Hou, H. Y. Chuang, M. Iredell, M. Ek, J. Meng, R. Q. 
Yang, M. P. Mendez, H. Van Den Dool, Q. Zhang, W. Q. Wang, M. Y. Chen and E. Becker. 2014. The NCEP Climate Forecast 
System Version 2. Journal of Climate 27(6):2185-2208. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-12-00823.1.
Sakov, P., F. Counillon, L. Bertino, K. A. Lisaeter, P. R. Oke and A. Korablev. 2012. TOPAZ4: An ocean-sea ice data assimilation 
system for the North Atlantic and Arctic. Ocean Science 8(4):633-656. DOI: 10.5194/os-8-633-2012.
Sandgathe, S., B. Brown, B. Etherton and E. Tollerud. 2013. Designing multimodel ensembles requires meaningful meth-
odologies. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 94(12):Es183-Es185. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-12-00234.1.
Sapsis, T. P. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2009. Dynamically orthogonal field equations for continuous stochastic dynamical 
systems. Physica D—Nonlinear Phenomena 238(23-24):2347-2360. DOI: 10.1016/j.physd.2009.09.017.
Sapsis, T. P. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2012. Dynamical criteria for the evolution of the stochastic dimensionality in flows with 
uncertainty. Physica D—Nonlinear Phenomena 241(1):60-76. DOI: 10.1016/j.physd.2011.10.001.
Sato, T., H. Miura, M. Satoh, Y. N. Takayabu and Y. Q. Wang. 2009. Diurnal cycle of precipitation in the tropics simulated in a 
global cloud-resolving model. Journal of Climate 22(18):4809-4826. DOI: 10.1175/2009jcli2890.1.
Satoh, M., S. Iga, H. Tomita, Y. Tsushima and A. T. Noda. 2012. Response of upper clouds in global warming experiments 
obtained using a global nonhydrostatic model with explicit cloud processes. Journal of Climate 25(6):2178-2191. 
DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-11-00152.1.
Savelli, S. and S. Joslyn. 2012. Boater safety: Communicating weather forecast information to high-stakes end users. Weather 
Climate and Society 4(1):7-19. DOI: 10.1175/Wcas-D-11-00025.1.
Scaife, A. A., D. Copsey, C. Gordon, C. Harris, T. Hinton, S. Keeley, A. O’Neill, M. Roberts and K. Williams. 2011. Improved Atlantic 
winter blocking in a climate model. Geophysical Research Letters 38. DOI: 10.1029/2011gl049573.
Scaife, A. A., A. Arribas, E. Blockley, A. Brookshaw, R. T. Clark, N. Dunstone, R. Eade, D. Fereday, C. K. Folland, M. Gordon, L. 
­Hermanson, J. R. Knight, D. J. Lea, C. MacLachlan, A. Maidens, M. Martin, A. K. Peterson, D. Smith, M. Vellinga, E. Wallace, 
J. Waters and A. Williams. 2014a. Skillful long-range prediction of European and North American winters. Geophysical 
Research Letters 41(7):2514-2519. DOI: 10.1002/2014GL059637.
Scaife, A. A., M. Athanassiadou, M. Andrews, A. Arribas, M. Baldwin, N. Dunstone, J. Knight, C. MacLachlan, E. Manzini, W. A. 
Muller, H. Pohlmann, D. Smith, T. Stockdale and A. Williams. 2014b. Predictability of the quasi-biennial oscillation and 
its northern winter teleconnection on seasonal to decadal timescales. Geophysical Research Letters 41(5):1752-1758. 
DOI: 10.1002/2013gl059160.
Schiller, A. and G. B. Brassington, Eds. 2011. Operational Oceanography in the 21st Century. Dordrecht: Springer.

310
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Schofield, O., S. Glenn, J. Orcutt, M. Arrott, M. Meisinger, A. Gangopadhyay, W. Brown, R. Signell, M. Moline, Y. Chao, S. Chien, D. 
Thompson, A. Balasuriya, P. F. J. Lermusiaux and M. Oliver. 2010. Automated sensor network to advance ocean science. 
Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union 91(39):345-346. 
Screen, J. A., I. Simmonds and K. Keay. 2011. Dramatic interannual changes of perennial Arctic sea ice linked to abnormal 
summer storm activity. Journal of Geophysical Research—Atmospheres 116. DOI: 10.1029/2011jd015847.
Semtner, A. J. 1995. Modeling Ocean Circulation. Science 269(5229):1379-1385. DOI: 10.1126/science.269.5229.1379.
Shapiro, M., J. Shukla, G. Brunet, C. Nobre, M. Beland, R. Dole, K. Trenberth, R. Anthes, G. Asrar, L. Barrie, P. Bougeault, G. 
­Brasseur, D. Burridge, A. Busalacchi, J. Caughey, D. L. Chen, J. Church, T. Enomoto, B. Hoskins, O. Hov, A. Laing, H. Le Treut, 
J. ­Marotzke, G. McBean, G. Meehl, M. Miller, B. Mills, J. Mitchell, M. Moncrieff, T. Nakazawa, H. Olafsson, T. Palmer, D. 
Parsons, D. Rogers, A. Simmons, A. Troccoli, Z. Toth, L. Uccellini, C. Velden and J. M. Wallace. 2010. An Earth-system 
prediction initiative for the Twenty-First Century. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91(10):1377-1388. 
DOI: 10.1175/2010BAMS2944.1.
Sherwood, S. C., S. Bony and J. L. Dufresne. 2014. Spread in model climate sensitivity traced to atmospheric convective 
mixing. Nature 505(7481):37-42. DOI: 10.1038/nature12829.
Shukla, J. 1998. Predictability in the midst of chaos: A scientific basis for climate forecasting. Science 282(5389):728-731. 
DOI: 10.1126/science.282.5389.728.
Shukla, J., J. Anderson, D. Baumhefner, C. Brankovic, Y. Chang, E. Kalnay, L. Marx, T. Palmer, D. Paolino, J. Ploshay, S. Schubert, 
D. Straus, M. Suarez and J. Tribbia. 2000. Dynamical seasonal prediction. Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society 81(11):2593-2606. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0477(2000)081<2593:Dsp>2.3.Co;2.
Siegel, D. A., J. C. Ohlmann, L. Washburn, R. R. Bidigare, C. T. Nosse, E. Fields and Y. M. Zhou. 1995. Solar Radiation, Phyto­
plankton Pigments, and the Radiant Heating of the Equatorial Pacific Warm Pool. Journal of Geophysical Research-
Oceans 100(C3):4885-4891. DOI: 10.1029/94jc03128.
Sigmond, M., J. F. Scinocca, V. V. Kharin and T. G. Shepherd. 2013. Enhanced seasonal forecast skill following stratospheric 
sudden warmings. Nature Geoscience 6(2):98-102. DOI: 10.1038/Ngeo1698.
Slingo, J., K. Bates, N. Nikiforakis, M. Piggott, M. Roberts, L. Shaffrey, I. Stevens, P. L. Vidale and H. Weller. 2009. Developing 
the next-generation climate system models: challenges and achievements. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society A—Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 367(1890):815-831. DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2008.0207.
Sluka, T., S. Penny, E. Kalnay and T. Miyoshi. 2015. Using strongly coupled ensemble data assimilation to assimilate atmo-
spheric observations into the ocean. Geophysical Research Letters (submitted). 
Smedstad, O. M. and J. J. Obrien. 1991. Variational data assimilation and parameter-estimation in an equatorial Pacific Ocean 
model. Progress in Oceanography 26(2):179-241. DOI: 10.1016/0079-6611(91)90002-4.
Smith, M. J., P. I. Palmer, D. W. Purves, M. C. Vanderwel, V. Lyutsarev, B. Calderhead, L. N. Joppa, C. M. Bishop and S. Emmott. 
2014. Changing how Earth system modeling is done to provide more useful information for decision making, science, 
and society. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95(9):1453-1464. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00080.1.
Smith, P. J., G. D. Thornhill, S. L. Dance, A. S. Lawless, D. C. Mason and N. K. Nichols. 2013. Data assimilation for state and 
parameter estimation: application to morphodynamic modelling. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological 
Society 139(671):314-327. DOI:  10.1002/Qj.1944.
Smith, P. J., A. M. Fowler and A. S. Lawless. 2015a. Exploring strategies for coupled 4D-Var data assimilation using an 
idealised atmosphere-ocean model. Tellus Series A—Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 67. DOI: 10.3402/
Tellusa.V67.27025.
Smith, P. J., A. M. Fowler and A. S. Lawless. 2015b. Exploring strategies for coupled 4DVAR data assimilation using an idealised 
atmosphere-ocean model. Tellus A 67. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/tellusa.v67.27025.
Smith, R. B. 2013. The Lower Atmospheric Observing Facilities Workshop: Meeting the Challenges of Climate System Sci-
ence. June 18-19, 2012, Boulder, Colorado. Boulder, CO: University Corporation for Atmospheric Research.
Sobczyk, K. 2001. Information dynamics: Premises, challenges and results. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 
15(3):475-498. DOI: 10.1006/mssp.2000.1378.
Sobolowski, S., G. Gong and M. F. Ting. 2010. Modeled Climate State and Dynamic Responses to Anomalous North American 
Snow Cover. Journal of Climate 23(3):785-799. DOI: 10.1175/2009JCLI3219.1.

311
References
Sondergaard, T. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2013a. Data assimilation with gaussian mixture models using the ­dynamically 
orthogonal field equations. Part II: Applications. Monthly Weather Review 141(6):1761-1785. DOI: 10.1175/
Mwr-D-11-00296.1.
Sondergaard, T. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2013b. Data assimilation with Gaussian mixture models using the dynamically 
orthogonal field equations. Part I: Theory and scheme. Monthly Weather Review 141(6):1737-1760. DOI: 10.1175/
Mwr-D-11-00295.1.
Srinivasan, G., K. M. Rafisura and A. R. Subbiah. 2011. Climate information requirements for community-level risk manage-
ment and adaptation. Climate Research 47(1-2):5-12. DOI: 10.3354/Cr00962.
Stan, C., M. Khairoutdinov, C. A. DeMott, V. Krishnamurthy, D. M. Straus, D. A. Randall, J. L. Kinter and J. Shukla. 2010. An 
ocean-atmosphere climate simulation with an embedded cloud resolving model. Geophysical Research Letters 37. 
DOI: 10.1029/2009gl040822.
Stark, J. D., J. Ridley, M. Martin and A. Hines. 2008. Sea ice concentration and motion assimilation in a sea ice-ocean model. 
Journal of Geophysical Research—Oceans 113(C5). DOI: 10.1029/2007jc004224.
Stickler, A., S. Bronnimann, M. A. Valente, J. Bethke, A. Sterin, S. Jourdain, E. Roucaute, M. V. Vasquez, D. A. Reyes, R. Allan and 
D. Dee. 2014. ERA-CLIM Historical surface and upper-air data for future reanalyses. Bulletin of the American Meteo-
rological Society 95(9):1419-1430. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00147.1.
Stockdale, T. N., D. L. T. Anderson, M. A. Balmaseda, F. Doblas-Reyes, L. Ferranti, K. Mogensen, T. N. Palmer, F. Molteni and F. 
Vitart. 2011. ECMWF seasonal forecast system 3 and its prediction of sea surface temperature. Climate Dynamics 
37(3-4):455-471. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-010-0947-3.
Stoffelen, A., G. J. Marseille, F. Bouttier, D. Vasiljevic, S. de Haan and C. Cardinali. 2006. ADM-Aeolus Doppler wind lidar 
observation system simulation experiment. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 132:1927-1947. 
Stommel, H. M. 1989. The Slocum Mission. Oceanography 2(1):22-25. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.1989.26.
Straus, D., J. Shukla, D. Paolino, S. Schubert, M. Suarez, P. Pegion and A. Kumar. 2003. Predictability of the seasonal 
mean atmospheric circulation during autumn, winter, and spring. Journal of Climate 16(22):3629-3649. DOI: Doi 
10.1175/1520-0442(2003)016<3629:Potsma>2.0.Co;2.
Strong, C. and I. G. Rigor. 2013. Arctic marginal ice zone trending wider in summer and narrower in winter. Geophysical 
Research Letters 40(18):4864-4868. DOI: 10.1002/grl.50928.
Su, H., Z. L. Yang, R. E. Dickinson, C. R. Wilson and G. Y. Niu. 2010. Multisensor snow data assimilation at the continental scale: 
The value of Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment terrestrial water storage information. Journal of Geophysical 
Research—Atmospheres 115. DOI: 10.1029/2009jd013035.
Suarez, P. and A. Tall. 2010. Towards forecast-based humanitarian decisions: Climate science to get from early warning to 
early action. London: Humanitarian Futures Programme, Kings College.
Subramani, D. N., T. Lolla, P. J. Haley Jr. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2015. A stochastic optimization method for energy-based path 
planning. In Dynamic Data-driven Environmental Systems Science Conference: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 
S. Ravela and A. Sandu, eds. Berlin: Springer International Publishing, in Press.
Sultan, B., K. Labadi, J. F. Guegan and S. Janicot. 2005. Climate drives the meningitis epidemics onset in West Africa. PLOS 
Medicine 2(1):43-49. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020006.
Tabatabaeenejad, A., M. Burgin, X. Y. Duan and M. Moghaddam. 2015. P-band radar retrieval of subsurface soil moisture 
profile as a second-order polynomial: First AirMOSS results. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
53(2):645-658. DOI: 10.1109/Tgrs.2014.2326839.
Takahara, H. and D. Parks. 2008. NEC High Performance Computing. Presented at World Modelling Summit for Climate 
Prediction, May 6-9, 2008, Reading, UK.
Tang, W. Q., S. H. Yueh, A. G. Fore and A. Hayashi. 2014. Validation of Aquarius sea surface salinity with in situ measure-
ments from Argo floats and moored buoys. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 119(9):6171-6189. DOI: 
10.1002/2014JC010101.
Tarantola, A. 2005. Inverse problem theory and methods for model parameter estimation. Philadelphia, PA: Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathmatics.
Tardif, R., G. J. Hakim and C. Snyder. 2014. Coupled atmosphere-ocean data assimilation experiments with a low-order 
climate model. Climate Dynamics 43(5-6):1631-1643. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-013-1989-0.

312
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer and G. A. Meehl. 2012. An overview of CMIP5 and the experiment design. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 93(4):485-498. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-11-00094.1.
Thacker, W. C., A. Srinivasan, M. Iskandarani, O. M. Knio and M. Le Henaff. 2012. Propagating boundary uncertainties using 
polynomial expansions. Ocean Modelling 43-44:52-63. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2011.11.011.
Thacker, W. C., M. Iskandarani, R. C. Goncalves, A. Srinivasan and O. M. Knio. 2015. Pragmatic aspects of uncertainty propaga-
tion: A conceptual review. Ocean Modelling 95:25-36. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2015.09.001.
Theurich, G., C. DeLuca, T. Campbell, F. Liu, K. Saint, M. Vertenstein, J. Chen, R. Oehmke, J. Doyle, T. Whitcomb, A. Wallcraft, 
M. Iredell, T. Black, A. M. da Silva, T. Clune, R. Ferraro, P. Li, M. Kelley, I. Aleinov, V. Balaji, N. Zadeh, R. Jacob, B. Kirtman, F. 
Giraldo, D. McCarren, S. Sandgathe, S. Peckham and R. Dunlap IV. 2015 The Earth system prediction suite: Toward a co-
ordinated U.S. modeling capability. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/
BAMS-D-14-00164.1.
Thiaw, W. M. and V. B. Kumar. 2015. NOAA’S African desk: Twenty years of developing capacity in weather and climate fore-
casting in Africa. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 96(5). DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-13-00274.1.
Thomas, J. A., A. A. Berg and W. J. Merryfield. 2015. Influence of snow and soil moisture initialization on sub-seasonal pre-
dictability and forecast skill in boreal spring. Climate Dynamics. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-015-2821-9.
Thompson, D. W. J. and J. M. Wallace. 2000. Annular modes in the extratropical circulation. Part I: Month-to-month variability. 
Journal of Climate 13(5):1000-1016. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2000)013<1000:Amitec>2.0.Co;2.
Thompson, D. W. J., M. P. Baldwin and J. M. Wallace. 2002. Stratospheric connection to Northern Hemisphere wintertime 
weather: Implications for prediction. Journal of Climate 15(12):1421-1428. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015<1421: 
Sctnhw>2.0.Co;2.
Thomson, M. C., S. J. Mason, T. Phindela, and S. J. Connor. 2005. Use of rainfall and sea surface temperature monitoring for 
malaria early warning in Botswana. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 73(1):214-221.
Thomson, M. C., F. J. Doblas-Reyes, S. J. Mason, R. Hagedorn, S. J. Connor, T. Phindela, A. P. Morse and T. N. Palmer. 2006a. 
Malaria early warnings based on seasonal climate forecasts from multi-model ensembles. Nature 439(7076):576-579. 
DOI: 10.1038/Nature04503.
Thomson, M. C., A. M. Molesworth, M. H. Djingarey, K. R. Yameogo, F. Belanger and L. E. Cuevas. 2006b. Potential of environ-
mental models to predict meningitis epidemics in Africa. Tropical Medicine & International Health 11(6):781-788. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2006.01630.x.
Thomson, M. C., E. Firth, M. Jancloes, A. Mihretie, M. Onoda, S. Nickovic, H. Broutin, S. Sow, W. Perea, E. Bertherat, and S. 
Hugonnet. 2013. A Climate and Health Partnership to Inform the Prevention and Control of Meningoccocal Meningi-
tis in Sub-Saharan Africa: The MERIT Initiative In Climate Science for Serving Society: Research, Modeling and Prediction 
Priorities. G. R. Asrar and J. W. Hurrell, eds. Dorcrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Thomson, M. C., S. Mason, B. Platzer, A. Mihretie, J. Omumbo, G. Mantilla, P. Ceccato, M. Jancloes and S. Connor. 2014. Climate 
and health in Africa. Earth Perspectives 1(17). DOI: 10.1186/2194-6434-1-17.
Timmermans, R. M. A., W. A. Lahoz, J.-L. Attié, V.-H. Peuch, R. L. Curier, D. P. Edwards, H. J. Eskes and P. J. H. Builtjes. 2015. Observ-
ing system simulation experiments for air quality. Atmospheric Environment 115:199-213. 
Tippett, M. K., J. L. Anderson, C. H. Bishop, T. M. Hamill and J. S. Whitaker. 2003. Ensemble square root filters. Monthly Weather 
Review 131(7):1485-1490. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2003)131<1485:Esrf>2.0.Co;2.
Tollefson, J. 2014. El Niño monitoring system in failure mode. Nature. DOI: 10.1038/nature.2014.14582.
Tompkins, A. M. and F. Di Giuseppe. 2015. Potential predictability of malaria in Africa using ECMWF monthly and seasonal 
climate forecasts. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 54(3):521-540. DOI: 10.1175/Jamc-D-14-0156.1.
Toniazzo, T. and S. Woolnough. 2014. Development of warm SST errors in the southern tropical Atlantic in CMIP5 decadal 
hindcasts. Climate Dynamics 43(11):2889-2913. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-013-1691-2.
Treadon, R. E. 1996. Physical initialization in the NMC global data assimilation system. Meteorology and Atmospheric 
Physics 60(1-3):57-86. DOI: 10.1007/Bf01029786.
Trenberth, K. E., G. W. Branstator, D. Karoly, A. Kumar, N. C. Lau and C. Ropelewski. 1998. Progress during TOGA in understand-
ing and modeling global teleconnections associated with tropical sea surface temperatures. Journal of Geophysical 
Research-Oceans 103(C7):14291-14324. DOI: 10.1029/97jc01444.

313
References
Trudinger, C., M. Raupach, P. Rayner and I. Enting. 2008. Using the Kalman filter for parameter estimation in biogeochemic 
models. Environmetrics 19(849-870). DOI: 10.1002/env.910.
Tsamados, M., D. L. Feltham and A. V. Wilchinsky. 2013. Impact of a new anisotropic rheology on simulations of Arctic sea 
ice. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 118(1):91-107. DOI: 10.1029/2012jc007990.
Tseng, W. L., B. J. Tsuang, N. S. Keenlyside, H. H. Hsu and C. Y. Tu. 2015. Resolving the upper-ocean warm layer improves the 
simulation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation. Climate Dynamics 44(5-6):1487-1503. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-014-2315-1.
Tsuyuki, T. 1997. Variational data assimilation in the tropics using precipitation data .3. Assimilation of SSM/I precipita-
tion rates. Monthly Weather Review 125(7):1447-1464. DOI: Doi 10.1175/1520-0493(1997)125<1447:Vdaitt>2.0.Co;2.
Ueckermann, M. P., P. F. J. Lermusiaux and T. P. Sapsis. 2013. Numerical schemes for dynamically orthogonal equations of 
stochastic fluid and ocean flows. Journal of Computational Physics 233:272-294. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2012.08.041.
Ueckermann, M. P. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. 2016. Hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin projection methods for Navier-Stokes 
and Boussinesq equations. Journal of Computational Physics 306:390-421. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2015.11.028.
Uppala, S. M., P. W. Kallberg, A. J. Simmons, U. Andrae, V. D. Bechtold, M. Fiorino, J. K. Gibson, J. Haseler, A. Hernandez, G. A. Kelly, 
X. Li, K. Onogi, S. Saarinen, N. Sokka, R. P. Allan, E. Andersson, K. Arpe, M. A. Balmaseda, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. Van De Berg, 
J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, S. Caires, F. Chevallier, A. Dethof, M. Dragosavac, M. Fisher, M. Fuentes, S. Hagemann, E. Holm, B. J. 
Hoskins, L. Isaksen, P. A. E. M. Janssen, R. Jenne, A. P. McNally, J. F. Mahfouf, J. J. Morcrette, N. A. Rayner, R. W. Saunders, P. 
Simon, A. Sterl, K. E. Trenberth, A. Untch, D. Vasiljevic, P. Viterbo and J. Woollen. 2005. The ERA-40 re-analysis. Quarterly 
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 131(612):2961-3012. DOI: 10.1256/qj.04.176.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2014. Fostering Innovation, Creating Jobs, Driving Better Decisions: The Value of Govern-
ment Data. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration.
U.S. Navy Task Force Climate Change. 2014. The United States Navy Arctic Roadmap for 2014 to 2030. Washington, DC: 
US Navy.
USCG (U.S. Coast Guard). 2013. U.S. Coast Guard Arctic Strategy. Washington, DC: USCG Headquarters.
USGCRP IGIM (U.S. Global Change Research Program Interagency Group on Integrative Modeling). 2015. Report of the 
First U.S. Climate Modeling Summit (USCMS), NOAA Center for Weather and Climate Prediction, College Park, MD, 
April 26, 2015. Washington, DC: USGCRP.
Uttal, T., J. A. Curry, M. G. McPhee, D. K. Perovich, R. E. Moritz, J. A. Maslanik, P. S. Guest, H. L. Stern, J. A. Moore, R. Turenne, 
A. Heiberg, M. C. Serreze, D. P. Wylie, O. G. Persson, C. A. Paulson, C. Halle, J. H. Morison, P. A. Wheeler, A. Makshtas, 
H. Welch, M. D. Shupe, J. M. Intrieri, K. Stamnes, R. W. Lindsey, R. Pinkel, W. S. Pegau, T. P. Stanton and T. C. Grenfeld. 
2002. Surface heat budget of the Arctic Ocean. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 83(2):255-275. DOI: 
10.1175/1520-0477(2002)083<0255:Shbota>2.3.Co;2.
van Leeuwen, P. J. 2009. Particle filtering in geophysical systems. Monthly Weather Review 137(12):4089-4114. DOI: 
10.1175/2009mwr2835.1.
Vancoppenolle, M., K. M. Meiners, C. Michel, L. Bopp, F. Brabant, G. Carnat, B. Delille, D. Lannuzel, G. Madec, S. Moreau, J. L. 
Tison and P. van der Merwe. 2013. Role of sea ice in global biogeochemical cycles: Emerging views and challenges. 
Quaternary Science Reviews 79:207-230. DOI: 10.1016/j.quascirev.2013.04.011.
Vecchi, G. A., M. Zhao, H. Wang, G. Villarini, A. Rosati, A. Kumar, I. M. Held and R. Gudgel. 2011. Statistical-dynamical predictions of 
seasonal North Atlantic hurricane activity. Monthly Weather Review 139(4):1070-1082. DOI: 10.1175/2010MWR3499.1.
Vedda, J. A. 2011. Climate change and national security: Implications for space systems. Crosslink 12(2). 
Vintzileos, A. and D. Behringer. 2008. On the importance of atmospheric and oceanic initial conditions for forecasting the 
MJO. Abstract #A52B-05. Presented at American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting, San Fransisco, CA.
Visbeck, M., E. P. Chassignet, R. G. Curry, T. L. Delworth, R. R. Dickson and G. Krahmann. 2003. The Ocean’s Response to North 
Atlantic Oscillation Variability. In The North Atlantic Oscillation: Climatic Significance and Environmental Impact. J. 
W. Hurrell, Y. Kushnir, G. Ottersen, and M. Visbeck, eds. Washington, D C: American Geophysical Union.
Vitart, F. 2013. Evolution of ECMWF sub-seasonal forecast skill scores over the past 10 years. ECMWF Research Dept. 
Tech. Memo. 220. Available at http://old.ecmwf.int/publications/library/ecpublications/_pdf/tm/601-700/tm694.
pdf, ­accessed September 2, 2015.
Vitart, F. 2014. Evolution of ECMWF sub-seasonal forecast skill scores. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 
140(683):1889-1899. DOI: 10.1002/Qj.2256.

314
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Vitart, F. and T. Jung. 2010. Impact of the Northern Hemisphere extratropics on the skill in predicting the Madden Julian 
Oscillation. Geophysical Research Letters 37. DOI: 10.1029/2010gl045465.
Vitart, F. and F. Molteni. 2010. Simulation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation and its teleconnections in the ECMWF forecast 
system. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 136(649):842-855. DOI: 10.1002/qj.623.
Vitart, F., M. R. Huddleston, M. Deque, D. Peake, T. N. Palmer, T. N. Stockdale, M. K. Davey, S. Ineson and A. Weisheimer. 2007a. 
Dynamically-based seasonal forecasts of Atlantic tropical storm activity issued in June by EUROSIP. Geophysical 
Research Letters 34(16). DOI: 10.1029/2007gl030740.
Vitart, F., S. Woolnough, M. A. Balmaseda and A. M. Tompkins. 2007b. Monthly forecast of the Madden-Julian Oscillation 
using a coupled GCM. Monthly Weather Review 135(7):2700-2715. DOI: 10.1175/Mwr3415.1.
Vitart, F., R. Buizza, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, J. R. Bidlot, A. Bonet, M. Fuentes, A. Hofstadler, F. Molteni and T. N. Palmer. 
2008. The new VarEPS-monthly forecasting system: A first step towards seamless prediction. Quarterly Journal of 
the Royal Meteorological Society 134(636):1789-1799. DOI: 10.1002/qj.322.
Vitart, F., A. W. Robertson and D. L. T. Anderson. 2012. Subseasonal to seasonal prediction project: Bridging the gap between 
weather and climate. WMO Bulletin 61(2):23-28. 
Vitart, F., G. Balsamo, R. Buizza, L. Ferranti, S. Keeley, L. Magnusson, F. Molteni and A. Weisheimer. 2014. Sub-seasonal predic-
tions. ECMWF technical memorandum no. 738. Reading, Berkshire, UK: European Centre for Medium-Range Weather 
Forecasts.
Waliser, D. E., R. Murtugudde, P. Strutton and J. L. Li. 2005. Subseasonal organization of ocean chlorophyll: Prospects for 
prediction based on the Madden-Julian Oscillation. Geophysical Research Letters 32(23). DOI: 10.1029/2005gl024300.
Waliser, D., K. Weickmann, R. Dole, S. Schubert, O. Alves, C. Jones, M. Newman, H. L. Pan, A. Roubicek, S. Saha, C. Smith, H. 
van den Dool, F. Vitart, M. Wheeler and J. Whitaker. 2006. The experimental MJO prediction project. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society 87(4):425-431. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-87-4-425.
Waliser, D. E. 2011. Predictability and Forecasting. In Intraseasonal Variability of the Atmosphere-Ocean Climate System, 
2nd Edition. Lau, W. K. M. and D. E. Waliser, eds. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Waliser, D. E., M. W. Moncrieff, D. Burridge, A. H. Fink, D. Gochis, B. N. Goswami, B. Guan, P. Harr, J. Heming, H. H. Hsu, C. Jakob, 
M. Janiga, R. Johnson, S. Jones, P. Knippertz, J. Marengo, H. Nguyen, M. Pope, Y. Serra, C. Thorncroft, M. Wheeler, R. Wood 
and S. Yuter. 2012. The “Year” of Tropical Convection (May 2008-April 2010) Climate variability and weather highlights. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93(8):1189-1218. DOI: 10.1175/2011bams3095.1.
Walker, G. T. 1924. Correlation in seasonal variations of weather, IX. A further study of world weather. Memoirs of the India 
Meteorological Department 24(9):275-333. 
Wallace, J. M. and D. S. Gutzler. 1981. Teleconnections in the geopotential height field during the Northern Hemisphere 
winter. Monthly Weather Review 109(4):784-812. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1981)109<0784:Titghf>2.0.Co;2.
Wang, B., J. Y. Lee, I. S. Kang, J. Shukla, J. S. Kug, A. Kumar, J. Schemm, J. J. Luo, T. Yamagata and C. K. Park. 2008. How accurately 
do coupled climate models predict the leading modes of Asian-Australian monsoon interannual variability? Climate 
Dynamics 30(6):605-619. DOI: 10.1007/s00382-007-0310-5.
Wang, B., J. Y. Lee, I. S. Kang, J. Shukla, C. K. Park, A. Kumar, J. Schemm, S. Cocke, J. S. Kug, J. J. Luo, T. Zhou, B. Wang, X. Fu, W. T. 
Yun, O. Alves, E. K. Jin, J. Kinter, B. Kirtman, T. Krishnamurti, N. C. Lau, W. Lau, P. Liu, P. Pegion, T. Rosati, S. Schubert, W. 
Stern, M. Suarez and T. Yamagata. 2009a. Advance and prospectus of seasonal prediction: assessment of the APCC/
CliPAS 14-model ensemble retrospective seasonal prediction (1980-2004). Climate Dynamics 33(1):93-117. DOI: 
10.1007/s00382-008-0460-0.
Wang, D., P. F. J. Lermusiaux, P. J. Haley, D. Eickstedt, W. G. Leslie and H. Schmidt. 2009b. Acoustically focused adaptive sam-
pling and on-board routing for marine rapid environmental assessment. Journal of Marine Systems 78:S393-S407. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2009.01.037.
Wang, Q., S. Danilov and J. Schroter. 2009c. Bottom water formation in the southern Weddell Sea and the influence of sub-
marine ridges: Idealized numerical simulations. Ocean Modelling 28(1-3):50-59. DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2008.08.003.
Wang, W., M. Chen and A. Kumar. 2013a. Seasonal Prediction of Arctic Sea Ice Extent from a Coupled Dynamical Forecast 
System. Monthly Weather Review 141(4):1375-1394. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-12-00057.1.

315
References
Wang, X. G., D. Parrish, D. Kleist and J. Whitaker. 2013b. GSI 3DVar-based ensemble-variational hybrid data assimilation 
for NCEP Global Forecast System: Single-resolution experiments. Monthly Weather Review 141(11):4098-4117. DOI: 
10.1175/Mwr-D-12-00141.1.
Weaver, S. J., W. Q. Wang, M. Y. Chen and A. Kumar. 2011. Representation of MJO variability in the NCEP Climate Forecast 
System. Journal of Climate 24(17):4676-4694. DOI: 10.1175/2011JCLI4188.1.
Webster, P. J. and R. Lukas. 1992. TOGA COARE: The Coupled Ocean Atmosphere Response Experiment. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society 73(9):1377-1416. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0477(1992)073<1377:Tctcor>2.0.Co;2.
Weigel, A. P., M. A. Liniger and C. Appenzeller. 2008. Can multi-model combination really enhance the prediction skill of 
probabilistic ensemble forecasts? Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 134(630):241-260. DOI: 
10.1002/qj.210.
Weisheimer, A., F. J. Doblas-Reyes, T. N. Palmer, A. Alessandri, A. Arribas, M. Deque, N. Keenlyside, M. MacVean, A. Navarra and 
P. Rogel. 2009. ENSEMBLES: A new multi-model ensemble for seasonal-to-annual predictions—Skill and progress 
beyond DEMETER in forecasting tropical Pacific SSTs. Geophysical Research Letters 36. DOI: 10.1029/2009gl040896.
Weisheimer, A., T. N. Palmer and F. J. Doblas-Reyes. 2011. Assessment of representations of model uncertainty in monthly 
and seasonal forecast ensembles. Geophysical Research Letters 38. DOI: 10.1029/2011gl048123.
WGA (Water Governor’s Association). 2008. Water Needs and Strategies for a Sustainable Future: Next Steps. Denver, CO: 
Western Governors’ Association.
Wheeler, M. C. and H. H. Hendon. 2004. An all-season real-time multivariate MJO index: Development of an index for 
monitoring and prediction. Monthly Weather Review 132(8):1917-1932. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2004)132<1917: 
Aarmmi>2.0.Co;2.
Whitaker, J. S. and T. M. Hamill. 2002. Ensemble data assimilation without perturbed observations. Monthly Weather Review 
130(7):1913-1924. DOI: 10.1175/MWR3156.1.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Malaria Early Warning Systems. Concepts, Indicators and Partners. A framework 
for field research in Africa. WHO/CDS/RBM 2001.32. Geneva: World Health Organization.
WHO. 2012. Meningococcal meningitis. Fact sheet 141. Available at www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs141/en/, ac-
cessed April 8, 2015. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Wiener, N. 1958. Nonlinear problems in random theory. New York: MIT Technology Press and John Wiley and Sons.
Wilkie, T. 2015. Exascale: expect poor performance. Scientific Computing World. 
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2013. Sub-Seasonal to Seasonal Prediction Research Implementation Plan. 
Geneva: World Meteorological Organization.
WMO. 2015a. Seamless Prediction of the Earth System: From minutes to months.  World Weather Open Science Conference, 
August 16-21, 2014, Montréal, Canada. Geneva: World Meteorological Organization.
WMO. 2015b. Seventeenth World Meteorological Congress: Abridged final report with resolutions. Geneva: WMO. Available 
at http://library.wmo.int/opac/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=18648#.VrNwC7IrKWh, accessed February 4, 2016.
Wood, R., C. R. Mechoso, C. S. Bretherton, R. A. Weller, B. Huebert, F. Straneo, B. A. Albrecht, H. Coe, G. Allen, G. Vaughan, P. Daum, 
C. Fairall, D. Chand, L. G. Klenner, R. Garreaud, C. Grados, D. S. Covert, T. S. Bates, R. Krejci, L. M. Russell, S. de Szoeke, A. 
Brewer, S. E. Yuter, S. R. Springston, A. Chaigneau, T. Toniazzo, P. Minnis, R. Palikonda, S. J. Abel, W. O. J. Brown, S. Williams, 
J. Fochesatto, J. Brioude and K. N. Bower. 2011. The VAMOS Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study Regional Experi-
ment (VOCALS-REx): Goals, platforms, and field operations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11(2):627-654. DOI: 
10.5194/acp-11-627-2011.
Woollings, T., B. Hoskins, M. Blackburn and P. Berrisford. 2008. A new Rossby wave-breaking interpretation of the North 
Atlantic Oscillation. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 65(2):609-626. DOI: 10.1175/2007JAS2347.1.
World Bank. 2013. Building Resilience: Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development.  Lessons from World Bank 
Group experience. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wunsch, C. 1996. The Ocean Circulation Inverse Problem. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wunsch, C. and P. Heimbach. 2013. Dynamically and kinematically consistent global ocean circulation and ice state esti-
mates. In Ocean Circulation and Climate: A 21st century perspective. 2nd Edition. G. Siedler, S. Griffies, J. Gould, and 
J. Church, eds. Dordrecht: Springer.

316
N E X T  G E N E R AT I O N  E A R T H  S Y S T E M  P R E D I C T I O N 
Xiu, D. 2010. Numerical Methods for Stochastic Computations: A Spectral Method Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Xiu, D. B. and G. E. Karniadakis. 2002. The Wiener-Askey polynomial chaos for stochastic differential equations. Siam Journal 
on Scientific Computing 24(2):619-644. DOI: 10.1137/S1064827501387826.
Xu, J. H., H. Shu and L. Dong. 2014. DEnKF-Variational Hybrid Snow Cover Fraction Data Assimilation for Improving Snow 
Simulations with the Common Land Model. Remote Sensing 6(11):10612-10635. DOI: 10.3390/rs61110612.
Yao, W. Q., H. Lin and J. Derome. 2011. Submonthly forecasting of winter surface air temperature in North America based 
on organized tropical convection. Atmosphere-Ocean 49(1):51-60. DOI: 10.1080/07055900.2011.556882.
Yuan, X., E. F. Wood and Z. Ma. 2015. A review on climate-model-based seasonal hydrologic forecasting: Physical under-
standing and system development. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 2(5):523–536. DOI: 10.1002/wat2.1088.
Yuh, J. 2000. Design and control of autonomous underwater robots: A survey. Autonomous Robots 8(1):7-24. DOI: 
10.1023/A:1008984701078.
Zhang, C. D. 2005. Madden-Julian Oscillation. Reviews of Geophysics 43(2). DOI: 10.1029/2004rg000158.
Zhang, C. D. 2013. Madden-Julian Oscillation bridging weather and climate. Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society 94(12):1849-1870. DOI: 10.1175/Bams-D-12-00026.1.
Zhang, F., D. M. Fratantoni, D. A. Paley, J. M. Lund and N. E. Leonard. 2007. Control of coordinated patterns for ocean sampling. 
International Journal of Control 80(7):1186-1199. DOI: 10.1080/00207170701222947.
Zhang, X. F., S. Q. Zhang, Z. Y. Liu, X. R. Wu and G. J. Han. 2015. Parameter optimization in an intermediate coupled climate 
model with biased physics. Journal of Climate 28(3):1227-1247. DOI: 10.1175/Jcli-D-14-00348.1.
Zhang, Y., J. M. Wallace and D. S. Battisti. 1997. ENSO-like interdecadal variability: 1900-93. Journal of Climate 10(5):1004-
1020. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0442(1997)010<1004:Eliv>2.0.Co;2.
Zhang, Y. F., T. J. Hoar, Z. L. Yang, J. L. Anderson, A. M. Toure and M. Rodell. 2014. Assimilation of MODIS snow cover through the 
Data Assimilation Research Testbed and the Community Land Model version 4. Journal of Geophysical Research—
Atmospheres 119(12):7091-7103. DOI: 10.1002/2013JD021329.
Zwiefelhofer, W. 2008. Trends in High-Performance Computing. Presented at World Modelling Summit for Climate Predic-
tion, May 6-9, 2008, Reading, UK.
Zwiers, F. W. 1996. Interannual variability and predictability in an ensemble of AMIP climate simulations conducted with 
the CCC GCM2. Climate Dynamics 12(12):825-847. DOI: 10.1007/s003820050146.

317
A P P E N D I X  A
Committee’s Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will conduct a study that will identify opportunities to increase 
forecasting skill on subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) timescales based on the 2010 NRC 
report Assessment of Intraseasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction and Predictability 
and progress since. The report will describe a strategy to increase the nation’s scientific 
capability for research on S2S forecasting. The committee will develop a 10 year scien-
tific research agenda to accelerate progress on extending prediction skill for weather 
and ocean forecasts from currently operational meso/synoptic scales to higher spatial 
and longer temporal resolutions to aid in decision making at medium and extended 
lead times. The committee’s report will cover
• 
Identification of potential sources of predictability and assessment of their 
relative value for advancing predictive skill; 
• 
Identification of process studies for incorporating new sources of predictability 
into models;
• 
Application and advancement of ocean-atmosphere-ice-land coupled models; 
• 
Key observations needed for model initialization and verification of S2S 
forecasts; 
• 
Uncertainty quantification and verification of probabilistic products; 
• 
Approaches to communicating this type of prediction in a way that is useful to 
and understandable by decision makers; and 
• 
Computational and data storage and visualization infrastructure requirements.


319
A P P E N D I X  B
Details of Seasonal and 
Subseasonal Forecast Systems
EXAMPLES OF MODELS USED BY OPERATIONAL CENTERS 
FOR SUBSEASONAL AND SEASONAL FORECASTING
At the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), the Climate Forecasting 
System version 2 (CFSv2) is currently used for both the subseasonal and seasonal (S2S) 
predictions. CFSv2 is a fully coupled model representing the inter­action between the 
Earth’s atmosphere, oceans, land, and sea ice (Saha et al., 2014). It became operational 
at NCEP in March 2011. The atmospheric model has a horizontal resolution of T126 
(about 100 km) and 64 vertical levels. The ocean component is the Modular Ocean 
Model developed by the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) with 0.5 to 
0.25 degree resolution and 40 vertical levels, and with an interactive sea ice model. For 
the subseasonal forecast (defined by NCEP as days 0-45), 16 members are run every 
day (4 members run four times a day at 00Z, 06Z, 12Z, and 18Z). The retrospective 
forecasts are done from 1999 to 2010, four members a day. For the seasonal forecast 
(defined by NCEP as months 0-9), four runs per day are performed. The retrospective 
forecasts are constructed with four members run every fifth day for the past 29 years 
(1982-2010).
The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) utilizes two 
different systems for the S2S predictions. The operational seasonal forecasting sys-
tem, known as System 4, was implemented in 2011. The atmospheric model is the 
ECMWF Integrated Forecast System (IFS) model frozen version 36r4. It has a horizontal 
resolution of TL255 (~60km) and 91 vertical levels. The ocean component is from the 
Nucleus for European Modeling of the Ocean (NEMO), with the ORCA1 configuration, 
which has a 1x1 degree resolution in midlatitudes and enhanced meridional resolu-
tion near the equator. The retrospective forecast is done from 1981 to 2010 for 15 
members for 7 months initialized with ECMWF Interim Reanalysis (ERA Interim) on the 
first day of each month. The seasonal forecasts consist of a 51-member ensemble. The 
ensemble is constructed by combining the 5-member ensemble ocean analysis with 
sea surface temperature (SST) perturbations and the activation of stochastic physics. 
The forecasts have an initial date of the 1st of each month, and run for 7 months. For 

320
A P P E N D I X  B
the subseasonal prediction, ECMWF’s monthly forecasting system is used. The atmo-
spheric model is the same version as ECMWF’s deterministic forecast. The atmospheric 
model is run at TL639 resolution from day 0 to day 10 and at T319 from day 10 to 32 
with 62 vertical levels. The ocean component is also NEMO with the ORCA1 configura-
tion. Fifty-one members run to 46 days twice a week (Monday and Thursday at 00Z). 
The ocean and atmosphere models are fully coupled, and the retrospective forecasts 
are constructed with 11 members run at the same day and month as the Thursday 
real-time forecast over the past 20 years.
Additional details about these and other operational seasonal forecast systems are 
shown in Table B.1, and Table B.2 provides similar information for subseasonal systems. 

321
Appendix B
TABLE B.1  Forecast and retrospective forecast system characteristics of the 12 Global Prediction Centers (GPC) of 
the WMO. SOURCE: Adapted from the S2S Research Implementation Plan and http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/
wcasp/gpc/gpc.php (accessed January 27, 2016).
Time range
Model
Resolution
Coupled
Ensemble Size
Frequency
Reforecast
length
Reforecast
frequency
Reforecast
size
BoM
m 0-9
POAMA
T47L17
yes
33
2/week
1981-2010
6/month
33
CMA
m 0-3
BCC-CM1
T63L16
yes
48
1/month
1982-now
1/month
6
EC
m 0-12
CanSIPS
T63L35
yes
20
1/month
1981-2010
1/month
20
ECMWF
m 0-7/12
System4
T255L91
yes
51
1/month
1981-2010
1/month
15
HMCR
m 0-4
SL-AV
1.1x1.4L28
no
20
1/month
1981-2010
1/month
10
JMA
m 0-3/6
JMA/MRI-CPS2
TL150L60
yes
51
1/month
1979-2010
2/month
5
KMA
m 0-3/6
GDAPS
T106L21
no
20
1/month
1979-2010
1/month
20
Météo-France
m 0-7
ARPEGE
T63L31
yes
41
1/month
1993-2003
1/month
5
NCEP
m 0-9
CFSv2
T126L64
yes
40
1/month
1982-2010
1/month
24
UKMO
m 0-6
GloSea5
N216L85
yes
42
1/week
1996-2009
4/month
12
CPTEC
m 0-7
CPTEC AGCM
T62L28
no
15
1/month
1979-2001
1/month
10
SAWS
m 0-5
ECHAM4.5
T42L19
no
6
1/month
1981-2001
1/month
6

322
A P P E N D I X  B
TABLE B.2  Forecast and retrospective forecast system characteristics for subseasonal forecasting systems from 
operational centers participating in the WCRP-WWRP Subseasonal to Seasonal Prediction Project. SOURCE: Adapted 
from s2sprediction.net and https://software.ecmwf.int/wiki/display/S2S/Models, both accessed January 27, 2016.
Time range
Resolution
Ensemble Size
Frequency
Reforecasts
Reforecast 
length
Reforecast 
frequency
Reforecast 
size
BoM (ammc)
d 0-60
T47L17
33
2/week
fix
1981-2013
6/month
33
CMA (babj)
d 0-60
T106L40
4
daily
fix
1994-2014
daily
4
EC (cwao)
d 0-32
0.6x0.6 L40
21
weekly
on the fly
1995-2012 
weekly
4
ECMWF (ecmf)
d 0-46
T639/319 L62
51
2/week
on the fly
past 20 years
2/week
11
HMCR (rums)
d 0-63
1.1x1.4 L28
20
weekly
fix
1985-2010
weekly
10
ISAC-CNR (isac)
d 0-32
0.75x0.56 L54
40
weekly
fix
1981-2010
6/month
1
JMA (rjtd)
d 0-34
T319L60
25
2/week
fix
1981-2010
3/month
5
KMA (rksl)
d 0-60
N216L85
4
daily
on the fly
1996-2009
4/month
3
Météo-France (lfpw)
d 0-61
T255L91
51
monthly
fix
1993-2014
2/monthly
15
NCEP (kwbc)
d 0-44
T126L64
16
daily
fix
1999-2010
day
4
UKMO (egrr)
d 0-60
N216L85
4
daily
on the fly
1996-2009
4/month
3

323
A P P E N D I X  C
Past, Current, and Planned 
Major International Process 
Studies
PAST PROCESS STUDIES
GATE (GARP1 Atlantic Tropical Experiment)—GATE was the first major international 
field experiment in the tropics with the purpose to understand the tropical atmosphere 
and its role in the global circulation of the atmosphere and the predictability of the 
atmosphere in the time range of daily weather forecasts to over 2 weeks. It took place 
in the summer of 1974 over the tropical Atlantic Ocean from Africa to South America. 
Twenty countries participated in GATE with 40 research ships, 12 research aircraft, and 
numerous buoys. These data are still being used today in research. More than 1,000 
papers have been published based on the GATE data. A major breakthrough of GATE 
is the recognition of organized mesoscale convective systems as the main sources of 
precipitation and convective energy in the tropics. Among others, the GATE soundings 
have been used as a golden standard in the development of cumulus parameterization 
in weather and climate models. 
TOGA COARE (Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere 
Response Experiment)—TOGA COARE was the second major international field cam-
paign in the tropics. Its goal was to describe and understand the principal processes 
responsible for the coupling and multiscale variability of the ocean and atmosphere in 
the western Pacific and their interaction with other regions. The field experiment took 
place over the western Pacific from November 1992 through February 1993. Eighteen 
countries participated in TOGA COARE with 12 ships, 7 airplanes, and more than 40 
moorings. Close to 1,000 papers have been published that are related to TOGA COARE. 
Among many of its outcomes, the one that contribute most significantly to model 
improvement is the COARE flux algorithm, which is recognized as the best flux scheme 
that can be used in models and observational diagnostics. 
1  Global Atmosphere Research Program.

324
A P P E N D I X  C
VOCAL-REx (The VAMOS2 Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study Regional 
­Experiment)—VOCAL-REx is another example of multi-nation collaboration to ad-
dress interactive processes of different components of the Earth system. Its objectives 
are to understand links between aerosols, clouds, and precipitation and their impacts 
on marine stratocumulus radiative properties, and physical and chemical couplings 
between the upper ocean and the lower atmosphere, including the role of mesoscale 
ocean eddies. It took place during October and November 2008 on and off shore of 
Chile. Eight countries participated in the field experiment with five research aircraft, 
two ships, and two surface sites in northern Chile. A major breakthrough of ­VOCAL-REx 
is the understanding of the strong role that aerosol-cloud-precipitation coupling plays 
in marine low clouds, which had previously been thought as controlled mainly by 
dynamics. Data collected by VOCAL-REx have played crucial roles in developing and 
refining new parameterization schemes that are used in regional and global models. 
SHEBA (The Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic Ocean)—SHEBA is an international 
research program designed to document, understand, and predict the physical pro-
cesses that determine the surface energy budget and the sea-ice mass balance in 
the Arctic. Its overall goal is to acquire the measurements needed to improve the 
parameteri­zations of key processes and to integrate new and improved parameteriza­
tions into general circulation and climate models. Scientists from seven countries par-
ticipated in SHEBA. The SHEBA field experiment was a yearlong (October 2, 1997-Oc-
tober 12, 1998) measurement on a drifting station in the pack ice of the Arctic Ocean. 
The drift station made measurement of the vertical column of the ocean, sea ice, 
and the atmosphere. It was augmented by a buoy array, research aircraft, heli­copter 
surveys, and submarine transects on a larger scale. SHEBA data provide up to date 
the first and only annual cycle of the surface energy budget for multi-year Arctic ice. 
They helped improve understanding of many processes critical to the surface ­energy 
balance and variability, including supercooled liquid water and advective events from 
lower latitudes. Knowledge gained from SHEBA data have led to new and improved 
parameterization of melt ponds, cloud microphysics, and turbulence. 
AMMA (The African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis)—AMMA is an interna-
tional project with an objective of improving knowledge and understanding of the 
West African monsoon, as well as the environmental and socioeconomic impacts of its 
variability. It is the biggest program of research on environment and climate issues in 
Africa. AMMA involved a comprehensive field experiment including ocean, land, and 
atmospheric measurements in many West African nations and their adjacent seas, on 
hourly, daily, and up to seasonal timescales over a number of years. The field campaign 
2  Variability of the American Monsoon Systems.

325
Appendix C
consisted of a long-term monitoring program (2001-2009) based on the existing 
infrastructure, an Enhanced Observing Period (2005-2007) with specific land-based 
and sea-based instruments, and four Special Observing Periods in 2006 with intensive 
measurements from the surface (continent-based and ocean-based) and from the air 
(research aircraft and balloons) that monitored the pre-monsoon dry season, as well as 
the onset, peak, and decay of the monsoon. Data collected by the AMMA field cam-
paign have greatly advanced our knowledge on coupling between the atmosphere, 
land and ocean, and between dynamics, physics, chemistry, biology, and hydrology. 
These data have also been used in validation and development of global and regional 
climate and weather models and specific process models (Lebel et al., 2010). 
AMY (Asian Monsoon Year)—AMY was a cross-cutting coordinated observation and 
modeling initiative participated by more than 20 countries. The objectives of AMY 
are to enhance understanding of ocean-land-atmosphere-biosphere interactions, 
multiple timescale (from diurnal to intra-seasonal) interaction, and the aerosol-water 
cycle interaction in the Asian monsoon system, in order to improve their physical 
representations in coupled climate models, and to develop data assimilation for the 
ocean-­atmosphere-land system in the Asian monsoon region. Its majority of field ob-
servations took place during 2008-2010, with 23 field campaigns throughout the Asian 
monsoon region in four targeted periods: the pre-monsoon period in March-May, the 
monsoon onset phase in May-June, the monsoon mature phase in July-August, and 
the winter monsoon from December to February. Among many results, AMY data have 
revealed how the diurnal cycle, intraseasonal oscillation, and monsoon flow interact 
to general extreme rainfall that led to flood events with tremendous socioeconomic 
impacts. 
DYNAMO (Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation)—DYNAMO was the most 
recent international field campaign aimed at the tropical atmosphere-ocean system. 
Its overall goal was to improve understanding the processes key to MJO initiation. 
Based on its three main hypotheses on the roles of convection-environment inter-
action, evolution of cloud population, and air-sea interaction, DYNAMO’s intensive 
sounding and radar arrays over the central equatorial Indian Ocean collected data 
from October 2011 to February 2012, and its broad sounding network continued 
data collection until March 2012. Sixteen countries participated in DYNAMO with 
four research vessels, two airplanes, rive special ground stations, and several sites of 
enhanced radiosondes. Although DYNAMO data are still being analyzed, initial results 
have revealed new findings in regime change of aerosol and evolution of cloud micro-
physics through the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) life cycle, interaction between 
the MJO and ITCZ, and ocean memory of MJO forcing through mixing related to 
prolonged vertical current shear, among others. DYNAMO data have been used in test-

326
A P P E N D I X  C
ing parameterization of cloud microphysics and convective cold pools and in helping 
validate numerical models of the atmosphere and ocean of different configurations 
and complexities. 
CURRENT AND FUTURE PROCESS STUDIES
YOPP (The Year of Polar Prediction)—YOPP (mid-2017 to mid-2019) is an interna-
tional program that coordinates a period of intensive observing, modeling, verification, 
user-engagement and education activities for the purpose of enabling a significant im-
provement in environmental prediction capabilities for the polar regions and beyond 
on a wide range of timescales. The observational component of YOPP is built upon 
several elements. A major one is MOSAiC (Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for 
the Study of Arctic Climate), which will deploy a polar research vessel starting in newly 
formed Arctic sea ice around September 2018, and drifting with the ice over the course 
of a year, to study a full annual cycle of coupled atmosphere-ice-ocean-biogeo­chemical 
system processes. Other observational activities will include intensive observing 
­periods (IOPs) during which aircraft flights and other research vessels will be deployed. 
In addition, land-based stations as part of the Sustaining Arctic Observing Network 
(SAON) provide numerous observations of Arctic system through staffed observatories 
and autonomous instruments. Many model experiments on a hierarchy of scales will be 
conducted, aimed at understanding and improving model predictability. Many coun-
tries will participate in the YOPP field observations. 
SOCRATES (Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol Transport Experimental 
Study)—SOCRATES is another ongoing international field experiment, which will take 
place in 2016-2019 in a region where numerical models perform particularly poorly. Its 
primary objective is to collect a data set suitable to study interactions between micro-
physics dynamics and radiation in mixed-phase and supercooled clouds. It includes 
four themes: (1) synoptically varying vertical structure of boundary layers and clouds, 
(2) seasonal and synoptic variability in cloud condensation and ice nucleus concentra-
tion and the role of local biogenic sources, (3) supercooled liquid and mixed-phase 
clouds, and (4) satellite retrievals related to clouds, precipitation, and aerosols. Five 
countries will participate in its field observations aboard ships (July-September 2017 
and January-March 2018), airplanes and pilotless aircraft (January-March 2018), ground 
stations (several IOPs during 2016-2019), and moorings (January 2016-­December 2019). 
SOCRATES observations will be used to advance understanding of the variability of 
Southern Ocean cloud systems on a broad scale and their underpinning processes, 
such as aerosol physicochemical properties, aerosol-cloud-­precipitation interactions, 
and to reduce model biases in this region. 

327
Appendix C
YMC (Years of the Maritime Continent)—YMC is a 2-year (planned for mid-2017 
to mid-2019) international project with its goal of “observing the weather-climate 
system of the Earth’s largest archipelago to improve understanding and prediction 
of its local variability and global impact.” There are five YMC science themes: Atmo-
spheric Convection, Upper-Ocean Processes and Air-Sea Interaction, Stratosphere-
Troposphere Interaction, Aerosol, and Prediction Improvement. YMC will engage in five 
main activities: Data Sharing, Field Campaigns, Modeling, Prediction and Applications, 
and Outreach and Capacity Building. Scientists from 13 countries are participating in 
the planning of YMC. The platform for the YMC field experiment will include numer-
ous research vessels, airplanes, suites of ground facilities, mobile radars, and oceanic 
autonomous devices and moorings. These special instruments will be augmented by 
the regional observing networks of radars, radiosondes, surface meteorological and 
climatological observations, and marine stations. Cloud-permitting data assimilation 
products will be made to synthesize data to be collected by the field experiment and 
the observing networks. YMC data will be used to test and evaluate ­parameterization 
schemes in climate models, which have suffered from several severe biases in the 
Maritime Continent region. 
Process Study for the Marginal Ice Zone (MIZ)—The MIZ refers to the region near 
the sea ice edge where sea ice concentrations are low and floes are small enough to 
permit the influx of ocean waves. The MIZ is widest in late summer, and the summer-
time width in the Arctic has broadened significantly in recent decades (Strong and 
Rigor, 2013). The Office of Naval Research (ONR) is already conducting a 5-year study of 
the Arctic MIZ that began in 2012, with project website3 and science and experi­mental 
plan (Lee et al., 2012). The project has an extensive observational component that 
extensively utilizes autonomous sampling with sea gliders and acoustically tracked 
floats, both of which can measure under sea ice. An array of buoys measures wave 
heights and ice mass balance. A goal of the project is to improve estimates of wave-
floe interactions and develop methods of modeling the sea ice floe size distributions. 
Three models are taking part in the project. All three are Arctic regional models, and 
only one has an atmosphere component (the other two are ocean-sea ice only). One 
of the ocean-sea ice only modeling groups is undertaking the development of floe 
size distribution capability (Zhang et al., 2015). The other two are specializing in fine 
resolution (up to 1/12 degree). 
3  http://www.apl.washington.edu/project/project.php?id=miz, accessed January 27, 2016.


329
A P P E N D I X  D
Biographical Sketches of 
Committee Members
Mr. Raymond J. Ban (Chair) is retired Executive Vice President of Programming, Opera-
tions and Meteorology at The Weather Channel, Inc. (TWC). Currently, he serves as Con-
sultant for Weather Industry and Government Partnerships, responsible for growing 
TWC relationships with the atmospheric science community across the entire weather 
and climate enterprise. He is currently President of Ban and Associates, LLC, provid-
ing consultative services to the weather media industry and also a guest lecturer in 
the Meteorology Department at The Pennsylvania State University where he teaches 
1 month each semester in the Weather Communications Program. He has served on 
the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate of the National Academy of Sciences, 
and he was Chair of the Academy Committee on Effective Communication of Uncer-
tainty in Weather and Climate Forecasts and most recently Chair of the NOAA Science 
Advisory Board. Currently, he is active on several boards and committees including 
Co-Chair of the Weather Coalition, a member of the Board of Directors of the National 
Environmental Education Foundation, and a member of the Advisory Council to The 
National Center for Atmospheric Research. He earned his B.S. in meteorology from The 
Pennsylvania State University in 1973. 
Dr. Cecilia Bitz is a professor in the Atmospheric Sciences Department at the Univer-
sity of Washington. Her research interests include climate dynamics, polar climate pre-
dictability, climate change, paleoclimate, the role of sea ice in the climate system, and 
sea ice model development. The primary tools for her research are a variety of models, 
from simple reduced models to sophisticated climate system models. Dr. Bitz is co-lead 
of the new Polar Climate Predictability Initiative of the World Climate Research Pro-
gram and co-Principal Investigator (PI) on the Sea Ice Prediction Network. Dr Bitz is an 
active participant in the Community Earth System Model project, which is sponsored 
by the National Science Foundation and Department of Energy. She received her Ph.D. 
in atmospheric sciences from the University of Washington in 1997. 
Dr. Andy Brown is the Director of Science at the UK Met Office. He works with the 
Chief Scientist on the development and implementation of the science strategy. He 
has particular responsibilities for the Foundation Science area, which provides the 
underpinning science and modeling capabilities that support Met Office weather 
and climate services. Dr. Brown joined the Met Office in 1990 and has worked in a 

330
A P P E N D I X  D
number of roles in science aimed at improving our understanding of the atmosphere 
and improving its representation in the Unified Model used for weather and climate 
prediction. Additionally, he has undertaken a secondment to the European Centre for 
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). He has been active in international sci-
ence coordination through involvement with the World Meteorological Organization 
and for 5 years was co-chair of the World Climate Research Programme/Commission 
for Atmospheric Sciences Working Group on Numerical Experimentation (WGNE).
Dr. Eric Chassignet is a Professor and Director of the Center for Ocean-Atmospheric 
Prediction Studies at Florida State University. His current area of research interest is on 
the role of the ocean in climate variability from the complementary perspectives of 
coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling and observations. Dr. Chassignet’s emphasis is 
on the study of the thermohaline circulation, western boundary currents, and associ-
ated eddies and their impact on the world ocean circulation. Dr. Chassignet earned his 
Ph.D. in physical oceanography from the University of Miami. 
Dr. John A. Dutton is President of Prescient Weather, Ltd., a firm providing information 
and strategies for managing weather and climate risk, and is Chief Executive of the 
World Climate Service, a commercial seasonal forecasting enterprise. He is Professor 
Emeritus of Meteorology and Dean Emeritus of the College of Earth and Mineral Sci-
ences at The Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Dutton holds B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. ­degrees 
from the University of Wisconsin—Madison and served for 3 years as an officer in the 
Air Weather Service of the U.S. Air Force. He is a fellow of the American ­Meteorological 
Society (AMS) and the American Association for the Advancement of Science and is 
the author of a variety of articles on the dynamics of atmospheric motion as well as 
two text books: Dynamics of Atmospheric Motion (Dover, originally The Ceaseless Wind) 
and Atmospheric Turbulence (with Hans Panofsky). Dr. Dutton has been active in the 
AMS, the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, and in National Academy 
of Sciences studies related to atmospheric science, space science, and aviation. He 
chaired the National Research Council (NRC) Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Cli-
mate while it produced The Atmospheric Sciences Entering the Twenty-First Century and 
most recently chaired an NRC committee that produced a report For Greener Skies—
Reducing the Environmental Impacts of Aviation. Dr. Dutton also served on an NRC com-
mittee that examined the potential of high-end computing for the atmospheric and 
other sciences. Earlier, he was the principal author of an award-winning NRC report 
Weather for Those Who Fly. He is a recent member of the Climate Working Group of the 
Science Advisory Board of the U.S. National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration (NOAA) and co-chaired a task force that produced a recent report, A Vision 
and a Model for NOAA and Private Sector Collaboration in a National Climate Services 

331
Appendix D
Enterprise. In recent years, he has been a member of the community-based committee 
reviewing and advising on the operations of the National Centers for Environmental 
Prediction (NCEP) of the U.S. National Weather Service. 
Dr. Robert Hallberg is an oceanographer and Head of the Oceans and Ice-sheet Pro-
cesses and Climate Group at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s 
(NOAA’s) Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), and a Lecturer on the faculty 
of Princeton University. He has a 1995 Ph.D. in oceanography from the University of 
Washington and a 1990 B.A. in physics from the University of Chicago. He has spent 
many years developing isopycnal (density) coordinate ocean models to the point 
where they are now valuable tools for coupled climate studies, including extensive 
work on the robustness of the models’ numerical techniques, and on the develop-
ment or incorporation of parameterizations of a wide range of physical processes. The 
isopycnal coordinate ocean model that Dr. Hallberg developed provides the physical 
ocean component of GFDL’s ESM2G comprehensive Earth System Model, which was 
used in the IPCC 5th Assessment Report, and its dynamic core is the basis for version 
6 of the Modular Ocean Model (MOM6). Dr. Hallberg has used global-scale numerical 
ocean simulations to study topics as varied as the dynamics of Southern Ocean eddies 
and their role in the ocean’s response to climate, sources of steric sea level rise, and 
the fate of the deep plumes of methane and oil from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. 
Dr. Hallberg has been actively involved in three ocean Climate Process Teams, study-
ing Gravity Current Entrainment, Eddy-Mixed Layer Interactions, and Internal Wave 
Driven Mixing. These teams aim to improve the representation of these processes in 
climate-scale models, based on the best understanding that can be obtained from ob-
servations, process studies, and theory. He is currently working on coupling a dynamic 
ice-sheet and ice-shelf model with high-resolution versions of GFDL’s coupled climate 
models for improved prediction of sea-level rise and is leading the effort to modernize 
GFDL’s sea ice model. 
Ms. Anke Kamrath is Director of Computing Operations and Services in NCAR’s 
Computational and Information Systems Laboratory. She came to NCAR in 2009 after 
22 years at the San Diego Supercomputer Center at the University of California, San 
Diego. Ms. Kamrath has more than 27 years of experience in supporting, operating, de-
ploying, and managing world-class supercomputing resources in support of scientific 
research. She has oversight responsibilities for the NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing 
Center, all supercomputing operations, and for all computing systems, operational and 
services staff. Prior to her experience in supercomputing, she worked as a rocket scien-
tist at the Aerospace Corporation in El Segundo, California, and has an M.S. in mechani-
cal engineering from University of California (UC) Berkeley. 

332
A P P E N D I X  D
Dr. Daryl T. Kleist is an Assistant Professor at the University of Maryland. His research 
interests include data assimilation, numerical weather prediction, atmospheric pre-
dictability, targeted observing, data thinning, and forecast sensitivity. His data assimila-
tion research has primarily focused on improving initial conditions through algorithm 
development for operational numerical weather prediction for short- and medium-
range timescales. Most recently, he has worked on developing and testing a hybrid 
ensemble-variational (EnVar) algorithm with an extension to four dimensions that 
does not require the use of an adjoint model. Before joining the faculty at Maryland, 
Dr. Kleist spent more than 10 years working at the National Centers for Environmental 
Prediction (NCEP) Environmental Modeling Center as a member of the data assimi-
lation team and within the global climate and weather modeling branch. There, he 
worked on various aspects of the operational data assimilation system for the global 
forecast system. Before leaving NCEP, he led the effort on the testing and development 
of the 4D-EnVar algorithm for operational implementation in the global data assimila-
tion system. Dr. Kleist earned his Ph.D. in atmospheric and oceanic science from the 
University of Maryland. 
Dr. Pierre F.J. Lermusiaux is an Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering and 
Ocean Science and Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He 
has made outstanding contributions in the fields of data assimilation, ocean modeling, 
and uncertainty predictions. His research thrusts include understanding and model-
ing complex physical and interdisciplinary oceanic dynamics and processes. With his 
group, he creates, develops, and utilizes new mathematical models and computational 
methods for ocean predictions and dynamical diagnostics, optimization and control 
of autonomous ocean systems, uncertainty quantification and prediction, and data 
assimilation and data-model comparisons. He has participated in many national and 
international sea exercises. He received a Fulbright Foundation Fellowship, the Wallace 
Prize at Harvard (1993), and the Ogilvie Young Investigator Lecture in Ocean Engineer-
ing at MIT (1998). He was awarded the MIT Doherty Chair in Ocean Utilization (2009-
2011) and the 2010 Ruth and Joel Spira Award for Distinguished Teaching by the 
School of Engineering at MIT. 
Dr. Hai Lin is a Senior Research Scientist at Environment and Climate Change Canada. 
He is also an adjunct professor at McGill University and Editor-in-Chief of Atmosphere-
Ocean. His research interests include climate dynamics and numerical weather predic-
tion. He was the recipient of the 2010 President’s Prize of the Canadian Meteorological 
and Oceanographic Society. He is a member of the Steering Group for Subseasonal to 
Seasonal Prediction of the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) and World 
Climate Research Programme (WCRP) of the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO). He earned his Ph.D. in atmospheric and oceanic sciences at McGill University.

333
Appendix D
Dr. Laura Myers is a Senior Research Social Scientist and Deputy Director, Center for 
Advanced Public Safety, at The University of Alabama. Her research, publication, and 
training areas include disaster management and planning, weather enterprise appli-
cation research, criminal justice education, criminal courts, criminal justice ethics, and 
criminal justice administration. Dr. Myers has received more than $600,000 in Depart-
ment of Homeland Security grants to develop and create a model for regional emer-
gency planning, with emphasis on the social science aspects of partnership planning 
between the National Weather Service and its weather enterprise partners includ-
ing emergency management, broadcast meteorology, and end users of its products. 
Through these grants, Dr. Myers works with the National Weather Service providing 
social science research for severe weather warning improvement and risk communica-
tion projects. Dr. Myers earned her Ph.D. in criminology from Florida State University. 
Dr. Julie Pullen is an Associate Professor in Ocean Engineering at Stevens Institute of 
Technology. She uses high-resolution coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling in order 
to understand and forecast the dynamics of coastal urban regions throughout the 
world. Her research interests encompass the ocean response to atmospheric flows 
around island topography, as well as sea breeze interactions with city morphology 
during heat waves. Applications include predicting chemical, biological, ­radiological, 
and nuclear dispersion in coastal cities in the event of a terrorist or accidental re-
lease. She has served on the steering team for field studies in urban air dispersion 
(DHS/DTRA NYC Urban Dispersion Program) and archipelago oceanography (ONR 
­Philippines Straits Dynamics Experiment). She is a member of the international GODAE 
Coastal Ocean and Shelf Seas Task Team and is the physical oceanography councilor 
for The Oceanography Society. Dr. Pullen earned her Ph.D. in physical oceanography 
at Oregon State University and did postdoctoral work at the Naval Research Labora-
tory’s Marine Meteorology Division. She is an Adjunct Research Scientist at Columbia’s 
Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory.
Dr. Scott Sandgathe is a Senior Principal Meteorologist in the Applied Physics Labo-
ratory at the University of Washington and an Adjunct Research Scientist at Oregon 
State University. He has extensive experience in operational oceanography and 
meteorology including tropical meteorology, synoptic analysis and forecasting, and 
numerical weather prediction. He is a retired Navy Commander and has served as 
the Deputy Director of the Joint Typhoon Warning Center and onboard the USS Carl 
Vinson supporting battle group operations including meteorological and oceano-
graphic ­support. In addition, he has held a number of positions in research policy and 
planning in the Navy. Prior to joining the Applied Physics Laboratory at the Univer-
sity of Washington, he was the Team Leader for the Office of Naval Research Marine 
Meteorology and Atmospheric Effects Program where he supported research and 

334
A P P E N D I X  D
technology development. He served as the Department of Defense (DOD) working 
group member on the Federal Coordinating Committee on Science, Engineering and 
Technology Subcommittee on U.S. Global Climate Change Research Program and the 
Climate Modeling working group and chaired the working group to develop the joint 
DOD-Department of Energy-Environmental Protection Agency Strategic Environ­
mental Research and Development Program research agenda. He is currently a tech-
nical advisor to National Earth System Prediction Capability and the National Unified 
­Operational Prediction Capability, two multi-agency programs focused on improving 
operational ­numerical weather and climate prediction through multi-agency col-
laboration. His current research is on developing automated forecast verification 
techniques for mesoscale numerical weather prediction and developing parameter 
optimization techniques for numerical modeling. Dr. Sandgathe is a Fellow of the 
American Meteorological Society and currently holds a top-secret security clearance. 
Dr. Sandgathe received a B.S. in Physics from Oregon State University and a Ph.D. in 
meteorology from the Naval Postgraduate School. 
Dr. Mark Shafer is Associate State Climatologist at the Oklahoma Climatological 
Survey and established and leads the Southern Climate Impacts Planning Program 
(SCIPP), a NOAA Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISA) Program based 
at The University of Oklahoma and Louisiana State University. SCIPP focuses on place-
based applications of climate and weather information to improve community pre-
paredness to a range of natural hazards. His research interests focus upon communi-
cation between the scientific community and policymakers, particularly in managing 
societal response to extreme events and climate change. Primary areas of research 
include the influence of scientific and technical information on policy outcomes and 
institutional factors that can affect the flow of information. Dr. Shafer earned an M.S. in 
meteorology and a Ph.D. in political science from the University of Oklahoma and was 
a coordinating lead author on the Great Plains chapter in the 2014 National Climate 
Assessment. 
Dr. Duane Waliser is Chief Scientist of the Earth Science and Technology ­Directorate 
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, which formulates, de-
velops, and operates of a wide range of Earth science remote sensing instruments for 
NASA’s airborne and satellite program. His principal research interests lie in climate 
dynamics and in global atmosphere-ocean modeling, prediction, and predictability, 
with emphasis on the Tropics and the Earth’s water cycle. His recent research foci at 
JPL involves utilizing new and emerging satellite data sets to study weather and cli-
mate as well as advance our model simulation and forecast capabilities, particularly for 
long-range weather and short-term climate applications. He received a B.S. in physics 
and a B.S. in computer science from Oregon State University in 1985, an M.S. in physics 

335
Appendix D
from UC San Diego in 1987, and his Ph.D. in physical oceanography from the Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography at UC San Diego in 1992. He is presently a member of the 
WCRP-WWRP Subseasonal to Seasonal (S2S) Project Steering Committee and Co-Chair 
of the WCRP Data Advisory Council’s obs4MIPs Task Team. Dr. Waliser is also a Visiting 
Associate in the Geological and Planetary Sciences Division at Caltech and an Adjunct 
Professor in the Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences Department at UCLA. 
Dr. Chidong Zhang is a Professor at the University of Miami. His research interests in-
clude large-scale air-sea interaction and atmospheric dynamics in the tropics. He was 
the Chief Scientist of the 2011-12 Indian Ocean field campaign of DYNAMO (Dynamics 
of the Madden-Julian Oscillation). He served as a member of the ­American Meteo-
rological Society Council, WWRP/WCRP YOTC MJO Task Force, International CLIVAR’s 
Atlantic Implementation Panel, and International Science Working Group of North 
American Monsoon Experiment., He is currently an Editor of Journal of Geo­physical 
Research—Atmosphere, Co-Chair of the Science Steering Committee of Years of the 
Maritime Continent (YMC), member of the U.S. Steering Committee of International 
Indian Ocean Expedition 2 (IIOP-2), the Steering Committee of Salinity Processes in 
the Upper Ocean Regional Study 2 (SPURS-2), and Tropical Pacific Observing System 
(TPOS) Planetary Boundary Layer Task Team. Dr. Zhang earned his Ph.D. in ­meteorology 
from The Pennsylvania State University in 1989.


