


P r i n c e t o n A r c h i t e c t u r a l  P r e s s  ·  N e w  Yo r k 
The Bubble Houses  
of Wallace Neff
Jeffrey Head


Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,
As the swift seasons roll!
Leave thy low-vaulted past!
Let each new temple, nobler than the last,
Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,
Till thou at last art free,
Leaving thine outgrown shell by life’s unresting sea!
—
from “Chambered Nautilus,” by Oliver Wendell Holmes,  
1858, found among Wallace Neff’s personal notes and  
a primary source of inspiration for his development of  
bubble house architecture
Sea shells have influenced the designs to some extent  
as they are one of the most nearly permanent and  
durable structures for living things. Developed by nature 
throughout the centuries to withstand tremendous  
pressures and hazards of the sea, these shapes offer  
mankind protection from natural destructive forces as  
well as new man-made forces. 
—
Wallace Neff, undated 

Published by
Princeton Architectural Press
37 East 7th Street
New York, NY 10003
For a free catalog of books, call 1-800-722-6657
Visit our website at www.papress.com
© 2011 Princeton Architectural Press
All rights reserved
Printed and bound in China
14 13 12 11   4 3 2 1   First edition
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any  
manner without written permission from the publisher,  
except in the context of reviews.
Every reasonable attempt has been made to identify  
owners of copyright. Errors or omissions will be corrected  
in subsequent editions.
Editor: Dan Simon
Designer: Paul Wagner
Special thanks to: Bree Anne Apperley, Sara Bader,  
Nicola Bednarek Brower, Janet Behning, Fannie Bushin, 
Carina Cha, Tom Cho, Penny (Yuen Pik) Chu,  
Russell Fernandez, Jan Haux, Felipe Hoyos, Linda Lee, 
Jennifer Lippert, John Myers, Katharine Myers,  
Margaret Rogalski, Andrew Stepanian, Joseph Weston,  
and Deb Wood of Princeton Architectural Press  
—Kevin C. Lippert, publisher
Frontispiece: Excerpt from “The Chambered Nautilus,” is 
reprinted from The Complete Poetical Works of Oliver Wendell 
Holmes by Oliver Wendell Holmes (Boston: Houghton, 
Mifflin), 1895.
Library of Congress  
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Head, Jeffrey.
No nails, no lumber : the bubble houses of Wallace Neff /  
by Jeffrey Head. — 1st ed.
       p.     cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-61689-024-7 (alk. paper)
1. Neff, Wallace, 1895–1982—Criticism and interpretation.  
2. Concrete houses. I. Title. II. Title: Bubble houses of  
Wallace Neff.
NA737.N37H43 2011
720.92—dc23
2011022740
previous, page 2 
A double-bubble house, 1942
previous, page 4 
Wallace Neff, in front of the  
first completed Airform house in  
Falls Church, Virginia

Foreword, Steve Roden 
Introduction
The Bubble Houses (USA)
Falls Church, Virginia 
Litchfield Park, Arizona 
Loyola University, California
Pacific Linen Supply Co., California 
The Andrew Neff House, California 
South Pasadena, California 
Hobe Sound, Florida 
Airforms Around the World
Latin America 
Europe 
Africa 
Asia 
Appendices
A – Interview: Former Bubble House Residents 
B – Patents of Wallace Neff 
C – Selected Unbuilt Airform Projects, 1944–1958
Afterword
Acknowledgments 
Notes 
Selected Bibliography 
Image Credits  
8
13
34
42
52
54
60
68
72
86
104
114
122
127
137
146
158 
160
162
165
168
Contents  

8
 Foreword
Steve Roden
The Oval Has Landed
One turns onto a small residential street and is confronted with 
a house that looks nothing like a house. The fact that it has a 
front door and a few visible windows only adds to its incongru-
ous presence amidst the traditional 1930s homes that comprise 
most of the neighborhood. Looking at the house, which resembles 
a smooth mound of earth, it feels as if some ancient space station 
has suddenly fallen from the sky; and upon landing, it has mys-
teriously embedded itself into the wrong context, its presence so 
strange it seems to have traveled through both space and time. 
Sixty plus years after it arrived, no one can deny that this dome, 
with its oval footprint, still retains a tremendously uncanny pres-
ence: it looks like it could be a home...but is it?
Handforms, Manforms, and Airforms
Standing in the central living room of Wallace Neff’s last remain-
ing bubble house, one can see that the inside of the dome is hardly 
perfect. In bright light one can see its inconsistent surface, which 

9
has no resemblance to anything made by a machine. The surface 
of the dome, as seen from the inside, looks like it were modeled 
by hand, although in truth it was formed by air. This interior sur-
face is decidedly human; in certain daylight hours it feels less like 
a cover, and more like an opening. While the house feels bogged 
down on the outside, it feels soft as an atmosphere on the inside.
In Praise of Shadows
On cloudy days its interior remains a bit dark; I assume that the 
lack of windows has something to do with the structural necessi-
ties of the shell. Nevertheless, light penetrates the windows and 
doors in wonderfully mysterious ways. The curved interior and 
freestanding walls allow refracted beams of light to enter the 
house, projecting abstract shadows that move across a variety of 
interior surfaces. As sunlight bounces images off of passing cars 
and sprinkler sprays, the light and its accompanying shadows 
resemble some of Hans Richter’s abstract films of the 1920s. Like 
insects, these images appear randomly at all times of the day, and 
generally in a variety of locations. At night the films also appear, 
projected via headlights, creating colored, flickering presences, 
as if Neff had hidden a series of Victorian magic lanterns in the 
garden.
Breathforms
After living in the bubble house for a few years, I began to think 
about how the interior space was truly formed of air, how Neff’s 
genius had allowed air to become a sculptor. As much as I had 
been fascinated with the humble qualities of the dome’s inner 
surface, I began to think about the house in relation to breath. 
Several years later, I generated a sculpture and sound installa-
tion entirely wrought from my own breath, related to the bubble 
houses that Neff built in Litchfield Park, Arizona, in collaboration 
with the Goodyear Company. The installation attests to the poten-
tial effects a house can have on its inhabitants, which are not only 
related to aspects of inspired living, but also to inspired making.

10
I n t r o d u c t i o n

11
I n t r o d u c t i o n

12

13
Introduction
Architect Wallace Neff (1895–1982) is perhaps most well-known 
for designing large, elegant Spanish Colonial–revival homes, 
built in Southern California for very wealthy clients. No Nails, No 
Lumber: The Bubble Houses of Wallace Neff is a survey of Neff’s 
lesser-known work: Airform-constructed buildings. Airform con-
struction, a type of pneumatic architecture, uses an inflated bal-
loon to create its form and structure. Neff often referred to these 
as “bubble houses,” and considered them his most significant con-
tribution to the field. He hoped the bubble houses would be his 
legacy, considered his greatest contribution to architecture. [Fig. 1]
Neff’s development of the bubble form was largely the result 
of a hands-on approach that he pursued throughout his life. 
At a young age he made architectural drawings and eventu-
ally taught himself enough about architecture to gain special 
admission to MIT, but he did not complete his studies. When the 
United States entered World War I, he chose to return home to 
Southern California where he worked for the Fulton Shipbuilding 
Company. This experience introduced him to cement construction, 
Fig. 1: Neff at an Airform 
construction site

14
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Fig. 2: A 12-foot-diameter Airform 
under construction near Burbank, 
California

15
I n t r o d u c t i o n
knowledge that reinforced his interest in architecture and became 
central to his work.
After the war, in 1919, Neff began working as a draftsman for 
George Washington Smith, a Santa Barbara architect who led the 
movement of Spanish Colonial–revival architecture in Southern 
California. This was the formal start of Neff’s architectural career, 
one that spanned more than fifty years and included designs for 
hundreds of buildings. In addition to the estates Neff built for 
Hollywood’s most popular film stars like Judy Garland, Groucho 
Marx, and Douglas Fairbanks Jr., he also constructed public build-
ings—libraries and churches.
Neff applied the same intrinsic sense of scale and proportion to 
both his estate-designed homes and his bubble houses. Although 
the latter were never intended to be luxury residences, they repre-
sent Neff’s innovative, industrious nature. The technical details of 
the bubble houses belie their aesthetically simple design in addi-
tion to Neff’s engineering skills. His sense of individualism and 
entrepreneurial interests combined a larger cultural perspective 
with a desire to service society’s basic need for housing.
Bubble houses require no special tooling and their building 
equipment is portable. Neff would repeat throughout his life that 
“Airform construction permits the best of modern design for the 
least money, yet permits building with materials which are plen-
tiful.” 1 Beyond the ease of construction and functionality, he also 
considered the structures to be, “the last word in streamlined 
beauty and efficiency.”2 The form itself was its shape. Its struc-
tural mass was neither hidden nor masked. [Fig. 2]
Many referred to the Airforms as igloos, including residents. 
Neff preferred to call them bubble houses.3 To increase appeal, 
Neff designed several traditional exteriors, including brick or 
stone veneer over the cement finish, along with a modified roofline 
made of asphalt and wood shingles.
While the bubble houses may appear to be prefabricated, Neff 
made it clear that “Airform is a method of construction and is in no 
sense allied in any way to construction of so-called ‘prefabricated’ 
houses.” Rather, it was “a revolutionary method providing for a 
low-cost, labor-saving process of extremely rapid construction of 

16
I n t r o d u c t i o n
permanent houses and buildings.”4 The uncomplicated, singular 
form of the bubble houses made them easy to build; however, since 
they were constructed on-site and did not include preassembled 
components, they could not be considered prefabricated. Robert L. 
Davison, of the John B. Pierce Foundation, was aware of Neff’s 
bubble houses and may have had them in mind when he wrote 
humorously, “an engineer is he who can do for one dollar what any 
fool can do for two dollars.”5 [Fig. 3]
During Neff ’s lifetime, thousands of bubble houses were  
constructed internationally, but by 2010, there was only one  
example of a Neff bubble house left in the United States, located 
in Pasadena, California. This last remaining bubble house— 
coincidentally one of the first—was built for Neff ’s brother 
Andrew. For a time, the two men lived there together.
Although Neff retired in 1975, he continued to believe in the 
value of his bubble house architecture and Airform construction, 
and its uses for the world’s unending need for low-cost housing. By 
this time, bubble houses had been built in more than fifteen coun-
tries. Neff hoped for more. For him, the design was still not fully 
exploited and represented a new approach to construction and 
building. He did not give up on the bubble house. He continued to 
spend his personal time and money developing construction vari-
ations and new designs. 
Neff was unfailing in his search for new materials and com-
pounds to reduce the time for cement to set and provide greater 
strength. He experimented with different paints, balloon con-
struction, air pressure, size, and shapes. [Fig. 4] He also performed 
extensive tests and research that included the removal of a wall 
section from one house that was rigorously tested in a lab. The 
tests showed the wool in the insulation not only kept the houses 
perfectly warm and dry, but prevented cracking from expansion 
and contraction under extreme heat and cold.6 This further con-
firmed the uniformly sturdy construction of the houses, regard-
less of size. [Fig. 5]
Neff’s designs remained progressive and were accepted in 
many areas such as Africa, Mexico, and South America, how-
ever, more often issues with local politics, funding, and a lack of 
Fig. 3: A comic Neff clipped  
from an unidentified newspaper 
showing Airform development  
in Los Angeles

17
I n t r o d u c t i o n
right
Fig. 4: Neff, in his signature white 
shirt and black tie (center)
bottom
Fig. 5: A two-page advertisement 
for Goodyear Mechanical Goods 
that appeared in several national 
magazines

18
I n t r o d u c t i o n
diligence from various companies prevented greater implemen-
tation of the bubble house. When projects did not move forward, 
which was a frequent occurrence, Neff returned to building large 
estates.
Research into Neff’s bubble house architecture and other build-
ings has uncovered their forgotten or previously unknown lineage. 
Many of the houses were built in areas that remain remote today, 
others have evolved beyond recognition, and some have been 
destroyed. There is even a scattered group of houses that were 
constructed without Neff’s permission or awareness. The results 
were isolated, one-off houses and hybrids. The accounting for all 
of Neff’s Airforms is not complete and requires further study and 
discovery across the world.
Development of Airform
Neff’s formal development of the Airform began in 1934, when he 
made his first drawings of a pneumatic house based on a balloon 
form. He continued to pursue the concept and wrote a descrip-
tion of his pneumatic form in 1939. For several years Neff pursued 
alternative construction techniques and reassessed conventional 
rectilinear design. Prior to his breakthrough design for the bubble 
house, Neff developed the construction technique for the Rondel 
House, a low-cost design for cement houses, in 1934. Although his 
day-to-day client work and finances prevented him from develop-
ing the concept further, the process could be best described as a 
collapsible umbrella sprayed with gunite and then removed from 
within—a clear predecessor to his Airform design.
Up to this point, engineers in the rubber industry had specu-
lated that it would be impossible to build structures over a rubber 
balloon.7 Neff had experimented on several different forms using 
gypsum; he had studied seashells to understand their convex form 
and structural integrity; and he had tested balloon seams, rein-
forcing strips, and their tensile strength. Eventually he developed 
scale models made in clay that he hand-painted and landscaped, 
which became the single- and double-bubble houses.
In addition to home construction, Neff believed the utilitar-
ian design had potential uses for aircraft hangers, oil and water 

19
I n t r o d u c t i o n
storage tanks, hospitals, warehouses, schools, grain bins, and 
other facilities. In the early 1940s he anticipated uses for Airform 
construction, particularly during wartime, including ammunition 
storage, garages, and barns.8 They could resist weather, explo-
sives, and vermin, and they were cheap and quick to build and 
easy to maintain.9 Above all, Neff stressed the simplicity of his 
Concrete Balloon-Type Buildings, praising their modern sensibili-
ties and seemingly painless manufacture.10 [Fig. 6]
He called the technique “Airform” and described it as “a new 
type of construction in which a rubber-coated fabric balloon is 
blown up and then sprayed with concrete or plastic.” 11 [Figs. 7 – 9] 
The combination of material, design, and technique was solely 
Neff’s domain. The process was facilitated using gunite, light-
weight cement that could be sprayed from a hose. Neff had used 
gunite in the wood-frame construction of several estate houses 
he designed, including the Sidney C. Berg Residence (1927), the 
Arthur Bourne Residence (1927), and the Edward L. Doheny 
Library at St. John’s Roman Catholic Seminary (1940). All three 
still stand.
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company manufactured the 
first Airform balloons out of industrial-strength neoprene nylon. 
Although there were no interior load-bearing walls, the strength 
and weight of the load were evenly distributed across the balloon, 
which acted as a mold. Costly wood framing was avoided; only 
minimal scaffolding was required to support workers spraying 
gunite.12 A 1941 article in Life magazine speculated that even the 
fifteen pounds of nails used in the construction of each house—an 
usually small amount—was possibly not necessary.13
Fig. 6: Neff’s set of Airform  
scale models

20
I n t r o d u c t i o n
right
Fig. 7: A woman with an ax 
demonstrating the durability of  
a built Airform.
bottom left
Fig. 8: A government official 
attempts an ax test on a built 
Airform.
bottom right
Fig. 9: A reporter gives an Airform 
the ax test.

21
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Precursors
While Neff’s Airform construction was technically very success-
ful, he was not the first to make the foray into pneumatic archi-
tecture, or to explore domes for residential use. Martin Wagner, 
an architecture professor at Harvard and former town plan-
ner from Berlin, Germany, designed his dome-style prefab MW  
House prototype in 1939. This one-room dome was approxi-
mately two hundred square feet and constructed from thirteen 
curved steel panels. Perhaps the most famous dome architect, 
Buckminster Fuller, in addition to the geodesic dome, designed 
the Dymaxion Deployment Unit (DDU) in 1941. DDUs were easily 
transported, portable dome-shaped structures that were adopted 
by the U.S. government for military field housing. The 324-square-
foot building was divided into three rooms by canvas curtains. 
[Figs. 10 + 11]
In 1919, British engineer Frederick William Lanchester pat-
ented the design for a pneumatic structure for military use in the 
field as hospitals and other temporary buildings. Lanchester’s 
design used a balloon-form that remained inflated by constant air 
pressure, allowing people to move in and out of the structure. This 
perhaps inspired Neff to explore permanent structures based on 
an inflated form. Meanwhile, construction engineer Fritz Ruppel 
developed a building system that used concrete reinforced with 
steel braces to replace traditional wood framing in 1933. This 
resulted in lower costs and helped to promote the strength of 
cement against earthquakes and fire.14 Neff would later adapt the 
use of steel reinforcement, opting for wire mesh between layers of 
gunite.
At various times since, architects and designers have revis-
ited the concept of dome housing. Paolo Soleri, working with Mark 
Mills in 1951, built a dome house in Paradise Valley near Phoenix, 
Arizona. Their design used two retractable hemispheres that 
enabled half of the roof to open to the sky. Also in the early 1950s, 
Los Angeles architect Jeffrey Lindsay applied Fuller’s geodesic 
dome principle to the construction of a house made with ultra-
thin, lightweight fiberglass panels reinforced with neoprene—
the same fabric Neff used in his Airform balloons. Lindsey’s dome, 

22
I n t r o d u c t i o n
made of fifteen diamond-shaped panels, also included a reflective 
material for environmental protection.
The countless variations of the dome-home were often consid-
ered novelties and regarded as one-of-a-kind structures. Some 
homes were a demonstration of technical elegance; others offered 
independence, livability, and an alternative lifestyle. In the United 
States, no architect, company, or dome-home type was able to suc-
cessfully transition to widespread cultural use.
Construction Process
The word “construct” comes from the Latin “to pile on,” so it is 
incorrect to say that bubble houses were constructed in the tra-
ditional sense. Airform construction was dramatically different 
from piling brick or stone on top of one another. For one, pressur-
ized air was essential to the construction method. All materials, 
such as concrete, insulation, or waterproofing were shot into place 
by a gunite machine using pneumatic pressure, supplanting the 
slow work of a mason.15 [Figs. 12 + 13]
Figs. 10 + 11: Patent drawings

23
I n t r o d u c t i o n
The first stage of construction, like any, was laying the foun-
dation of the structure. Based on the diameter of the Airform bal-
loon, a circular trench was dug at the site and filled with poured 
concrete to form the footing. Inside the trench, a layer of concrete 
was poured, filling the ring and forming the foundation and floor. 
Before the cement set, steel rods were inserted into the foundation 
and then bent to form hooks.16 The utility wiring and pipes were 
then installed.
The balloon was then laid uninflated on the foundation. 
Grommets mounted along allowed the balloon to be roped to the 
bent hooks sticking out of the foundation. Once secured, the bal-
loon was inflated through an inlet valve at the bottom. A catenary 
ring kept the inflated balloon anchored to the foundation. Using 
left
Fig. 12: Photograph of a strength test 
of an Airform balloon
right
Fig. 13: Detail of an Airform balloon 
anchored to its foundation

24
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Gunite
Gunite is a mix of dry Portland cement and sand, forced through a hose and forcibly added to 
water at the nozzle to liquefy the combination on contact. The powerful air pressure required to 
mix the content must be maintained as the gunite is shot directly from the hose. It is considered 
to have twice the strength of standard concrete. One of the early modern uses of gunite was in 
the construction of swimming pools. Initially known as a plastering machine, the gunite process 
provided structural waterproofing in a variety of uses. It is often referred to as “shotcrete”—
shot concrete—and the hose-nozzle as a “cement gun.” These became industry terms and were 
reflected in the names of competing businesses. It became a widely used method of construction 
throughout the twentieth century, applied to both wood and metal framing. Today it remains an 
efficient way to produce a dense, compact, and uniform material that is evenly distributed and 
resistant to moisture. Neff’s gunite mix was nearly 3.5 times as strong as ordinary concrete.20
Several of Neff’s fellow Pasadena architects made early use of the cement gun, including 
Reginald D. Johnson, with his Harvard Military School for Boys in Los Angeles (1914), and Roland 
E. Coate with his 1930 addition to his Southern California Automobile Club office building 
(1923), in the West Adams area of downtown Los Angeles.
bottom
Fig. 14: A scale model of a single 
Airform residence
left
Fig. 15: A sketch featuring 
measurements

25
I n t r o d u c t i o n
approximately one and a half pounds of air pressure through an 
air compressor, inflation took about five minutes.
At this point, wooden scaffolding was built around the balloon. 
These temporary wood frames formed the outline for windows, 
doors, and other openings. The framework had to be sturdy so that 
the gunite could be shot around it.17 These openings would also 
provide access to the deflated balloon once the gunite set. After 
the wooden framework was erected but before gunite application 
began, the balloon was coated with a powder to keep the cement 
from sticking to it. It was then completely covered with a reinforc-
ing wire mesh. After the mesh was laid out, the form was ready for 
gunite.
Using the cement gun, a layer of gunite was shot directly onto 
the balloon, from the top down, as the mesh was manually lifted 
so the gunite reached both sides of the wire. This layer became the 
ceiling and interior wall of the house. The weight of the top-down 
technique slightly lowered the ceiling height, which decreased 
the curvature and made for straighter walls on the side. Thus 
the domes were not true hemispheres, but more elliptical, with a 
wider curvature at the top and straighter walls inside.18 Top-down 
application helped distribute the gunite evenly.
After the first layer hardened (about eight hours), a one-inch 
layer of waterproof insulation was applied to the entire form. In 
colder climates, the insulation was increased to one and a half 
inches. Neff experimented with different insulation materials 
that could be sprayed or brushed on, such as pumice and balsam-
wool. A Rockwool blanket became the preferred material. When 
completed, a bubble house would have a thermal value of .16 BTU, 
an exceedingly low number.
After insulating, the form was covered with another layer of 
wire mesh and a second layer of gunite was applied. When it hard-
ened, it formed the roof and exterior walls. After twenty-four hours 
the balloon was deflated and removed from one of the house’s 
openings in the house, immediately ready for reuse. At this point, 
Neff remarked, “interior fitting and decorating proceeds in the 
conventional manner.” The exterior was painted near the end of 
the drying stages to absorb more of the paint.19 [Figs. 14 + 15]

26
I n t r o d u c t i o n

27
I n t r o d u c t i o n
The Airform International Construction Company
The completion of several Airform buildings proved the effec-
tual use of the materials and construction method. Based on 
these achievements Neff’s attorneys suggested in 1945 that he 
turn the Airform Company into a corporation to generate fund-
ing and reach a larger market. He called the new firm the Airform 
International Construction Company (AICC). By 1949 the com-
pany had published an extensive, thirty-one page brochure that 
advertised Airform as “the modern low-cost construction method 
for concrete buildings,” explaining the construction process with 
schematics, renderings, and photographs of completed work, as 
well as forthcoming designs.20 Key projects, such as bubble houses 
in Virginia and Senegal, storage bins in Arizona, and military 
housing in Pakistan were included. [Figs. 16 – 18]
The AICC gradually became more sales-oriented than  
construction-minded, particulary so in Europe, at the behest  
of regional director Adolf K. N. Waterval. It was beginning to 
sink in that without new construction contracts, the AICC would 
become insolvent.21 By 1954 the company was preparing to move 
into a smaller office, having failed to secure projects while con-
ventional buildings remained more aesthetically palatable.22 The  
loss of a major commission for the military in 1956 had a per-
manent impact and the AICC had to fold. It became clear that 
Waterval was the problem.
An architect based in Alexandria, Virginia, Adolf Waterval 
designed contemporary brick and stone houses before he became 
the AICC’s regional director in Europe in 1954. Formerly engaged 
in prefab housing models, he approached Neff a year later about 
forming a partnership.23 As director in Europe, Waterval aggres-
sively marketed Airform buildings. He was frequently requesting 
custom-sized Airforms specifications for potential clients, which 
required Neff’s approval. Neff believed this helped him monitor 
Waterval’s developments. However, as Jose de Lemos, the Airform 
licensee in Portugal, wrote to Neff, Waterval wanted “barbarous 
profits at a given moment, not caring for the development of the 
Airform system, nor having in mind the interests of sub licens-
ees.”24 Waterval would change the terms and conditions with 
Fig. 16: The Airform marketing 
brochure

28
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Figs. 17 + 18: Pages from the Airform 
marketing brochure

29
I n t r o d u c t i o n

30
I n t r o d u c t i o n

31
I n t r o d u c t i o n
contractors, adding to the debt and growing uncertainty of the 
solvency of the AICC. He would take advance royalties and write 
bogus checks. He was likely the cause of several failed projects in 
Europe during his time with the AICC.25
Once the AICC had folded and Waterval was out of the picture, 
Neff made plans to sell worldwide rights to the Airform construc-
tion method. Struggling to find a buyer, he instead decided to start 
another company, Pneumatic International, Inc. in 1961. Although 
most of his patents were about to expire, he hoped that Pneumatic 
International would reactivate interest in Airform construction. 
Arthur Libby Neff, Neff’s youngest son, was president of the new 
company. He was able to make agreements with licensees in the 
early 1960s that would pay Neff a royalty fee of twelve and a half 
cents per square foot of completed Airform space.26 
Although Airform structures had been built all over the world, 
eventually the company could no longer compete with other mod-
ern architectural developments.27 It was lost to history in the late 
1960s as large-scale housing projects became more institutional 
and industrialized. [Figs. 19 – 22]
Figs. 19 – 22: Plan pages from  
The Airform marketing brochure


The Bubble 
Houses
(USA)

34
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Neff’s first project using the Airform technique was the completion 
of twelve houses in Falls Church, Virginia, in May 1942. The ten 
double-bubble houses and two single-bubble units were built as an 
experiment to determine the potential for building more, specifically 
for low-cost defense housing. [Figs. 1 + 2] 
Neff traveled to Washington, DC, in January 1941 to seek 
government support and funding. He received approval from Jesse 
Jones, U.S. Secretary of Commerce, who endorsed the project and  
its financing through the Defense Housing Corporation (DHC). Jones 
supported Neff’s pending patent application and wrote that it was 
“of importance to the public interest” to develop the Airform houses, 
since it was possible to construct them quickly and without critical 
wartime materials.1 During construction, Jones, who posed at the 
site holding a gunite nozzle, swung an axe at the side of one of the 
completed bubble structures to demonstrate its strength (it remained 
undamaged). It cost a total of $91,000 (approximately $1.4 million 
today) to build these twelve houses, including $22,000 that was 
spent on land. The estimated cost was $3,000 for a single bubble  
and $6,300 for a double. [Figs. 3 + 4]
 Falls Church
Virginia
opposite top
Fig. 1: Vistors at the Falls Church 
bubble houses, 1942 
opposite left
Fig. 2: A double-bubble Airform 
home
opposite right
Fig. 3: Neff, with an Airform  
scale model in hand

35
Fa l l s C h u r c h

36
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
The government officials considered Neff’s bubble houses an 
innovative and inexpensive method for constructing houses for 
defense workers, particularly in areas where war production was 
concentrated. In the area of Long Beach, California, there were plans 
for thousands of houses for aircraft workers at both the Vultee and 
Douglas Aircraft plants. In each case, more traditional construction 
was selected instead. Neff did not receive any other commissions from 
the DHC, and the bubble houses in Falls Church would remain the 
agency’s most experimental, smallest, and permanent housing project.
Neff did not start construction of the Falls Church bubble houses, 
what eventually become known as “Igloo Village” among residents and 
locals, until October 1941. The houses were built on a wooded fifteen-
acre property approximately ten miles west of Washington, DC, each 
on a lot with one hundred feet of frontage. [Figs. 5 + 6]
While the houses were under construction, the Goodyear Tire & 
Rubber Company promoted its development of the Airform balloon 
with advertisements in both Newsweek and Time magazines.2 
Combined with various press stories, Jack Linforth, a Goodyear Vice 
left
Fig. 4: A double-bubble Airform  
floor plan
right
Fig. 5: An aerial view of the first  
Falls Church bubble houses

37
Fa l l s C h u r c h
President, wrote to Neff in 1941, saying he had personally described 
the Airform development to Henry Ford. 
The houses were built using a single twenty-two-foot, eight-
inch-diameter balloon from the Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company 
at an approximate cost of $900.3 The double-bubble houses were 
approximately 1,040 square feet and the single-bubble units were 
480 square feet. The ceiling height was eleven feet in all the houses. 
In the double-bubbles, the living room was in one bubble and the two 
bedrooms, each 10' x 14', in the other. The two forms, about six feet 
apart, were connected to a traditionally built cinder block structure, 
with a flat roof that contained the kitchen, bathroom, entrance way, 
and gas furnace. Vernon Case, the contractor, commented at the time 
of construction that the houses “could be produced at the rate of 100 
in 60 days or 200 in 90 days, using only four balloon forms in the 
construction cycle.”4 Neff believed the same balloon could be used 
to build 1,000 houses.5 All told, each of these original single-bubble 
houses required approximately 150 sacks of cement.6 Each house  
took about two days to finish. [Figs. 7 – 16]
The floors were made of an asphalt tile and finished with a wood 
floor, which many covered with linoleum. Although fireplaces and 
bookcases were planned for the units, they were not included in every 
house. For the exteriors, white paint was mixed with the gunite to 
create efficiency and reduced cost. For the metal sash windows, Neff 
chose the same dark green color for the painted wood shutters that  
he had used on the mansion he built for Hollywood legend and his 
one-time business partner, King Vidor. Neff asked Mary Lee, the wife 
Fig. 6: The Airform “Igloo Village,” 
Falls Church, Virginia

38
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Figs. 7 – 11: Constructing the cement 
anchor and positioning the Airform 
balloon on top.

39
Fa l l s C h u r c h
Figs. 12 – 16: Attached, the  
Airform balloon was inflated on the 
anchor under constant air pressure. 
A layer of gunite was sprayed over 
the balloon, wrapped in a wire 
mesh, and covered with a second 
layer of gunite.

40
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
of Douglas Fairbanks Jr., to be the consultant for the interior design. 
She made several suggestions for the décor of the first completed 
bubble house that included traditional furnishings, such as a Duncan 
Phyfe dining room table.7
Neff expected to receive multiple orders from the government and 
commented that “the tests were spectacularly successful” with the 
Falls Church bubble houses.8 He proposed construction of airplane 
hangars, barracks, bomb shelters, munitions storage, gas and oil 
storage tanks, and even concrete barges.9 Despite expressing interest, 
the government committed to very few projects, limited to several 
administrative buildings for the Navy in San Pedro and for the Marine 
Corps in San Diego.
Throughout their construction and after their completion in 
1942, local newspapers printed stories and photographs of the 
“Igloo Village.” They reported, for example, on the traffic caused by 
crowds as large as five thousand people who drove through to see 
the houses.10 The unconventional shape remained a curiosity that 
attracted a steady number of visitors to the site. For some people, the 
houses appeared primitive in their unadorned functionalism; while for 
others, like architecture writer Douglas Haskell, the bubble houses 
were a counterpoint to the glass and steel structures of the modernist 
aesthetic.11 Other published responses to the houses said, it “may or 
may not be ‘architecture,’” and it was “like something out of a fairy 
tale...[a] charming, graceful, completely original and uniquely modern 
concrete cottage.”12 Another stated, “an odd little colony of Walt 
Disney mushrooms has sprung up under the trees on Horseshoe Hill, 
Fairfax County.”13 One reporter alluded to Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s 
Travels, and wrote, “Neff has taken the melon for his model and 
literally blown it up to Brobdingnagian proportions.”14 [Figs. 17 + 18]
The DHC sold the Falls Church bubble houses in 1947. Residents 
attempted to buy their individual units, but the lots were sold 
as a group for $48,000 to a Captain Hampton E. Turner as an 
investment.15 In 1961, a developer demolished the bubble houses  
and built an apartment complex.
Fig. 17: Cars lined up to view the 
completed Falls Church Airforms. 
opposite
Fig. 18: A Falls Church Airform 
featured in an advertisement for the 
Lehigh Portland Cement Company

41
Fa l l s C h u r c h

42
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Coming off a successful project for Cole of California in 1942, 
Neff built a series of storage bins later in the year for the Southwest 
Cotton Company (which was eventually bought by Goodyear and 
that included an adjoining corporate retreat area which the company 
later renamed the Wigwam.) in Litchfield Park, Arizona. The company 
used cotton in the manufacture of rubber tires for cars, trucks, and 
inflatable products such as basketballs and air mattresses—in addition 
to several models of Neff’s Airform balloons.
In addition to cotton, the Southwest Cotton Company had a vested 
interested in barley, corn, and wheat that was also grown in the area. 
For grain storage, twenty bins were built approximately thirty feet in 
diameter and fourteen feet high. Instead of using the gunite process, 
inexpensive local labor manually applied the cement with trowels. 
The approximate cost was $1,100 per 200-ton bin, which offered 
significant savings compared to traditional storage construction.1 
Each bin ensured the quality of stored grains and protected it against 
varying weather conditions and moisture. [Figs. 19 – 22]
 Litchfield Park
Arizona
opposite top
Fig. 19: Grain bins, one of several 
proposed uses for Airform 
construction
opposite middle left
Fig. 20: The construction of  
an Airform grain storage bin.  
Neff stands at right.
opposite middle right
Fig. 21: The grain storage bins 
in use
opposite bottom 
Fig. 22: Completed grain  
storage bins

43
L i tc h f i e l d Pa r k

44
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
In 1942, while the storage containers were under construction  
Neff secured a contract with Paul Litchfield, the developer of the 
Wigwam. The three single- and one double-bubble houses provided 
a contrast to the existing Southwestern architecture on the property. 
Since Litchfield Park was a Goodyear company town, the bubble 
houses at the Wigwam may have been a public relations decision 
by Litchfield. The houses were on the fairway of the first hole of the 
Wigwam’s golf course. Vernon Case, who had helped build the 
Falls Church “Igloo Village,” also assisted on the Wigwam houses in 
Litchfield Park, Arizona which Neff referred to as the “Desert Colony.”2 
The Wigwam eventually became a public resort that continues to 
operate today. [Figs. 23 – 25]
The houses were published in both architectural and popular 
magazines. One reporter remarked about the “no fuss, truss—
or corners to sweep” ease of housekeeping, an idea that was not 
previously highlighted.3 The finished interior was an egg-shell white 
with draperies and furniture in “soft pastel desert colors.”4 [Figs. 26 – 29] 
The exterior was painted white with the window sash and trim originally 
painted dark green. Neff used the same green for the window  
shutters on the Falls Church houses. 
below
Fig. 23: Construction of  
a double-bubble Airform
opposite top
Fig. 24: A newly completed 
double-bubble house, 1942
opposite bottom
Fig. 25: Airform houses along  
the golf course’s fairway

45
L i tc h f i e l d Pa r k

46
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Figs. 26 + 27: An Airform living room
opposite
Fig. 28: Kitchen

47
L i tc h f i e l d Pa r k

48
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Between 1941 and 1942 Neff developed two types of bubble 
houses for Litchfield Park: Types A and F. The Type A House, a 
720-square-foot double-bubble plan, had a living room and kitchen 
in one bubble and two bedrooms and a bathroom in the other.  
At the time, it cost $2,500.5 The Type A had a brick fireplace and 
a carport connected by a pergola. [Fig. 30 + 31] The Type F was the 
single-bubble house constructed at the Wigwam and configured 
the same as the two single-bubble houses in Falls Church, Virginia, 
earlier in the year. Neff designed a third type that was never built, 
the Type E, a variation of the Type A plan with a fanned pergola 
overhang to cool the house. Neff also specified a fireplace in the 
living room, a glassed-in porch, and a Murphy Cabranette kitchen 
(a combined single unit with a four-burner stove, oven, refrigerator, 
and sink). Another unbuilt version of this floor plan called for 
Plexiglas windows, three skylights, and an overhanging area with 
enclosed space for a bathroom, with the garage set in back, 
between the two bubble forms. 
Both the Type A and F houses were initially used to host visiting 
Goodyear guests and employees, and later became available to 
Wigwam employees during the off-season. Linda Lamm, who grew 
up in Litchfield Park, lived in one of the bubble houses for a short 
time with her family. She recalled how, “as kids we thought of the 
bubble houses as Hostess cupcake kinds of things, or something out 
of the movie, Forbidden Planet [1956].”6 In the 1950s the Wigwam 
advertised the “Famous Bubble Houses” in its brochures; the listed 
prices for the air-conditioned, two-bedroom house, with meals 
included: $42 to $60 a night.7	
The bubble houses remained in use through the 1970s, but in 
the mid-1980s, Goodyear Farms was forced to sell the Wigwam 
and the houses were demolished, yielding their site to more 
conventional-looking guest cottages. The grain storage bins were 
demolished during the same period.
opposite
Fig. 29: An Airform residence  
with garden

49
L i tc h f i e l d Pa r k

50
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Fig. 30: An Airform residence 
with garden
opposite
Fig. 31: Detail of an Airform 
porch with pergola

51
r u n n i n g f o o t e r

52
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Neff built four Airform structures in 1944 for Loyola University (now 
Loyolya Marymount) in Los Angeles. One, a single-bubble unit with  
six separate bedrooms and a bathroom, was initially a dormitory  
for university employees. The three other structures were built together 
to form a single coherent unit, referred to as the “Triple Igloo.”1 The 
horizontal grouping of the bubbles is the only known instance where 
Neff chose to overlap the forms rather than to create passageways 
or hallways between units, as he did at Falls Church and subsequent 
projects. It may have been an experiment to test the limits of a single-
story traditional dome structure. 
The Loyola Airforms were a mixture of cement and gypsum.  
The exterior surface was treated with a bituminous water emulsion and 
covered with white paint. In subsequent bubble construction, Neff 
preferred Portland cement, when available, and a cement wash with  
a waterproofing mixture for coating the exterior. Neff’s design 
included his signature pergolas, similar to those for the Litchfield Park 
bubble houses. Eucalyptus bows were typically specified while the 
classical columns supporting the pergolas were concrete-filled clay 
pipes covered with stucco.2 [Fig. 32]
For a short time after the war it became the athletic office. It 
became the headquarters for the Loyola Air ROTC after the program 
was established in 1948, and continued to be so through the 1950s. 
The single bubble was converted to a kitchen facility. [Figs. 33 – 35] 
The triple-bubble form was demolished in 1958 for the 
construction of the new campus library. In the early 1960s the single 
bubble was also demolished and replaced by green space.
 Loyola University
California
Fig. 32: A triple-bubble Airform
opposite top
Fig. 33: Engineering students at  
work in the triple-bubble Airform
opposite left
Fig. 34: Loyola’s ROTC cadets with 
the triple-bubble Airform in the 
background
opposite right
Fig. 35: The interior of the triple-
bubble Airform

53
Loyo l a  U n i v e r s i t y

54
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Completed in 1944, the bubble structure for the Pacific Linen  
Supply Company, located in the Garment District (Fashion 
District) of downtown Los Angeles, was the largest Airform that 
Neff designed (more than one-and-a-half times the size of a 
basketball court). It measured one hundred feet in diameter and 
was approximately thirty-two feet at its peak but required no interior 
support columns, girders, or beams. It offered 7,850 square feet  
of floor space with five entries and doubled capacity for the 
company’s marking and sorting laundry supply service. Neff placed 
a circular six-foot vent at the top of the ceiling, and spaced six,  
six-foot diameter skylights near the top of the Airform’s approxi-
mately 13,500 square feet of surface area. Additional lighting came 
from four rows of five large fluorescent lights. Including all materials, 
the Pacific Linen Airform cost about $70,000 (today, approximately 
$875,000). Neff’s client, R. C. Merritt of the Pacific Linen  
Supply Company, paid him the equivalent of only $3,000— 
a transaction that Neff wished to keep secret.1 [Fig. 36]
 Pacific Linen Supply Co.
California

55
Pa c i f i c L i n e n S u p p ly Co.
The balloon for the Pacific Linen Company was made of sixty 
segments, a total of 1,020 yards of fabric, and was anchored to a 
twelve-inch-thick concrete slab foundation. In the center, the form was 
tied to a temporary pole for reinforcing. Several air compressors were 
needed to keep the inflated Airform intact. Although wire mesh and 
steel bars reinforced the structure, Neff noted that it was only about 
7.8 percent of the steel used in traditional reinforced concrete.2 In 
addition to its size, the building was unique because the gunite was 
applied from the bottom up instead of top down. This helped to insure 
the final shape of the building and to satisfy potential engineering 
issues if the building were to collapse during construction, which is 
exactly what happened.
Fig. 36: The scaffolding for  
a 100-foot-diameter Airform

56
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
The balloon collapsed during construction, attracting negative 
attention in the press and overshadowing Neff’s innovative and 
unusual design. One story in the The Engineering News Record 
reported that, “about 20 men working on the scaffolding escaped 
death or serious injury as the framework, although shaking violently, 
remained upright,” and speculated, “that a loose piece of scaffold 
might have crashed through the mortar shell and pierced the canvas, 
allowing the air pressure to drop.”3 Although the accident occurred 
during the preparation of the second layer of gunite, it was not 
accurately reported in the press. After the building was finished, Neff 
wrote to Engineering News Record, tracing the cause of the accident 
to rotted airproofing material inside the balloon. He emphasized that 
only the balloon had collapsed, not the dome.4 [Figs. 37 – 39] 
By the late 1940s Pacific Linen Supply was no longer in business, 
and the building was demolished several years later.
Fig. 37: Preparing the balloon  
for a 100-foot-diameter Airform 
structure
opposite
Fig. 38: The scaffolding for a 
100-foot-diameter Airform

57
Pa c i f i c L i n e n S u p p ly Co.

58
Fig. 39: Construction of a 100-foot-
diameter Airform

59
r u n n i n g f o o t e r

60
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
left
Fig. 40: Airforms were featured on 
the cover of the Los Angeles Times’s 
Home magazine, 1947.
right
Fig. 41: A floor plan for a single-
bubble Airform residence
Andrew Neff House
California
The bubble house in Pasadena, California, was built in 1946 for  
Neff’s brother, Andrew. [Fig. 40] It features shortened seven-foot 
interior walls in the kitchen, shared bedroom, and living room so that 
the space was open to the full height of the twelve-foot dome ceiling, 
making it feel larger. [Fig. 41] A traditionally framed, two-car detached 
garage and workshop was included and a sizable bomb shelter  
was built in the 1960s. The house was furnished with modern pieces 
of the era that included furniture by Russel Wright and Van Keppel-
Green. [Figs. 42 + 43]

61
A n d r e w N e f f  H o u s e
Figs. 42 + 43: The Andrew Neff  
House today

62
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Fig. 44: A load test using sandbags
opposite
Fig. 45: Neff’s Airforms 
demonstrated his preference  
for Dutch doors.
Construction of the house was fraught with challenges. At one 
point, during the first application of gunite, the form collapsed when 
a piece of wood scaffolding fell and punctured the wet cement. Years 
later, Andrew Neff recalled how his brother, “tall, stately Wallace, 
dressed as always in black wingtip shoes, black suit, white shirt, and 
unpatterned black tie would walk amid the dusty rubble, unflappable, 
planning the next pour.”1 For neighbors, the implosion sounded like  
a bomb. Once the house was completed, neighbors began to protest 
the design. Neff was obliged to landscape the property to make it less 
visible. The neighbors continued to object, citing structural concerns, 
but a Cal Tech load test quieted those concerns.2 [Figs. 44 + 45]
The Andrew Neff House is unique among extant Airform  
structures for its bomb shelter, built in 1962 under the side yard.  
It was intended to serve as a functional model and promote a new use 
for the Airform design. The underground shelter was built on a 4" slab 
foundation using the same method of construction as the standard 
bubble house. Neff described the psychological benefit of the shape, 
saying it removed “the feeling of being closed in,” which was common 
to rectangular shelters.3 Fifteen feet below ground, the shelter  
is accessed through the garage by a wooden ladder. The shelter is 
approximately 850 cubic feet and designed to accommodate a family 
of four to five, based on the standards established by the Office  
of Civil Defense.4 [Figs. 46 – 50]

63
A n d r e w N e f f  H o u s e

64
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )

65
A n d r e w N e f f  H o u s e
opposite
Fig. 46: Original interior  
circa 1947, with Diego Rivera 
painting at right
Fig. 47: View today of Airform interior 
with free-standing fireplace

66
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
right
Fig. 48: The kitchen
bottom
Fig. 49: The living room 

67
A n d r e w N e f f  H o u s e
Fig. 50: The sitting area

68
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
  South Pasadena
California
Eleanor Ince, the widow of silent film director Thomas H. Ince, 
financed this single-bubble house built in South Pasadena, California. 
Ince never lived in the house but the two had a lasting professional 
relationship. Neff hoped she would finance the construction of 
several bubble houses on the two lots making up the South Pasadena 
property, but by 1946 only one was completed. [Figs. 51 – 54] The 
house, built shortly after the Andrew Neff House in Pasadena, was an 
oval with straight sidewalls and 1,752 square feet of floor space. After 
Neff and his wife Louise separated, the South Pasadena bubble house 
became her home along with their children. [Fig. 55]
The house was divided into two halves. One contained the living 
room, a galley-type kitchen, and fireplace, while the other housed 
three bedrooms and bathroom. The master bedroom, with walls that 
ran to the ceiling, was placed between the others with half-height 
walls. The interior kitchen wall and two walls in the living room were 
also half-height, which kept the form open. For the entrance to the 
house, Neff installed a Dutch door.

69
S o u t h  Pa s a d e n a
right
Fig. 51: The construction plan for  
an Airform residence
bottom left
Fig. 52: An air compressor (center) 
inflating the Airform balloon
bottom right
Fig. 53: A worker applies the first 
layer of gunite.

70
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
During construction, an executive with the contractor, Pneumatic 
Coatings, commented on the free movement of air throughout the 
building. He also noted that “the walls are practically perpendicular 
to a point equal with eye level and from that point on curve in gentle 
symmetry to the height of the ceiling, adding a certain classic charm 
and healthful element to the room, and thereby eliminate former 
impractical dead air corner pieces.”1
In 1970, Louise Neff sold the house and adjoining lot. Architect 
Richard Tanzmann had seen the house with a “For Sale” sign on its 
pie-shaped lot while driving in the neighborhood. He made immediate 
plans to buy the house with his wife Virginia. The Tanzmanns were the 
first to own the three-bedroom house after the Neffs. They remodeled 
it with shag carpet, rainbows painted on the steps, and purple walls, 
and tiled the bathroom with mirrored shards of glass. They painted 
the interior an earthy beige. Virginia explained, “there were no 
problems with hanging things on the walls and we placed a sideboard 
against one of the straight sidewalls.”2 For the couple, the curvature 

71
S o u t h  Pa s a d e n a
opposite
Fig. 54: Workmen preparing for 
the second layer of gunite
Fig. 55: The completed Airform
of the walls was most noticeable in the kitchen area. No structural 
modifications were made while the Tanzmanns owned the house, 
although at one point there were plans for a two-story free-standing 
cube for the adjoining property, accessed through a glass breezeway 
kind of tunnel. 
 The Tanzmanns eventually sold the house. The new owners had 
plans to expand it, cutting a large opening in the side, which left 
it vulnerable to the earthquake that struck Southern California in 
October 1987 and caused irreparable damage. It was demolished 
soon after and replaced with a traditionally styled home. Before it 
was destroyed, the house had remained unaffected by earthquakes 
for many years, including the Sylmar earthquake in 1971 that caused 
extensive damage throughout the Los Angeles area.

72
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
top left 
Fig. 56: Eliot Noyes with scale 
model of his modified Airform 
structure 
top right 
Fig. 57: Another scale model 
by Noyes
above 
Fig. 58: An interior scale view 
of Noyes’s modified Airform 
Hobe Sound
Florida
Architect and industrial designer Eliot Noyes expressed significant 
interest in Neff’s Airform architecture during the 1950s. He agreed 
that the Airform’s engineered and inventive design had uses in a range 
of applications, from gas stations and garages to roadside shops  
and big housing developments. [Figs. 56 – 61]
After continued efforts to develop an Airform project on his own, 
Noyes received a commission from Joseph V. Reid for the construction 
of two bubble houses on adjoining lots in Hobe Sound, Florida,  
in 1953. The Airform design was partially an environmental choice, 
since it offered protection in areas with seasonal hurricanes and 
could withstand winds up to 125 miles per hour. Neff estimated the 
aerodynamic Airform shape was 40 percent stronger against the 
wind than traditional home construction.1 Noyes’s innovative design 
modifications and low cost were also factors in the decision to  
build the houses. [Figs. 60 + 61]

73
H o b e S o u n d
above
Fig. 59: An Eliot Noyes floor plan 
for a double-bubble Airform
right
Figs. 60 + 61: Illustrations of  
the interior

74
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Fig. 62: Floor plan of a completed 
Airform designed by Noyes
The two Hobe Sound bubble houses, each 600 square feet, were 
built in 1953 and represented a departure from the fully enclosed 
bubble structure. In a special agreement between Noyes, Neff, and 
the AICC, Noyes was granted permission to alter Neff’s original 
design. For the Hobe Sound bubble houses he flattened the dome 
shape on top and cut two elliptical openings on opposites of the form. 
He filled them with windows and doors that gave Neff’s bubble house 
a new, open aesthetic. [Fig. 62]
To create the large openings on two sides of the form, a full-size 
outline was placed on the inflated balloon that indicated the framed 
area that did not require gunite, leaving the form open. To create 
the sidewalls of the form, wire mesh was wrapped around the lower 
portion of the inflated balloon to keep the walls straight. [Figs. 63 – 65] 
For insulation, a fiberglass cover was placed between the two layers of 
concrete.2 The ceiling was fourteen feet high at the center and interior 
walls were kept below the curve to keep the plan open and allow for 
air circulation. [Fig. 66] The structure and process was so unusual, 
children were let out early from the local school to visit the site.3 When 
the house was completed, one report commented, “the Airform house 
looks like an ice-cream cone without the cone.”4 

75
H o b e S o u n d
left
Fig. 63: A page from an article 
appearing in Spain featuring  
a Noyes-designed bubble house
bottom left
Fig. 64: Placing the wire mesh on 
Airform between layers of gunite
bottom right
Fig. 65: Second application of  
gunite with Airform opening

76
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Fig. 66: Completed Airform  
open on two sides
opposite 
Fig. 67: Interior decorator  
Kathryn Smallen seated with  
Eliot Noyes

77
H o b e S o u n d

78
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
above
Fig. 68: Airform interior by  
decorator Kathryn Smallen
left
Fig. 69: A Noyes Airform at  
night, Hobe Sound, Florida

79
H o b e S o u n d
Figs. 70 + 71: Additional views 
of Airform interior by decorator 
Kathryn Smallen

80
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )

81
H o b e S o u n d
opposite and below
Figs. 72 – 74: Airform house in  
Hobe Sound, Florida, today
Only the bathroom was enclosed with a ceiling made of corrugated 
plastic panels. The kitchenette, closet, bathroom, and utility core  
were on one side of the house with the living room, eating area, and 
two bedrooms on the other side. Aluminum verandas were placed on 
the patios on each side of the house. The large glass-fronted windows 
added to the cross-breeze that kept the house cool. [Figs. 67 – 71]
Today, the bubble houses in Hobe Sound remain intact. The two 
houses alone costed approximately $3,250 each, approximately 
$44.00 per square foot today. This included the $4,000 cost of the 
balloon. Noyes believed the houses could be sold for about $6,500 
(not including the cost of land), if they were mass-produced. He 
estimated eighteen to twenty days to complete each house, with five 
of those days specifically dedicated to concrete work. 
With the completion of the Hobe Sound houses, Noyes was 
able to change the public’s perception of the bubble houses as 
simple cement igloos. He received widespread attention in various 
publications such as Time and Life, in addition to architectural and 
international press. One review called them, “the most graceful 
bubble houses yet.”5 Neff also considered the houses an achievement 
and continued to support Noyes’s interest in developing new Airform 
projects. [Figs. 72 – 75]

82
T h e B u b b l e H o u s e s ( U S A )
Fig. 75: A Noyes Airform today,  
Hobe Sound, Florida

83
r u n n i n g f o o t e r


85
r u n n i n g f o o t e r
Airforms 
Around  
the World

86
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Several large-scale Airform projects were planned for Mexico,  
Central America, and South America during the late 1940s.  
The flurry of Airform activity in Latin America can be attributed  
to the efforts of Manuel Reachi. Reachi had become aware of Neff’s 
Airform architecture during his service as a Mexican diplomat and 
secretary. His belief in the value of Airform construction motivated him 
to start Construcciones Ultramodernas, S.A., in the early 1950s to 
promote and build Airform structures. 
Neff and Reachi enjoyed a friendship that led to Neff’s  
designing Reachi an Airform home that featured a central 60-foot-
diameter Airform, with an atrium-like living room area incorporated  
into a traditional, rectilinear floor plan. The adobe house, to be  
built in Ensenada, Mexico, did not get past the blueprint stage 
because Reachi died in 1955. At the time, two renderings of the  
house were painted, one by Neff, the other by Elizabeth Calovich,  
a Los Angeles–based artist. [Figs. 1 – 4]
Latin America

87
L at i n  A m e r i c a
opposite top
Fig. 1: Neff’s painting of the  
planned Airform residence  
for Manual Reachi
opposite bottom
Fig. 2: Neff standing with  
Reachi
right
Fig. 3: Floor plan for the  
Reachi residence
below
Fig. 4: Artist Elizabeth Calovich  
made this painting of Reachi’s 
proposed Airform residence.

88
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Brazil
Neff found some success building Airform projects in Brazil. The first 
Airforms in South America were built in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. 
The original 1946 contract with the Brazilian government called for  
a plan to build one thousand Airform houses each year. By 1947, about 
three hundred one-bedroom and two hundred two-bedroom houses 
had been built, in addition to one Airform gasoline station that was 
built for a naval arsenal. [Figs. 5 – 7]
Neff did not use gunite for any of the Brazilian Airforms. Instead, 
he employed a local labor force to lay concrete on the balloon with 
trowels. At the time, manual labor actually represented a cost savings, 
since the required concrete mix was cheaper than gunite. Neff 
recommended trowel application in India, China, and other locations 
where labor was cheaper.1 [Figs. 8 – 18]
Fig. 5: An advertisement for  
Airform licensee in Rio de Janeiro

89
L at i n  A m e r i c a
Figs. 6 + 7: An Airform gas station, 
Rio de Janeiro

90
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
above
Figs. 8 – 11: Construction showing 
hand-applied concrete
right
Figs. 12: A brochure promoting 
Airform housing in Rio de Janeiro

91
L at i n  A m e r i c a
Fig. 13: Completed Airforms, 
Rio de Janeiro
Fig. 14: A model Airform house,  
Rio de Janeiro

92
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d

93
L at i n  A m e r i c a
opposite
Fig. 15: An advertisement for  
Airform houses in Rio de Janeiro
top
Fig. 16: A completed  
model home
bottom
Figs. 17 + 18: The interior  
of an Airform home

94
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Mexico
A handful of Airforms were built in Mexico, limited to four school 
buildings and twelve houses in Mexico City, and four more in Veracruz, 
for workers of the Mexico National Railway. Local labor applied the 
concrete by hand over closed-form balloons. These balloons cost more 
to manufacture, but were quicker and easier to inflate. The Airforms 
were completed in 1949. [Figs. 19 – 25] 
A restaurant and bar, Los Globos, composed of two forms 
connected to a flat-roofed building in the middle, was built in Mexico 
City. Los Globos remained in business through the early 1970s when it 
became a dance club. Today, such significant modifications have made 
that there is no indication of Neff’s original design. [Figs. 26 – 29]
below left
Fig. 19: Airforms in Vera  
Cruz, Mexico

95
L at i n  A m e r i c a
opposite right, below
Fig. 20: Brochure promoting Airform 
construction in Mexico
right
Fig. 21: Diagram for construction, 
Mexico City

96
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
above
Figs. 22 + 23: An Airform school  
in Mexico City
right
Fig. 24: Detail of the windows at  
the school in Mexico City
opposite
Fig. 25: A brochure promoting 
construction of Airforms for schools

97
L at i n  A m e r i c a

98
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d

99
L at i n  A m e r i c a
opposite, this page
Figs. 26 – 29: This Airform was used 
as a restaurant and bar.

100
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Nicaragua
In 1955, Neff made an agreement with Nicaragua’s Compañía 
Nacional Productora de Cemento. The company was one of 
the largest cement producers in Central America, with several 
manufacturing facilities and their own staff of engineers and 
architects. They constructed the only three Airform buildings in the 
region, built in the cement yard of the company’s Managua plant.
Venezuela
In the late 1940s, Venezuela was another large-scale Airform 
development. A Venezuelan company, Construcciones Aerodinámicas 
de Venezuela, C.A., contracted Goodyear to manufacture the 
Airform balloons. When Goodyear did not send the correct ones, 
Construcciones Aerodinámicas lost the contract. Later, construction of 
grain storage bins in Venezuela was interrupted by popular revolution 
in 1948. The U.S. Steel Company and Orinoco Mining became 
interested in Airform construction in 1952 to house workers along the 
Orinoco River, but although Neff created several renderings for the 
project, it was never completed. [Figs. 30 – 32]
Fig. 30: A rendering of a  
residential Airform design

101
L at i n  A m e r i c a
right
Fig. 31: Plan for a large residence 
constructed of multiple Airforms
below
Fig. 32: Rendering of a proposed 
Airform resort

102
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
The Caribbean
After the construction of the two Hobe Sound, Florida, houses, the 
balloon was sent to Cuba in 1954 where the Constructora Airform de 
Cuba S.A, a company specifically formed to market and build Airforms, 
built two bubble houses in Havana.2 
Pneumatic International Inc. received interest from several local 
companies to license and build Airforms in the Bahamas. This included 
four connected bubble structures, each with separate entrances, 
for the Pineapple Beach Club in St. Thomas. The combined spaces 
were used at various times for guest quarters, cabanas, and common 
space. Their design was comparable in size to Noyes’s Hobe Sound 
bubble houses, except they were open on four sides. The form carried 
the structural load on its corners, as Noyes had demonstrated in  
his experimental models. Neff traveled to the site during construction  
in 1961 and oversaw the new use of a Hypalon paint that offered  
a fire-resistant protective coating. During one of the renovations of  
the Pineapple Beach Club resort in the 1980s, the bubble buildings 
were demolished. [Figs. 33 – 36]
below left
Fig. 33: A brochure featuring Airform 
resort accomadations
below right
Fig. 34: A set of Airforms that Noyes 
planned for resort housing

103
L at i n  A m e r i c a
above
Fig. 35: Resort housing in the  
Virgin Islands
right
Fig. 36: A floor plan by Noyes  
for resort housing

104
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Portugal
One of the largest and most successful Airform developments was  
in Portugal. The original plan called for the construction of five 
thousand Airform buildings, including single- and double-bubble 
houses and a large number of storage tanks for wine.1 Once 
completed, the Portuguese government considered using Airforms  
for gasoline stations and ammunition storage, and wanted to create  
a tourist community with motels, restaurants, and stores. [Figs. 37 – 39]
After Adolf Waterval’s Airform world rights were cancelled in 
1956, a Portuguese man named Jose Lemos, a long-time advocate 
for Airform building, became the exclusive Airform licensee, making 
good on Waterval’s debts and advances. He was responsible for 
building Airforms in Angola, St. Thomas, and South Africa. [Fig. 40] 
In 1955, he formed Constructora Iberica Lda. to construct Airforms 
in the Portuguese-speaking world. Shortly after its formation, the 
Portuguese government awarded Iberica the entire Airform contract 
for construction of houses, grain bins, ammunition magazines, and 
storage tanks.2
Europe
opposite, top
Fig. 37: A brochure promoting 
different uses for the Airform
opposite, bottom
Figs. 38 + 39: Airforms used for  
wine storage
opposite, right
Fig. 40: Jose Lemos, who ultimately 
became Neff’s Airform licensee  
in Europe, Africa, and Brazil, seen  
here in Portugal

105
E u r o p e

106
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
The first project was the construction of three Airform houses 
outside of Lisbon. This was followed by Iberica’s development of fifty 
globe-shaped Airforms built to store wine for government-owned 
wineries. They were produced at a rate of one every two days; Neff 
estimated that a conventional tank would have taken at least a month 
to construct.3 Testing of the new structures determined the interior 
temperature was evenly distributed and kept wine safe. At the height 
of the Portuguese project, in 1958, Neff traveled to Portugal to view 
construction first-hand and to offer Lemos additional support in his 
development efforts. According to Neff, tests conducted by French 
chemists “found that wine stored in these gunite vats was far superior 
than wine stored in any other container.”4 The success of these 
storage tanks lead to the government’s extensive adoption of Airform 
construction. [Figs. 41 – 57]
Fig. 41: These Airforms were used  
for wine storage.

107
E u r o p e
The success of Airform construction in Portugal can be largely 
attributed to architect Joe A. Wahler of Altadena, California. Wahler 
was Chief Engineer for the AICC at the time and had worked with 
Waterval on the project before the his licensing rights were canceled. 
In Portugal, Wahler taught the local crews about Airform construction 
and the gunite technique. Ultimately, the difference in experience 
between Wahler and Waterval added to the difficulties of the project.5 
[Fig. 58]
left
Fig. 42: The J.N.V. (Junta Nacional 
do Vinho) wine facility
right
Fig. 43: Airforms were used  
for wine storage.

108
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Fig. 44: Preparation of the 
foundation for Portuguese liquid 
storage units 
Fig. 45: Positioning the  
Airform balloon
Fig. 46: Fastening the form to  
the framework with metal cable
Fig. 47: The air pump inflating  
the balloon

109
E u r o p e
Fig. 48: The Airform balloon

110
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Fig. 49: Airforms in various stages  
of construction

111
E u r o p e
Fig. 52: Another view of the second 
layer of gunite applied to Airform
Fig. 53: Airform balloon carried into 
position on foundation
Fig. 50: The metal gridwork applied 
between layers of gunite
Fig. 51: Application of second  
layer of gunite

112
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d

113
E u r o p e
opposite left
Fig. 54: Metal gridwork was  
applied between layers of gunite.
opposite middle
Fig. 55: Preparing the site for 
additional construction
opposite right
Fig. 56: Flat area readied for  
gunite process between the  
storage containers
opposite bottom
Fig. 57: Airforms used for  
wine storage
right
Fig. 58: A Wellington Sears 
advertisement promoting their 
industrial fabrics

114
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Senegal
Between 1948 and 1953 approximately 1,200 Airform houses were 
built in Dakar, Senegal, with expectations for 3,000 bubble houses 
a year to replace the indigenous grass shacks.1 While many belived 
that the project was financed by the Marshall Plan for postwar Europe, 
it was more likely funded by the Point Four Program, which funneled 
development money into Africa and Asia.2 [Figs. 59 – 66]
The Dakar bubble houses were mostly single-bubble forms, 
although many double-bubble homes were also constructed. Some 
Airform balloons were reused more than a dozen times, reinforcing 
Neff’s view of efficiency and low costs.3 Construction time was 
typically less than eighteen hours per house.4 The cost to build each 
bubble house was $200 to $300, approximately $2,200 today. This 
was reduced even further by using pipes to frame the smaller Airforms 
instead of wood scaffolding, where it was scarce. The houses were 
considered a success, outlasting traditional construction materials 
despite characteristic cracks.
Africa
above left 
Fig. 59: Official opening ceremony 
for a completed Airform house, 
near South Johannesburg, South 
Africa. Neff wrote: “The Mayoress of 
Johannesburg officially opening the 
Airform house at Baragwanath.”
above right 
Fig. 60: An Airform constructed for 
for French West African military 
officials in Dakar 
opposite top
Fig. 61: The first Airform houses 
under construction in Dakar, Senegal
opposite bottom
Fig. 62: Aerial view of the Airform 
houses in Dakar, Senegal

115
A f r i c a

116
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d

117
A f r i c a
opposite top
Fig. 63: Street view, Dakar, Senegal
opposite bottom
Fig. 64: Neff touched up this 
photograph to enhance the Airforms’ 
perspective and scale.
right, below
Figs. 65 + 66: Exterior views 

118
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d

119
A f r i c a
Urban growth has all but hidden the once readily identifiable 
bubble houses of Dakar. Few remain, and an even smaller number are 
in original condition. People have built on to existing bubble houses, 
adapting them for their own use with toilets, living rooms, and other 
spaces. The result are walled-in compounds, mixed with traditionally 
shaped, rectangular cement buildings. One of the original double-
bubble houses still stands, housing a restaurant and after-hours bar. 
[Figs. 67 – 73]
opposite, below
Figs. 67 – 73: Dakar Airforms today, 
with surrounding construction

120
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
South Africa
In South Africa, the Airform technique appealed to medical officials 
in Johannesburg, Durban, Cape Town, and other South African city 
governments who had condemned the use of ordinary cement blocks 
as unhygienic and improperly insulated. In 1945, three hundred 
Airforms were constructed in Johannesburg.5 In Welkom, a city about 
160 miles south of Johannesburg, an additional 50 single-bubble 
homes were built in 1950. This group was among the first to be built 
with a ventilator on top to circulate air to keep the interior cool in 
warmer climates.
Egypt
Former British Army Colonel L. B. Barrington and the Anglo-Syrian 
Trading and Construction Company facilitated the construction of  
two Airform buildings in Cairo in 1949. The first Airform was included 
in the Société Royale d’Agriculture’s XVI Exposition Agricole et 
Industrielle du Caire as a solution to the city’s housing shortage.  
Neff was awarded a gold medal by King Farouk of Egypt in 1949 for 
his contribution
In 1964, the Egyptian government reconsidered Airform, intending 
to make the form square, with a domed roof. Schools in rural areas  
and community houses were planned, but Neff believed it would be 
too expensive to adapt the form to public preference.6 The square-
plan project did not advance, although several bubble houses were 
later built in Ismalia.
Angola
In 1956, a Portuguese venture built four hundred Airform houses for 
employees of the Bengal Railroad company. Double-bubble houses 
were also constructed. Today, many of those larger Airforms are 
schools for young children. [Figs. 74 – 78]

121
A f r i c a
Figs. 74 – 78: Today, this set  
of Airform buildings is a school  
in Angola.

122
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
The Middle East
Under the U.S. State Department’s Point Four Program, ten Airform 
containers were built for storing wheat, barley, and corn in Ruseifa, 
near Amman, Jordan, in 1953. Each of Jordan’s ten storage bins 
featured straight side-walls and were constructed using the same 
balloon. Each had capacity for five hundred tons of grain. An conical 
floor created a slope that increased the efficiency of loading and 
unloading grain, assisted by a conveyor system that was built at the 
top of each bin. The bins helped the country stabilize its crop supply 
and protect against the impact of crop failures. The Airforms served  
as a model for similar development in Irbid, Karak, and Nablus  
(then part of Jordan).
In 1945 Neff partnered with Standard Oil of California to 
construct several houses for their company staff and local labor 
on their Middle Eastern oil fields. Stores, commissaries, and other 
buildings were also planned under the auspices of the Arabian 
American Oil Company (Aramco).
In 1950, L. B. Barrington constructed a licensed set of houses  
for a resort in Nebioglu, Turkey, in addition to several houses in Kuwait. 
There were also plans to construct five hundred Airforms in Harper 
City, Liberia, but only a small number were built for military housing. 
[Figs. 79 + 80]
Asia

123
A s i a
right
Fig. 79: An Airform with  
a ceiling vent
below
Fig. 80: Resort housing  
in Turkey

124
A i r f o r m s a r o u n d t h e  w o r l d
Pakistan
The Pakistani military commissioned thirteen bubble houses in Karachi 
in 1952. Today the houses remain as living quarters by the Pakistani 
Navy. Two typologies were constructed: a 22' × 32' ellipse and a 27' 
square with a cloistered roof. Edward D. Chang from China, a licensed 
architect in Karachi, served as the Chief Engineer on the project for 
the AICC. Chang also supervised the application of Insulcrete, an 
insulating material used in tropical and subtropical locations that was 
ideal for the Karachi bubble houses. [Figs. 81 – 83]
below left
Fig. 81: A story in the March 1964 
United Nations Review mentioned 
the Airforms in Karachi, Pakistan, 
and included them on the cover.
below right
Figs. 82 + 83: Completed Airforms for 
military housing, Karachi, Pakistan

125
A s i a
India
The number of bubble houses built in India is unknown, especially 
since a large number were constructed with an unlicensed balloon, 
without Neff’s awareness or permission. In some cases, they were 
constructed with hybrid materials and modified designs. Later, a more 
formal plan to address destitute housing areas was developed for 
major Indian cities as part of India’s Second Five Year Plan in 1959, 
but no officially sanctioned constructed bubble houses were built  
at that time. [Figs. 84 + 85]
Figs. 84 + 85: Construction of 
Airforms for military housing, 
Karachi, Pakistan


127
A p p e n d i x  — A
An interview with Mary Mayhew and Kathy Miles, the daughters 
of Mr. and Mrs. Robert J. Carmody, former residents of a double-
bubble house in Falls Church, Virginia.1 
How did you come to live in a bubble house?
Mary: After the Second World War, there was a tremendous hous-
ing shortage in the Washington, DC, area. People were on waiting 
lists to get apartments because there was such an influx of peo-
ple. Our dad heard about these houses and eventually found this 
street, Horseshoe Drive, with these igloo houses on it...we lived in 
one for just under eleven years.
How did your parents like living in the house?
Mary: My dad said he was embarrassed to bring my mother to 
the house when we came down to see it. Apparently it was pretty 
rough, unfinished, even though it was solid construction, just this 
huge dome of concrete. The floor was a slab of concrete with black 
linoleum tile. Sort of like a basement.
Kathy: And all the houses were painted white on the outside.
Appendix — A
Interview

128
A p p e n d i x  — A
right
Fig. 1: Sisters Kathy Miles and  
Mary Mayhew in front of their 
childhood home, a double-bubble 
Airform.
below
Fig.2: One of the Airform  
“igloos” in snow-covered Falls 
Church, Virginia.

129
A p p e n d i x  — A
How was the interior of your house painted?
Kathy: I remember the living room was green. All green. Up to  
the ceiling. My father was not handy. He was completely covered 
with paint. He used to say the only thing he could fix was a sen-
tence. After that he got someone to do the painting for him. My 
mother ended up doing all the rest of it. If it was going to be done, 
she did it.
Mary: In the other dome was our room. It was pink, and our par-
ents’ room was blue. My mother went through a phase where she 
painted the hallway different colors. One year it was maroon. I 
think because she couldn’t put up artwork she painted the hall-
way and the flat ceiling. Another year it was aqua.
She did not hang photographs or art on the walls?
Mary: There was no wallboard. It was concrete, so there wasn’t 
any way to hang pictures or anything. We had a bookcase that 
Mother used to lean pictures on against the curved wall in the liv-
ing room. She did prop things up like paintings on various pieces 
of furniture.
How old were you when you moved into the bubble house?
Mary: I was about two years old.
Kathy: I was five and a half, and started first grade when we 
moved in. I remember in school we were asked to draw our house. 
So I tried to explain it, but really couldn’t. They thought I was 
making it up...so that kind of set the scene and got me started on 
the wrong foot in first grade. It was such an isolated road, a lot of 
people didn’t even know it was there, and hadn’t seen the houses.
What do you remember about your house?
Mary: When you walked in through the center door, you were in 
the hallway that connected the two bubbles. To the right, that 
whole bubble was the living and dining room. That was big with 
a lot of furniture. There were no electric plugs—only a couple on 
the wall; so my mother would run the cords under the floral rug 
and put plastic protectors where the cords weren’t covered, so 
we wouldn’t trip over them. There were lamps and things in the 

130
middle of the room. No ceiling fixtures. It was hard to light the 
room because it was big and there was shade from outside, and 
the windows were only on the front and back. There were no side 
windows. The doors were the old solid wood type and the walls 
were thick.
Kathy: The interior walls were plaster. Wood-framed. The kitchen 
and bathroom were made with wood framing. Between the two 
bedrooms, the walls went all the way up to the ceiling. There was 
no gap. They were flat solid walls.
What about the hallway?
Mary: In the hallway, on the right in the back, was the kitchen 
and a closet that my mother used as a pantry. If you walked to the 
left, that bubble was split down the center with a straight flat wall 
that went all the up to the ceiling. The front half of that dome was 
the children’s room that my sister and I shared. The other room 
was my parents’ bedroom. There was a little bathroom with a tub. 
It wasn’t tiled. It was pretty simple. The bedrooms were big. My 
sister and I each had a twin bed on opposite sides of the room, and 
there was quite a distance between us with a play area in the mid-
dle, and we had dressers and a closet.
And the kitchen?
Mary: We had a tiny gas cooking stove, and my mother had to 
stuff things in the oven door to keep it from falling open. We had a 
white-porcelain sink and a small refrigerator. At some point dur-
ing the [19]50s, we did get a clothes washer.
Kathy: The kitchen was so tiny.
What about the windows?
Mary: The windows were only on the front and back. There were 
no side windows. Each window had three sections: they were case-
ments that were painted green. They opened outward, and you 
could sit on the window sill, and slip in and out.
Kathy: The windows had a wood frame, but there was no other 
wood, so our mother hung the curtains from concrete nails. There 
was a valance put in to hide the top of it, just a piece of plywood 
A p p e n d i x  — A

131
A p p e n d i x  — A
covered with fabric. It kind of bowed out and sat there because of 
the tension inside the window frame. There were screens on the 
windows.
Did you have a garage or driveway?
Mary: Each house had little flagstones walking up to the front 
door from the street. There were no driveways. You parked on the 
street, and when you got out of your car, you walked over the ditch 
on a concrete slab.
Kathy: They put a pipe in the ditch in front of each house and cov-
ered the top with dirt, so you could walk over it to your house from 
the street. Like a bridge.
Mary: The ditches were made of concrete.
Kathy: As a child the ditch seemed huge but it was probably a foot 
and a half or two deep on sides of the road for the water to run off.
Mary: They were great for playing. After it rained, Kathy and  
I would run out, make boats, and send things floating down  
the ditch.
Fig. 3: A single-bubble  
Airform home

132
What was the street like?
Mary: The street was paved at one time and seemed mostly like 
gravel.
Kathy: There were no street lights. It was a scary dark place for 
people who didn’t live there. There was a porch light in front, but 
that was it, and people didn’t always put them on all the time. It 
was a very dark street.
What was it like growing up in the house, in the 
neighborhood?
Mary: It was a great place for kids. My memories are very happy. 
It was a lovely setting. There was nothing else there for acres and 
acres, and you could go out in the woods and play, climb trees.
How was the neighborhood?
Mary: It was just a normal neighborhood with a lot of kids. I 
remember for Halloween, we’d go to the individual houses, and 
we’d stay for a while, and the mothers would do things like make 
candied apples and popcorn. It was such a small community.
Did the neighborhood ever change?
Kathy: In the first four or five years, there was quite a difference 
in the type of people who lived there compared to the people who 
moved in after, during the last five years [we were there]. There 
A p p e n d i x  — A
Fig. 4: Kathy and Mary playing in  
the “Igloo Village.”

133
A p p e n d i x  — A
was a change in the occupational and educational level, and it 
became more blue-collar.
Kathy: The rents stayed low.
Your parents rented the house?
Mary: I remember at one point in the [19]50s, my parents paid $50 
a month for rent.
Kathy: Later I think they paid $60 a month, then maybe $70.
How would you describe the neighborhood, the area?
Mary: It was all trees when we moved there. I don’t know how 
they built the houses, because there were so many trees. There 
were two single-bubbles up at the top of the street, which was a 
gravel kind of road. At the end, there was something we called the 
turn-around, a round area. Those were occupied by single people, 
or they didn’t have kids.
Did you have a garden?
Kathy: When we moved in there was nothing but dirt around the 
house, but my father over the years went to a lot of trouble to put 
in grass by bringing in top soil and having seed put down and 
had a good lawn which he enjoyed, except for the mowing with a 
push-mower.
Mary: He took out twenty-two trees in one area just to create a lit-
tle lawn and my mother planted irises and zinnias. Over the years 
it was really very sweet.
Kathy: Our father used to call the front lawn a poor man’s 
Riviera...people would sit outside on the lawn in the evening, get-
ting together while the kids played.
Was there any social stigma or novelty about living in a  
bubble house?
Kathy: The older I got, the more I noticed the stigma about living 
in an igloo house, and I felt a little more strange about it. A lot of 
parents wouldn’t let their kids come visit us, because they thought 
we were too weird for living in the houses.
Mary: We realized we were a source of curiosity for people who 

134
lived in regular houses. Sometimes kids in school would make fun 
of us and ask us if we were Eskimos.
Kathy: For years, even as an adult, I never mentioned that I lived 
in an Igloo.
Did you call them Igloos too?
Mary: Yes. Single-bubble and double-bubble igloos.
Kathy: In the early days it was Igloo Village because everything 
was a Village then. No one ever called them bubble houses, just 
igloos.
People visited the neighborhood?
Mary: Yes, on Sundays particularly, a lot of cars would drive up 
our street with the windows rolled up tight with the people inside 
looking at us.
Kathy: Even in the summertime, they rolled up the car windows 
when they drove down the street.
Mary: We used to laugh because it was really obvious. They’d drive 
slowly; looking at both sides of the street, then turn around and 
leave. We sort of felt like we were in the zoo, people were curious 
about the houses.
Kathy: People would come up and point, and we felt a bit like we 
were on display. They thought we were strange.
Mary: Our father was very cautious, conservative financially 
about purchasing a house, so we stayed a long time, and my 
mother was very eager to leave the community. She was raised in 
the city, but he was a country boy, so he thought it was great. She 
was a city girl. It was not the house she dreamed of.
Why did you move from the house?
Mary: Our mother desperately wanted to live in a real house, and 
I wanted a room of my own, and Kathy wanted her own room. My 
parents bought a brick, three-bedroom, one-bath house in Poplar 
Heights, and later added another bedroom and bathroom in the 
basement.
A p p e n d i x  — A

135
A p p e n d i x  — A
How do you think living the bubble house affected you?
Mary: I think living in the house gave us awareness and made us 
more tolerant of other people’s lifestyles.
Kathy: I think it did make me more tolerant of people who were 
different. We grew up with a broader perspective.
Do you miss living in the bubble house?
Mary: I live in a house now with cathedral ceilings and win-
dows that look out into trees—and my sister has the same kind of 
place—and that comes from living in the igloo with high ceilings 
and growing up in a wooden area.
How comfortable was it for you to live in the house?
Mary: Since the house was flat on the ground, it made it very cold 
like a basement floor. That was really the only thing that made it 
unpleasant...that it was damp and chilly. Of course I’m thinking of 
it, remembering it as a ten-year-old.
Did your house have a fireplace?
Mary: No. There was no air conditioning either. Radiant heat 
would have made it paradise.
Kathy: There was a chimney, an exhaust for the furnace; It had tar 
around it and was painted and there was a white, maybe concrete, 
liner around the black chimney that you could see from outside.
Was the house cold or damp?
Mary: Because it was concrete, the walls and floors were cold. 
We had little scatter rugs but we didn’t have carpeting. I always 
remember having cold feet. There may have been a wood-burning 
stove when we first moved in. There was a gas furnace with duct­
work. It was drafty. The house across the street had a fireplace. 
They built a flat wall against the curve in their living room for it.
Kathy: In the summer, it stayed fairly cool, but damp, so that’s 
when the mildew encroached.

136
What is one of your best memories of living in the house?
Mary: Kathy and I climbed over the top of the house. That was a 
play area in the nice weather. There was a small cement enclo-
sure for the gas or electric meter at the back of the center hallway 
outside. It was just enough to create a shelf for us to jump up on, 
then we’d climb up to the ledge that stuck out on top of the win-
dow and crawl up the dome to the top and run around up there in 
our tennis shoes or bare feet. That was one of our favorite things. 
I think our parents encouraged us and didn’t mind. The center 
area of the house had a tar and gravel texture, so we didn’t climb 
on that in our bare feet. We would sit on the dome. I would sketch 
and take the cat up there. Kathy was much better at climbing and 
scampering around. You could either climb down the same way or 
climb down the poplar tree that was in the front of the house. We 
also had a mulberry tree to the right of the right front door that 
we trained to grow up and over the porch, and there were tons of 
birds that would feast on the mulberries.
Kathy: I used to read up there during the summers under the 
tree. It was cool and pretty. Sometimes I sat on the very top. Most 
of the time, I sat on top of the window ledge and leaned against 
the bubble. One time I wanted to bring a wooden kitchen chair up 
there while our parents left us with a babysitter, so I tied a rope to 
it. Unfortunately, when I was hauling it up, it swung, and I broke 
the window...and I got in trouble. 
A p p e n d i x  — A

137
A p p e n d i x  — B
Appendix — B 
Patents of Wallace Neff
As Neff developed and refined his architectural use of a pneumatic 
form for construction, he realized the value of his innovations, 
and received U.S. patents to protect his designs and techniques. 
In 1941, after several years of research, Neff received his first of 
twelve patents related to Airform construction.  In the develop-
ment of this first patent, Neff cited the Hayden Planetarium, in 
New York City, as a similar form, although his elaboration in the 
patent quickly points to the fundamental differences with the 
Planetarium and other traditionally built dome structures. As he 
stated in the patent application, the Airform has:
the provision of a thin-shell concrete structure of the continu-
ous wall or span type which is so constructed as to eliminate the 
requirement for joists, beams, studding, girders, and like struc-
tural parts, and which nevertheless possess sufficient strength 
as to withstand all normal stresses to which it may be subjected; 
the provision of thin-shell concrete structures of barrel, vault or 
dome shape constituted by a continuous wall or span in which all 
stresses are predominately those of compression, with the shell 
being substantially self-sustaining and requiring only minimum 
reinforcement for the negligible lateral stresses.1

138
Building Construction
Patent Number: 2270229 / Granted: January 20, 1942
Details the specifics of Neff’s pneumatic construction process and 
technique based on a flat-bottom balloon form. Neff referred to the 
design as form “#1.” [Figs. 5 + 6 ]
Design for a Dwelling
Patent Number: D127276 / Granted: May 20, 1941
A single bubble house with more of a peaked dome shape, and a 
louvered double-door entry with three matching windows, non-
symmetrically placed along the form. 
below and opposite
Figs. 5 + 6: Patent Drawings
A p p e n d i x  — B

139
A p p e n d i x  — B

140
A p p e n d i x  — B

141
A p p e n d i x  — B
opposite
Fig. 7: One of Neff’s patent  
drawings for a double-bubble  
house
overleaf, page 142
Fig. 8: Patent drawing
overleaf, page 143
Fig. 9: A patent drawing for  
a Quonset-type Airform
Design for a Dwelling
Patent Number: D13299 / Granted: July 7, 1942
A barrel-shaped bubble form, similar to a Quonset hut with a lou-
vered double-door entry on one end, and another set of louvered 
double doors on the side, and two sets of matching windows on the 
two long sides and a set at the end without the entry, and included 
a (fireplace) chimney.
Design for a Dwelling
Patent Number: D133658 / Granted: September 1, 1942
A double-bubble house with a connected, flat-roof structure. 
Distinguishes between the type of front door (single or double) 
and details the location of the (fireplace) chimney. Windows on two 
sides of each form. [Fig. 7]
Building Construction
Patent Number: 2335300 / Granted: November 30, 1943
Details the application of gunite (concrete) from the top of the 
form down. [Fig. 8]
Building Construction
Patent Number: 2365145 / Granted: December 12, 1944
Specifically details construction of Quonset hut-like form. Neff 
referred to the design as form “#3-a.” [Fig. 9]
Design for an Airplane Hangar
Patent Number: D139953 / Granted: January 9, 1945
A low, elongated single bubble form, with no entryway indicated 
or windows.
Design for a House
Patent Number: D140059 / Granted: January 16, 1945
A single bubble house with a triple French-door entry and a sin-
gle window on two sides of the form. Design closest to completed 
Airform built for Andrew Neff in Pasadena, California, and the 
bubble houses in Litchfield Park, Arizona.

142
A p p e n d i x  — B

143
A p p e n d i x  — B

144
Fig. 10: Neff’s sketches of various 
Airform shapes
A p p e n d i x  — B

145
A p p e n d i x  — B
Design for a House
Patent Number: D140060 Granted: January 16, 1945
A form with a single door and no windows.
Method and Apparatus for Constructing Shell-Form Structures
Patent Number: 2388701 / Granted: November 13, 1945
Details the open bottom Airform. Considered more efficient since 
it did not require as much of air pressure during construction. 
The balloon form could be made of nylon, cotton muslin instead of 
rubber-coated material or rubberized canvas—materials then in 
short supply during World War II. In 1942, the Cole of California, 
Inc., parachute plant in Vernon, California, was the first structure 
completed with this patent. Neff referred to the design as form “3.”
Storage Tank and Method of Constructing
Patent Number: 2413243 / Granted: December 24, 1946
Specifies a new type of construction to replace concrete storage 
gasoline, oil, water, and other liquids, eliminating steel-reinforced 
concrete, to create a more cost-effective and efficient system of 
construction. Neff referred to the design as form “3-B” and it was 
associated with his underground bubble structures. [Fig. 10]
Improved Method of Erecting Shell-Form Concrete Structures
Patent Number: 2892239 / Granted: June 30, 1959
Details use of wire mesh to create reinforced, straight side walls 
that also offered control to shape of the form. Neff referred to the 
design as form “4.”

146
Appendix — C 
Selected Unbuilt Airform  
Projects, 1944 – 58
A p p e n d i x  — C

147
A p p e n d i x  — C
1944
3 Five hundred bubble houses in the Channel Islands
1946
3 Multiple plans for government housing in China
3 Forty thousand bubble houses for the Philippine government
1947
3 Various movie theaters in Mexico City, Mexico [Fig. 12]
3 A lid for an industrial water tank for the Preload Corporation
Houses in Greece for the Matrad Corporation and the Greek 
government
3 A 2-million-gallon water tank in West Virginia and an 
180-thousand-gallon reservoir for the Bridgeport Water 
Company in Norristown, Pennsylvania
opposite 
Fig. 11: An illustration of an unbuilt 
Airform for a public space
below
Fig. 12: Stylized floor plans for 
Unbuilt Airforms published in Mexico 
to promote to different uses

148
Fig. 13: Floor plan for a single- 
bubble Airform
A p p e n d i x  — C

149
A p p e n d i x  — C
1948
3 Bubble houses for twenty thousand families for the U.S. 
government’s atomic energy activities in Los Alamos,  
New Mexico [Fig. 13]
3 A 1,200-seat theater for Twentieth Century Fox in  
Los Angeles, California
1949
3 Various plans for residential and commercial use for the United 
States’s Kadena Air Force base in Okinawa, Japan [Figs. 14 – 16]
1950s [Fig. 17]
3 Dome covers for two- to five-million-gallon reservoirs for the 
city of Flint, Michigan
3 Structures for atomic energy plants for the U.S. government
3 A group of double-bubble houses in Richland, Washington
3 A restaurant, “La Perla,” in Mexico [Fig. 18]
3 Three thousand bubble houses for the Preload Corporation and 
the Pacific Bridge Building Company of San Francisco to house 
factory workers in Tlalnepantla, Mexico [Fig. 19] 
1951
3 Various plans for La Mesa Housing in San Diego, with the  
LA Cement Gun Co.
1953
3 One thousand bubble houses for public housing in Las Vegas, 
with Paul R. Williams
3 A 350-room hotel in Las Vegas
1954
3 Six thousand ammunition storage units in Bordeaux, France, 
for the French Air Force
3 A motel on El Camino Real in San Mateo, California
3 Large public housing projects by Harrison and Abramovitz  
and the IBEC Housing Corporation [Figs. 20 + 21]

150
A p p e n d i x  — C
below
Fig. 14: Unbuilt Airform military 
barracks
opposite top
Fig. 15: An illustration of  
an Airform military residence
opposite bottom
Fig. 16: Cut-away illustrations of  
an unbuilt Airform residence

151
A p p e n d i x  — C

152
A p p e n d i x  — C
below 
Fig. 17: Rendering of an unbuilt 
Airform residence
opposite 
Fig. 18: A hand-colored Airform 
design by Neff

153
A p p e n d i x  — C

154
A p p e n d i x  — C
right 
Fig. 19: Data sheet for a three-
bedroom Airform residence
opposite top 
Fig. 20: Line-item cost estimates  
for high-volume Airform production
opposite bottom
Fig. 21: Additional accounting of  
cost estimates for high-volume 
Airform production

155
A p p e n d i x  — C

156
A p p e n d i x  — C

157
A p p e n d i x  — C
1955
3 Thirty-five thousand bubble houses for American-Indian 
reservations [Figs. 22 + 23]
1956
3 Airform containment structure for a nuclear reactor  
facility for Holyoke, Massachusetts
3 Storage builings for the Union Tank Car Co., Chicago
1957
3 Grain storage bins for the Italian Federation of Farmers 
Cooperative
3 Bomb shelters for the U.S. Civil Defense Authority
1958
3 Vegetable and grain storage bins for the General Foods 
Company in Eslou, Sweden
opposite top 
Fig. 22: An unbuilt Airform for 
Native American housing
opposite bottom 
Fig. 23: Cut-away illustrations of  
an unbuilt Airform residence

158
During Neff’s lifetime approximately 400,000 bubble houses were 
speculated for construction around the world. A fraction of these 
reached various planning stages that in the end lead to the com-
pletion of fewer than 2,500 houses and buildings.
The unusual design of the Airform structures made wide-
spread acceptance difficult, particularly in the United States. 
Living in a bubble house required a change in lifestyle and raised 
concerns about resale value. Since there were no internal walls 
to define interior spaces, the space was largely left open and the 
floor plan may have been too unfamiliar for home buyers. The 
shape, room arrangement, placement of furniture, and other dec-
orative concerns also challenged the Airform’s aesthetics and for 
some, functional options. The limit of a single story may have also 
added to questions of livability since the form was not flexible and 
could not accommodate additions or expansions. Ultimately it was 
difficult for bubble houses to compete with traditional aesthetics 
and conventional housing of the era. Perhaps a social and cultural 
stigma also affected consumer perceptions.
Afterword

159
From a business and government standpoint, the various shifts 
in administrations, with the associated changes with budgets and 
policies, contributed to a lack of commitment from Airform’s inter-
national clients. Even when the best intentions of providing bub-
ble houses served both public and private sectors, large-scale 
adoption was never forthcoming. Typically the completion of an 
Airform structure would gain the attention of local commercial 
interests and various government agencies, as with Constructora 
Airform de Cuba S.A, a company specifically formed to market 
and build Airforms. Two bubble houses were built in Havana but 
the company was unable to secure further support. In another sit-
uation, Construtora Airform S.L., a Spanish licensee, planned to 
build Airform storage containers for wine and olive oil, similar to 
those built in Portugal, but none were built even though the proj-
ect in Portugal was a proven success and set a precedence for the 
wine industry.
When bubble houses were considered for emergency hous-
ing—disaster relief—a lack of qualified builders and contractors 
prevented plans from moving forward although the Airform’s rela-
tively simple construction, low cost, and use of available materials 
was consistently recognized.
Today, seventy years after Neff built the first bubble houses, 
a widely adopted housing solution remains elusive for today’s 
architects and builders, however Neff effectively nailed it with the 
Airform.

160
This book was made possible with a generous research grant from 
the Graham Foundation for Advanced Studies in the Fine Arts. It 
is an honor for me to be a recipient of the award. Writing about 
Wallace Neff’s bubble houses could not have happened without 
the Graham Foundation’s support.
The most significant aspects of my research were conducted at 
the Huntington Library in San Marino, California, the repository 
of the Wallace Neff Collection, which formed the foundation of this 
book. Erin Chase, Curatorial Assistant, was always attentive and 
fully understood my research. Many additional images appear in 
the book because of her.
Scott Tennent, who might consider his involvement minor, 
was instrumental in guiding me through the development and 
manuscript phase. Thank you to Jennifer Thompson for seeing 
the potential of my work and for her patience with me. I worked 
closely with Dan Simon whose editorial direction was straight-
forward and helped me focus and refine the scope of writing for a 
more distilled manuscript. I understand the process more, thanks 
to him.
Acknowledgments

161
Thanks to Neil Bethke at the Loyola Marymount University 
Archives and Special Collections in Los Angeles; James 
Robert Allen II at Arizona State University–Architecture and 
Environmental Design Library; Sara Homan, Linda Lamm, and 
Rosemary Lang-Fiebig of the Litchfield Park Historical Society; 
and Craig Holbert at the University of Akron, Ohio.  
I offer special acknowledgment to Stefanos Polyzoides, whose 
articulate nature offered insights about Neff I had not previ-
ously considered. I am indebted to the time and effort he gave me. 
Thanks also to photographers Leslie Williamson, Candace Feit, 
and Ron Rosenzweig.
I met many people in the course of writing this book that I 
would not otherwise know. For that, I am grateful to those who 
added interest and expanded my world: Virginia Tanzmann, 
Richard Tanzmann, Mary Mayhew, Kathy Miles, Arif Hasan, 
William Turner, Victor Miguel, Adrienne Wong, Onnis Luque 
Rodriguez, John Kelly, Ron Russell, Greg Packham, Frank P. 
Tighe Jr., and Michael C. Tighe.
My most personal thanks to: John and Marilyn Neuhart, whom 
I continue to learn from; Wallace L. Neff and Richard Pettigrew; 
Ann Gray for her early and helpful support; Yolanda Lopez for her 
translations of French and Spanish texts; Robin Purvis; Aaron 
Sosnick, friend and unwitting patron; Becky Fischbach; and 
SLPTL.
With gratitude I offer this book to Steve and Sari Roden.

162
Notes
Introduction
1. “Airform Construction Wallace Neff Architect,” undated 
document, Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Ibid.
3. The Book of Knowledge (The Grolier Society: New York, 
1943), s.v. “housing.”
4. “Airform International Construction Corporation,” undated 
marketing brochure, Airform Construction folder, box 2, 
Wallace Neff Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
5. Robert L. Davison, The Engineered Dwelling (Raritan, NJ: 
The John B. Pierce Foundation, 1943), 6.
6. The Book of Knowledge, s.v. “housing.”
7. “General Outline of Airform Construction.”
8. “Airform International Construction Corporation,” 4.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. “General Outline of Airform Construction,” undated 
document, Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
12. “Plastic Bubble Buildings,” March 1944, Airform 
Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
13. “Balloon Houses Designed for Defense Workers Bloom 
Under Virginia Tree,” Life (December 1, 1941): 34–35.
14. Wallace Neff 1895–1982: The Romance of Regional 
Architecture (Huntington Library, San Marino, CA: 1998), 83.
15. “General Information Airform Construction,” undated 
document, Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
16. “Inflated Balloon Provides for Novel Defense House,” 
Architect and Engineer (January 1942): 22–23.
17. The Book of Knowledge, s.v. “housing.”
18. “The Pneumatic Form by Wallace Neff,” September 1958, 
Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
19. “A New Technique in Home Building.” National Real 
Estate Journal (January 1942): 32–33.
20. “Airform International Construction Corporation.” 
21. Letter to Wallace Neff from J. A. Wahler, September 25, 
1954, Airform Correspondence, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
22. Ibid.
23. Licensee agreement between Wallace Neff and Adolph 
Waterval, October 3, 1955, Airform Construction folder, box 2, 
Wallace Neff Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
24. Letter to Wallace Neff from Jose Lemos, August 18, 1956, 
Airform Correspondence, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 

163
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
25. Ibid.
26. Licensee agreement between Wallace Neff and Robert N. 
Kuhn, January 29, 1963, box 3, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
27. Untitled and undated document, Patents and Contracts 
folder, box 1, Wallace Neff Collection, Huntington Library,  
San Marino, CA.
Falls Church, Virginia
1. Patent notice, New York Times, January 25, 1942, D8.
2. “The Home built upon a BALLOON,” [Goodyear Mechanical 
Goods Advertisement] Newsweek (January 1942): 34–35;  
and Time (January 5, 1942): 36–37.
3. “Ballyhooed Balloon,” Architecture Forum (December  
1941): 421. 
4. “A New Technique in Home Building,” National Real Estate 
Journal, (January 1942): 32–33.
5. “Ballyhooed Balloon,” Architecture Forum.
6. Wallace Neff handwritten daily notes folder 1941–1951 
[1941] Box 11. Huntington Library Wallace Neff Collection.
7. Letter dated April 4, 1986 from Douglas Fairbanks Jr. to 
Wally [Wallace L.] Neff. Wally [Wallace L.] Neff Collection.
8. Wallace Neff handwritten daily notes folder 1941–1951 
[1941] Box 11. Huntington Library Wallace Neff Collection.
9. “Inflated Balloon Provides for Novel Defense House,” 
Architect and Engineer (January 1942): 22–23. 
10. “Balloon Houses,” Catholic Digest (January 1942): 80. 
11. Douglas Haskell, “Bubble House Afflatus,” The Nation 
(February 28, 1942), 264–66.
12. Clark M. Bacon, “For the Bride of 1952,” Hollands—
Magazine of the South (April 1942): 6.
13. “Bubble Houses,” The Architects’ Journal (January 22, 
1942): 72–74. 
14. Hubert G. Ripley, “Back to pithecanthropus erectus: some 
notes on the igloo house,” Michigan Society of Architects 
(January 6, 1941): 1.
15. Interview with William Turner, April 19, 2008.
Litchfield Park, Arizona
1. “Grain Bins for South West Cotton Company, Arizona, 
U.S.A.” Architect & Building News (April 23, 1943): 60.
2. Ibid.
3. “Airform House for a Desert Colony,” Architectural Record 
(July 1944): 81–83.
4. Liberty, September 29, 1945, 30.
5. “Airform House for a Desert Colony,” 81–83.
6. Interview with Linda Lamm, July 22, 2008, with the author.
7. Wigwam Resort Brochure, undated, Litchfield Park 
Historical Society.
Loyola University, 1944
1. University Archives, Special Collections, Campus Files, 
President Records (Series 8), Loyola Marymount University.
2. Ibid.
Pacific Linen Supply Co.
1. Letter from Wallace Neff to “Mr. Robeson” [client], 
September 28, 1943, box 4, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Wallace Neff handwritten daily notes folder 1941–1951 
[1943] Box 11. Huntington Library Wallace Neff Collection.
3. “Inflated—bag forms let it down,” Engineering News Record 
131 (December 2, 1943): 55. 
4. “Concrete Dome,” letter to editor by Wallace Neff, 
Engineering News Record 133 (August 10, 1944): 77.
Andrew Neff House, California
1. Note by Andrew Neff, undated, box 9, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Interview with Wallace Neff by Alson Clark and Jae 
Carmichael, Pasadena Historical Society and Friends of the 
Pasadena Public Library for the Pasadena Oral History 
Project, 1977.
3. “Unusal Dome–icile,” Pasadena Star News (June 7,  
1962): 25.
4. Ibid.
South Pasadena, California
1. Letter from William S. Stokes to Wallace Neff, May 14,  
1946, box 3, Wallace Neff Collection, Huntington Library,  
San Marino, CA.
2. Interviews with Virginia Tanzmann and Richard 
Tanzmann, August 12 and August 19, 2008.
Hobe Sound, Florida
1. “Houses Sprayed from Gun,” Christian Science Monitor 
(January 15, 1954): 12. 
2. “Big glassed openings give balloon houses a new look,” 
House & Home (March 1954): 153.
3. “Houses Sprayed from Gun,” Christian Science Monitor.
4. “The Airform House,” Vogue (January 1954): 127.
5. “Big glassed openings give balloon houses a new look,” 
House & Home.

164
Latin America
1. “General Information Airform Construction,” undated 
document, Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Licensee agreement between Wallace Neff and Joseph. A. 
Wahler, September 17, 1954, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
Europe
1. “General Outline of Airform Construction,” undated, 
Airform Construction folder, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Ibid.
3. “General Outline of Airform Construction.”
4. Ibid.
5. Letter to Wallace Neff from J. A. Wahler, September 25, 
1954, Airform Correspondence, box 2, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
Africa
1. “Airform Construction General Information,” undated 
marketing brochure, folder 3, box 5, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
2. Interview with Wallace Neff by Alson Clark and Jae 
Carmichael, Pasadena Historical Society and Friends of the 
Pasadena Public Library for the Pasadena Oral History 
Project, 1977.
3. “Airform Construction General Information,” undated 
marketing brochure, folder 3, box 5, Wallace Neff Collection, 
Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
4. “Airform International Construction Corporation,” undated 
marketing brochure, Airform Construction folder, box 2, 
Wallace Neff Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
5. “Advantages of Airform Construction,” proposal to the 
Department of the Air Force, undated, box 5, Wallace Neff 
Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
6. An undated document outlining Wallace Neff’s plans for 
different Airforms, Airform Construction folder, box 5, Wallace 
Neff Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
Appendix A
1. Interviews with Mary Mayhew and Kathy Miles, March 18 
and 21, 2008, with the author.
Appendix B
1. Wallace Neff. Building construction. U.S. Patent 2,365,145, 
filed April 3, 1941, and issued December 12, 1944.

165
Selected Bibliography
Several previously published bibliographical references  
do not appear in the following list. Their exclusion is not an 
omission or oversight.
1941
Architecture Forum, December 1941, p. 421
Architectural Record, December 1941, p. 22, 108
Life, December 1, 1941, p. 34–35
Los Angeles Times, November 23, 1941, p. 5
Architectural Forum, February 1941, p. 87–90.
Michigan Society of Architects, January 6, 1941, p. 1
1942
Portland Cement Association, 1942, p. CP50
Architect and Engineer, January 1942, p. 20–23
Catholic Digest, January 1942, p. 80
National Real Estate Journal, January 1942, p. 32–33
Newsweek, January 1942, p. 34–35
Western Construction News, January 1942, p. 12
Time, January 5, 1942, p. 36–37
Illustrated London News, January 10, 1942, p. 56
The Architects’ Journal, January 22, 1942, p. 73–74
New York Times (patent notice), January 25, 1942, p. D8
The United States News, February 13, 1942, p. 24–25
The Nation, February 28, 1942, p. 264–266
Concrete Builder, Spring 1942, p. 8–9
Fortune, March 1942, p. 155
Popular Mechanics, March 1942, p. 155
Hollands—Magazine of the South, April 1942, p. 6
Nuestra Arquitectura, May 1942, p. 174–177
Los Angeles Times, June 29, 1942, p. 5
Arizona Farmer, July 18, 1942, p. 3
Christian Science Monitor, July 31, 1942, p. 10
Christian Science Monitor, September 2, 1942, p. 17
1943
Architectural Forum, February 1943, p. 76–78
Architect & Building News, April 23, 1943, p. 60
Engineering News Record, December 2, 1943, p. 55
Davison, Robert L. The Engineered Dwelling. Raritan, NJ:  
The John B. Pierce Foundation, 1943.
The Book of Knowledge. New York, NY: The Grolier  
Society, 1943
1944
The Indiana Framers Guide, January 1944, p. 10
Southwest Builder & Contractor, February 11, 1944, Cover
Engineering News Record, February 24, 1944, p. 97

166
Popular Mechanics, March 1944, p. 7
Forbes, April 1944, p. 26
Fortune, May 1944, p. 170
Popular Mechanics, May 1944, p. 46–48
Architectural Record, July 1944, p. 81–83
Country Gentleman, July 1944, p. 15
Southwest Builder & Contractor, July 28, 1944, Cover
London Pictorial, August 6, 1944
Engineering News Record, August 10, 1944, p. 77
1945
Popular Mechanics, April, 1945, p. 48
L’Architecture d’Aujourd’hui, July–August 1945, p. 4–12
Prefabrication, September 4, 1945, p. 38–40
Liberty, September 29, 1945, p. 30
Goodyear Triangle, November 20, 1945
Bruce, Alfred and Harold Sandbank. A History of 
Prefabrication. Raritan, NJ: The John B. Pierce  
Foundation, Housing Research, 1945.
1946
Picture Wise, May 1946, p. 22
See, September 1946, p. 24
Los Angeles Times, October 20, 1946, p. E5
Casson, Hugh. Homes by the Million: An Account of 
the Housing Methods of the U. S. A. 1940–1945. 
Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penquin Books, 
1946.
Forman, Robert. Make it Yourself Architectural Models. 
London & New York: The Studio, 1946.
Gloag, John, and Grey Wornum. House Out of Factory.  
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1946.
1947
Los Angeles Home Magazine, April 13, 1947, Cover
Revista de la Esquela National de Arquitectura, July 1947,  
p. 58–6
West Coast Real Estate & Business Opportunity Journal,  
July 1947, p. 10
Architectural Forum, July 1947, p. 10
A Rodovia, November 1947, p. 54
1948
Engineering News Record, April 22, 1948, p. 5
1949
Rubber Popular Blad Gewidaan Rubber, February 1949, p. 15
Engineering News Record, August 25, 1949, p. 34
1950
Journal of the American Institute of Architects, November 
1950, p. 221
Christian Science Monitor, November 10, 1950, p. 14
Gloag, John. Men and Buildings, second edition, revised and 
illustrated. London: Chantry Publications Limited, 1950.
1951
Interiors, March 1951, p. 14
Engineering News Record, June 1951, p. 55
1952
Science Digest, September 1952, p. 20–22
1953
Reader’s Digest, June 1953, p. 98–99
Time, June 22, 1953, p. 62
Prefabrication, November 1953, p. 22
Popular Science, December 1953, p. 133–135
Engineering News Record, December 24, 1953, p. 45
1954
Mademoiselle, January 1954, p. 91
Vogue, January 1954, p. 127
Christian Science Monitor, January 15, 1954 p. 12
Time, January 25, 1954, p. 104
Life, February 22, 1954, p. 75–76, 78
House & Home, March 1954, P. 153
American Industrial Exporter Special Report, 1954, p. 22
Architectural Record, May 1954, p. 314, 316
Progressive Architecture, June 1954, p. 116–119
Architectural Record, November 1954, p. 221, 223
1955
Arts and Architecture, January 1955, p. 12–15, 32–35
House & Home, January 1955, p. 134
Architectural Record, February 1955, p. 206–208
1956
Architectural Record, Mid-May 1956, p. 204–205
Domus, May 1956, p. 13–14

167
1957
Business Week, January 5, 1957, p. 206–208
1948
Business Week, August 23, 1958, p. 206–208
1959
Time, August 18, 1959, p. 24–26
1961
Junior Scholastic, January 25, 1961, p. 8
1963
Kaswell, Ernest R. Wellington Sears Handbook of  
Industrial Textiles. New York: Wellington Sears  
Company, Inc., 1963.
1964
United Nations Review, March 1964, cover
Neff, Wallace. Architect, FAIA Architecture of Southern 
California Architecture of Southern California; a selection 
of photographs, plans, and scale details from the work of 
Wallace Neff. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1964.
1976
Newlon, Howard Jr., ed. A Selection of historic American 
papers on Concrete 1876–1926. Detroit: American  
Concrete Institute, 1976.
1977
Clark, Alison and Jae Carmichael. Interview with Wallace 
Neff. Pasadena. Historical Society; Friends of the Pasadena 
Public Library; Pasadena Oral History Project. 1977.
1980
Bernhardt, Arthur D. Building Tomorrow: The Mobile/
Manufactured Housing Industry. Cambridge, MA:  
MIT Press. 1980.
1982
Los Angeles Times, June 10, 1982, p. G9
1986
Neff, Wallace, Jr., and Alison Clark. Neff, Architect of 
California’s Golden Age. Foreword by David Gebhard. 
Santa Barbara, California: Capra Press, 1986.
1987
Pasadena Star News, May 17, 1987, p. B–1
1989
Pasadena Star News, May 11, 1989, p. B–1
Wallace Neff, 1895–1982: The Romance of Regional 
Architecture. In connection with an exhibition presented by 
the Virginia Steele Scott Gallery at the Huntington Library 
from May 6 through September 4, 1989. Huntington 
Library, San Marino, California. 1989.
1995
World War II and the American Dream. Albrecht, Donald, ed. 
National Building Museum, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
1995.
1998
Architectural Design, September 1998, p. iii–iiv
2001
Rose, Joseph. Folds blobs + boxes: Architecture in the  
Digital Era. Pittsburgh, PA: The Heinz Architectural 
Center Books, 2001.
2005
Kanner, Diane. Wallace Neff and The Grand Houses of  
the Golden State. New York: Monacelli Press, 2005.
2006
Bruce, Gordon. Eliot Noyes: A Pioneer of Design and 
Architecture in the Age of American Modernism. New York: 
Phaidon Press Inc., 2006.

168
Image Credits 
Huntington Library, Maynard Parker Collection: 2, 45 top, 
46–51, 53 bottom right, front cover image
Courtesy of the Huntington Library: 12, 14, 22, 25 right, 
26–30, 32–33, 35 bottom left, 36 left, 37–38,  
39 top right and middle left, 40, 53 top, 55, 57–59, 60 right, 
63, 69–71, 73 top, 75 top, 78 top, 79 top, 87 bottom, 89,  
91 top, 92, 95 top, 96 top right, 97, 98 bottom, 101 top, 102, 
103 bottom, 105–12, 115 bottom, 116 top, 124, 125 bottom, 
138–40, 142–44, 147–51, 153–56
Courtesy of Steve Roden: 16, 17 top, 19–20, 23–24, 36 right,  
39 middle right, 39 bottom left, 39 bottom right,  
43 top right and middle left, 44, 56, 88, 90, 91 bottom, 93, 
94, 95 bottom, 96 top left, 96 bottom, 98 top, 99–100,  
101 bottom, 114, 115 top, 123 top, 131 
Courtesy of Wallace L. Neff: 10–11, 17 bottom, 25 left,  
35 top and bottom right, 41, 52, 62, 64, 72, 73 middle and 
bottom, 74, 75 bottom, 76–77, 78 bottom, 79 bottom,  
84–86, 113, 116–17, 123 bottom, 124 left, 124 top, 146,  
back cover images: top and bottom left, bottom right
Courtesy of the Litchfield Park Historical Society:  
43 middle right, 45 bottom
Courtesy of the Arizona State University Library: 43 bottom, 
87 top, 152
Courtesy of the Loyola Marymount University Library:  
53 bottom left
The Los Angeles Times: 60 left
Leslie Williamson: 61, 65–67
Robert Rosenzweig: 80–83, back cover image: top right
Private collection: 103 top
Candace Feit: 118–19
Victor Miguel: 121
Kathy Miles and Mary Mayhew: 128–32

