Noise, Cognitive Function, and Worker Productivity
Joshua T. Dean∗
February 25, 2020
Abstract
I investigate the relationship between noise and worker productivity with two exper-
iments in Kenya. I ﬁrst randomize exposure to engine noise during a textile training
course at a government training facility. An increase of 10 dB reduces productivity
by approximately 5%. In order to study what mechanism drives this eﬀect, I then
randomize engine noise during tests of cognitive function and placebo eﬀort task. The
same noise change impairs cognitive function but not eﬀort task performance. This
illustrates how environments associated with poverty can aﬀect economic outcomes by
impairing cognitive function. Finally, in both experiments, I examine whether indi-
viduals appreciate the impact of noise on their performance by eliciting participants’
willingness to pay for quiet working conditions while randomly varying whether they
are compensated based on their performance. Individuals’ willingness to pay does not
depend on the wage structure; suggesting that they are not aware that quiet working
conditions would increase their performance pay.
This cautions against the ability
of workers to appropriately adapt to the impacts of noise and suggests dealing with
environmental cognitive impediments may require policy intervention.
∗University of Chicago Booth School of Business; Address: 5807 S Woodlawn Ave, Chicago, IL 60637;
Email: joshua.dean@chicagobooth.edu. I am extraordinarily grateful for the guidance and support of my
advisors Esther Duﬂo, Frank Schilbach and Abhijit Banerjee without whom this project would not have been
possible. This project also beneﬁted from conversations with Alonso Bucarey, Emily Breza, Sydnee Caldwell,
Stefano DellaVigna, Dave Donaldson, Aicha Ben Dhia, John Firth, Chishio Furukawa, Rachel Glennerster,
Nick Hagerty, Johannes Haushofer, Peter Hull, Namrata Kala, Supreet Kaur, Gabriel Kreindler, Matt Lowe,
Benjamin Olken, Benjamin Marx, Rachael Meager, Matthew Rabin, Gautam Rao, Otis Reid, Chris Roth,
all of the participants at the Russell Sage Foundation Summer Institute in Behavioral Economics, Joshua
Schwartzstein, Mahvish Shaukat, Elizabeth Spelke, Carolyn Stein, Daniel Waldinger, Roman Zarate and
Ariel Zucker. I would also like to thank the entire team at the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics for
their superb advice and assistance with implementing this project. Finally, I would like to thank the Busara
Center for Behavioral Economics, the J-PAL Directors Fund, the George and Obi Shultz Fund, National
Science Foundation grant DGE-1122374, and the Weiss Family Program Fund for ﬁnancially supporting this
work. This project was registered with the AEA RCT registry under ID AEARCTR-0001500.
1

While noise is ubiquitous in the modern world, in low and middle income settings ex-
posure can reach egregious levels. In factories, workers can experience jet-engine-level noise
daily (Nandi and Dhatrak 2008; Kimani 2011). On streets, it is common for honking and
shouting to ﬁll the air. In India, this cacophony is so great that car manufactures have begun
to increase the volume of their horns (Sen Gupta 2014). Cognitive science research suggests
that this exposure might reduce productivity by impairing task management skills like at-
tention and working memory (Szalma and Hancock 2011; Matthews et al. 2000b; Jones and
Broadbent 1991). While it seems intuitive that inhibiting these cognitive functions should
make individuals less productive, limited causal evidence demonstrates or quantiﬁes their im-
portance for productivity. Without this link, assessing the economic implications of excessive
noise exposure is diﬃcult.
This paper uses two randomized experiments in Kenya to investigate the relationship
between noise exposure and productivity. First, I estimate the reduced-form impact of noise
on productivity by randomly exposing participants in a textile training course to engine
noise. Second, I study the importance of cognitive function as a mechanism by randomly
exposing individuals from the same population to the same engine noise while they complete a
battery of cognitive tests and an eﬀort task as a placebo.1 Third, in both experiments I assess
whether individuals understand how noise aﬀects their productivity by oﬀering participants
the chance to pay for quiet working conditions while I randomly vary whether their pay
depends on their performance. If individuals completely understand the impact of noise, we
might expect the eﬀects to be attenuated by adaptations such as avoiding noisy locations.
On the other hand, if these kinds of environmental impediments are unnoticed by workers,
policy intervention may be needed to improve eﬃciency.
I demonstrate that noise can meaningfully reduce productivity in a real-work setting.
While a signiﬁcant body of literature considers the impact of noise on cognitive function,
very little work considers how this eﬀect might manifest itself when individuals are faced
with incentivized tasks in a real-work setting (Matthews et al. 2000b). I recruited a sample
of 128 manual laborers accustomed to factory noise for a two-week textile production course
at a government vocational training facility outside of Nairobi, Kenya. After training the
sample to complete an incentivized production task, I randomly exposed participants to
engine noise while they worked autonomously for a piece rate. In order to isolate the impact
of noise, I chose a task that did not involve communication, randomly varied which work
location was noisy, and randomized work stations to minimize participants’ familiarity with
1This mechanism holds particular interest because a recent literature in economics considers how condi-
tions of poverty might aﬀect cognitive function, but no work has yet estimated a causal relationship between
cognitive function and economic activity (Mani et al. 2013; Schilbach et al. 2016).
2

their neighbors.
I estimate that increasing the noise level from that of a dishwasher to
that of a vacuum cleaner (an increase of 10 dB) reduced output by approximately 5%. For
comparison, Bloom et al. (2013) ﬁnd that an intensive, nine-month management intervention
increased output by 9%.
Given that the task did not involve communication, the most plausible channel for this
impact is through the eﬀect that noise has on cognitive function, which decades of laboratory
work has shown can be easily impaired by noise (Evans and Hygge 2007; Hockey 1970;
Jones and Broadbent 1991; Matthews et al. 2000b; Smith 1989; Szalma and Hancock 2011).
Cognitive function (also called executive function) encompasses all of the general-purpose
abilities involved in task management. This includes the ability to direct one’s attention,
manipulate information in memory and switch between tasks (Diamond 2013). These skills
appear critical for many types of work. For example, a factory foreman requires a broad
range of attention to ensure that his/her workers do not make mistakes. An auto-rickshaw
driver must simultaneously drive and take directions from his/her passenger.
Cognitive
science research has shown stronger cognitive function is correlated with better job market
outcomes, physical health and success in school (Bailey 2007; Borella et al. 2010; Crescioni
et al. 2011; Duncan et al. 2007; Gathercole et al. 2004). Nonetheless, we do not have any
causal estimates of the impact of these task management abilities on productivity, and one
might be concerned that their impact would be small relative to other inputs like eﬀort.
To evaluate the importance of this mechanism, in a second experiment I randomly ex-
posed 213 individuals from the same population to noise while they completed a wide variety
of cognitive tests. The same engine noise reduced performance on a common factor index of
test outcomes by 0.07 standard deviations. As a placebo to rule out alternative mechanisms,
respondents also completed an eﬀort task where they alternated pressing the “a” and “b”
keys on a keyboard for 10 minutes (DellaVigna and Pope 2018). This task requires all the
same inputs as the sewing task (e.g. motor control and eﬀort), except it requires minimal
amounts of cognitive function. Noise has no impact on performance. In fact, the point
estimate suggests that doubling the noise level increases the number of key presses by 1.9
relative to a control mean of 2192, and any decrease in eﬀort larger than 1.4% is outside of
the 95% conﬁdence interval. Combined with the results of the ﬁrst experiment, this suggests
cognitive function is an important input to productivity.
I then demonstrate that individuals neglect the productive impact of noise. While a
signiﬁcant literature examines the disutility individuals derive from living in noisy conditions
(see Navrud (2002) for an overview), no work has assessed whether individuals are aware of its
productive impact. More generally, while a rapidly expanding literature suggests experiences
associated with poverty might have important economic consequences by impairing cognitive
3

function, almost nothing is known about whether individuals take actions to protect their
cognition from these stimuli (Kremer et al. 2019).2 3 Understanding whether individuals are
aware of environmental hazards to their productivity is critical to predicting the real-world
impact of such impediments. If individuals understand the eﬀects and have the ability to
either avoid or compensate for exposure to these stimuli, we would expect their actions to
attenuate any eﬀect observed in a controlled experiment. If, on the other hand, individuals
do not appreciate their vulnerability, these environments are potential sources of signiﬁcant
ineﬃciencies.
In order to assess this possibility, I allowed participants in both experiments to pay
for quiet working conditions and randomly varied whether they were paid based on their
performance. If individuals attend to the productive eﬀects of noise exposure, they should
be willing to pay more to work in quiet when their earnings depend on their performance.
Instead, I ﬁnd that individuals’ willingness to pay was unaﬀected by the wage structure.
I use my within-person variation to evaluate potential mechanisms underlying this ne-
glect. I ﬁrst assess whether individuals who were relatively unaﬀected by noise are driving
the result. By estimating individual-level treatment eﬀects, I show that the impact of noise
on an individual’s productivity does not predict the responsiveness of their demand to per-
formance pay. Second, I show that a simple prompt to think about the productive impacts
of noise also did not increase demand responsiveness. Finally, I demonstrate that responses
are consistent with a failure to notice the productive impact of noise (Hanna et al. 2014;
Schwartzstein 2014). In particular, individuals were able to somewhat predict their output
but were unable to predict the impact of noise. Moreover, individuals appear to have realized
that they did not understand the productive value of quiet and were unwilling to stake any
money on their stated beliefs. I conclude by considering the eﬃciency implications of this
neglect for labor market sorting.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the prevalence
of noise pollution in developing cities and its eﬀects on cognitive function, before Section 2
describes the design and results of the productivity experiment. Section 3 then presents the
design and results of the cognitive experiment, Section 4 assesses whether individuals neglect
the eﬀects of noise and considers implications for eﬃciency, and ﬁnally Section 5 concludes.
2For example, there is recent work on on eﬀects of alcohol consumption, heat, air pollution, sleeplessness
and ﬁnancial strain (Schilbach 2017; Adhvaryu et al. 2016b; Zivin and Neidell 2012; Bessone et al. 2019;
Kaur et al. 2019).
3Schoﬁeld (2014) demonstrates that individuals fail to make food purchases that would improve their
productivity which suggests possible neglect. Also previous work in psychology on the human capacity for
introspection (for example, Nisbett and Wilson (1977)) also suggests individuals in these environments might
not be aware of their potential impact.
4

1
Background
1.1
Noise Pollution in Developing Contexts
Noise pollution is one of the oldest externalities documented in the written record. In the
6th century BCE, the Greek colony of Sybaris had such a noise problem that they banned
potters, tinsmiths and other noisy tradesmen from working in the city (Goldsmith 2012).
When the founding fathers of the United States gathered in the Pennsylvania State House
in May 1787 to craft the constitution, they ﬁrst spread dirt on the cobblestone streets
surrounding the building to prevent the noise of passing carriages from disrupting their work
(United States National Archives and Records Administration 2017). Since the industrial
revolution, sources of noise pollution have proliferated at an impressive rate (Bronzaft 2002).
Given weak state capacity, it is unsurprising that noise pollution is pervasive in the rapidly
urbanizing and industrializing developing world. In many cities the noise level experienced
by simply standing on the street reaches dangerous levels (Wawa and Mulaku 2015; Mehdi
et al. 2011; Bhosale et al. 2010). For example, areas of the central business district of Nairobi
approach 85 dB (the level of noise made by a power lawn mower).
Beyond city streets, many workplaces are ﬁlled with noise. The Indian National Institute
of Occupational Health reports that noise levels in most industrial occupations exceed 90
dB, a level that the United States Centers for Disease Control estimates will induce disabling
hearing loss in one out of four workers exposed (Nandi and Dhatrak 2008). Similarly, an
NGO in Kenya ﬁnds that 75% of metal workers are exposed to unsafe levels of noise and
22% already have disabling hearing loss (Operation Ear Drop 2010).
While comprehensive data on noise levels does not exist outside of the European Union,
we can use hearing loss as a proxy for exposure. Figure 1 combines measurements of hear-
ing ability recently collected by Mimi (2017) with data on city-level GDP from Berube et
al. (2014) to show that citizens of poorer cities have substantially more age-adjusted hearing
loss. The average citizen of Delhi or Mumbai has as much hearing loss as residents of New
York or Tokyo who are eight years older. While there are undoubtedly many causes for this
diﬀerence, for example variation in access to medical care, it suggests that citizens in poorer
countries are likely exposed to more noise.
1.2
Noise and Productivity
Despite the research on the cognitive impacts of noise, we have almost no causal evidence of
the impact of noise on economic outcomes in real-work settings. Weston and Adams (1935)
randomized hearing protection among 20 textile workers and estimated that output was 3%
5

higher among those with hearing protection over the next 18 months. Unfortunately, the
study does not report standard errors or any statistical tests which makes it diﬃcult to
interpret this result. Broadbent and Little (1960) studied the eﬀects of a noise-abatement
treatment in one room of a Kodak factory and found that the noise decrease of 10 dB
was associated with fewer worker errors; although, there was also a signiﬁcant improvement
in the non-abated rooms. Finally, Levy-Leboyer (1989) cross-randomized 52 workers into
assembling either carburetors or air conditioners in either their typical noisy conditions or a
separate quiet room. Workers assigned to assemble air conditioners in quiet were 14% faster
than those in normal conditions; however, those assigned to assemble carburetors in quiet
were 10% slower than their counterparts in noise. Although no study provides large-sample
evidence that distinguishes the eﬀects of noise exposure from other location-speciﬁc features,
together this work suggests that noise might aﬀect real-work outcomes.4
1.3
Cognitive Function and Productivity
Studies on cognitive function and productivity generally fall into one of two groups, the ﬁrst
of which examines how stimuli can aﬀect cognitive function. A large psychology literature
studies how a variety of factors such as heat, fatigue, sleep, and health can aﬀect cognitive
performance (see Matthews et al. (2000a) or Dean et al. (2017) for overviews). Additionally,
recent literature in economics examines how conditions of poverty can impede cognitive
function (Haushofer and Fehr 2014; Lichand and Mani 2016; Mani et al. 2013; Schilbach et
al. 2016). These studies then generally appeal to theory, the correlational evidence mentioned
above, and our intuition about the importance of cognitive abilities to make inferences about
how stimuli might aﬀect productivity.
A second group of studies examines how stimuli associated with poverty can aﬀect pro-
ductivity directly. This includes recent work in economics on how temperature, alcohol,
air pollution, hunger, sleeplessness, and ﬁnancial strain can aﬀect productivity (Adhvaryu
et al. 2016b; Chang et al. 2016b, 2016a; Park 2017; Schilbach 2017; Schoﬁeld 2014; Zivin
and Neidell 2012; Bessone et al. 2019; Kaur et al. 2019). While these studies provide in-
valuable evidence on the potential for environments to aﬀect productivity, they are unable
to speak directly to the quantitative importance of a cognitive mechanism because the fac-
tors that they study generally aﬀect productivity through multiple channels or do not have
quantitative measures of cognitive function.
To my knowledge, no work bridges the gap between these two groups and estimates the
quantitative impact of a single stimulus associated with poverty on both productivity and
4Researchers have studied the impact of OSHA regulations on productivity; however, such work is unable
to separate the eﬀects of noise regulations from other safety regulations (Denison 1978; Gray 1987).
6

cognitive function. Without tracing this entire causal path, it’s hard to know the importance
of cognitive function relative to other inputs. This makes it diﬃcult to forecast the economic
impact of environmental stimuli where we only have evidence on the magnitude of cognitive
impairments.
Finally, almost none of this work directly evaluates whether individuals understand how
environments can aﬀect their productivity via cognitive impediments (Kremer et al. 2019).
If individuals appreciate these impacts, they might be able to take actions that signiﬁcantly
attenuate the eﬀects estimated in controlled experiments. However, there is some reason to
doubt this is the case. Schoﬁeld (2014) ﬁnds individuals fail to consume calories that would
improve their productivity, Adhvaryu et al. (2016b) reports that managers were surprised
by the results of their study demonstrating heat reduced productivity, and research in psy-
chology such as Nisbett and Wilson (1977) suggests individuals may not have the capacity
to truly monitor their own cognitive processes. On the other hand, Adhvaryu et al. (2016a)
ﬁnds evidence that managers alter worker assignments in response to air pollution induced
productivity shocks. This study provides direct evidence on this question by demonstrating
demand for quiet working conditions is unresponsive to incentives to increase productivity.
2
Experiment One: Noise and Worker Productivity
This experiment provides reduced-form evidence of the impact of noise on productivity.
By randomly exposing workers in a textile training course to engine noise, I estimate that
increasing the noise level by 10 dB (from the noise level of a dishwasher to that of a vacuum)
reduces output by approximately 5%.
2.1
Experimental Design
2.1.1
Context
My survey team recruited 128 individuals for a ten-day sewing course at the Kenyan National
Industrial Training Authority’s Technology Development Center (TDC), a government vo-
cational training facility located in an industrial development zone outside of Nairobi. This
facility is well-suited to the experiment because it allows for signiﬁcant realism. The trainers,
machines and materials are all similar to what exists in a factory setting because the center’s
primary purpose is to train workers to then work in nearby textile factories.
We recruited our sample from groups of manual laborers who gather at the gates of
nearby textile factories hoping to be hired for a day’s work (see Figure A1). This population
is well suited for this experiment for three reasons. First, the fact that respondents typically
7

work in factories means that they are accustomed to signiﬁcant levels of noise. Second, these
participants have the opportunity to use the skills learned in the course to gain employment,
which helps the experience approximate typical working conditions. Third, the sample is
demographically similar to many poor communities where we are interested in the importance
of cognitive function (Table B1).
2.1.2
Generating Noise
There are three ways to manipulate noise exposure: ambient-level abatement, individual-
level protection, and generating additional noise. Ambient-level abatement is undesirable
from an experimental perspective because it involves signiﬁcant, location-speciﬁc invest-
ments that confound the reduced noise with other location-speciﬁc features. For example, a
common abatement technology is to replace or pad the existing ceiling with more absorbent
material. While eﬀective at reducing noise, this means that those randomized to the room
with the absorbent ceiling are necessarily also treated with the other features of that room
such as temperature, humidity, and ventilation. Individual-level protection does not involve
location-speciﬁc investments, but noise control experts view it as an option of last resort
due to its relative ineﬀectiveness and the safety risks that it creates by impeding workers’
ability to warn each other about hazards (Hansen and Goelzer 2001). Additionally, hearing
protection not only alters the experienced noise level but also aﬀects the physical comfort
of the participants. For these reasons, I chose to manipulate noise by adding a new noise
source to the preexisting noise generated by the sewing machines.
In order to create noise representative in both the level and quality of that faced by
residents of developing countries, I chose to generate noise with a car engine that the TDC
uses for auto-mechanic training classes (see Figure A2). This type of noise does not contain
any informational content and is relatively consistent, but is not perfectly constant like a
white noise machine. These qualities match noise pollution generated by both traﬃc and
occupational noise generated by large industrial machines. This has two beneﬁts: ﬁrst, the
eﬀect of noise is known to depend on predictability and variability (Matthews et al. 2000b),
thus the representative nature of the noise is important for external validity; and second,
this type of noise is unlikely to be novel to participants, which limits concerns about whether
any productivity eﬀects are due to respondents simply changing behavior in response to a
novel stimulus. The end result is that participants in the control condition experienced noise
approximately equal to that of a home dishwasher running in the background, while in the
treatment condition workers experienced noise equivalent to listening to a home vacuum
cleaner.
As noted previously, the noise level experienced in many factories is suﬃciently loud to
8

pose a danger to hearing loss. For ethical reasons, this level of noise is never experienced
by participants in the experiment. The American Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration (OSHA) requires ﬁrms to implement a hearing conservation program if workers are
exposed to 85 dB(A) or more for 8 hours a day or more. To stay well below this limit, the
noise level was continuously monitored and exposure did not exceed 80 dB(A) for a period
of six hours. This level of exposure was approved by both the MIT Committee on the Use
of Humans as Experimental Subjects and the Kenyan Medical Research Institute Scientiﬁc
and Ethics Review Unit.5
One might be concerned that in addition to creating noise, engine exposure could alter
other environmental conditions. For example, engine exhaust might diminish the room’s air
quality or annoyance with the noise might cause participants to close windows, changing
the temperature inside the room. These altered environmental conditions could then have a
direct eﬀect on productivity independent of any eﬀects of the noise level. Thus, in order to
ensure that treatment only increased noise exposure, enumerators were instructed to keep
the windows and doors unchanged and ensure that the exhaust pipe from the engine pointed
away from the workroom doors into an open courtyard. To assess whether this was successful,
I measured CO2 (as a proxy for engine exhaust), temperature, and humidity during every
session.6
2.2
Production Task
I chose sewing pockets as the incentivized production task for several reasons. First, it is
a task that can be completed relatively quickly, which allowed me to observe variation in
performance over a short time period. Second, it requires many key sewing skills (e.g. sewing
under control, sewing in parallel lines, hemming, and taking corners). In fact, the TDC uses
this task as a tool to evaluate potential instructors for precisely these reasons. Third, these
sewing skills in turn require a variety of cognitive functions. For example, sewing in a straight
line requires paying close attention to how hard one presses the machine foot pedal, how
quickly one moves the fabric with both hands, and exactly where the needle is puncturing the
fabric being sewn at all times. These cognitive requirements are common to many production
tasks that workers perform in developing contexts, which improves the external validity of
the study. Third, this task does not require communication. If the task I chose for the study
required participants to communicate, any observed eﬀects would be the result of impairing
5The protocol numbers are 1606621783 and Non-KEMRI Protocol Number 520 for MIT COUHES and
KEMRI SERU respectively.
6CO2 is typically highly correlated with other exhaust pollutants such as particulate matter and black
carbon (Johnson et al. 2016; Abdel-Salam 2015).
9

both communication and cognitive function. This would then preclude me from using this
experiment to explore the importance of cognitive function as a mechanism and participants’
awareness of this importance. Finally, the task does not generate considerable noise. If the
task I chose created signiﬁcant noise (for example metal work), I would observe a mechanical
positive correlation between noise and productivity.
The quality of the pockets produced was graded each hour by treatment-blind enumer-
ators according to six criteria developed by the TDC (see Figure 3 for an example pocket
with the criteria marked). In the analysis below, I use these grading data to construct three
types of productivity measures. First, I use the number of pockets created per session as
a pure quantity metric. Second, I combine quantity and quality by calculating the number
of “points” earned across all pockets produced in a session. For example, if a subject made
one pocket meeting four criteria and another meeting three criteria, they would earn a total
of seven points. This is my most continuous metric where I have the most power. Finally,
I report the number of pockets meeting the diﬀerent possible quality thresholds per session.
For example, the number of pockets meeting two criteria, the number of pockets meeting
three criteria, and so on. The distribution of these outcomes is skewed, but has zeros (see
Figure A4). Thus, in order to improve power I use inverse hyperbolic sine transformations
as my preferred outcomes following Burbidge et al. (1988).7 For robustness, in each table I
also present the results in levels and Table B3 presents the results of Poisson regressions for
the reduced-form. All of the methods yield similar results.
2.2.1
Experiment Timing Overview
For logistical reasons, the course was repeated in four rounds with the number of respon-
dents equally split over each round. On the ﬁrst two days of the course, TDC staﬀtaught
participants how to operate a sewing machine (see Figure 2a). This included basic skills such
as how to thread the machine and how to avoid breaking the sewing needle. After learning
these basic skills, workers then learned how to sew a pocket. All training occurred without
engine noise.
Respondents worked three sessions per day for the remainder of the experiment, sewing
pockets and earning a piece rate for each perfect pocket that they created. On the last
two days, respondents had the opportunity to pay to work in quiet for two sessions each
day. On all days, participants worked for three two-hour sessions separated by one-hour
7An inverse hyperbolic sine transformation is deﬁned as f(y) = ln

y +
p
1 + y2

. It has the beneﬁt
that, except for values of y close to zero, f(y) ≈ln(2) + ln(y). Thus, as long as there are not too many
zeros and values are reasonably large, coeﬃcients can be interpreted in a similar manner to a standard log
transformation.
10

breaks without knowing their future treatment status (see Figure 2b). These breaks allowed
workers who were in the more noisy environment to decompress between sessions. Combined
with the lack of knowledge about future treatment status, this allows me to isolate the
contemporaneous eﬀects of noise. This improves my power in the analysis below because
it allows for the pooling of all workers within a session based on their contemporaneous
treatment status, rather than having to include interactions with their previous or future
exposures.
2.2.2
Lasting Eﬀects of Noise
While I designed this schedule to isolate the contemporaneous eﬀects of noise, whether noise
exposure has lasting eﬀects is an important policy question. I thus also include the following
decision tasks that were completed in quiet at the end of the day:
1. On every production day, participants decided how much to save in/withdraw from
an account with a 1% per working-day interest rate (approximately 7% interest over
the course of the experiment). This was intended to assess whether noise exposure
reduced willingness to forgo current consumption by either raising the contemporaneous
marginal utility of consumption or narrowing attention to the present.
2. On the ﬁfth day, participants decided whether to buy maize ﬂower in 5 kg bags or 1
kg bags. To test for increased inattention prices were set so that it was less expensive
to buy ﬁve 1 kg bags than one 5 kg bag.
3. On the sixth day, participants decided whether to stay an additional hour and con-
tinue working for a piece rate. This was intended to assess whether noise reduced
participants’ willingness to exert eﬀort.
2.2.3
Randomization
For each of the sessions following training, I randomized which participants were exposed to
engine noise while working. For this purpose, I generated random schedules for each round
that satisﬁed both of the following constraints:
• Each participant spent half of the sessions in noise and half in quiet.
• In each session, an equal number of participants worked in quiet and in noise.
I then randomly assigned each participant to one of the schedules. In order to avoid any
location-speciﬁc confounds, participants worked in two similar rooms (room “A” and room
11

“B”), and I randomly assigned each to be the noisy room for half the sessions within each
round (see Table B2 for balance tests).8 To implement this assignment, each participant
received a schedule specifying for each session whether they were supposed to report to
room “A” or room “B”. Thus, workers could not anticipate whether they would be in noise
or in quiet in future sessions, reducing concerns about workers intertemporally substituting
eﬀort. Finally, while participants were instructed not to talk, to further minimize the scope
for communication I randomized seating assignments to prevent workers from becoming
familiar with their neighbors.
This randomization procedure was necessary because my piloting demonstrated signif-
icant heterogeneity in the ability to complete the production task across both individuals
and time. Thus, even though simple randomization procedures would have resulted in bal-
ance in expectation, the risk of imbalance in ﬁnite samples was substantial. Following this
randomization method, I include worker, room and session ﬁxed eﬀects in my regressions,
which signiﬁcantly improves my power.
2.2.4
Compensation
On training days, all respondents received 600 Ksh (approximately $6.00) for participating.
For each production session, I randomized, stratifying by participant, workers to one of three
wage conditions with equal probability. Each wage was a combination of a piece rate paid
based on the number of perfect pockets produced (5, 10 or 15 Ksh) and a ﬂat payment
calibrated so all three conditions would yield approximately 200 Ksh per session (or 600
Ksh).9 Workers were informed at the start of each session of their assigned wage for that
session.
This allows me to benchmark the observed eﬀect of noise against the eﬀect of
traditional incentives.
8The rooms were located within walking distance of each other in the compound, but not so close that
sound could travel from one to the other.
9In the ﬁrst round, the corresponding ﬂat rates were 140, 160, and 180 Ksh, respectively. After partici-
pants in the ﬁrst round were more productive than anticipated, the ﬂat rates were reduced to 95, 130, and
165 Ksh to make the wage treatments as income neutral as possible. All wage ﬁxed eﬀects are determined
based on the piece rate, which is common across all rounds.
12

2.3
Analysis and Results
2.3.1
Environmental Eﬀects of Treatment
Treatment increased the noise level by approximately 7 dB (Figure A3 and Table 1).10 As
noted previously, this diﬀerence is equivalent to the diﬀerence in noise between a home
dishwasher and a home vacuum cleaner. Meanwhile, no other environmental variables were
aﬀected, suggesting that the pollution and temperature control procedures were eﬀective.
2.3.2
Estimation Speciﬁcations
I estimate two diﬀerent speciﬁcations. The ﬁrst is the reduced-form eﬀect of being in a
treated room on productivity outcomes for individual i in room j at time t being paid wage
w shown in equation (1). The regression includes individual, time, room, and wage ﬁxed
eﬀects and has standard errors clustered at the level of randomization (room × session).
yijtw = τ · Treatmentjt + αi + γt + φj + κw + ϵijtw
(1)
yijtw = ν · Noise Leveljt + αi + γt + φj + κw + ϵijtw
(2)
To improve interpretability, I also estimate an instrumental-variables speciﬁcation shown in
equation (2) using an indicator for being in a treated room as an instrument for the noise
level.11 All noise levels are reported in 10s of decibels because the human ear perceives a 10
dB(A) increase as a doubling in loudness; this means all coeﬃcients can be interpreted as
the eﬀect of doubling the perceived noise level on the outcome variable.
2.3.3
Main Results
Workers sewing in treated rooms produced approximately 3% fewer pockets (Table 2). Scal-
ing this by the average noise change implies a 5% decrease in productivity for every 10 dB
increase (or perceived doubling) in the noise level (Table 3).12 In these speciﬁcations, there
10For interpretability, all noise levels in regressions are reported in 10s of decibels because the human ear
perceives an increase of 10 dB as a doubling of the noise level. Thus, coeﬃcients can be interpreted as the
eﬀect of doubling the noise level.
11Using only a simple indicator for treatment discards the signiﬁcant variation in treatment intensity
shown in Figure 5. Since this treatment intensity is quasi-randomly determined based on the noise levels at
the compound and whether the engine was running smoothly or rattling, in Appendix B I use this variation
to obtain more precise estimates by generating separate treatment indicators for each decile of intensity
(diﬀerence in noise level between treatment and control room), Treatmentjpt, that are equal to one if room
j was treated during a session with intensity p and zero otherwise. There are no clear relationships between
session intensity and any observable characteristics besides noise (see Table B6) and the instruments yield a
strong ﬁrst stage (see Table B7).
12Using a larger portion of the variation by generating separate instruments for diﬀerent treatment inten-
sities yields slightly larger coeﬃcients (see Table B8).
13

appears to be no eﬀect of the noise on the number of perfect pockets. This is likely due
to ﬂoor eﬀects. During the ﬁrst days of work, most participants were unable to make any
perfect pockets. Because individuals cannot produce negative pockets, this attenuates the
estimated treatment eﬀect.13 Fisher p-values shown in Table B4 yield similar inferences.
These eﬀects are unlikely to diminish with further exposure to noise. As noted above,
the participants are already accustomed to working in large, noisy factories, and they are
exposed to frequent road noise (the community sits at the intersection of two major highways
from Nairobi to Mombassa and Arusha). What is less certain is how these eﬀects map into
diﬀerent types of tasks. These sewing tasks were chosen explicitly because they appear to
depend on cognitive function. It is unlikely that noise exposure would impede the ability of
someone doing a less cognitively demanding task such as holding open a door. On the other
hand, many factory employees are required to work in teams assembling complex objects, and
noise would likely impede both each individual’s cognitive function and the team’s ability
to coordinate. Another complication with extrapolating from these eﬀects is that diﬀerent
sources of noise pollution vary in predictability and informational content. While the noise
in this study was chosen to be representative in level and quality of major sources of noise
pollution, they are by no means the only sources. Further research is needed to understand
the eﬀects of other common sources, such as your child overhearing your neighbor’s television
while trying to study.
2.3.4
Treatment Eﬀect Heterogeneity
One might wonder whether this eﬀect is driven by low-ability workers. If this is true, then
a ﬁrm could eliminate the eﬀect by ﬁring the bad workers.
To assess this possibility, I
calculate each individual’s performance in the control condition and split the sample at
the median.14 I then estimate the treatment eﬀect separately for each group in a stacked
regression with common ﬁxed eﬀects.15 The treatment eﬀects are equally large among better
workers (Figure A5).
Another question is whether these results are speciﬁc to contexts in which individuals
are learning how to perform a task or where they have not yet had the chance to adjust fully
13An alternative explanation is that workers substitute their eﬀort so that they make fewer but higher
quality pockets. This is not borne out in the data. If eﬀort substitution were occurring, we would expect
the proportion of perfect pockets to be higher in treatment than in control. Table B9 shows this is not
the case. Additionally, estimates of the reduced-form in the second week, although imprecise, show a larger
eﬀect on perfect pockets than on total pockets, suggesting that once individuals are capable of producing
perfect pockets their production is also aﬀected by noise exposure (Table B5).
14I exclude the current session from the calculation to avoid the overﬁtting problems highlighted by Abadie
et al. (2014).
15This procedure is equivalent to ﬁrst partialling out the ﬁxed eﬀects and running the regressions separately.
14

to their surroundings. I assess this possibility by estimating the treatment eﬀect separately
for each week and for the ﬁrst and second hours of each session. While these regressions
have lower power, the eﬀects appear homogenous across both dimensions (see Figure A6
and Figure A7). This suggests that workers operating a sewing machine, regardless of their
proﬁciency, must continue to engage their task management skills to prevent mistakes, and
provides further assurance that the eﬀects are unlikely to fade with longer exposure to noise.
2.4
Lasting Eﬀects of Noise
Some models of the eﬀects of noise predict that exposure should generate lasting eﬀects
(Matthews et al. 2000b). While this study was designed to minimize these eﬀects by in-
cluding breaks in the schedule, I assess whether the eﬀect of noise exposure is cumulative
by regressing the inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed outcomes on a treatment indicator,
a lagged treatment indicator and their interaction.16 The results are imprecise due to the
reduction in eﬀective sample size, but do not provide compelling evidence that lagged treat-
ment is important (Table B11). Additionally, treatment did not aﬀect any of the decision
tasks (Table B12). This seems to suggest that the eﬀects of noise do not persist into later pe-
riods of quiet; however, given that the experiment was not primarily focused on this question
and power in these tests is low, future work should evaluate this question directly.
2.5
Conclusions from Experiment One
To interpret these magnitudes, it is helpful to compare them to other methods of improving
productivity. In this experiment, doubling the piece rate from 5 Ksh to 10 Ksh while lowering
the ﬂat rate to compensate raised output by 3%.17 Kaur et al. (2015) found that oﬀering
commitment contracts increased output by 2.3%. Finally, Bloom et al. (2013) found that a
ﬁve-month intensive management intervention in an Indian textile ﬁrm increased output by
9%.
Another way to interpret the size of these eﬀects is to consider how these estimates might
aﬀect ﬁrm noise-abatement decisions. Unfortunately, it is impossible to make any general
claim about cost-eﬀectiveness because abatement costs are highly context-speciﬁc. Costs
can vary by orders of magnitude depending on the noise’s source, the building structure,
and the production processes (Hansen and Goelzer 2001). Nevertheless, one can consider
16The lagged treatment indicator is set to zero for the ﬁrst session of each day.
17Table B13 presents the full results of the piece-rate variation. Increasing the piece rate from 5 Ksh
to 15 Ksh had no eﬀect on output. One explanation consistent with this evidence is that even though we
attempted to calibrate the ﬂat rates to compensate on average, income eﬀects began to mitigate the piece
rate’s eﬀectiveness as an incentive.
15

whether this eﬀect is suﬃciently large to be relevant to some ﬁrms’ abatement decisions. In
particular, Lahiri et al. (2011) report a case study of a large computer manufacturing ﬁrm in
Singapore, where reducing the noise level by 23 dB cost the ﬁrm $156 per worker per year.
Combining this cost with my estimate and assuming all productivity gains would translate
into increased proﬁts implies that this ﬁrm would break even on abatement if each worker
produced $1,357 per year ($5 per day) in proﬁt. For comparison, workers at this ﬁrm were
paid $100 per day. This suggests that, at least for some ﬁrms, a 5% increase in productivity
is suﬃcient to aﬀect abatement decisions.
Additionally, these eﬀects are as large or larger than other environmental pollutants
studied in the literature (Table B10). This suggests that as policy makers consider priorities
in managing the explosive urbanization and industrialization of the developing world, they
should not neglect noise pollution. Even simple regulations such as limiting the volume of
car horns can prevent a race to the bottom that imposes costly externalities.
3
Experiment Two: Noise and Cognitive Function
While the evidence from experiment one demonstrates the potential importance of noise
pollution, it does not speak to the underlying cognitive mechanisms. These mechanisms
hold particular interest because recent work argues that conditions of poverty may trap
participants by impeding their cognitive function (Schilbach et al. 2016). However, without
causal evidence on the importance of these cognitive functions for economic activity it is
diﬃcult to evaluate the plausibility of this claim. It could be the case that being able to
manage tasks is relatively unimportant compared to other inputs like eﬀort or having the
knowledge of how to complete the task.
I use this second experiment to provide some of the ﬁrst evidence on the importance of
this mechanism in three steps. First, I estimate the eﬀect that the same noise change has
on cognitive function. Second, I evaluate the potential importance of other mechanisms by
having participants complete an eﬀort task as a placebo. This task, alternating pressing
“a” and “b” on a keyboard, requires all of the same inputs as the sewing task except for
it has minimal demands on cognitive function. Speciﬁcally, the participant must use eﬀort
and motor control, but does not need to attend to any cues or switch between aspects of
the task. Finally, because I only ﬁnd evidence of an eﬀect on cognitive function, I use a
split-sample IV to compute a hypothetical “return to cognitive function” to illustrate how
the combined evidence from these experiments implies cognitive function is an important
input to productivity.
16

3.1
Design Overview
In order to examine the mechanisms in a credible way, I replicated the conditions of the ﬁrst
experiment as closely as possible. I used the exact same recruiting procedure (see Table B1
for a comparison of sample demographics). The experiment was conducted in similar rooms
less than a mile away from the TDC (see Figure A1 for a map of the locations). The timing
was a condensed version of experiment one (see Figure 4). 213 participants came for two-
day rounds with three, two-hour sessions per day.
They spent the ﬁrst session learning
how to complete the cognitive tests, after which they spent the remaining sessions working
autonomously on the assessments being compensated based on their performance. For the
second through ﬁfth sessions, I randomly assigned each worker to spend half the sessions in
noise and half in quiet. The ﬁnal session was used to elicit participant’s willingness to pay for
quiet working conditions (see Table B15 for balance tests). I also again randomly assigned
each room to be noisy for half the sessions. Noise was generated by an engine similar to the
one used in the ﬁrst experiment.
3.2
Assessments and Measurement
Because there is no consensus among cognitive psychologists about the most important
measures of cognitive function and which are most likely to be relevant in this context, I
used a wide variety of tasks drawn from Dean et al. (2017), summarized in Table B14 (see
Appendix C for details). I programmed each task in an open-source, python-based platform
developed by Mathˆot et al. (2012). The order of the tasks was randomly chosen for each
individual in each session. For each task, I developed a scoring rule that is a combination
of the relevant outcome measures (e.g. percentage correct and reaction time). Participants
were then paid based on their performance as measured by these scoring rules.
For analysis, I aggregate these individual test results into an index. Because the literature
thus far does not provide guidance on the production function mapping cognitive function
to productivity, my preferred index is the ﬁrst factor of a common factor analysis of the
percentage correct and reaction times estimated using each individual’s ﬁrst control session
(see Cudeck (2000) and Grice (2001) for details). This data-driven method assumes that
each measure mij of individual i on test j depends on cognitive function in the following
linear relationship:
mij = bjψi + Σij
(3)
where ψi is the cognitive function of individual i at time t, and Σij is a noise term. The
17

method uses an eigenvalue decomposition to construct a set of linearly-independent factors
that approximate the measures’ population covariance matrix. Assuming that all Σij are
independent of ψi and each other, any correlations between the measures can be attributed
to the latent variable ψi.
Thus, the ﬁrst factor, which explains the most covariance, is
an index of the only common factor ψi. For robustness, I also present the eﬀects on the
standardized total number of points earned by a participant, the average of the standardized
test scores following Kling et al. (2007), and the ﬁrst component of a principal component
analysis estimated on the same control data with similar results.
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Main Cognitive Results
As in the ﬁrst experiment, treatment did not aﬀect any environmental characteristics besides
the noise level in the room (Table 4). Moreover, the diﬀerences in average noise level between
treatment and control were also quite similar to those in experiment one (Figure 5).18 This
is useful because it allows me to use these results to understand the mechanisms at work in
the ﬁrst experiment without strong functional form assumptions.
My preferred speciﬁcation to estimate how noise aﬀects cognitive function is the IV
using an indicator for being in a treated room as an instrument. I estimate that doubling
the perceived level of noise reduces performance on my preferred index by approximately
0.07σ (Table 5).19
This change does not appear to be driven by any particular domain
(Table B19).20 While this eﬀect may seem small, it is important to recognize that the size of
the standard deviation is primarily driven by across-person diﬀerences (the R2 of a regression
of the index on individual ﬁxed eﬀects is 0.81). This implies that even substantial within-
person shifts will appear small because the measure captures size relative to diﬀerences
between individuals.
These eﬀects are comparable to those induced by other cognitive impediments.
For
example, Lichand and Mani (2016) ﬁnd that a rainfall shock reduces performance on an
index of cognitive tests by 0.041 standard deviations.
Similarly, Park (2017) ﬁnds that
a one standard deviation increase in temperature reduces students’ exam scores by 0.052
standard deviations. However, the eﬀect is substantially smaller than the eﬀects observed
18Speciﬁcally, Table 1 and Table 4 show the ﬁrst stage in the ﬁrst experiment is 6.7 dB(A) while in the
second it’s 9.4 dB(A). This diﬀerence is less than the 3 dB(A) threshold commonly accepted as the minimum
change in sound level detectable by humans.
19The reduced-form eﬀect of treatment, the IV using separate instruments for diﬀerent treatment intensi-
ties, and Fisher p-values presented in Table B16, Table B17 and Table B18 yield similar inferences.
20This does not appear to be due to ﬂoor or ceiling eﬀects, as most metrics generate good variation
(Figure A8).
18

by Mani et al. (2013), who ﬁnd that once-a-year payments from sugar cane harvests increase
performance by 0.67 standard deviations.
3.3.2
Alternative Mechanisms
Before interpreting what these eﬀects mean for the importance of cognitive function for
productivity, it’s important to understand if noise could have aﬀected performance on the
production task through alternative mechanisms.
If noise only aﬀected productivity by
impairing cognitive function, the ratio of eﬀects between the two experiments is informative
about how shifts in cognitive function can translate into changes in productivity. On the
other hand, if cognitive function is only one channel, it’s hard to draw any ﬁrm conclusions.
The ﬁrst potential alternative mechanism is that the noise level aﬀects the technology
of the task. For example, if the task required coordination, the increased noise level would
have likely reduced productivity by impairing communication. As mentioned above, the task
in experiment one was chosen precisely because it does not require any kind of listening or
communication to avoid this issue. I further attempted to reduce the potential that noise
could aﬀect the technology of the task by instructing participants in both conditions not
to talk to each other, and I randomized seat assignments to avoid participants becoming
friendly with their neighbors.
Another possible concern is that the noise level aﬀected other inputs to an individual’s
performance; for example, by reducing motivation21 or impairing motor coordination. To
assess this possibility, participants in experiment two completed a placebo task, used by
DellaVigna and Pope (2018) to measure eﬀort, where respondents had to alternate between
pressing the “a” and “b” keys on a keyboard for 10 minutes. This task imposes as minimal
of a demand on cognitive function as possible while still requiring the other inputs needed for
the sewing task like motivation and physical coordination. The results presented in Table 5
show that eﬀort did not change in response to the increase in noise. The point estimate
suggests that doubling the noise level increases the number of key presses by 1.9 relative
to a control mean of 2192, and a decrease in eﬀort larger than 1.4% is outside of the 95%
conﬁdence interval. This is consistent with the results of the ﬁrst experiment, where being
in noise did not reduce respondents’ willingness to stay and work an additional hour for a
piece rate (see Table B12).
21There are many reasons this might be the case. For example, one might think respondents are resentful
of the noise and decide to retaliate by reducing output. Alternatively, respondents might become discouraged
by struggling to perform in noise.
19

3.3.3
Implied Importance of Cognitive Function for Productivity
If cognitive function is indeed the only channel through which noise aﬀects productivity,
the combined results of the experiments suggest cognitive function is an important input to
productivity. A relatively modest-sized, temporary shift in cognitive function is responsible
for an economically signiﬁcant decrease in productivity. This implies policy makers should
take other environmental factors shown to inhibit these abilities seriously.
To illustrate, it’s useful to do some back-of-the-envelope calculations of what these results
imply for how large the potential consequences of these other impediments might be. Suppose
there is a single “returns to cognitive function” parameter in the production function. If this
parameter existed, it could be estimated with the ratio of the treatment eﬀect on productivity
to the eﬀect on cognitive function in a split-sample IV (Angrist and Krueger 1992). The
results of this exercise imply a substantial “return” to temporary shifts in cognitive function
(Table 6). In particular, for total pockets, the estimate suggests a 79% change in productivity
for every one standard deviation change in my measure of cognitive function.22
One can then multiply other eﬀects observed in the literature by this estimated “return”
to illustrate what they might imply for productivity (Table 7).
For example, Ebenstein
et al. (2016) ﬁnd that a ten unit increase in ﬁne particulate matter on the day of a high-
stakes exam reduces performance by 0.017 standard deviations and Park (2017) ﬁnds a one
standard deviation change in temperature on the day of an exam worsens performance by
0.052 standard deviations. Assuming that this change in performance is entirely driven by
diminished cognitive function, my “estimate” would imply that the same changes would
reduce productivity by approximately 1.3% and 4.11% respectively.
4
Sorting and Eﬃciency
4.1
Motivation and Strategy
The combined evidence of my two experiments suggests that noise can have important im-
pacts on productivity by impeding cognitive function; however, this is not suﬃcient to con-
clude that the eﬀects are relevant outside of an experimental setting. To understand whether
noise has meaningful, real-world consequences, it is vital to understand whether individuals
and ﬁrms will employ strategies to mitigate these eﬀects. For example, the most obvious
mitigation strategy for this type of distractor is paying a compensating diﬀerential to be
able to work in quiet. If the eﬀects observed in the experiment are driven by a subsample
22Estimates obtained using separate instruments for diﬀerent treatment intensities yield larger implied
returns (Table B20).
20

who are willing to accept lower wages to work in quiet, then in equilibrium the eﬀect might
be signiﬁcantly attenuated by sorting. I investigate the possibility that workers will adopt
these mitigation strategies by testing whether they are aware of the impact noise has on
their productivity.
Measuring individuals’ awareness of the impacts of noise also provides an opportunity to
contribute evidence on the more general question of whether individuals act strategically to
protect their cognitive function from environmental impediments. Without understanding
this level of sophistication, it’s diﬃcult to assess the economic implications of controlled
experiments demonstrating the eﬀects of environmental stimuli associated with poverty (see
Dean et al. (2017) for an overview). If individuals are generally aware of what situations
impair their productivity or decision-making, the substantial eﬀects observed in controlled
experiments might be signiﬁcantly attenuated by adaptation in the real-world. On the other
hand, if individuals do not understand these eﬀects, they might cause signiﬁcant ineﬃciencies.
For example, Schoﬁeld (2014) documents individuals failing to make food purchases that
would improve their productivity.
I assess awareness by oﬀering participants at the end of both experiments the chance to
pay for quiet working conditions and randomly vary whether their compensation will depend
on their performance. Speciﬁcally, workers in the non-performance pay condition of both
experiments were paid 200 Ksh for the session while workers in the piece-rate condition
were paid 15 Ksh per perfect pocket in the ﬁrst experiment and 4 Ksh per point in the
second in addition to ﬂat rates calibrated to yield total pay of approximately 200 Ksh.23 If
participants are aware that noise reduces productivity, they should be more willing to pay
for quiet when they will recoup a portion of the investment through increased performance
pay. For example, the median worker in my study can produce 13.5 perfect pockets in quiet
by this point in the course. If they realize working in noisy conditions will reduce their
productivity by 3%, when they are facing a 15 Ksh piece rate they should be willing to pay
6 Ksh more to work in quiet than when facing a pure ﬂat rate.
4.2
Elicitation Procedure
I elicit willingness to pay for quiet working conditions with a modiﬁed version of Becker
et al. (1964) following the approach of Berry et al. (2015) as outlined in Figure A9 using the
script in Appendix D. In this incentive-compatible task, respondents state the maximum
23In the ﬁrst experiment, for each of the two days over which WTP was elicited, one of the two sessions
was chosen for the worker to be compensated by 15 Ksh piece rate, ﬂat rate combination while the other was
compensated by a pure 200 Ksh ﬂat rate. For logistical simplicity, in the second experiment individuals have
their willingness to pay elicited for a single session under the possibilities of being paid a piece rate based on
their score and a 200 Ksh ﬂat rate. They are told that one of their choices will be randomly implemented.
21

that they are willing to pay for a good, after which a random price is drawn. If the price is
below the respondent’s willingness to pay, he/she purchases the good at the random price,
and if the price is above the willingness to pay, the respondent does not purchase the good.
I begin with a slight modiﬁcation to the procedure by employing a binary search over the
range 0-200 Ksh to identify the respondent’s maximum willingness to pay rather than begin-
ning by asking the open-ended question, “How much is the most you’re willing to pay?”.24
This procedure makes the task as concrete as possible, avoids the respondent needing to
engage in contingent resoning and narrows to a ﬁnal number in only eight questions. In
order to ensure understanding, after ﬁnalizing a maximum willingness to pay, respondents
must correctly answer veriﬁcation questions, and they practice the entire procedure for a lol-
lipop. I also avoid potential issues with credit constraints, time preferences and compliance
by deducting any charges from respondents’ earnings in the session where they paid to be in
quiet. This also has the beneﬁt of approximating a labor market situation where individuals
deciding where to work must choose whether to forgo higher potential wages for the sake of
future quiet.
This elicitation procedure appears to work well in this context. In this sample, in spite of
the multiple opportunities, almost no respondents ever change their willingness to pay after
the binary search (fewer than 2% of respondents in the ﬁrst experiment and zero respondents
in the second). Additionally, the practice exercise elicits a sensible demand curve for the
lollipops. Median WTP is around 5 Ksh ($0.05) in the ﬁrst experiment and 10 Ksh ($0.10)
in the second, and the means are 9.4 Ksh and 9.6 Ksh respectively.
Subsequent work in the same context provides further evidence of comprehension. Berk-
ouwer and Dean (2019) use the same elicitation method and script with a sample of 1000
low-income households in Nairobi. In that sample, the mechanism is evaluated by randomiz-
ing which of two consumer goods will be used to practice the BDM at the respondent level.
The good not chosen is then oﬀered at a randomly chosen take it or leave it price. Figure A10
shows the demand curves are strikingly similar across the two diﬀerent methods of elicitation
and give reasonable values given the market prices of the goods. Moreover, 97% of those
respondents answer two comprehension checks correctly providing further conﬁdence in the
results.
24For example, the respondent is ﬁrst asked “If the random price is 100 Ksh would you want to pay to
work in quiet?” If they respond no, they are then asked “If the random price is 50 Ksh would you be willing
to pay to work in quiet?” If they respond no again, they’re asked about a random price of 25 Ksh and so on
until the search narrows to a single number.
22

4.3
Willingness to Pay Results
The histograms presented in Figure A11 demonstrate that willingness to pay for quiet is
extremely low, even before trying to separate the willingness due to productivity concerns
from that due to disutility. The median willingness to pay is only 2 Ksh ($0.02) in the
ﬁrst experiment and 0 Ksh in the second experiment. These low levels of willingness to pay
provide some assurance that workers do not appreciate the impact of noise in addition to
the test using the random variation in the compensation scheme. To justify levels this low
with workers that appreciate the impact noise has on their productivity, it would have to be
the case that the participants enjoyed working while listening to engine noise.
Nonetheless, it is possible that individuals are at least partially aware of the productivity
eﬀect and are willing to pay more for quiet when facing a piece rate. To test this possibility,
I regress the level of willingness to pay, an indicator for being willing to pay a positive
amount, and the level of willingness to pay after restricting to strictly positive amounts on
an indicator for whether the respondent was oﬀered a piece rate or a ﬂat rate with standard
errors clustered at the individual level.25 Willingness to pay is essentially non-responsive to
the piece rate, with any increase greater than 3.5 Ksh lying outside of the 95% conﬁdence
interval (Table 8). For comparison, the median level of productivity from the piece-rate
compensated individuals in the quiet room on those days is 18 pockets, combined with
the reduced form eﬀect of a 3% decrease in productivity and a piece rate of 15 Ksh, the
respondent’s break-even willingness to pay should be around 8 Ksh.
There are several possible explanations for this lack of response. The ﬁrst is that for
many individuals the eﬀect of noise is relatively small, so they may not notice it, or I may
not be powered to detect their responses. I assess this possibility by estimating how much
more each individual is likely to earn in the quiet working conditions and testing whether
those with the most to gain are responsive to the wage structure. To do so, I estimate
individual-level treatment eﬀects using the following hierarchical linear model:
yit = ρi + τitreatmentit + φisessiont + βsession2
t + ϵit
(4)


ρi
τi
φi
Σi


∼N








µρ
µτ
µφ
0


,


σ2
ρ
σρτ
σρφ
0
στρ
σ2
τ
στφ
0
σφρ
σφτ
σ2
φ
0
0
0
0
σ2
ϵIt








25Willingness to pay after restricting to only positive amounts is a potentially problematic outcome because
it involves selecting the sample on the dependent variable; however, in this case, the speciﬁcation serves to
show that the subsample does not behave diﬀerently than the complete sample.
23

In principle, instead of using this model to estimate the within-person treatment eﬀect,
one could take the simple diﬀerence between treatment and control performance within
an individual. However, because I have few observations for each individual, this would
lead to imprecise estimates. Imprecision is especially concerning in this context because
the hypothesis of interest is whether the interaction between the wage condition and an
individual’s value of quiet is zero and including an imprecisely-estimated, right-hand-side
variable would create attenuation bias. The hierarchical model yields more precise individual
estimates by engaging in partial pooling. This is analogous to the approach used by Chetty
et al. (2014) and Kane and Staiger (2008) to evaluate a teacher’s value added. Figure A13
shows that the model appears to ﬁt the data well and strongly predicts the out-of-sample,
realized scores in the willingness-to-pay sessions. To improve the interpretability of these
estimates, I multiply the estimated change in productivity induced by noisy conditions by
the piece rate to yield a monetary value of quiet working conditions for each individual. The
distribution of estimated productive values of quiet shown in Figure A12 has signiﬁcant mass
beyond the 95% conﬁdence interval of the response to the piece rate estimated above.
To test for diﬀerential responses among those for whom quiet is most valuable, I re-
estimate the willingness to pay regressions while interacting the individual-level estimates
of the value of quiet with an indicator for being compensated with a piece rate. If indi-
viduals for whom quiet is most valuable respond more to the piece rate, the eﬀect should
manifest itself in the interaction term. Table 9 shows this is not the case. In particular,
consider the benchmark case of perfectly rational, risk-neutral individuals who understand
how noise aﬀects their productivity. For these individuals, if the prediction were perfect,
the interaction term should be one as switching to performance pay should increase their
maximum willingness to pay by the additional amount that they will earn through increased
productivity.26 I can reject this benchmark for both experiment one and experiment two at
the 10% and 5% conﬁdence levels, respectively.27
Another potential explanation for this lack of response is that the possible productive
gains from quiet are not “top-of-mind” for the participants so they do not consider it when
making their decisions. To assess this possibility, in experiment two I elicited respondents’
beliefs about their future scores if they worked in quiet and if they worked in noise following
26Note that if some individuals are actually more productive in noise, we would no longer expect the
coeﬃcient to be one because individuals cannot pay less than zero. This is a potential concern for experiment
two, although it is still a useful benchmark.
27Note that this is not the case simply because those aﬀected by noise are generally unproductive (and
thus are not concerned with the compensation scheme). The model predicts that the treatment eﬀect is
in fact more negative for those that are more productive (with a correlation coeﬃcient of -0.52). Thus, if
anything, they should care more because they both stand to lose more in a proportional sense and because
this proportional loss translates into a greater monetary loss due to their greater productivity.
24

Delavande (2014). Speciﬁcally, respondents were asked to distribute ten beans across the
ten bins of possible scores for each of the four possible compensation scheme and noise level
combinations. Half of the respondents were randomly chosen to provide their beliefs before
stating their willingness to pay, while the other half provided their beliefs afterward. If the
lack of demand response is due to this simple form of inattention, then those who were
forced to think through their beliefs before stating their willingness to pay should be more
responsive to the piece rate. The results shown in Table 10 show that this is not the case. I
can reject a positive response at the 5% conﬁdence level for the level of willingness to pay
and at the 10% level for the extensive margin of being willing to pay anything.
A ﬁnal possibility is that individuals have incorrect or imprecise beliefs about the impact
that noise will have on their productivity.
I test for this possibility using the means of
the belief distributions collected in experiment two. The results are presented in Table 11.
Columns 1 and 2 test whether beliefs are at least correct on average by comparing the
predictive power of the mean of a respondent’s relevant belief distribution to the predictive
power of the model’s predictions. While individuals’ beliefs are reasonably predictive, they
are signiﬁcantly outperformed by the model. In column 3, I then compare what the data
predicts an individual’s income gain from working in quiet would be to what the participant
predicted and ﬁnd that they are essentially unrelated, suggesting individuals hold incorrect
beliefs about the impact of noise on their productivity. This then raises the natural question
of whether individuals were deciding their willingness to pay based on their incorrect beliefs.
I test this possibility in columns 4-6 by interacting respondents’ predictions of their income
gain from quiet with the piece-rate indicator. I ﬁnd that even those who stated that they
believe they are more productive in quiet do not respond to the piece rate.28 I can reject the
benchmark case of increasing their willingness to pay one-for-one with their stated beliefs
about the value of quiet at the less than 1% conﬁdence level. Thus, the workers both had
very little concept of how noise aﬀects their productivity and, to the extent that they were
willing to express beliefs, they were not willing to stake any money on those beliefs being
correct.
One explanation consistent with this evidence is that respondents failed to notice the
impact that noise has on their productivity (Hanna et al. 2014; Schwartzstein 2014). In this
model individuals are Bayesians with two-level hierarchical beliefs about their productivity.
At the higher level, individuals decide which variables to notice. Subsequently, at the lower
level, individuals form beliefs about the productive impact of the variables that they noticed.
The key feature of the model is that when a variable is unobserved, individuals do not attempt
to infer its missing value and instead assume it to be constant. In this model, if workers fail
28Experiment one’s belief data is not as detailed but is consistent with these ﬁndings (Table B21).
25

to attend to noise, they will still have reasonably accurate beliefs about their ability, but their
beliefs about the impact noise has on their productivity will be wrong. Moreover, individuals
will realize that they do not understand the impact that noise has on their productivity, and
they will be unwilling to stake any money on their stated beliefs. This is consistent with the
pattern of eﬀects described above.29
Another possible explanation is that workers simply have not had enough time to form
coherent beliefs about the eﬀects of noise on their productivity. Productivity is a relatively
random outcome and it may simply be diﬃcult for respondents to infer treatment eﬀects over
the time period of the experiment. However, in other ways the experiment is an ideal learning
environment. Respondents complete the exact same task with minimal other changes to their
environment besides variation in the noise level in quick succession. Given that they do not
learn in this setting of experimental variation, there is reason for caution in hoping that they
will learn in the real world even though their time in the experiment was relatively short.
4.4
Eﬃciency Implications
An important determinant of the welfare consequences of these results is whether ﬁrms are
aware of the eﬀects of noise and optimally abate. While assessing the degree to which this
is true is beyond the scope of this paper, there are at least two reasons to be concerned
this may not be the case.
First, Bloom et al. (2013) demonstrates that even seemingly
obvious management practices, such as sorting thread by color, is neglected by some major
textile manufactures. Second, noise levels do not typically vary exogenously which makes
it a diﬃcult for managers to infer the causal eﬀect and adjust appropriately. Future work
should assess the degree to which this is true.
However, worker-level neglect creates the potential for eﬃciency losses even if the ﬁrm is
fully aware of the average impact of noise. Because the productivity losses that I estimate
are heterogeneous, and because ﬁrms’ costs of noise abatement are known to be heteroge-
neous, an eﬃcient allocation would match the workers whose productivity is least aﬀected
by noisy working conditions with the ﬁrms that have the highest cost of noise abatement.
The traditional solution to implementing these allocations is to pay workers based on their
performance; however, if workers neglect the impact that noise has on their productivity,
this screening mechanism no longer works, and unless ﬁrms are capable of observing types
directly, simple policy interventions will be unable to restore the eﬃcient allocation.30
29Additionally, respondents’ stated beliefs are suspiciously similar to their stated levels of annoyance (see
Figure A14). This is what we would expect in a world where respondents do not understand the impact
that noise has on their productivity, and instead provide something that they do understand, namely how
annoying they ﬁnd noise.
30See Appendix E for an illustration using a compensating diﬀerentials model.
26

The degree to which these screening diﬃculties reduce eﬃciency depends on the correla-
tion between the factors that workers attend to and those that are neglected. For example,
in the case of noise, even if workers do not understand the impact that noise has on their
productivity, they likely understand how much disutility they derive from working in noisy
conditions. If the severity of this disutility is a perfect proxy for the productive costs then
the eﬃciency losses may be contained. The data in my experiment suggest that this is not
the case. Figure A15 shows that there is essentially no correlation between the participant’s
willingness to pay for quiet when facing a ﬂat rate (a measure of their disutility of noise)
and the individual level treatment eﬀects that I previously estimated.
More generally, many of the cognitive impediments studied in the literature have both
productivity and disutility components. For example, it is unpleasant to be hot and high
temperatures also reduce productivity. This exercise demonstrates that in order to under-
stand the eﬃciency implications of these impediments, it is important to understand the joint
distribution of workplace amenities and cognitive impediments, and how workers attend to
each aspect.
5
Conclusion
As the developing world continues to become more urban and industrial, noise pollution is
destined to spread even further. Between 2001 and 2015, the number of cars per person in
India tripled, and this growth shows no signs of slowing (Government of India 2017). While
this should be celebrated as a sign of progress, it will undoubtedly bring with it even more
noise pollution. The results in this paper suggest this is a policy problem that warrants both
further research and policy makers’ attention.
This paper presents evidence that an increase of 10 dB inhibits cognitive function and
that this results in a decrease in productivity of approximately 5%. This eﬀect does not
appear to operate through alternative channels, as the same noise change has no eﬀect on
the placebo eﬀort task. This provides evidence for the importance of cognitive function as
a productive input. Individuals do not seem to be aware of these eﬀects. Whether they are
compensated by a guaranteed ﬂat rate, or paid based on their performance, individuals are
unwilling to pay for quiet work environments. Together this evidence suggests noise is an
important problem unlikely to be solved by individual adaptation.
While eliminating noise pollution is likely an unrealistic goal, there are steps that gov-
ernments can take to mitigate the problem. First, governments can follow the lead of the
European Union and collect comprehensive data on noise exposure. The current state of
data requires researchers and policy makers to rely on proxies, data from speciﬁc locations,
27

and a general sense of “loudness”. Being able to quantify exposures and understand the
types of people who are exposed would be a signiﬁcant step forward. Second, many sources
of urban noise stem from competition to be heard. For example, there is no intrinsic need
for extra-loud car horns; rather, they are needed because other drivers have loud car horns.
This creates an ineﬃcient race to the bottom. Regulating these sources could likely reduce
noise levels without incurring any signiﬁcant eﬃciency costs. Finally, governments can try to
raise awareness among workers and ﬁrms about the potential eﬀects of noise on productivity.
If the failure to respond to incentives is actually due to a failure to notice, calling attention
to this problem is likely a way to improve outcomes at a minimal cost.
More generally, these results suggest that policy makers should take the impact that
cognitive impediments can have on economic outcomes seriously. If the eﬀect of cognitive
function on productivity is as large as it seems to be, then policies and environments that
tax the poor’s cognitive resources may have serious economic costs. Moreover, if individuals’
apparent lack of awareness of the impact of noise generalizes to other impediments, this
suggests the potential for signiﬁcant ineﬃciencies. Future research should provide estimates
of these costs and how policies can be designed that account for these cognitive constraints.
28

References
Abadie, Alberto, Matthew M. Chingos, and Martin R. West. 2014. “Endogenous Stratiﬁca-
tion in Randomized Experiments”. NBER Working Paper No. 19742.
Abdel-Salam, Mahmoud M. M. 2015. “Investigation of PM2.5 and Carbon Dioxide Levels in
Urban Homes”. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association 65 (8): 930–936.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham. 2016a. “Management and Shocks
to Worker Productivity”. Working Paper.
— . 2016b. “The Light and the Heat: Productivity Co-beneﬁts of Energy-saving Technol-
ogy”. Mimeo.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “The Eﬀect of Age at School Entry on
Educational Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from
Two Samples”. Journal of the American Statistical Association 87 (418): 328–336.
Bailey, Charles E. 2007. “Cognitive Accuracy and Intelligent Executive Function in the Brain
and in Business”. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1118:122–141.
Basner, Mathias, and David F. Dinges. 2011. “Maximizing Sensitivty of the PVT to Sleep
Loss”. Sleep 34 (5): 581–591.
Bates, Marsha E., and Edward P. Lemay Jr. 2004. “The d2 Test of Attention: Construct
Validity and Extensions in Scoring Techniques”. Journal of the International Neuropsy-
chological Society 10:392–400.
Becker, Gordon M., Morris H. DeGroot, and Jacob Marschak. 1964. “Measuring Utility by
a Single-Response Sequential Method”. Systems Research and Behavioral Science 9 (3):
226–232.
Berkouwer, Susanna B., and Joshua T. Dean. 2019. “Credit and attention in the adoption
of proﬁtable energy eﬃcient technologies in Kenya”. Mimeo.
Berry, James, Greg Fischer, and Raymond Guiteras. 2015. Supplementary Materials to Elic-
iting and Utilizing Willingness to Pay: Evidence from Field Trials in Northern Ghana.
Mimeo.
Berube, Alan, Jesus Leal Trujillo, Tao Ran, and Joseph Parilla. 2014. Global Metro Monitor.
Tech. rep. Brookings Institution.
Bessone, Pedro, Heather Schoﬁeld, and Mattie Toma. 2019. “Sleepless in Chennai: The Con-
sequences of Increasing Sleep among the Urban Poor”. Working Paper.
Bhosale, B. J., Amul Late, P. M. Nalawade, S. P. Chavan, and M. B. Mule. 2010. “Studies
on Assessment of Traﬃc Noise Level in Aurangabad city, India”. Noise and Health 12
(48): 195–198.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David Mckenzie, and John Roberts. 2013.
“Does Management Matter? Evidence from India”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
128 (1): 1–51.
Borella, Erika, Barbara Carretti, and Santiago Pelegrina. 2010. “The Speciﬁc Role of Inhibi-
tion in Reading Comprehension in Good and Poor Comprehenders”. Journal of Learning
Disabilities 43 (6): 541–552.
29

Brickenkamp, Rolf, and Eric Zillmer. 1998. The d2 Test of Attention. Seattle, Washington:
Hogrefe & Huber.
Broadbent, D. E., and E. A. J. Little. 1960. “Eﬀects of Noise Reduction in a Work Situation”.
Occupational Psychology 34:133–140.
Bronzaft, Arline L. 2002. “Noise Pollution: A Hazard to Physical and Mental Well-being”.
Chap. 32 in Handbook of Environmental Psychology. Ed. by Robert B. Bechtel and Arza
Churchman, 499–510. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Brunetti, Riccardo, Claudia Del Gatto, and Franco Delogu. 2014. “eCorsi: Implementation
and Testing of the Corsi Block-tapping Task for Digital Tablets”. Frontiers in Psychology
5:1–8.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative Transformations to
Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable”. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 83 (401): 123–127.
Chang, Tom, Joshua GraﬀZivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. 2016a. “Particulate Pol-
lution and the Productivity of Pear Packers”. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 8 (3): 141–169.
— . 2016b. “The Eﬀect of Pollution on Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call-Center
Workers in China”. NBER Working Paper No. 22328.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoﬀ. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of
Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates”. The American Economic
Review 104 (9): 2593–2632.
Crescioni, A. Will, Joyce Ehrlinger, Jessica L. Alquist, Kyle E. Conlon, Roy F. Baumeis-
ter, Christopher Schatschneider, and Gareth R. Dutton. 2011. “High Trait Self-control
Predicts Positive Health Behaviors and Success in Weight Loss”. Journal of Health Psy-
chology 16 (5): 750–759.
Cudeck, Robert. 2000. “Exploratory Factor Analysis”. Chap. 10 in Handbook of Applied
Multivariate Statistics and Mathematical Modeling, ed. by Howard E. A. Tinsley and
Steven D. Brown, 265–296. Academic Press.
Davidson, Matthew C., Dima Amso, Loren Cruess Anderson, and Adele Diamond. 2006.
“Development of Cognitive Control and Executive Functions from 4 to 13 Years: Evidence
from Manipulations of Memory, Inhibition and Task Switching”. Neuropsychologia 44
(11): 2037–2078.
Dean, Emma Boswell, Frank Schilbach, and Heather Schoﬁeld. 2017. “Poverty and Cog-
nitive Function”. In The Economics of Asset Accumulation and Poverty Traps, ed. by
Christopher B. Barrett, Michael R. Carter, and Jean-Paul Chavas. University of Chicago
Press.
Delavande, Adeline. 2014. “Probabilistic Expectations in Developing Countries”. Annual
Review of Economics 6 (1): 1–20.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Devin Pope. 2018. “What Motivates Eﬀort? Evidence and Expert
Forecasts”. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (2): 1029–1069.
30

Denison, Edward F. 1978. “Eﬀects of Selected Changes in the Institutional and Human
Environment Upon Output Per Unit of Input”. Survey of Current Business 58 (1): 21–
43.
Diamond, Adele. 2013. “Executive Functions”. Annual Review of Psychology 64:135–68.
Duncan, Greg J., Chantelle J. Dowsett, Amy Claessens, Katherine Magnuson, Aletha C.
Huston, Pamela Klebanov, Linda S. Pagani, Leon Feinstein, Mimi Engel, Jeanne Brooks-
Gunn, Holly Sexton, Kathryn Duckworth, and Crista Japel. 2007. “School Readiness and
Later Achievement.” Developmental Psychology 43 (6): 1428–1446.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Victor Lavy, and SeﬁRoth. 2016. “The Long Run Economic Conse-
quences of High-Stakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution”.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (4): 36–65.
Evans, Gary W., and Staﬀan Hygge. 2007. “Noise and Cognitive Performance in Children
and Adults”. Chap. 25 in Noise and its Eﬀects, ed. by Linda M. Luxon and Deepak
Prasher, 549–566. West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Gathercole, Susan E., Susan J. Pickering, Camilla Knight, and Zoe Stegmann. 2004. “Work-
ing Memory Skills and Educational Attainment: Evidence from National Curriculum
Assessments at 7 and 14 Years of Age”. Applied Cognitive Psychology 18 (1): 1–16.
Goldsmith, Mike. 2012. Discord: The Story of Noise. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Government of India. 2017. Registered Motor Vehicles per 1000 Population from 2001 to
2015.
Grant, David A., and Esta A. Berg. 1946. “A Behavioral Analysis of Degree of Reinforcement
and Ease of Shifting to New Responses in a Weigl-Type Card-Sorting Problem”. Journal
of Experimental Psychology 38 (4): 404–411.
Gray, Wayne B. 1987. “The Cost of Regulation: OSHA, EPA and the Productivity Slow-
down”. The American Economic Review 77 (5): 998–1006.
Grice, James W. 2001. “Computing and Evaluating Factor Scores”. Psychological Methods
6 (4): 430–450.
Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. “Learning Through
Noticing: Theory and Evidence from A Field Experiment”. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129 (3): 1311–1353.
Hansen, Colin H., and Berenice I. F. Goelzer. 2001. “Engineering Noise Control”. Chap. 10
in Occupational Exposure to Noise: Evaluation, Prevention and Control, ed. by Berenice
I.F. Goelzer, Colin H. Hansen, and Gustav A. Sehrndt. World Health Organization.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Ernst Fehr. 2014. “On the Psychology of Poverty”. Science 344
(6186): 862–867.
Hockey, G. Robert J. 1970. “Eﬀect of Loud Noise on Attentional Selectivity”. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 22 (1): 28–36.
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference in Statistics, Social and
Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
31

Johnson, Karoline K., Michael H. Bergin, Armistead G. Russell, and Gayle S. W. Hagler.
2016. “Using Low Cost Sensors to Measure Ambient Particulate Matter Concentrations
and On-Road Emissions Factors”. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques Discussions.
Jones, Dylan M., and Donald E. Broadbent. 1991. “Human Performance and Noise”. Chap. 24
in Handbook of Acoustical Measurements and Noise Control, ed. by Cyril Harris, 24.1–
24.24. McGraw-Hill.
Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation”. NBER Working Paper No. 14607.
Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2015. “Self-Control at Work”.
Journal of Political Economy 123 (6): 1227–1277.
Kaur, Supreet, Sendhil Mullainathan, Suanna Oh, and Frank Schilbach. 2019. “Does Finan-
cial Strain Lower Productivity?” Working Paper.
Kimani, John Muturu. 2011. “Evaluation of Occupational Noise Exposure Among Workers in
Metal Fabricating Sector in Kamukunji Nairobi”. PhD thesis, Jomo Kenyatta University
of Agriculture and Technology.
Kling, Jeﬀery R., Jeﬀerey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis
of Neighborhood Eﬀects”. Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119.
Kremer, Michael, Gautam Rao, and Frank Schilbach. 2019. “Behavioral Development Eco-
nomics”. Chap. 5 in Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations and Applications,
Volume 2, ed. by B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson. North
Holland.
Lahiri, Supriya, Colleen Low, and Michael Barry. 2011. “A Business Case Evaluation of
Workplace Engineering Noise Control”. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine
53 (3): 329–337.
Levy-Leboyer, C. 1989. “Noise Eﬀects on Two Industrial Tasks”. Work and Stress 3 (4):
315–322.
Lichand, Guilherme, and Anandi Mani. 2016. “Cognitive Droughts”. Mimeo.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shaﬁr, and Jiaying Zhao. 2013. “Poverty Impedes
Cognitive Function”. Science 341 (6149): 976–80.
Mathˆot, Sebastiaan, Daniel Schreij, and Jan Theeuwes. 2012. “OpenSesame: An Open-
source, Graphical Experiment Builder for the Social Sciences.” Behavior Research Meth-
ods 44 (2): 314–24.
Matthews, Gerald, D. Roy Davies, Stephen J. Westerman, and Rob B. Stammers. 2000a.
Human Performance: Cognition, Stress and Individual Diﬀerences. Philadelphia, PA:
Taylor & Francis.
— . 2000b. “Noise and Irrelevant Speech”. Chap. 10 in Human Performance: Cognition,
Stress and Individual Diﬀerences, 177–192. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Mehdi, Mohammed Raza, Minho Kim, Jeong Chang Seong, and Mudassar Hassan Arsalan.
2011. “Spatio-temporal Patterns of Road Traﬃc Noise Pollution in Karachi, Pakistan”.
Environment International 37 (1): 97–104.
32

Mimi. 2017. The World Hearing Index.
Nandi, Subroto S., and Sarang V. Dhatrak. 2008. “Occupational Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
in India”. Indian Journal of Occupational & Environmental Medicine 12 (3): 53–56.
Navrud, Stale. 2002. The State-Of-The-Art on Economic Valuation of Noise. Tech. rep.
European Commission DG Environment.
Nisbett, Richard E., and Timothy DeCamp Wilson. 1977. “Telling more than we can know:
Verbal reports on mental processes”. Psychological Review 84 (3): 231–259. arXiv: arXiv:
1011.1669v3.
Operation Ear Drop. 2010. The RBA-OED Kenya Jua Kali Hearing Conservation.
Park, Jisung. 2017. “Temperature, Test Scores, and Human Capital Production”. Mimeo.
Raven, John. 2000. “The Raven’s Progressive Matrices: Change and Stability over Culture
and Time”. Cognitive Psychology 41 (1): 1–48.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Diﬀerences”. Chap. 12 in Handbook of La-
bor Economics, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, 1:641–692. Elsevier Science
B.V.
Schilbach, Frank. 2017. “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India”. Mimeo.
Schilbach, Frank, Heather Schoﬁeld, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2016. “The Psychological
Lives of the Poor”. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 106 (5): 435–
440.
Schoﬁeld, Heather. 2014. “The Economic Costs of Low Caloric Intake: Evidence from India”.
Mimeo.
Schwartzstein, Joshua. 2014. “Selective Attention and Learning”. Journal of the European
Economic Association 12 (6): 1423–1452.
Sen Gupta, Nandini. 2014. “Foreign Cars Grow Local Horns in India”. Times of India.
Smith, Andrew. 1989. “A Review of the Eﬀects of Noise on Human Performance”. Scandi-
navian Journal of Psychology 30 (3): 185–206.
Stoet, Gijsbert. 2017. “PsyToolkit: A Novel Web-Based Method for Running Online Ques-
tionnaires and Reaction-Time Experiments”. Teaching of Psychology 44 (1): 24–31.
— . 2010. “PsyToolkit: A Software Package for Programming Psychological Experiments
using Linux”. Behavior Research Methods 42 (4): 1096–1104.
Szalma, James L., and Peter A. Hancock. 2011. “Noise Eﬀects on Human Performance: A
Meta-analytic Synthesis”. Psychological Bulletin 137 (4): 682–707.
United States National Archives and Records Administration. 2017. Constitution of the
United States - A History.
Wawa, Enock Abe, and Galcano Canny Mulaku. 2015. “Noise Pollution Mapping Using GIS
in Nairobi, Kenya”. Journal of Geographic Information System 7 (5): 486–493.
Weston, H. C., and S. Adams. 1935. “The Performance of Weavers Under Varying Conditions
of Noise”. In Industrial Health Research Board Report, vol. 70. London: HMSO.
33

Wilhelm, Oliver, Andrea Hildebrandt, and Klaus Oberauer. 2013. “What is Working Memory
Capacity, and How Can We Measure It?” Frontiers in Psychology 4 (443).
Zivin, Joshua Graﬀ, and Matthew J. Neidell. 2012. “The Impact of Pollution on Worker
Productivity”. American Economic Review 102 (7): 3652–3673.
34

Figures
Delhi
Johannesburg
Mexico City
Tokyo
Moscow
Zurich
New York
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
20,000
40,000
60,000
GDP Per Capita (PPP)
Hearing Age Minus Actual Age
Figure 1: Average Hearing Loss in Cities by Income
Note: This ﬁgure shows the relationship between hearing loss and income at a city level. The y-axis plots
years of hearing loss in excess of what would be expected based solely on age as measured by Mimi (2017).
The x-axis plots the city’s income per capita as estimated by Berube et al. (2014). The size of each circle
is proportional to the population of each city. In the absence of representative data on noise levels, the
relationship between hearing loss and income provides evidence that those in poorer cities are exposed to
more noise than those in comparable richer cities.
35

(a) Course Overview
Training
Regular Production
Willingness to Pay
Day 1
Day 3
Day 2
Day 5
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 6
Day 4
(b) Day Overview
10:00
9:00
8:00
11:00
12:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
First Work Session
Tea Break
Misc. Data 
Collection
Second Work Session
Lunch Break
Third Work Session
Figure 2: Experiment One Timing
Note: This ﬁgure shows the timing of the ﬁrst experiment. Panel A shows the course level overview. On the
ﬁrst two days participants received basic training, in quiet, on how to use a sewing machine and how to sew a
pocket. Over the next six days participants worked autonomously for a piece rate/ﬂat rate combination while
being randomly exposed to noise. On the last two days respondents had the opportunity to pay in order to
work in quiet while I randomly varied their performance incentives. Panel B shows the day level overview.
On each day participants worked for three sessions separated by breaks to isolate the contemporaneous eﬀects
of noise.
36

Figure 3: Example Pocket with Marked Grading Criteria
Note: This ﬁgure shows an example of the pockets produced in experiment one. Pockets were chosen as
the incentivized production task because they require all of the basic skills that are needed in sewing and
can be completed in a short period of time, allowing for repeated observation. In fact, the TDC uses these
pockets as tools to evaluate potential hires for these reasons. Pocket quality is assessed by treatment-blind
enumerators according to the following six criteria marked in the ﬁgure:
1. Are there double stitches around the pocket?
2. Is the outer stitch uniformly 1 mm from the edge?
3. Is the inner stitch uniformly 6 mm from the edge?
4. Is the top of the pocket correctly hemmed?
5. Are the ends of the seams reversed?
6. Are the corners even and continuous?
37

Day 1
Day 2
10:00
9:00
8:00
11:00
12:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
Practice Session
Tea Break
WTP 
Collection
First Work Session
Lunch Break
Second Work Session
10:00
9:00
8:00
11:00
12:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
WTP Session
Tea Break
Third Work Session
Lunch Break
Fourth Work Session
Figure 4: Experiment Two Timing
Note: This ﬁgure shows the timing outline of the second experiment. The timing was intentionally designed
to follow that of experiment one as closely as possible. The one substantial departure was that instead
of happening over two weeks, the second experiment happened over two days due to logistical constraints.
Participants still had a training session in quiet and then worked autonomously in sessions separated by
breaks.
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Noise Level Difference
Density
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Figure 5: Diﬀerence in Noise Level Between Treatment and Control
Note: This ﬁgure shows the density of the session-level diﬀerence between average treatment and average
control noise levels for both experiments. Because humans perceive a 10 dB increase as twice as loud, all
noise levels are presented in 10s of decibels. The ﬁgure shows that treatment is equivalent to going from
working with a home dishwasher in the background to having a home vacuum cleaner in the background.
38

Tables
Table 1: Environmental Eﬀects of Treatment in Experiment One
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Noise Level
CO2
Humidity
Temperature
Treatment
0.674∗∗∗
4.765
0.038
0.048
(0.036)
(24.678)
(0.450)
(0.175)
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean
6.892
624.677
42.474
26.547
Normalized Diﬀerence
2.462
0.072
0.004
0.009
Observations
157
153
153
153
Note: This table shows regressions of environmental variables on a treatment indicator, session ﬁxed eﬀects,
and room ﬁxed eﬀects with robust standard errors. The normalized diﬀerence is the diﬀerence between the
treatment and control means divided by the square root of the average of the treatment and control variances
as deﬁned by Imbens and Rubin (2015). Because an increase of 10 dB is perceived by the human ear as
twice as loud, all noise levels are reported in 10s of decibels. The results demonstrate that treatment only
aﬀected the noise level and that other environmental variables potentially aﬀected by the machine such as
pollution and temperature were unaﬀected.
Table 2: Eﬀect of Treatment on Productivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation
Treatment
−0.0311∗∗∗
−0.0425∗∗∗
−0.0315∗∗∗
−0.0378∗∗∗
−0.0570∗∗∗
−0.0597∗∗∗
−0.0450∗∗
−0.0137
(0.0118)
(0.0134)
(0.0117)
(0.0113)
(0.0145)
(0.0179)
(0.0182)
(0.0189)
Levels
Treatment
−0.2289∗
−1.1985∗
−0.2184∗
−0.2313∗
−0.2503∗
−0.2493∗
−0.2061
−0.0430
(0.1275)
(0.7199)
(0.1273)
(0.1252)
(0.1277)
(0.1273)
(0.1267)
(0.1189)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
2.924
4.487
2.918
2.901
2.775
2.645
2.529
2.163
Control Median-Levels
10
54
10
10
10
9
9
6
Observations
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
Note: This table shows ordinary least squares regressions of productivity outcome variables on a treatment
indicator, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session
level. The ﬁrst panel shows the results for the inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed outcomes while the second
panel shows the results for the untransformed outcomes. The results demonstrate that noise signiﬁcantly
reduced productivity. In particular, respondents in treated rooms (those working with the background noise
of a vacuum instead of a dishwasher) made approximately 3% fewer pockets.
39

Table 3: IV Eﬀect of Noise on Productivity – Treatment Indicator Instrument
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation
Noise Level
−0.0534∗∗∗
−0.0617∗∗∗
−0.0537∗∗∗
−0.0578∗∗∗
−0.0800∗∗∗
−0.0822∗∗∗
−0.0642∗∗
−0.0193
(0.0161)
(0.0187)
(0.0160)
(0.0160)
(0.0202)
(0.0249)
(0.0256)
(0.0270)
Levels
Noise Level
−0.3969∗∗
−1.9737∗
−0.3876∗∗
−0.3844∗∗
−0.3935∗∗
−0.3985∗∗
−0.3305∗
−0.0792
(0.1786)
(1.0172)
(0.1785)
(0.1775)
(0.1810)
(0.1786)
(0.1777)
(0.1730)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
2.924
4.487
2.918
2.901
2.775
2.645
2.529
2.163
Control Median-Levels
10
54
10
10
10
9
9
6
Observations
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
Note: This table shows estimates from a two stage least squares regression of productivity outcome variables
on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by
session level. The noise level is instrumented with an indicator for being in a treated room. The ﬁrst panel
shows the results for the inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed outcomes, while the second panel shows the
results for the untransformed outcomes. The results demonstrate a 10 dB change (perceived by the human
ear as twice as loud) reduces productivity by approximately 5%.
Table 4: Environmental Eﬀects of Treatment in Experiment Two
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Noise Level
CO2
Humidity
Temperature
Treatment
0.938∗∗∗
−47.956
−0.552∗
−0.041
(0.049)
(46.633)
(0.295)
(0.113)
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean
7.206
924.460
47.447
24.433
Normalized Diﬀerence
3.155
−0.154
−0.127
0.029
Observations
88
84
84
84
Note: This table shows regressions of environmental variables on a treatment indicator, session ﬁxed eﬀects,
and room ﬁxed eﬀects with robust standard errors. The normalized diﬀerence is the diﬀerence between the
treatment and control means divided by the square root of the average of the treatment and control variances
as deﬁned by Imbens and Rubin (2015). The results show that the noise change was similar to the change
in the ﬁrst experiment and that no other environmental variables were aﬀected by treatment.
40

Table 5: Eﬀect of Noise on Cognitive Function and Eﬀort – Treatment Indicator Instrument
Cognitive Function Tests
Placebo Eﬀort Task
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Normalized
Sum of Scores
Average of
Normalized Scores
PCA of
Percent Correct
and Reaction Time
CFA of
Percentage Correct
and Reaction Time
Key Presses
Normalized Score
Noise Level
−0.0323∗∗∗
−0.0254∗∗∗
−0.0626∗∗∗
−0.0676∗∗∗
1.9391
0.0041
(0.0113)
(0.0083)
(0.0150)
(0.0175)
(16.6155)
(0.0355)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean
0.000
0.000
-0.000
0.000
2192.013
-0.000
Observations
762
762
762
762
762
762
Note: This table shows estimates from a two-stage least squares regression of cognitive outcome and placebo
eﬀort task variables on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors
clustered at the room by session level. The noise level is instrumented by an indicator for being in a treated
room. The ﬁrst outcome is the normalized sum of points that participants earned on tests during a session.
The second column normalizes ﬁrst at the test-score level and averages across normalized scores within a
session. The third outcome is the ﬁrst component of a principal component analysis of percentage correct
and reaction time estimated on each individual’s ﬁrst control session. The fourth column is my preferred
outcome: the ﬁrst factor of a common factor analysis of percentage correct and reaction time estimated on
each individual’s ﬁrst control session. The results show that a 10 dB increase in the noise level (perceived
as twice as loud) reduces performance on my preferred index by 0.07 standard deviations. The last two
columns show that there was no eﬀect of the same noise change on the placebo eﬀort task. Any decrease in
performance greater than 1.4% is outside of the 95% conﬁdence interval.
Table 6: Split-Sample IV of Productivity on Cognitive Function
(1)
(2)
(3)
IHS
Total Pockets
IHS
Pocket Points
IHS
Perfect Pockets
CFA Index
0.7899∗∗
0.9135∗∗
0.2857
(0.3137)
(0.3634)
(0.4070)
Note: This table shows the ratio of the noise level coeﬃcients from the two-stage least squares regressions
of productivity and cognitive function on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects as an
estimate of a hypothetical “return to cognitive function”. The noise level is instrumented with an indicator
for being in a treated room. Standard errors are ﬁrst clustered in each regression and then computed for the
ratio using the delta method. The results show that a one standard deviation change in cognitive function
increases productivity by approximately 79%.
41

Table 7: Implications for Cognitive Eﬀects in the Literature
Source
Stimulus
Change
in Stimulus
Cognitive
Eﬀect
Implied
Productivity
Change
Ebenstein et al. (2016)
PM2.5
10 index units
0.017σ
1.34%
Park (2017)
Temperature
1σ
0.052σ
4.11%
Lichand and Mani (2016)
Low Rainfall
< 30th percentile
0.041σ
3.24%
Mani et al. (2013)
Harvest
0.67σ
53%
Note: This table combines the results of several studies’ estimates of the impact of diﬀerent environmental
conditions on cognitive function with the estimate from my split-sample IV in order to assess what these
impediments might mean for productivity. While the results should be interpreted with caution given that
they involve diﬀerent types of cognitive shifts and those exposed are likely doing diﬀerent types of tasks,
they indicate that cognitive impediments have the potential to have economically meaningful eﬀects
Table 8: Willingness to Pay by Compensation Scheme
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
Piece Rate
0.4202
0.0000
0.7812
0.3066
0.0377∗
−3.6531
(1.4553)
(0.0189)
(2.3519)
(1.6045)
(0.0221)
(4.2607)
Day FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Outcome Mean
17.697
0.538
32.906
13.392
0.316
42.373
Observations
476
476
256
424
424
142
Note: This table shows a regression of willingness to pay, an indicator for being willing to pay a positive
amount, and willingness to pay for the subsample that are willing to pay a positive amount on an indicator
for whether the respondent was facing a piece rate when the willingness to pay was elicited. Because in
experiment one willingness to pay was elicited on two diﬀerent days, the regressions include day ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. The results show that individuals’ willingness to pay
for quiet does not depend on the wage structure. This suggests that they neglect the productive impacts of
noise.
42

Table 9: Response to Piece Rate by Productive Value of Quiet
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
Piece Rate
−1.5874
−0.0225
−1.4565
0.7110
0.0431∗
−2.5101
(2.5186)
(0.0311)
(3.7060)
(1.6572)
(0.0235)
(5.1276)
Model Predicted
−0.5297
−0.0075
−0.6834
1.6734∗∗
0.0189∗
2.9648∗
Income Gain
(0.5794)
(0.0085)
(0.9689)
(0.7200)
(0.0111)
(1.7303)
Model Predicted
0.3746
0.0042
0.4514
−0.3504
−0.0047
−0.5879
Income Gain × Piece Rate
(0.3580)
(0.0036)
(0.6441)
(0.4441)
(0.0076)
(1.3279)
Day FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Outcome Mean
17.697
0.538
32.906
13.392
0.316
42.373
Observations
476
476
256
420
420
138
Note: This table shows a regression of willingness to pay, an indicator for being willing to pay a positive
amount, and willingness to pay for the subsample that are willing to pay a positive amount on an indicator
for whether the respondent was facing a piece rate when the willingness to pay was elicited, how much more
the model predicts the individual would make in quiet and their interaction. Because in experiment one
willingness to pay was elicited on two diﬀerent days, the regressions include day ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. The results show that even the willingness to pay of those who
beneﬁt the most from quiet is unresponsive to performance incentives.
Table 10: Testing Prompting Consideration of Noise
(1)
(2)
(3)
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
Piece Rate
3.3905
0.0667∗
2.5523
(2.3536)
(0.0339)
(6.5711)
Asked Beliefs Before
5.3799
0.0601
9.0658
WTP
(4.1393)
(0.0641)
(9.9233)
Asked Beliefs Before
−6.1101∗
−0.0573
−11.4321
WTP × Piece Rate
(3.1913)
(0.0441)
(8.4494)
Outcome Mean
13.392
0.316
42.373
Observations
424
424
142
Note: This table shows a regression of willingness to pay, an indicator for being willing to pay a positive
amount, and willingness to pay for the subsample willing to pay a positive amount on an indicator for whether
the respondent was facing a piece rate when the willingness to pay was elicited, whether the respondent gave
their beliefs before their willingness to pay, and their interaction. The results show that even when forced to
think through the impact noise has on their productivity, respondents’ willingness to pay is unchanged by
the piece rate. This argues against the idea that willingness to pay does not respond to the wage structure
because noise was simply not “top-of-mind”. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
43

Table 11: Testing for Incorrect Beliefs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Realized Score
Realized Score
Model Predicted
Income Gain
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
Model Predicted
0.9986∗∗∗
Score
(0.0273)
Participant
0.1535∗∗∗
Predicted Score
(0.0468)
Participant
−0.0031
0.0558∗
0.0011∗∗
0.0381
Predicted Income Gain
(0.0034)
(0.0331)
(0.0006)
(0.1237)
Piece Rate
0.3796
0.0509∗∗
−7.3685
(1.5761)
(0.0221)
(5.1188)
Participant
−0.0042
−0.0008∗
0.1936∗
Predicted Income Gain × Piece Rate
(0.0143)
(0.0004)
(0.1041)
Outcome Mean
33.929
33.929
1.078
13.392
0.316
42.373
Observations
187
187
210
424
424
142
Note: Columns one and two of this table show a regression of each respondent’s realized score on the model’s
predictions and their predictions, respectively. The results show respondents’ beliefs have some predictive
power over their future scores, but are not as predictive as the model. Column three shows a regression of
the model’s predicted value of quiet on the respondents’ predicted value of quiet. The result shows that
individuals’ beliefs about the impact of noise on their productivity is uncorrelated with my estimates of the
true impact of noise on their productivity, suggesting their beliefs are incorrect. Columns four, ﬁve, and six
show regressions of willingness to pay, an indicator for being willing to pay a positive amount, and willingness
to pay for the subsample willing to pay a positive amount on an indicator for whether the respondent was
facing a piece rate when the willingness to pay was elicited, what the respondent believes to be his/her
productive beneﬁt from working in quiet, and their interaction.
The results show that respondents are
unwilling to stake any money on their beliefs. These results are consistent with a “failure to notice” form
of inattention where respondents fail to learn about particular determinants of their productivity, but are
aware that they do not know (Schwartzstein 2014; Hanna et al. 2014). Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level.
44

A
Supplementary Figures For Online Publication
Figure A1: Experiment Locations and Surrounding Area
Note: This ﬁgure shows a map of the experiment locations and recruitment location in Kitengela, Kenya
just outside of Nairobi. The experiment sites are less than a mile apart and close to the recruitment site at
the gates of the local textile factories.
45

Figure A2: Noise Generating Engine
Note: This ﬁgure shows a picture of the car engine used to generate noise in experiment one. The engine was
borrowed from an automotive mechanic training facility at the TDC. A car engine was chosen as the noise
source because it is representative of important sources of noise pollution – traﬃc noise and large industrial
machines – and leaves minimal room for experimenter manipulation.
46

0
5
6
7
8
Control
Treatment
Noise Level (10 dB)
Figure A3: Noise Level By Treatment Status
Note: This ﬁgure shows the average noise level in treatment and control.
A noise increase of 10 dB is
perceived as twice as loud by the human year. Thus, for interpretability, all noise levels are reported as 10s
of decibels and the y-axis is shown on a log scale. Treatment increased the noise level by the same amount
as replacing a dishwasher running in the background with a vacuum cleaner.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0
20
40
Number of Pockets
Density
Total Pockets
Perfect Pockets
Figure A4: Output Density
Note: This ﬁgure shows the density of the number of total and perfect pockets created in experiment one. The
distribution is signiﬁcantly skewed, but has zeros. Thus, to increase power I present the inverse hyperbolic
sine-transformed versions of the outcome variables.
47

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Meets 1
Criteria
Meets 2
Criteria
Meets 3
Criteria
Meets 4
Criteria
Meets 5
Criteria
Meets 6
Criteria
IHS Transformed Outcome
Noise Level Coefficient
●Low Ability
High Ability
Figure A5: Treatment Eﬀects by Ability
Note: This ﬁgure shows coeﬃcient estimates and their 95% conﬁdence intervals from a two-stage least
squares regression of productivity outcome variables on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room
ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The noise level is instrumented
by an indicator for being in a treated room. Before estimation, within each session the sample was split
by median performance in other control sessions. Treatment eﬀects were estimated separately for the two
groups in a stacked regression. The results show that the treatment eﬀect is relatively constant across ability
levels.
48

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Meets 1
Criteria
Meets 2
Criteria
Meets 3
Criteria
Meets 4
Criteria
Meets 5
Criteria
Meets 6
Criteria
IHS Transformed Outcome
Noise Level Coefficient
●Week 1
Week 2
Figure A6: Treatment Eﬀects Over Time
Note: This ﬁgure shows coeﬃcient estimates and their 95% conﬁdence intervals from a two-stage least
squares regression of productivity outcome variables on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room
ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The noise level is instrumented by
an indicator for being in a treated room. Before estimation, the sample was split into two groups by week.
Treatment eﬀects were estimated separately for the two groups in a stacked regression. The results show
that the treatment eﬀect is relatively constant across weeks.
49

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Meets 1
Criteria
Meets 2
Criteria
Meets 3
Criteria
Meets 4
Criteria
Meets 5
Criteria
Meets 6
Criteria
IHS Transformed Outcome
Noise Level Coefficient
●Hour 1
Hour 2
Figure A7: Treatment Eﬀects by Hour of Session
Note: This ﬁgure shows coeﬃcient estimates and their 95% conﬁdence intervals from a two-stage least squares
regression of productivity outcome variables on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects
with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The noise level is instrumented by an indicator
for being in a treated room. Before estimation the sample was split into two groups by hour within each
session. Treatment eﬀects were estimated separately for the two groups in a stacked regression. The results
show that the treatment eﬀect is relatively constant across hours.
50

Ravens
Effort
Systolic Pressure
NBack
Hearts and Flowers
Wisconsin
PVT
D2
Corsi
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Normalized Scores
Desnsities
Figure A8: Normalized Test Score Variation
Note: This ﬁgure shows the density of the normalized scores for each measured outcome in experiment
two. The results show that with the exception of d2, all metrics generate good variation and do not appear
susceptible to ceiling or ﬂoor eﬀects.
51

Binary Search 
over 0-200 KES to 
get initial guess of 
maximum WTP.
Ask 
if result is 
maximum 
WTP
Yes
Ask what is maximum 
WTP and update WTP.
No
Test understanding by 
asking what happens if 
price is five higher and five 
lower than current WTP 
(require correct responses)
Ask 
if would 
want to buy if price 
was five higher than 
current 
WTP.
No
Finalize 
WTP
Yes
Update current WTP to be 
current WTP plus five
Is it the 
first day?
Yes
Elicit WTP for lollipop as 
practice, and run price 
randomization to show end 
result
No
Inform about first wage and 
elicit WTP
Inform about 
second wage and 
elicit WTP
Process
 Overview
Elicitation 
Procedure
Figure A9: Willingness to Pay Overview and Elicitation Procedure
Note: The ﬁrst panel of this ﬁgure shows the overview of the process of eliciting willingness to pay including
when practices were conducted, and how information was timed with the elicitation. The second panel is
a detailed view of how willingness to pay was elicited using a modiﬁed version of the procedure outlined in
Berry et al. (2015).
52

0
.5
1
1.5
Price (USD)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Q
BDM (Lotion)
BDM (Soap)
TIOLI (Lotion)
TIOLI (Soap)
Figure A10: Comparison of BDM and TIOLI Oﬀers from Berkouwer and Dean (2019)
Note: The ﬁgure plots the BDM procedure validation results from Berkouwer and Dean (2019). The authors
use the same BDM elicitation procedure as this paper in a sample of 1000 households from Nairobi. However,
instead of only having a single practice good, the authors randomly assign participants to practice the BDM
for either lotion or soap. For the good not chosen as the practice good, the respondent is given a take it
or leave it (TIOLI) oﬀer at a randomly chosen price. This allows comparison of the demand curves elicited
by the BDM script employed by the authors to those elicited by more traditional purchase decisions. The
results show the BDM gives comparable demand curves.
53

(a) Experiment One
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0
50
100
150
200
Average Willingness to Pay
Percent Choosing
With Flat Rate
With Piece Rate
(b) Experiment Two
0%
20%
40%
60%
0
50
100
150
200
Average Willingness to Pay
Percent Choosing
With Flat Rate
With Piece Rate
Figure A11: Average Willingness to Pay by Compensation
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of willingness to pay in order to work in the quiet room by whether the
respondent was facing a piece rate or a ﬂat rate. The ﬁrst panel shows the results for the ﬁrst experiment,
while the second shows the results for the second. The results show that willingness to pay for quiet is
generally quite low.
54

(a) Experiment One
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0
10
20
Estimated Value of Quiet
Density
(b) Experiment Two
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
−5
0
5
10
15
Estimated Value of Quiet
Density
Figure A12: Productive Value of Quiet
Note: The ﬁgure shows the densities of the hierarchical linear models’ predicted income gains from working
in the quiet room. The ﬁrst panel shows the density from the ﬁrst experiment and the second shows the
density from the second. The model was used to obtain better predictions of the within-person treatment
eﬀect than would be obtained from simply taking the diﬀerence between treatment and control performance
within person.
55

(a) Experiment One
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
Predicted Output
Realized Output
●
Quiet
Noise
(b) Experiment Two
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
50
60
Predicted Score
Realized Score
●
Quiet
Noise
Figure A13: Model Fit
Note: The ﬁgure plots the hierarchical linear model’s predictions of the respondents’ output and scores in the
willingness to pay sessions on the x-axis against the respondents’ realized output and scores on the y-axis.
Values are plotted separately depending on whether the individual ended up in quiet or in noise based on
their willingness to pay. The solid line shows the 45 degree line or perfect prediction.
56

(a) Experiment 1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
Level of Noise Annoyance
Percentage Holding Belief
Believe No Difference or Less Productive in Quiet
Believe More Productive in Quiet
(b) Experiment 2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Level of Noise Annoyance
Percentage Holding Belief
Believe No Difference or Less Productive in Quiet
Believe More Productive in Quiet
Figure A14: Beliefs and Annoyance
Note: This ﬁgure shows the proportion of individuals who believe they are more productive in quiet for each
level of stated annoyance with the noise level. The high level of correlation provides suggestive evidence that
individuals do not actually understand the impact of noise on their productivity and are instead substituting
in their annoyance level.
57

(a) Experiment One
0
5
10
15
0
25
50
75
100
Disamenity Value
Productive Value
(b) Experiment Two
−5
0
5
10
0
25
50
75
100
Disamenity Value
Productive Value
Figure A15: Correlation Between Amenity and Productive Value of Quiet
Note: This ﬁgure plots the joint density of each respondent’s willingness to pay for quiet when facing a ﬂat
rate compensation scheme and what the model predicts is their productive value of quiet. The results show
that the two are essentially uncorrelated. This suggests that if respondents neglect the productive impact
and sort simply on annoyance, this will change the composition of workers sorting into working in noise.
58

B
Supplementary Tables For Online Publication
Table B1: Sample Summary Statistics
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Total
Female
0.641
0.521
0.566
(0.482)
(0.501)
(0.496)
Age
28.84
26.07
27.11
(6.791)
(6.748)
(6.885)
High School or More
0.516
0.690
0.625
(0.502)
(0.464)
(0.485)
Typical Daily Wage
677.2
548.6
597.0
(725.8)
(633.4)
(671.5)
Days Worked Last Week
2.188
1.235
1.592
(2.528)
(2.130)
(2.330)
More Annoyed by Noise than Others
0.258
0.305
0.287
(0.439)
(0.462)
(0.453)
Number of Participants
128
213
Note: This table presents summary statistics for each experiment sample. The main entries are the means
of the variable in each row. Standard deviations are in parentheses below. The samples are relatively similar
on demographic terms.
59

Table B2: Experiment One Balance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Female
Age
High School
or More
Typical Daily
Wage
Days Worked
Last Week
More Annoyed
by Noise
than Others
Treatment Mean
0.641
28.812
0.518
684.163
2.192
0.257
Control Mean
0.640
28.861
0.513
670.259
2.183
0.259
Two-Sided P-Value
0.962
0.889
0.846
0.673
0.915
0.936
Normalized Diﬀerence
0.006
−0.007
0.016
0.021
−0.006
−0.006
Note: This table assesses the balance of sample characteristics between treatment and control sessions.
The ﬁrst two rows display the average of the variable indicated in the column for individuals observed in
treatment and control sessions, respectively. Row three shows the p-value from a regression of the variable on
a treatment indicator with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The normalized diﬀerence
is the diﬀerence between the treatment and control means divided by the square root of the average of the
treatment and control variances as deﬁned by Imbens and Rubin (2015). The sample observed in treatment
and control are almost identical. This is a result of the within-person randomization. The only reason
balance does not hold exactly is due to small levels of attrition.
Table B3: Experiment One Poisson Regressions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Marginal Eﬀects
Treatment
−0.3094∗∗
−1.7523∗∗
−0.2961∗∗
−0.3124∗∗∗
−0.3496∗∗∗
−0.3392∗∗
−0.3000∗∗
−0.1671
(0.1210)
(0.7287)
(0.1212)
(0.1206)
(0.1290)
(0.1343)
(0.1381)
(0.1309)
Poisson Coeﬃcients
Treatment
−0.0269∗∗
−0.0284∗∗
−0.0258∗∗
−0.0274∗∗∗
−0.0320∗∗∗
−0.0326∗∗
−0.0306∗∗
−0.0216
(0.0105)
(0.0118)
(0.0106)
(0.0106)
(0.0118)
(0.0129)
(0.0141)
(0.0169)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean
11.527
61.849
11.493
11.421
10.965
10.446
9.832
7.692
Control Median
10
54
10
10
10
9
9
6
Observations
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
Note: This table shows the marginal eﬀects and coeﬃcients from poisson regressions of productivity outcome
variables on a treatment indicator, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered
at the room by session level. The ﬁrst panel shows the results for the inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed
outcomes while the second panel shows the results for the untransformed outcomes. The results demonstrate
that noise signiﬁcantly reduced productivity. In particular, respondents in treated rooms (those working with
the background noise of a vacuum instead of a dishwasher) made approximately 3% fewer pockets.
60

Table B4: Experiment One Fisher P-Values
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
IHS Transformed
0.008
0.008
0.013
0.004
0.003
0.006
0.053
0.597
Levels
0.081
0.13
0.098
0.08
0.066
0.081
0.148
0.754
Note: This table shows the p-values from randomization inference. Treatment was randomly reassigned 1000
times using the original randomization code. Each outcome variable was then regressed on the reassigned
treatment indicator, individual, session, room, and wage ﬁxed eﬀects. The true coeﬃcient was then compared
to the distribution of coeﬃcients induced by reassignment in order to generate p-values. The inferences are
similar to those reported in the main regressions.
Table B5: Eﬀect of Treatment in Week Two
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation
Treatment
−0.0212
−0.0289
−0.0203
−0.0187
−0.0256
−0.0506∗∗
−0.0450∗
−0.0279
(0.0149)
(0.0174)
(0.0149)
(0.0146)
(0.0188)
(0.0244)
(0.0251)
(0.0271)
Levels
Treatment
−0.1162
−0.6172
−0.1071
−0.0826
−0.0920
−0.1544
−0.1569
−0.0242
(0.1956)
(1.1361)
(0.1954)
(0.1928)
(0.1911)
(0.1966)
(0.2027)
(0.2111)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
3.241
4.909
3.240
3.233
3.177
3.111
3.023
2.687
Control Median-Levels
14
75
14
14
13
13
12
9
Observations
1190
1190
1190
1190
1190
1190
1190
1190
Note: This table shows ordinary least squares regressions of productivity outcome variables on a treatment
indicator, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session
level for the second week of the ﬁrst experiment. The ﬁrst panel shows the results for the inverse hyperbolic
sine-transformed outcomes, while the second panel shows the results for the untransformed outcomes. The
results demonstrate that during the second week the eﬀect size is as large on the perfect pockets as it is
on the total number of pockets even though there is no longer power to detect whether the coeﬃcients are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
61

Table B6: Intensity Level Balance
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Temperature
CO2
Humidity
Second Half
Temperature
CO2
Humidity
Second Half
Intensity 1
27.17
642.67
39.24
0.50
25.10
894.75
45.87
0.40
(0.67)
(44.03)
(2.13)
(0.11)
(0.77)
(91.41)
(2.05)
(0.14)
Intensity 2
25.94
635.52
44.76
0.88
25.19
848.38
45.77
0.25
(0.65)
(42.63)
(2.06)
(0.11)
(0.88)
(103.64)
(2.32)
(0.16)
Intensity 3
27.78
636.00
39.05
0.38
22.19
872.54
52.26
0.80
(0.67)
(44.03)
(2.13)
(0.11)
(0.77)
(91.41)
(2.05)
(0.14)
Intensity 4
26.51
648.78
41.51
1.00
23.28
853.90
49.24
0.25
(0.70)
(45.58)
(2.20)
(0.12)
(0.88)
(103.64)
(2.32)
(0.16)
Intensity 5
26.16
653.34
44.17
0.62
23.54
909.17
48.13
1.00
(0.65)
(42.63)
(2.06)
(0.11)
(0.82)
(96.95)
(2.17)
(0.16)
Intensity 6
27.59
624.70
41.68
0.38
24.02
1003.74
50.90
0.60
(0.67)
(44.03)
(2.13)
(0.11)
(0.73)
(86.72)
(1.94)
(0.14)
Intensity 7
26.35
565.96
44.00
0.14
23.30
847.84
50.98
0.75
(0.70)
(45.58)
(2.20)
(0.12)
(0.82)
(96.95)
(2.17)
(0.16)
Intensity 8
26.96
617.94
42.52
0.75
26.37
897.77
38.83
0.40
(0.70)
(45.58)
(2.20)
(0.11)
(0.73)
(86.72)
(1.94)
(0.14)
Intensity 9
26.11
654.69
43.67
0.62
26.74
1033.98
40.79
0.00
(0.65)
(42.63)
(2.06)
(0.11)
(0.82)
(96.95)
(2.17)
(0.16)
Intensity 10
25.93
647.63
43.30
0.43
24.75
849.89
47.85
0.50
(0.70)
(45.58)
(2.20)
(0.12)
(0.82)
(96.95)
(2.17)
(0.16)
Observations
149
149
149
154
84
84
84
88
Note: This table shows the observable diﬀerences in sessions by treatment intensity. The main entries in
each row show the means of the variables listed at the top for sessions of a given decile of intensity. The
standard errors of the means are in parentheses and are clustered at the session level. The results show no
clear relationship between treatment intensity and any observable characteristic.
62

Table B7: First Stages
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Noise Level
Noise Level
Noise Level
Noise Level
Treatment
0.6745∗∗∗
0.9403∗∗∗
(0.0247)
(0.0368)
Treated with
0.1529∗∗∗
0.3419∗∗∗
Intensity 1
(0.0294)
(0.0363)
Treated with
0.3146∗∗∗
0.5649∗∗∗
Intensity 2
(0.0057)
(0.0102)
Treated with
0.4171∗∗∗
0.7394∗∗∗
Intensity 3
(0.0113)
(0.0150)
Treated with
0.4942∗∗∗
0.8635∗∗∗
Intensity 4
(0.0041)
(0.0127)
Treated with
0.5725∗∗∗
0.9210∗∗∗
Intensity 5
(0.0067)
(0.0075)
Treated with
0.6841∗∗∗
1.0675∗∗∗
Intensity 6
(0.0071)
(0.0087)
Treated with
0.7620∗∗∗
1.1137∗∗∗
Intensity 7
(0.0056)
(0.0052)
Treated with
0.8572∗∗∗
1.1803∗∗∗
Intensity 8
(0.0117)
(0.0077)
Treated with
1.0970∗∗∗
1.2953∗∗∗
Intensity 9
(0.0194)
(0.0239)
Treated with
1.4459∗∗∗
1.3966∗∗∗
Intensity 10
(0.0460)
(0.0091)
F-Statistic
745
6699
651
23347
Observations
2512
2512
762
762
Note: This table reports coeﬃcients of a regression of the noise level on the excluded instruments with
standard errors clustered at the room by session level. Columns 1 and 3 use a single indicator for being in a
treatment session. Columns 2 and 4 use separate indicators for each level of treatment intensity. F-statistics
are for a joint test that the coeﬃcients are zero. The results show that all instruments generate a strong
ﬁrst stage.
63

Table B8: IV Eﬀect of Noise on Productivity – Treatment Intensity Instruments
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation
Noise Level
−0.0646∗∗∗
−0.0751∗∗∗
−0.0651∗∗∗
−0.0661∗∗∗
−0.0905∗∗∗
−0.0975∗∗∗
−0.0861∗∗∗
−0.0549∗∗
(0.0152)
(0.0180)
(0.0151)
(0.0150)
(0.0198)
(0.0240)
(0.0247)
(0.0252)
Levels
Noise Level
−0.5253∗∗∗
−2.9572∗∗∗
−0.5192∗∗∗
−0.5187∗∗∗
−0.5466∗∗∗
−0.5671∗∗∗
−0.5205∗∗∗
−0.2851∗
(0.1696)
(0.9632)
(0.1695)
(0.1691)
(0.1718)
(0.1723)
(0.1653)
(0.1492)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
2.924
4.487
2.918
2.901
2.775
2.645
2.529
2.163
Control Median-Levels
10
54
10
10
10
9
9
6
Observations
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
2400
Note: This table shows estimates from two-stage least squares regression of productivity outcome variables
on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room
by session level. The noise level is instrumented by a set of treatment intensity indicators in order to capture
variation in treatment intensity. The ﬁrst panel shows the results for the inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed
outcomes, while the second panel shows the results for the untransformed outcomes.
Table B9: Quality Response
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Proportion
Meeting
1 Criteria
Proportion
Meeting
2 Criteria
Proportion
Meeting
3 Criteria
Proportion
Meeting
4 Criteria
Proportion
Meeting
5 Criteria
Proportion
Meeting
6 Criteria
Reduced Form Eﬀect of Treatment
Treatment
0.0000
−0.0025
−0.0113∗
−0.0133∗
−0.0063
0.0054
(0.0019)
(0.0035)
(0.0058)
(0.0073)
(0.0075)
(0.0074)
2SLS Eﬀect of Noise - Treatment Indicator Instrument
Noise Level
−0.0009
−0.0018
−0.0117
−0.0134
−0.0030
0.0131
(0.0024)
(0.0047)
(0.0079)
(0.0101)
(0.0105)
(0.0107)
2SLS Eﬀect of Noise - Treatment Intensity Instruments
Noise Level
−0.0009
0.0002
−0.0137∗
−0.0174∗
−0.0100
0.0022
(0.0021)
(0.0044)
(0.0078)
(0.0097)
(0.0104)
(0.0099)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
0.995
0.980
0.904
0.833
0.765
0.574
Control Median-Levels
2389
2389
2389
2389
2389
2389
Note: This table shows the impact of treatment on the proportion of pockets meeting each quality threshold.
The ﬁrst panel shows the estimates from a regression of the proportions on a treatment indicator, wage,
session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The
second panel shows the estimates from a two-stage least squares regression of the proportions on the noise
level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session
level and the noise level instrumented with a treatment indicator. The third panel shows the estimates from
a two-stage least squares regression of the proportions on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room
ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session level and the noise level instrumented by
a set of treatment intensity indicators in order to capture variation in treatment intensity. The results show
that there does not appear to have been a quality response to treatment.
64

Table B10: Comparison with Other Environmental Eﬀects
Source
Setting
Stimulus
Stimulus Change
Productivity Eﬀect
This Paper
Textile Production
Noise
Perceived Doubling
5%
Adhvaryu et al. (2016)
Textile Production
Temperature
0.81σ
1.3%
Zivin and Neidell (2012)
Agricultural Labor
Ozone Pollution
0.76σ
5.5%
Chang et al. (2016)
Call Center
Air Pollution
15%
0.35%
Chang et al. (2016)
Factory
Air Pollution
1σ
8%
He et al. (2016)
Manufacturing
Air Pollution
0.2σ
0%
Note: This table compares the eﬀects of noise on productivity estimated in this experiment with the eﬀects
of other environmental factors on productivity estimated in the literature. While we should be cautious
in interpreting results from diﬀerent experiments with diﬀerent kinds of environmental changes on diﬀerent
types of tasks, it appears the eﬀects estimated in this paper are similarly sized to other environmental factors.
Table B11: Lagged Treatment Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
Treatment
−0.0163
−0.0305
−0.0168
−0.0302∗
−0.0649∗∗∗
−0.0554∗
−0.0289
0.0011
(0.0172)
(0.0208)
(0.0171)
(0.0159)
(0.0221)
(0.0282)
(0.0284)
(0.0291)
Lagged Treatment
0.0000
−0.0198
−0.0043
−0.0125
−0.0406
−0.0077
0.0149
0.0194
(0.0213)
(0.0250)
(0.0214)
(0.0201)
(0.0291)
(0.0384)
(0.0390)
(0.0428)
Treatment ×
−0.0504
−0.0356
−0.0515
−0.0344
0.0101
−0.0033
−0.0297
−0.0023
Lagged Treatment
(0.0354)
(0.0473)
(0.0366)
(0.0353)
(0.0447)
(0.0571)
(0.0598)
(0.0637)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control Mean-IHS
2.924
4.487
2.918
2.901
2.775
2.645
2.529
2.163
Observations
2209
2209
2209
2209
2209
2209
2209
2209
Note: This table shows estimates from an ordinary least squares regression of the inverse hyperbolic sine-
transformed productivity outcome variables on a treatment indicator, a lagged treatment indicator, an
interaction of the treatment indicator and the lagged treatment indicator, wage, session, person, and room
ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The results are imprecise, but do
not suggest that cumulative eﬀects of noise exposure are important.
65

Table B12: Decision Task Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
Net Savings
Bought Bulk
Worked
Extra Hour
Treated 1st Session
0.3483
0.0358
−0.0241
(39.9039)
(0.0723)
(0.0942)
Treated 2nd Session
20.1870
−0.0504
0.0457
(41.6946)
(0.0715)
(0.0945)
Treated 3rd Session
10.7555
−0.0782
0.0013
(33.9952)
(0.0717)
(0.0930)
Day FE
Yes
No
No
Person FE
Yes
No
No
Outcome Mean
8.204
0.190
0.525
Outcome SD
694.611
0.394
0.501
Observations
733
126
120
Note: This table shows regressions of the outcome variables from three decision tasks conducted at the end
of selected days on indicators for whether the respondent was treated in the ﬁrst, second, or third session
on those days. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. The ﬁrst column shows the net amount
saved (deposits less withdrawals) by respondents in an account with an interest rate of 1% per working day.
The second column shows whether an individual chose to buy a 5 kg bag of maize ﬂour when they had the
opportunity to buy ﬁve 1 kg bags of ﬂour at a lower cost. The ﬁnal column shows whether the respondents
elected to stay for an extra hour and work for a piece rate when oﬀered the chance. All results show that
noise exposure during the day does not seem to aﬀect decisions taken later in quiet.
Table B13: Eﬀect of Piece Rate on Productivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Total
Pockets
Total
Points
Earned
Pockets
Meeting
1 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
2 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
3 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
4 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
5 Criteria
Pockets
Meeting
6 Criteria
10 Ksh Piece Rate
0.0270∗
0.0336
0.0245
0.0267
0.0238
0.0290
0.0513∗
0.0407
(0.0158)
(0.0207)
(0.0162)
(0.0171)
(0.0233)
(0.0283)
(0.0299)
(0.0329)
15 Ksh Piece Rate
−0.0180
−0.0239
−0.0223
−0.0104
−0.0040
−0.0028
−0.0139
−0.0120
(0.0166)
(0.0233)
(0.0173)
(0.0179)
(0.0250)
(0.0296)
(0.0310)
(0.0341)
Noise Condition
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5 Ksh Mean
2.898
4.450
2.894
2.869
2.728
2.590
2.476
2.129
5 Ksh Median
10
51
10
10
9
9
8
6
Observations
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
2447
Note: This table shows ordinary least squares regressions of inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed productivity
outcome variables on piece rate indicators, treatment indicators, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with
robust standard errors. The results demonstrate that increasing the piece rate from 5 to 10 Ksh increased
productivity by approximately 3%, but that there was no eﬀect of the 15 Ksh piece rate condition, possibly
due to income eﬀects.
66

Table B14: Measures of Cognitive Function
Domain
Task name
Ability task measures
Why ability is needed to sew
Attention
Psychomotor Vigilance
Ability to sustain focus
To avoid sewing oﬀthe edge or go-
ing past where the turn is supposed
to be
d2
Ability to ignore distractions
To focus on task while other things
are going on around you
Working Memory
Reverse Corsi Block
Ability to store and manipulate in-
formation in your mind
To be able to keep in mind how el-
ements will ultimately ﬁt together
N-Back
Ability to continuously update in-
formation
To be able to keep track of where
you are in the task
Inhibitory Control
Hearts and Flowers
Ability to resist tempting impulses
To maintain control of sewing speed
when surprised by something
Cognitive Flexibility
Wisconsin Card Sort
Ability to maintain multiple rules
in memory and select which is most
appropriate
To be able to switch from one el-
ement of the task to another (e.g.
hemming to sewing the sides)
Higher-Level Reasoning
Raven’s
Ability to recognize patterns and
extrapolate
To identify potentially better meth-
ods for accomplishing the task
Note: This table contains descriptions of the cognitive tests used in the second experiment. The ﬁrst column
shows the domain of cognitive function that the test is designed to assess. The second column shows the
name of each test. The third column shows the speciﬁc cognitive ability the test is designed to assess. The
ﬁnal column shows how this ability is potentially important in sewing.
Table B15: Experiment Two Balance and Summary Stats
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Female
Age
High School
or More
Typical Daily
Wage
Days Worked
Last Week
More Annoyed
by Noise
than Others
Treatment Mean
0.523
25.846
0.696
528.916
1.208
0.296
Control Mean
0.509
25.940
0.706
550.188
1.203
0.302
Two-Sided P-Value
0.716
0.868
0.768
0.670
0.973
0.852
Normalized Diﬀerence
0.028
−0.014
−0.021
−0.033
0.003
−0.014
Note: This table assesses balance of sample characteristics between treatment and control sessions. The ﬁrst
two rows display the average of the variable indicated in the column for individuals observed in treatment
and control sessions, respectively.
Row three shows the p-value from a regression of the variable on a
treatment indicator with standard errors clustered at the room by session level. The normalized diﬀerence
is the diﬀerence between the treatment and control means divided by the square root of the average of the
treatment and control variances as deﬁned by Imbens and Rubin (2015). The results show that those observed
in treatment and control are well balanced on observable characteristics. This is due to the within-person
design. The only lack of perfect balance comes from a small amount of attrition.
67

Table B16: Experiment Two Reduced-Form Eﬀect of Treatment
Cognitive Function Tests
Placebo Eﬀort Task
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Normalized
Sum of Scores
Average of
Normalized Scores
PCA of
Percent Correct
and Reaction Time
CFA of
Percentage Correct
and Reaction Time
Key Presses
Normalized Score
Treatment
−0.0304∗∗
−0.0239∗∗
−0.0589∗∗∗
−0.0635∗∗∗
1.8234
0.0039
(0.0128)
(0.0092)
(0.0165)
(0.0194)
(19.0984)
(0.0408)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
762
762
762
762
762
762
Note: This table shows estimates from an ordinary least squares regression of cognitive outcome variables
on an indicator for treatment, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered
at the room by session level. The ﬁrst outcome is the normalized sum of points that participants earned
on tests during a session. The second column normalizes ﬁrst at the test-score level and averages across
normalized scores within a session. The third outcome is the ﬁrst component of a principal component
analysis of percentage correct and reaction time estimated on each individual’s ﬁrst control session. The
fourth column is my preferred outcome: the ﬁrst factor of a common factor analysis of percentage correct
and reaction time estimated on each individual’s ﬁrst control session. The last two columns show that there
was no eﬀect of the same noise change on the placebo eﬀort task.
Table B17: Experiment Two IV Eﬀect of Noise – Treatment Intensity Instruments
Cognitive Function Tests
Placebo Eﬀort Task
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Normalized
Sum of Scores
Average of
Normalized Scores
PCA of
Percent Correct
and Reaction Time
CFA of
Percentage Correct
and Reaction Time
Key Presses
Normalized Score
Noise Level
−0.0233∗∗
−0.0168∗∗
−0.0478∗∗∗
−0.0529∗∗∗
−2.8033
−0.0060
(0.0110)
(0.0082)
(0.0154)
(0.0182)
(15.8894)
(0.0339)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
762
762
762
762
762
762
Note: This table shows estimates from a two-stage least squares regression of cognitive outcome variables on
the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the room by
session level. The noise level is instrumented by a set of treatment intensity indicators. The ﬁrst outcome
is the normalized sum of points that participants earned on tests during a session. The second column
normalizes ﬁrst at the test-score level and averages across normalized scores within a session. The third
outcome is the ﬁrst component of a principal component analysis of percentage correct and reaction time
estimated on each individual’s ﬁrst control session. The fourth column is my preferred outcome: the ﬁrst
factor of a common factor analysis of percentage correct and reaction time estimated on each individual’s
ﬁrst control session. The last two columns show that there was no eﬀect of the same noise change on the
placebo eﬀort task.
68

Table B18: Experiment Two Fisher P-Values
Normalized
Sum of Scores
Average of
Normalized Scores
PCA of
Percentage Correct
and Reaction Time
CFA of
Percentage Correct
and Reaction Time
Key Presses
Normalized Score
0.165
0.115
0.022
0.035
0.906
0.906
Table B19: Impacts of Noise on Normalized Scores by Metric
Attention
Working Memory
Inhibitory
Control
Cognitive
Flexibility
Higher
Reasoning
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
PVT
D2
Corsi
NBack
Hearts and
Flowers
Wisconsin
Ravens
Noise Level
−0.0210
−0.0011
−0.0308
−0.0253
−0.0380
−0.0509∗
−0.0106
(0.0266)
(0.0192)
(0.0303)
(0.0193)
(0.0232)
(0.0266)
(0.0204)
Wage FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Session FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Person FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
762
762
762
762
762
762
762
Note: This table shows estimates from a two-stage least squares regression of the normalized score on each
test on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the
room by session level. The noise level is instrumented by an indicator for being in a treated room. The
results show that the eﬀects of noise do not appear to be concentrated in any particular domain.
69

Table B20: Split-Sample IV of Productivity on Cognitive Function (Treatment Intensity
Instruments)
(1)
(2)
(3)
IHS
Total Pockets
IHS
Pocket Points
IHS
Perfect Pockets
CFA Index
1.2232∗∗
1.4219∗∗
1.0394∗
(0.5100)
(0.5962)
(0.5968)
Note: This table shows the ratio of the noise level coeﬃcients from the two-stage least squares regressions
of productivity and cognitive function on the noise level, wage, session, person, and room ﬁxed eﬀects. The
noise level is instrumented the treatment intensity indicators. Standard errors are ﬁrst clustered in each
regression and then computed for the ratio using the delta method. The results show that a one standard
deviation change in cognitive function increases productivity by approximately 100%.
Table B21: Eﬀects of Beliefs in Experiment One
(1)
(2)
(3)
WTP
WTP Any
WTP COP
Piece Rate
−0.2584
0.0169
−1.5658
(1.5306)
(0.0203)
(2.5481)
Believe More
6.2208
0.2614∗∗∗
−3.0795
Productive in Quiet
(5.7762)
(0.0760)
(7.9450)
Believe More
2.6918
−0.0669
7.1020
Productive × Piece Rate
(3.8755)
(0.0480)
(5.4276)
Day FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Outcome Mean
17.697
0.538
32.906
Observations
476
476
256
Note: This table shows the results of a regression of willingness to pay and an indicator for being willing to
pay a positive amount on an indicator for whether an individual was facing a piece rate, whether they stated
they were more productive in quiet and their interaction. Because willingness to pay was elicited over two
days in experiment one, day ﬁxed eﬀects are also included. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. The results are consistent with the more detailed belief data from experiment two.
70

C
Cognitive Task Descriptions For Online Publication
This appendix describes how the cognitive tasks were implemented and scored. All tasks
were programmed on the python-based, open-source platform OpenSesame developed by
Mathˆot et al. (2012).
During each trial session, respondents were seated at a desk and
worked autonomously for approximately two hours.
Tasks were presented in a random
order on Windows touch-screen tablets with external keyboards attached at a resolution of
1280x768. During practice sessions, participants were instructed on the rules of each task,
shown demonstrations, and given the opportunity to ask clarifying questions.
C.1
Attention
C.1.1
Psychomotor Vigilance
The Psychomotor Vigilance Task is implemented following Basner and Dinges (2011). Re-
spondents stare at a blank white screen while resting a ﬁnger on the spacebar. At random
intervals between 2 and 10 seconds, a red counter appears (see Figure C16). When the
counter appears, the respondent’s job is to tap the spacebar as quickly as possible. In each
session respondents completed 100 trials scored as follows:
• Pressing the spacebar while no counter is present results in an incorrect response, the
screen ﬂashes “FALSE START” and earns zero points.
• Responses faster than 100 ms are considered as anticipatory responses, counted as
incorrect, and earn zero points.
• Responses slower than 500 ms are considered attentional lapses, counted as incorrect,
and earn zero points.
• Following Basner and Dinges (2011), for each correct response participants earn points
depending on their inverse response time according to the following scoring rule: 5000×
Inverse RT −10.
The total score is then the average of the trial scores. For consistency with the other tests,
in the common factor and principal component analyses response times are used rather than
inverse response times.
C.1.2
d2
The d2 task follows the general instructions outlined in Brickenkamp and Zillmer (1998) and
Bates and Lemay Jr. (2004), but is modiﬁed for computer presentation. For each trial, eleven
71

Figure C16: PVT Stimulus
Note: The ﬁgure shows a snapshot of a counter that appears in the PVT test displaying a time of 320 ms.
The test is designed to assess attention. When the counter appears, respondents must press the space bar
to stop it from counting up. The faster they press the space bar, the more points they earn.
72

Figure C17: d2 Stimuli
Note: The ﬁgure shows an example of a trial from the d2 test. The test is designed to assess attention.
Respondents see a series of d’s and p’s with up to two lines below and above. They must tap the boxes
below all d’s with a total of two dashes before the trial ends.
letters (either p or d) appear on the screen with between zero and two dashes above and zero
and two dashes below for a total number of dashes between zero and four (see Figure C17).
The respondent’s job is to mark all of the d’s with a total of two dashes by tapping the box
below the letter. After 5106 ms, the trial ends. Until that time has elapsed, respondents
can un-mark and re-mark letters as they please. Another set of eleven letters appears after
500 ms. Respondents complete 100 trials. For every d with two dashes correctly marked,
respondents earn one point. Respondents lose one point for marking anything else. Their
score is total number of points earned divided by number of possible points.
C.2
Working Memory
C.2.1
Reverse Corsi Block
Implementation of the Reverse Corsi Block task follows Brunetti et al. (2014). For each trial,
nine blue blocks appear in random locations on the screen. They take turns lighting up for
500 ms with 1000 ms between each ﬂash. Respondents are then asked to tap the blocks
in reverse order of how they lit up (see Figure C18). For each element in the sequence,
if the respondent taps on the correct block, it turns green for 500 ms and the respondent
can proceed to tap the next block in the sequence. If the respondent taps any other block,
it ﬂashes red and the respondent moves to the next trial. The ﬁrst trial sequence contains
two elements. For each sequence the respondent gets completely correct, the sequence length
increases by one. For every sequence incorrect, the length decreases by one up to a minimum
sequence length of two. Respondents complete 50 trials. The score is the average length of
73

the sequences that respondents complete.
(a) Blocks appear in random positions
(b) Blocks light up yellow randomly
(c) Respondents tap blocks in reverse order
Figure C18: Corsi Stimuli
Note: This ﬁgure shows the three stages of the reverse corsi blocks test. The test is designed to measure
working memory. First nine blocks appear in random positions. They then light up in a random sequence.
Respondents must then tap the blocks in the reverse order of how they lit up. After each correct trial, the
length of the sequence increases by one, and after every incorrect trial, the length of the sequence decreases
by one down to a minimum of two elements.
C.2.2
N-Back
Implementation of the N-Back task follows Wilhelm et al. (2013) with an “N” of two. For each
trial, respondents see a sequence of twelve animal pictures. For each picture following the
second, the respondents are required to tap either “MATCH” or “NO MATCH” depending
on whether the image currently on screen matches the image shown two animals ago (see
Figure C19). Each image is presented with a 2500 ms maximum response time and a 500 ms
interstimulus interval. Each sequence is randomly determined by randomly drawing elements
from a pool of ten images such that for each trial there is a 50% chance of the draw being
a match. At the start of every session, respondents complete one practice trial sequence
and then another 40 scored sequences. A respondent’s score is the percentage of responses
correctly marked times 10.
74

(a) First element
(b) Second element
(c) Third element does not match ﬁrst
(d) Fourth element does not match second
(e) Fifth element does not match third
(f) Sixth element does match fourth
Figure C19: N-Back Stimuli and Responses
Note: This ﬁgure shows an example of six elements from an N-back sequence.
The test is designed to
assess working memory. Respondents see a series of animals and must indicate whether the animal currently
displayed matches the animal seen two elements previously.
75

C.3
Inhibitory Control
C.3.1
Hearts and Flowers
Implementation of the Hearts and Flowers task follows the “dots” task outlined by Davidson
et al. (2006). Respondents see a ﬁxation dot in the center of their screen with blue boxes
on the left and right. Respondents then see a sequence of hearts and ﬂowers appear on the
boxes. For each trial, respondents must press either the “Q” or “P” key. When a heart
appears, respondents must press the key on the same side as the heart. While when a ﬂower
appears, respondents must press the key on the opposite side (see Figure C20). During each
session respondents complete the following:
1. 6 practice trials with only hearts.
2. 126 scored trials with only hearts.
3. 6 practice trials with only ﬂowers.
4. 126 scored trials with only ﬂowers.
5. 492 scored trials with both hearts and ﬂowers.
Each stimulus times out after 750 ms and there is a 500 ms interstimulus interval. Trials are
scored as follows:
• Responses faster than 100 ms are scored as incorrect, anticipatory responses and earn
zero points.
• Trials where the incorrect key or no key is pressed are scored as incorrect and earn
zero points.
• For each trial with a correct response, respondents earn points according to the follow-
ing scoring rule that is linear in their response time: 10 × RT −750
200 −750
C.4
Cognitive Flexibility
C.4.1
Wisconsin Card Sort
The Wisconsin Card Sort task follows the procedure originally outlined by Grant and Berg
(1946) as modiﬁed for computer display by PsyToolkit (Stoet 2010, 2017). The respondent
sees four response cards at the top of the screen and one question card (see Figure C21).
Their job is to tap the response card that “matches” the question card. There are three
possible matching rules:
76

(a) Press ‘Q’ Key
(b) Press ‘P’ Key
(c) Press ‘Q’ key
(d) Press ‘P’ key
Figure C20: Hearts and Flowers Possible Stimuli and Responses
Note: The ﬁgure shows the four possible stimuli and responses for the hearts and ﬂowers test. The test is
designed to assess inhibitory control. Respondents see a series of hearts and ﬂowers appear on the blocks.
When a ﬂower appears, the respondent must press the key on the opposite side of the keyboard. When a
heart appears, the respondent must press the key on the same side of the keyboard.
77

1. Shape – In the example, the correct answer would be the fourth response card (four
gold stars).
2. Color – In the example, the correct answer would be the third response card (three
blue crosses).
3. Number – In the example, the correct answer would be the second response card (two
green triangles).
Every ten trials a sorting rule is chosen at random. Respondents must ﬁgure out the sorting
rule through trial and error. If the respondent taps the correct response card, the screen
ﬂashes “Correct!”. If the response card they tap is incorrect, the screen ﬂashes “Wrong!”.
Respondents complete 100 trials.
Every incorrect trial earns zero points.
Every correct
trial is scored according to the following scoring rule linear in reaction time31: 10 + 200 ×
10
30000 −200 −RT ×
10
30000 −200.
C.5
Higher-Level Reasoning
C.5.1
Raven’s
The Raven’s task follows the classic task described by Raven (2000) with supplemental ma-
trices graciously provided by Heather Schoﬁeld based on Schoﬁeld (2014). Respondents see
a matrix with a missing piece and a set of possible pieces (see Figure C22), and their job
is to tap the piece that completes the pattern in the matrix. In each session, respondents
completed ten original Raven’s progressive matrices alternating with ten supplemental ma-
trices increasing in diﬃculty. For each incorrect response, respondents earned zero points.
For each correct response, respondents earned points in a scoring rule linear in their reaction
time32: 10.0 + 200 ×
10
60000 −200.0 −RT ×
10
60000 −200 .
C.6
Eﬀort
C.6.1
Eﬀort Task
The eﬀort task is implemented following DellaVigna and Pope (2018). Respondents have 10
minutes to alternate pressing the ‘a’ and ‘b’ keys. For each complete alternation, a progress
31Note that it is not traditional to score reaction time on this task because the task is typically presented
with physical cards by an enumerator. I took advantage of the computer-based administration to collect
reaction time and improve the measure’s sensitivity.
32Reaction time is not traditionally collected on this test; however, I decided to take advantage of computer-
based implementation and maximize the sensitivity of the test.
78

(a) Question
(b) If correct
(c) If incorrect
Figure C21: Wisconsin Stimuli
Note: The ﬁgure shows the three key screens from the Wisconsin card sort test. The test is designed to
assess cognitive ﬂexibility. Respondents are shown a card at the bottom of the screen and are asked to
choose which of four cards at the top of the screen it matches according to one of three possible sorting rules.
Respondents are not told which of the rules is being used and must ﬁgure it out by trial and error. Every
ten trials the sorting rule changes.
79

Figure C22: Raven’s Stimulus
Note: This ﬁgure shows an example of a trial from the Raven’s matrices test. The test is designed to assess
higher-reasoning skills. The respondent sees a pattern of shapes with one missing. They must choose which
of the possible answers completes the pattern.
bar on the screen increases by one hash mark. At increments of 50, the bar resets and
respondents are reminded of their total score (see Figure C23). Respondents earn one point
for every 300 alternations.
80

(a) Press ‘a’ and ‘b’ until progress bar ﬁlls
(b) See total score every 50 presses
Figure C23: Eﬀort Stimuli
Note: The ﬁgure shows the two key screens from the eﬀort task. The respondent must alternate pressing the
‘a’ and ‘b’ keys. As they do, a progress bar (shown on the left) begins to ﬁll up. After every 50 completed
alternations the respondent sees his/her score (shown on the right), and the progress bar resets to zero.
D
Willingness to Pay Script For Online Publication
“I’m sure you’ve noticed these two weeks that sometimes a noisy engine is outside of the
rooms. For each of the ﬁrst two practice sessions tomorrow, we are going to give you the
chance to pay in order to work in a room without the engine outside. However, the price for
working in the quieter room has not yet been decided. It will be determined for each session
by a game of chance. You will not have to pay anything more than you want to, and you
might even get it for less! Here’s how this will work:
For each session, you and I will ﬁgure out the highest price that you are willing to pay
to work in the quieter room. Then tonight our computer will randomly decide the price. If
the price is higher than you said you are willing to pay, when you come tomorrow you will
be in the room with the engine outside. If the price is lower than what you said you were
willing to pay, the randomly chosen price will be deducted from your pay for that session,
and you will work in the quieter room.
Since this is complicated, we will ﬁrst make a plan for which prices you would like to
pay to work in the quieter room. I will ask you whether you would be willing to pay several
prices in order to be in the quieter room and you will tell me yes or no. After we are done,
you will not be able to change your plan. Do you understand?”
81

E
Compensating Diﬀerentials Model For Online Pub-
lication
Consider the following simple model in the style of Rosen (1986).
Suppose there is an
economy with two sectors: noisy and quiet. Firms with heterogeneous costs of abatement
given by γj must choose in which sector to produce. Each ﬁrm is seeking one worker to
produce a good the ﬁrm sells for a unit price. Workers can produce according to Y (ηi, Si) =
θ −Siηi where Si = 1 if the worker is in the noisy sector and ηi represents each worker’s
heterogeneous productivity loss due to working in noise. In order to ensure that workers
never destroy value, this loss is assumed to be less than θ. Firms pay workers sector-speciﬁc
wages WN and WQ which are allowed to depend on observed output but not on ηi directly.
Each worker tries to maximize their utility given by U(Si) = (1 −Si)WQ + Si(WN −ψi)
where ψi is each worker’s heterogeneous disutility from working in noisy conditions. Finally,
assume that the workers have free entry and an outside option of zero. In this economy, a
worker chooses the noisy sector if and only if
WN −ψi > WQ
(5)
Free entry and the worker’s outside option imply WQ = 0. Thus a worker chooses the noisy
sector if WN > ψi. The ﬁrm then chooses not to abate if and only if
E[YN|WN > ψ] −WN > E[YQ|WN ≤ψ] −γi
(6)
E[η|WN > ψ] + WN < γi
(7)
Namely, if the expected productivity losses and the wage premium are lower than the cost of
abatement. Setting the supply of workers in the noisy sector equal to the noisy sector labor
demand gives the equilibrium condition
1 −G (E[η|WN > ψ] + WN) = M(WN)
(8)
where G(·) and M(·) are the CDFs of γ and ψ respectively.
Eﬃciency then depends on how the wages are structured and whether the worker neglects
the productive eﬀects of noise. First, consider the case where the ﬁrm pays a ﬁxed-wage
contract and workers fully attend to noise’s impact. Even without neglect, the fact that the
productive impact of noise is the worker’s private information creates ineﬃcient allocations
through standard contracting problems. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms in the noisy sector would like to
hire the workers whose productivity is least aﬀected by noise, but will be unable to identify
82

these workers.
Because the wages are ﬁxed, workers will not internalize the productive
impacts of noise and instead will sort solely based on whether the wage premium exceeds
their disutility. This leads to an ineﬃcient composition of workers in the noisy sector. Worker
neglect does not have eﬃciency implications under this wage structure because the ﬁxed wage
means that workers already do not base their decisions on their productivity.
As usual, these contracting problems can be solved by paying the worker based on their
performance. Speciﬁcally, consider the case where the worker is paid a sector-speciﬁc piece
rate ws and workers attend to the impact of noise. The worker chooses the noisy sector if
and only if
wN >
ψi
θ −ηi
(9)
It follows that the supply curve of workers in the noisy sector is given by F(wN) where F(·)
is the CDF of the random variable χ =
ψi
θ−ηi. The ﬁrm then chooses to be in the noisy sector
if and only if
(1 −wN)E[YN|wN > χ] > E[YQ|wN ≤χ] −γj
(10)
(1 −wN)E[η|wN > χ] + wNθ < γj
(11)
This achieves the ﬁrst-best equilibrium where 1−G((1−wN)E[η|wN > χ]+wNθ) = F(wN).
However, if workers neglect the impact that noise has on their productivity, this solution
to the private information problem no longer works. Speciﬁcally, suppose that workers do
not realize that their ability depends on noise and instead think they have constant ability
θ. The worker’s decision rule changes to:
wN > ψi
θ
(12)
By changing the composition of workers sorting into the noisy sector, this in turn changes
the ﬁrm’s decision rule to the following:
(1 −wN)E

η
wN > ψi
θ

+ wNθ < γj
(13)
Thus inattention when the worker is the residual claimant aﬀects eﬃciency in two ways.
First, neglecting the productive eﬀects of noise makes workers more willing to work in the
noisy sector for a given piece-rate. Second, neglect changes the composition of the workers
in the noisy sector, which in turn changes the expected productivity penalty that the ﬁrm
faces. In essence, this neglect undoes the screening eﬀect of the piece rate and restores the
83

situation where the ﬁrm is paying a ﬁxed-wage contract and faces a private information
problem.
This implies that the eﬃciency implications of worker neglect critically depend on the
joint distribution of the productive eﬀect of noise and the disutility of noise. If they are
perfectly, positively correlated, then worker neglect or being paid a ﬁxed-wage contract
does not change each worker’s propensity to work in the noisy sector.33
In this case, a
properly-calibrated wage (as set by the ﬁrm or as modiﬁed by a tax) can restore the ﬁrst-
best composition of workers in each sector. However, the further the joint distribution moves
away from perfect correlation, the more each worker’s propensity for working in the noisy
sector will be changed by neglect or ﬁxed-wage contracts. This means that with neglect, in
most realistic scenarios, simply manipulating wages or quantities will not be able to restore
the ﬁrst-best allocation.
To illustrate, consider the instinctive response of a corrective tax when the worker is
being paid a piece rate. If policy makers were omniscient, they could restore the ﬁrst-best
by simply taxing each individual’s noisy sector wages at rate τi = θ−ηi
θ .
θ −ηi
θ
wN > ψi
θ
=⇒wN >
ψi
θ −ηi
(14)
However, this is unlikely to be feasible. Suppose instead that the planners try to use a
constant ad valorem tax. This will cause the labor supply curve to shift back towards the
optimum by making the noisy sector less attractive. But because ﬁrms also care about the
composition of the workers in the noisy sector, the eﬀect on the labor demand curve will
depend on how closely the disutility and productive impacts of noise are related.
33This follows from the fact that ηi < θ. This condition means that in the optimal sorting case each
successively larger ψi is divided by a smaller number and thus the ordering is preserved when neglect
changes the denominator to a constant.
84

