FREE AND WHAT DO YOU DO?: 10 STEPS TO CREATING
A PORTFOLIO CAREER PDF
Barrie Hopson,Katie Ledger | 272 pages | 15 May 2010 | Bloomsbury Publishing PLC | 9781408116302 | English | London, United Kingdom

Portfolio Careers: And What Do You Do?
Dedicated to helping job seekers find work during the pandemic. Click here to read more. Assess your hobbies and interests. Spend time
reflecting on the types of activities that give you the most satisfaction, the most joy.
When not working, what kind of activities do you enjoy? How do And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career fill your

weekends? What do you do on vacations? Make a list of these activities and consider whether any of them could be turned into revenue-
producing work. Examine your educational background. Besides the credentials you've received from your educational experiences, make a list of
your favorite courses or subjects.
From that list of favorite subjects, research occupations that utilize the knowledge you gained. Review And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to
Creating a Portfolio Career work history. Look for the common threads that bind all your past jobs together. Most of us follow a career path,
intentional or not, but that path is not always straight and narrow. Have you always worked in marketing? In education? How have you chosen
these jobs? Deconstruct past experiences into skill sets. For all your past experiences -- work, volunteering, and educational -- develop a list of
skills you've mastered and enjoy.
Don't just focus on technical skills, but look beyond them for softer skills, such as communications, leadership, management. Weigh the pros and
cons. There's risk involved in all activities, but managing a portfolio career carries additional risks. Develop a plan. The best way to deal with some
of the common problems people face when forging into a portfolio career is developing a plan of action.
Get organized. One of the keys to your portfolio career success is having a system. If you're a natural organizer, then get to it Have a support
system. It's absolutely crucial, especially in the early phases, to have the support of family and friends.
In the beginning, as you are developing your portfolio career, you may feel a bit isolated and nervous -- and you'll want and need people to keep
you focused on your goals. Use your network. Just as with traditional job-hunting, your network of personal contacts will be extremely beneficial
to you when you have a portfolio career. Talk with folks in your network regularly about trends in their companies and industries, especially as it
relates to outsourcing and the process for hiring consultants or independent contractors.
And don't forget about expanding and growing your network, including joining professional and civic associations, as you move into new areas.
Always act professional. Your reputation is your lifeblood in a portfolio career, and the more positive word-of-mouth you receive from performing
your jobs professionally, the more opportunities will come your way.
Questions about some of the And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career used in this article?
Get more information definitions and links on key college, career, and job-search terms by going to our Job-Seeker's Glossary of Job-Hunting
Terms. Randall S. Hansen is the founder of Quintessential Careers, one of the oldest and most comprehensive career development sites on the
web, as well CEO of EmpoweringSites.
He is also the founder of MyCollegeSuccessStory. Hansen is a published author, with several books, chapters in books, and hundreds of articles
to his name. He is frequently quoted in the media and conducts empowering workshops around the country; he is also an educator who has taught
at the college level for more than 15 years.
Skip to primary navigation Skip to content Skip to primary sidebar Dedicated to helping job seekers find work during the pandemic. By Randall
Hansen. Hansen, Ph. About the Author. Follow Randall : Read more stories by Randall. As seen in:. Customer Service.
All rights reserved.
Portfolio Careers — Portfolio Careers 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career
Goodreads helps you keep track of books you want to read. Want to Read saving…. Want to Read Currently Reading Read. Other editions.
Enlarge cover. Error rating book. Refresh and try again. Open Preview See a Problem? Details if other :. Thanks for telling us about the problem.
Return to Book Page. And What Do You Do? Katie Ledger. Each job would utilize different skills and allow you to follow your passions with
enough built-in flexibility and diversity to help you thrive during economic slumps.
Whether part-time worker or a combination of working for yourself and an organization, this book will show you the way to And What Do You
Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career innovative career opportunities and find the maximum fulfillment in your work. Get A Copy.
Paperbackpages. More Details Other Editions 4. Friend Reviews. To see what your friends thought of this book, please sign up.
Lists with This Book. This book is not yet featured on Listopia. Community Reviews. Showing Average rating 3. Rating details. Sort order. Nov
01, Will rated it really liked it. For it is likely that the working generation now may find themselves either by choice or by necessity working for a
number of businesses. The precept of this And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career is that every job is now temporary or
without long-term assurance, so therefore most of us are effectively self-employed but with one source of revenue coming in I.
With this book someone can decide whether the leap into a so-called portfolio career is desirable, but also whether you are someone who can
make that leap. Whilst most of us singly-employed do not think about networking and social media as possibilities waiting to happen, a portfolio
worker uses these tools to create an employment lifestyle that meets not just their financial needs but fills the gaps that conventional employment
cannot answer.
This book looks at the skills you can bring to a portfolio career, as well as marketing and branding yourself in such a way that a potential employer
can see you as not just a CV with a random selection of previous And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career that have no
coherence.
I found this book to be an incredibly useful tool in identifying the sorts of things that need to be considered when changing your working lifestyle.
There are no guarantees that this book will make the problems go away, but it will provide you with most of the answers when you are questioned.

The most valuable book I have read on career change in years A close friend recommended that I read this book and it is really quite brilliant.
Do read it in its entirety! Jan 27, Anna Lundberg rated it really liked it. Eye-opening book that serves as an inspiration as well as giving concrete
and practical advice when considering a portfolio career. Mar 29, Lori Grant rated it really liked it Shelves: career-development. A should-read
book on career development.
May 29, Anwen Garston rated it really liked it Shelves: career. Useful read for anyone contemplating more than one job. Oct 15, Heinrich Souza
added it. Jan 09, Sippy rated it really liked it Shelves: pers-ontwikkelingloopbaan-werkondernemen. Was inspired by it in some ways. Hands on
book with lots of sound advice, but outdated in many ways too by the time I read it in Still: it made me think, so 4 stars.
There are no discussion topics on this book yet. Readers also enjoyed. About Barrie Hopson. Barrie Hopson. Books by Barrie Hopson. Escape
the Present with These 24 Historical Romances.
You know the saying: There's no time like the present In that case, we can't Read more No trivia or quizzes yet. Welcome back. Just a moment
while we sign you in to your Goodreads account.
And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career by Barrie Hopson
Delighted to hear from the very lovely and very talented Marianne Cantwell this morning that the second edition of her great book is now available
in the UK. I had the pleasure of helping her to get the first edition published 6 years ago. Portfolio careerists are not necessarily free range humans
but most free range humans have portfolio careers. I have written before about this topic and it continues to be discussed in articles in British
medical journals.
Most of what I quote below comes from her fascinating and very well written article. I hope she takes this as And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to
Creating a Portfolio Career compliment as opposed to proof of […].
However, it is likely always to be a more limited portfolio career as someone with […]. Ailsa Sharak has written a wonderful article on her own
portfolio career centred around And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career.
Following on from similar pieces on portfolio career patterns for doctors you can begin to see that the work pattern is beginnig to appeal to many
members of the medical profession. Until very recently I think most people would have […].
I recently came across this description of the pluses of creating a portfolio career in an article by Shweta Taneja om the Live Mint website. You
may […]. We know just how much the concept has taken off in the UK. We also know that in Europe generally it is also increasing but not
apparantly at […]. I do get asked this question from time to time. I do not get excited by it simply because I And What Do You Do?: 10 Steps to
Creating a Portfolio Career no intention of retiring — and I am now However, it is a very crucial aspect of later life.
I have just read a brilliant article by Don Ezra in the FT. I […]. This will be part of the title of my new book which moves us on from portfolio
careers. There is an excellent article in todays Evening Standard by Hannah Flint in which she discusses the massive growth of portfolio careers,
side hussles, etc. I have been writing quite a lot over the past year about health service professionals who are being attracted more and more by
the idea of portfolio careers.
Join our group on LinkedIn. Portfolio Careers or Side Hustles? Portfolio Careers for Pharmacists 8 November Ailsa Sharak has written a
wonderful article on her own portfolio career centred around pharmacy. Wonderful example of a millenials portfolio career 1 November I recently
came across this description of the pluses of creating a portfolio career in an article by Shweta Taneja om the Live Mint website.
I have a portfolio career but will I be able to retire? Portfolio Living 11 July This will be part of the title of my new book which moves us on from
portfolio careers.
NHS to promote portfolio careers as part of new workforce plan 5 June I have been writing quite a lot over the past year about health service
professionals who are being attracted more and more by the idea of portfolio careers. No content on this site may be reused without the written
permission of the authors.


