Preprint
Nonlinear Models of Neural and Genetic Network Dynamics:  
Natural Transformations of Łukasiewicz Logic LM-Algebras in a 
Łukasiewicz-Topos as Representations of Neural Network Development and 
Neoplastic Transformations
I. C. Baianu
University of Illinois at Urbana, 
             Urbana, IL 61801, USA
ABSTRACT
A categorical and  Łukasiewicz-Topos framework for  Łukasiewicz LM-Algebraic Logic 
models of nonlinear dynamics in complex functional systems such as neural networks, 
genomes and cell interactomes is proposed. Łukasiewicz Algebraic Logic models of genetic 
networks and signaling pathways in cells are formulated in terms of nonlinear dynamic 
systems with  n-state components that allow for the generalization of previous logical 
models  of  both  genetic  activities  and  neural  networks. An  algebraic  formulation  of 
variable 'next-state functions' is extended  to a  Łukasiewicz Topos with an  n-valued 
Łukasiewicz LM-Algebraic Logic subobject classifier description that represents non-
random  and  nonlinear  network  activities  as  well  as  their  transformations  in 
developmental processes and carcinogenesis. Kan extensions are also considered in the 
context of neural network development.
1.
Introduction. 
A basic operational assumption was previously made (Baianu,1977) that certain genetic 
activities have n levels of intensity, and this assumption is justified both by the existence of 
epigenetic controls and by the coupling of the genome to the rest of the cell through specific 
signaling pathways that are involved in the modulation of both translation and transcription 
control  processes. This model  is  a description  of genetic  activities  in terms  of  n-valued 
Łukasiewicz logics. For operational reasons the model is directly formulated in an algebraic 
form by means of  Łukasiewicz Logic algebras.  Łukasiewicz algebras were introduced by 
Moisil (1940) as algebraic models of n-valued logics:  further improvements are here made by 
utilizing categorical constructions of Łukasiewicz-Moisil, LM-logic algebras (Georgescu and 
Vraciu, 1970).
2. Nonlinear Dynamics in Non-Random  Genetic Network Models in Łukasiewicz Logic 
Algebras.
 Jacob and Monod (1961) have shown, that in E. Coli the "regulator gene" and three 
"structural genes" concerned with lactose metabolism lie near one another in the same region of 
1
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

the chromosome. Another special region near one of the structural genes has the capacity of 
responding to the regulator gene, and it is called the "operator gene". The three structural genes 
are under the control of the same operator and the entire aggregate of genes represents a 
functional unit or "operon". The presence of this "clustering" of genes seems to be doubtful in 
the case of higher organisms although in certain eukaryotes, such as yeast, there is also evidence 
of such gene clustering and of significant consequences for the dynamic structure of the cell 
interactome which is neither random nor linear. 
Rashevsky (1968) has pointed out that the interactions among the genes of an operon are 
relationally analogous to interactions among the neurons of a certain neural net. Thus, it would 
be natural to term any assembly, or aggregate, of interacting genes as a genetic network, without 
considering the 'clustering' of genes as a necessary condition for all biological organisms. Had 
the structural genes presented an "all-or-none" type of response to the action of regulatory genes, 
the neural nets might be considered to be dynamically analogous to the corresponding genetic 
networks, especially since the former also have coupled , intra-neuronal signaling pathways 
resembling-but distinct- from those of other types of cells in higher organisms. In a broad sense, 
both types of network could be considered as two distinct realizations of a network which is built 
up of two-factor elements (Rosen, 1970). This allows for a detailed dynamica1 analysis of their 
action (Rosen, 1970). However, the case that was considered first as being the more suitable 
alternative (Baianu, 1977) is the one in which the activities of the genes are not necessarily of the 
"all-or-none" type. Nevertheless, the representation of elements of a net (in our case these are 
genes, operons, or groups of genes), as black boxes is convenient, and is here retained to keep 
the presentation both simple and intuitive (see Figure 1a and 1b). 
The formalization of genetic networks that was introduced previously (Baianu,1977) in 
terms of  Lukasiewicz Logic, and the appropriate definitions are here recalled in order to 
maintain a self-contained presentation. 
The genetic network presented in Figure 1a,b is a discriminating network (Rosen, 1970). 
Consider only Figure 1b and apply to it a type of formalization similar to that of McCulloch and 
Pitts. The level (chemical concentration) of P1 is zero when the operon A is inactive, and it will 
take some definite non-zero values on levels ‘1’, ‘2’, and  (n - 1)', otherwise. The first of A is 
obtained for a threshold value 
ou A  of P2 that corresponds to a certain level 'j' of B. Similarly', the 
other corresponding thresholds for levels 1, 2, 3,..., '(n-1)' are, respectively,   
u1
A , u2
A  … , un-1
A . The thresholds are indicated inside the black boxes, in a sequential order, as 
shown in Figure 2. Thus, if A is inactive (that is, on the zero level), then B will be active on the k 
level which is characterized by certain concentration of P2. Symbolically, we write:
2
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

A(t; 0) := B(t + δ ; k) ,
 where t denotes time and δ is the ‘time lag’ or delay after which the inactivity of A is reflected 
in to the activity of B, on the k level of activity.  Similarly, one has: 
                                                                
 
Figure 1 (a).  Two-operon switch model 
3
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

                          A                                                                         B
                          
                                                                 Pi
                                     
                                                 S1                                                                                                               S2
Figure 1. The simplest control unit in genetic net and its corresponding black-box images. 
Figure 2. Black-boxes with n levels of activity. 
4
R G
O1
SG
E1
E1
R G2
O2
SG2
P2
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

The levels of A and B, as well as the time lags  δ and  ε, need not be the same. More 
complicated situations arise when there are many concomitant actions on the same gene. 
These situations are somewhat--but not completely-- analogous to a neuron with alterable 
synapses. Such complex situations could arise through interactions which belong to distinct 
metabolic pathways. In order to be able to deal with any particular situation of this type one 
needs the symbols of n-valued logics. Firstly, re-label the last (n - 1) level of a gene by 1. An 
intermediary level of the same gene should be then relabeled by a lower case letter, x or y. 
The zero level will be labeled by '0', as before. Assume that the levels of all other genes can 
be represented by intermediary levels. (It is only a convenient convention and it does not 
impose any further restriction on the number of situations which could arise).
With all assertions of the type “gene A is active on the i-th level and gene B is active on the 
j-th level” one can form a distributive lattice, L. The composition laws for the lattice will be 
denoted by ∪ and ∩. The symbol ∪ will stand for the logical non-exclusive 'or', and ∩ will 
stand for the logical conjunction 'and'.
 Another symbol" ⊂:" allows for the ordering of the levels and is the canonical ordering of 
the lattice. Then, one is able to give a symbolic characterization of the dynamics of a gene of 
the not with respect to each level i. This is achieved by means of the maps δt: L→L and 
N: L→L, (with N being the negation). The necessary logical restrictions on the actions of 
these maps lead to an n-valued Łukasiewicz algebra.
(I) There is a map N: L →L, so that N(N(X))= X, N(X ∪Y) = N(X) ∩N(Y)  and N(X
∩Y) = N(X) ∪N(Y), for any X, Y ∈ L.
(II) there are (n-1) maps δi:L→L which have the following properties 
(a) δi(0) =0, δi(1) =1, for any i=1,2,….n-1;
(b) δi(X ∪ Y) = δ(X) ∪ δi(Y), δi(X ∩Y) = δi (X) ∩ δi(Y), for any X, Y∈ L, and i=1,2,…, n-1;
(c) δi(X) ∪ N(δi(X)) = 1, δi(X) ∩  N (δi(X)) = 0, for any X ∈ L;
(d) δi(X) ⊂ δ2(X) ⊂ …⊂ δn-1(X) , for any X ∈ L;
(e) δh*δk =δk for h, k =1, …, n-1;
(f) I f δi(X) =δi(Y) for any i=1,2,…, n-1, then X=Y;
(g) δt(N(X))= N(δj(X)), for i+j =n. 
5
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

(Georgescu and Vraciu, 1970). 
The first axiom states that the double negation has no effect on any assertion concerning any 
level, and that a simple negation changes the disjunction into conjunction and conversely. The 
second axiom presets in the fact ten sub cases which are summarized in equations (a) –(g).  Sub-
case (IIa) states that the dynamics  of the genetic  net is such that it maintains  the genes 
structurally unchanged. It does not allow for mutations which would alter the lowest and 'the 
highest levels of activities if the genetic net, and which would, in fact, change the whole net. 
Thus, maps δ: L→L are chosen to represent the dynamical behavior of the genetic nets in the 
absence of mutations. 
Equation (IIb) shows that the maps δ maintain the type of conjunction and disjunction. Equations 
(IIc) are chosen to represent assertions of the following type. 
<the sentence “a gene is active on the i-th level or it is inactive on the same level" is true), and
<the sentence "a gene is inactive on the i-th level and it is inactive on the same level" is always 
false>.
Equation (IId) actually defines the actions of maps δt. Thus, "I is chosen to represent a change 
from a certain level to a level as low as possible, just above the zero level of L. δ2 carries a 
certain level x in assertion X just above the same level in δ 1(X) . δ 3 carries the level x-which is 
present in assertion X-just above the corresponding level in δ 2(X), and so on.
Equation (IIe) gives the rule of composition for maps δt.
Equation (IIf) states that any two assertions which have equal images under all maps δ t, are 
equal.
Equation (IIg) states that the application of the ‘transition’ map δ t  to the negation N of 
proposition X  leads to the negation of the  proposition, N(δ (X)),  if   i+j =n.
The nonlinear dynamic behaviour of a genetic network can also be intuitively pictured as an n- 
table or matrix with k columns, corresponding to the genes of the net, and with rows 
corresponding to the moments which are counted backwards from the present moment p. The 
positions in the table are filled with 0's, l's and letters i,j, . . ., n which stand for levels in the 
activity of genes. Thus, 1 denotes the i-th gene maximal activity. For example, with k = 3, the 
activity matrix of a gene network would be as shown in Table I.
Table I.  A table representation of the behavior of the particular genetic net 
Time
A
B
C
P
0
.1
i
P-ε
k
0
1
P-δ
1
0
1
6
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

…
The 0 in the first row and the first column means that gene A is inactive at time p; the 1 in the 
first row and second column means that C is active on the i-th level of intensity of gene at the 
same instant of time.
In order to characterise mutations of genetics networks one has to consider mappings of 
n-valued Lukasiewicz algebras. These lead, in turn, to categories of genetic networks that contain 
all such networks together with all of their possible transformations and mutations.
(D2) A mapping f: L
1
→L
2
 is called a morphism of Łukasiewicz algebras if it has the following 
properties:
The totality of mutations of genetic nets is then represented by a subcategory of Lukn – the 
category of n-valued Łukasiewicz algebras and morphisms among these, as discussed next in 
Section 3. 
A special case of n-valued Łukasiewicz algebras is that of centered Łukasiewicz algebras, that 
is, these algebras in which there exist (n-2) elements a1, a2,….an ε : (called centers), such that :
                       
δ (aj) 



−
≤
≤
−
−
≤
≤
=
2
,1
1
,0
n
i
j
n
for
j
n
j
for
If the activity of genes would be of the “all or none” type then we would have to consider genetic 
nets as represented by Boolean algebra. A subcategory of the category of Boolean algebras, B
1
, 
would then be represented by the totality of mutations of “all or none” type of genes. However, 
there exists equivalence between the category of centered Lukasiewicz algebras, Luk
C
. 
This equivalence is expressed by two adjoint functors:
7
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

  
LukC 
→

→

D
C
B1
LukC , 
 
 with the left adjoint functor C being both full and faithful (Georgescu and Vraciu). The above 
algebraic result shows that the particular case n = 2 (that is “all or none” response) can be treated 
by means of centered Łukasiewicz logic algebras, LukC.
3. Categories of Genetic Networks
Let us consider next categories of genetic networks. These are in fact subcategories of 
Lukn, ,the  category of Łukasiewicz n-logic algebras and their connecting morphisms. The 
totality of the genes present in a given organism—or a genome-can thus be represented as an 
object in the associated  category of genetic networks of that organism. Let us denote this 
category by N. There exists then a genetic network in N which corresponds to the fertilized 
ovum form which the organism developed. This genetic net will be denoted by 0, or G..
Theorem 1. The Category N of Genetic Networks of any organism has a projective limit. 
Proof. To prove this theorem is to give an explicit construction of the genetic net which 
realizes the projective limit. If  G1, G2,…,Gi are distinct genetic nets, corresponding to 
different  stages of development of a. certain organism, then let us define the Cartesian 
product of the last (l - 1) genetic nets 
2
=
∏l
i
 as the product of the underlying lattices 
L2, L3,…, Lp.  Correspondingly, we have now (l-1) tuples are formed with the sentences 
present in  L2, L3,…Lp, as members. The theorem is proven by the commutativity of the 
diagram
8
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

               
for any G
k
 and G
m
 in the sequence G
2
, G
3
,…,G
i
 , such that  m > k.  The commutativity of this 
diagram is compatible with conditions (M1), (M2) and (M3) that define morphisms of lattices. 
Moreover,
and one also has that G
i
 = 0.   Q.E.D.
This result shows that the genetic network corresponding to a fertilized ovum is the projective 
limit of all subsequent genetic networks-corresponding to later stages of development of that 
organism. Such an important algebraic property represents the ‘potentialities for development 
of a fertilized ovum’.
9
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

Theorem 2. Any family of Genetic Networks of N has a direct sum, and also a cokernel exists in N. 
The proof is immediate and stems from the categorical definitions of direct sum and cokernel 
(Mitchell,1965; and Baianu, 1970,1977 in the context of organismic models). The above two 
theorems show a dominant feature of the category of genetic nets. 
The algebraic properties of  N are similar to those exhibited by the category of all automata (sequential 
machines) A   and by its subcategory of (M, R)-systems, MR (for details see theorems 1 and 2, Baianu, 
1973).  
        Furthermore, Theorems 1 and 2 hint at the validity of a more fundamental conjecture. 
Conjecture 1.  There exist certain  adjoint functors  and weakly adjoint functors 
(Baianu,1970) between the category of genetic networks described here and the category of 
generalised (M,R)-systems characterized previously (Theorems 1 and 2 of Baianu, 1977, and 
Baianu, 1973, respectively). There are also certain Kan extensions of the generalised (M,R)-
systems category in the N, and Lukn, categories that could be constructed explicitely for 
specific equivalent classes of (M,R)-systems and their underlying, adjunct genetic networks
.  
Such Kan extensions may be restricted to the subcategory of  centered Łukasiewicz 
Logic Algebras and their Boolean-compatible dynamic transformations of (M,R)-systems, 
with the latter as defined by Rosen (1971, 1973).
4. Realizability of Genetic and Neural Networks
The genes in a given network  G  will be relabeled in this section by g1,g2,g3,……gN. The 
peripheral genes of G are defined as the genes of G which are not influenced by the activity of 
other genes, and that in their turn do not influence more than one gene by their activity. Such 
genes have connectivities that are very similar to those present in  random genetic networks, and 
could be presumably studied in  Łukasiewicz Logic extensions of  random genetic networks, 
rather than in strictly Boolean logic nets. The intermediate  case of centered  Łukasiewicz 
Algebra models of random genetic networks will thus provide a seamless link between various 
type of logic-based random networks, and also to Bayesian analysis  of simpler organism 
genomes, such as that of yeast, and possibly Archeas also.
The assertion A(t;0) in (1) is called  the action  of gene gA. The predicates which define the 
activities of genes comprise their syntactical class. As in the formalization of McCullouch and 
Pitts, a solution of G will be a class of sentences of the form:
10
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

                                                
with Pri  being a predicate expression which contains no free variable save z1, and such that 
St  takes on one of the values of the n-valued logic, except zero.
Given a predicate expression  
)
,
,...,
)(
(Pr
1
1
1
z
p
p
S
p
m
the functor S is defined by the following two equalities:
                       
          
with m being a natural number and s a constant sequence, then it is said to be realizable if there 
exists a genetic, or neural, network G and a series of activities such that :
                                 
has a non-zero logical value for sa1= A(0). Here the realizing gene will be denoted by gp1.
Two laws concerning the activities of the genes, which are such that every S which is realizable 
for one of them is also realizable for the other, will be called equivalent.
Equivalent genes may have additional algebraic structures in terms of topological grupoids
(Ehresmann, 1956; Brown, 1975) and subcategories of  Luk
n
 that contain such topological 
grupoids of equivalent genes, TopGd.
A genetic network will be called cyclic if each gene of the net is arranged in a functional 
chain with the same beginning and end.  In a cyclic net each gene acts on its next neighbor and 
is influenced by its precedent neighbor.  If a set of genes g1, g2, g3,…, g p of the genetic net 
11
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

G  is such that its removal from G  leaves G without cycles, and if no proper subset has this 
property, then the set is also called cyclic. The cardinality of this set is an index of the 
complexity of its behavior. It will be seen later that this index does not uniquely determine the 
complexity of behavior of a genetic network. Furthermore, such cyclic subnetworks of the 
genome may have additional algebraic structure that can be characterized by a certain type of 
algebraic groups that will be called genetic groups, and will be forming a category of Genetic 
Groups, GrG, with group transformations as group morphisms. GrG is obviously a subcategory 
of N, the category of genetic networks, or genomes. In its turn, the category N is a subcategory 
of the higher order Cell Interactome category, IntC, that includes all signaling pathways 
coupled to the genetic networks, as well as their dynamic transformations and other metabolic 
components and processes essential to cell survival, growth, development, division and 
differentiation. 
There is, therefore, in terms of the organizational hierarchy and complexity indices of 
the various categories of networks the following partial, and strict, ordering:
Automata Semigroup Category (ASG) <  MR < CtrLukn < GrG < TopGd < IntC <Lukn
This sequence of network structure models forms a finite, organizational semi-lattice of 
subcategories of network models in Lukn. Their classification can be effectively carried out by 
selecting the  Łukasiewicz Logic Algebras  as the subobject classifier in a  Łukasiewicz Logic 
Algebras Topos (Baianu et al, 2004) that includes the cartesian closed category (Baianu,1973) of 
all networks that has limits and colimits. A particularly interesting example is that of the TopGd 
category that will contribute certain associated sheaves of genetic networks with striking, 
‘emerging’ properties such as ‘genetic memory’ that perhaps reflects underlying holonomic 
quantum genetic proceeses, as well as related quantum automata reversibility properties, such as 
relational oscillations in genetic networks during cell cycling (Baianu, 1971), neoplastic 
transformations of cells and carcinogenesis (Baianu, 1971,1977).
12
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

(D3) An n-valued propositional expression (NTPE) designates a temporal propositional function 
(TPF) and is defined by the following recursion:
(NT1). A 1p1[z] is an NTPE if P1 is a predicate variable with n-possible logical values;  
(NT2). If  S1 and S2 are NTPEs containing the same free individual variable, so are S1 ∧S2, 
S1∨S2, S1.S2, and S1~S2. 
Note that these definitions have similar formal content as the corresponding ones of  McCullouch 
and Pitts (1943), except for the presence of n-logical values. As a consequence, one can prove 
the following three theorems.
Theorem 3.  Every genetic, net of order zero can be solved in terms of n-valued temporal 
propositional expressions (NTPE).
Theorem 4.  Every NTPE  is  realizable in terms of a genetic net of zero-th order.
Theorem 5. Any complex sentences S1 -built up in any manner out of elementary sentences of 
the form p(z1-zz)—(where zz is any numeral), by means of negation, conjunction, implication 
13
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

and logical equivalence), is an NTPE. 
   Si acquires the logical value of zero only when all of its constituents p(z1 - z0 ) have all zero 
logical value.  Moreover, if two or more genes influence the activity of the same gene then the 
influenced genes are called alterable.  The following Theorem 6 concerning alterable genes can 
be then inferred directly from the LM- logic algebra properties and the connectivity restrictions 
of alterable nodes of  such networks. 
Theorem 6.   Alterable genes can be replaced by cycles.
 (See also theorem VII and its proof in the original paper of McCullouch and Pitts, 1943).
For cyclic genetic nets of order  p one can adopt the construction method introduced by 
McCullouch and Pitts (1943). However, there will be no different sentences formed out of the 
pN1 by joining to the conjunction of some set of the conjunctions of the “negated” forms of 
each level of the rest. Consequently, the logical expression which is a solution of G, will have 
the form:
with i =1,2,. .., n- 3.zzn,  res (r, s)  being the residue of r mod s and zzp=ip.
In our case of LM-logic algebras the realizability of a set of Si objects is not simple as it was 
in the case of neural nets operating with Boolean logic; instead of just the two values of 
Boolean logic, one has n simultaneous conditions for the n distinct logical values of the LM. 
As a consequence, it is then possible that certain LM-based genetic networks will be able to 
‘take into account’ through their switching sequence dynamics and their levels of activities the 
future of their peripheral genes, thus effectively anticipating sudden threats to cell survival, 
and also exhibiting multiple adaptation behaviors in response to exposure to several damaging 
chemicals or mutagens, antibiotics, radiotherapy, etc. Thus, another index of complexity of 
behavior of genetic networks is the number of future peripheral genes which are taken into 
14
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

account by a specific realization of a network. In contrast to a feedback system, this will be 
called a feedforward system. Furthermore, the fact that the number of active genes, or simply 
the number or genes, is not constant in an organism during its development, but increases until 
maturity is reached, makes it difficult to apply directly the ‘purely’ logical formalization 
introduced in this section. 
However, the categorical and Łukasiewicz-Logic Topos formalization that was introduced in 
Section 2 can now be readily applied to developmental processes, and also efficiently solves 
such realizability problems through effective categorical construction methods that inolve: 
presheaves, sheaves, higher dimensional algebras, limits, colimits, adjoint functors and Kan 
extensions (Anderson, 2007). 
5. Conclusions and Discussion
One of the first successful applications of Logics to Biology was the use of predicate 
calculus for a dynamical description of activities in neural nets (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943),
That was subsequently further developed by several neural network theorists. Another 
significant application of related to Boolean Logic was the calculus of predicates which was 
applied by Nicolas Rashevsky (1965) to more general situations in relational biology and 
organismic set theory. Lőfgren (1968) introduced also a non-Boolean logical approach to the 
problem of self-reproduction. The characterization of genetic activities in terms of Łukasiewicz 
Logic Algebras that was here presented has only certain broad similarities to the well known 
method of McCulloch and Pitts (1943). There are major differences arising in genetic networks 
both from the fact that the genes are considered to act in a step-wise manner, as well as from 
the coupling of the genetic network to the cell interactomics through intracellular signaling 
pathways. The "all-or-none" type of activity often considered in connection with genes results 
as a particular case of the generalized description for n =2 in centered Łukasiewicz logic 
algebras. The new concept of a Łukasiewicz Topos expands the applications range of such 
models of genetic activities to whole genome, cell interactomics, neoplastic transformations and 
morphogenetic or evolutionary processes.
   Whereas neural networks have considerable fuzzier behaviours than the genetic networks of 
various cells in the same organism (other than neurons), their dynamics is not either merely 
chaotic  or completely random.  Moreover a deterministic  network model  such as  that  of 
McCulloch and Pitts (1943) appears to be more applicable to the genetic networks of simpler 
organisms, rather than to neural networks in higher organisms, with the exception of the 
presence of n-states and the incorporation of multi-valued operational logics in such adaptive 
15
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

genetic networks. Thus, the new concept of a Łukasiewicz Topos expands the possible range of 
models involving genetic activities to whole genome, epigenetics, as well as cell interactomics, 
neoplastic transformations, morphogenetic and evolutionary processes. 
The approach of genetic activities from the standpoint of  Łukasiewicz Logic algebras 
categories and Topoi leads to the conclusion that the use of n-valued logics for the description 
of genetic activities allows for the emergence of new algebraic and transformation properties 
that are in agreement with several lines of experimental evidence
(such as adaptability of genetic nets and feedforward, or anticipatory, processes), including 
evolutionary biology observations, as well as a wide array of cell genomic and interactomic 
data for the simpler  organisms, such as yeast and a nematode (C. elegans) species. In 
principle, and hopefully soon, in practice, such categorical- and Topos- based applications to 
cell genomes and interactomes will not be limited to the simpler organisms but will also 
include higher organisms such as Homo sapiens sapiens. 
Nonlinear dynamics of non-random genetic and cell networks can be thus formulated 
explicitely through categorical constructions enabled by Łukasiewicz Logic algebras that are 
in  principle  computable  through  symbolic  programming  on  existing  high  performance 
workstations and supercomputers even for modeling networks composed of huge numbers of 
interacting  ‘biomolecular’  species  (Baianu  et  al.,  2004).  Strategies  for  meaningful 
measurements and observations in real, complex biological systems (Baianu et al., 2004 a), 
such as individual human organisms, may thus be combined with genomic and proteomic 
testing on individuals and may very well lead to optimized, individualized therapies for life-
threatening diseases such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
On the other hand, one has to consider the fact that the problem of compatibility or 
solvability of complex models is further complicated by the presence of n-valued logics. 
The categorical notion of representable functor would correspond to the computability concept 
for genetic nets. This strongly indicates that the genetic nets are not generally equivalent to 
Turing machines as the neural nets are. However, the results of Section 3 show that only those 
genetic networks that are characterised completely by centered Łukasiewicz algebras may 
possess equivalent Turing machines. 
       The modelling framework introduced in Sections 2 and 3 in terms of categories, functors, 
higher dimensional algebra and Łukasiewicz Topos allows for the derivation of additional 
results concerning neural network development and neoplastic transformations of stem cells 
and tissues. 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, A. 2007. “Kan Extensions and Nonsensical Generalizations”. Preprint.
http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/VIGRE/index.html
16
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

http://www.math.uchicago.edu/~may/VIGRE/VIGRE2007/.../Anderson.pdf 
Baianu, I. 1970. "Organismic Supercategories: II On Multistable Systems."  Bull. Math.
Biophysics., 32:539-561.
Baianu, I. 1971 "Organismic Supercategories and Qualitative Dynamics of Systems."
Ibid., 33, 339-353.
Baianu, I. 1973. "Some Algebraic Properties of (M, R).Systems.", Bull. Math. Biol., 35.
213-217.
Baianu, I.C. 1977. “A Logical Model of Genetic Activities in Łukasiewicz Algebras: The Non-
linear Theory.” Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 39:249-258 (1977).
Baianu, I.C., J. Glazebrook, G. Georgescu and R.Brown. 2010. “Łukasiewicz-Moisil Many-
Valued Logic Algebra of Highly-Complex Systems in Biology and Medicine” BRAIN, vol. 1, 
pp.1-11; ISSN 2067-3957.
Carnap. R. 1938. "'The Logical Syntax of Language" New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. 
Georgescu, G. and C. Vraciu 1970. "On the Characterization of Łukasiewicz Algebras."       J. 
Algebra, 16 (4): 486-495.
Hilbert, D. and W. Ackerman. 1927. Grunduge der Theoretischen Logik, Berlin: Springer.
Lőfgren, L. (1968). "An Axiomatic Explanation of Complete Self-Reproduction", Bull.Math. 
Biophysics, 30: 317-348.
McCulloch, W and W. Pitts. 1943.  “A logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous 
Activity” Bull. Math. Biophys., 5, 115-133.
Mitchell, B. 1965. The Theory of Categories. Academic Press: New York and London.
Pitts, W. 1943. “The Linear Theory of Neuron Networks”, 5: 23-31.
Rashevsky, N. 1954. "Topology and Life: In Search of General Mathematical Principles in 
Biology and Sociology." Bull. Math. Biophysics, 16: 317-348.
Rosen, R.1958.a.”A Relational Theory of Biological Systems” Bull. Math. Biophys., 20:
245-260.
Rosen, R. 1958b. “The Representation of Biological Systems from the Standpoint of the 
Theory of Categories” Bull. Math. Biophys., 20: 317-341.
Rosen, Robert. 2001. “Essays on Life Itself “. New York: Columbia University Press, pp.221.
 Russel, Bertrand and A.N. Whitehead, 1925. Principia Mathematica, Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press.
Warner, M. 1982. Representations of (M,R)-Systems by Categories of Automata., Bull. Math. 
Biol., 44: 661-668.
17
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

Submitted to:  Studies in Computational Intelligence, 8-9 September 2011 
                           ISSN: 1860-949X, Springer
18
Nature Precedings : hdl:10101/npre.2012.7114.1 : Posted 3 Apr 2012

