UNDERSTANDING TEACHING FOR 
UNDERSTANDING IN THE 
MATHEMATICS CLASSROOM 
Sandra Folk 
A thesis submined in conformity with the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Education 
Department of C ~ c u l u m ,  
Teaching & Leamhg 
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto 
Ocopyright by Sandra Folk, 1999 

National Library 
of Canada 
Bibliothèque nationale 
du Canada 
Acquisitions and 
Acquisitions et 
Bi bliographic Services 
services bibliographiques 
395 Wellington Street 
395. rue Wellington 
OttawaON KlAON4 
OtiawaON KlAûN4 
Canada 
canada 
The author has granted a non- 
exclusive licence ailowing the 
National Library of Canada to 
reproduce, loan, distribute or seil 
copies of this thesis in microform, 
paper or electronic formats. 
L'auteur a accordé une licence non 
exclusive permettant à la 
Bibliothèque nationale du Canada de 
reproduire, prêter, distribuer ou 
vendre des copies de cette thèse sous 
la forme de microfiche/film, de 
reproduction sur papier ou su. format 
électronique. 
The author retains ownership of the 
L'auteur conserve la propriété du 
copyright in this thesis. Neither the 
droit d'auteur qui protège cette thèse. 
thesis nor substantial extracts fkom it 
Ni la thèse ni des extraits substantiels 
may be printed or otherwise 
de celle-ci ne doivent être imprimés 
reproduced without the author's 
ou autrement reproduits sans son 
permission. 
autorisation. 

UNDERSTANDING TEACHING FOR UNDERSTANDING IN THE 
MATHEMATICS CLASSROOM 
Sandra Folk, Doctor of Education, 1999 
Department of Curriculum, Teaching and M
g
 
University of Toronto 
Abstract 
North Amencan students' poor performance in mathematics and the controversy 
regarding how mathematics shouid be taught were the basis for tbïs interpretive study on 
teaching for understanding. The study inquired into teachers' practice, explored their 
beiiefs and views, and examineci their content knowledge in order to understand what 
teachers understand about teaching for understanding in the context of maîhematics. 
Factors within the context in which they teach weE also considered. Two comprehensive 
cases were developed within the framework of the study. The first focuses on a grade seven 
teacher who was at the beginning of his teaching career. The second concentrates on ari 
experienced grade five teacher who had taught for twenty five years. 
Data in the form of field notes, observation, tape recordings of daily classroom 
instruction and audio taped interviews were collecte- cver a four month period for each 
teacher. Key themes that emerged fiom the data, teachers' betiefs and views about the 
teaching and leaming of mathematics, teachers' content knowledge, teachers' perspective of 
understanding, how teachers promote understanding, how they perceive their role as teacher, 
and their style of teaching were discussed in order to develop detailed portraits of the 
participants. Factors of context that rnitigate against teaching for understanding were also 
addressed. 
Similar to other closely relateci studies in the iiteraturie, this study revealed that 
teachers' views of understanding may Vary and may not necessarily ùe congruent with those 
of the research litenhue and curriculum developers. The study also demonstrated that 
teachers may not have weii f o d  
images of what it means to teach for understanding. In 
addition, factors within the wntext that teachers work add to the chaiienge of teaching for 
understanding. Unlike other studies in the literature, this study demonstrated that language 
arts is an important referent for understanding what teachers understand about teaching for 
understanding. 

Table of Contents 
............................................................................... 
Abstract 
...................................................... 
Figures ....................... .. 
................................................................................. 
Tables 
Chapter 1 
Introduction ......................... .. 
...................................... 
Setting of The Problem ...................... ..... 
.............................. 
...................................................................................... 
The Study 
Overview of the Smdy ................. .... 
......................................... 
............................................................. 
Chapter 2 
Literature Review 
What is Understanding? ..................... ... 
..................................... 
What is Understanding in Mathematics? ......................... ........ 
.... 
Teaching for Understanding ........................ ... 
......................... 
Factors that Affect Teaching for Understanding ................................ 
Teachers' Beîiefs and Views .................... .... 
............................... 
Teachers' Knowledge ...................................................................... 
The Context in Which Teachers Create Their Practice ....................... 
............................................................................... 
Related Studies 
Chapter 3 
MetIiod 
The Research Approach . 
A Rational ................................... ........ ..... 
Selection of Participants ................... ... 
..................................... 
Role of the Researcher .................................................................... 
..................................................................................... 
The Setting 
................................................................................ 
Data Collection 
............. 
Field Notes ....................................................................... 
Sample from the Field Notes ............................................................ 
Analytic Notes and Reflections on Field Notes .................................. 
.................................................................................... 
Documents 
.......................................... 
......... 
Interviews 
.................................. 
.................................................................................. 
Data Analysis 
.............................................................. 
Tnistworthiness of the Data 
Presentation of the Data-Writing ....................................................... 
Chapter 4 
Preview of Eric and Melany .............................................. 
.............................................................................. 
Overview of E3ic 
Eric's Views of Understanding ....................... ... 
........................ 
Ovewiew of Melany ........................................................................ 
Melany's Views of Understanding ................................................. 
Chapter 5 
A Portrait of Melany's Life in the Classrmm .................. 
Melany's Approach to Language Arts ................................................ 
Melany's Approach to Mathematics ................................................... 
A Different Approach to Area ............................................................ 
What 1s Place Value About? .............................................................. 
................................ 
Science as Mathematics, Mathematics as Science 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge ....................................................... 

....................... 
Chapter 6 
A Portrait of Eric's LXe in the Clwn>om 
................................................................. 
Eric's Views on Teaching 
Eric's Views About Mathematics ...................................................... 
A "Hands On" Approach to Fractions - The Power of One ............... 
............................................ 
Teaching Multiplication with Fractions 
Visualizing Mixed Numbea and Improper Fractions ......................... 
.............................................................................. 
Chapter 7 
Ending 
The Context in which Teachers Create their Practie ........................... 
................................... ...............-.......-..--.... 
Pressure for Coverage 
.. 
............................................................................. 
The Curriculum 
.................................................................................... 
Bureaucrac y 
......................................... 
Textbooks and Teacher Resource Books 
.......................................................................................... 
S tudents 
................................................................... 
Reflections on the Study 

Figures 
Figure 1. 
Figure 2. 
Figure 3. 
Figure 4. 
Figure 5. 
Figure 6. 
Figure 7. 
Figure 8. 
Chart in Which Students Recorded Their Measurements 
Converting a Fraction to Lowest Terms 
A Series of Squares on the Dot Paper Transparency 
Eric's Version of the Rule for Making Fractions Equivalent 
Eric's Note on How to Multiply Fractions 
The Mixed Numkr 1 1/3 
The hproper Fraction 5/3 
The hproper Fraction 5/3 

Tables 
Table 1 
Summary of the Perspectives on Understanding 
Table 2 
Adaptation of Davis' (1978) Model of Understanding 
Table 3 
Adaptation of Davis' Model of Understanding 

1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
At the heart of the concern about students' performance in mathematics in North 
America lies a controversy regardhg how mathematics should be taught. Advocates of 
refonn favor an approach that promotes meaning and understanding in students' leamhg of 
mathematics. Traditionalists argue for a back-to-basics approach with its emphasis on 
proficiency with basic operations and the ability to apply rules. These differing views 
regardhg the nature of instruction and the implication for students' 1earning were the basis 
for this interpretive study which looks at elementary teachers' mathematical practice. The 
s tud y inquires into teac hers ' understanding of teaching for understanding in mathematics 
and the implications for their practice. 
It aIso considers factors chat affect that 
understanding and the realities of teaching in tbis way in the current educatioaal climite. 
As participant observer 1 spent a period of four months, almost daiiy, in each of two 
elementary teachers' classrooms. The cases 1 developed within the framework of this study 
portray these teachers' unique views and understandings of what it means to teach for 
understanding in rnathematics. In discussing issues relatai to the teachùig and leaming of 
mathematics this chapter sets a context for the study. It also provides an overview of the 
content and structure of subsequent cbapters in the thesis. 
Sening: of The ProbIem 
Mathematics education in North America is frequently characterized by inadequate 
student achievernent and declining participation in mathematics courses (Silver and Stein, 
1996). The public perception is that North American students do not measure up to their 
Japanese and Chinese counterparts. Much discussion is focused on students' poor resuits, 
particularly with higher level cognitive skills involving understanding and problem solving 
(Carpenter, Matthews, Luidquist, and Silva, 1984). Results from the second international 
assessrnent of educational progress in mathematics, The Second International Mathematics 

Smdy revealed that Canadian students ranked midway between other participating countries 
of the world even though Canada was at the top for spending (Lewington, 1992). 
Canadians traüed Taiwan and South Korea (Japan was not part of these sweys), but were 
ahead of the United States. In comparison to provinces such as Quebes, British Columbia, 
and Alberta, Ontario students scored the lowest in Lnathernatics in the international survey. 
Results indicated that students scored reasonably well in basic mathematics tasks, but not in 
sophisticated problem solving. Findings from The T ' d  International Mathematics and 
Science Study, the Iargest of its kind in the worId, conflmed thai Japan, China and Korea 
are stiil ahead of Canada, and Ontario students ranked the lowest compared to their 
provincial counterparts (SrnaIl, 1 996). Among the five participating provinces Bntis h 
Columbia students scored the highest, then Alberta and Newfoundland, followed by New 
Brunswick and Ontario (Robitaiiie, Taylor, Orpwood (1996). Despite the limitations of 
international surveys (Silver and Kenney, 1995), public perception is that North American 
students are not measuring up to their Japanese and Chinese counterparts. 
As noted, Ontario students' test results in mathematics have been a concern for the 
advocates of reform and those who favor a more traditional approach to education. Both 
interest groups attribute students' poor performance to the curriculum and to the nature of 
classroom instruction and are calling for change. The traditionalists, such as the Coalition 
of Parents and People for Education and other critics of education favor a back-to-basics 
approach, not only for maîhemaîics, but for ali subject areas. As Nelson, Carlson, and 
Palonsky (1 993) suggest, "Not only do we need to reemphasize the fundamental skiiis in 
elementary school; we need to insist upon ngorous evaluation of the skills before we allow 
students to continue in school" (p. 158). Many believe that success in mathematics is 
measured by students' proficiency with the basic operations and their ability to apply d e s .  
The growth of remedial leaming centers such as Kumon mathematics, which promote this 
kind of leaniing, is testimony to their belief. Yeî, a widely used form of instruction which 

relies on explanation and practice, evident in a majority of classrooms, does not necessarily 
foster mathematics achievement (Lo, Wheately, and Smith, 1994). 
Closely tied to concems regarding the content and how it should be delivered is the 
issue of assessment. Proponents of the back-to-basics approach to learning believe that the 
absence of system-wide testing in Ontario for the past twenty years has been a factor in the 
decline of students' achievement. Tbey argue for unifonnity of teaching and 
standardization of content that this type of testing is believed to improve. However, as 
Landsberg (1995) points out, "Standardized tests have nothing to do with improved leamuie 
or intellectual achievement. (In fact they can consume enonnous and futile amounts of tirne, 
effort and money.)" (pK 1). According to Stake (1995), standardized test results tell ver- 
iittle about students' thought processes and how theu leamhg is progressing. It is also 
suggested that teachers' practice tends to be influenceci by theu perceptions of the content 
of externally mandami tests, especiaily when they view thaî the test resuits have important 
consequences for them and their students (Romberg, Zarinnia, and Williams, 1989). 
Moreover, standardized tests are quite limited as guides for instructional decision making 
(Siiver and Kenney, 1995). 
As a voiœ of the refoxm, The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 
recomrnends that the long-standing tradition of school mathematics be rieplaceà by an 
approach that emphasizes teaching for understanding (Prawat, Remillard, Ritnam, and 
Heaton, 1992). However, t&is way of teaching, which 
stresses "doing", raîher rhan 
"knowing that" (National Council of Teachers of Maîhematics, 1989), is extremely complex 
(Hiebert, 1986) and mcuit 
to achieve, as this study dernonstrates. In Gardner's (1993) 
view, teaching for understanding is challenging for schooling and for society. For the 
teacher, it requires teaching in more intricaîe ways than simply transmitting information. 
For the leamer, it suggests a need for flexibility and tboughtfd engagement, rather than ski11 
development and memorization. 

Most teachers believe that they teach for understanding (Byers and Herscovics, 
1977) and this may be problematic as the following illustrates. Firstly, there is a lack of 
consensus regarding what it means to teach for understanding. As Cohen and Bail (1!3!3ûa, 
b), Gardner (1993), and Prawaî (1989), point out, teachers vary in their perceptions of what 
it means to teach for understanding. 
Moreover, their views may not necessarily be 
congruent with those of the research community and curriculum developers. Secondly, 
many teachers are steeped in their traditional views of teaching and learning rnaîhematics 
(Cohen and BA, 19% 
1990b). The narrow perspective and limiteci understanding of 
mathematics that teachers have developed, as a result of their early classroorn learning 
(Lortie, 1975; Zeichner and Gore, 1990), have impiications for their practice. 
My 
experiences with teachers as a consultant and teacber educator are congruent with these 
views of the literature (Cohen and Bail 1990a, I990b; Lortie, 1975; Zeichner and a r e ,  
1990). In a majonty of classrooms, often 1 have seen mathematics presented as a collection 
of facts and procedures (Gregg, 1995; Romberg, 1992) where memorization rather than 
construction of knowledge is stressed. 
Projects such as the Summer Math for Teachers Program at Mount Holyoke 
College (Bail, 1996) further demonstrate how teachers' early experiences affect their 
practice in mathematics. Many teachers who participated in the project, particuiariy those 
who taught elementary children, reported that their experiences as students were so negative 
that they chose not to study mathematics beyond their middle years of high school. Tbe 
teachers also taiked about how unprepared they felt and how they lacked the necessary 
resources to help their own students understand or do mathernatics. 
Many of the prese~ce teachers that 1 have taught frequently talked about their 
anxieties and the confidence they lacked in their ability to teach mathernatics. In some 
instances, students who were mathernatics majors were af'raid to teach elementary children. 
The story of Tania is particularly compeliing. Pnor to coming to the faculty of education, 
she had studied calculus for two years. %%en 
faced with the prospect of teaching a lesson 

on multiplication of fractions to a grade eight class, she was overcorne with fear. AU she 
couid think about were the difficulties with naftions and decimals she had expenenced as 
an elemen tary student. 
In summary, 1 have focussed on concerns regardhg the teaching and leaming of 
mathematics for educatioa today. The foilowing section provides an overview which maps 
out the organization of a study that inquires into teachers' practice in mathematics. 
The Studv 
Rogers (1995) suggests that "Any inquiry is set within a context that gives shape 
and meaning to its questions and interpretations" (p. 6). In the interpretive tradition, this 
study is designed to inqWre into what it is bat two teacbers understand about teaching for 
understanding in mathematics. in so doing, it takes an indepth look at their classroom 
practice and explores their views on teaching for understanding in mathematics. 
The 
intricate connection of beliefs and content knowledge and their effect on teaching for 
understanding, dong with issues of context, are also examined. 
The study focuses on two elementiuy teachers whom 1 came to know through my 
work as a consultant and teacher educator. Tbeir varïed professional experience and their 
comfort level with my presence in their classrooms were factors that motivated me to invite 
these two teachers to participate in this study. One teacher was an expenenced pedagogue, 
who had spent twenty years in the classroom working with both adults and children. At the 
time of the study she was teaching grade five and had been for the previous seven years. 
The other teacher, who was just beginning bis career, was teaching grade seven for the 
second tirne. 1 spent four months, almost M y ,  observing in each teacher's classroom so 
that 1 might corne to lem about their practice and their understanding of teaching for 
understanding. 1 will talk further about these teachers as the study unfolds. In addition, 1 
wili describe my role as participant observer (Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992) and discuss 
the methodology 1 employed to gather and interpret the necessary data for the study. 

Because this study seeks to understand and interpret how two teachers "constnxct 
their worid around them" (Glesne and Peshkin, 1992, PA), an uiterpretive approach to 
inquiry seemed appropriate. The open and emergent nature of such an approach "sets the 
stage for discovery" (Glesne and Peshkin. 1992 p.6) of what it is that teachers understand 
about the complexities of teaching for understanding and the implications for their practice. 
It also allows for multiple means of data collection. The thick, rich description characteristic 
of interpretive inquiry is weli suited for capturing the meaning perspectives of participants in 
particular situations. To preserve the unique character, Life hîstory, professional experience, 
and work context of participants, separate case studies are developed. As Goode and Hatt 
(1 952) suggest, " The case study ... is a way of organizing social data so as to presexve the 
unit;trv character of the social object being studied" (p.33 1). 
However, for the sake of 
consistency a similar structure and format were employed for the data gaihering and 
analysis phases, and for the final write up. 
Like other cases in the fiterature that focus on teacbing for understanding in 
mathernatics, this study also inquires into teachers' practice and their understanding of this 
complex phenornenon. However, it ciiffers in that it provides an in-depth portrait of two 
elementary teachers' practice and their understanding of teaching for understanding. As I 
noted earlier, 1 spent four months, almost daily, in each teacher's classroom. The study also 
looks at factors of context that both support and mitigate against teaching for 
understanding. A detaiied discussion of comparable cases in the rieview of the literature 
uncovers M e r  differences that exist. The discussion also highlights that there is a paucity 
of comprehensive cases thaî fofus exclusively on whaî teachen understaad about teaching 
for understanding. This study then, as one smaii piece of the research on understanding, 
will add to the body of knowledge regarding cognitions and context relatexi to teaching for 
understanding. Momver, it wiU help fill the need for more "schools-based" msearch in 
mathematics (Goldin, 1993) and "feed the development of increasingly useful thwries of 
mathematics teaching and leaming" (Hiebert and Carpenter, 1992). The study, wbich is 

based in teachers' practice, will provide nvo more cases on teacbing for understanding that 
may be used by other researchers and practitioners in the research and educational 
community . 
Overview of the Studv 
The thesis is organized so that in Chapter Two a review of the literature looks at 
relevant research that has been conducted on teaching for understanding (Alkin, 1992; 
Cohen, McLaughlui, and Talbert, 1993; Hiebert and Carpenter, 1992; Roulet, 1998). It aiso 
provides evidence of the need for more comprehensive case studies that concentrate on the 
problem of what teachers understand about teaching for understanding and the context for 
that teaching. According to Gardner and Boix-Mansilla (1994). "There have only been 
scattered attempts to define wtiat is meant by this phrase baching for understanding] and 
set up programs that explicitly address this goal" (p. 2 0 ) .  
Chapter Three provides a detailed discussion of the methodological features of the 
smdy and the research approach. Selection of the participants, settïng, role of the researcher, 
data collection, data analysis and ethical considerations are discussed. Measures to ensure 
the credibility (Janesick, 1992) of the smdy are also addresseci in the chapter. As I 
previously suggested, an interpretive approach was selecied as it ailowed for an indepth 
look into a phenornenon as cornplex and chdenging as teaching for understanding and 
provided for the thick, nch description necessary for capturing the rneaning perspectives of 
the participants as they constructed the world around them. It is from an interpretive 
perspective then that 1 developed the foiiowing questions which h
e
 
this study. 
a) What does it mean to teach for understanding in the context of the mathematics 
classroom? 
b) What are the implications of teachers' perceptions of what it means to teach for 
understanding? 

C) What is the nature of the context in which teachers create their practice in 
mathematics? 
These three questions provide a basis for the development of this study which fiords the 
reader an opportunity to l e m  about what it means to teach for understanding in 
mathematics. 
Prior to the presentation and interpretation of the &ta in Chapters Five and Six, a 
detailed pichue of the two teachers is presented in Chapter Four. Inciuded in the chapter is 
a prehninary discussion of these teachers' views of the concept of understanding. The 
presentation and interpretation of the data in Chapters Five and Six are intended to address 
the frrst two questions that guide this study. The comprehensive portraits that emerge in 
these two chapters allow the reader to make a comection with the participants while coming 
to understand what it me,ms to teach for understanding in the context of mathemaîics. To 
answer the third question, the ha1 chapter concentrates on issues of context that both 
mitigate and support teachers' practice. A discussion of the problematic nature of teaching 
for understanding and the Iieality of teaching in this way in today's educational climate is 
included. Personal reflections and ideas for future research in this a
.
 
of teacber education 
are addressed as 1 conclude the thesis. 

Chapter 2 
Literature Review 
This interpretive study, which is based in teachers' practice, seeks to understand 
what it means to teach for understanding in mathematics. As suggested in Chapter One. 
teaching for understanding is complex, challenging, and open to broad interpretation, which 
is reflected in the diverse views of the literature. The purpose of this chapter is to present 
these views. The chapter also discusses factors that affect teac hers ' understanding about 
what it means to teach for understanding. These factors, teachers* beiiefs about teaching 
and leaming, teachers' content knowledge, and the context in which teachers create their 
practice are important as they are the key concepts that frame this study. Studies of others 
who have conducted research on this complex phenomenon are also addressed. These 
studies, whic h are closely tied to this research, provide a context for lhis inquiry . They also 
demonstrate that there is a paucity of comprehensive case studies that focus exclusively on 
what teachers understand about teaching for understanding. 
In order to do justice to this review of the iiterature, I fmt need to talk about the 
concept of understanding as it is at the heart of what it means to teach for understanding. 
Like teaching for understanding, it too is a complex idea, and "What is understanding?" is 
a question that is not easily answered (Perkins, 1993). 
What is Understanding? 
In education as in everyday iife the term "understanding" is often liberaliy used to 
represent a range of ideas. For example, in a discussion regarding what it means to 
understand in mathemaiics, Byers (1980) suggests that understanding wiii have different 
meanings depending on teachers* use. Some teachers in speaking about the progress of 
their students will Say "The student doesn't understand." 
What they really mean is that 
"The student does not comprehend the question" (Byers, 1980). There are other teachers 
who wiii use the tenn as a way of describing students' problem solving ability. They will 

say that a student who is able to take a key step in solving a non-routine problem, or who is 
able to grasp quickly the main idea of a piece of matbematics, understands. Sieqinska 
(1994) points out thaî in the context of mathematics understanding may be used to talk 
more generaliy about understanding 'mathematical concepts', and more speciticaily about 
understanding concepts such as number, quantity, volume, function, limit of sequence, linear 
independence of vectors. She adds that other things such as patterns and phenornena a~ 
aiso objects of understanding. 
A snidy which exploreci the nature of scientific understanding in "in-school" and 
"out-O f-SC hool" contexts provides further evidence. In this study Anderson and Roth 
(1989) noted that a discrepancy existed between researchers' and students' interpretation of 
the concept of understanding. According to students, understanding meant being prepared 
to answer r
d
 
questions. For the researchers it was a more complex and intellectually 
active process of conceptuali;rirîion. The study also revealed that students' "in- SC hool" 
understanding of science did not fit with "out-O f-SC hool" usage of scientific knowledge. 
Anderson and Roth (1989) argue that, in fact, many students claimed to "understand" 
scientXc topics when they actuaiiy did not. My experience with children in dassroorns, in 
the ara of maîhematics, is congruent with tbe findings of this science based study. Like 
Anderson and Roth (1989)' I have found that students' (if not teachers') views of what it 
means to understand in mathematics differed from mine. Many viewed understanding in 
mathematics as the ability to reduce knowledge to a list of facts to be memorized in order to 
complete a particular task. For me, understanding is a more complex and conceptuaüy 
challenging process as the foiîowing demonstrates. When elementary students successfully 
perform operations with rnoney, teachers assume that they "understand" 
its part-whole 
relationship. 
1 believe thaî students know how to figure out caiculations with money 
because of its importance and use in real Ise, but many lack a deep understanding. When 1 
suggest that teachers ask students to express different arnounts such as $1.09 or $0.62 in 
fiactional fonn to show their understanding of its part-whole relationship, students generally 

are unable to do so. They f d  to understand that one dollar is the same as a hundred 
hundredths and that a part of a dollar can be expressed as a fiaction out of one hundred. 
What is Understanding in Mathematics? 
Early in the nineteenth century, in debates about school mathematics, Warren 
Colburn defended understanding and discovery as the avenue to leaming arithmetic in his 
book, First Lessons in Anthmetic on the Plan of Pestalozzi, with Some Improvements 
(1821). His conception of understanding emphasized the importance of mental discipline, 
the emerging theory of that time. Colburn argued that "students would understand 
arithmetic if they were allowed to discover its rules" (Sztajn, 1995, p. 377). He believed 
that through a series of specialiy chosen examples purposefidiy arranged in a sequence of 
increasing d=culty, students would develop their own methods of solving problems. The 
d e s  that govem arithmetic would then emerge for students from these methods. Toward 
the end of the century, McLellan and Dewey (1895) advocated for the need to develop 
understanding rather than skill in mathematics. They argued thai d e r n a t i c s  was not a 
disjointed enterprise and would be best understood if it was seen as a subject in relation to 
other fields of activity (Brown, Cooney, and Jones, 1990). 
In so doing they designed a 
curriculum for mathematics to improve students' level of understanding beyond that which 
existed in classroorns at the time (Hiebert and hfewe, 1986). 
For Poincaré (1956) 
understanding in mathematics went beyond logical reasoning and was detennuied by one's 
ability to grasp a mathematicai argument in one global idea As with other mathernaticians 
at the tum of the centuxy, Poincaré viewed understanding in mathematics as an "all-or- 
nothing" phenornenon (Byers, 1980), devoid of partial understanding. 
Browneil (1935) also argued for the need for understanding in mathematics. He 
opposed the idea of instruction which saw leaming as the acquisition of a senes of isolated 
skills or " the mechanistic mastery of procedures" (Brown et al., 1990, p.640). According 
to Brownell, "meaning" was the key in children's learning of arithmetic as it aüowed them 
to see the sense in what they leam. For example, chiidren would see why four times five is 

twenty based on what is known about the meaning of those numbers and on the nature of 
multiplication as repeaîed addition (Brown et al.). 
In Browneii's view, meaning was 
derived from witbin the comectedness of mathematics itseif and encouraged understanding. 
The goal of instruction then was "to make arithmetic l e s  a challenge to the pupil's memory 
and more a challenge to his intelligence" (Browneii, 1935, p.3 1). 
More recent theories have advanced beyond the "all- or-nothing" phenomenon 
(Byers, 1980; Skemp, 1987), acknowledging that there are different levek (Byers, 1980) 
and degrees (Bacbouse, 1978) of understanding. Holt (1964) and Van Engen (1953) 
viewed unders tanding as a continuum which accounted for students' partial understanding 
of concepts and ideas. To help teachers leam what students really know as opposed to what 
they might give the appearnnce of knowing, Hoit (1964) developed the foiiowing seven 
point iist that teachers could use in planning instruction and assessing learning. 
I feel 1 understand something if and when 1 c m  do some, at least, of the 
foiiowing: (1) state it in my own words; (2) give examples of it; (3) 
recognize it in various guises and circurnstances; (4) see connections 
between it and other facts or ideas; (5) make use of it in various ways; (6) 
foresee some of its consequences; (7) state its opposite or converse. 
(p. 36-37) 
According to Holt this iist was ody a beginning in assessing students' understanding. 
Van Engen's (1953) approach is different. In a discussion regarding the 
development of concepts Van Engen taiks about the "meaning" of understanding. 
H e  
points out that what is meant by understanding is different from the "meaning" of 
meaning. According to Van Engen, understanding is "more nearly a process of integrating 
concepts, placing them in a certain knowledge according to a set of cnteria ... 
Understanding is an organizational process" (p. 76). Van Engen notes, wben a student 
says " 1 know what you mean but 1 do not understand it," tbe student might know what to 
do, but not know why it should be done. 
Skemp's (1976) two tiered mode1 also 
corroborates that understanding is not uni-dimensional. His mode1 (Skemp, 1976), which 

applies both to leamhg and teaching (Byers, 1980), delineates two categories of 
understanding: instrumental and relational. Instrumental understanding is based on a 
student's ability "to apply niles [of mathematics] without reason" (Byers, 1980). 
Relational understanding, which according to Skemp ( 1976) was deeper than instrumental 
understanding, was based on a student's ability "to deduce d e s  from more general 
mathematical relationships" (Byers and Herscovics, 1977, p. 24). 
Students who 
demonstrated relational understanding would know "what to do and why". Byers and 
Herscovics (1977) extendeû Skemp's (1976) classification system and added two more 
levels of understanding, intuitive and formai understanding. According to the tetrahedral 
model they developed, a student might have at any one tirne a mixture of these different 
types of understanding of a particular topic. Like Skemp, Davis (1 978) proposed a model 
which postulated levels of understanding. His model was based on the moves that teachers 
make in the process of instruction. Davis (1978) notes that moves teachers make when 
teaching mathematical concepts such as place value, exponent, or triangle are different from 
those they make when teaching children to become skilled at canying out a procedure such 
as long division, bisecting a line, or measuring an angle. These moves could be used as a 
model for planning instruction and assessing students' knowledge. Byers (1980) suggests 
that Davis' rnodel is important because of it' s ability to evaluafe systematically a student 's 
understanding of a mathematical topic. 
According to Hiebert and Carpenter (1992). the idea of understanding as making 
cognitive connections is a long standing theme in mathematics. Haylock (1982) explains 
that models based on this theme ailow for a broad specauni of degrees or levels of 
understanding of mathematicai concepts. In his view, "The more connections the learner 
can make between the new experience and previous experiences, the greater and 
consequently the more useful the understanding" (Haylock, 1982, p. 54). 
Similady, 
Hiebert and Carpenter (1992) suggest that "mathematics is understood if its mental 
representation is part of a network of representations. The degree of understanding is 

determined by the number and strength of the connections" (p. 67). Good, McCaslin and 
Reys ( 1992) also conceptuaiize understanding in mathematics in terms of a student's ability 
to make connections. in their view, "To achieve understanding, students must l e m  not only 
the individual elements in a network of related content but also the connections between 
them, so that they can explain them in their own words and can access and apply it 
appropriately to solve problems" (p. 128). Carey, Fennema, Carpenter, and Franke (1995) 
add that there are universals, irrespective of culture, regardhg how people corne to 
understand certain basic arithmetic ideas. 
Pirie and Kieren (1989) depict understanding in mathematics as a growing process 
which is leveiled and recursive. It is leveiied in the sense that each level is not the same as 
the previous level, and recursive in that each Ievel is not defmed in terms of itself. 
The 
following is a sumrnary of Pirie's and Kieren's (1989) theory of transcendent recursion. 
Mathematical understanding can be ctiaracterized as IeveUed but non-linear. 
It is a recursive phenornenon and recursion is seen to occur when thinking 
moves between levels of sophistication .... lndeed each Ievel of understanding 
is contained within succeeding levels. Any particular level is dependent on 
the fonns and processes within and, further, is constrained by those without. 
(p. 8) 
Gardner (1993) defmes understanding as "having sufficient grasp of concepts, 
principles, or skills so that you can bring them to bear on new problems and situations" (p. 
21). He notes that there are three kinds of understanding: intuitive understanding of the 
young child, understanding where the leamer is only able to apply knowledge in a very 
explicit context, and genuiae understanding which constitutes expertise. Tbe foliowing is a 
description of genuine understanding. "The capacity to use current knowledge, concepts, 
and skills to illwninate new problems or unanticipated issues" (Gardner and Boix- Mamilla, 
1994, p. 200). It is suggested that 
"genuine understanding has been achieved if an 
individual proves able to apply knowledge in new situations, without applying such 
knowledge erroneously or inappropriately; and if he or she can do so spontaneously, 
without specific instruction to do so" (Gardner and Boix- Mansilla, 1994, p. 200). This 
performance perspective of understanding is at the core of an integrated curriculum project 

Gardner (1 993) and his colleagues designed to promote understanding within and beyond 
the disciplines. Perkins and Blythe (1994) pointed out that fiom a "performance 
perspective" understanding was " a matter of king able to do a variety of thought- 
demanding things with a topic - W<e explaining, finding evidence and examples, 
generalizing, applying concepts, anaiogizing and representing the topic in a new way" (p. 5). 
It is evident from the previous discussion that "What is understanding?" is not 
easy to answer. Views of the research reflect its varied and broad interpretation. Some 
rnodels conceptualize understanding as an "dl-or-nothing" dichotomy. 
Others use 
multiple categories. There are models of understanding which are based on theories of 
instruction. Others focus on theories of leaming, which Byers (1980) believes are more 
pIausible. Sometimes the concept of understanding is developed within the framework of a 
subject specific project. In other instances a more global view of understanding is promoted 
as in Project Zero (Gardner, 1993). The literatufe also reveals that understanding could also 
be classified according to students' ability to make cognitive connections. My view of 
understanding is congruent with the multiple categones theory which postulates that there 
are different leveIs (Byers, 1980) and degrees (Backhouse, 1978) of understanding. It is 
also consistent with Byer's (1980) suggestion that models which focus on theories of 
learning are more credible. Moreover, the idea of understanding as making cognitive 
connections (Hiebert and Carpenter, 1992) fits with my interpretation of what it means to 
understand not only in mathemaîics, but for leaming genemily. In the table that foilows 1 
provide a summary of previously discussed theones that defme understanding according to 
categories. This table serves as a usehil orgimbzr for connecting views of the literahin with 
a discussion of the two participants in Chapters Four, Erve and Six. Now t
h
 1 have 
focused on the concept of understanding and f m s  which highlight its problematic 
nature, 1 move to a discussion of teaching for understanding. 

Table 1 
Summarv of the Pers~ectives on Understanding 
Author 
Holt (1964) 
Van Engen (1 953) 
- -  
Skemp (1 976) 
3yers and Herscovics 
( 1977) 
Davis (1 978) 
Haylock (1982) 
Hiebert and Carpenter 
( 1 992) 
Applies to teaching and learning. 
Provides seven point Iist for assessing student learning and 
planning instruction. 
Applies to learnïng. 
Defines understanding as a process of integrating and organizùig 
concepts according to a set of critena which are unidentified 
~nd&tanding is diffmtiated h m  
rneaning. 
Applies to teaching and leaming. 
Distinguishes two types of understanding. 
Instrumentai understanding - The ability to apply an appropriate 
remembered rule to the solution of a problem without knowing why 
the mie works. 
Relational Understanding - ïhe ability to deduce rules or 
procedures h m  more general mathematical relationships - what to 
do and why. 
Applies to teaching and learning. 
D e m i  four levels of understanding. 
The ability to apply an appropriate remembered rule to the 
solution of a problem without howing why the rule works. 
The ability to deduce rules or procedures fiom more general 
mathematicai relationships - what to do and why. 
ve U
-
 
The ability to solve a problem without prior analysis of the 
problem. 
The ability to connect mathematical symbolisrn and notation 
with relevant mathematical ideas and to combine these ideas 
into chahs of reasonin~. 
Applies to teaching. 
Descni understanding as a process of organiziag and integrating 
knowledge according to a set of "moves" teachers make in the 
pmcess of instniction. 
Moves are the logicai things teachers do in teaching mathematics. 
Classifies understanding according to a taxonomy of concepts, 
generdizations, procedures, and number facts. 
Applies to learning 
Understanding is the ability to make cognitive connections. The 
more connections the leamer can make between the new experience 
and the previous experience, the deeper the understanding. 
Applies to leaming. 
Mathematics is undentood if its mental reprcsentation is part of a 
network of representations. The degree of understanding is 
detennined by the number and strennth of the comections. 
- 
Applies to leaming. 
Understanding is determined by a student's ability to make 
connections and apply connected ideas in one's own words to 
problem solving. 

1 
( 
as the previous one and recursive in that each level is not defined in ( 
Au thor 
L 
Pirie and Kieren (1989) 
Mode1 
Applies to learning. 
Describes understanding as a growing process that is levelled and 
recursive. It is levelled in the sense that each level is not the same 
- Descn'bes 3 kinds of understanding: 
a) intuitive understanding of the young child who applies theones 
about the wor1d prorniscuously. 
b) Contcxt specific understanding of the student who can use 
knowiedge in a very lirnited way. 
c) Genuine understanding in which knowledge is applied 
correctly and spontaneously in new situations. 
Gardner (1 9 3 )  
Teaching for Understanding 
In a discussion about whaî it means to teach for understanding, Alkin (1992) 
suggests that teachers need to do more than just present information. He points out that if 
true understanding is to be achieved, "teachers need to induce concepnial change in 
students, not simply infuse knowledge into a vacuum" (Aikin, 1992, p. 1383). In so doing, 
teachers need to insure that students' misconceptions are corrected in order to prevent the 
distortion and fragmentation of new Ieaming. Similarly, Anderson and Roth (1989) point 
out that understanding in science involves a process of conceptual change since students 
frequently enter science instruction with ways of understanding that are substantiaiiy 
different fiom tnie scientific understanding. In order to promote meaningfbl understanding, 
Anderson and Roth (1989) suggest that appropriate academic goals and weii designed 
instruction are needed. They add that instruction should take the form of scaffolded 
dialogue and academic woric in a comrnunity of leamers. G d  
et al. (1992) also agree that 
teaching for understanding bbinvolves inducing conceptual change in students" (p. 130). In 
their view, interactive discourse and thoughtfiil discussion between teacher and student and 
among students are important for students' construction of meaning that will lead to clear 
terms of itself. 
Applies to leming. 
Defines understanding as having sufficient grasp of concepts, 
principles, or skills so that they can be applied to new situations 
understanding. They recommend that teachers aiiow sufficient time for this complex 

process. Because understanding involves iinking new knowledge to existing knowledge, 
teachers also need to pay attention to what students h o w  at different stages of the leaming 
process (Fe~erM, Carpenter, and Peterson, 1989). Good and Brophy ( 199 1) emphasize 
that "depth" rather than "breadth" is important when teaching for understanding. From 
the perspective of teachers' subject matter knowledge, Ball (1991a) suggests the foUowing 
regarding what is needed to teach for understanding. 
Teaching for understanding entails keeping wide range of considerations in 
mind: about the substance of the content, about the ways in which the nature 
and discourse of mathematics are represented, and about social and culturai 
aspects of mathematics. Teachers' capacity and inclination to weave togekr 
these different considerations is a critical part of teaching mathematics for 
understanding, one that goes beyond simply knowing or king aware of 
certain things. (p. 8 1) 
In an interim report for a project on educating for understanding, Gardner and Boix- 
Mansua (1994) noted that teaching for understanding was grounded in four essentiai 
elements that interact dynamidy with each other. The fmt element is essential questions 
or generative issues. According to Gardner and Boix-Mansilla (1994) these questions or 
issues need to be rich and engaging topics of interest for students and non students. The 
second element is the goals of understanding. Any course, lecture, or exercise needs to have 
one or more of these goals that specifies whaî it is that teachers want students to understand 
as a result of their participation. The third element is the performances of understanding 
which "specify just what students need to do in order to demonstrate that they have in fact 
achieved requisite understanding" (p. 213). The k t  element is ongoing assessments. 
Performances of understanding need to continuously assess stuCents' understanding, rather 
than king "one-shot" tests. 
These views of the research on teaching for understanding that 1 have just presented 
are consistent with recommendations and perspectives of professional organizations such as 
The Nationai Council of Teachers of Mathernatics. They are also consistent with my views 
on what it means to teach for understanding. In guidelines such as The Curriculum and 

Evduation Standards for School Mathematics (NCI'M, 1989) and The Professional 
Standards for Teaching Mathematics (NCïM, 1991), The National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics encourages teaching for understanding and higher order applications. They 
advocate a kind of instruction that emphasizes "doing" rather than "knowing that", as I 
do. The guidehes also recommend that teachers provide opportunities for students to 
explore concepts and ideas, and to create knowledge in the course of active engagement with 
the discipline. Perspectives of the research aiso fit with policy refom efforts such as the 
Mathematics Framework for W o m i a  Public Schools, Kuidergarten Through Grade 
Twelve (CSDE, 1985) undertaken to affect change in mathematics instruction, which 
emphasizes not only the "how" 
but the "why" of mathematics (Peterson, 1990a). 
According to the vision of the Mathematics Framework for Califoniia Public Schools, 
Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (CSDE, 1985) teaching for understanding emphasizes 
"the relationships among mathematical siciils and concepts and leads students to approach 
mathematics with a cornmon sense attitude, understanding not oniy how but also why skills 
are applied" (p. 12). The twelve guiding principles of the Mathemaiics Frameworks 
(CSDE, 1985) encourage teachers to fafiiitaîe and support students as they becorne active 
leamers and constmct their own understanding of mathematics. 
The previous discussion has provided views of the Literatlve on what it means to 
teach for understanding. These views, which are congruent with my interpretation of 
teaching for understanding, highlight the complexity and challenges for teaching in this 
way. It is evident that teachuig for understanding is not a simple undertaking. As Gardner 
(1993) points out, "In practice, it's realiy quite diff~cult" (p. 21). In the followiag section 1 
talk about factors that affect teaching for understanding. The discussion further illuminates 
its complex nature. 

Factors that Affect Teac h i n ~  
for Understanding 
It is suggested that teachea' beliefs and views about teaching and learning (Rawat, 
1989), teachers' content knowledge about the subject domain (Prawat, 1989) and 
dimensions of context (Anderson and Roth, 1989; Cohen and Ba& 1990% 1990b; Gardner, 
1993; Good et al., 1992; Prawat, 1989; Schœnfeld, 1988) are factors that affect teachers' 
understanding of what it means to teach for understanding and their practice. Although 
research on the importance of resources such as knowledge, skilis and beliefs that teachers 
bring to the l e h g  (Heaton, 1992; Prawat, 1992; Putnam. 1992; RemilIard, 1992). and my 
own extensive interactions wi th presemice and insenice teachers pmvide evideace that 
teachers' beliefs and knowledge (Peterson, Fennema and Carpenter, 1991; Thompson, 1992) 
are complexly intertwined, 1 have chosen to discuss each of these factors separately for 
analytical clarity . 
Teachers' Beiiefs and Views 
According to Schoenfeid ( 1 WZ), beiiefs may be interpreted as "an individual' s 
understandings and feelings that shape the ways that the individual conceptualizes and 
engages in mathematical behavior ..." (p. 358). He points out that teachers' beliefs about the 
nature of mathematics determine the environment of the classmom, which in turn shapes 
students' mailiematical understandings. Thompson (1992) adds that, " teachers' beliefs 
appear to act as filters through which teachers interpret and ascribe meanings to their 
experiences as they interact with children and the subject matter" (p. 139). It is suggested 
that beliefs may have such a powerfui influence on teachers' practice that teachers who 
possess the same conceptuai understanding may teach differently as a result of their beliefs 
about teaching and learning (Prawat, 1989). 
Current views of the refonn movement, which are reflected in documents of the 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCïM, 1989, 1991), suggest that many 
teachers have a narrow view of mathematics which idiuences their teachuig and students' 

learning. Accordiog to Marshall (1992) teachers penieive leaming mathematics as "the 
transmission of discrete elements from a static body of knowledge to passive students" (p. 
2). Brown et al. (1 WO), and Romberg (1 992) suggest thaî teachers do not apprefiate the 
generative possibilities that the discipline offers, nor do they see the leaming of mathematics 
as problematic. In fact, understanding of mathematics is tied only to students' success on 
tests or homework (Brown et al.). In many instances, leamhg is seen as "starnping in" 
(Marshall, 1992, p.8) correct responses. Teachers are frequently blind to the fan that 
mathematics is man made and is the product of human ability (Romberg, 1992). In my 
work with both p n s e ~ c e  
and inservice teachers 1 have found the above views about 
teachen and student teachers to be true. 1 recail the student teacher wbo disagreed with my 
suggestion that, as teachers, we need to provide opportunities for children to leam for 
understanding rather than for rote. 
She chaiienged me when 1 recommended that the 
concept of equivalent fractions be taught so students understand it as multiplying by a form 
of one because it wouid be more meanuigful. The foiiowing were my reasons. Muitiplying 
by a fom of one connected to students' earlier learning that multiplying and dividing by a 
form of one resuited in the sarne number. Also, the concept of one is an important anchor in 
mathernatics. Her response was, "If it was good enough for me to learn that you make 
equivalent fractions by multiplying the top by a number and doing the same to the bottom, 
and 1 came this far in school, then it's good enough for my students to learn it in that way 
too". 
According to Brown et ai. (1990), and Thompson (1986), teachers form some of 
their beliefs and conceptions about mathematics and its teaching even before tbey begin 
their teacher education programs. ianpert (1990) suggests that "Beliefs about how to do 
mathematics and what it means to know in school are acquired through years of watching, 
Iistening, and practicing" (p. 32). 
As leamers, teachers have spent many hours in 
classrooms observing teaching practice, a phenornenon which Lortie (1975) describes as the 
"apprenticeship of observation." It is these eady experiences that strongly influence b w  

teachers corne to know in mathematics (Zeichner and Gore, 1990) and the beliefs that they 
develop about the subject matter. Schoenfeld (1989) points out that research in rnathematics 
education assumes that the development of beliefs about mathematics is strongly influenced 
by the cultural setting of the classroorn. According to Feinman-Nemser and Buchmann 
(1 986), classroom experiences may not be the best teacher, but they are an exîremely 
influentid teacher. The probiem then becornes that "teacher beliefs tend to come home to 
roost in successive generations of teachers, in what for the most part may be a vicîou 
pedagogicaVepistemological circle" (Schœnfeld, 1992, p. 360). The repeating cycle is not 
easy to change. A h ,  the long standing tradition of classroom mathematics does not 
necessarily fit with the complex nature of teaching for understanding, which requins a more 
conceptualiy oriented view and a broder based vision of mathematics. 
The role played by subject matter knowledge in teaching is complex (Bali, 1991b; 
Wineburg and Wilson, 199 1). As Fernema and Franke (1992) point out, "there is no 
consensus on what aïtical knowledge is necessary to ensure that students leam 
mathematics" (p. 147). However, studies conducted with teachers in different subject areas 
(Bd, 
199 1 b; Hashweh, 1986; Wineburg and Wilson, 199 1) support the view that teachers 
who possess a rich, integrated knowledge of the subject can influence instruction in a 
positive way (Fernema and Franke, 1992). Hashweh (1986) suggests that teachers who are 
more knowledgeable about a particdar subject are able to weave together theû 
understandings of different aspects of the discipline. They are also able to recognize and 
deal with students' mixonceptions. According to Rawat (1989), teachen' koowledge of 
content and the depth of understanding they are able to promote in their students are clearly 
related. From the perspective of Fernema and Franke (1992), " what a teacher knows is 

one of the most important influences on what is done in classrooms and ultimately on what 
students learn" (p. 147). 
Bail (1991a) argues that teachers' subject knowledge "matters" to instruction and 
students' learning. Zn a discussion regardkg the connection between teachers' knowledge 
of mathematics and concems for improving its teaching and leaming, Bail outlùies the kind 
of subject matter knowledge that is needed in order to teach for understanding. In so doing 
BaU tallcs about four dimensions of subject matter understanding that she beiieves teachers 
need to have: howledge of the substance of mathematics, knowledge about the nature and 
discourse of mathernatics, knowledge about mathematics in culture and society, and the 
capacity for pedagogical reasoning. Bali further delineates the kind of knowledge that 
teachers need to have. They need to know such chings as, our number system is based on 
tens and division by zero is indefinable. They need to be cognizant of the knowledge 
students need to have at different grade levels. Also, they need to have an understanding of 
the mathematical meanings underlying concepts and procedures- to know "why" they are 
doing what they do. FUiaUy, teachers need to understand that mathematics consists of a 
network of connections, rather than a senes of disparate ideas and procedures. 
in Ball's (1991a) view, t e a c h  who have a sense of the complen nature and 
discourse of mathematics know what counts as an answer in mathematics, and what counts 
as doing mathemaiics. They are also aware that mathematical knowledge is based on 
convention and Iogic and are able to distinguish the difference between the two ideas. 
Moreover, teachers who possess knowledge of the role played by mathematics in culture 
and society are able to connect mathematics to real life in meaningfbl ways. They also 
possess the ability to develop students' awareness of the evolution of mathematicai ideas 
across history and in different cultures. Along with the aforementioned subject matter 
howledge, teachers also need to have "a rich repertoire of representations" (Bail. 1991a, 
p. 80) in order to teach from a more conceptually oriented view. 

Closely related to content knowledge is a different kind of knowledge which dows 
teachers to transfom what they know into "something meaningfùi for students" (Piawat, 
1989). This special knowledge, which S hulman (1 986) defmes as pedagogical content 
knowledge, is needed to teach for understanding (McLaugbiin and T
m
 
1993). 
According to Shulman's (1986) conception, pedagogical content biowledge includes: 
the most usehil forms of representation of those [content] ideas. the most 
powerhil 
analogies, 
illustrations, 
examples. 
explanations, 
and 
demonstrations- in a word, the ways of representing and formulating the 
subject to make it comprehensible to others .... an understanding of what 
makes the leaming of specific topics easy or difncult, the conceptions and 
preconceptions that students of different ages and backgrounds bring with 
them to the leamhg of those most frequently taught topics and lessons. 
(P. 9) 
Fennema, Carpenter, and Peterson ( 1989) point out that teachers' pedagogical content 
knowledge is a critical component in chiidren's leaming of mathematics with understanding. 
Teachers need this kind of knowledge in order to make inforrned decisions for effective 
instruction Ui mathematics (Borko et al., 1992). 
The previous two sections have dealt with teachers' beliefs and teachers' knowledge, 
N/O concepts which hune this study. As suggested, these concepts are factors that affect 
what teachers understand about teaching for understanding and their practice. In the section 
that foiiows, 1 discuss the third factor which affects teachuig for understanding, the context 
in which teachers create their practice. 
The Context in Which Teachers Create Their Practice 
Because teachers' cognitions do not exist in a vacuum, the influence of context on 
teachers' thinking and practice is important in unpacking the idea of teaching for 
understanding. Talbert and McLauglin (1993) point out that context has the capacity to 
~ i ~ c a n t l y  
shapc practice. A survey of the Literahue on context effects on educationd 

outcornes and their own research lead Talbert and McLauglin (1993) to form a view of 
teaching which is permeated by the mdti layers of context. According to Talben and 
McLaughiin (1993), these layers of context range from students in a classmm, subject 
matter, colleagues, school administrators and school organization to broder environments 
beyond school systems such as parents, the community, and institutions such as 
governrnent. 
From an alternative perspective Gardner (1993) tallcs about obstacles that stand 
between schools and educating for undentanding. In a discussion on educatuig for 
undentanding he identifies the foiiowing as obstacles, the test-text context pknomenon, the 
correct-answer phenornenon, pressure for coverage, cognitive Freudianism, institutionai 
cons train ts, and disciplinary constraints. Gardner ( 1993) notes that pressure for coverage is 
the greatest enemy of understanding. Good et al. (1 992) point out chat few teachers have 
been trained to teach for understanding. Most teachers are luniteci by too Little time for 
exploring instructional models, cwiculurn, and ways for assessing student performance that 
are new. Good et ai. suggest that there are three factors which inhibit curriculum reform: 
external pressures for simple measures to determine students' success, schools that 
discourage teac hers from making professional decisions, and iimited knowledge about how 
to structure classroom settings that foster mathematicai understanding. 
According to Anderson and Roth (1989) research in science, which in my view 
easily applies to rnathematics, reveals that students themselves are obstacles to teaching for 
understanding as a result of the "task environments" to which they have becorne conditioned 
in science classrooms. Anderson and Roth (1989) add that textbooks and other materials, 
management and curricular demands are issues of context that mitigate against tbe 
development of classroom environments thai contribute to the kind of instruction that 
promotes understanding. These findings are also consistent with Newman (1988) who 
reported that extemal pressures on social studies teachers to cover prescnbed amounts of 
curriculum, as well as tests, district guidelines, and textbooks weIe major obstacles to 

teaching for understanding. My experiences in the area of mathematics also fit with these 
findings. 
Many of the teachers with whom 1 have worked as a consultant and teacher 
educator often expressed the urgency they felt to cover the long iist of curriculum outcomes 
in order to meet school board expectations. They also talked about the need to ensure 
students' success on board and provincial standardizeû testing in mathernatics. 
There are studies withùi the literature that iliustrate how the interplay of context and 
classroom environments affect teachers' practice. In an experimental study with a second 
grade teacher, Wood, Cobb, and Yackel (1990) concluded that she was able to change her 
practice in mathematics to a way of teaching that promoted meaning and understanding in 
students' les-g because of the ongoing support that she received h m  the researchers. 
However, in reading, where she received no support from the researchea and was 
constrained in instruction by her obligations to administrators, she continueci to maintain her 
usual approach of mowig chüdren through the instmctional materials at a set pace to 
prepare them for mastery skiil tests. Wood et ai. aiso noted the foliowing: 
schools in which the teachers' goal is to direct students through instmctional 
activities thaî emphasize discrete skills at a pace that will ensure complete 
coverage of the cu~culum and then to evaluate students' ability to provide 
correct answers ... mitigate against learning that involves cons tmcting 
mathematical relationships and structures. (p. 5 10) 
In some environments teachers are compelled to deal with confîicting messages 
about classroom instniction. Eisenhardt et al. (1993) noted in a study conducted with 
preservice teachers that practicing teachers in the placement schools were presented with 
conflicting messages by central administraiors. At the same time that these administrators 
expressed a cornmitment to teaching for conceptual knowledge, they mandated 
irnplementaûon of a curriculum and testing programs that emphasized procedural 
knowledge. Eisenhardt et al. add that in some instances school h
l
 administrators 
conveyed a comparable message to practicing teachers. In my work with classroom 
teachers 1 have found the same to hold m e .  On the one hand, central administrators expect 

teachers to instnict h m  
a more conceptuaiiy based perspective. On the other han& teachers 
are expected to follow curriculum guidelines which divide mathematics into to a set of 
leaniing expectations to be covered in a prescribed fashion within a limited tirne frame. For 
example, teachen mut ensure that they cover expectations from each of the five strands of 
Number Sense and Numeration, Measurement, Geometry and Spatial Sense, Patternhg and 
Algebra, and Data Management and Robability monthly. Failure to address expectaiions 
from each of these strands in their teaching becomes problematic for a teacher. Fond 
reporting is set up so that teachers must address students' progress in each of the strands. 
Board adrninistered tests also include items fiom these five different areas. 
There are instances in the literature in which the reverse occurs, and teachers 
influence broad policy that is intended to bring about change in practice to a way of teaching 
that promotes understanding. 
They inhibit or modify the goals of teaching for 
understanding to suit their preexisting practice, beliefs, and knowledge. Studies (Cohen and 
Bail 1990a, 1990b) which looked at California's smte wide effort, The Mathematics 
Framework for CaLifomia Public Schools, Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (CSDE, 
l98S), to change teachers' maihematical practice provide insight into the problem. Teachers 
were equipped with curriculum materials and revised textbooks designed to promote 
understanding in children's leaniing. However, in many instances they modifieci the way 
that they used the materiais. For example, some teachers implemented an elernent of the 
new curriculum in their lessons, but the content was orgiinized within the existing structure 
of traditional schail mathematics. Others embraced the use of visuais and concrete 
materials provided by the new policy, but their use was filtereà through the teachers' 
es tablished prac tice. 
The previous discussion has focused on factors that affect teachers' understanding 
of what it means to teaching for understanding and their practice. In this 1st section of the 
chapter 1 now shift to a discussion of s ~ x k s  
2 the hximrc that ye closely related to the 
questions b a t  this inquiry seeks to understand. 

Related Smdies 
This last section lwks at studies that are closely related to this study. These studies 
are important as they provide an important context for situating this study as part of the 
larger phenornena in the research that looks at teaichhg for understanding. The studies 
highlight the complex nature of teaching for understanding and the challenges it presents 
for teachers. They also provide evidence that a paucity of comprehensive case studies that 
focus exclusively on teachers' understanding of what it means to teach for understanding in 
mathematics exists in the literature. In the foliowing section I examine these studies. 
A nurnber of case studies of second and fifth grade teachers' experiences (Prawaî, 
Remiilard, Puinam, and Heaton, 1992) were developed within the framework of The 
Cdifornia Study of EIementary Mathematics (Peterson, 1990a) to examine the effects of 
policy refonn on classroom teaching and leamîng, and to gain an understanding of their 
perspectives on teaching mathematics for understanding. These case studies demonstrate 
that teachers generally believe that they teach for understanding. 
Y* their views of 
understanding are often apprehended "through lenses of older policies" that stress 
didactic teaching, memorizing procedures, learning facts and recitation (Cohen and Bail, 
1990a, 1990b). The studies also illustrate tbat teachers' perceptions of what it rneans to 
teach for understanding Vary and their views may not necessarily fit with researchers' and 
the vision of curriculum developers (Prawat et al.). The foliowing is a review of eight cases 
discussed in the literature that are a subset of the larger body of cases developed witbin The 
California S tudy of Elementary Mathematics (Peterson, 1 WOa). 
The case of Carol Turner illustrates how one second grade teacher "who was 
disposed to teach in ways that seemed consistent with the California Mathematics 
Curriculum Frame w orks" (Baii, 1990, p.263), interpreted teachuig for understanding in 
rnathematics. 
According to Bali, Carol beiieved that she taught mathematics for 

understanding. However, Ball raises the question if this was the case. As Bal1 points out, 
Carol viewed mathematics as a set of tools with which she needui to equip her students. In 
the following Bail describes Carol's practice. 
Carol' s Prac tice: "Teaching Wi thout Understandhg Is Not Teac hing" 
Carol demands that her students understand. She makes sure that they attend 
and she believes that the mark of a successfûi teaching moment is that 
"every eye was on [me]." Syllogistically, sbe reasons: When the children 
are looking at her, they are probably engage4 then they wiU understand. 
They wiU understand because she carefully structures their activities so that 
they will develop correct understandings: giving them templates for 
explaining procedures, guiding their work with manipuiatives, leading them 
with questions. (p.264) 
The case of Mark Black (Wilson, 1990) provides an aitemate perspective on what it 
means to teach for understanding. Wilson notes that this fifth grade tacher talked about 
differen t types of understanding. Although Mark emphasized the acquisition and mastery 
of algorithrnic knowledge, he did suggest that there was a distinction between understanding 
for which he aimed and understanding that was required to know "why" an aigorithm 
worked. Wilson suggests he possessed a "building block" notion of understanding, 
devoid of intuition, where concepts rested on a foundation of mathexnatical rules and 
procedures. 
As with the previous studies, cases developed by Cohen (1990), Jennings Wiemers 
(1990), and Peterson (1990) provide evidence that teachers Vary in their perceptions of what 
it means to teach for understanding. In addition, their perceptions may not necessarily fit 
with those of researchers and cumculum developers. According to Cohen, Mrs. Oublier, 
the teacher in the case study on which he reported, believed that changes she had instituted 
in her teaching practice promoted understanding in students' leaming. Cohen suggests that 
this teacher was "teaching math for understanding", but the question was how weii her 
students understood. In Cohen's view, her teaching ~£iected a lack of in-depth knowledge 
of mathematical concepts necessary for probing students' answers, and for initiaîing the 

kind of classrwm discourse that leads to àeep understanding. In fzt, he believed that she 
conducted classes in ways that discouraged exploration of students' understanding. 
The case of Joe Scon (Jennings Wiemer, 1990) iilustrates yet another view of what 
it means to teach for understanding. Accordhg to Jennings Wiemer, Joe Scon viewed 
mathematics as a fveù body of procedures that students needed to leam. The procedures 
were intended as twls for students "to pack into their mathematical twl chests". For Joe, 
teaching for understanding meant insuring that students understd how to apply traditional 
school mathematics leamhg to real life situations. Jennings Wiemer points out that 
teaching in this way satisfied his "traditional approach to implementing state-wide 
mathematics reform" (p. 297). 
Cathy Swift, a grade two teacher that Peterson (1990) observed, is a case in contrast 
with the other teachers previously discussed. According to Peterson, 
Cathy Swift is a teacher who stands out because she readily admits that she 
doesn't know if she is teaching for understanding and she is unsure of how 
to teach children to solve mathematical problems and how to think. (p. 295) 
Cathy herself admitted that she felt less knowledgeable and confident teaching mathematics 
than she did teaching literature. In her view mathematics was less "creative" and open- 
ended than literature. Peterson points out that Cathy viewed mathematics as a futed body of 
content to be covered, and it was "a lot more sequential than literature". Cathy felt she had 
the *dom 
to teach literaîure in the way that she wanteù, a feeling which mathematics did 
not afford her. However, she did point out that she was not sure if she would have changed 
the way that she taught rnathematics, even if she felt that she had the license to do so. 
One of the most important issues to surface in case studies on which Pumam, 
Heaton, Prawat, and Remillard (1992) reported as part of The California Study of 
Elementary Mathematics (Peterson, 1990a) was the cornplex interrelationships between 
teachers' beliefs and knowledge and their mathematical practice. Putnam et al. point out 

that the kind of teaching advocated by The Mathematics Frameworks (CSDE, 1985) and 
The Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics (NCTM, 1989) relies 
heavdy on teachers' beliefs and knowledge. The case of Valene Taft, 
a fifth grade teacher 
(Putnam, 1992) reveals how a teacher's beliefs and knowledge c m  shape the way that she 
teaches mathematics. According to Aitnam Valerie viewed mathematics "as a set of useful 
procedures" whose ultimate importance was determined by how effectively they couid be 
applied to everyday Me. Because she believed it was more important to teach students the 
"how" of mathematics, rather than the "why", Putnam points out that her teaching focused 
on completing the steps for procedures. In addition, her lack of subject matter knowledge 
prevented her £iom realizing that she had treated the content incorrectiy. Putnam is quick to 
point out that The Mathematics Frameworks (CSDE, 1985) recommends that, in order to 
teach for understanding, teachers require richiy developed content knowledge and an 
approach that altows for exploration and sense making. 
Although subject matter knowledge is not the sole factor in teaching for 
understanding, it is critical (Heaton, 1992). The case of Sandra Stein raises questions about 
the role of subject matter knowledge in teaching for understanding. It also illustrates what 
happens when a teacher who has the best of intentions tries to teach a concept which she 
does not understand (Heaion, 1992). 
According to Heaton, Sandra believed in the 
importance of making mathematics fun and engaging for her students. Heaton suggests 
that it seemed as if Sandra had a clear sense of how children could be Mped to leam. To 
achieve her goals and to make mathematics meaningfid, Sandra relied less on the textbook 
and focused her efforts on involving students in practicai problems with a real life context. 
Yet when Heaton observed Sandra teach, she demonstrated a limiteci understanding of the 
mathematics concepts that she taught. She misrepresented the content and failed to attend to 
important mathematicai ideas that were at the kart of activities that she was developing in 
her lessons. Heaton explains that in the two lessons that Sandra taught "her efforts to teach 
for understanding may have lead to misunderstanding" (p. 160). 

The case of Karen Hill (Prawat, 1992) demonstrates that teachers may make 
important changes in theu views about teaching mathematics and begin to appreciate the 
meri ts of an approach that promotes rneaning and understanding. However, these changes 
may not necessarily affect their practice. Prawat suggests that this teacher's views about tbe 
new curriculum had changed "a bit" in the three month pend between the fmt and second 
tirnes that she intervieweci ber. Yet, she continued to express very traditional ideas about 
mathematics which are reflected in the foiiowuig statement. 
Mathematics leaming proceeds hierarchicaliy, with children first needhg to 
master the "basics", certain math facts and procedures learned in rote 
fashion, before getting into problem solving and other application sorts of 
activities. (p. 199) 
The teacher also explaineci that she always provided students with reasons for the 
rules and procedures she taught, and she would illustrate their real world application. In this 
sense the teacher believed that she was providing students with understanding. Yet Rawat 
indicates that her teaching focused on the procedural, which was reflected in the question 
and answer format she regularly employed. 
She also made limited use of concrete 
representations, because in her view they "added" to understanding rather than were "at 
the heart" of it. 
In addition to demonstrating the effect of teachers' beliefs and knowledge on their 
practice, the case of Jim Green (Remillard, 1992), aibeit in a small way, addresses the 
influence of context on teachers' practice. This case is different from the previous three 
cases (Heaton, 1992; Prawaî, 1992; Putnam, 1992) in that the teacher appeared to 
understand mathematical concepts and was cornfortable teaching them. 
As Redard 
suggests, the teacber seemed to have flexible and detailed knowledge about the ~lnathematicai 
concepts that he taught and was able to articulate them. For Jim. teaching for understanding 
meant making mathematics applicable to daily Me. Yq at the same tirne that he wanted his 
students to realize the relevance of mathematics to their lives, it was important for him to 

teach rules and formulas. He believed that through procedural learthg children would 
automaticaliy develop conceptual understanding, as teaching niles and procedures went 
"hand in hand with teaching for understanding. The foilowing description of Jim's views 
provides added insight. 
Jim stands behind the Framework's proposition that children should 
understand and be able to apply the underlying concepts of mathematical 
d e s  and procedures, and he believes that he teaches concepts to his 
students. This stance does not belittle the importance of mastering rules and 
procedures. Jim most certahly believes his students should becorne 
proficient with the mechanical elements of mathematics, but be ais0 expects 
that they WU understand why these procedures work. (p. 18 1) 
Based on her observations of Jim's teaching, Remillard (1992) points out that the 
integration of the conceptual aspects of mathematics into his procedural approach to lessons 
was somewhat sporadic. Remillard also notes that in looking at the case of Jirn Green it is 
important to consider the effects of context on his teaching. On the one hand the state of 
California had rnandated through its policy initiatives that teachers change the way that they 
teach mathematics to a more conceptually oriented approach. Y& the school district in 
which he taught expected teachers to foliow a carefully paced mastery leaming of basic 
skills program in order to address the problem of low standardized test results of a large 
minority population. This mastery learning program was structureci so that teachers would 
teach the s a ,  practice it, apply it, test for mastery. For students who did not achieve the 
required level of mastery on the k
t
 
test, the tacher would reteach and retest. According to 
Remillard, "Such an approach seemed at odds with the Framework's focus on 
understanding and on the development of slcills including computational mastery within 
meaningful contexts" (p. 192). 
Putnam et al. (1992) provide the foiiowing summary regarding the cases discussed 
The cases suggest clearly that teaching mathematics for understanding 
cannot be reduced to using the right textbook, having students work in 
groups, using fllitnipuiatives, or using mathematics activities in reai-worlds 

settings. AU these may serve as important resources or tools for good 
mathemaiics teaching ... It is how teachers use these resources or tools, 
however, that shapes the leaming environment for students. (p. 214) 
In their view, teaching that promotes meaningful leaming should not simply ban t e h g  and 
explainhg to the exclusion of allowing students to construct knowledge. Teachers need to 
make responsible decisions as to how to effectively integrate these ideas. 
As suggested earlier, these cases are closely related to this study on teaching for 
understanding in that they provide a necessary guide for understanding whai elemntary 
teachers understand about teaching for understanding. Skrdar to this study, these studies 
examine teachers' beliefs and knowledge and the effect on their practice, but they do so in 
the context of changes in instruction mandated by the Mathemaiics Frameworks (CSDE, 
1985). The present study was designed to inquire exclusively into the phenornenon of 
teaching for understanding in rnathemaîics. 
Although brief mention is made of the 
influence of context in the case of Jim Green (Remillard, 1992), the cases ricviewed 
previously do not attend to factors of context that mitigate and support teaching for 
understanding, as this study does. Furthermore, the cases do not provide complete portraits 
or analyses of teachers' practice. As Rawat et al. (1992) point out: 
We did not spend enough time with the teachers to develop comprehensive 
cases of them as teachers. The stories of these teachers, however, do 
iliustrate issues that we saw as important for other teachers we visited. We 
also believe that the cases are usefbi, more generally, for any teachers 
making changes in their teaching practice. (p. 1 5 1) 
Researchers observed and intervieweci teachers only twice in four months. Each tacher was 
observed teaching two thirty to ninety minute mathematics lessons during each week that a 
researcher visited a school. interviews, which lasted for a duracion of approximately three 
hours, were intended to inquire into teachers' goals for mathematics teaching, how they 
viewed teaçhing that subject for understanding, how they assessed student leaniing, and 
other factors which influenced their teaching of mathematics (Prawaî et al., 1992). In this 

study 1 spent four months, almost daily, observing each teacher in the classroom so that 1 
might coliect copious data regarding their views, beliefs and content knowledge on teaching 
for understanding. 
Extensive inteniewing was camed out. 
Formal inte~ews were 
conducted three times a month, while informal interviews were conducted after most lessons 
to gain M e r  insight into teachers' thinking and to better understand their actions and 
Ideas and practices for teaching both procedurai and conceptuai knowledge (Hieben 
and Lefewe, 1986) are two interrelated aspects of Ieaming to teach for understanding 
(Eisenhardt et al., 1993). Theses ternis, procedural and conceptuai, are used to denote a 
distinction made between two forms of mathematical knowing (Hiebert and Lefewe, 1986). 
According to Eisenhardt et al., 
Procedural kaowledge refers to mastexy of computational skills and 
knowledge of procedures for identifying mathematical components, 
dgorithms and defhitions ... Conceptuai knowledge refers to knowledge of 
the 
underlying structure of 
mathematics- the 
relationships 
and 
interconnections of ideas that explain and give meaning to mathematical 
procedures. (p. 9) 
A two year study in which Eisenhardt et al- (1993) examined novice teachers' 
knowledge, bebefs, thinking, and actions regarding the teaching of mathematics reveded 
some of the tensions and pressures that these teachers experienced as they aîtemptted to 
move beyond teaching for procedural knowledge and teach for conceptual knowledge. The 
study of Ms. Daniels Eisenhardt et ai.) is one case in point which reports on student 
teachers' views and beliefs and their efforts to teach for procedural and conceptuai 
knowledge. This study shows that the teacher knew the ciifference between the two kinds of 
knowledge and believed that both weE necessary for understanding in mathematics. Y6 
she had difficulty articulating her ideas about how to teach for conceptual understanding. 
Observations of her teaching indicated that the value she placed on learning algorithrns and 
procedural skills until they werr: weil entrenched in students' mincis was evident in a 

majority of her lessons. They also illustrated her less frequent and unsuccessful attempts to 
teach for conceptual understanding. Eisenhardt et ai. point out that limitations in ber 
knowledge base led, on some occasions, to her focusing exclusively on procedural 
knowledge. In addition, there were other factors such as the type of lesson she was 
expected to teach, the pressure of coverage and time, and the ciifference in expectations of 
the university course work and placement schools that needed to be taken into açcount, in 
looking at the tension between her teaching for procedural and conceptual knowledge. 
Eisenhardt et ai. further note that there were few opportunities for Ms. Daniels, as with other 
novice teachers, to observe teaching for conceptual lcnowledge in their host schools, or to 
receive encouragement for teaching in this way. 
Although Eisenhardt et al. (1993) inquired into teachers' understanding of teaching 
for understanding, as the present study does, the authors were particularly interested in 
participants' knowledge of mathematicai concepts and their understanding of the 
connections arnong concepts and procedures. The present study goes beyond and takes an 
in-depth look at teachers' beliefs and perceptions of teaching for understanding in relation 
to their practice in mathematics. It also considers more than the process of leamhg to teach 
for conceptual knowledge in rnathematics. Unlike the teachers in Eisenhardt' s snidy, who 
were preservice teachers in their hnal year of a teacher education program, the two 
participants in this sîudy were both practicing teachers. 
An extensive study on teaching for understanding which Roulet (1998) conducted 
demonstrates that teachers who choose to tea~h fiom a conceptually based perspective may 
be confronted with obstacles which mitigate against their attempts to teach in tbis way. In 
the study, Rouiet (1998) examined each of two high school teachers' conceptions and 
practice in mathematics over a four month period in order to look at how k i r  images of 
subject mslated into practice. Roulet (1998) points out thai, even though a majonty of 
high school teachers are unwilling to endorse instructional strategies recommended by The 
Professional Standards for Teaching Matbernatics (NcTPUI, 1 Wl), these two teachers were 

working to implement mathematics education reform in their classroom practice. One 
teacher "with a weli developed social constructivist image of mathematics" (Rdet, 1998, 
p.iii) managed to put his personal philosophy into pmtice in spite of the opposition 
encountered from students, their parents, and tk administration. However. the second 
teacher. "with a more mixed subject conception" thaî was in the process of transition and 
reconstruction tumed to traditional transmissive modes of instruction when confronted with 
the forces of opposition. 
There are a number of similarities between the present study and Roulet's (1998). 
Like this study, Roulet's study examines teachers' beliefs and knowledge and their intimate 
connection with teaching for understanding. It too considers obstacles which confront 
teachers in their efforts to teach for understanding. In so doing, Roulet also develops in- 
depth portraits of two teachers' practice in rnathematics. Unlike this study, which inquires 
into elementary teachers' understanding of teaching for understanding, Roulet's study 
focuses on two high school teachers' mathedcai practice and their efforts to implement 
mathematics education refonn in their classmm. 
In summary, this review of the literature has provided an in-depth view of the 
research on understanding and teaching for understanding, key concepts that underpin this 
study. It has also provided a context for this study and demonstrated why a study such as 
this is needed to help fill the gap that exists in the literature. Evidence suggests that teaching 
for understanding is complex and open to interpretation as this study demonstrates. Most 
teachers believe that they teach for understanding as Gardner (1993) &y 
points out, 
"Nearly every teacher 1 know -myself included- would c l a h  to be teaching for 
understanding" (p. 21). The problem is that teacbers, as this study will demonstrate, have 
different understandings of what it means to teach in this way (Cohen and Ba& 1990% 
1990b; Gardner, 1993; Prawat, 1989). To conduct research into a phenornenon as complex 
and challenging as teaching for understanding warrants an approach which is able to capture 
the subtleties of its multi-dimensionai nature, and to weave together the network of evidenœ 

regardhg how teachers' beliefs, views and content knowledge afkct this type of teaching. 
In the chapter that follows I discuss the research approach selected for the study and aspects 
of methodoiogy . 

Chapter 3 
Method 
In the previous chapter I examineci the research on teaching for understanding and 
factors thai affect that understanding. To inquire into a phenomenon as complex and 
chalienging as teaching for understanding warrants an approach that is able to capture its 
multidimensionai nature and the su btleties of teachers ' understanding. 
This chapter 
discusses the research approach 1 selected for the study and provides a rationale for my 
choice. Methods for selection of participants and the setting, role of the researcher, data 
collection and data analysis procedures, and measures that were taken to ensure 
trustworthiness of the research are also addressed. 
The Researcti Abbroach - A Rational 
Morgan and Smircich (1980) suggest that the appropriateness of the research 
methodology is contingent on the nature of the phenomenon to be studied. 
As 
demonstrated, teaching for understanding is complex and not easily characterizai by a 
single category or idea Most teachers believe that they teach for understandhg and their 
views may not necessarily be congruent with those of the research and professional 
comunity. Teachers' understanding is both constrained and supported by their beliefs 
and content knowledge, wbich themselves are complex concepts. Moreover, teachers do not 
carry out their practice in a vacuum and are affectai by the multi-layered context in which 
they teach. To capture the complexities of teachers' understanding and the intriacies of 
their beliefs and content knowledge of rnathematics, an approach with the openness of 
interpretive inquiry seemed appropnate. 
An approach of this nature allows researchers to carry out inquiry Ïn the natural 
sening of participants' lived experiences. In this way researchers may corne to understand 
how participants make sense of their world and their experiences in tha. world (Glesne and 
Peshkin, 1992; Merriam, 1998). As Erickson (1 986) suggests, interpretive methods are 

useN when one needs to know more about the meaniag- perspectives of participants in 
particular events. Interpretive research also defmes the nature of data collection and data 
analysis procedures (Memam, 1988) and provides for the thick description that Denzin 
(1994) suggests, "gives the context of an expenence, siates the intentions and meanings, 
and reveals the experience as a process" (p. 505). 
Frequent use of interpretive methodologies is evident in curent research on teacher 
education (Cooney, 1994). This research reveals a growing interest in studies on teaching 
for understanding (Alkui, 1992) and the use of case study as a common way of describing 
teachers' meaning-making processes in mathematics education (Cooney, 1994). In this 
inquiry case study allows for the indepth examination of how teachers make sense of the 
world and their expenences in that world. Each case in its particularity and complexity 
"tells a story" (Stake, 1994) of teaching for understanding in mathematics. At the same 
tirne that the case focuses on a single actor, it is also part of a larger phenomenon in tbe 
research that Iooks at teaching for understanding in mathematics. As Denzin and Lincoln 
(1994) suggest every instance of a case bars the stamp of the general class of phenomena 
to which it belongs. The detailed description and in-depth view in each case is intended to 
inform the reader so that personai expenence may be c o ~ e ~ t e d  
with that of the participant 
As Merriam (1998) suggests, it enables readers to compare the "fit" 
with their own 
situations. 
Case study is not a methodological choice for this inquiry, rather a choice of object 
to be studied (Stake, 1994). It is defined by the nature of the final report. Consistent with 
this view, Memam (1998) points out that case studies do not daim any particular methods 
for data collection and data analysis. Therefore, techniques characteristic of the interpretive 
approach selected for the study are employed for gathering and analyzing data in each case. 
These techniques are discussed in the following section on methods for d a t i o n  of 
participants and the setting, role of t&e researcher, data collection and data analysis 
procedures, and measures that were taken to ensure tnistworthiness of the research. 

Selection of Participants 
As noted earlier, in any social setthg researchers need to gain access to the varied 
perspectives of participants so that they corne to undentand their actions. Accorciing to 
Erickson (1986) gaining valid iosights into participants' point of view is important to the 
success of the research enterprise. Access rests in part on participants selected for the study 
and the trust and rapport a reseaccher is able to establish with them. Purposehil sarnpfing 
(Bogdan and Biklen, 1992, p. 71) and attention to Morse's (1994) criteria for a good 
participant guided the selection of participants for tbis study. According to Morse (1994) , 
a good participant has the knowledge and experience the researcher requires, has the abiiity 
to reflect, is articulate, has the tirne to be interviewed, and is w i h g  to participaîe in the 
study. 
Of the many teacbers with whom 1 had worked as a consultant and teacher educator, 
I seIected two that stood out for me, as they fit Morse's (1994) criteria for a "good 
informant". 
Regular conversations revealed their willingness to talk openly about their 
practice. They also expressed concern about m a h g  mathematics meaningful for students. 
My invitation to participate in this study was greeted with enthusiasm. Yet, one of my 
choices resulted in a false start. Despite my earlier work as a consultant with this teacher 
and others on her team, she confessed after three weeks in her classroom that my presence 
as a researcher caused her considerable discodort. The research was abortecl, and 1 
continued with the second teacher as 1 cautiously sought out and interviewai other 
candidates until an appropnate replacemcn t was found. 
My deliberate effort to select two teachers with different M e  histones and 
professional experience resulted in the participation of Eric and Melany, who are at the 
center of this study. Eric, one of the teachers with whom 1 had initially worked, was in his 
third year of teaching. At the time of this study he was teaching grade seven in a s m d  
urban school in a working class neighborhood. Enc often tallced about making quick 

strides in order to becorne an administrator. Already, he was looking for a new teaching 
assignment that would Sord him increased responsibility in his quest to achieve his goal. 
Melany was an experienced pedagogue who was recognized by her peers for her teaching 
expertise. She had taught for twenty years in a variety of settings. At the tirne of this study 
she was teaching grade five in the same d a n  school that she had taught for nine years. 
The population of the school was predominantly ethnic and working class. Based on my 
previous acquaintance with Melany and Eric, it was my sense that they would be good 
participants (Morse, 1994). 
In the year prior to this study 1 bad worked on a regular basis, almost monthly, with 
Eric and other teachers in his school, both in workshops and in their classroorns. As 1 
noted above, Eric was easily able to converse about a variety of educational issues. He 
frequentiy taiked about the need to provide students with expenences that were grounded in 
real life l e d g  and his role in doing so. He also suggested that he would be interested in 
participating in research, as this was "something" he had never done before. In his view 
king part of a research project would be a valuable leaming experience. A h ,  it would add 
to his professional repertoire. His comfort level with my presence in his classroom was an 
incen tive . 
Like Eric, Melany had a facility with language and could easdy express her thoughts 
and ideas. When Melany talked about issues of teaching, she saw them as 
more 
problematic in their complexity than Eric. Her participation in this study was more about 
making change in her mathematics program than it was about having another expenence to 
add to her professional repertoire. For the past five years Melany had been working on 
making mathematics more like her language arts program, which tiad also undergone major 
changes. 
Melany viewed her involvement as an oppoxtunity to gain new ideas in 
mathematics and said that I, as the "math expert", would be a good resource. 
The 
depamire of a colleague who had provideci Melany with fresh ideas for teaching 

mathematics had created a void for her. In addition, 1 would serve as a positive role model, 
particularly for her female students. 
. .  . 
My previous relationship with both Melany and Eric minunized the challenge that 
researchen often expenence in theû effort to gain access and connect with potential 
participants in the field (Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992). Our relationship aiso facilitateci 
the development of rapport and trust building (Exickson, 1986). The credibiiity 1 had 
estabfished in Eric's school from my earlier work with his pers was beneficiai. It reduced 
the challenge of initial rapport building with the main gatekeepers. Not only was the 
principal supportive, he thought it was a good idea for Eric to participate. Ya at the same 
tirne that familiaxity allows for ease of access and rapport building, suspending one's 
preconceptions and maintaining marginality may be more challenging (Hammersley and 
Atkinson, 1992). As Powdennaker (1966) suggests, a researcher needs to be inteilectually 
poised between "familiarity" and "strangeness" so as not to lose one's objectivity 
(Glesne and Peshkin, 1992). Regular reflection and discussion with individuais outside this 
study assisted in maintaining a balanced analytical perspective. 
Melany offered a different situation. Although we had known each other prior to 
the research endeavor, 1 had never b e n  to her school. Rapport building with the main 
gatekeepers began with a meeting with her principal to talk about the study and to provide 
him with a written description. The early stages of fieldwork in the school were particulariy 
focused on gaining access and building tmt. 1 took time to engage in social interaction for 
"social and pmgmatic reasons" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992). At the same tirne, 1 
dso made certain to maintain marginality and to stay cornmitteci to my purpose for king 
there. Basic ethical p ~ c i p l e s  
and measures to protect participants were aiso ensured. Ai 
the outset of my work, each participant was infonned of the purposes and the aaivities of 
the research both orally and in writing. They were also made aware of the option to 
withdraw at any tirne. The additionai burden that participating in this study would involve 

was outlined. Ethical reviews wexe completed for and approved by the research coumittee 
of the particuiar boards of education. 
Role of the Researcher 
Hammersley and Atkinson (1992) suggest, "Rather than engaging in futile attempts 
to eliminate the effects of the researcher, we should set about understanding them" (p. 17). 
In any interpretive study there are varying degrees of participation (Glesne and Peshkin, 
1993; Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992). As researcher, 1 was neither complete observer 
(Harnmersley and Atkinson, 1992), nor complete participant (Hamrnersley and Atkinson, 
1992). My roie fluctuated between participation and observation. In Eric's classroom, 
most days 1 sat at the back observing the pattern of his teaching and events of the day. Even 
though 1 had offered to be an "extra pair of hands" in return for allowing me to corne into 
his classroom to conduct research, 1 tended to be more of an observer than a participant. It 
was only toward the end of my stay that Eric provided me with an opportunity to teach a 
unit on integers- He wanted me "to experience" what it meant to teach mathematics when 
iittle time was available for anything other than teaching to the prescribed outcornes of the 
curriculum. This opportunity allowed me "to pay back" Eric for the research 1 conducted 
in his classrmm. 
The situation was diff'erent for Melany. As I suggested earlier, Melany agreed to 
allow me to conduct research in her classroom in exchange for new ideas for her 
mathematics program. 
As Glesne and Peshkin (1992) suggest, researchers need to 
reciprocate in retum for a teacher's consent to spend numerous hours at the back of their 
cIassroom or in i n t e ~ e w  
sessions. As with Eric, 1 would sit most days observing in her 
classroorn as she taught. 
However, there were times when 1 was more involved with 
Melany in my role as researcher. At her request, 1 provided input into her matbernatics 
program and helped her plan activities for the uni& she taught on area and stnictures. In 
some instances in conducting research it may appear that "overparticipation" (Bogdan and 

Biklen, 1992, p. 88) has occumd. However, "As the task of field work is to becorne more 
and more reflectively aware of the frames of interpretation of those we observe" (Erickson, 
1986, p. 140), this opportunity fit within "the participant/observer continuum" (Bogdan 
and Biklen, 1992, p. 88), and the goals of this study. 
The Setting 
Researchers engage in obsewationai tieldwork because they are concemeci with 
context and its effect on the actions of participants (Bogdan and Biklen, 1992). To do 
justice to the phenomenon under study 1 spent almost every day of a four month period 
observing in each teacher's classroom. 1 would also go with the teacher and their students 
to activities outside the classrwm. 1 would go with Eric to the gym when he taught physicai 
education and to the shop for design and technology. With Melany 1 went to the Iibrary 
and class trips outside the school. The rnajority of my days began before students arrived 
for class in the morning and lasted till well after dismissal time at the end of the day. 
Although the focus of my observation was on the teaching of mathematics, 1 wanted 
to observe other areas of the curriculum. My intention was to examine and compare each 
teacher's practice in mathematics with other areas that they taught. 1 also wanted to Vary the 
pattern of my observation in the classroom, "to ensure as full and representative a range of 
coverage as possible, not just to iden* 
and single out the superficially 'interesting' 
events" (Harnmersley and Atkiason, 1992, p. 48). The extended tirne that 1 spent with each 
of these teachers afforded me an in-deph view of their practice. It also provided me with 
valuable information cuiied h m  
conversations whose spontaneity supplemented field note 
information and audio taped data kom scheduled interviews and daily classroom 
proceedings. Discussions with other participants in the setting were also a useful source of 
data. Even though our discussions were social and pragmatic in nature, 1 was always 
vigilant of the importance of my d e  as researcher in the gathering of data for analysis. 
The previous two sections have provicied a brief introduction to the participants, the 
setting, and some of the early research work c e e d  out for this study. The next chapter 

extends this introduction to develop a more complete picture of Eric and Melany and begins 
t6 unpack their views on the concept of understanding. 
Data Collection 
Data collection is a tirne when progressive problem solving (Hammersley and 
Atkinson, 1992)' theory building and hypothesis testing take place - when order and 
understanding emerge (Morse, 1994). Researchers use a variety of procedures to gain first 
hand accounts of the situation under investigation. These procedures are generally defuied 
by the research approach (Merriam, 1988). For this shidy on teaching for understanding 
the following methods characteristic of an interpretive approach were employed: participant 
observation in the form of field notes, audio taping of teachers' classroom practice, 
collection of documents such as teachers' lesson plans, cmiculum materials, student tests 
and textbook materials, and formal and infonnal inteniews. The use of muitiple sources of 
information was intendeci to cross- check and validate resuits of data collection (Merriam, 
1998). These methods also aiiowed for the full range of variation in social organizational 
arrangements and meaning-perspectives, and for the co11ection of recurrent instances across 
a wide range of events (Erickson, 1986). Because the research for this snidy was conducted 
as two independent cases, data collection for each teacher was done separately. 1 began with 
Eric as he was one of the fmt two teachers that 1 had invited to participate in this study. Ln 
retrospect 1 Meve that 1 pressed him more for his views on understanding than 1 did 
Melany during the data gathering period. Perhaps it was my inexperience as a researcher 
and Eric's wiiiingness to respond, 
Field Notes 
As noted eariier, the majority of my daily visits to each teacher's classroom in the 
four month period consisted of fidi days of obsemation. This routine aüowed me to 
observe a teacher' practice in mathematics in the context of other content areas of the 

curriculum- The results of my obsenrations were recorded in extensive field notes. 
Consistent with Hammersley ' s and Atkinson ' s ( 1 992) recommendation, these field notes 
consist of concrete descriptions of social processes and their contexts. They include 
detailed descriptions of important happenings during the day and recordings of informa1 
conversations and i n t e ~ e w s  
that fkequently occurred. These written accounts cap- 
events "in their integrity" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992, p. 145) for later analysis and 
interpretation. Field notes were also used to verify and supplement data cokted from 
audio tapes which recorded the ebb and flow of daily classroom We. 
AnaIytic notes, which were included either within the body of the field notes or 
appended at the end of a day's written notes, heiped to narrow and direct the focus of 
progressive data collection. They include reflections on conversations and events, huches 
and other thoughts about the phenomenon under investigation. The following is a sample 
of field notes with accompanying anaiytic notes I c o k t e d  for Melany. They provide 
insight into the observational work carried out for the study and its relationship with the 
final report. 
Sarn~le from the Field Notes 
September 24- Aftemoon Measurement Activity 
1 believe thaî this math activity is supposed to provide the students with practice so 
they wiil be prepared for measuring the playground during the integrated unit for social and 
environmental studies. Melany explains the steps of the activity to the students and mdels 
what they are to do. The activity rquires that students kick a roiled up kleenex, a Cotton ba& 
and an eraser with their heel, estimate the distance they kicked the object, then record their 
measurement in a chart. (see Figure 1). The d e  
is that fmt they m u t  estimate the distance 
the object was kicked and record the estimate. Then they measure the distance accurately 
with a meter stick and record the measurement. 

Fi oure 1. 
Chart in Which S tudents Recorded Their Measurements 
HOW FAR DID YOU KICK IT ? 
A discussion ensues as to what constitutes an estimate. On the board Melany writes the 
following words. 
as 
about 
over 1 m 
more than lm 
less than lm. 
(1 notice that these words connect with the assignment that 1 saw on the board the &y 
before.) 
Using a student's measurement of lm 22 cm fkom the indoor recess activity as her 
example, Melany tries to explain how to round when the amount is not exact. Sensing their 
confusion, Melany changes her approach and provides pairs of students wiih meter sticks. 
She then has îhem fmd Im 22 cm on their meter sticks. As they do, she draws their 
attention to the end point on the meter stick and explains that the f b t  marking is covnted as 
zero not one (good that she notes this important fact). After this brief expIanation, students 
are then asked to fmd other amounts on their meter sticks. It is obvious fkom Melany 's 
ITEM 
Paper tissue 
Cotton bal1 
Eraser 
MY ESTIMATE 
ACTUAL DISTANCE 

cornrnents as she circles the room observing students' strategies that her explanation 
appears "to have failen on deaf ears". Most students neglected to move one unit to the 
right before they began to count and are SU identiQing the marking at the end point as one. 
1 have often observai students make this error when measuring with a der, and Melany 
seems to be aware of it, At this point she stops the class and proceeds to teach a lesson 
"off the cuff' on how to count units correctly. As she does, she explains why it is 
necessary to move a distance of one unit before a value of one can be assigned. She also 
notes that the distance between any two long markings on the meter stick is always equal to 
one unit of maure. 1 am most impressed that Melany is cognizant of the problems that 
children frequentiy encounter when they measure with meter sticks or other measuring tools 
of this nature. It is not often that 1 have seen teachers engage in this practice to ensure that 
students understand how to measure correctly. Melany seems to possess a combination of 
deep understanding of content, and knowledge of the appropriate pedagogy that teachers 
need to teach for understanding. 1 need to check out and compare my observations with my 
audio tape recording of the lesson because it is important information for future analysis 
and wrïting of my thesis. 1 notice that once students are actively engaged in measuring 
Melany checks that evey estimate and actual measure for each object is recorded with the 
correct unit of measure in the charts. 
Analvtic Notes and Refiections on Field Notes 
Sep tember 24- Aftemoon Measurement Activity 
My inteniew with Melany today revealed some very interesthg aspects about her 
understanding of mathematics. Melany's ability to recognize the dX~culty that children 
experienced counting units on a meter stick, and her way of dealing with it are classic 
evidence of what Shulman identifies as pedagogical content knowledge. 
Her ability to 
weave together a lesson fiom the homework assignment on two, thcee, and four digit 
numbers and connect it to the textbook was also impressive. It is also fascinahg that 

Melany feels so differently about mathematics than she does about language arts-classic of 
the literature. She says that teaching mathematics is not the same as teaching Ianguage arts. 
This is something that 1 ne& 
to pursue further with her, and on which I need to focus. 
Why does she feel this way? Where do these thoughts corne from? Why does Melany 
feel so differently about teaching mathematics than she does about language arts? 
Documents 
Hammersley and Atkinson (1992) suggest thaî it would be hard to conceive of an 
ethnographie account without some reference to documentary materiai in context 
Teachers' weekly lesson plans, tests, professional support materials, teachers' manuals and 
textbooks were examined to gain a better understanding of each case. Weekly lesson plans 
provided an overview of the content to be covered in different subject areas during a week. 
They also revealed the time of &y that a subject was taught and the amount of time the 
teacher devoted to teaching it. Tests, text books, and other materials also provided insight 
into a teacher's view of the particular subject area. Melany rarely used the textbook in 
mathematics or any subject area because she felt that textbook teaching did not foster 
learning. Eric, on the other hand, used a textbook that leaned more to aigorithmic learning 
than to promoting depth of understanding of concepts. However, he did supplement this 
text with materials he created. 
Inte~ews 
Patton (1990) points out that the interviewer's task is fmt and foremost to gather 
data In this study both informal and formai interviews were conducted regdarly and used 
to support observationai data collected through field notes. 
Informal inte~ews were 
usually conducted after a lesson so that 1 might gain M e r  ùisight into teachers' thinking 
in order to better understand their actions and behavior. These interviews usually occurred 
about three to four tirnes a week and were held at some point in the day that was convenient 

for the teacher. Because of the spontaneous nature of these interviews, audio taping was not 
always an option. When this occurred 1 was forced to commit to memory the information 
and to record it as soon as the discussion ended. Interviews of this type were also held with 
other in forrnants in the setting . 
Forma1 interviews were conducted differently. They were held three times a month 
and planned in advance to fit a teacher's schedule. Questions for these interviews were 
designed to uncover specifk aspects of teachers' understanding of teaching for 
understanding in mathematics often prompted by events 1 observed in class. There were 
times when these questions focused on issues that were not answered in informal interviews 
and were still puzzling. Ail formai i n t e ~ e w s  
were audio taped and the fesdts transcnbed 
for later data analysis, as were the results of audio taped informal interviews. 
Data Analvsis 
Data analysis does not necessaiiiy follow in a iinear fashion and occurs 
simultaneously with data coiiection. However, intense data anaiysis takes place after the 
data collection phase is completed (Merriam, 1988). It is the stage when anaiytic coding of 
the data is camied out in preparation for writing of the final report (Glesne and Peshkin, 
1992). Data for each teacher was analyzed separately. Unlike the data collection stage, this 
time I began with Melany. My hunch was that analysis of the data for Melany would 
provide me with a more comprehensive coding scheme thai 1 could also use with the data 1 
coilected for Eric. 
Intense analysis began with careN reading and rereading of field notes and analytic 
notes to familiariz myself fuliy with the data in preparation for the process of anaiytic 
coding. Further reading of the data was then carried out in order to develop a scheme for 
organizing and coding (Glesne and Peshkin, 1992; Hammersley and Atkinson, 1992). 
M e r  several readings patterns began to emerge in the field notes and particular concepts 
and ideas k a m e  apparent. The foiiowing are examples of ihe forty or more concepts and 

ideas that ernerged as 1 read through the field notes and analytical notes: tirne constraints, 
Melany's view of her role as a teacher, Melany's view of herself versus her peers' view, 
children's knowledge and beliefs about mathematics, teacher's views of mathematics versus 
views of language arts, structure of the class, making connections, pedagogicai content 
knowledge, 1e-g 
for understanding. Sorting and refining of these concepts and ideas 
led to the eliminaîion of those that were less relevant. Cntena 1 employed to &termine 
which concepts and ideas 1 would keep and those that 1 would discarci were: the frequency 
with which they appe& 
their relevancy to the goals of the study, and their link with key 
concepts in the lïteraturie such as factors that affect teaching for understanding. Those 
concepts and ideas that 1 kept were kted and assigned a colored symbol. 1 rhen went back 
through the data to color code it according to the symbols. Once relevant segments of the 
data were noted, they were then recorded on index cards. Searching of the data was also 
intended to idenw d i s c o n f i g  evidence, an activity for improving the probability that 
findings and interpretation will be f o n d  credible (Erickson, 1986; Glesne and Peshkin, 
1992; Lincoln and Guba, 1985). 1 also read and coded transcriptions of interviews and 
audio ta@ 
data of classrwm lessons as a way of checking results of the classiS.hg and 
categorizing of the field notes and analytic notes. This process of cross-checking was also 
intended to corroborate tbe dependability of the data Concepts that remained such as 
making connections, teacher's beliefs, tirne constraints, pedagogical content knowledge, 
views of mathematics versus views of language arts, assessment, teacher's content 
knowledge, curriculum documents, leaniuig for understanding, childxen and classrooms 
were then grouped by index card into more general categories according to identifid 
phenomena These categories were then assigned names which wen more inclusive and 
abstract than those used for the concepts w i t h  them. Tbc foilowing are the categories: 
factors of context that affect (inhibit) teaching for understanding, factors of context that 
promote teaching for understanding, teachers' views and kliefs about the discipline, 
teachers' views about students, teachers' views about their roles as teachers, effectiveness of 

the teacher, xeactivity, access, promoting understanding, content knowledge of the teacher, 
perspective on understanding, c hanging perspective. 
Grouping of concepts within 
categories revealed key linkages of concepts across the categories. In some instances the 
sarne concepts appeared in different categories confirming the consistency and 
dependability of the data (Merriam, 1998). Once the coding for Melany , which resulted in a 
comprehensive scheme, was completed, 1 then went back and repeateû the process for Eric. 
1 faund that analysis of the data for Melany provided a frame of reference for my work with 
Eric. However, 1 was vigilant to ensure that the data were analyzed on their owa merit. On 
completion, cornparison of results reveaIed similarities in my findings. 
Further investigation demonstrated thaî categories which emerged from the c&g 
process matched with the key concepts that frame this study - teachers' bdiefs, teachers' 
content knowledge, and factors of context. These categories gave nse to the centrai themes, 
teachers' beliefs about the tea~hing and learning of rnathematics, teachers' content 
knowledge, teac hers ' perspective of understanding, how teachers promote understanding, 
how they regard their role as teacher, and their style of teaching, which served as scaffolding 
for my writing in Chapters Five and Six. Further scmtiny of these themes revealed k i r  
natural fit and close iink with the thee questions that guide this inquj.. 
Trustworthiness of the Data 
Evidence of measures taken to ensure trustworthiness of the research such as 
triangulation (Glesne and Peshkh, 1992; Harnrnerstey and Atkinson, 1992; Lincoln and 
Guba, 1989; Memam, 1998). searching for negaîive cases (Erickson, 1986; Glesne and 
Peshkin, 1992; Lincoln and Guba, 1985) have been addressed as part of the discussion on 
procedures for data collection a d  anaiysis in previous sections. The following are intended 
as M e r  evidence to support these ideas regarding trustworthiness of the data Morse 
(1994) suggests that it is the amount of data collected, rather than the nurnber of subjects 
which contributes to the rigor of a study. A d i l e m  with which I was confronteci in this 

inquiry was how to deai with the extensive amount of data 1 had collected. After spending 
eight months of research aimost daily from early moming until well afier students were 
dismissed, 1 needed to figure out how best to present this data. Prolonged time researching 
in a setting is more likely to contribute to credible fmdings and interpretation (Lincoln and 
Guba, 1985; Glesne and Peshkin, 1992). Tirne at the research site, time spent interviewhg 
and time building relationships aU contributed to the tmstworthiness of the inquiry. 
Presentation of the Data-Wnting 
Presentation of the data is a time when "the author attempts to weave a text that re- 
creates for the reader the real world that was studied" (DenWn, 1994, p. 507). This stage of 
the research process is filled with new insights, intuition, and decision making (Glesne and 
Peshkin, 1992). Before 1 began writing 1 went back and carefuily reread the data a number 
of h e s  to determine how "to capture the lived experience of participants" (Janesick, l m ,  
p. 218). 
Because the fmt two questions of the study focused on two different, but 
connected aspects of teachers' understanding of teaching for understanding, my initiai 
response was to address h m  
separately in my writing. Sometimes it makes sense to taik 
about what we believe and what we do as two separate ideas. 
After deiiberation and 
discussion with my thesis supervisor, 1 decided that there are times when such an approach 
does not do justice to the phenomenon wder study. Empirïcai and practical considerations 
and the research on the interrelationship between thinking and action (Butt, 1983; Kilboum, 
1988; Schon, 1983) provided powerful evidence to suggest that 1 combine thinking with 
action in my writing. In so doing 1 addressed both question one which inquires into 
teachers' thlliking, and question two which looks at teachers' practice as they rielaie to 
Melany in Chapter Five, and Eric in Six. My decision to change the order in my wrïting 
and discuss Melany before Eric was influenced by images that emerged from analysis of 
the data, and other data sources. The structure that 1 designed for Wnting Chapter F~ve 
served as a mode1 for Chapter Six. 

Presentation of the data took the form of episodes. Of the ten episodes that 1 recall 
for Melany, 1 selected the t h e  that best portrayeci her perspective on teacbing for 
understanding. To guide my writing, 1 used themes, outlined in the &ta analysis section, 
that emerged from restnicturing of the twelve categories. Those themes that fit with 
question one, whic h inquired into teachers ' thinking, were teahers' content knowledge, 
teachen' beliefs about teaching and leaming mathedcs, and teachen' perspective of 
understanding. Those thai connected with question two, which looked at teachers' practice, 
were how teachers promote understanding, how they regard their role as teacher, and their 
styIe of teaching. The foilowing key ideas, subsumed by these themes, were also included 
in developing the episodes: the teacher's perspective of the discipline, resources wed, 
mathematics as compared to Ianguage arts, knowledge of mathematicai concepts, and 
instructional strategies. These key ideas came from the categories that gave rise to the 
themes. On completion of writing Chapter Five, 1 repeated the process for Eric in Chapter 
Six. 
In summary this chapter has discussed the methodology employed for this study. 
The next chapter has two purposes. 
First, it extends the description presented in this 
chapter and provides a more detailed view of each participant. Secondly, it begins CO unpack 
Melany ' s and Eric' s perspectives on understanding. In subsequent chapters 1 continue the 
development to complete in-depth portraits of the two participants. 

Chapter 4 
Preview of Eric and Melany 
This chapter offers a more complete picture of Eric and Melany. In so doing it 
describes their perceptions of themselves as teachers and taks about how others regarded 
them. It also describes Eric's and Melany's views on the teaching of language arts and 
rnathematics. The discussion on language arts is important to this study as it provides a 
usefid referent for understanding what it means to teach for understanding in matheLnatics. 
The chapter also unveils Eric's and Melany 's views on the concept of understanding. This 
preview of Eric and Melany and their views on understanding set the stage for the detailed 
portraits that are developed in Chapters Five and Six. In keeping with the format of the 
previous chapter, 1 begin with Eric. I want to point out thaî 1 have remained faithful to the 
quoted material From the data as 1 presented participants' perceptions and views in this 
chapter; oniy when it interfered with meaning or readability were minor changes made. 1 
have continued this practice in subsequent chapters. 
Overview of Eric 
As a beginning teacher Eric seemed to have "a nanual talent" and sailed through 
his first year of teaching to achieve permanent teaching statu. During the time that 1 
observed Eric, his classroom always ran smoothly and student behavior was never an issue. 
He managed his students with ease and maintained an excellent rapport with them. They 
willingly abided by the class d e s  and readily foliowed routines. It was easy to sense the 
mutual respect that they had for each other. His principal and v i e  principal lauded his 
ability as a teacher, and his cofleagues held hirn in high esteem. At the board levei, Eric 
served on a variety of cornmittees, and he regularly presented workshops to administrators 
and principals on the cornputer tracking system thaî he had developed. 

When Eric taught a lesson he carefully laid out his expectations and modeled 
procedures. I recall the lesson he taught on the science fair project assignment. To 
demonstrate for students what he expected, he presented his version of a project. First he 
displayed a project which was illustrated on heavy cardboard so that it would stand freely. 
All students were expected to use these boards for their projects. Eric then foiiowed with a 
ten minute talk on the project, which in this instance was solutions and suspensions. When 
he finished, he modeled how students were to answer questions about their topics from their 
peers. Eric ended the lesson by carefiilly reviewing each step that he had modeled. 
In Eric's view the leamhg he provided for his students was not the same as other 
teachers. Even though he believed that it was not possible to run a totally experiential 
program at the grade seven Ievel, he suggested that the type of learning that he set up for his 
students was more open ended, and based more in expenence than the "average tacher 
provides" (interview, Apd 9, p. 9). It was different from just giving them information or 
using the textbook. 
For instance, one type of Ieaming he provided was how to conduct your own 
research. As Eric suggested, "studen ts were always working on some independent project 
or topic in a subject, solving and sifting through information" (interview, April 9, p. 12). In 
order to do the research students had to collect information on a topic, organize it, and 
decide how to structure the fuial submission. He emphasized thai the finished product was 
always their decision. One example of a research project that he descnbed was the Native 
Peoples Project in history. For this project students had to gather information, synthesize 
their fmdings, and hand in a written package to him. Eric explained that he would give hem 
a one page sheet of instructions which laid out how to read through a set of materials and 
how to organize the information according to the categories that he had set out for them. 
A second type of learning involvd the use of concrete matenals. In geography he 
wou1d use compasses to teach students how to figure out angular bearings. Once students 
knew how to read a compass, he would take them outdoors to practice. In mathematics he 

would use manipulatives such as fraction sets and geoboards to help students "see" the 
concepts they were learning. The use of portfolios and writing folders also played an 
important role. 
A third type of learning which Eric provided was intenâed to simulate d 
Me 
situations. He partïcularly believed that students requKed the abiiity to respond to the need 
of the moment in their jobs as adults, whether it was business, or teaching, or whatever they 
would be doing. As 1 noted in Chapter Three, Eric believed that students had to know how 
to cope in the real world when they were adults, and his responsibility was to teach them the 
skills. 
1 think there's tons of t b e s  in the d 
world, in aii aspects of Me, that you 
are asked to perfonn on a moment's notice. Like maybe you're an account 
manager, or maybe you're a bond trader. or maybe you're a whatever. It's 
sort of taken for granted. You've got aü these skills, or be able to do ail 
these things. So the boss wallcs in and he says, "Okay 1 got this stuff. 1 
hate to tell you this but 1 need it done by Iunch tirne. Can you get it for 
me?" 
You don't have the night to go home and prepare and get ready. You've got 
to sit down and get it ready .... 
1 think that they've [the students] got to understand what that feels like. 
(interview, April9, p -4) 
According to Eric these skiils were more important than the content he taught. 
Tbe 
following incident that 1 observeci provides evidence of Eric's beiief that it was important to 
prepare his students for adulthood and the world of work. 
Eric was always very diligent about making certain that his students were weU 
informed about upcorning tests and quines. He explained that he would always review the 
necessary subject matter for a test or quiz and would tell students of the appointed date. 
However, this day in particular students were not told previously about the quiz on 
comparing and ordering fractions that he was about to give them. According to Eric this 
was the first tirne that he had ever surprised these students with a test or quiz. They received 
no advance warning. As they entered the rwm be greeted them with the instructions that 

they were to take their seats and put away their books; they were having a mathematics quiz. 
A look of disbelief registered on their faces. Most students appeared to cope with the 
situation. There were some who appeared stressed and anxious; one student became vexy 
excited and o v e m u g h t  Later that &y when 1 ialked with Eric about the experience, he 
explained to me that his intention that morning was to simulate the kind of work situation 
which required dealing with the unexpected with which students, as addts, might be faced. 
Ln his view, the experience was beneficial for them, rather than detrimental. 
As Eric 
suggested, the Life skills that he was developing in his students were the kïnd that the board 
promoted in their exit outcomes and that employers wanted for their employees. 
1 would now Like to tum to a discussion about Enc's views on language arts. For 
the purpose of this inquiry language arts provides a useful referent for understanding what 
it means to teach for understanding in mathematics. Eric's perspective on language arts was 
different from his view of mathematics. According to Eric the language arts cunicuium was 
less structured and pennitted teachers the flexibility that he thought was necessary to teach 
effectiveIy. For example, if students were workuig on a writing assignment and they were 
experiencing mculty 
with the correct use of adjectives and adverbs, he explained that he 
could easily stop, deai with the problern, and still cover the outcomes. If he chose to "flip 
around" the order in which ideas were presented during language arts and he taught bias 
one week instead of creative writing, that was al] right. He also believed that the cwiculurn 
was suffîciendy broad-based to allow him to choose his own novels rather than teach those 
outlined in the guideiines. In Enc's view he had the license to select whatever "vehicle" he 
wanted for presenting concepts. If he were teaching bias or prejudice he could easily use 
the newspaper, a unit on forests or ecosystems raîher than foiiow the expectations of the 
curriculum. According to Exic, "Language arts has latitude and transcends ail bundaries. 
It cornes from ali over, and kids are invoIved in language outside of school. But in math 
they don't think about, and have math learnuig outside of school" (interview, A p d  23, p. 
133). 

Mathematics was different from language arts for Eric. 
It had a more logical 
progression than language arts. He said that, "it doesn't lend itself to spinning ail over the 
place" (interview, March 25, p. 8). Often in our conversaîions, as is common, Eric tended to 
be colloquial. What he probably meant by the previous comment was that rnathematics did 
not provide him with the flexibiiity in his planning and teaching that language did, as noted 
in the previous section. 
Ln mathematics Eric maintained a tight schedule that fit the 
curriculum outcornes. He never veered h m  
the schedule or went beyond the boundaries as 
he did in Ianguage arts. He taught only what was expected. Nevertheles, he did point out 
that he taught mathematics differently fkom the way he taught other subjects. According to 
Eric, he "would pay lip service to what they [the board] wanted done [in the other areas] 
but not in math" (field notes, April22, p. 88). 
Even though Eric provided students with research and "hands-on" experiences in 
mathematics, he explaineci that he was more heavily into Socratic teaching. This kind of 
teaching included "a lot of telling, imparting information and dispensing ideas so they 
[snidents] could perfonn a skill or complete a task" (inte~ew, April 9, p. 13). Eric 
suggested that eighty percent of his time in mathematics was &voteci to Socratic teaching. 
The other twenty percent of the time students worked with partners in "hands on" 
investigations to figure out ideas on their own. According to Eric these percentages also fit 
with his style of teaching in history. However, for language arts, science, and design and 
technology the percentages were reversed. In the following excerpt from the data he 
provides an explanation for his choice. 

Well I'd say, I'm more heaviiy into Socratic teaching in math. and history. 
some type of social studies, history /geography . 1' m more open in science, 
language arts, design and tech ... Yeah, 1 think in math. 1 think in math and 
probably in social studies and what not, there seems to be more of a laid out, 
this is what you shouid be teaching. It's like a checklist. There it is. me 
pointed to the year's outline for mathematics that he had posted on the waii 
by bis desk.] 1 highlight things .... It's more time efficient [in matbematics] 
to teli than to allow them to discover. (interview April9, p. 14) 
In the overview of Eric that I have p~sented 
1 have talked about Eric's perception of 
himself as a teacher and how others saw him. 1 have also discussed his perspective on 
language arts and mathematics. Before 1 taik about Eric's vie- 
on the concept of 
understanding, 1 want to briefly sketch out what it mûant for Eric to be a beginning teacher. 
In one conversation in particulzr 1 recaii Eric saying that he was stiU young and 
impressionable and that he had not taught long enough to develop al1 of his own ideas. He 
said that he had not figured it ail out yet so he was constantly modifying, ~ieviewhg. and 
revising his lessons and assignments in order to meet the needs of his students. He was 
willing to try out other teachers' ideas, and if they worked welI he would incorporate hem 
into his repertoire. It also meant that he was prepared to make m ~ c a t i o n s  
in his program 
to accornrnodate the needs of his students. For example, the changes he made to his 
language arts program this year were motivated by problems his students had encountered 
last year. The assignments he designed for the novel studies at thai time weE far too 
difficult and above the level of the students. From his perspective it was important to do 
what was best for students. I now shift the discussion to Eric's views on understanding, 
particulad y his view s on understanding in mathematics. 
Eric's Views of Understanding 
1 found that Enc was more willing early in our relationship to t& 
about his views 
on understanding than was Melany. 1 believe that my familiarity with Eric was a factor. As 
1 noted in the previous chapter, in the year prior to this study 1 had corne to know Exic quite 

weil professionaily as a result of our work together. 1 am certain that the cornfort level 1 had 
established with Eric made me more relentless than 1 was with Melany in my pursuit to 
learn about his views on understanding. However' on those occasions that 1 did press Eric 
he would explain, as Perkins (1993) advises, thaî it was quite difficult to articulate a 
de finition of understanding. 
... You know, iike, 1 don't know necessarily what understanding is. I'm sure 
that 1'11 see a kid thaî can manipulate it [an idea or concept], and work it 
around, and wheel it around, and they can apply different strategies. And 
sure I'd Say, yes, that kid understands. But to define what understanding 
means, it beats me. (interview, March 28, p. 1) 
Yet, he did suggest that understanding was more of an innate or gut feehg and he could tell 
when students understood, especiaily when he exarnined their work. The longer 1 spent in 
Eric's classrmm the more 1 came to leam about his views on what it means to understand. 
The foilowing discussion serves as evidence. As 1 observed Eric teaching, 1 began 
reguiarly to notice that he would Say to his students, 1 want you to understand. When 1 
asked him what he meant by this statement, he explained that the Unplieci message was that 
he wanted his students to have a wel thought out reason for their answer rather than just 
copying down someone else's ideas. He wanted them to have some reasonable exphnation 
for their written work even if the answer was not c o m t ,  as he States in the following 
comment. 
1 want you [the student] to explain why you put the answer there and not 
because Matthew told me to put it there. 1 want you to feel confident if you 
put that answer there, right or wrong, you can explain to me why you put it 
there. (interview, March 26, p. 14) 
In Eric's opinion, a student's completion of an assignment was not necessarily a parantee 
that the student understood. 
According to Eric, when students t d y  understood concepts and ideas they wouid be 
able to do two things. They would be able to make connections (Good, McCaslin and Reys, 

1992; Hiebert and Carpenter, 1992). and they would be able to apply the knowledge and the 
s a s  that he imparted in a new way (Gardner, 1993). To describe what he meant, he used 
an example from his work on the meaning of fractions. Eric thought that if his students 
couid apply their knowledge about halves and quarters to thirds and sixths, then that showed 
hirn that they understood the concept of fractions. He also suggested, "When they 
[students] formed the pathways and connections themselves to the end product and they're 
abIe to say, Wow, okay, 1 got it; now 1 understand" (interview, March 25, p. 15), that 
demonstrated tme understanding. Eric emphasized tbat students who t d y  understood 
ideas or concepts did not have to mimic the teacher. In a Iater conversation that 1 had with 
Eric, he explaineci. 
The kid wili show me he understands ten years from now when 1 nin into 
them in the store, in the shopping ma& and they start rambling off bat they 
are a math specialist in the University of Toronto. And they stiU never had 
anybody explain it quite weli, and clearly enough, about how to divide 
fractions as 1 did in grade seven. I'ii say, wow, okay, you must have really 
got it. (field notes, April 1, p. 88) 
Eric also noted that tme understanding was dependent on a number of factors. First, 
it was important that a teacher set up activities that had sufficient &pth, so that students 
wouid be able to "sow it [ideas] around, and mix it around, and reuiforce it" (interview, 
March 25, p. 15). Secondly, a teacher needed to have suffîcient tirne for these kinds of 
activities. Eric pointed out that he did not think that he had the time to teach in this way. 
For this reason he hoped that his students wodd be able to make some of the fundamentai 
connections of concepts on their own. Thirdly, the leaming environment bat the teacher 
created was important. He believed that certain leaniing environments generaîed more 
understanding than others. A discovery learning environment was more conducive to 
promoting learning for understanding. 
According to Eric teachers needed to have a good understanding of the content in 
order to effectively teach mathematics or any subject for understanding. Studies conducted 

with teachers in different subject areas (Bail, 1991b; Hashweh, 1986; Wineburg and -, 
Wilson, 199 1) support the beiief that teachers who possess a rich integrated knowledge of 
the subject c m  influence instruction in a positive way (Fennema and Ffanke, 1992). Eric 
also believed that, if a teacher was not able to see the connections that existed among 
concepts, then there was lit& iikelihood that the teacher could structure learning so it was 
meanin@. 
From my observations it was evident bat Eric possessed characteristics of a 
teacher who teaches for understanding. In many of our conversations Eric demomtrated his 
knowledge of the discrete understandings of mathematical concepts and his comfort leve1 
with the discipline. 1 want to add that as a student he had dways been successful in 
mathematics in high school and in university, Eric had a deep understanding of the concepts 
that he taught- One conversation that stands out for me was a discussion on the topic of 
division of fractions. Eric suggested that to teach division of hctions so it was meaningtiil, 
it was important to connect the concept to division with whole numbers. This comment is 
signif~cant for two reasons. Firstiy, it suggests ttat Eric was aware of the need to draw 
students' attention to the many connections that exist in mathematics. In Haylock's (1982) 
view, the more comections the learner can make, the deeper the understanding. Secondly, it 
implies that Eric knew thaî the measurement model for division with whole numbers could 
be used to teach division of fractions to help students "see" why the quotient ends up 
greater than the dividend. From my experience, many elernentaxy teachers are not aware of 
how the measurement model can be used to teach division of fractions. However, Eric was. 
He convinced me of his understanding when he explained that in order for students to 
answer the question, divide four by one eighth, they needed to think about the problem as 
how many groups of one eighth are there in four. He pointed out that if students were able 
to conceptualize the problem in this way, it suggested they understood the idea of whaî it 
means to divide by a fraction. This approach to dividing fractions is more meaningful than 
memorizing the rule, to divide by a fraction, invert and multiply. 

Eric also believed in the idea that there were different levels or degrees of 
understanding in any classroom, a notion that is formaiiy discussed in the literature 
(Backhouse, 1978; Byers, 1980). The following excerpt provides evidence of Eric's views. 
AU the kids wili undentand it [the concept of mixed numbers and improper 
fractions] at different levels. How about that? Every kid in this room will 
understand something about that sheet. Some will understand it better than 
others. Some of them don't understand the instructions, let alone the 
answers. (interview, March 26, p. 16) 
For Eric, it was not possible to teach for one hundred percent understanding, because, as he 
said, "You can't make aii kids understand di the things that you're teaching" (interview, 
March 28, p. 1). Moreover, not many students in his class had whaî he considered to be 
true understanding. In his view, there mïght only be three or four students who tndy 
understood when a new concept or idea was taught. 
Overview of Melany 
Even though Melany had sûuggled early in her career, her teaching now could easily 
be described as a "portrait of expertise" (Shuiman, 1987). Melany 's close colleague, Sherri, 
described her as someone who "always knows how things are going to work and what the 
outcome will be" (field notes, November 11, p. 150). Other teachers in the schwl lauded 
her superior teaching ability and provided me with unsolicited accounts of her achievements. 
Her pers in the teaching community had honored her with a special award fiom The 
National Reading Association for exceilence in teaching language arts. 
From my observations and conversations with Melany and from comments that her 
colleagues would casually offer about ber teaching, 1 came to see her as a teacher who had, 
in Shulman's (1987) tenns, " ... the capacity of a teacher to transform the content 
knowledge he or she possesses into fonns that are pedagogically powerfui and yet sdapbve 

to the variations in ability and background presented to the students" (p. 15). There were 
many occasions when 1 observed this unique ability about which Shulman (1987) ialks. 
1 recail how she effectively facilitateà students' learning and skillfully orchestrated 
successes that they might not otherwise attain. One situation stands out for me. 
Her 
students had to design a questionnaire for the playground study which was part of an 
integrated unit she had developed with a colleague. Each student had to develop questions 
that would eiicit from pers in a neighboring school detailed information about the positive 
and negative characteristics of their playground. 
It was a difficult task even for an 
intermediate student. 
However, Melany knew how to inject the appropriate blend of 
support and independence as her students worked through the task. She would ask just the 
right question at the opportune moment to stimulate her students' thinking. 1 recall when 
they were struggling with the content of the questions Melany suggested that they think 
back to concerns they had with their own school playground. This advice seemed to be the 
jump start that they needed. The mode1 questions that she wrote on the chalkboard to guide 
them also worked effectively. It was evident from their work at the end of the lesson that al1 
students had successfÙily completed the task with impressive questions for grade five 
children. The foUowing are samples: What are some of the problems on the play stmctures 
at your school? What places are safe to play? What places are unsafe on the playground? 
Why? What kinds of actinties do you play on the field of your school? What do people 
play when the field is closed? What kinds of activities do boys play? What kinds of 
activities do girls play? 
1 should add that discipline was never an issue for Melany whiIe 1 observeâ in her 
classroom. An effectively worded comment or a discemhg glance at the right moment 
seemed to d i m e  any situation before it became a problem. Melany, iike Exic, believed that 
she offered her students learning experiences that other teachers did not. Most teachers 
subscnbe to this belief, Melany demonstrated that she actudy took this statement to kart. 
For example, to provide students with practice for finding area Melany had thcm complete 

an investigation designed by Mariiyn Burns, rather than have them fmd how much carpeting 
was needed for a house. In her view, not many grade five students ever bought carpeting for 
their house, and there reaily was no point in teaching students ideas that had no meaning for 
them. Moreover, Bums' investigations engaged students in inquiry that C O M W ~ ~ ~  
with their 
interests and knowledge base. Melany also regularly integrated mathematics concepts with 
other areas of the curriculum in order to make leamhg meaningfd for her students. 
For the present overview 1 have included ttiree examples to illustrate what integration 
meant for Melany. These examples aiso demonstrate how she began from students' 
knowledge base. The fmt example is the integrated social and environmental studies unit 
which extended over much of the time that 1 spent observing in Melany's classroom. This 
unit, which Melany and Shem developed, was designed to integrate mathematics with 
environmental studies. A key feature of the unit was to engage students in solving real iifè 
problems. A major activity for students was to conduct a study of the school playground to 
find out how effectively the playground met the needs of the school population. The task 
involved interviewhg teachers and students throughout the school to detexmine their views 
on whether the playgound was well used. Students also had to observe the play area every 
day for one week at peak times such as recess, before school began in the moming, and in 
the afternoon to determine the pattern and frequency of use of the equipment. The data they 
collecteci fiom their observations was aaalyzed and used as the basis for deciding if 
additional equiprnent was needed. A class forum was held, and after much discussion a 
decision was made that the school needed to buy more equipment. Students then worlced 
together to figure out the total cost of equipment from catalogue pnces paying close 
attention to budget constraints, as Melany advised. The class was also responsible for 
measuring the school yard in order to detennine the availability of space for the new 
equipment. When dl this work was completeà, a report was drafied and sent io the school 
principal for approval. 

The second example involves the Structures Unit in science. In this unit Melany 
integrated mathematics with science. The unit bega. with three dimensional geometry 
activities which were iatended to familiarize students with the names and characteristics of 
the solids. These activities were followed by an activity in which students built structures 
out of newspaper. The purpose of structures activity was to provide students with an 
opportunity to figure out which geometric shapes offered the most stability in preparation 
for bridge building. The unit then culminated with the design, building, and testing of their 
bridges for sturdiness, 
The third example concentrates on the teaching of French, which was not Melany's 
favorite subject. Even in this subject Melany made certain that school leaming was 
comected to students' real M e  interests. To help students learn the names of different 
nouns, Melany had them conduct surveys in French to fmd out which sports were favored 
by the class. Once the da& was collected and andyzed, students were then required to 
graph their results. 
This French activity demonstrated yet another way in which 
mathematics was integrated with different areas of the curriculum. 
For Melany it was important to provide students with the structure that she thought 
that they needed and wanted. Each morning she would p s t  the day's schedule on the 
board before her students arrïved in the classroom. The schedule outlined the subjects she 
would be teaching, the ixtivity for each subject, the homework assignments that would be 
taken up that day, and the homework for that evenuig. She dways made certain that 
students were well acquainted with the d e s  and routines of the classroom and posted them, 
dong with the names of monitors for the week, in a strategic location in the classroom In 
Melany's view, when a teacher was responsible and consistent with students, it would "pay 
off' in their classroom behavior. As 1 suggested eariier, discipluie was never a problem in 
her classroom. 
1 want to shift now and talk about Melany's language arts program. The discussion 
is important for two reasons. First, Melany's persona as a teacher can not be portrayeci 

adequately without addressing her language arts program. It defmed who she was as a 
tacher, and it was the source of her images and views about teaching. Secondly, as 1 
suggested eariier, with respect to this inquiry, language arts provides an important referent 
for understanding what it means to teach for understanding in mathematics. From my many 
conversations with Melany I leamed that language arts had a preferred status for her. Over 
the years she had spent considerable time reading and researching in the area of Ianguage 
arts. The support she had received from colieagues and board personnel facilitated the 
development of the program that she now had in place. The program focused on reading, 
wnting and discussion. From my view, it was comprehensive and rigorous yet sufficiently 
flexible to accommodate the diverse backgrounds and levels of ability of her students. For 
rnost activities, students worked at theu own pace on individualized assignrnents with the 
occasional whole class assignment. 
Melany reserved mornings in her schedule for language arts so she could devote 
considerable tirne to it each day. There were times when she would extend language arts 
into the afiemoon after the lunch break. Her reason for choosing momings was that it 
afforded more t h e  for teaching than aftemoons. Also, she did not want her ESL students, 
who were withdrawn for upgrading in the afternoon, to miss it. Most mornings began with 
Melany reading to her students from a variety of authors which included different styles of 
writing. She wanted to expose students to different genres so that she might develop their 
appreciation of literatute. Morning readings were usuaiiy followed with a class discussion 
on the reading. Then students were given instructions for the upcomiag writing activity. 
Because Melany's writing program was individualized, she and Shem, the resource m h e r  
for language arts, would meet regularly with students, either in small groups or one-on-one, 
to discuss their work. Shem's role was to provide suppon for Melany's language arts 
program. While students worked on their stories and poems, she and Melany judkiously 
offered suggestions. As the stories and poems began to emerge, public readings known as 
"audiences" were held. This activity was unique in (hat it provided a forum for studenîs to 

read their stories or poerns to classrnates who would then offer advice in a constructive 
manner. During the time that 1 was present, students were cornfortable with the process and 
favorably accepted cntiquing and suggestions. Another technique that Melany used with 
her students for editing poems and stories was partner- work. For this activity students 
would work with fkiends in pairs and take tums providing each other with ideas for 
improving their writing. 
Reading was also an important component of Melany's Iauguage arts program. It 
too was individualized. During this activity students would read their favorite library book 
independently for about twenty minutes each day. In addition, students read once a week to 
children in the younger grades. An important ntual during language arts was status-of-the- 
class. For this activity, either Melany or Shem wodd stop the class at strategic intervals to 
survey students in order to determine theu progress on the variety of assignments on which 
they were working. This tracking activity insured that Melany's fmger was always on the 
pulse of her language arts program. 
1 have just given a quick overview of Melany's language arts program to illustrate its 
complex nature and the extensive time that she devoteû to it. 
The situation was not the 
same for mathematics. Similar to other teachers on her team, Melany taught matbernatics 
for 45 minutes in the afternoon. However. less than half way through this inquixy, Melany 
decided to change her schedule and move language arts to the afternoon. As a remit, 
mathematics was switched to the morning so that more time could be devoted to it. 
Accordhg to Melany, a better balance was needed between laquage and mathematics in her 
overail program. She also wanted to accommodate her ESL students in mathematics 
because the ESL tacher had movd language classes to the aftemoon. Even though 
Melany suggested that mathematics lacked some of the important features of ber language 
program, she did not want these students to be "short changed". 
Melany's mathematics program was not as individualiIed and diverse in its 
approach as was ber language arts program. 
According to Melany, it did not provide 

students with the "opportunity for independent thinking" (interview, November 26, p. 40) 
in the same way that language arts did. Ya she did suggest that the experiences she 
provided for students in mathematics were different from those prescnbed by the board or 
that most teachers offered. 
Melany was most emphatic when she told me that she wouid only teach "something 
[in mathematics], if 1 could teach it to make it rneaningfbl" (interview, November 26, p. 43, 
which was her motivation for using Marilyn Burns' materiais. Burns (1987) uses a 
holistic approach to teaching mathematics. The investigations she develops are designed to 
promote meaning and understanding in children's leaming. 
Burns also sets up the 
investigations so that students work both individuaüy and in smaii groups to problem solve, 
to inquire into ideas, and to experience reai life mathematics. Discussion, jouxnal writing 
and the use of concrete materials are important features of the investigations. Melany 
started to use these investigations when she "began changing the way she thought about 
mathematics" (fieid notes, September 27, p .45). She selected them on the basis of their fit 
with concepts in the prescribed rnathematics curriculum and her level of confidence in 
teaching them. She liked Mariiyn Burns' ideas. In Melany 's vkw, the narrative style that 
Burns uses to describe investigations, and the description of children's responses provided 
Melany with the detaii that she needed to construct the kind of activities in which she wanted 
her students engaged. 
Another consideration for Melany in deciding which concepts to teach was, "how 
well they fit together" (interview, November 26, p. 39). According to Melany, it made more 
sense to teach area and perimeter together, rather than to teach area one month and five 
rnonths later teach perimeter. Pedagogically and conceptuaily this was a sound decision. 
When area and perimeter are taught as two connecteci ideas rather than as isolated concepts, 
it reduces the probabiiity of confusion that students ofien experience. Instead of fmdhg 
perimeter when they need to find ana or vice versa, or using the wrong unit of measure 
when solving a problem, students are more inclined to cany out these tasks correctly. The 

added benefit of teaching in this way is that students may corne to appreciate some of the 
less obvious relationships between perirneter and area such as four-sided figures with tbe 
same area can have different shapes, or the closer the shape of these figures approximatcs a 
square, the greater their surface axea. To make leamhg of decimals more rneaningfid for 
her students, Melany said that she always taught them after fractions. In Melany's view tbe 
purpose of teaching them in this way was to heip students realize that decimal numbers were 
yet another notation for fractions. 
From our many conversations I came to learn that Melany did not think that 
textbooks were usefid for teaching new concepts. S he suggested that "with textbook work 
you dont need t~ think" (field notes, November 29, p. 227). However, there were instances 
when the textbook did play a role in her program. She used the textbook when she thought 
that she did not have any other options for interesting ways to teach a concept, or when she 
needed a break from the intensity of teaching. When 1 fmt ohserveci her in the classrmm, 
she was using a textbook to teach standard and expanded forms of numbers and to teach 
mu1tipIes of ten. She explained at the time that even if it was boring for her to teach in this 
way, she did not feel that she had any other options. She had used Baratta-Lorton's (1976) 
approach the previous year to teach place value and taught other bases such as t h ,  four, 
and five before teaching base ten. Baratta-Lorton sets up leamhg so that students explore 
groupings in other bases in order to facilitaie their understanding of place vaiue with base 
ten. From Melany's point of view, it was more meanulgful than the textbook method, but it 
was confusing for her students because they were not accustomed to working in other 
bases. So this year she reverted to the conventional textbook method. It was less work for 
her as she only needed to focus on base ten, and it saved her fiom preparing ai! the extra 
rnaterials. The textbook was also w r 6 d  for students to practice k i r  skiiis, and for days 
when supply teachers replaced her due to absence. 

These, then, are impressions of Melany that 1 developed as I observed in her 
classroorn over a period of four months. Let me tum to Melany's views on understanding, 
particdariy those views C O M ~ C ~ ~  
to mathematics. 
Melanv's Views of Understanding 
To fully capture Melany's views on understanding 1 have included in this section 
her generai cornments regarding the phenornenon, her views on teaching for understanding 
and learning for understanding. According to Melany, "understanding was not something 
that you codd talk about in the abstract" (interview, October 17, p. 39). It had to be tied to a 
specific content area because it was not "a generic concept which was inclusive to d 
disciplines" (field notes, October 7, p. 66). Each content area or concept had its own set of 
critena that determined what it meant to understaud. 
You know when we were working on area, then 1 can tell you what 1 think it 
means to understand area at this point. And when it has to do with writing, it 
means, you know, 1 would have to look at what they're writing now in terms 
of poetry, and what they're writing heading into fiction writing, whatever .... 
(interview, October 17, p. 40) 
For Melany , teac hing for understanding meant "giving kick expenences where they 
can start coming up with their own, expressing and cladjhg tàeir own understanding of 
concepts" (interview, Novernber 20, p. 13). In her view, neither transmission teaching or 
textbook work provided students with this kind of leamhg. According to Melany it was a 
teacher's responsibility to motivate students to think, to make generalizations. The teacher 
also needed to provide students with the opportunity to taik about their M
g
,
 
and whai 
they were thinking, as Good, McCaslin and Reys (1992) advise. For Melany, "being able 
to articulate what you think, is a very high tevel of understanding" (interview, Novernber 29, 
p. 19). It was also important to extend students' thinking, and making learning relevant as 
she notes in this bnef excerpt fiom the data. 

How can students be expected to understand what large numbers are when 1 
myself don't. When do we ever really get to see what five thousand or 
twenty five hundreû looks like in real Me. 
(field notes, September 18, p. 1 1) 
In order for students to leam for understanding, Melany suggested that they had to 
be able to comect new concepts in different ways- to theu d t y ,  to other mathematical 
concepts and to other disciplines. The more connections that students made, the more 
rneanuigful the learning wouid be for them and the greater the understanding. As I noted 
earlier, the idea of making connections to increase understanding in mathematics is a weîl 
discussed theme in the literaiure (Haylock, 1982; Hiebert and Carpenter, 1992). The 
following is an example of important connections needed for making the learning of area 
more meaningful: that area and perimeter are related, that square units are used for 
measuring area, that ara concerns the amount of surface, that area is important when 
building houses or buyùig land, and so on. 
According to Melany, the greatest understanding occumd when leamiog was 
"needs generated" (field notes, November 27, p. 222) either by the student, or by the task at 
hand. 
An example of what she meant by "needs generated can be seen in the 
measurement activity which 1 discussed in Chapter Three. When Melany realized that 
students were using their meter sticks incorrectly to measure the distances, she stopped the 
ciass. At that point she taught a lesson on the concept of a linear unit and how to measure 
correctly with a meter stick. When it was obvious to her that most students could measure 
correctly, she had them resume the original activity. Later, in conversation about this 
incident she explained that this was an instance wherie teacbing evolved fiom students' 
needs. 
Like Eric, Melany also subscribed to the belief that in any class there ate degrees of 
understanding, "[a] wide spectnun of different levels or degrees of understanding", as 
Haylock (1982, p. 54) suggests. According to Melany, the indicators of these degrees of 

understanding might be the strategies that a student employed to work through an idea, the 
nature of a student's co~~~munication, 
and the nature of the reflection in a student's writing. 
Students who could talk about an idea and explain it in their oum words demonstrated 
understanding. Monover, if they had the ability to express themselves effectively in writing, 
that constituted reai understanding. 
A discussion that Melany had with her students, before she set hem to work on an 
activity that focused on the relationship between perimeter and area of four- sided figues, 
demonstrates how levels of understanding might vaq in a classroom. For this activity 
students fmt had to outline their foot with a marker on one-centimeter graph paper. Then 
they had to lay string around the outline of their foot in order to find its perimeter. At this 
point they were asked to predict if the piece of string that was laid on the graph paper to 
make a square would have the same or different area measure fiom their foot. An additional 
condition was that the square had to inçIude as many complete squares on the graph paper 
as possible. 1 want to point out that this activity, which also considered the relationship 
between perimeter and area, was sirnilar to one on which students had worked the previous 
week 
During the discussion on the fmt activity in which students talked about their 
predictions, I observai that there were some who demonstrated tbat they cledy understood 
that the square would have the greater surface area. These students were able to show with a 
series of diagrams that as the rectangle became "Ionger and thinnef' and closer to the 
shape of their foot. its area diminished. They were also able to demoustraie the reverse- that 
the area of the rectangle increased as it approached the shape of a square. There were 
students who sensed that the square would have the greater surface area. However, they 
were unable to provide an explanation. Othr students said that they thought the areas 
would be different, but their reasoning was faulty as the foilowing s a q l e  responses 
demonstrate. 

Student One: 
Student Two: 
S tudent Three: 
Student Four: 
You don't count the litde parts of the squares in the foot and that 
would make up for the ciifference. 
The areas would be different because the foot goes in and out and 
the square doesn* t. 
The areas would be different because the foot has curves in it, but 
the square has straight lines. 
The areas would be different because its flatter. 
(field notes, November 7, p. 129) 
There were those students who appeared ta have no idea at aü. Perhaps they were not 
prepared to risk presenting their ideas to their pers. Some quietly urged me to tell tbem 
what 1 thought the correct answer might be. As Backhouse (1978) points out, '6Not all 
pupils will be equaüy successful; there are degrees of understanding ..." (p. 40). 
To 
complete this brief discussion on Meiany's views I want to add that, for her, understanding 
was a changing and evolving process. 
Because of its dynamic nahirie, students' 
understanding never stayed the same and was affectecl by different experiences. Citing her 
own situation as an exarnple, Melany noted that her understanding in mathematics was also 
changing, and it would probably undergo further change by the time thaî I was finished my 
research in her classroom. 
In summary, this chapter reveals that Eric was a teacher who had a "natural talent" 
for teaching. According to Eric, he provideci students with leamhg that was different h m  
the type of leaming that other teachers offered their students. In his view it was more open- 
ended and based more in experience, and different from just giving students information or 
using the text book. Although it was not easy for Eric to articulate what understanding 
meant for h i . ,  he did suggest that it was more of an innate or gut feeling and he could tell 
when students understood, especiaiiy when he examined their work According to Eric, 
when students truly understood concepts and ideas they would be able to make comections 
as Good, McCaslin and Reys (1992) and Hiebert and Carpenter (1992) suggest, and they 
would be able to apply the knowledge and the skills that he imparted in a new way (Gardner, 
1993). 

It is also evident that Melany was a teacher who "always knew how things wae 
going to work and what the outcornes would be" (field notes, November 1 1, p. 150). As she 
suggests, she would only teach concepts and ideas if she could make them meaninghil for 
her students. Moreover, Melany had the capacity to transform the content knowledge she 
possessed into forms that were pedagogically powerful and adaptive to the variations in 
ability and background presented to her students (Shulman, 1987). 
In her Mew, 
"understanding was not some thing that you could t a k  about in the abstract" (interview, 
October, 17, p.39). It had to be tied to a specitic content area because it was not " a generic 
concept which was inclusive to aU disciplines" (field notes, October 7, p.66). For Melany, 
the greatest understanding o c c ~ d  
when learning was "needs generated" (field notes, 
November, 27, p.222). Like Eric, sbe believed that in any class there are degrees of 
understanding, "[a] wide spectrum of ciifferen t levels or degrees of understanding" 
(Haylock, 1982, p. 54). 
The next two chapters M e r  &velop the pictures of Eric and Melany 1 have 
presented. 
However, the nature of the Mting varies in order to accommodate the 
presentation and interpretation of the data Also the order has been changed, as 1 noted in 
Chapter Three, in which 1 taik about Melany and Eric. This decision was influenceci by 
images that emerged h m  analysis of the data and conversations with others about my 
research. 

Chapter 5 
A Portrait of Melany's Life in the Classrmm 
The purpose of this chapter is to address the fmt two questions that guide this study 
as they relate to Melany, 
1 ) What does it mean to teach for understanding in the context of the mathematics 
classroom? 
2) What are the implications of teachers' perceptions of what it means to teach for 
understanding? 
The chapter begins by briefly revisiting Melany's views about language arts; those are 
significant because they defme Melany's image of herself as a teacher, and they serve as a 
useful benchmark for understanding her perspective on mathematics. A discussion of her 
approach to mathematics foliows and sets the stage for the three teaching episodes that are 
the focus of the chapter. 
As 1 explained in Chapter Three, initiaiiy 1 intended to address the fust two 
questions separatety. However, empiricai and practical considerations and the research on 
the interrelationship between thinking and action (Butt, 1983; Kilboum, 1989; Schon, 1983) 
convinced me to deal with both concepts together. The foilowing key themes which 
emerged from the data provide the necessary scaffolding for what I have to Say: teachers' 
beliefs about the teaching and leaming of maîhematics, teachers' content knowledge, 
teachers' perspective of understanding, how teachers promote understanding, how they 
regard their role as teacher, and their style of teaching. The fint three themes (teachers' 
beliefs about the teaching and leamhg of mathematics, teachers' content knowledge, 
teachers' perspective of understanding) are tied to teachers' ttiinking, which is at the kart 
of question one. The latter thne (how teachers promote understanding, how they regard 
their role as teacher, and their style of teaching), which are practice-related, fit with question 
number two. The foilowing key ideas subsumed by these themes are also addresseci: the 
teacher's perspective of the discipline, tesotmes use& mathematics as compared to language 

am, 
knowledge of mathematid concepts, and insbuctional strategies. My interpretive 
commen taries are iategrated with the descriptive passages in each episode. 
Melany's A~oroach to Laneage Arts 
Melany's approach to language arts reflected her view of herseif as a facilitaîor of 
leaming and a picture of what it means to teach for understanding. She explained that she 
only resorted to telling when she had no other strategies upon which to draw. Her extensive 
repertoire in this area of the curriculum allowed her to fill any "tirne-lag" in her day with a 
language activity - sornething she would not do with mathematics. According to Melany, 
the process nature of her language arts program "accomrnodated a wide breadth of 
understanding" (tield notes, November 15. p. 156). 
There were few large group 
assignments in language arts during the time that I observed in Melaay's classroom. Most 
activities were individualized to meet the diverse needs of student and to allow them to work 
at their own level of ability. At the came tirne that she encouraged students to take 
responsibility for their learning, Melany also ûied to provide them with the support she 
thought they needed: 
Kids aren't king told what to do, when to do it, how to do it- Weii maybe, 
how to, but they're not king told what to write, how long to write it, how 
long it has to be. Like there's aii kinds of things that all of a sudden aren't 
cut and dried for hem, so it's a little disconcerting for them. They're 
responsible to choose their own topic. They're responsible to decide when 
it's done and when it needs to be revised, ail that kind of stuff. 1 mean I'm 
there to help them out and give them suggestions, but it's their, basicaiiy 
their responsibility . (interview, October 9, p. 2) 
Students chose their own books for independent reading, acted as critics during the 
ritual of public audience, and confemed with each other as they worked. 
Assignments 
reflected Melany's effort to make learning meaningful and connect it to students' real Me 
experiences and interests. One that stands out was a story writing assignment in which 
students were asked to describe an encounter with a favorite television or mwie character. 

The enjoyment that students experienced was reflected in their enthusiasm for the task and 
the quality of the stories they produced. Io summary 1 suggest that Melany believed that in 
language arts sbe provided for a "breadth of understanding", made leaming meaninghil for 
her students and promoted understanding. 
Also, the process nature of her program 
accommodated her facilitative style of teaching. 
Melany ' s  A~proach to Mathematics 
In the foUowiBg paragraphs 1 briefiy âiscuss Melany's early experiences with 
mathematics; then 1 talk about her approach to mathematics. The discussion regarding her 
early experiences is important because it acts as a backdrop for understanding changes she 
was making in her approach to teaching mathematics. It also provides a frame of reference 
for understanding her views of teaching for understanding. Melany pointed out that, at the 
beginning of her career, she regardeci mathematics as something she was obligeci to teach, 
not something that she redy wanted to teach. She gave students drills, the very CLnUs that 
she "flunked out on", and she focused on knowing facts and tirnetables. She said that she 
never considered asking students what they wexe thinking; neither did she consider that 
there might be more than one way to get an answer. 
She based instruction on the 
progression in the cmiculum guidelines, and she used the textbook for ideas on how to 
teach the concepts. She claimed that her approach to teaching had been colored by her eary 
negative experiences in elementary school. Research suggests that teachers' earlly ctassrmm 
experiences often shape the way that they think about mathematics (Brown, Cooney, and 
Jones, 1990; Feinman-Neriser and Buchmann, 1986; haie, 1975; Schoenfeld, 1992; 
Thompson, 1986; Zeichner and Gore, 1990). 
Although Melany had always been the best student in her class and could do 
mathematics, she believed that she was not very good at it because she faiied basic skilis 
testing as early as grade two. The problem was that she could not do bcr number facts, 
particularly addition and subtraction, quickly enough. Accordhg to Melan y matbernatics 

was &y, dull, and boring in elementary school. It was rules and drills with only one right 
answer. It was not until high school that mathematics k a m e  fascinating for Melany; then 
it becarne more iike doing a woademil puzzle, especiaiiy algebra and georneay. It was th 
time when 
Melany was rnost successful in school, and her highest marks wexe in 
mathematics. However, there were stül "things that I didn't d
y
 
know how they worked 
till 1 got to teach it" (interview, October 4, p.35). 1 want to add that Melany chose not to 
study mathematics beyond highschool, and the professional development in which she 
engaged as a teacher was iimited to special activity days mandated by the schoot board. 
For Melany, mathematics was now "a topic that 1 am becoming more and more 
enamored with and fmd very fascinating" (interview, Oftober 4, 19%, p. 27). She was 
aware that "there's very many more ways to get these answers and in fact to fmd out from 
kids how they get their answen was fascinating" (interview, October 4, p. 34). Also, she 
was spending more tirne in mathematics "having kids talk and relate to each other, having 
more kids explaining in a class discussion what they thought and why" (interview, 
November 27, p. 27). In Melany's view, her approach to mathematics was becoming more 
like Ianguage arts as she suggests in the following. 
So that's [my mathematics program] bexoming more iike my language 
program where 1 base my teaching on whai their needs are, whereas in the 
past it would have been according to what was in the textbook. 1 shouldn't 
have said what's in the textbook. It wouid have been according to the 
curriculum guidelines and then going to the textbook and seeing what they 
would teach. (interview, October 4, p. 34) 
Melany pointed out lhat she had been working at changing her mathematics program for 
about the past five years. (She indicated that she had experienced similar changes in 
language arts earlier in her carrer.) Even though her mathematics program was changing 
she doubted if it could ever be exactly the same as ber language arts program. From her 
point of view, mathematics was still more structurrd and answer-oriented than language arts. 
Also, not al1 the teaching techniques thaî she used for language arts could be used for 
mathematics. For exarnple, it was tw difncult to set up mathematics so that atl students 

worked at their own pace. However, she did insist that her mathematics program offered 
students experiences that other teachers wouidn't or couidn't as noted in this comment. "It 
is my impression that not too many people give kids the kind of richness of experiences in 
math that 1 do" (interview, December 16, p. 41). 
In the following paragraphs 1 tak about features of Melany 's mathematics program 
that she beiieved made it different fiom other teachers. The "hands-on" problem solving 
investigations in which her students were regularly engaged was one feature. 
These 
investigations were taken from Marilyn Burns' resources. 
Melany favored Burns' 
approach to teaçhing mathematics because it made mathematics meaningfbl for students, 
and the investigations fit with topics in the cumiculum- As 1 noted in Chapter Four, Burns 
presents mathematics differently from most textbook authors. According to Melany, the 
narrative style that Burns uses "almost scripted" the lessons for the teacher and it was 
similar to the language arts resources that she liked to use. The following is an example of 
an excerpt of a lesson taken from Marilyn Burns (1987) in which students explore 
multiplication with rectangles. 
In this lesson the students investigate multiplication from a different approach- 
through a gwmeûic investigation of rectangular arrays. Having children look at 
multiplication fkom a geometric perspective contributes to their concept 
development. Too often children's multiplication instruction focuses kavily on 
learning the d e s  and procedures for performing multiplication calculations at îhe 
expense of leaming underlying concepts. Teaching mathematical understanding 
must emphasize underlying concepts with procedures.. . . 
DAY ONE: MAKING THE RECTANGLES 
For this part of the leson. 1 used one-inch square t h ,  paper d e d  into one- half- 
inch squares, and scissors. The children were seated in srnail groups; there were six 
groups of four children each and one group of three. 1 had enough paper so thaï 1 
could give twenty-five to each group and I had duplicated enough paper so that each 
group had four sheets. 1 put an extra stack of paper on the supply table. There were 
enough scissors so each student could have a pair. 
1 began by introducing rectangular arrays. 1 explaineci, "There are twenty-five tiles 
for your group. I'd like you to work with partners for this first task." (p. 72) 

Another component of Melany's program that she thought made it different was 
the ideas from Barb. her former coileagw. Barb had introduced Melany to Marilyn Burns. 
She credited Barb with "getting her into another approach to teaching mathematics" 
(interview, November 27, p. 27). According to Melany, Barb was "[the] one teacher at the 
elementaq level in my twenty years of teaching who had a sense of teacbing ... with 
something of interest in math" (interview, October 4, p. 35). Barb, Iike Marilyn Burns, 
believed in the importance of a holistic approach to the teaching and leamhg of 
mathematics. 
Melany point& out that the strategies she used to make mathematics more 
meaningfid for her students also made ber program different from other teachers. One 
strategy, about which she talked, was the use of concrete materids. In Melany's view the 
materials provided students with a .  opportunity "to see" ideas, and helped to build their 
unders tanding . Research (Cruickshank and Sheffield, 1988; Labinowin, 1985) suggests 
that the appropriate use of concrete materials contributes to children's understanding of 
mathematical concepts. Another strategy of Melany's was to start with a basic concept 
when teaching new ideas and gradually move to concepts that were more complex. One 
exarnple Melany used to explain what she meant was the concept of area, a topic on which 
she was working at the tirne. In Melany's view, the basic concept for area was "covering- 
the- surface". With this idea in muid, she would begin a lesson by iilustrating a closecl 
figure on the overhead. Then, she would demonstrate, for example, how to cover the surface 
area with standard units of measure using centirneters. Once students were cornfortable 
measuring with centimeters, she would move to working with meters. Eventually, students 
wodd solve area problems using larger units of rneasure. A second example was the 
concept of place value, on which she was also workuig. For place value, the basic approach 
was to teach grouping by tens and hundRds ushg the base ten matenalsl. Thea, she would 
move to teaching thousands, ten thousands, and hundred thousands. 1 was able to observe 
Melany use these strategies in her teaching during the time 1 spent in her classroom. 

The above introduction sets the stage for understanding the ttuee episodes of 
teaching that follow. As 1 explained in Chapter Three, 1 spent most days of a four month 
period in Melany's classroom from early momuig until well after students were dismissed 
for home. From the ten episodes that stand out as markers, 1 have selected three. 1 have 
chosen tbese episodes because fmt they show how Melany implemented new ways of 
teaching that made her mathematics program more like her language program. Second, the 
episodes iiiustrate how Melany promoted understanding in her teaching. 
Tbird, they 
indicate Melany 's depth of knowledge and deep unders tanding of maîhematid concepts. 
Finaily, the episodes reveal Melany's beliefs about the teaching and leaniiag of mathematics 
and her views on understanding. 
A Different Approach to Area 
This first episode descnbes an approach to teaching the concept of area thai is 
different from whai Melany and other teachers 1 have observed generaliy use. 
This 
approach was implemented as part of tbe integrated social and environmental studies unit 
Melany designed with her colleague, Sherri. Previously 1 pointed out that Melany believed 
in the importance of making leamhg relevant and connecting new ides to students' Me 
experience. Unless a need was created for leaming a particular concept or idea, Melany 
believed that it was best not to teach it, According to Melany the playground study, which 1 
described in the previous chapter, was an ideal place to teach area because a need was 
created. To determine the most effective use of the playground, it was important for 
students to know the area and the perinieter of the school yard. Tbey had to ensure that 
there was still sufficient space for younger students to play once the new equiprnent was in 
place. 1 move now to a discussion of Melany ' s approach to teaching area. 
As we had inîtidiy agreed 1 helped Melany plan the aaivities for area This 
opportunity to work with Melany provided me with valuable learning about her attitude to 
mathematics. 1 also discovered thaf unlike language arts, teachers on the grade five team 

usualiy planned their own mathematics units. Typically, tachers follow the progression 
laid out in textbooks and curriculum documents when they plan measurement units. They 
begin with perimeter, then follow with area Melany, on the other hand began with area and 
followed with perimeter. Her reasoning was that the investigations on perimeter and area 
that she liked to use h m  Marilyn Burns were laid out differently fiom curriculum 
documents. 
Melany's decision to begin with standard units of measurement was uinuenced by a 
belief that students would already have some basic ideas about area and perimeter fiom 
grade four. Also, the curriculum guidelines recommended that teachers begin with standard 
measurement. Her plan was to begin with zn activity in which students were to fmd the atea 
of a nurnber of different classroom objects using square centimeter paper and the fia& 
fmm the base ten materials. Then they would engage in an activity with squam meters. In 
Melany's view, working with square meters would prepare the students for fmding the area 
of the playing field. By the end of the unit, she wanted students "to undentand that length 
times width gives you area" (field notes, September 25, p. 27). 
At this juncture 1 found myself in somewhat of a diiemma From my experience, 
students at this grade level need the experience of measurïng with nonstandard uni& before 
they work with standard measurement. In so doing it allows them to focus on the process 
of meamring, rather than being distracteâ by the standard units. It also provides students 
with an opportunity to come to understand that the basic unit of masure for area is a 
square, which is one unit by one unit, not a "centimeter squared" - a term that students and 
teachers frequently use incorrectly. Also, they would learn that area is more than just 
multiplying length by width, rather it is the sum of al1 the squares that make up the surface 
of the interior of a closed figure. It is also the product of the number of square units in one 
row by the number in one column. Holmes (1995) points out that: 

Using nonstandard units, children can think about the numerical aspects of a 
measurement and no t be concemed with learning standard units. Nonstandard units 
also help children be attentive to the attnbute king measured and the process of 
measuring and contributes to the development of an intuitive understanding of 
measurement. (p. 364) 
Melany said that she aiways began a new topic in mathematics with a basic concept. 
Based on this comment 1 assumed that she would start with nonstandard measurement. 
However, she wanted to begin with activities that focused on standard measurement. Even 
though Melany was a teacher, who in S hulman' s ( 1 987) temis had tbat special amalgam of 
content and pedagogy, in my view she seerned too ready to "jump in" to teach standard 
measurement before she found out what students actually knew about area, and before she 
taught nonstandard measurement. Moreover, Melany was cognizant of the difficuities that 
students often experience with measurement (Fernema, Carpenter and Peterson, 1989) . 
But 1 always found that [getting the right unit of measure] difficult, because 
they can't see that a square centime!ter is different than a centimeter. They 
really don't. I'd always get these answers and rd aiways have to Say that area 
is in square centimeters. And when you have to Say th& 1 guess what that 
means is that they dont really know what it means. 
(interview, September 27, p. 13) 
With these thoughts in min4 1 proposed that Melany fust fmd out what students 
knew about the concept of area. A teacher would need to know what knowledge students 
bring to the leamhg in order to teach for understanding (Fernema, Carpenter and Peterson, 
1989). 1 also suggested that she start with nonstandard units. Melany was somewhat taken 
aback by the idea that she ask her students what they knew about area, because it was not 
the way that she usually taught mathematics. She usudy began units in lauguage arts by 
fxst fmding out what students knew about the topic. Her response was, "Weii that's not my 
style, but 1 could try anyway" (interview, September 25, p. 29). She confessed thai, " 1 f 
Marilyn Burns says it in her book to ask them what they b o w  about multiplication then I'd 
do it" (inte~ew, September 25, p. 29). Melany agreed to try out my suggestions and 
incorporated them into her fmt lesson. 

1 also want to point out that on a number of occasions Melany challenged me to 
show her how learning in mathematics could be individudi7ed as it was for ianguage arts. 
By individualized Melany meant that, "students could work on a task and 1 codd wander 
around and see whaî they're doing, instead of always sort of saying, do this, do this, do 
this" (interview, September 25, p.32). In Melany's view teaching for understanding was 
not possibIe unless Ieaniing could be individualized. However, in her mind it could not be 
done: "[ I ] couldn't imagine how this could happen in mathematics" (field notes. 
September 25, p. 32). She also talked about the ease with which she could change direction 
in a language lesson as the need arose. 1 recall the day she approached me during language 
arts to point out that it was easy for her to "break up the pacing" of a language lesson with 
an impromptu writing assignment. She could do it even if the children were writing at 
different levels. However, she could not envision doing the same for mathematics: "1 can't 
just Say oh let's go look at page ten in the textbook, because 1 think, geez, it's going to be 
impossible for some of those kids to do it" (interview, September 24, p. 2). 
In spite of her doubts about my suggestions for teaching the unit on are* Melany 
consented to try. She began the fmt area lesson with the question, "What does area 
mean?" The first chiid to respond was one of her brightest students. First he drew a 
rectangle on the board with sides that represented 2m by Sm, then he proceeded to talc 
about how to find "the area". He actuaiiy described how to find the perimeter. He began 
by writing 2x 5 rn = 10 m and pointed out that this number sentence represented the sum of 
one pair of sides. Then, he wrote 4m below the lOrn and said that it represented the sum of 
the other two sides of the rectangle. To illustrate how he arrived at the two sums and 
explain what he meant by area he wrote the fouowing on the board, 
P = lxw = 2+2 
=4=5+5= 10= 10. 

At thai point Melany, as other students, suggested that he was wrong and proceeded to 
explain why his explanation was faulty. She noted that he had confused perimeter with area 
and iliustrated on the board that he should have written the foiiowing for fioding perimeter. 
P= w+w+l+l = 14m 
A second student suggested that to fmd the area he needed to multiply length times width. 
The student followed with the fonda, A = Ixw, then he wrote it on the board. With M e r  
convincing, the first student 6naIly accepted that he had erred. Melany then moved to 
questioning other students about their ideas. The foiiowing excerpt is a sample of the 
interchange. It illustrates the variation in students' ideas about area and some of their 
confusion about the concept. It also demonstrates how Melany effectively provided the 
appropriate blend of support and independence as she "keeps a wide range of 
considerations in minci" (Bd, 
1991a). 
1. Melany: 
2. Second Student: 
3. Second Student: 
4. Melany: 
5. Second Student: 
6. Melany: 
7. SecondStudent: 
8. MeIany: 
9. Second Student: 
10. Melany: 
1 1. Third Student: 
What does area mean? What are we taiking about? 
Draw a box. [At this point Melany drew a box on the board.] 
Put length and width. 
Lengtb and width. 
Then you multiply them. 
[Alluding to the fvst student's incorrect explanation of ana] Okay, 
so that's what he meant when he said area equals length times width. 
No, how you do that is length times width times height. 
That would give you volume. 
Oh yeah. 
This works for fîat. So what are we figuring out? [She pointed to the 
diagram on the blackboard.] Like what does this stand for? 
We're figuring out this part inside hem. [She approached the board 
and touched the inside of the rectangle.] 

12. Melany: 
Did you hear what she said? Say it again. 
2 3. Third Student: 
You figure out the inside. You put little boxes inside. 
welany divided the intenor of the rectangle into srnail squares.] 
Note the variation in students' understanding of the concept of area that is revealed in tbe 
dialogue above and in the section that foilows. 
14. Melany: 
Okay, so we're figurjng out what's inside here. 
15. First Student: 
Yah, that's what 1 was thinking of, volume. 
16. Melany: 
Okay, So were figuring out what's inside here. Yes. 
17. Fourth Student: 
Is it iike if it was a mansion. Like let's Say it was a mansion. 
18. Melany: 
If it was what? 
Even though Melany was completely caught off guard by tbis student's comment (17) she 
reserved judgment and continued with her questioning in order to uncover ûis thinking. 
19. Fourth Student: 
A mansion. 
20. Melany: 
A mansion. 
2 1. Fourth Student: 
And it was Like 13 000 square feet or something like that. 
22. Melany: 
Okay so he's saying the area. We talked about you Say something 
square. Where's my eraser? Just a miaute. You guys know a lot 
about this. So he said that it would be iike a mansion is 13 000 
square feet. So we measure area in squares. See these little squares. 
[She pointed to the iittle squares she had drawn in the rectangle that 
was illustrateci on the board.] What else do you know about area? 
It is from a comment iike this (22) that I came to view Melany as a teafher who recognizes 
that students have varied interpretations of mathematical concepts thaî count as knowledge. 
23. Fiflh Student: 
How ugh. How many squares are inside? 
24. Melany: 
Okay, like for example if I were to ask you whkh desk has the most 
area, your desk top or my desk top? 
25. Sixth Student: 
Yours. 

26. Melany: 
27. Seventh Student: 
28. Melany: 
29. Third Student: 
30. Melany: 
In s-ary, 
"interactive discourse 
My desk top is much bigger than your desk top. What, the top of 
what? 
The top of the coat rack. 
coat rack to which the student aiiuded 
was a free standing open closet which stretched about two thirds the 
length of the roorn. The closet serveci as a divider between Melany's 
and her coiieague's classroom in the open area where they taught.] 
Right. So the area of the top of the coat rack is bigger than the area 
of the top of my desk. So we're figuring out how much is t?lling in 
this space. Anything else? 
The ciifference between area and volume. Axa, Like if you were to 
put boxes m this part of the mm, like fÎom there to tbere and all 
around. [She pointed to the part of the room where bey were sitting 
between the window and the closet where the students hung their 
coats.] For area, we would only put the squares on the bottom. For 
voiume, you put them f?om bottom to top. 
Yeah. We would fill it right up. 
(audio tapes, September 27, p. 19) 
the dialogue reveals Melany's ability to efféctively facilitate 
and thoughtful discussion between tacher and student and among 
students ... that will lead to clear understanding" (Gd, 
McCash and Reys, 1992). As a 
teacher who keeps a "wide range of considerations in minci" (Ball, 1991a). Meiany 
recognizes that, what counts as knowledge in mathematics is open to interpretation, which 
in rny view is a necessary prerequisite for teaching for understanding. 
The foiiowing 
excerpt taken from a conversation I had with Melany after the discussion provides added 
insight. 

Oh, okay. 1 guess 1 didn't think chat they wouId have so many ideas about 
area. They had some interesting ideas about area and they were coming up 
with the logarithm w, you know of length times width. The fmt student 
went into great lengths to show how you do length times width and he had 
done length plus width to do perimetter. And 1 don? think that he really 
liked me suggesting that he hadn't done any time at ail, that he had done aii 
adding. So any ways, the ouly kid, the fmt kid who got it was the kid who 
said that it's ail thaî part in there and used their hand to show the part, you 
know, inside the iines. So then 1 icnew that some of them understood it, but 
the whole idea of length times width gives you area was something that 
didn't seem to make sense to them. 
It was something that they had 
obviously been taught and they mernorizai it, but they reaiiy didn't 
understand why it worked. So that was reaily inieresting for me. 
interview, September 27, p. 12 
1 want to shift now to a discussion of the activity on nonstandard measurement thai 
foliowed. It was the fmt time that Melany had used nonstandard units in teaching 
measurement. For this activity students had the choice of working with a partner in a small 
group, or on their own. The objective was to find the area of three classroom objects using 
three different nonstandard units of masure which the teacher provided. 
The units 
consisted of two different size and color squares cut out of construction paper, and the flats2 
from the base ten materials. The use of the flats resulted in some unanticipated outcornes. 
Melany began the activity with a demonstration on the board of how to record the 
area measurement for each object in a chart. The sequence students were to foliow was fmt 
estirnate the number of squares needed to cover the surface area of the object, then record 
the estimate. Secondly, they were to lay down the squares on the object and fmd the actual 
measure of the area This measurement was also recorded in the chart. Each object was to 
be measured three times using a different size square for each trial. The purpose of having 
students rneasure the same object with different size squares was to help them see that tbe 
area measure of a figure is determined by the size of the unit. In other words, the larger tbe 
unit the smailer the measure that represents the area. The reverse oçcurs as the unit 
decreases in size. After checking to ensure that students knew what to do, Melany set tbem 
to work. 

As Melany and 1 waked about the room observing and conferring with students, \nt= 
were fascinated by the range of xsponses. To provide a framework for discussion of these 
responses, I have adapted Davis' (1978) mode1 of understanding based on moves that 
students make that demonstrate their understanding of procedures (see Table 2) in order to 
classify our observations. 
Table 2 
Ada~tation of Davis' (1978) Mode1 of Understanding 
Lmel 1 : 
Understanding how the procedure works 
Children understand the procedure to the extent that they c m  make the foliowing moves: 
1. 
Accurately carry out the procedure as instructed 
2. 
Execute the procedure accurately in more than one way 
3. 
Show another student how to carry out the procedure 
4. 
Explain the procedure step by step 
Level2: 
Understanding why the procedure works 
5. 
Give a plausible explanation or proof justifying the procedure 
5. 
Recognize the applicability of the procedure in new contexts 
There were some students who, as instnicted, used one size square at a time and 
accurately counted partial squares to fmd the surface area of an object. In my view, their 
ability to c
q
 
out the procedure as iostructed would qualiFy them as a Level 1: (1) in theu 
understanding of how the procedure works. Of this group of students, there were some 
who realized that if they laid down one row of squares in the width and another in the 

length, they could easily find the area Because they were able to execute the procedure in 
more than one way and to provide justification 1 would classiQ them at a hvel 2: (5) in 
understanding. There were some who covered the surface a~ and counted all the squares 
to fmd the area. 
Even though they laid the squares down correctiy, they did not count 
accurately. They assigned partial squares a value of one. Foliowing Davis' (1978) adapted 
model, 1 would classifj these students as close to Level 1 in understanding, however they 
stiU have not achieved this plateau. In my view, students who laid down different size 
squares on the same object because they wanted to ensure that "everything fit evenly" 
(field notes, Octokr 2 1 p. 8 1) had very Little understanding of tbe process. 
At the lowest 
end of the range of abilities, there was one student who had no idea thaî to accurately 
measure area it was important that the squares were aligned so that there were no spaces in 
between. Some students, though few, appeared to have such limited understanding t h t  they 
failed to realize that the squares were the units of measure that detemiined the surface area 
of the objects. At the other extreme there was one student who surpriseci Melany with bis 
sophisticated use of the flats to fmd area He "proved able to apply knowledge in new 
situations, 
without applying such knowledge 
erroneously 
or 
inappropnatel y ... 
spontaneously, without specific instruction" (Gardner and Boix-Maasilla, 1994, p. 200). 
The foliowing incident provides evidence. 
When Melany selected the flats as one possibility for the activity, she assumed chat 
students would use them for measuring in the same way that the construction paper squares 
would be used. However, this student did not. He reasoned that each flat was equal in area 
to one hundred square centimeters. To cover the surface of uie object that he was 
measuring it twk four whole and two partial flau. Each partial flat was qua1 in value to 
70/100, and each whole one to 100/100. With this idea in mind he wrote the following 
sentence to represent the surface area of the book, noting that the measutexnent was in 
square centimeters: 
2 + 2 + 70/100+ 70/100 = 5.40 cm. 

In conversation with Melany laier that day she said that she would never have realized his 
exceptional ability in mathematics if she had not done this activity. From my experience, 
few grade five students could demonstrate the understanding of fractions and decimals that 
he displayed. Moreover, not many studenü at that level would have been able to apply these 
ideas to the process of measuring as spontaneously as he did. In my view this student 
demonstrated genuine understanding (Gardner and Boix-Mansilla, 1 994). I s hould add that 
Melany also noted that he possessed a similar ability in language arts. 
As a foiiow up students were asked to reflect in writing about whaî they had leamed 
from the activity about measuring with nonstandard units. Although this kind of writing 
was a routine occurrence for language arts, it was the fust thm that she had used it for 
mathematics. Studen ts ' responses provide further insight into their understanding of the 
concept of area The following are examples. 
1. First Student: 
Area 
1 measured my Mathquest book. 1 used 4 flats and 8 smaii. 1 used the 4 flats 
because it covers most of the book. 1 didn't use the same objects because they 
didn't fit. 1 used different sizes because you are supposed to make it fit right. 
It is obvious from this reflective piece that the student had minimal undestanding of the 
procedure. In order to correctly meaçure the surface area of an object, a student would need 
to use only one size unit. In my view, this student has not achieved the fmt level of Davis' 
(1 978) adapted mode1 of understanding of a procedure. 
2. Second Student: 
1 measured my math quest. 1 used des. 1 made two rows. One along the width and 
one along the length. Then 1 counted both of the rows and then 1 muitiplied then my 
answer was 80. 1 picked the tiles because when 1 finished my math quest would be 
colorful. 
It appears that this student was able to carry out the procedure for frnding the area in 
nonstandard units in other than the prescribed way. From my view, the student does not 
necessarily provide a plausible proof which suggests a Level 1 : (4) understanding. 

3. Third Student: 
1 measured my chair top. With one big orange square and 5 srnaii yeiiow squares 
becuase al1 of them fitted on perfectely and if 1 used two big orange squares than it 
wouldn't fit. 
On the basis of ihis student's writing it is obvious that there is little understanding of the 
concept of measuring with square units in order to find the area of an object. 
4. Fourth Student: 
1 measured my d e r  with 12 colored squares, because if 1 used 12 yeilow squares 
than it deffentley wouldn't fit perfectley. 
1 suggest that this student's attempt at reflective writing demonstrates very littie 
understanding of the concept of measuring with square units to fmd the area of an object. 
As I noted earlier Melany had several ESL students in her class. From the spelling it 
appears that this student was a second language leamer. 
5. Fifth Student: 
1 measured my msth quest cover. 1 used orange flats. First 1 put the flats across. 
Then 1 put them down and there was 4 but there was 6 tens more so 1 put down 
4.m. 1 used the same size squares because if 1 used different squares it wodd be a 
different number that I got. 
It is evident frorn this student's reflections that the flats were used for measuring. The 
student demonstrates an awareness of the part whole relationship of decimal nurnbers 
represented by the flats. However, the student incorrectly uses the term tens when it should 
be tenths because .60 is the same as six tenths. This student would probably classe as a 
Level2 learner. 
6. Sixth Student: 
Aria 
1 chose smaii sqwars becuase it was easier for me 1 Like when 1 chuse esear ways for 
myself. I measund my desk top. 1 measured it with small sqrs. 1 used ail of tbe 
same sizes. I used et becaus it was isier. 
The writing suggests that this student was another of Melany's ESL students who 
was in the process of developing his Engiish skills. The student had the right i&a about 

how to carry out the measuring, but did not have a plausible explanation suggesting a Lvei 
1 ( 1) understanding of the procedure. 
(field notes September 27, p. 44a) 
In the following excerpt Melany offers ber reflections on the activity. As 1 noted 
eariier, in Melany's view, unless learning could be individuaiized and students had the 
opportunity to taik about their ideas then they wouid not be leaming for understanding. 
What 1 iike about the approach that 1 did in math is that it does really give 
those kids an opporninity to show you the extent of their ability to thïdc in 
theù thinking. The other way 1 would have taught area would never have 
afforded them the opportunity to show me that. 1 think 1 gave them some 
basics. 1 think 1 gave them a bit of stmcture. You know iike we're talking 
about. Then, 1 provided them with some materials that are appropriate to the 
activity. Like for poetry 1 don? give them novels, you know. And I, you 
know, gave them a format to sort of get them focused. Like you know they 
had to rnake a little table in their notebook because 1 just could have visions 
of thirty two kids all ninning to the table ... So 1 think 1 just give them a few; 
it's kind of similar in a sense that I've given some stmcture and a purpose 
and an appealing activity to do. 
1 mean 1 didn't see anybody not doing it. 
1 mean they were d quite 
engaged in the task, and they all had different ways of approaching it. So, it 
was quite easy. It was quite individuaiized and it was quite easy. Remember 
1 was saying to you, I challenge you to come up with something where 1 can 
do something individualized in math. I'm always Iooking for it, nght! And 
in this case 1 was conferencing with kids with different situations with what 
they were doing. Yeah, it was quite similar to my way of doing language, 
very similar, yeah. 
(interview, September 27, p. 18) 
It was at this point that Melany decided to switch Erom nonstandard units to 
standard measurement. She was anxious to make certain that students knew how to fmd 
area with standard units. 1 was not as convinced as she that students were ready to make 
this transition. Nevertheless, she had trieci out new ideas that made mathematics more like 
language arts for her, even when the strategies were w t  at her fingertips. 
Yeah. This is definitely a new approach for m and 1 Ued it because they 
come up with things, iike it's totally unpredictable. So for me, as a teacher, it 
keeps it interesthg and fkesh for me. Oh, now what am 1 going to do with 
this idea? 1 mean because 1 know what a m  is. It's not like rrn shaky with 
the content. So Tm quite happy to see what they come up with. And to tell 

you the tnith, when 1 think about how 1 might have approached it another 
way. I'm thinking, 1 would have stood up in front of the class and eventudy 
would have got them to see length times width equals area And 1 would 
have thought, oh that's great they're getting it. And 1 wouldn't have evw 
reaiiy. 1 don't thïnk 1 wouid have realized how much they weren't getting it 
This way, 1 understand where they are at any ways and who knows. The 
interesting thing is to see how c m  1 extend their understanding. And maybe, 
we should have a discussion at the end about it. See what happens. 
(interview, September 29, p. 12) 
In summary, the episode I have just discussed offers insight into Melany's beliefs 
and views about teaching matbernatics and her content knowledge - factors that affect a 
teacher's understanding of teaching for understanding (Rawat, 1989). Comments such as, 
"1 couldn't imagine how this (individualizing her program) could happen in mathematics" 
(field notes, September 25, p. 32) provides evidence of Melany's belief that mathematics 
c0d.d never be taught like language arts. 
Melany's ability to uncover students' 
understanding of concepts, in my view, suggests she is a teacher who possesses a deep 
understanding and knowledge of the discipline. 
1 now move to the second episode whicb focuses on strategies that Melany 
employed to develop students' understanding of place value. Although this episode is not 
as extensive as the other two that 1 selected, 1 chose it because place value is a topic with 
broad application and importance in students' learning of a variety of mathematicai 
concepts. Frequently students' difficulties with number concepts and procedures can be 
traced to their weak understanding of place value (Cniickshank and Sheffield, 1988). 1 want 
to add that place value is an area of mathematics about which teachers themselves have fuzzy 
understandings (Graeber, Tirosh, and Glover, 1989). Also, the episode provides further 
insig h t into Melan y ' s unders tanding and knowledge of mathematicai concepts, panicularly 
the importance of grouping in students* understanding of place value. 

What 1s Place Value About? 
Place value is the basis for work that students do with whole numbers, fractions, and 
decimals. From my experience, snidents who do not understand place value frequentiy have 
difflculty with trading of whole numbers and decimals (Cruickshank and Sheffield, 1988), 
changing fractions to percent and vice versa, correctly placing the decimal in multiplication 
and division, penent, ratio, proportion, and probability. As a characteristic of number, place 
vdue determines the value of a digit in relation to its position in a nurnber. Students' 
knowledge of grouping is fwidamental to their work with place value. 
As most eiementary teachers, Melany taught place value in the fmt tem. When 1 
arrivecl in her classroom she was working on multiples of ten and one hundred, standard 
and expanded notation, and large numbers. From my observations. there was a particular 
routine to Melany's lessons. She began by taking up a brain teaser or problem that had 
been assigned in the moming when students amved for class. A short introduction to the 
fesson, which often iaçluded a discussion about a question on the challc board, followed. 
One question 1 recall asked students to prove how a set of nurnbers are multiples of ten. At 
the gracie five fevel a question such as this suggests that students show bow these numbers 
c m  k 
divided evenly by ten. 
How c m  you prove that these numbers are multiples of ten? 
a) 70 
b) 80 
c) 100 
d) 500 
e) 1000 
As students discussed the question, Melany would record their input on the 
chalkboard. When the exercise was cornpieteci, students were assigaed practice questions to 
answer in their notebooks. As they worked, Melany and Janet, her educational assistant, 
wouid move about the room observing and conferring with the students to ensure that they 

were able to answer the questions. When Melany was confident that they understood what 
to do, she wouid assign questions from the textbook which were either completed in class, 
or finished at home for the foiiowing day. 
On the particular day of this episocie, Melany followed her usual routine. First she 
took up the homework, which in this instance focused on standard and expanded forms of 
numbers. 1 noticed that some students had difficulty figuring out the place value of tbe 
digits in numbers such as 5089. One student suggested that the expandeci form was 5
0
 
+ 800 + 90 +9. Another thought that it should be 5000 + O + 8 + 9. However, Melany 
effectively dealt with the problem with the use of concrete materials and pictonal images. 
Once the homework was taken up, students were asked to put away aii textbooks. 
This instruction was greeted with a loud sigh of relief from students as it signaleci no further 
textbook work for that afternoon. Melany then waked about the rmm distributing two or 
three handfuls of macaroni to pairs of students. On completion of the distribution, students 
were instmcted to work with their partner to fmd a way for figuring out, without counting 
each piece separately, how many pieces they had on their desks. 
I'rn going to give you some macaroni. I'm going to give you a pile of 
macaroni and I'd like you to keep them on your desk for starters. What I'd 
like you to do is figure out how many pieces there are. I'd also like you to 
do it in such a way, like Say you Say to me, there are sixty four here. I'd like 
you to somehow put them on your desk so that 1 can quickly check to see 
that you are right, that 1 don't have to go through and count each one. 
(audio tapes, September 18, p. 5) 
Melany was careful not to tell students how to organize the macaroni, only that the 
strategy they used had to be obvious to her. Even when students quested m e r  direction, 
Melany offered her support without leading them- a technique she frequentiy used in 
language arts. 1 sensed that she wanted to see how students would work through the task of 
grouping the macaroni to show the numbers they chose to represent. I should add that 
eariier that day Melany had talked briefly about ber concerns regarding students' learning 

of place value. In her view place value seemed to be more of a rote process, and students 
needed to have "some understanding". According to Melany, it was important for students 
to "see" what numbers looked liked, especiaily large numbers, and she wanted to provide 
hem with activities that wouid improve the'u understanding. 
The following dialogue reveals how students went about the task of organizing the 
macaroni. It demonstrates the way in which M e h y  facilitateci "interactive discourse and 
thoughtful discussion between teacher and student and among studen ts... that wili lead to 
clear understanding" (Gd, 
McCasin and Reys, 1992, p. 130). It also shows how 
Melany provided a balance of support and independence. 
1. Melany: 
2. First Student: 
3. Melany: 
4. Second Student: 
5. Melany: 
6. Third Student: 
7. Melany: 
Can you put them in groups of ten? 
Yeah. You can group them by ten. 
By twenty? 
You decide how you want to group them because grouping is 
the key to it dl. Yes? 
What if you have one less? 
So then you're going to have to figure out what happened to 
that. Okay. You can't throw it away. It has to stay on your 
desk. Remember that fmt d e  1 gave you. It has to stay on 
your desk. DonT t put these on your lips please because you 
don' t know who's been touching them. You don't want to 
be putting them in your mouth. You don't know who's been 
touching them. So they're staying on your desk. 
Once Melany set the students to work she walked about the r w m  examining the 
different representations. After every student had completed at least one example, Melany 
stopped the class to discuss their representations as the following sequel of the dialogue 
illustrates. 1 want to draw attention to the way in which Melany focuses on the idea of 
grouping to elicit students' knowledge of number and place value. 

8. Melany: 
9. Fourth Student: 
10. Melany: 
1 1. Fourth Student: 
12. Melany: 
13. Fourth Student: 
14. LMelany: 
15. Fifth Student: 
16. Melany: 
17. Sixth Student: 
18. Melany: 
19. Sixth Student: 
20. Melany: 
2 1. Sixth Student: 
22. Melany: 
23. Seventh S tudent: 
What kind of groupings did you use? AU of you finally 
figured out that you could group them md easily figure out. 
So how rnany did you put in a group? 
Ten. 
Okay, so then how many groups do you have there? 
1 have ten. 
b k i n g  at the student's representation] You have ten 
groups? You have eleven groups. 
Eleven, yeah. 
You have eleven groups. She has eleven gmups of ten. So 
how much is that? 
One hundred and ten. 
Do you agree? 
How did you group yours? 
Groups of five. We have one hundred and seventy five. 
You have one hundred seventy five altogether. So you 
counted five, ten, and were quickly able to figure out how 
many you bad. 
You girls, how did you group yours? 
First we divided them into fives and then we put them kto 
tem. 
It is evident From the previous dialogue that Melany is a teacher who does more than "jus t 
present information" (Alkin, 1992). The following section demonstrates how she c o n n e  
ideas as she continues to probe students' undersiandhg of number concepts. 
24. Melany: 
How many groups of ten do you have? 
25. Seventh Student: Fifteen. 
26. Melany: 
How many groups altogether? 
27. Seventh S tudent: Fifteen. 

28. Melany: 
Fifteen groups of ten aad anything left over? 
29. Seventh Student: Five. 
30. Melany: 
3 1. Eight Student: 
32. Melany: 
33. Ninth Student: 
34. Melany: 
35. Ninth Student: 
36. Melany: 
So how much is fifteen groups of ten and five left over? 
Twenty. 
Twenty would be two groups of ten. Fifteen groups. I'm 
going to use the short form of ten. [She pmceeded to write 
this amount on the board.] How much is that? 
One hundred and fifty. 
And five lefi over, right? So how do you get one fifty so 
quickly? How did you get this was one hundred fifty and 
five more? How did you do that? 
Well if 1 take away five, and it's ten times ten is one hundred 
and ten times five is fifty. 
Does anyone have another way of getting one hundred frfty 
so quickly? 
(audio tapes, September 18, p. 6) 
The dialogue thai 1 have just presented reveals that Melany is a teacher who knows 
how to ask the right questions in order to uncover students* knowledge of mathematical 
concepts. She aiso shows how she effectively uses concrete materials for doing so. As she 
suggested in a conversation that 1 had with her after the lesson, "It's just nice to have 
concrete proof that they understand grouping" (interview, September 18, p. 12). To finish 
the lesson Melany foliowed with a brief discussion of ten and its importance in our decimai 
number system. From there she moved to activities which focused on grouping by 
hundreds, then thousands. 
In summary, Melany's teaching in this episode is a contrast in perspectives. At the 
sarne tirne that she taught lessons that wexe "tied to the textbook", she also provided 
oppominities for students to explore concepts and ideas in order to create knowledge 
(NCTM, 1989, 199 1) as the grouping activity dernonstrated. It is also evi&nt thaî Melany 
was a teacher who understood thaî students needed to have a clear grasp of the concept of 

groupicg "in order to be quick at their math and be able to show thaî they know what they 
are doing" (inte~ew, 
September 18, p.12). Comments such as ''grouping is the key to it 
all" (audio tapes, September 18, p.5) in section (5) of the dialogue further demonstrates that 
Melany recognized the importance of students' understanding of grouping as a prerequisite 
for working with number and place value. 
As research (Fennema and Franke, 1992) 
suggests, " ... what a teacher knows is one of the most important influences on what is done 
in classroorns, and ultirnately on what students leam" (p. 147). 
To cornpiete the portrait of Melany's life in the classroom 1 move to the third 
episode of this chapter which describes Melany's approach to teaching three dimensional 
geometry. As Cathcart, Pothier and Vance (1994) suggest, " ... geometry leaming for 
elernentary school students should be informai, involve explorations, discovery, guessing, 
and problem solving" (p. 100). The work on geometry, as 1 noted in Chapter Four, was 
part of a science unit on stmctures. Similar to the fmt episode, Melany was trying out new 
ideas that wouid make mathexnatics more like language arts. In so doing, these ideas were 
intendd to provide opportunities for students to explore concepts and ideas in order to 
create knowledge in the course of active engagement with the discipiine (NCïM, 1989, 
1991). 
Science as Mathematics. Mathematics as Science 
From my view, geometry, particularly 3-dimensional geornetry, is an area of the 
cux-riculum that teachers often €id troublesome to teach. Either they leave it to the end of 
the year, or they skip over it cornpletely. For some, it is the content knowledge that is 
challenging, for others it is having the appropriate strategies. In some instances, it is M. 
The availability of concrete materials is aiso a problem. 
Although Melany taught 3- 
dimensional geometry as part of a science unit on structures, she limited her teaching to one 
activity in which students identifieci the faces, edges and vertices of the structures. It was 
not the content knowledge or a lack of confidence that was a problem for Melany, it was 

having suitable teaching resources in the style of Marilyn Burns. "And 1 mean there migbt 
be some content [in geometry] that I'm not familiar with, but 1 can eady figure it out .... It's 
the pedagogy " (interview, Dezember 3 1, p. 49). 
As an aside, in my judgment as an educator who has worked with students in 
mathematics classrooms, one activity would not suffice to develop their knowledge of 3- 
dimensional geometry at the grade five level. Neither would it rneet the objectives of the 
curriculum. Research (Fuys, Geddes, and Tischler, 1988) suggests that students need a 
varieiy of leaming experiençes in orQr to develop their biowledge of geomüic concepts. 1 
suggested that Melany expand the geometry component of the science mit to incluâe 
different sorting and classify ing activities to increase students ' knowledge and 
understanding of the solids.3 Melany agreed on condition that 1 help her with the planning. 
As I pointed out in Chapter 'Ihnr, in some instances in conducting research it may appear 
that "overparticipation" (Bogdan and Biklen, 1992, p. 88) has occurred. However, the 
nature of my participation fit within "the participant/observer continuum" (Bogdan and 
B ikien, 1992, p. 88) and the goals of this study . 
1 worked with Melany to design a series of 3aimensional geometry activities as part 
of the structures unit. One goal of the activities was to ensure that students were able to 
identiQ the solids by name and describe their features. Another was for students to develop 
their knowledge and understanding of the solids. For example, they would be able to 
distinguish between those solids that were polyhedra and those that were not and provide 
reasons for their choices. In a simiiar marner they would be abie to distinguish between 
pyramids and prisms. Moreover, they would know that a mangdar pnsm could not be 
classified as a pyrarnid because it does not have a minimum of h e e  triangular faces that 
meet at the apex, and so on. Also, they would corne to understand some of the less obvious 
aspects of solids such as why a cube could be classified as a rectangular prism. 
There were five activities in all, however 1 have chosen to focus on two as they 
provide valuable insight into Melany's beiiefs and practice in mathematics and her views on 

understanding. The first activity was introduced in science class. For this activity students 
were divided into groups of four and given a collection of the following solids to son: 
c ylinders, cones, rectangular prisms, îriangular prisms, hexagonal prisms, cubes, spheres, 
square base pyramids, tetrahedra, and pentagonal base pyramids. 
Rather than teilhg 
students how to group the solids, Melany encouraged them to choose their own categories. 
Zn this way she could use the activity to assess k i r  knowledge. Also, as 1 noted earlier, 
Melany preferred to ailow students to develop their own understanding of ideas and 
concepts rather than tehg them. In her Mew, t e h g  was not as effective for promoting 
leaming as the foliowhg suggests. "1 don't like telling them Like what's the point in 
telling km, 
right. The kids who already know it, know it. The kids who don? know it 
won' t get it fiom me telling them." (interview, November 8, p. 2 1) 
The following dialogue, wtiich occurred at the beginning of the lesson, illustrates 
how Melany encouraged students to take responsibility for their leaming and constmct their 
own knowledge of concepts. Yet, at the same tirne she ensured that they understood the 
instructions - a technique she frequently used in language arts. 
1. Melany: 
2. Fust Student: 
3. Melany: 
4. Second Student: 
5. Melany: 
6. Third Student: 
Each group is going to be getting a collection of solids. 
They're d e d  3-D solids. They not only have length as a 
dimension, and width as a dimension; they have length and 
width and. 
And height. 
Or maybe I should Say they have length, they have width, and 
they have depth or height. So they're called 3-D, 3- 
dimensional solids. They're solid. Now you're going to be 
given a set of these at your table, at your group. We always 
have to work in groups of four. Okay here's your 
instructions. [At this point she turned on the ove- 
projector to display the instnictions.] Okay it says sort. 
What does the word sort mean to you? 
Sort them out like. 
Who can help him? 
Fixing them up. 

7. Melany: 
Fixing them up? 
8. Fourth Student: 
Organize them. 
9. Melany: 
Organize them. Okay. 
10. F i  
Student: 
You have a scattered pile. If you have a scattered pile of 
obj ects... 
[At this point Melany asked the student to speak up because the class could not hear 
ml 
11. Fifth Student: 
If you have a pilt of abjects, sorting out means you take the 
same objects and put them into different groups. 
12. Melany: 
Okay so you have the same objects and you put them in 
groups. Anybody want to agree or disagree with him? 
13. Sixth Student: 
1 agree with him. 
14. Seventh Student: 1 agree with him_ 
15. Eighth Student: 
1 agree with him because it means putting them into groups. 
16. Melany: 
So you're going to be putting them into groups and they 
have to have something the same in their groups. So, for 
example. No I'm not going to give you an example. Read 
question one. 
[A student read question one.] 
17. Seventh Student: What happens if 1 Say that this goes in this group and 
someone else says it goes in a different group? 
Note below (18) how Melany encourages students to keep an open miud to the variety of 
possibilities that they could use for sorting. 
18. Melany: 
Yes. So if one person says, "1 think that tbis one goes in 
this group". And someone else says, "No, 1 think it goes in 
this group". So the fmt person has to say, " Weii this is 
my nile for puniag it in tbis group because all these shapes 
have the same whatever". Then, the second person disagrees 
and says, "1 think that it should go in this group because all 
these shapes have this". So. if you have a disagreement. then 
you c m  sort it in two different ways. Son it with the first 
person's d e ,  then with the second person's d e .  
19. Ninth Student: 
What about judges? 

20. Melany: 
No. You don't have to have judges. There can be more than 
one way to sort them. Now number two is where you have to 
do some work- Read number two. 
2 1. Second Student: "Record the reasons for sorting the solids tbe way that you 
did." 
22. Melany: 
Record means write. 
You write down in your notebook. 
That's why you have it there. You cm write down al1 the 
shapes in this group go together because, and you write 
down your reason. And if one person has one reason and 
another person has a different reason, you can write down 
two different ways. Does anyone have any questions about 
that? 
(audio tapes, November 8, p. 7) 
I want to draw attention to Melany's use of the term "dimensions" at the beginning 
of the dialogue. In my view it is important that teachers introduce this tenn in mathematics 
because it provides smdents with a more flexible view of what constitutes length, width or 
height respectively of any figure or 3-dimensional object. Often students, as do their 
teachers, assume that the length of any figure or 3-dimensional object mut always be the 
longest side. However, this assumption may not necessariiy hold true. Once the figure or 
object is rotated, the longest side may no longer be the length. In fact, it may be the width or 
the height 
During the activity Melany walked about the room observing and talking with 
students about their work. Ody when she thought it necessary, or when a student 
requested, did she intervene to offer assistance. Otherwise, she aiiowed the natural ebb and 
flow of Ieaniing to prevail as they worked through the task. On completion, students 
reporteci on the results of their sorting. nieir responses demonstrated their varied ability 
and knowledge of the solids. Some groups sorted the solids in very rudimentary ways, 
such as those that r o W  and those that did not. Other groups sorted them in more 
sophisticated ways. For example, one group of students "put ail cubes and rectangles 
together because they had six faces, dl pyrarnids and rectangles together because they had 
five faces, and all hexagonal and octagond prisms together" (field notes, November 8, p. 

132). Another group said that they put "ali cylinders together because they were round and 
they roiled; trianguiar and hexagonal prisms together because they were flat" (fdd notes, 
November 8, p. 132). 
In discussion with Melany later that &y she noted that the activity provideci her with 
valuable learning about students' knowledge of the soiids. in her view, students who could 
only classifj the solids according to whether they rolled or not had a very limited 
understanding. Students who couid categorize the solids in more than one way, such as by 
the shape and nurnber of faces, demonstrated a higher level of understanding. Students who 
sorted and classifieci the solids in more than two ways, with added detail, had an even higher 
level of understanding. This category scheme for assessing students' performance d e d  
the fmt occasion in which Melany openly talked about what understanding in mathematics 
meant for her. 
As 1 noted in Chapter Four, Melany was reluctant to talk about 
understanding "in the abstract" (inte~ew, October, 17, p. 39) because it was not "a 
genenc concept which was inclusive to ail disciplines" (field notes, October 7, p. 66). For 
Melany, understanding had to be connecteci to a particular concept or content area. 
There were four more activities which aorded students the opportunity to apply 
previous learning to the task at hand as they sorted and classifieci the solids in new ways. In 
so doing leaming evolved fiom the general to the specific. Once students could classify the 
solids according to those that were polyhedra and those chat were not and give reasons for 
their choices, they moved to the next stage. At this level they worked ody with those solids 
that were polyhedra to determine if they were pnsms or pyramids, and providing reasons for 
their choices. Further xtivities focused exclusively on pyramids, then prisms, and so on, 
Each activity culminated in a public audience, a language arts ntuai that was now a regular 
routine for mathematics. 
1 want to talk now about the fifth activity. 
It was the culmination and hnal 
development of the work on the solids. It occurred the day before the quiz. The activity 
stands out because of the level of discussion that occurred just before students were to 

create their definitions of the prisrns and pyramids. 
Although students had spent 
considerable time working with the solids the previous day, Melany was concemed because 
she was not sure how deeply they understood prisms and pyramids. Like any teacher, 
Melany preferred to have her fmger on the pulse of the class and know exactly what was 
happening. 
Melany gathered the students on the carpet at the back of the room. When tbey 
were ready, she placed different types of pyramids on the carpet and posed the question, 
"What is a pyramid?". The students easily talked about the pyramids naming them and 
discussing their distinguishg features. Iust as they were finishing the discussion about 
pyrarnids, Melany shifted to prisms. The dialogue that foiiows portrays the vaned Ievels of 
understanding of the solids that emerged fiom Melany's discussion with the students. It 
also reveak Melany's ski11 as a facilitaior, and her ability to uncover students' 
understanding which in my view m characteristics of a teacher who teaches for 
understanding. As the dialogue unfolds 1 unpack the Merent levels of understanding 
according to an adapted version of Davis' (1978) mode1 of mderstanding based on moves 
students make that demonstrate their understanding of a concept (see Table 3) is used. 
Table 3 
Ada~tation of Davis' Mode1 of Understanding 
Level 1 : 
Chiidren understand a concept to the extent that they can make the foliowing moves: 
1. 
Give or identify examples of the concept 
2. 
Defend choices of examples of the concept 
3. 
Give or identiQ nonexamples of the concept 
4. 
Defend choices of nonexamples of the concept 
Level2: 
Characteristics of the concept 
5. 
Identifj things thai are necessarily mie about examples of the concept 
6. 
Determine properties sufncient to make something an example of the concept 
7. 
Tell how one concept is W<e (or unlüce) another concept 
8. 
Define the concept 
9. 
Recognize the applicabitity of the concept in unfamiliar contexts 

The dialogue begins just as the class finished tallang about whether a pyramid could have 
more than one apex. 
1. First Student: 
2. Melany: 
3. Second Student: 
4. Melany: 
5. Second Student: 
6. Melany: 
7. Second Student: 
So the bottom of the triangular faces [of a pyramid] meet at 
the base. At the top the triangular faces stop at the apex. 
Okay, so there is only one apex. Now the other question that 
I have for you is, whaî is a prism? We have some shapes 
here. welany held up some cylinders and different shape 
prisms.] 1 want you to teli us, which one doesn' t belong and 
why. Which one doesa't klong? 
The one with the rounded sides. 
Teli me what it' s cailed. 
A cylinder. 
Why do you Say that the cylinder doesn't belong? 
(pointing to the cylinder) That one of them is kind of like a 
circle. It goes around. It's kind of circular and the others 
[the pnsms] don? roll. 
Although the student (7) knew that a cylinder was not a pnsm, her reason for not including 
it suggests a limited understanding of the cnteria that determine a pnsm. I suggest that the 
student was possibly at a Level 1: (3) in her understanding of the concept. 
WeIany acknowledges a third student.] 
8. Melany: 
Okay, what do you say to that ? 
9. Third Student: 
1 think it does belong, because aren't those faces? me 
pointai to the two opposite ends.] 
It appears on fmt glance fkom the student's comment (9) that she was conirct in suggesting 
that a cylinder could be classified as a prism because the opposite ends of prism are the 
faces. However, on doser examination the response is problematic. A cylinder can not be 
classified as a prism because the opposite ends are not joined by rectangular faces. 1 
suggest that this student had not achieved LRvel 1 in understanding of the concept. 

10. Melany: 
That's a g
d
 
question. What is a face? 
11. Fourth Student: [pointing to the base of the cylinder] The circle part on the 
side. It's got two faces. 
12. Melany: 
This part here. welany pointed to the base and its opposite 
face.] Okay . So, it's got two faces. Why is this not a face 
[running her fmger across the curved surface of the 
c yliader]? 
13. Fourth Student: 
Because it goes around and around 
Melany's ability to effstively probe students' ideas to eiicit their understanding of the 
solids provides evideilce that she is a teacher who possessed the pedagogical content 
knowledge that teachers need in order to teach for teaching for understanding (Fermema, 
Carpenter and Peterson, 1989). As Alkin (1992) points out, teaching for understanding 
involves more than presenting informaiion. 
14. Melany: 
Okay. It goes around. How else rnight you say that this is 
not a face? 
15. Fifth Student: 
Okay the center part isn't a face because the faces can 
stabilize a shape. The center part is not a f e .  Like for 
instance, it' ll sit right Like that me student pointed to the 
triangular face of a prism.] 
In my view, this student's (15) explanation, albeit unconventional, suggests a deep 
understanding of the structure of 
pnsms. 
1 would easily classify this student's 
understanding at the upper end of Level2 of the table. 
16. Melany: 
Another teason that this is not a face [pointing to the curved 
surface of the cylinder]. 
17. Sixth Student: 
Because, ali faces are flat, and that's round. 
18. Melany: 
Say that again. 
me student repeated his corn men^] 

19. Melany: 
So they have to be flaî, and this is not f l a ~  [running her 
fmger dong the curved surface of the cylinderl. Okay. So 
now this does not belong. 
What îs this calied? 
20. Seventh Student: A cylinder. 
@lelany removed the cylinder and continueci with the prisms.] 
21. Melany: 
[pointhg to the prisms] Now what are these shapes caiied? 
22. Eighth Student: 
Solids 
23. Melany: 
Solids, that's tme. But, also pyramids are solids. These are 
something even more special than t h .  
24. Second Student: Prisms. 
As 1 suggested earlier in the dialogue, this student (24) was able to ident* 
prisms, but 
appeared not to possess an in-depth understanding of the criteria that quaIifV a solid as a 
prism. 
25. Melany: 
Okay, they're prisms. So, let's take a look at them. What is 
a prism ? [pointhg to the prisms] So these are aii prisms. 
Can you teii me what a prism is. Who would like to try? 
26. Eighth Student: 
I think it's a shape that is sort of stretched. Like someone 
took it and stretched it and it is 3-D. 
The previous student's (26) description of a prism reveais his depîh of understanding of 
the structure of solids, which suggests a Level2: (5) understanding of the concept. Note in 
the section that follows how Melany uncovers these students' understanding of the solids. 
27. Melany: 
But a cylinder is not a prism, and it's stretched. 
28. Eighth Strident: 
It's like the real shape of a prism is 2-D. It's d
y
 
a 2-D 
shape, and when you stretch it, it's called a prism. 
29. Melany: 
So you're making a 2-D shape into a 3-D sori of thing. 
What can you teli us about the faces on each end of a prism? 
Look on the faces at the end of the prisrn. 

30. Ninth Student: 
3 1. Melany: 
32. Tenth Student: 
33. Melany: 
34. Tenth Student: 
35. Melany: 
[Speaking out before others had a chance to put their hands 
up] They 're the same. 
Would you let people think for themselves. Does everyone 
agree that the faces on each end of a prism are the same? 
Yeah. 
Now if you look at the faces on the side they are al1 a 
particular shape. What is the shape of this face? The fice 
on the side, what shape is it? 
Rectangle. 
Do you agree witb him hat aU of these faces are rectangles? 
36. Eleventh Student: Y& 
37. Melany: 
Okay. This is another prism. 
(audio tapes, November 1 1, p. 30) 
The discussion continued until di the different prisms had been covered. Then 
Melany had the students r e t m  to their seats to develop their own defLnitiuns for pyramids 
and prisms. ln her viewT if students could write ideas in their own words, it dernonstrated 
unders tanding . A h ,  writing required a higher level of understanding than articulating 
ideas, as she suggests in the following comment. "1 do think it is more difficult to be able 
to write it in your own words so it's clear and correct" (interview, December 16 , p. 9). 
According to Melany, in her experierice, this discussion was the most outstanding 
example of students' ability to express their mathematical knowledge. For her, it was the 
level of thinking that students dernonstrated, as she notes in the foliowing comment. "A 
child who is able to express ideas clearly in their own words ratber than regurgitate 
something she'd read sornewhere, understands" (interview, December 16, p. 8). Ln her 
view, the students were so sicilifid in their ability to commUMcate with each other, they 
"bypassed her". 
Teaching this unit on gwmetry was a unique experience for ber. She 
explained, " 1 think 1 got a lot more out of that [unit] than 1 ever have before in math" 
(inteniew, December 16, p. 7). In ber view, mathematics had becorne even more likt 
language arü. Students were discussing ideas and learning from each other. They wac 

doing more than "just memorizing terms"; they were learning concepts and they were 
"explaining what they thought and why" as the following reveals. 
Students are responsible for figuring out their own process. 
They're 
responsible for figuring out their own way to corne to the answer. They're 
responsible to solve the problem in a way that makes sense to them. 
They're responsible to articulate how they got that, and they're responsible 
to explain how they got th& (interview, December 9, p. 3) 
In surnrnary, this episode further illustrates Melany's cornfort level with teaching 
mathematics, particularly 3dimensional gwmetry. It also reveais that Melany was a teacher 
who employed the appropriate blend of content knowledge with pedagogy in order to 
integrate mathematics with science in order to teach for understanding. Lady, the episode 
shows that Melany understood whaî counted as knowledge in students' leamhg of 
mathematics. 
During that whole unit on 3-D geometry, there was a whole lot of thinking 
going on .... Yeah, it was great. 1 really enjoyed it, and 1 was just amazed at 
their thinking. And 1 was amazed at who was comulg up with definitions, 
you know. Like Becky just knows; she understands math concepts. 
1 
would have thought tbaS looking at her language. No, 1 shouldn't Say in 
language, because that is language, but in reading and writing. 
(interview, December 16, p. 7) 
1 would now like to tum to the concluding part of this chapter in which 1 briefly talk 
about Shulman's (1986, 1987) conception of pedagogical content knowledge to which 1 
alluded in Chapter Four. As 1 noted in Chapter Two, Fennema, Carpenter and Peterson 
( 1989) point out that teachers' pedagogical content knowledge is a critical component in 
children's leamhg of rnathematics with understanding. Borko et al. (1992) suggest that 
teachers need this kind of knowledge in order to make informed decisions for effective 
instruction in mathematics. Although there were several instances in which Melany 
demonstrated her ability to relate subject matter lcnowîedge with pedagogical knowledge, 
this incident particuiarly stands out. 

Pedagogical Content Knowled~e 
In a discussion of pedagogical content knowledge Shulman (1986) suggests that a 
teacher needs to have knowledge of the content, an understanding of the knowleàge and 
background that students bring to the leaming, and an awareness of the stages they WU pass 
through in developing mastery. The teacber must also be able to transform content 
knowledge so thaî it is comprehensible to students. There were many instances when 
Melany demonstrated these traits, not oniy in language arts, but also in mathematics. It was 
as if she had a "sixth sense" wben it came to making the right move at the strategic 
moment in a lesson. as she demonstrates in this particuiar incident. She was particularly 
aware of students' varied levels of understanding of concepts and was able to accommodate 
these in her teaching. 
The incident on which 1 wish to focus occurred in the second gwmetry activity 
during the science unit on structures. Earlier in the day Melany had discussed her plans 
for the activity with me. She decided that fmt students would sort and group the solids 
according to those that had oniy flat surfaces and those that did not. The purpose of this 
activity was to differentiate solids that were polyhedra h m  those that were not. The activity 
was to be foiiowed by a discussion which focused on the sorting process and the different 
ways that the solids had been grouped. The succeeding day was merved for making 
certain that students knew the appropriate names for the solids and how to write them 
correctly. Yet, I noticed that once students began to t a k  about their different groupings after 
the sorting had been completed, Melany stopped the lesson and proceeûed to draw a chart 
on the ch& board. She divided the chart into two columns. At the top of one column she 
wrote the heading, polyhedra. In the second, she wmte the heading, not polyhedra. Then 
she continued the discussion. Each time a student identif~ed and named a solid, Melany 
would make a particular effort to emphasize the correct name and spelling of the solid, 
particularly when a student erred. Then she would record the name of the solid in the 
appropriate column on the chart For example, when a student incorrectly called an 

octagonal pnsm an octagon Melany corrected the student and made certain that the 
appropriate name was recorded in the chart. When 1 asked her later that &y why she 
decided to include the chart with the naws of the solids at that point in the lesson, she 
ex plaine.: 
Part of it was a management thing. Like what are these Lids going to do 
sitting  the^ with nothhg to record. And 1 don't h o w  if somebody said 
something or not, but 1 just knew that 1 didn't have to wait for more 
expenence. They wanted to know what these things [the solids] are called 
Some kids were coming up and asking me if this is d e d  this and this is 
called fhis, and ail that had happened. 1 just thought go right into it. So 
those were the two things. (interview, November 8, p. 15) 
There are many teachers who might not have recognized the problem, or might not 
have been able to shift direction on a moment's notice during a mathematics lesson, because 
they lacked the necessary content knowledge or pedagogicai skill. Ya for Melany it 
seemed effortiess. Even when she thought that students weîe sufficiently knowledgeable to 
t a k  about the solids, she was easily able to nlke the necessary adjustment when she 
realized there was a problem. The incident reflects one of the several instances in which 
Melany demonstrated her pedagogical content knowledge, a criticai component of 
children's' learning of mathematics for understanding (Fennema, Carpenter and Peterson, 
1989). 
In surnmaxy, 1 have presented three episodes in order to address the fmt two 
questions that guide this study. Each episode has portrayed different aspects of Melany's 
thinking on what it rneans to teach for understanding in the context of mathematics and bas 
considered the implications for her practice. In so doing, 1 have focused on Melany's 
beliefs about the teaching and learning of mathematics, her content knowledge and her 
perspective of understanding, themes which are tied to question one. 1 have also discussed 
how Melany promoted understanding in her teaching, how she regarded her role as teacher, 
and her style of teaching, themes which fit with question two. As 1 ptesented diEerent 
aspects of her practice, 1 have also focused on three key areas of the mathematics curriculum 

and their underlying concepts: ma, place value and three dimensional geometry. In the 
next chapter 1 deal with Eric. 

Fmtnotes 
1. 
Base ten materials are matbernatical manipulatives that are used for teaching place 
value and number operations. They are designed to illustrate the different powers of 
tens such as hundreds, thousands, etc. They may be commercially produced such as 
Dienes blocks, abacuses, money, etc., or constnicted by students. The maîerials 
which Melany used were Dienes blocks. These materials are designed so that they 
are proportionai in size to the values they represent. For example, one is represented 
by a single plastic cube which is one cubic centimeter in size. Ten is represented by 
ten single cubes joined on one face only to make a rectangular pnsm. 
The 
dimensions of the pnsm would be IxlxlO. One hundred is represented by a 
hundred single cubes joined to fonn a 10x 10 array. One thousand is represented by 
a thousand individual cubes which are joined to form a cube with dimensions, 
10~10~10. 
2. 
Flat is the name given to the 10x10 array which is part of the set of Dienes blocks. 
3. 
Geometric solids are rnauïpuiatives such as cyhders, cones, spheres, pyramids and 
prisms that are usually constructed out of wood. 

Il9 
Chapter 6 
A Portrait of Eric's Life in the Classroom 
In this chapter I present a portrait of Eric's Me in the classroom. The chapter 
begins with a brief introduction in which 1 revisit Eric's views on teaching. Then 1 talk 
about his approach to mathematics. Tàe discussion sets a context for the three episodes that 
are the focus of the chapter. The f m t  episode concentrates on Enc's approach to teaching 
the beginning concepts of a unit on fractions he developed The second episode describes 
his approach to teaching multiplication of fractions. I have chosen this particular episode 
because it contrasts with Eric's approach in the fmt episode. The third episode describes 
an introductory lesson on mixed numbers and improper fractions Eric taught- This episode 
effectively illustrates his depth of understanding and knowledge of maîhematicai concepts. 
My interpretive commentaries are intepteci with the descriptive passages in each episode. 
The chapter foiiows the structure and style of the previous chapter as it addresses 
the fmt two questions of the study. However , there is one striking difference between this 
chapter and the previous one that emerges as the chapter unfolds. Acts of teaching are 
conceptualized in more straigbt forward terms in this chapter than in the one prior. When 
Melany talked about issues of teaching they were more problematic and muitifaceted than 
they were for Eric. In her view mathematics was more about fmding new ways to make it 
more like her language arts program. Although it was important to Eric bat his students 
were successful in rnathematics, he seemed more concerned with c o v e ~ g  
the curriculum. 
In the following 1 revisit Enc's views on teachg. 

Eric's Views on Teaching 
In conversation with Eriç 1 leamed thaî he viewed his teaching as a combination of 
the traditional and the nontraditional. For Eric, traditional teaching was teaching by rote, 
t e h g ,  and using the textbook. Teaching in this way meant giving students knowledge and 
from Eric's perspective, "when you get knowledge fiorn someone else, this is learning" 
(field notes, April9, p. 99). His only "strong mernories" of mathematics from elementary 
and high school were of teachers who taught in this way. Eric pointed out that he favored a 
traditional approach to teaching mathematics because it was more efficient, it twk less tirne 
to tell than to discover, and it ailowed for practice of new s u s .  As he suggests, " 1 am a 
strong advocate of. .. [the idea that] the human brain learns things through repetition" 
(interview, February 26, p. 12). 
Over the four month period in which 1 spent mostly full days in Eric's classmom, 
there were many instances when 1 observeci him "giving students lmowledge". 
One 
occasion that stands out is a lesson Eric taught on lowest-terms fractions. This lesson took 
place afier he had taught the p ~ c i p l e  of equivalent fractions. Tbe occasion is particularly 
striking because, at the same time that Eric employed a traditional textbook approach to 
teach converting fractions to lowest tenns, he incorporateci ideas that promoted concepnial 
understanding. 
Eric introduced the lesson with, 'roday I'm going to explain to you like the 
textbook does so it wiil help you" (field notes, March 4, p. 41). On the overhead projector 
was a transparency (sec Figure 2) that was partially exposed. It contained the steps for 
converhg a fraction to lowest te-; 
ody the foliowing was visible. 

Figure 2. Converting a Fraction to Lowest Terms 
Lowest Terrns Fractions 
1. 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
example: Is 9/12 in lowest ternis? 
factors of 9 = 1 
He proceeded to walk students through the steps for ascertainhg if a fiaction was in 
lowest tenns. First he talked about how to determine if a number was a factor of another 
number. While doing so, he uncovered the following section of the transparency revealing 
numbers that were factors of the numerator. 
Fiwre 2. Converting a Fraction to Lowest Terms 
Lowest Terms Fractions 
1. 
A fraction is in lowest tenns when the greatest cornmon factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: is 9/12 in lowest ternis? 
factors of 9 = 1 
2. 
A fraction is in lowest tenns when the gxeatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
factors of 9 = 1.3 

Then he uncovered more of the transparency and taüced about the denominaior and its 
factors. 
Fimire 2. Converthg a Fraction to Lowest Terms 
Lowest T e m  Fractions 
1. 
A fraction is in lowest terms wh 
denominator is 1. 
en the p
t
 common fa 
of the numera itor and 
exarnple: Is 9/12 in lowest terms? 
factors of 9 = 1 
2. 
A fraction is in bwest terms when the greatest cornmon factor of tbe numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
example: 1s 9/12 in lowest te-? 
factors of 9 = 1,3 
3. 
A fraction is in Iowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denorninator is 1. 
exam~le: Is 9/12 in lowest terms? 
-factors of 9 = 1,3 
-factors of 12 = 1,2,3,4,6, 12. 
He foIiowed by drawing students' attention to the number three noting that it was the 
common factor of the numerator and the denominator, which confirmeci that 9/12 was not in 
lowest terrns. Then he uncovered more of the transparency to display the foiiowing: 

Fi are 2. Converting a Fraction to Lowest Tenns 
A fraction is in lowest te= 
when the greatest common factor of tbe numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
factors of 9 = 1 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest cornnion factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
example: 1s 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
factors of 9 = 1.3 
A fraction is in lowest tenns when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
example: 1s 9/12 in lowest te=? 
-factors of 9 = 1,3 
-factors of 12 = 1,2,3,4,6, 12, 
A fractions is in lowest t e m  when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exarn~le: 
1s 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2,[3], 4,6, 12. 
Lowest Terms Fractions 
3 is the G.C.F., 
therefore 9/12 is not in lowest terms. 
As Eric uncovered the foiiowing question, "What is 9/12 in lowest ternis?". he began to 
taik about how to change a fraction to lowest terms. 

Figure 2. Converting a Fraction to Lowest Tenns 
Lowest T e m  Fractions 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
example: Is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
factors of 9 = 1 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: Is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
factors of 9 = 1,3 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the matest comrnon factor of the numerator and 
denorninator is 1. 
example: 1s 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
-factors of 9 = 1,3 
-factors of 12 = 1,2,3,4,6, 12. 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest common fact 
denominator is 1. 
example: Is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2, 13 ],4,6, 12. 
3 is the G.C.F., therefore 9/12 is not in lowest tenns. 
of the numer; ator and 
A fraction is in lowest tenns when the greatest cornmon factor of the numerator and 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2, [3], 4,6, 12. 
3 is the G.C.F., therefore 9/12 is not in lowest terms. 
exarnvle: What is 9/12 in lowest terms? 
Eric explauied that in order to convea a fiaction to lowest tem. it was necessary to divide 
by a fonn of one. The form of one that he used was 3/3, as shown. 

Figure 2. Converting a Fraction to Lowest Terms 
Lowest Terms Fractions 
A fraction is in lowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator an 
denominator is 1. 
example: 1s 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
factors of 9 = 1 
A fiaction is in lowest tenns when the greatest common factor of the numerator an 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
factors of 9 = 1,3 
A fiaction is in lowest terms when the greatest common factor of the numerator an 
denominator is 1. 
exam~le: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
-factors of 9 = 1,3 
-factors of 12 = 1,2,3,4,6, 12. 
A fraction is in lowest temm when the greatest common factor of the numerator an 
denominator is 1. 
exarnple: Is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2, [3], 4,6, 12. 
3 is the G.C.F., therefore 9/12 is not in lowest t e m .  
A fraction is in lowest ternis when the greatest common factor of the numerator ani 
denominator is 1. 
exarnple: 1s 9/12 in lowest terms? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2, [3], 4,6, 12. 
3 is the G.C.F., 
therefore 9/12 is not in lowest terms. 
exarn~le: What is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
A fractions is in lowest ternis when the greatest common factor of the numerator am 
denominator is 1. 
exarn~le: Is 9/12 in lowest terms? 
-factors of 9 = 1, [3] 
-factors of 12 = 1,2, [3], 4,6, 12. 
3 is the G.C.F., therefore 9/12 is not in lowest tenns. 

example: What is 9/12 in lowest tenns? 
9/12 i 13/31 
9/12 + 13/31 = 314 
~ h i s  
is a form of "1". 
To check our answer: 
- factors of 3 = 1,3 
- factors of 4 = 1,2,4 
G.C.F. is "1" 
Given the nature of this type of research, there are different interpretations that one 
could place on Eric's approach to reducing fractions in order to convert to lowest terms. In 
my view, when a teacher presents the concept of equivalent fractions as dividing (or 
multiplying) by a form of one, even if telhg is the teacher's strategy, it is conceptuaiiy 
more meaningful for students than saying, do the same to the numerator as you do CO the 
denorninator. An approach suth as this, which is based on the principle of one, helps 
students appreciate that equivalent fractions are just different representations for the same 
number concept. In ottier words, they ciiffer in form, not in value, as their appearance might 
suggest. (Note: The principle of one is based on the idea that multiplying or dividing any 
number by one or a form of one never changes the value of the number. Students leam this 
principle as it applies to whole numbers as early as grade three.) This approach to making 
fractions equivalent on which the fmt episode concentrates is generally not used by 
teachers. Yet, Eric appeared cornfortable using it. 1 nim now to a brief discussion of Eric's 
views about nontraditional teaching. 
From Eric's perspective nontraditionai teaching rneant leaming through experience 
and for hùn, "leaming by experience was the most valid kind of leaniing" (field notes, 
April 9 p. 99). Reviously in chapter four 1 talked in detail about the different kinck of 
experiential leaming thaî Eric provided for his snidents. Thes were: doing independent 
research, engaging in "hands-on" learning, and l e h g  skills for dealing with tbe 

unexpected in life. He suggested thaî these three types of learning were intended to develop 
both the content and the skills that bis students wouid need both in and out of school. Eric 
also described non-traditional teaching as "just sort of traveling with them [the students], 
just sort of discoverhg things dong the way with hem, not really telling them a whole lot 
yet" (interview, February 26, p. 13). In bis view, nontraditional teaching was "doing a lot 
of the spatial stuff' to develop understanding and helping students see concepts better. 1 
interpreted Eric's colloquial way of speaking as meaning that he had his students engage in 
experiences where they manipulated concrete objects to build visual images of concepts. He 
also suggested that nontraditional teaching included having students keep porffolios and 
writing folders. 
In the following paragraphs 1 focus on Eric's views about mathemaîics. This 
discussion is important because it is a basis for understanding the move. he makes in his 
teaching in the three episodes thai follow. 
Eric's Views About Mathematics 
According to Eric. mathematics was sequential and ideas buiiî, not only from one 
year to the next, but from one week to the next. He cited the following example to explain 
what he meant. Before students were able to learn about place value with decimals and 
fractions, they first needed to know about place value with whole numbers. Tbey aiso 
needed to know how to group by tens or tenths before they could work with hundfeds or 
hundredths respectively. In his view* mathematics was straightfoward and did not provide 
the flexibility he needed to ûy out varied ways of approaching ideas that language arts did. 
As 1 noted previously, when Eric tatked about mathematics he often used language arts as a 
basis for comparïson. He pointed out that mathematics, unlike laaguage arts, had specific 
outcornes and an outline which he felt obliged to foliow over the year. 
For Eric there was a logical progression to teaching maîhemaîics, whereas in 
language arts it was different. For example, in mathematics equivalent fractions had to be 

taught before addition of fractions; otherwise, students would not be able to solve exercises 
with uniilce denomulators. However, in language arts, it was easy to teach a creaîive writing 
activity one week, bias the next week, or "fiip it around", and it would not matter. In Eric's 
view, mathematics was d e s  and conventions and it was important to foliow them The 
following excerpt in which Eric was taking up questions on how to convert mixed numbers 
to improper fiactions is an example. 1 want to draw attention to his explanation regarding 
why mixed numbers or answers to questions should not be left as impcoper fractions. 
Some of you might have done this right. [At this point he wrote on the 
blackboard 1718 = 1 918.1 You're not wrong. You're right. It is right. But 
the convention, the standard way again, a dxed number isn't written or 
shouldn't be left written with an improper fiaction in it. Because ttiis, 1 9/û, 
9/8 is still more than one whole, isn't it. 8/8 is one whole and you've got 
9/8. You generally don't write with an improper fraction ... It's just not the 
convention; the way that things are written. What 1 mean by convention is 
you can still understand what's going on, but it's not the proper way that 
things are doue. It's not îbe proper way that were used to dealing with 
tbings, and math is international. So it's important that we keep using the 
same standard conventions evexywhere; so every one understands exactly 
what we are doing. (audio tapes, March 28, p. 13) 
Eric also beiieved that mathematics lacked the latitude thaî language arts provideci. 
Even though there were different techniques he could use to teach a concept in mathematics 
such as using a geoboard or fraction sets to teach fractions, it did not offer him the scope 
that language arts did. In language arts he could teach any novel he wished. He could use 
the newspaper, a short story, or poetry to teach concepts such as bias and courage. In 
mathexnatics, he could not do the same. He was more willing to "take different tums and 
direc tions ..." (interview, March 25, p. 8) in language arts than he was in mathematics. For 
Eric, mathematics was closely tied to the c l a s ~ f ~ ~ m ,  
and he did not think that students ever 
thought about it outside, as they might with language arts. However, he did point out, as 1 
noted in Chapter Four, ?haî he taught mathematics differently h m  most teachers. 
Nevertheless, he did suggest ?haî the majority of his teaching in mathematics was tied to 
teachuig by teiling, rather than experiential leaming where students discovered on their own. 

The above oveniew of Eric's perspective on teaching and his beliefs about 
mathematics sets the scene for understanding the following three episodes. As 1 said in 
Chapter Three, 1 spent most days of a four month period in Eric's classroom. From ten 
episodes 1 have selected the three thai foUow for these reasons. Fmtly, they ülustrate the 
nature of his understanding and depth of knowledge of mathematical concepts. Secondly, 
they demonstrate the dominant straîegies that he used in his practice. Thirdly, they reveal 
his beliefs about the teaching and leamhg of mathematics. They also demonstrate how he 
promoted understanding of mathematicai concepts. Finally, they illustrate how he viewed 
his role as teacher. 
A "Hands On" A ~ ~ r o a c h  
to Fractions - The Power of One 
This episode focuses on the introductory work to a unit on fractions that Eric taught 
his students. It particularly concentrates on his unique approach to teaching the concept of 
equivalent fractions. Although Enc favored an approach to mathematics that was based on 
rote "because it took less time to tell than to discover", the episode reveals how he taught 
from a more conceptuaiiy oriented view to promote meaning in students' leaming. He 
believed that if he devoted additional time to develop visuai images of concepts in the early 
part of the unit it would build students' understanding of concepts. According to Eric, it 
would prepare them for moving through ideas more quickly in the laiter part of the unit 
when "we' re going to start jamming through the numbers, and we're going to be doing 
some rote paper and pend repetition" (interview, February 26, p. 13). The episode also 
reveals Eric's depth of knowledge of mathematics, and his awmness of the misconceptions 
and partial understandings that students generally bring to the learning of fractions, factors 
that affect teaching for understanding. 
Research (Bezuk and Cramer, 1989; Carpenter, Corbitt, Kepner, Lindquist, and 
Reys, 198 1 ; Pie1 and Green, 1994) suggests thaî elementary, as weii as secondaty students 
demonstrate a lack of understanding of and have misconceptions about fractions. 

Frequently, students add denominators rather than just the numerators when operating with 
fractions. They incorrectiy estimate fractional values suggesting that the sum of fractions 
such as lU13 + 7/8 are 19 or 21. Students often mistakenly apply the whole number 
notion that multiplication nakes larger and division smaller to operations with fractions, and 
so on. 1 want to add that, in some instances, teachers have these same misconceptions 
(Thipkong and Davis, 1991). 
It was evident h m  my conversations with Eric that based on his teaching of grade 
seven the previous year and pretests this year, he was aware of the difliculties that students 
experience with fractions. According to Eric, "many of them [the students] did fractions 
mechanicaliy and couid do them, but they had no understanding of what they are doing" 
(field notes, February 16, p. 4). In Eric's opinion students needed to understand fractions 
so they could apply them to different situations. For example, they had to be able to take 
what he had told them about the relationship of halves, quarters or eighths to one whole and 
apply it to fifths. If students could see in their heads aii the ways that fractions could be 
represented visuaily, 'When they are king asked to crunch them, they're going to be better 
at it" (field notes, February 19, p. 18). He suggested when students couldn't visualize 
fractional concepts, or didn't have a finn grasp on k m ,  
that is when he would lose them. 
Eric thought thai if students understood fractions, they would know that fractions 
were less than one whole and that the fractional parts that made up the whole had to be qua1 
in six. They would understand that the process of making one fraction equivalent to 
another changed only the numerial representation of the second fiaction, not its value. 
They would know that the principle of one, an important anchor in rnaîhemaîics, was at the 
heart of the principle of equivalent fractions. 
Also, they would understand division of 
fractions rather than memorizing a procedure. By this he meant, they would understand that 
division meant how many times 1/4 fits inside ln. 
In the time that 1 obsexved Eric teaching mathemaîics, he taught fractions. Fust he 
focused on the meaning of fractions. Then he taught the principle of equivaient fractions, 

making fractions quivalent, comparing fractions, ordering ktions, reducing fiactions to 
lowest terms, changing fractions to mixeci numbers and vice versa Then he concenbrated on 
operations with fractions, and connecting fractions to decimals. I was stnick by the 
dflerence in his appmach to teaching concepts in the first part of the unit in compared to 
the latter part. The contrast becornes apparent as the chapter unfolds. 
Before 1 talk about Eric's approach to teaching the concept of equivalency, 1 want to 
briefly describe his lesson on the meaning of fractions. This "bands-on" lesson, whicb 
was the basis for his work on equivaiency, incorporated the use of visual images to buiid 
understanding. 
Eric began the Iesson by illustraMg a 4x4 square on a dot paper 
transparency on the overtiead. First he named the square as one whole, then he invited a 
snident to divide the square into two equal parts. A second student followed by shading 
each part of the square with a diHerient color rnarker to show the two parts. Eric then 
recorded the fraction 1/2 under the illustration. Students were instnicted to do the same on 
their dot paper, but were given an added challenge. They were asked to divide the square in 
such a way that the two halves were not obvious. This meant that they could not divide the 
square with a horizontai, vertical, or diagonal lhe. Although the task was chailenging for 
students, the majority were able to figure out at least one way to solve the problen Once 
students finished theû patterns on dot paper, they replicated them on their geoboards. 
Students then took nims presenting their geoboard patterns in s
d
 
groups to ihe 
class. As they displayed k i r  work, Eric tailcecl about the different configurations. Each 
time students presented, he would poll the class to fmd out if they thought that the patterns 
represented one half. There were some pattems where it was obvious that the two parts 
were congruent. It was evident that these students understood the concept to the extmt that 
they could go beyond the simplest levcl of representing the idea. For others it was 
necessary to couat the SIMU squares on the geoboard to c o n f i  that the two p w  were 
equal in size. Students who created these pattems demonstraied a more sophisticated kvel 
of understanding. m i r  patterns prompted a discussion about the idea of congruency. 

From my observations Eric appeared easiiy able to faicilitate such a discussion without 
reference to a teacher's resource book. On completion of the discussion of the concept of 
1/2 Eric repeated the process for 1/4, 118, and 1/16. In a conversation I had with him later 
that day, 1 asked why he had chosen the fractions 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, and 1/16. He said. 
My understanding in math telis me 1 don? want to use the examples of 
fifths when I'm showïng the kids how to do this kind of stuff, because fifths 
don't lend themselves very weiî to equivaient fractions with things that kids 
will understand. If 1 go with halves, quarters, eighths, they aii just build on 
one another, and you cm ... identify a very easy pattern to tha~ Ym can 
work with it and then you can start branching out. 
(interview, February 16, p. 7) 
The previous description of Eric's lesson on the meaning of fractions, albeit brief, 
demonstrates how Eric w d  visuai images to develop the concept of fractions for students. 
In order to teach fiom a more conceptuaiiy orienteci view, teachers need to have the content 
knowledge and repertoire to do so (BA, I991a). The strategies Eric employed helped 
students "see" concepts and provided them with the opportunity to engage in "hands-on" 
learning. Alkin (1992) suggests that teachers need to do more than just present information 
in order to teach for understanding. Eric's teaching of the concept of equivalency, which 
foUows, provides further evidence. 
As I move to a discussion of Ends teaching of the concept of equivaiency I should 
note its importance in mathematics as a principle. Before students are able to compare and 
order fractions with unlike denominators, they need to know how to make fiactions 
equivalent. They also need to have knowledge of the concept of equivalency in order to add 
and subtract fractions with unlike denominators. To convert fiactions to decimal numbers 
and vice-versa, students need to understand the principle of equivdent fractions. 
Also, 
knowledge of the concept of equivalency is a prerequisite for work with percent, rate, ratio, 
proportion, and probability-ideas that ail build on the concept of a fraction. It was apparent 
from my conversations and observations that Eric was aware of these ideas. To teach the 

concept of equivalency teachers usually tell students chat to make fractions equivalen~ they 
should do the same to the top as they do to the bottom. In other words, if you multiply or 
divide the top by three, then multiply or divide the bottom by three. As commonly taught, 
this smtegy for fractions emphask the aigorithmic method and attends minimaiiy to 
meaning or understanding. The method emphasizes how, but not why. Eric's approach 
was different. 
The foiiowing paragraphs describe Eric's approach to the concept of equivalency. It 
was divided into three parts. In the first part Eric laid the ground work for the develop~~~ent 
of the concept. In so doing he established the importance of one whole with the aid of 
pictorial iilustrations and connectai it to its fractional representations. 
He began by 
displaying a senes of squares on a dot paper transparency (see Figure 3) on the overfiead 
Each square was five uni& by five uni& and covered an area of twenty five dots. 
Figure 3. 
A Series of Squares on the Dot Paper Transparency 
He identified the first square as one whole and proceeded to tak about the meaning of this 
concept. 
The fust square, I'm going to label it one whole in brackets. I've put the 
nurnber one. So what I'm telling you is, if you Say one whole, the number 
one is the numerical representation of what 1 just said. 1 said one whole and 
the number that represents one whole is this. [He pointed to the number one 
that he had just written in brackets below the square.] 
The symbol that 
represents one whole is this syrnbol right here- the number one. 
Now if 1 want to take my pen and you want to take your pend, 1 want to 
represent to you, 1 want to show you with a picture, 1 want to use this square. 

How can 1 visually show you that 1 understand whaî one whole is? How 
much one whole is? How can I show you that visually, so you could see it 
in a picture? (audio tapes, February 19, p. 15) 
At this point a snident suggested that Eric shade in the whole square, which he did. 
He followed by joining the dots in the interior of the square to make sixteen smaller squares 
and tallced about how one couid be represented in htional fom, in this instance 16/16. 
1. Eric: 
2. First Student: 
3. Eric: 
4. Second Student: 
I'm going to try to think of another way that 1 could write 
one whole as a fiaction. That's a fraction. 
In the f i t  
example, this is one whole. What symbol or whaî number 
did 1 use to represent one whole? 
One. 
One. In the second example, the rnidde square, here, that's 
still one whole. I'm stiU showiag you one whole, but I've 
written it in a different way. How did 1 write one whole, in the 
second example? What was the different me- 
that 1 used? 
The following segment of the dialogue (5-10) illustrates Eric's efforts to ensure îhat 
students understood the purpose of the numerator and the denorninator in any fraction. 
Note ( 1 1 - 13) how he reinforces the connection between one whole and its fractional 
equivalent, 16/16. 
5. Eric: 
6. Third Student: 
7. Eric: 
8. Third Student: 
9. Eric: 
10. Fourth Student: 
16/16. Good. Sixteen pieces out of a possible sixteen. The 
bottom nwnber in the fiaction teils us that the whole was 
divided into sixteen equal size pieces. What does the top 
number tell us? What information does it tell us? 
That there was sixteen out of a possible sixteen. 
What do you mean thai there were sixteen out of a possible 
sixteen? 
There was sixteen ... ummm, sixteen boxes. 
Okay. The bottom number tells us that we took tbe whole 
and we divided it into sixteen pieces. nK top number tells 
us? 
We shaded in sixteen. 

11- Eric: 
Yah, we shaded in sixteen or we were working with, we took 
sixteen of those squares. How do you know by lwkng at 
these two illustrations? How do you know that both one and 
16/16 are the same amount? Can you tell me? How do you 
know that? 
12. Fifth Student: 
The whole larger box, the boxes are shaded in. 
13. Eric: 
The entire larger box here is shaded in. And even though uiie 
shaded in sixteen srnaller boxes, wàen you add aiI of the 
sixteen smaiier boxes together, the result is the larger box. 
The entire box or square is shaded in. So they're both the 
same. They 're both the same? 
14. Sixth Student: 
Size. 
In the section that foliows Eric repeats the process for u2. 1 want to draw attention to the 
manner in which he continues to make connections for students. First, he relates 2/2 to one 
whole (19-26). Then, he ties it to other fractional representations (27-30). 
15. Eric: 
1 6. Seventh S tudent: 
17. Eric: 
18. Eight Studeot: 
19. Eric: 
20. Ninth Student: 
21. Eric: 
Size. The same amount. Let's take a look. Let me get my 
other pen out hem. Let's take a look this tirne. Take the 
third square. I'm goiag to divide it, like this. (He divided it 
into two equal parts.] I'm stiil going to concern myself with 
one whole. This time I've taken the large square and I'm 
still telling you. 1 want to worry about a whole. 1 still want 
to talk about a whole. But the f i t  thing 1 want to recognize 
is, how many equal size pieces did 1 divide the whole into? 
In this case, how many quai size pieces did 1 divide the 
whole into? 
Two. 
What kind of shading should 1 do to represent to you that 
I'm working with the whole, the wbole thing? What kind of 
shading should 1 do? Can you descnbe for me what I should 
shade. 
AU of it. 
AU of it. We're still talking about the whole aren't we? 
We're SU talking about the whole tbing. How am 1 going to 
represent numeridly, with a number, that out of hvo equal 
size pieces, we're working with or concemed with both of 
hem? How am 1 going to represent this with a number? 
With two. 
Where am 1 going to put the two? 

22. Ninth Student: 
23. Eric: 
24. Tenth Student: 
25. Eric: 
26. Tenth Student: 
27. Enc: 
On top of the other two. 
By putting that two up top here, I've said that out of the two 
equal size pieces that the whole is divided ho, I'm working 
with, or 1 have two of them. Umm, how would you Say thaî 
number there? 
2'2. You have îf2. So 2/2 is the same as what? It's îhe sarne 
as how much? 
One whole. 
It's the same as one whole. What's another way of writing 
one whole or 2/2? DBerent way of Mting it, exact same 
amount. 
28. Eleventh Student: Sixteen over sixteen. 
29. Eric: 
Sixteen over sixteen, 1 W 16. 
With those three examples, how many people see a pattern? 
Do you see something that rnight help you if 1 said to you, 
write for me another fraction that would represent one whole. 
How many people see a pattern here? If I said write another 
fraction for one whole. 
30. Fifth Student: 
4/4 
(audio tapes, February 19, p. 25) 
Once the fmt part of the lesson was completed and Eric established the importance 
of one whole and comected it to its vaxied fiactionai representations, he had students work 
with a partner to develop a d e  or generalization for making fractions equivalent. ïk 
intention was that students would use what they had leamed in the fmt part of the lesson to 
solve a series of questions that culrninated in the formulation of a generalization. As Enc 
suggested, "Based on this whole dculation that they [the students] would do, would they 
see any way that maybe they could make up a little d e  that would help them or somebody 
to make equivalent fiactions all the tim" (inicrview, Febmary 26, p. 14). 
The assignment on which students worked was designed so that the fraction sets1 
were used to aoswer the questions. There were six questions in dl. The questions wece 
organized so îhat it was necessary to answer the fmt five comtly in order to solve the 

sixth. The questions were as foliows. in question one students had to figure out and record 
the vdue of one of each different color fraction piece. In question hvo they had to use the 
fraction pieces to determine the fiactional equivalents, such as 2t2, 3/3, 44, of one whole, 
and so on. For the next two questions, students had to use àifferent f o m  of one fiom the 
previous question to make fiactional equivalents for ln and ln. In the fifth question 
students had to discover the pattern for makiog ftactions quivalent This question was 
intended to help students figure out in question six the meaning of y/y so they could create 
a rule or generalization for making fractions equivalent. According to Eric question six 
required "taking what we talked about and going beyond" (audio tapes, February 26, p. 
10). In Gardner's (1 993) tenns, it was "having sufficieut grasp of concepts, priaciples, or 
skills so that they can be applied to new situations or problems" (p. 21). 
Once students completed the assignment and it was taken up, Eric presented his own 
version of the d e  
for making fractions equivalent. According to Eric, it was now time to 
concentrate on the abstract. 
The way we've been creating equivalent fraçtions so far has been a lot of 
"hands on". You're taking a whole. You're dividing it in baif, coloring in 
a half. You've been taking two quarters, two fourths; you've been coloring 
them in. You've been looking at them. Hey, they're the same size. 1s that 
really a practical methoci of creating equivalent fractions in the real world? 
You know if you're out and you're trying to do a cdculation because you're 
in the store. You know if you're trying to figure out whether one third off 
$25.00 is a better deal than a quarter off $30.00, things like that. But when 
you have to manipulate fractions in your heod can you always have your 
picture of a fraction hem when you're messing mund with it? 
Probably not, nght. So we've gotta not oniy be able to look at things 
visually and see what fractions mean visually. You've got to be able to 
manipulate the numbers and the hction activity introduced you to du& 
Right at the end you were asked to figure out a nile and some of you figured 
out that d e .  Basidiy, it was a rule to help you numericdiy creafe 
equivalent fractions. I'm going to give you a piece of graph paper to copy 
down the following, Creating Equivaient Fractions. Here's a statement that 
we already know. You were able to figure this out. 1 just reworded it [the 
d e  
for making fractions equivalent] so that it is hopefully worded so that it 
makes sense to most people. I'm going to give you the nile to help you 
numerically mate equivalent fractions. 
(audio tapes, March 1, p. 5 ) 

As Eric led studeats through his version of the d e  for making fractions equivalent, the 
foilowing was displayed on the overhead. 
Fime 4. 
Eric's Version of the Rule for Making Fractions Equivalent 
Euuivaient Fractions 
Equivalent fractions are fractions that name the same number. (They have the same value.) 
2/3 x 313 = 619, x 919 = 1 8/27, x 10/10 = 20/30. and 100/100 = 200/300 are aU equivaleni 
fractions. 
1/ 1, 2/2,3/3,4/4, ... are dl equivalent fractions that name the same nurnber " 1 ". 
To change a fraction to an equivalent k t i o n  we multiply or divide the fraction by some 
form of "1". 
example: Write an equivalent fraction for: 
a) 2/6 
b) 15/18 
a) 26 x 313 = 6/18, 
Therefore 216 and 6/ 18 are equivalent. 
b) 1 SI 1 8 + 313 = 3 6  Therefore 191 8 and 516 are equivalent. 
niis is a form of one. 
(field notes, March 1, p. 30) 
Eric concluded by saying: "If two fractions are equivalent, they've got exactly the 
same value. They're describing the same amount or the same number. Just because they're 
written differently . it doesn' t mean that the value har chaaged" (audio tapes, March 1, p. 6). 
As 1 suggested earlier, given the nature of this type of research, there are different 
interpretations that one could place on Eric's conception of equivaient fiaçtions. In my view 
his definition is conceptuaiiy more meaningful than saying that @valent 
fractions are 
fractions that "name the same number" (Lesage et ai., 1987, p. 170), or 'Y fiactions which 
are equal " (Kelly et ai., 1987, p. 378). 
In summary 1 want to point out that this episode offers a view of Eric as a 
pedagogue who teaches h m  a more conceptuaiiy oriented view in order to promote 

understanding in mathematics. 
He pmvided students with "hands-on leamhg and 
effectively incorporated pictonal representations and concrete materials into his teaching. 
Research (Cruikshank and Sheffield. 1988; Labinowicz, 1985) suggests that the appropnate 
use of concrete materials in conjunction with pictoriai images promotes understanding. In 
my expience, few teachers at the upper elementary level wouid have used the concrete 
materials in their teaching as Eric did. Neither would they have devoted the tirne to build 
visuai images of the concepts. Teacbers need to do more than just present Wonnation in 
order to teach for understanding (AUon, 
1992). Often teachers assume that students already 
know how to make fractions equivalent, and that it is not necessary to reteach the concept. 
They believe that grade seven students are at the formal operational stage in their Iogicai 
thinking (Labinowicz, 1980) and do not need to work concretely. 
The episode also illustrates Eric's depth of knowledge and understanding of 
mathematicai concepts. As research (Femema and Ftanke, 1992) suggests, "... what a 
teacher knows is one of the most important influences on what is done in clas.srooms, and 
ultimately on what students' learn" (p. 147). Not only did Eric establish the concept of 
one as an important anchor in mathematics, he used this principle as a basis for developing 
the concept of equivalency. Moreover, he demonstrated how he was able to make important 
connections in his teacbing. In the view of Prawat (1989)' teacher's content knowledge of 
the subject domain affects understanding of what it means to teach for understanding and 
their practice. Findy, the episode provides evi&nce of Eric's ability to challenge students 
to apply theù knowledge of concepts and skills to new problems. In Gardner's (1993) 
terms, students who can do so truiy understand. 1 move now to the second episode. 
Teaching Multiulication with Fractions 
In this episode I also talk about Eric's approach to teaching fractions. It focuses on 
multiplication Eric taught in the latter part of the unit. 1 seiected this particular episode 
because it contrasts with Eric's teaching in the one prior. As 1 explained earlier, Eric's 

approach to teaching concepts at the beginniag of the unit was different h m  the way he 
taught in the latter part. According to Eric: 
1 had put the t h e  up fiont on making sure we had a good gounding 
concretely in what fractions are aad the relationship between fractions, and 
we spent less time on other aspects. 
Doing a lot of concrete work on 
fraction equivalency would d o w  me to skim through it [the laîter part of the 
unit] when 1 did alî my other aspects of fractions. 
(interview, April 19, p. 15) 
Eric's plan for dtiplication was to ?.each only tbe d e  because he needed to cover 
the cmiculum. There was no longer time for concrete materials, even if they were important 
for building visual images. Yet, he did point out that, even if he had tirne, he would only use 
the fraction pieces for one or two more lessons. In his view, it was necessary to teach the 
rule for multiplying because, "when you are my age, you remember the d e  for multiplying 
and that's what counts" (field notes, April 23, p. 126). Once his students knew the rule, 
multiply top thes top and bottom times bottom, ail they needed to do was to apply it, that 
was his objective. 
My goal is not that they'li be able to think independently. It's not that 
they'll be able to problem solve in an abstract manner. It's not that they'll 
be able to internalize, synthesize, and evaluate their respoIlSeS. It's that when 
1 give them ten questions they can get nine or better. 
(audio tapes, April23, p. 2) 
-. 
He emphasized that ttiere would be no concrete materials and no extra tirne for students to 
discover on their own. It was mostly "plug and grind", and the goal was to achieve 87% 
accuracy or better. 1 noted earlier that, as with any coiieague in conversation, Eric was 
collquial when we talked. 1 believe what Eric meant when he said, "plug and grind" was 
that students would be working exclusively on questions from the textbook, rather than 
working on exploration and discussion of ideas. 
1 want to point out that often students' misconceptions or commonly held beliefs 
that multiplication always makes larger and division always makes smaller confiicts with 
their Ieaming of multiplication and division of fiactions (Graeber, Tirosh, and Glover, 

1989). Because of this probkm, teachers need to ieach multiplication and division with 
fractions so that students can d
e
 
sense of the idea why multiplication with hctions 
makes smaller, and division makes larger. In my expenence, the use of concrete materials 
and/or pictorial images helps students understand why this situation occurs. In so doing, 
they see why the prduct of two fractions is generally less than its factors and the quotient 
greater than its dividend, 
Because Eric beiieved that multiplication of fiactions was an easier ski11 to leam than 
addition or subtraction of fiactions, although not necessarily easier to understand, a rote 
approach to teaching made sense. In conversation with Eric, he suggested that aU he really 
wanted his students to know about multiplication was: 
I'd want you to know how to multiply them [the fractions]. I'd want you to 
take this one and multiply it by that one, get your answer, reduce it. It may 
involve changing that mixed number to an improper fiaction, then multiply. 
Depending on how smart you were 1 might even take the time to point out to 
you that you notice that when you multiply fractions tbe number doesn't 
necessarily get bigger. There's a couple of kids who 1 would point that out 
to and they'd go "Huh". 
Can you do it? Great. Let's go. That's what I'm aiming for now. 
(interview, April23, p. 2) 
Let me turn now to how these ideas worked in practice. To teach muitiplicaîion of 
fractions, Eric introduced the lesson by connecting new ideas to concepts he believed that 
students already knew. Researcti (Fernema, Carpenter and Peterson, 1989) suggests that 
teachers need to pay attention to wbaî students already know because understanding 
involves linking new howledge to existing knowledge. Fit, Eric talked about the 
similarities between multiplication with whole numbers and multiplication with fiactions. 
Then, he focused on multiplication of fractions. He pointed out how easy the task would be 
as students already had learned the basics for multiplying fiactions from their work with 
equivalent fractions. The foiiowing is Eric's intraiuction to the lesson. 1 want to draw 
attention to the manner in which Eric connects the task of multiplying common fractions to 
what s tudents already knew about multiplication. 

1. Eric: 
Let's thïnk back to whole numbers, grade two, maybe grade 
three. Yw've already leamed how to add. You've l
e
d
 
how to subtract. What should you learn to do next? 
2. First Student: 
Multiply. 
3. Eric: 
Multiply. See that, fractions are just a different way to write 
a number. We're going to leam how to multiply. Now, how 
many people, if 1 gave you this question codd get the correct 
answer, 6 x 5? h t  your hand up if you think that you could 
do that and get the correct answer, 6 x 5. 1 don't care if you 
have to do it in your head or you'd have to work it out on 
paper, if you could get the correct answer. How about this 
one, 13 x 4? You codd work it out or you could do it in 
your head, whatever, but you can teil me what 13 x 4 is. AU 
right good. How about this, 11 x 5? 6 x 9? How many 
people think that they can do that? How many people know 
how to reduce to lowest tenns? 1s any of this stuff 1 just 
asked you new? 1s it new or do we know this M y ?  
We've leamed this already right. 
4. Second Student: 
Yeah. 
5. Eric: 
Then you know how to multiply fractions. 1' m not going to 
show you one things that's new. Honestly. I'm just going 
to show how, lwk, you can do this, this, and tbis, and put it 
ail together. Nothhg new I'm showing you here- I'm not 
showing you new rules to memorize. I'm not showing you 
new tricks. I'm just saying this is how we're going to do it. 
You multiply. You convert. You reduce. Can you make sure 
that you have the title, Multiplying Fractions, and the &te as 
well. 
And today we're going to leam how to muitiply fractions. 
(audio tapes, April23, p. 7) 
According to his usual style Eric displayed on the overhead projector a transparency 
of a written note (see Figure 5). The note, which was covered with a sheet of paper so its 
contents were not visible, outlined the steps for multiplying cornmon kactions and mixed 
numbers . 

Figure 5. 
Eric's Note on How to Multiply Fractions 
Multiplv ine Fractions 
To multiply fractions, fmd the product of the numerators and place it over the product of the 
denominators. 
~Vultiply mixed numbers by changing the mixed numbers to improper fractions. 
e.g. 6: 2 1/8 x 115 = 1718 x 1/5 = 17140 
(field notes, April26, p. 128a). 
For the purpose of tbis episode 1 focus oniy on multiplication of common fractions. Eric 
began with 112 x 3/4. At that point he moved the paper down so the expression was visible. 
To help students understand how to multiply common fractions, Eric suggested that they 
think of 112 x 213 as multiplying 3/4 by 3/3. He explaineci that they already knew how to 
multiply any fraction by a f o m  of one, and multiplying two common fractions was the 
same. Research (Gd, 
McCaslin and Reys, 1992; Haylock, 1982) suggests h
t
 students' 
abiiity to make connections is important to tbeir learning for understanding. As Eric led 
students through the steps of muitiplying fractions, g r a d d y  uncovering more of the 
transparency, he invited students to offer their input. At straîegic intervals Eric stopped to 

reasaure students that learning multiplication of fractions was going to be easy. In Eric's 
view, they already knew the necessary subskills, so it was going to be "a piece of cake". 
The foilowing excerpt demonstrates how Eric lead his students through the 
procedure for multipiying common fiactions. 1 want to draw attention to the connections he 
makes between students' previously acquired howledge and the task of multiplying 
fractions. Note (3, 5 and 15) how he focuses on the similarities between rnultipIication of 
common fractions and the task of creating equivalent fractions. 
1. Eric: 
2. First Student: 
3. Eric: 
4. First Student: 
5. Eric: 
6. Second Student: 
7. Eric: 
8. Third Student: 
9. Eric: 
10. Third Student: 
And today we're going to l e m  how to multiply fkactions. 
Now here's another one of my famous reaily wordy 
sentences. You read and you go, "Huh". 
But, as soon as 
you see an example, it will rnake total sense to you. So w e  
have one sentence here. 
To muitiply fractions, fmd the 
product of the numerators and place it over the product of the 
denominators. 
The interesthg thing about this is, by the time we get to this 
part of the unit, when 1 teach multiplying fractions, I've 
aîready taught you how to do it. When have you already 
used multiplying fractions? Anybody know? 1 mean this 
year. When have 1 taught you this year to do this? 
Sometimes you do it when you're converting to lowest 
terms. 
Sure. Sometimes when yod re converting to lowest terrns. 
Not usualiy multiplying, but we're applying the sarne d e s  
when we're creating equivalent fractions. Right. 
Yeah. 
When you multiply by a form of one. 1 said thai to you 
several times wben we took up the quiz. What form of one 
did you multiply this fraction by? So I've already s h o w  
you how to multiply fractions. 
When you go to lowest te=, 
you divide, so it's exact 
opposite. 
You got it. You got it. So 1 saki, if you want to multiply 
fractions, fmd the product of tbe numerators. Weii, product, 
what does ttiat mean? What is a product? This is a math 
tem. What is a product? 
The answer to the question. 
Yeah. What type of question is the answer d e d  a product? 

11. Eric: 
No. When you're doing some type of operation the answer 
is called a product, What operation would you be doing? 
12. Third Student: 
BEDMAS. 
Note: BEDMAS is an acronym teachers fkquentiy use with 
their students to help them remember the niles for the order 
of operations in rnatbematics. The order of the letters 
represents the order in which the operations are perfomed. 
For example, B, the first letter, stands for brackets. 
It 
reminds a student that all work in brackets in any question in 
which there are brackets and other operations must be done 
fmt, and so on. 
13. Eric: 
Well, BEDMAS is six different things. 
It's not one 
operation. Let's see if somebody can help out. 
14. Fourth S tudent: 
Multiplication. 
15. Eric: 
Multiplication. The answer to a multipiication question is the 
product. So you find the product of the numerators and you 
place it over top of the denomhators. Wow simple. Let's 
see how many of you cm solve this question based on what 1 
just told you. There's the fmt example, 1/2 x 3/4. Copy the 
example and try to unte down the answer for me. 
Remember, when you multiply, you place the product of the 
numerators over top of, over top of the product of the 
denominators. Think how you wouid multiply fiactions if 
you were creating equivdent fi;cctions. If you were creating 
equivaient fractions, what would you do? 1 haven't told you 
anythuig new. Retend that you're making an equivalent 
fraction. Pretend just like you had 1/2 x 3/3. What would 
you get right here? Well, it's not 3/3; it's 3/4. 
I'm not 
showing you anything new. 
Anything we're doing, you 
know how to do. 
(audio tapes, Apri.123, p. 9) 
As studenu worked, Eric circulated about the class observing their strategies. 1 
noticed that at particular intervais he would retuxn to the overhead at the front of the room 
and address the whole class. It was at these times that he would reassure students that they 
redy knew how to do multiplication. Note (22-25) the emphasis on connecting what 
students already knew with the task of muitiplying common k t i o n s .  
16. Eric: 
Okay, this is like adjectives, right? 
You're oying to make up your own d e s .  Trust me. Believe 
me. There's nothing new. You take the product of the 
numerators. Multiply the numerators together and you get 
the product. What's one Umcs ttiree? 

17. F i  
Student: 
18. Eric: 
19. Sixth Student: 
20. Eric: 
2 1. Fourth Student: 
22 . Eric: 
23. Seventh Student: 
24. Eric: 
25. Seventh S tudent: 
Place it over top of the product of the denominators. 
Well 
the denominator here is two. The denombator here is four. 
What's the product of the denominators? 
Eight. 
Eight. Two times four is eight. Your answer is going to be... 
What's it going to be? 
3/8. Some of you are making up, and this is just like your 
adjectives work. You're making up your own rules. 1 even 
stopped you, 1 said, look, I'm not going to teach anything 
new. I'm not going to show you anything ditYerent. You're 
rnaking up your own ruies. What would you have done if 
I'd said this, make ln an equivalent fraction with a 
denominator of ten. What would you have multiplied ln by 
to mate an equivalent fraction with a denominator equai to 
ten? 
9 5 .  Do you see how this is no different than this? 1x3 is 3. 
2x4 is 8. We' ve been multiplying fractions for weeks. I've 
just never said this is multiplying fiactions. I've just said, 
multiply this nwnber multiplied by that one, and put it there. 
Don't make up your own ruies. Some of you have like eight 
steps. You bave like eight steps. It was like this long. You 
had things equal to 46, 858. I'm going, 'Where did this 
corne from?' You're making up your own des. Let's ~IY 
this one. Before 1 go ahead, 1Rx 314. What word might I, or 
you substitute for the multiplication sign? It means multiply. 
Sometimes, if you hear the word, and, it means addition. 
What's six and four? It's ten. So, and, means addition. 
What word can be substituted to mean multiplication? I've 
got an example here because your textbook uses it quite 
ofien. 
Times. 
1 want to draw attention to the manner in which Eric emphasizes the importance of the word, 
of, to the multiplication of fractions. 
26. Eric: 
No. Times, times is slang. We do Say that many times but it 
is slang. Of, 112 of 10 is 5. Of implies multiplication. So, if 
you see the word of. .., your textbook uses it quite a lot 
About as often as you see a multiplication sign, you see the 
word of. So you might see something like this, 2 3  of 1/4. 

27. Eight Student: 
28. Eric: 
29. Ninth Student: 
30. Eric: 
3 1. Tenth Student: 
32. Eric: 
35. Third Student: 
36. Eric: 
37. First Student: 
38, Enc: 
Wherever you see the word of, it can be replaced with a 
multiplication sign. That's what it means. It bas the exact 
same meaning. So you try to solve the question for me. 
What is Z 3  of 3/4? Don't forget ail answers must be p l d  
into ... 
You've got it. Don't forget. (Eric walked around the room 
to check their work] Ail answers must be placed into lowest 
tenns. That's sort of an ovemding mie that we have for 
fractions. Okay, 2/3 of 1/4 equals or means the same as 2/3 
x 1/4. You didn't have to write that step. I'm just showing 
you. It equals the same thing here. I just replaceci the word 
of with multiply. So, when we multiply M o n s ,  it's the 2 
multiplied by, or with what number? What number does the 
2 multiply with? 
One. 
The one. Two times one is what? 
Two. 
The four, the other denominator. Three time four equals 
what? 
Twelve. 
Twelve, so our answer is 212. Ask yourself is that in lowest 
terms? And a question like that, you should be able to Say, 
no, right away. They're both even numbers. They both 
divide easily by two. No way, it's in lowest tem. What is 
2/12 in lowest terms? 
Wow, it's getting so simple. It's scary, It's scary that they 
actually made me teach this in grade seven, and not in grade 
three. 1 mean it's so simple, isn't it? Let's take another 
example. My favorite example, my favorite example because, 
1 like these examples, because they mess you up. 
You're 
going to look at it and you're going to go, '1 don't have a 
due how to do it'. So copy it dom, but don't go ahead. 
Just copy down what you see, and we'll see if we can figure 
it out. Anybody have an idea how to do it? [About six 
students raised their han& to acknowledge thai they knew 
how to do it.] The fmt thing that you have to recognize is, 
this is going to be a multiplication question. The word, of, 
it's multiplication, 2/3 of 6. Now, the trick is going to be 
rewriting the six as a fraction. That's going to be the trkk 
3/3,3B equals how much? 
(audio tapes, April23, p. 10) 

In sumarizhg 1 want to point out that the predominate approach evident in this 
episode, unlike the previous one, is teaching by rote. As 1 explained earlier, Eric's plan for 
multiplication was to teach oniy the d e  because he needed to cover the curriculum. He no 
longer had tirne for concrete materials, even if they were important for building visual 
images. Yet, in my view. he did incorporate strategies to pmmote conceptual understanding 
in students' leaming. First he linked new learning to students' previous knowledge as he 
connected multiplication of fractions to multiplication of whole nurnbers. Then, he showed 
srudents how multiplying cornmon fractions was the same as making fractions equivalent. 
As 1 noted earlier, the ability to make co~ections is important for students' learning for 
understanding (Good, McCasl. and Reys, 1992; Haylock, 1982). Moreover, students w b  
view mathematics as a connected body of knowledge generaüy have a better understanding 
of the discipline. At the same time that the episode iiiustrates that building students' 
understanding of mathematics was important to Eric, it also reveals that covering the 
curriculum was more pressing. In the next chapter, 1 will talk about factors within the 
context of teaching work, such as covering the curriculum, that mitigate against teaching for 
understanding. 
The previous two episodes provide evidence that Eric's teaching of mathemaîics was 
a contrast in perspectives. At the same tirne that teaching d e s  and telling were impo~ant to 
his practice in mathernatics, Eric provided opportunities for students to work through ideas 
on their own so "they got a good understanding of fractions, what they are, so that they 
actualty know hem" (inteniew Febmary 16, p. 9). To complete the portrait of Eric's life in 
the classroom I now focus on the last teaching episode. The following describes Eric's 
approach to teaching mixed nurnbers and improper fractions. 1 have selected this episode 
because it further illustrates Eric's deep understanding of mathematicai concepts, and his 
ability to present ideas in meaningful ways to his students, factors that affect teaching for 
understanding (Prawat, 1989). 

Visuaiizin~ Mixed Numbers and imuro~er Fractions 
Often 1 have observed teachers teil students that in order to convert a mixed nmber 
to an improper fiaction, multiply the whole number by the denominator and add tbe 
numerator. They explain the reverse procedure, changing an improper fraction to a xnixed 
number, as divide the numerator by the denominator, then wxite the whole number and the 
fraction. This method emphasizes how, but not why. in the view of The National Council 
of Teachers of Mathematics (NClM, 1989; NCIU, 1991), to teach for understanding 
teachers need to provide students with opportunities to explore concepts and ideas, and to 
mate knowledge in the course of active engagement with the disciphne. This kind of 
instruction emphasizes "doing" rather than "knowing that". 
Enstead of presentuig 
students with the steps for converting mued numbers to improper fractions and the reverse 
procedure, Eric designed an assignment in which students used concrete and pictorial 
images to discover the relationship and the intirnate connection between niixed numbers and 
improper fractions. 
The assignrnent was designed so that students worked on their own using the 
fraction pieces to leam about mixed numbers and improper fractions. There were three 
parts. With a view to building on students' previous learning, the fmt part included a 
number of questions that focused on the different ways that one whole could be represented 
in fractionai form. This task set the stage for the developrnent of concepts in the parts thai 
followed. Part two focused on mixed numtiers. 
First students used the fraction pieces to 
create visual images of the mixed nwnbers. These images also dowed them to see the 
mixed number equivalents of the improper fractions. To apply to what they had leamed 
about improper fractions, students then answered questions on addition of mixed numbers. 
Part three focused on impmper fractions. Once more the fraction pieces were used to 
iliustrate the fractions. However, this time the reveise occurred and the images of the 
improper fiactions also showed the rnixed numbers equivalents. The follow up to this 

section of the assignment consisted of a series of questions in which students created 
pictorial representations of different mixed numbers and improper fractions and recordeci 
both forms of the number for each representation. 
Using the fraction pieces, Eric introduced the lesson with a brief review of the 
different ways for representing one whole using the fraction pieces. Once he was certain 
that students remembered the different fractional forms for one whole, he moved to the 
focus of the lesson. First he pointed out that mixed nurnbers were part whote number and 
part fraction. Then he a e d  about the different ways, comretely, pictoriaüy, or abstractly, 
that a mixed number could be represented. The following is an excerpt from the data in 
which Eric introduced the concept of mixed numbers. 1 have included it because it tieveals 
how Eric incorporateci the use of the concrete and pictoriai to develop the concept of a 
mixed number. As noted, research (Cruikshank and Sheffield, 1988; Labinowicz, 1985) 
suggests that the appropnate use of concrete materiais in conjunction with pictorial images 
promotes understanding. The dialogue begins with Eric's definition of the concept of a 
mixed number. 
1. Eric: 
It's a number that has both whole numbers and fractions. It 
doesn't just have to have one. 
It could imve the whole 
nurnber 64 in it. It has a whole nwnber and it has a fraction. 
And together, you put them together and what you cal1 that is 
a rnixed number. It's not just a fraictional nunber. It's not 
just a whole number. It's a rnixed number. It has a whole 
number part, and 1 has a fraction as part of it. 
Now if 1 gave you the mixed number 1 113. The number 
might be represented by a picture something Like tbis (see 
Figure 6). It doesn't have to be. Try to see what you can 
do, either looking at this p i c m  or messing around with your 
k t i o n  set. What pieces, what colored pieces did 1 put 
together to make that reprcscntation? What colored pieces 
out of the fiaction set would you have to put together to make 
this illustration? If 1 said, make it on your table nght now, 
what colored pieces would you have to put together? 
2. First S tudent: 
Blue. [Note: the blue pieces of the fraction set each repfesent 
1/3 of the whole.] 
3. Eric: 
Blue ones. You would have to use thirds. How many of 
those pieces would you need in order to make the 

4. Second Student: 
5. Eric: 
6. Second Student: 
7. Eric: 
8. Third Student: 
representation right there thai I've shown you? How many 
of those pieces wiii you need to make this? 
Four. 
You need four. Can you do that at your table right now? 
No. 
No, you can't. You've got only three blue pieces. If 1 said 
get with another pair [of students], could you guys then make 
this? 
In the comment that follows note how Eric draws students' attention to the comection 
between one whole and its fractional equivalent as he develops the concept of a rnixed 
number. 
9. Eric: 
Sure you could. You have to, each of you, kick in nivo blue 
pieces sa that you have in total four blue pieces. The three 
blue pieces right hem, and I'm pointing at this picture so you 
should see where I'm pointing, the three blue pieces together 
right here represent one whole. That's one whole and this is 
one third. We read a mixed number by reading the whole 
number fmt, one and one third. Now up here 1 gave you a 
couple of different ways to represent fractions. Down here, 
can you take your pencii or a pencil crayon, and draw for me 
some other representation, some other illustration thai might 
represent the same mixed numkr, 1 l n ?  Can you draw 
some iUustration for me down here in the space at the bottom 
of the page that would represent to you, or to me, 1 l n ?  I 
gave you one way that it might look. Can you corne up with 
some other way that it might look? Just a rough sketch, 
nght. We don't have to be artists. 
At this point Eric had the students ïilustrate their version of the mixed number 1 ln. As he 
circulated about the room observing students' representations, Eric continud to focus on 
the relationship of one whole with its fractional equivalent. 
10. Eric: 
Good. Good. That's good. Okay. Okay. G d .  Good. 
That's good. So remember, just Wre up hem, you can draw 
some shape to represent one whole. It doesn't have to be a 
circle. It doesn't have to be a square. It's one whole, and 
then you've got one-third. You've got a second whole, and 
all you're concemed with is one-third of it. One-third, that's 
all you need. How many th.& in total do you need to make 
1 in? How many thirds in total would you need to make 1 
113, to make that illustration? 

I 1. Fifth S tudent: 
One-third. 
12. Eric: 
How many in total? How many thirds? Each piece here is 
one-third. How many of those pieces are you going to need? 
13. First Student: 
One. 
14. Eric: 
One, to make 1 1/3? 
15. FirstStudent: 
Four. 
Four. You've got it right. You're going to need four of 
those pieces, if you want to make that mixexi number, 1 1/3. 
How many thirds does that make altogether? 
17. Sixth Student: 
Four. 
18. Eric: 
1s four thirds the same as one whole and one third? Sure it 
is. 
(audiotapes, March 25, p. 12) 
Figure 6. 
The Mixed Number 1 113 
Eric repeated the process with another numkr before he set the students to work on 
their own. When this part of the assignment was completed and checked, Eric moved to the 
last section and briefly talked about irnproper fractions. With the use of pictorials Eric 
demonstrated how to show the improper fraction 513. First he shaded ail three parts of the 
fmt circle that was illustrated on the overheaci and wrote both one whole and 3/3 under it 
(see Figure 7). 

Fiare 7. 
The Improper Fraction 5/3 
Then, he shaded two of the three parts of the second circle and wrote the following two 
number phrases, 3/3 + î/3 and 1 + Z3, below both circles (see Figure 8). At this point Eric 
briefly explained that even though these phrases looked difierent, they both represented the 
same idea. He foilowed by wrïting the rnixed number 1 2/3 noting that it was yet another 
way of showing t!!e concept that was iilusuated. Mer several practice examples, students 
completed the last section of the assignrnent. 

Figure 8. The Improper Fraction 9 3  
Eric's development of mixed numbers and improper fractions in this episode 
demonstrates his depth of knowledge and deep understanding of mathematical concepts, 
factors that affect teachers' understanding of teaching for understanding (Prawat, 1989). 
He designed an assignment that offered students an alternative to memorizing a rule and 
provided them with a view of mixed numbers and improper fractions that concentrated on 
meaning and understanding. In so doing, students were able to constnict new leaming on 
the basis of their previous knowledge. In my view this approach attends more to meaning 
and understanding than it does to rote. As 1 noted earlier, The National Council of Teachers 
of Mathematics (NCTM, 1989; NCïM, 199 1) recornmends that teachers need to provide 
students with opportunities to explore concepts and ideas, and to create knowledge in the 
course of active engagement with the discipline in order to teach for understanding. 
In summanzing the chapter I want to point out that in the three episodes 1 have 
presented, 1 have portrayed different aspects of Eric's understanding of what it means to 
teach for understanding in the context of mathematics 1 have also considered the 

implications for his practice. In so doing 1 have provided evideace of Eric's beliefs and 
views about the teaching and leaming of rnathematics, his content knowledge, and his 
perspective of understanding, themes which are tied to questions one. 1 have also focuseci on 
the manner in which Eric promoted understanding in his teachïng, his teaching style and 
how he regarded himself as a teacher, themes which fit with question two. Whether Eric 
taught by telling, or by providing students with experiential leamiag, Eric demonstrated a 
deep understanding of mathematical concepts and the knowledge that students bring to their 
learning. Although Eric believed in the importance of developing conceptual understanding 
in students' leaming of maihematics, he also pointed out thai, in the best of aii worlds. he 
would stiU teach d e s  and generaiizations. 
Both in this chapter and the previous one, 1 have developed a portrait of Melany ' s 
and Eric's life in the classroom as 1 addressed the fmt two questions that guide this study. 
1) 
What does it mean to teach for understanding in the context of the 
mathematics classroom? 
2) 
What are the implications of teachers' perceptions of what it means to 
teaching for understanding? 
In the seventh chapter of this study, which follows, 1 address the last question. 
3) 
What is the nature of the context in which teachers create their practice in 
mathemaiics? 
I also present my conclusions and reflections on this inquiry. 

Footnotes 
1. 
A fiaction set is a commercially made set of different size plastic pieces that have 
been cut to represent fractions such as halves, quarters, thirds, eightbs, etc. The 
whole is the template for the other fractional pieces. The shape of the pieces in a set 
may be rectangular, or they may be circular. The sets are cut so that the pieces 
represent different fractions and are proportionate in size to the whole and to each 
other. Different fractions are distinguished by color. For example, one whoie is 
black. The two pieces that each represent one half are orange. The three pieces that 
each represent one third are green. Quarters are bIue, etc. 

Chapter 7 
Ending 
In this final chapter of the study my purpose is twofold. First 1 adcires tbe third 
question that guides this study: 
What is the nature of the context in which teachers create their practice in 
mathematics? 
In so doing 1 talk about the effects of context as they relate to Melany's and Eric's practiœ. 
Then I talk about what 1 have found as a resdt of my research on teaching for 
understanding in the context of mauiematics. I also consider the realities of teaching for 
understanding in today's educational climate. A discussion which focuses on the strengths 
and limitations of the study, and plans for funire research foiiows. The chapter concludes 
with reflections on personal learning. 
The Context in which Teachers Create their Practice 
As 1 noted in Chapter Two, context has the capacity to signifcantly shape practice. 
According to Talbert and McLaughlin (1 993)' factors ranghg fkom students in a classroom, 
subject matter, curriculum, colleagues, school administrators and school organization to 
broader environments that extend beyond school systems such as parents, the community, 
and institutions such as goveniment detennine whether a teacher is likely to embrace a 
vision of teacbùig for understanding. 
From an alternate perspective Gardner (1993) 
suggests that obstacles such as test-text phenomenon, tbe correct-answer phenomenon, 
pressure for coverage, cognitive Freudianism, institutional constraints, and disciplinary 
constraints stand between schools and educating for understanding. In the next section 1 
focus on factors of context that affected Melany's and Eric's practice. In so doing 1 tak 
about the following: pressure for coverage, the curriculum, bureaucracy, textbooks and 
teachers' resources, and students. 

Pressure for Coverage 
In Gardner's (1993) view the greatest enemy of understanding is pressure for 
coverage. Teachers are exceedingly busy and often do not have sufficient time to fulfi 
their curriculum responsibilities (Good, McCaslin and Reys, 1992). In the four month 
period that 1 observed in each of Melany's and Eric's classroom, Eric in particular talked 
about not having enough tirne to cover the curriculum. Frequently our conversations would 
gravitate to his concerns about not king able to acbieve this goal. He would teil nie as he 
pointed to the year' s ovemew on the wali k i d e  his desk, "1 have a curriculum to cover 
and 1 have to stick to it" (field notes, March 4, p. 49). There were several instances dwing 
the fi-actions unit, as the foiiowing examples suggest, when pressure to cover the curriculum 
affected Eric's teaching. When Eric devoted additional time at the beginning of the fkactions 
unit to develop the concept of fractions and the principle of equivalent fractions, he covered 
the latter half and teach only the d e s  for the operations. During the subtraction part, Eric 
confessed that he had no choice but to move on, even though some students werie 
experiencing difficulty. As he suggested, he had to "cycle" through it because there was a 
schedule to keep. His need to cover tbe curriculum also s t d  in the way of providing 
students with the opportwiity to work at their own pace in mathemaîics. 
I recali the 
occasion when one of bis better mathematics students approached Eric to ask if he would 
ailow those "who really know their stuff" to work ahead, his response was that it was not 
possible. According to Enc, there was not sufficient tirne to individualize mathematics and 
ailow students to work at their own pace. Yet, pressure for coverage was not an issue for 
Melany. There were few instances while 1 observed in her classmm when she talked about 
the need to cover the curriculum. Accordhg to Melany, it was more important to focus on 
investigations that C O M ~ Z ~ ~  
with students' reality than to wony about how much tirne she 
had to cover the curriculum. 
The challenge of teaching for understanding while aîtempting to cover mandated 
curriculum expectations became a reality for me when Eric let me teach a unit on integers to 

the class. To reduce some of the pressure that Eric was experiencing and aiiow him to 
attend to his many classroom and extracurricular responsibilities, 1 offered my help. 
1 
suggested that he let me feach a unit on integers as a way to "pay back" 
(Glesne and 
Peshkin, 1992) for letting me conduct research in his classroom. Also, 1 thought that this 
offer would provide me with an opporninity to fhd out what it might be like to try to teach 
for understanding while attempting to adhere to the tight schedule of the curriculum. As 1 
saw it, "the curriculum was stnictured so that it was really hard to involve students in the 
bigger picture [of mathematics], because you realiy feel obligated to stick to the 
expectations" (field notes, June 6, p. 239). During the two weeks that 1 taught the unit on 
integers, Eric regularly remindeci me that dong with teaching the concepts "for 
understanding", 1 still had to "stick" to the curriculum guidelines. Daiiy, he would teli rrr= 
that I had only two weeks and no longer. It was al1 the tirne that he could spare. When 1 
faiied to meet the deadline, Eric, tongue-incheek, pointed out that this was the reality of 
classroom Me. 
The Curriculum 
According to Anderson and Roth (1989) cumicular demands often mitigate against 
the development of classroom environment. that contribute to instruction which promotes 
understanding. Carefiil examination of The Ontario Curriculum Grades 1-8 Mathematics 
(Ministry of Education and Training, 1997) that Melany and Eric were expected to foliow, 
provides support for these views. For example, the introduction to the document tends to 
concentrate more on rigor and challenge and less on promothg a view of mathematics as 
invention and the creation of knowledge. It States that: 
The Ontario Curriculum, Grades 1-8: Mathematics, 1997 has been 
developed to provide a ngorous and challenging cmicu1u.m for students in 
Grades 1-8. The required knowledge and skiils for each grade set high 
standards ... 

New Features of the Mathematics Curriculum 
The mathematics cumcuium set out in this document is significantiy more 
rigorous and demanding than previous curricula. This curriculum includes a 
broader range of knowledge and skills and introduces many skills" 
(Minisûy of Education and Training, 1997, p. 3). 
The document also presents mathematics as an extensive list of ideas to be covered, rather 
than a holistic body of conaected knowledge. Firstly, the curriculum is divided into five 
separate strands. These are: Nurnber Sense and Numeraiion, Measurement, Geomeûy and 
Spatial Sense, Patterning and Algebra, and Data Management and Probability. Secondly, 
each strand is subdivided into a series of concepts and skills in the form of expectations. 
There are a minimum of twenty expectaîions for each grade level within each of the five 
strands. Consequently, teachers must cover approxirnately one hundred expectations w i t b  
a school year. They are also expected to teach concepts and SUS 
fiom each of the five 
di fferent strands monthl y. Requirements such as these tend to inhibit teachers' flexibility , 
particulady those who wish to teach for understanding. Furrhennore, students are left with 
the impression that mathematics is a series of expectations. 
Eric saw the cuniculum as "loaded" and felt obliged to foiiow it, "otherwise you 
end up teaching them [students] things you have no business teaching tbem right now and 
not teaching them things they should know at this level" (interview, March 23, p. 9). He 
pointed out that if he sent students to grade eight and grade nine without teaching topics 
such as fraction operations "because they had only worked on equivalent fktions, and 
that's what they [students] would Say to the teacher [the following year]" (field notes, 
March 4, p.50), then he was not fulfilling his responsibiiity. 
Melany, on the other band, saw the expectations as a list of concepts to be covered. 
In her view it was not possible to follow the expectations and stiU teach for understanding. 
For Melany, it was more important to individuaiize leaming and provide students with 
experiences that connectecl to their reality, rather than teach to the curriculum. 
The 
foiiowing provides evidence. 

Well, I'li teli you 1 dont use it except 1 know [I should]. Do 1 stick to it? 
Some times, 1 get really hyper, and think that 1 better do this. Then, 1'11 look 
at what the kids can do and 1 think 1 cm oniy go with when they are ready 
to go. I mean this is ridiculous pounding into their heads. I'm just going to 
set up ali kinds of problems for myself and them. So then 1 just put it on the 
shelf. (interview, September 25, p. 8) 
Bureaucracy 
In many instances, as the previous discussion on the curriculum ckmonstrates, 
school boards and ministries of education may stand in the way of teaching for 
understanding. Yet there are those who see it differently. Eric saw the school board as 
supporting teaching mathematics for understanding. When 1 fmt observed Eric teaching 
fractions. he explained that his approach to teaching the beginning concepts of the fractions 
unit was congruent with tbe board's philosophy for teaching for understanding in 
mathematics. According to Eric he "would pay lip service to whaî they [the board] wanted 
done [in the other areas] but not in math" (field notes, April 1, p. 88). 
Melany, on the other hanci, was not as positive about the support that the board 
provided for teachers in mathematics. In her view, if teachers were expected to teach 
mathematics according to guidelines recommended by The Nationai Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics (NCïM, 1989, 1991), then the board needed to provide teachers with 
appropriate professionai development. She pointed out that during the term there had oniy 
k e n  one insecvice session for teachers in her school to introduce the new maihematics 
curriculum. "So they came and they gave you this [the new curriculum] and that's it. And 
they said 'follow it' and there's no foliow up" (interview, October 23, p. 17). According to 
Melany, the school administration also fded to provi& adequate support for mathexnaiics. 
There was only one half hour lunch rmxîing, and it was "basicaiiy passing out papers" to 
insert into their curriculum binders. She pointed out that in language arts it was different. 
Already, the school board haà given ber two fidl release days to attend meetings that covered 
new initiatives, and it was oniy the beginning of the school year. 

Textbooks and Teacher Resowce Books 
1 want to talk bnefly about the d e  of textbooks and teachers' resources in teaching 
for understanding. They may either stand in the way of teaching for understanding or help 
to promote it. Accordhg to Melany, unless she had a "good unit" to teach, she would 
rather not teach that particular area of the curriculum. She explained that her motive for not 
teaching rhree-dimensional geornetry and volume was that she did not have the appropriate 
resources. As I noted in an =lier chapter, according to Melany Marilyn Burns' resources 
were good uni& because the investigations ~ 0 ~ f 2 ~ t e d  
with students' interests and they 
promoted meanin@ learning. However, not ail Burns' materials fit with every area of the 
curriculum thaî Melany was expected to teach. in her view, there were no other suitable 
options. Her infrequent use of the textbook was based on a belief that textbook learning 
was not rneaningful. As I noted in Chapter Five Melany resorted to using the textbook only 
when she needed time for herself, when she was at a loss for ideas, or when a supply teacher 
was filling in for her. 
Eric used the textbok more often. Aithough he developed his own teaching 
rnaterials, his rationaie for using the textbook was that it was equaiiy as important for 
students to know how to do textbook work as it was to l e m  for understanding. However, 
the textbook that Eric used attended less to meaning than to algorithmic learning. The series 
is no longer approved by the Minisüy of Education and Training because its philosophy 
does not fit with the currently appmved approach to teaching mathematics for 
understanding. Although the board had provided Eric's school with money to purchase 
new textbooks, Eric explained that the school was still in the process of deciding whicb 
books to buy . 

Students 
According to TaIbert and McLaughlin (1993), "Students are the most salient and 
powemil context of teaching. Their needs, as teachers perceive them, and the constraints 
and opportunities that they provide for instructional choices shape teachers' goals, and 
conceptions of practice" (p. 186). 
Anderson and Roth (1989) concur that students, as 
viewed by their teachers, affect teachers' practice and their goals about leaming. However, 
students' views of what counts as knowledge are often detennined by the nature of 
instruction. The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (199 1) points out thaî often 
students are exposed to a style of teaching in which teachers describe and explain 
information, rather than teachîng which facilitates the construction of knowledge. 
According to Melany, students presented a roadblock for the changes she was 
implementing in her mathematics program- In the foilowing excerpt fiom the data she taiks 
about the resistance she encountered when she attempted to implement writing as a tool for 
reflection in mathematics. 
... part of the reason thai it's hard is because the kids aren' t conditioned to 
deai with math in that way. They haven't been taught in that way so it takes 
them a whiie to realize that they 're going to write. 
(inte~ew, 
December 16, p. 14) 
Melany compareci this problem to a simiiar one thai she had previously experienceâ when 
she was attempting to change the way that she taught laquage arts: 
Children have to go through this because I'm going through a leaming 
process here so it's not going to go ticketycboo because 1 remember that 
with the writing process. 1 remember that there's this sort of c a m e  
because kids aren't being told what to do, when to do it, and b w  to do it. 
(inteniew, October 9, p. 2) 
On one occasion when Melany assigned students exercises from the textbook they 
jurnped into their work without a moment's hesitation after receiving uieir instructions. As 

they worked studiously at their desks, bent over their with pencil in hanci, Melany chuckled 
and commented with a grin on her face: 
Look how enthusiastic they are when they are assigned work from the 
textbook. Why is that? It's because they are cornfortable and they don? 
need to think. They 're like robots and they don't need to think and this is 
what school's ail about. It's hard to make kids think. 
(field notes, November 28, p. 227) 
As Melany pointed out, many students are happiest when they are doing textbook work 
rather than having to figure things out for thernselves. 
The following incident, which occurred while I taught the unit on integers, provides 
fwther evidence of how student pressure can force a teacher to remain committed to a style 
of teaching as telling. Of the eight lessons that 1 taught, one lesson in particdar stands out. 
While teaching the lesson, 1 sensed students' reluctance to participate. 1 wondered if they 
were confused by my teaching, or they were not sufficiently cornfortable with my teaching 
style. When 1 attempted to elicit reasons for their behavior, the responses 1 received 
reveaied how students might sabotage a teacher who wishes to teach for understanding. The 
following are samples of their comrnents. Some students said that my questions were " t oo 
long". Further probing revealed thaî words 1 used such as nagaitude, counting numbers, 
and axis were terms that they had not heard before. In my view, these are temu with which 
students in grade seven should be familiar. Another student explained that my questions 
were 'hot easy". He, as others, explained that they could only respond to my "short- 
answer questions". I was also told that 1 posed questions for which the answers were not 
obvious. Further inquiry rievealed that, "He m c ]  gives an explanation first, and then he 
asks the question so it is easier to understand" (field notes, M a y  31, p. 233). At the end of 
the two week period 1 asked students for additional feedback about my teaching. The 
followhg is an example of their responses. "1 spent too much t k ,  and 1 should have 
taught more iike their teachei' (field notes. Jme 10, p. 246). The most mernorable 
comment came fkom a student who privately told me, 'Uaybe your teaching is a littie rusty 

because you haven't taught for a long time and probably need lessons from our teacher" 
(field notes, June 10, p. 246). 
In the previous sections 1 have talked about the effet of context as it related to 
Melany and Eric. It is evident that factors within the multi-layered context in which teachers 
work have the potential to affect their thinkjng and their practice and to stand in the way of 
teaching for understanding. 1 move now to the second part of this chapter in which 1 talk 
about what 1 have found as a result of conducting research on teachers' understanding of 
teaching for understanding in the context of mathematics. 
Reflections on the Study 
The purpose of the study was to inquire into teachers' understanding of teaching 
for understanding in mathematics. In so doing 1 looked at two elementary teachers' beliefs 
and views and observed their practice so that 1 might corne to understand what they 
understood about teaching for understanding in mathematics. The siudy demonstrated the 
problematic nature of teaching for understanding and the challenges it presents for teaching 
in this way. Firstly, it showed that teachers' views of texhing for understanding may Vary 
and may not necessarily be congment with those of the literaturie, as the research (Cohen 
and BA, 1990a; Gardner, 1993; Prawat, 1989) suggests. 
Melany's perspective on teaching for understanding focused on the tesponsibility 
of the teacher. She believed that it was a teacher's duty to motivate students to think, to 
make generalizations and to provide tbem with the opportunity to talk about their thinking- 
what they were thinking and why. According to Melany, teâching for understanding was 
also "giving kids experiences whexe they can start coming up with their own [ideas], 
expressing and cladjhg theù own understanding of concepts" (interview, November 20, 
p. 13). On the other hmd, Eric's view of teaching for understanding was tied to his idea of 
nontraditional teaching. According to Eric, teaching in this way provideci for leaming which 
war based in experience, and it was a teacher's responsibility to provide students with 

different experiences. He described these experiences as "hands-on" leaming, providing 
students with indepth activities in which ihey had to figure things out on their own, and 
leaming skills for deahg with the unexpected in life. 
Secondly, the study ~ievealed, as Eisenhardt et al. (1993) suggest, that teachers may 
not always have weil formed images of whaî it means to teach for understanding. At the 
same tirne that Eric believed thai he taught for understanding, he aiso doubted himseif. In a 
conversation 1 had with him, initiaily he stated, "1 don? not teach for understanding in 
math" (interview, May 2, p. 6). Yet, later in that same conversation, he explained. 
In math, 1 don? know if teaching for understanding is the way I'd like to 
describe it because I'm not so sure 1 understand myself exactly what that 
means. But 1 like to think üiat I'm teaching the kids to be criticai and to 
think in my other subject areas, most definitely. Math, yes, in the extent that 
like look at this, does this make sense to you? Corne on, think about it. 1s 
this really a logid answer? 1s tbis really a logicai way to solve this 
problem? 
(interview, May 2, p. 6) 
Thirdly, the study provides evidence that it is not an easy task for teachers to define 
understanding, the very concept which is af the heart of what it means to teach for 
understanding (Perkins, 1993). Eric, who could easily talk about his ideas, found it mcult 
to find words to express whaî understanding rneant. 
Like 1 don? know necessarily what understanding is. I'm sure I'ii see a kid 
that can manipulate it [new concepts or ideas] and work around it and wheei 
around and they can apply different strategies to it and sure I'd say, yes, that 
kid understands. But to define what understanding means, it bats me. 
(inte~ew, 
March 28, p. 3) 
At one point he did suggest that understanding was more of a "gut feeling - something chat 
I know inside of me" (iite~ew, 
March 28, p. 1). It was "something" he knew when he 
lwked at students' written work or when he talked to them. Although Melany skirteû 
around my attempts to engage her in conversation about her views on understanding, she 
did point out later in the study that understanding was not "something" she could easily 
t a k  about in the abstract. For her understanding was specifk to a particular content area or 

concept, rather than "a generic concept th& was inclusive to al1 disciplines" (field notes. 
October 7, p. 66)- 
FourthIy, factors within the context that teachers work add to the challenge of 
teaching for understanding. As 1 suggested earlier, for Melany it was fmding "good ideas" 
in the style of Marilyn Burns rather than "knowing" mathematics. It was also the demands 
that teaching for understanding put on her time and energy. 1 recd her teiling me how 
periodically she needed to revert to textbook teaching because it "gave her a break". 
For 
Eric it was having sufficient time and covering the curriculum. 
In the previous paragraphs 1 have talked briefly about the problematic nature of 
teaching for understanding as it relates to this study. and the challenges it presents for 
teaching in this way. 1 want to shift now and focus on what 1 have found about teaching for 
understanding that goes beyond cases in the literahue that are closely related to the present 
s tudy . 
As 1 noted in Chapter Two, case studies developed within The California Smdy of 
Elementary Mathematics (Peterson, I990a) provide an important context for situating this 
study. These studies (Peterson, 1990a) are closely related to this study as they too inquired 
into teachers' perspectives on teaching rnaihernatics for understanding. However, their 
orientation varied in that they looked at the effects of poiicy change on teachers' practtice. 
h o ,  researc hers spent considerably less tirne observing in teac hers ' classroorns. 
Nevertheles, the present study corroborates fmdings of these case studies peterson, 
1990a). The two teachers in this study also varied in their perceptions of what it means to 
teach for understanding in matbernatics and their views did not necessady fit with 
researchers' and those of curricuium developers. As with the previous studies (Peterson, 
1990a) and others in the literature (Eisenhardt et al., 1993, Roulet, 1998) that focus on 
teaching for understanding, the present study also provides evi&nœ of the cornpiex 
interreiationship between teachers' beliefs and views and their practice. However, this study 
goes beyond those in the literaîure (Eisenhardt et al., 1993; Peterson, 1990a; Roulet, 1998) 

in that it demonstrates that language arts provideci an important referent for understanding 
these teachers' understanding of teaching for understanding in mathernatics. It would be 
surprising if this situation was not the pattern for studies camed out in a similar mamer 
with other teachers. Ln the section that follows 1 want to t a k  briefly about the realities of 
teaching for understanding in mathematics in today's educationai clirnate. 
Gardner (1993) points out thai, "Teaching for understanding is a compelling 
notion- but it isn't necessarily easy, as researchers at Harvard University's Project Zero are 
findùig out" (p. 22). Developing units of study for a project whose goals were to deve10p 
understanding took Ume. In addition, there wenz institutional and pedagogical constraints 
with which to deal. Teachers and students had to adjust their thinking. The California 
Study of Elementary Mathematics (Cohen and Ball, 1990a, 1990b) reveaied that forces such 
as teachers' attitudes, insufflcient professional development, vagueness of policy reform and 
other factors within the multi-layered context of the ducational landscape presented 
challenges for teaching for understanding. 
Despite efforts of The California Staîe 
Department of Education to support elementary teachers with texts, curriculum, and 
professional development to encourage them to change theu practice to instruction that 
promoted understanding, resistance was encountered. Wide scaie implemntation was not 
achieved. In fact the policy has been changeci. Roulet's (1998) study on teaching for 
understanding points out that a major* 
of high schwl teachers are unwilling to endorse 
instructional strategies recornmended by The Professional Standards for Teaching 
Mathematics (NCI'M, 199 1). His study revealed that a teacher "with a more mixed subject 
conception" (Roulet, 1998, p. iü) who was in the pmcess of transition and reconstruction, 
tumed to traditionai transmissive modes of instruction when conhnted with the forces of 
opposition. As 1 noted in Chapter One, the views of interest groups who favor a more 
traditional, back-to-basics approach for deaüng with students' poor performance in 
mathematics are inconsistent with the views of The National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics, which advocates teaching for understandhg (Prawaî, Remillard, Aitnam, 

Heaton, 1992). 1 move now to the final part of this chapter in which 1 address the strengths 
and weaknesses of the study, plans for hiture research, and conclude with some personal 
refiections. 
Because of the paucity in the literature of comprehensive studies that focus 
exclusively on teaching for understanding, as I noted in Chapter One, the study, as one 
srnall piece of the research on understanding, adds two more comprehensive cases on 
teaching for understanding in the context of mathematics to the body of howledge 
regarding cognitions and context related to tpachuig for understanding. It dso helps fiil tbe 
need for more "schools-based" research in mathematics (Goldin, 1993) and "feed the 
deveIopment of increasingly useful theories of mathematics teaching and learning" (Hiebert 
and Carpenter, 1992). The study also provides readers with m e r  insight into contexts 
chat significantly shape teachers' practice, and factors within those contexts that affect 
teachers' understanding of teaching for understanding. 
The study's base in teacher practice wiJi appeal not only to researchers in the field 
of education, but also to prztitioners who wish to understand what it means to teach for 
understanding in the context of mathemstics. Each of the cases or bounded systerns 
represents an "instance drawn from a class" (Adelman, Jenkins and Kemrnis, 1983, p. 3) 
and provides the detail necessary to describe the "meaning perspectives of the particular 
actors in the particular events" (Erickson, 1986, p. 121). In so doing, the study will permit 
readers to c o ~ e c t  
persona1 experience to that of the participants. 
Having focused in the previous paragraphs on the strengths of the study, 1 want to 
talk briefly about its limitations. Given the nature of the problem 1 was addressing, the 
appropnateness of the research methodology fit with the multidimnsional nature of this 
phenornenon. 1 was able to observe hvo teachers in the "natural" (Hammersley and 
Atkinson, 1992) setting of their classrooms so that 1 might leam how they construct the 
world about them. 1 was also able to gain insight into their beliefs and views about 
mathematics and teaching for understanding. However, as 1 contemplate what 1 might bave 

done differentiy in this study, 1 suggest that with the luxury of time 1 mïght have inquired 
into more than two teachers' practice, possibly those who ieach at different grade levels so 
that 1 might add to the portraits of teaching for understanding that this study offers. 1 might 
aiso have included students' perspectives. The leamer's perspective might have provideci a 
more complete picture of what it means to teach for understanding in mathematics. Inquiry 
into students' perspectives on understanding, a topic for future exploration and research, is 
discussed in the next section. 
Although 1 was able to gather sufficiently rich data as 1 carried out rny research, 
there were times when I found it extremely chdenging in Melany's open plan classroom to 
capture quality data in my audio taping. Even though videotaping tends to be more 
intrusive, 1 would consider its use if presented with a similar situation in the future. Lastly, 
as a new researcher who is in the process of developing and refining my intewiewing and 
data collection techniques, 1 hope to becorne more proficient with practice. 
From rny view this study is the "payoff of my research" (Glesne and Peshkin, 
1992). It is also the culmination of my extensive experience as a teacher educaîor and my 
continuous effort as a life long leamer. The study marks the beginning of future research 
endeavors with teachers and students in the field. Some of the questions that 1 intend to 
explore that have evolved as a result of my work on this study are: 
a) 
What is it thaî elementary students understand about what it means to 
understand in mathematics? 
My earlier comments regarding iimitations of the study were the basis for this question. It 
is my sense that investigaîing students' understanding wodd provide a more complete 
picture of the phenornenon that this study investigated. It would also offer increased insight 
into students' views on what it means to understand in mathematics. 
Although standardized testing was not a concern for Melany and Eric during the 
time that 1 observed in their classrooms, it is an issue closely related to teaching for 
understanding that 1 wish to explore. In many instances standardized teshg stands in the 

way of teaching for understanding. Teachers are wiüing to alter their practice and the nature 
of instruction to confonn to the content of tests flalbert and McLaughh, 1993). As a 
consultant working with teachers in classrooms, 1 have often observed this problem. For 
these reasons, 1 suggest the foilowing question for future investigation. 
b) 
What is the nature of the impact of Ministry testing on teaching for 
understanding? 
The next question relates to my work with pnsenice teachers. The majority of 
preservice teachers 1 have taught in the past decade have been schooled on a diet of teaching 
in which telling and rote are cornmon. As a result of their "apprenticeship of leaming" 
(Lortie, 1975), many are cornfortable with and believe that a traditional approach is the only 
way to teach mathematics. Frequently 1 encounter resistance when 1 introduce a style of 
teaching in class that is different. For this reason 1 wish to investigate the foiiowing. 
C) 
What is the effect of preservice teachers' beliefs about mathematics on their 
understanding and willingness to teach for understanding in mathematics? 
As 1 reflect on my learning 1 suggest Chat this research endeavor has opened my 
eyes to the complexities of kachhg for understanding in mattiernatics. It has also belped 
me to corne to understand and better appreciate the challenges with wbich teachers, who 
wish to teach in this way, are faced. Moreover, 1 have becorne aware that, as a researcher, 
one cannot use brod brush strokes to judge a teacher's practice. What might initially 
appear to be a style of teaching that does not promote understanding may on further 
investigation and reflection do so. 

Adelrnan, C., Jenkins, D., Kemmis, 
Kemrnis, S. and Gillard, G. 
University. 
S. (1983). Rethinking case study. In Bartlett, L, 
(Eds.), Case Studv An Overview. Victoria: Deakin 
Alkin, M.C. (Ed.). (1992). Mathematics education, elernentary. In The Encvclo-pedia of 
educational research (6th ed.) (Vol .3, pp.776-785). New York: Macmillan. 
Alkin, M.C. (Ed.). (1992). Teaching Effectiveness. In The EncvcloDedia of educational 
research (6th ed.) (Vo1.4, pp.1373- 1388). New York: Macmillan. 
Anderson, C.W. and Roth, KJ. (1989). Teachhg for rneaningful and self-regulated 
leaming of science. In Brophy, J. (Ed.), Advances in research on teaching (Vol. 1, 
pp. 265-309). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press. 
B ackhouse, J.R. (1 978). Understanding school mathematics - A comment. Mathematics 
Teaching. 82 39-4 1. 
Bail, D.L. (1990). Reflections and defiections of poiicy: The case of Carol Turner. 
Education Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3), 263-275. 
Ball, D. L. (199 la). Teaching mathematics for understanding: What do teachers need to 
know about subject matter? In. M.M. Kennedy (Ed.), Teachinp acadernic subiects 
to diverse leamers (pp. 63-84). New York: Teachers CoUege Press. 
Bd, DL. (199 1 b). Research on teaching mathematics: Making the subject matter part of 
the equation. In J. Brophy (Ed.), Advances in research on teaching (Vo1.2, pp. 1- 
48). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press. 
Ball, D. L. (1996). Comecting to mathematics as part of leaming to teach. In D. Schifter 
(Ed.), Mat's h a ~ ~ e n i n e  
in rnaîhernaîics class?: Reconstmcting professionai 
identities (Vo1.2, ppI 36-45). New York: Teachers Coiiege Press. 
Barratta-Lorton, M. (1976). 
Mathematics their way. 
Phillipines: Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company. 
Bezuk, N. and Cramer, K. (1989). Teaching about fractions: Whaî, when, and how? In 
PX. Trafton (Ed.). New Directions for Elementary Schwl Mathematics. 51st 
edition. 
(pp. 156-167). Reston, VA: The National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics. 
Bogdan, R.C. and Biklen, S.K. (1992). Qualitative Research for Education: An introduction 
- to. 
2nd edition. Needharn Heights, MA: AUyn and Bacon. 
Borko, H., Eisenhardt, M., Brown, C.A., Underhili, RG., Jones, D., and Agard, P.C. (1992). 
Learning to teach hard mathematics: do novice teachers and their instnictors give up 
too easily ? Journal for Research in Mathematics. 23. (3), 194-222. 
Brophy, J. (1 992). Probing the subtleties of subject matter reading ]Educational LRadership. 
49 (7), 4-13. 
- 

Brown, S. Cooney, T., 
and Jones, D. (1990). Mathematics tacher education. In W. R. 
Houston (Ed.), Handbook of research on teacher education (pp. 637-656). New 
York: Macmillan. 
Browneil, W.A. (1935). Psychotogical considerations in the learning and the teaching of 
arithmetic. In W.D. Reeve (Ed.), The teaching of arithmetic. Tenth vearbook of the 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (pp. 1-31), New York: Teachers' 
College, Columbia University. 
Burns, M. (1987). A collection of math lessons from mdes 3 throueh 6. CA: Math 
Solution Pubiications. 
Burns, M. (1992). About teachine mathematics a k-8 resource. CA: Math Soutions 
Publications. 
Butt, R.L. (1983). Arguments for using biography in understanding teacher thinking. In R. 
Hakes and J.K. Olson (Eùs.) Proceedinos of the First Svmmsium of the 
International Studv Association on Teacher Thinkin~: Teacher thinkina: 
- A new 
persmiive on mistine problems in education (pp. 95-102). Lisse: Swets and 
Zeitlinger. - 111. 
Byers, V. (1 980). What does it mean to understand dematics? International Journal of 
Mathematical Education Science and TecbnoIoev. 1 1 (l), 1-10. 
B yen, V. and Herscovics, N. ( 1977). Understanding SC hool mathematics. Mathematics 
Teaching 8 1,24-27. 
California State Department of Education (CSDE) (1985). Mathematics framework for 
California ~ublic schoois. kinderearten throueh p d e  twelve. Sacramento, CA: 
Author. 
Carey, D.A., Fernema, E., Carpenter, T.P., and Franke, M.L. (1995). 
Equity and 
mathematics education. In W.G. 
Secada, E. Fennenia, and L. Byrd Adajian (Eùs.), 
New directions for eauitv in mathematics education (pp. 93-125). New Y& 
Cambridge University Press. 
Carpenter, T.P., Corbitt, M.K, Kepner, H.S. Jr., Lindquist, M-M., and Reys, R. (198 1). 
Results from the second mathematics assessment of the national assessment of 
educational ~romess. Reston, V A  The National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics. 
Carpenter. T., Matthews, W., Lindquist, M., and SilverE. (1984). Achievement in 
mathematics: Results from the Nationd Assessment. Elementq SchooI Journal, 
84 (5). 485495. 
- 
Cathcart, W.G., Pothier, Y.M., Vance, J.H. (1994). le am in^ mathematics in elementw and 
middle school. Ontario: Aiiyn & Bacon Canada. 
Cohen, D.K. (1990). A revolution in one classroom: The case of Mrs. Oublier. Education 
Evaluation and Policv AnaIvsis. 12 (3), 327-345. 
Cohen, D. and Ball, D.L. (1990a). Relations between poiicy and practice: A commentaxy. 
Educational Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3), 249-256. 

Cohen, D. and Bail, D.L. (1990b). 
Policy and practice: An overview. Educaîional 
Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3). 347-353. 
Cohen, D.R., McLaughlin, M. W., Talbert, J E  (Eds.) ( 1993). Teachine for un der stand in^: 
Challenges for wlicy and ~ractice. San Francisco: Jossey -Bass Publishers. 
Colbum, W.J. (1 825). First lessons in arithmetic on the plan of Pestalozzi with some 
improvements. In J.K. BidweU and R.G. Clason (Eds.) (1970), Readings in the 
history of mathematics education. Washington, DC: National Council of T e x  hers 
of Mathematics. (Reprint h m  
the book) 
Cooney, T. (1994). Research and teacher education: In search of common ground. Journal 
for Research in Mathematics Education. 25 (6), 608-636. 
Cruikshank, D.E. and Sheffield, L.J. (1988). Teachine mathematics to elementary school 
children. Columbus, Ohio: M e r d  Publishing Company. 
Davis, E.J. (1978). A model for understanding understanding in mathematics Arithmetic 
Teacher. 26 (l), 13- 18. 
Demin, N.K. (1994). The art and -politics of inteqxetation. In N.K. Denzin and YS. 
Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of aualitative research. (pp. 500-515). CA: Sage 
Publications. 
Denul, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds.) (1994). Handbook of aualitative research. CA: Sage 
Publications. 
Eisenhardt, M., Borko, H., UnderhiIl, R, Bmwn, C., Jones, D., and Agard, P. (1993). 
Concepmal knowledge fAs through the cracks: Complexities of 1earning to teach 
for understanding. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. 24 ( 1). 8-40. 
Enckson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In MC. Wittrock, (Ed.), 
Handbook of research on teachine third edition (pp. 119- 161). New Yodc 
Macmillan Pubiishing Company. 
Feinman-Nemser, S. and Buchmann, M. (1986). Pitfds of experience in teacher education 
preparation. In J. Raths and L. Kak (Eds.), Advances in teacher education (Voi.2, 
pp. 6 1-73). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Fennema, E., Carpenter, T.P., and Peterson, P. (1989). 
Learning mathematics with 
understanding: Cognitively guided instruction. In J. Brophy (Ed.), Advances in 
researc h on teaching (Vol. 1, pp. 195-22 1). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press Inc. 
Fernema, E. and Franke, M.L. (1992). Teachers' knowledge and its impact. In D.A. 
Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on mathematics teachine and leaming 
(pp. 147- 164). New York: Macmillan. 
Fuys, D, Geddes, D., and Tischler, R. (1988). The van Hiele model of t h . g  in geometry 
among adolescents. Journai for Research in Mathematics Education. Monoma~h 
Number 3. Reston, VA: The National Council for Teachers in Mathematics. 
Gardner, H. (1993). Educating for understanding. The American School Board JouniaL 
180 (7), 20- 24. 
- 

Gardner, H., and Boix-Mansilla, V. (1994). Teaching for undentanhg in the disciplines- 
and beyond. Teachers College Record. 96 (2), 200-217. 
Glesne, C. and Peshkùi, k (1992). 
Becorning aualitaiive researchen. 
New Yodc 
Longman. 
Goldin, G. (1993). Mathematics educaîïon crisis. In R.B. Davis & C.A. Maher (Eds.), 
Schools. mathematics. and the world of reality. Boston: AUyn and Bacon. 
Good, T. and Brophy, S. (1 99 1). Lookine into classrmms. (5th cd) N.Y.: Harper Collins. 
G d ,  T., McCasiin, M., & Reys, B. (1992). hvestigating work groups to promote 
problem solving in maihematics. In J Brophy (Ed.), Advances in research on 
teaching (Vol. 3, pp. 1 15-160). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press Inc. 
Goode, W.J. and Ha& P.K. (1952). Methods in social research. (1st ed.) New York 
McGraw-ï3ü.l. 
Graeber, A., Tirosh, D., Glover, R (1989). Preservice Teachers' Misconcepions in S o l h g  
Verbal Problems in Multiplication and Division. 
Journal for Research in 
Mathematics Education. 20,95- 102. 
Gregg, J. (1995). The tensions and contradictions of the school mathematics tradition. 
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26(5), 442-446. 
Hammersiey , M. and Atkinson, P. (1992). Ethnoaraphv ~rinci~les 
in ~ractice. London: 
Routledge. 
Hashweh, M. (1986). Effects of subiect matter in the teachine of biolow and ~hvsics. 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of The Amencan Educational Research 
Association, San Francisco, CA. 
Haylock, D. (1 982). Understanding in mathematics: Makuig connections. Mathematics 
Teachine. 98 ,5456. 
Heaîon, R. (1992). Who is minding the mathematics content? A case study of a fifth- 
grade tacher. The E l e m e n q  School Journal. 93 (2), 153- 162. 
Hiebert, J. and Carpenter, T. (1992). LRaniing and teaching with understanding. 
in 
Grouws, D.A. (Ed.), Handbook of research of mathematics teachinn and leanllng, 
(pp. 65-79). New York: Macmillan. 
Hiebert, J. and kfevxe, P. (1986). Conceptual and procedural knowledge in mathematics: 
An introductory analysis. 
In J. Hiebert m.), Conce~tual and brocedufal 
lmowledee: The case of rnathematics (pp. 1-27). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
. . 
Holmes, E.E. ( 1995). New directions in elementarv school mathematm mteractive teaching 
and lea~nitig. New Jersey: Prentice Hali Inc. 
Holt, J. (1964). How children fail. N.Y.: Dell Pubiishing. 

Janesick, V.J. (1994). The dance of qualitative research design. In N.K. Denzin, Y.S. 
Lincoln (Eds.), JIandbook of aualitative research. (pp. 209-219). 
CA: Sage 
Publications. 
Jennings Wiemer, N. (1990). Transformation and accommodation: A case study of Joe 
Scott. Education Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3), 297-308. 
Keily, B., Carlow, C., NeufeId, R, Syrnington, J., Worth, J. (1987). Mathauest Five. Don 
Mills, Ontario: Addison Wesley Pubiishers Ltd. 
Kilbourn, B. (1 988). Reflecting on vignettes of teaching. In P. Grimmett and G. Enckson 
(Eds.), Reflection in teacher e d u d o n  (pp.9 1 - 1 1 1). New York: Teachers Coilege 
Press. 
Labinowicz, E. (1980). 
. CA: Addison- 
Wesley Publishing Company. 
Labinowicz, E. ( L 985). Learnine fiom children new beeinnings for teachine numerical 
thinking. CA: Addison Wesley Publishing Company. 
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the 
answer: mathemaiid knowing and teaching. 
Amencan Educational Research 
Journal. 27 (l), 29-63. 
Landsberg, M. (1995, September 9). A right-wing attack on our public schools. The 
Toronto Star, pp. KI. 
Lesage, J.W., Morton, J., Comeily, R., Marsh, F., O'Shea, T., S h q ,  J.N., Biiovs, F., Bober, 
W.C., Catkins, T., Drost, D., Hope, LA., Lee, R, Sarkissian, J., Tossell, S. (1987). 
Journevs in Math 7. Toronto: Ginn and Company. 
Lewington, J. (1 992, Iuly 24,). Excellence in schwl refonn is the unknowu quantity. 
Globe and Mail, pp. Al, A6. 
Lincoln, Y.S. 
and Guba, E.G. (1985). Naturalistic inauiw. CA: Sage. 
Lincoln, Y.S. and Guba, E.G. (1989). Fourth neneration evaluation. CA: Sage. 
Lo, J., Wheatley,G., and Smith, A (1994). The participation, beliefs and development of a 
third- grade student in mathematics class discussions. 
Journal for Research in 
Mathematics Education. 25 (l), 3049. 
Lortie, D. ( 1975). School teacher: A sociolonical studv. Chicago: University of Chicago. 
Marshall, H. (1992). Seeing, redefining, and supporting student learning. In H. Marshall 
(Ed.), Redefinine student leamhg Roots of educational chans (pp. 177-205). 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Matthews, M. (1994). Science teachine the role of history and ~hiiosophv of science. New 
York: Routledge. 
McLaughh, M.W. and Talbert, J.E. (1 993). Introduction: New visions of teachiag. In D. 
K. Cohen, M.W. McLaughlin, and LE. Talbert (Eds.), Teachine for Understanding. 
(pp. 1 - 10). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 

McLeiian, J.A. and Dewey, J. (1895). The svcholow of nurnber and its a~~lications 
to 
methods of teachinn arithmetic. New York: D. Appleton. 
Memam, S.B. (1988). Case studv research in education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers. 
Merriam, S.B. (1 998). Oualitative research and case stud~plications in education. San 
Francisco: Jossey- Bass Publishers. 
Ministry of Education and Training (1997). 
The Ontario curriculum mades 1-8 
mathematics . Ontario: Queen's Printer for Ontario. 
Morgan, G. and Smircich, L. (1 980). The case for qualitative research. 
Academ~ of 
Management Review. 3 (4), 491-500. 
Morse, J.M. (1 994). Designing funded qualitative research. In N.K. Denzin and Y.S. 
Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Oualitaiive Research (pp. 220-235). 
CA: Sage 
Publications. 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards 
for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 
National Councii of Teachers of Mathematics (199 1). Professional standards for teaching 
mathematics. Reston, VA: National Govemors' Asssociation Center. 
Nelson, J. L., Carlson, K, and Palonsky,S.B. (1993). Cntical issues in education a dialectic 
ap~roach. New York McGraw-Hill. 
Newman, F.M. (1 988). m h e r  order thinkine in hieh school social studies: An andvsis of 
classrooms. teachers. students and leadekhi~. Madison, WI: University of 
Wisconsin, National Center on Effective Secondary Schools. 
Patton, M.Q. (1 990). Oualitative evaluaîion methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, Catif: 
Sage. 
Perkins, D., (1 993). Teaching for understanding. Amencan Educator, 2 -35. 
Perkins, D., and Blythe, T. (1994). 
Putting understanding up front. 
Educational 
Leaders  hi^. 5 1 (5), 4-7. 
Peterson, P.L. (1990a). The Caiifomia study of elementary mathematics. Educational 
Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3), 257-261. 
Peterson, P.L. (1990b). Doing more in the same amount of cime: Cathy Swift. Educationa 
Evaluation and Policv Analvsis. 12 (3), 277-296. 
Peterson, P., Fennema, E., and Carpnter, T. (1991). Teachca' howledge of students' 
mathematics problem- solvhg kaowledge. In J. Bcophy (Ed.). Advances in research 
on teaching (Vol. 2, pp. 49- 86). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press. 
Piel, J.A. and Green, M. (1994). De-mystifying division of fractions: The convergence of 
in? Problems in Mathematics, 
quantitative and referential meaning. 
16 (I), 44-50. 
- 

Pirie, S. and Kieren, T. (1 989). A ~cursive 
theory of mathematicai understanding. For the 
Learning of Mathematics. 9 (3), 7-1 1. 
Poincaré, H. (1956). Mathematicai creation. 
In J.R. Newman (Ed), The world of 
mathematics. @p. 2 W  1-2050). New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Powdermaker, H. (1966). Stranger and fiend: The wav of an anthrowlonist. New Y& 
Norton. 
Prawaî, R. ( 1 989). Teaching for understanding: Three key attributes. 
Teachina and 
Teacher Education. 5 (4). 3 15-328. 
Prawat, R. (1992). Are changing views about mathematics teaching sufficient? The case of 
a frWl grade teacher. The Elernenw School Joumal. 93 (2), 195-21 1. 
Prawat, R., Rernillard, J., Putnam. R. and Heaton, R.M. (1992). 
Teachinn math for 
~. 
understanding: Case studies of four fifth-grade teachers. ? l e  ~ l e m e n k  
School 
Journal. 93 (2), 145-15. 
Putnam, R. ( 1992). Teaching the "hows" of mathematics for everyday Me: A case study of 
a fiWi grade teacher. The Elernentary School Journal. 93 (S), 163- 177. 
Putnarn, R, 
Heaton, R, Rawat, R, and R e d &  J. (1992). Teaching mathematics for 
understanding: Discussing case studies of four fa-grade teachers. 
Elementary SchooI Journal. 23 (2), 2 13-229. 
Remillard, J. (1992). Teaching mathematics for understanding: A fifth grade teachefs 
interpretation of policy. The Elementarv School Journal. 93 (2), 179- 193. 
RobitaUe, D.F., Taylor, AR, Orpwood, G. (1996). 
The TIMSS-Canada rewrt. 
Vancouver, C a n a  University of British Columbia, Department of Curriculum 
S tudies. 
Rogers, J. ( 1 995). Teaching m r  readers in made one. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of Toronto, Toronto. 
Romberg, T. (1992). Problematic features of the school mathematics curriculum. in P. 
Jackson (Ed.), Handbook of research on curriculum: A ~roject of the Amencan 
Educafionai Research Association @p. 749-788). New York: Macmillan. 
RombergT., Zarinnia, E., and Williams, S. (1989). The influence of mandateà testine on 
mathematics instruction: Grade 8 teachers' mrce~tions. Madison, WI: National 
Center for Research in Mathematical Sciences in Education. 
Roulet, R.G. (1998). 
Exem~larv mathematics teachers: subject conce~tions and 
instructional ~mctice. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto. 
Schoenfeld, A. (1988). When good teaching leads to bad resuits: The disaster of "well- 
taught" mathematics courses. mcational P ~ ~ ~ h o l o e i ~ t ,  
23 (2), 145- 166. 
Schoenfeld, A. (1 989). 
Explorations of students' mathematicai beliefs and behavior. 
d
o
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
 
238-355. 

Schoenfeld, A (1992). Leaming to think rnaîkmaticaüy: Problem solving, metacognition, 
and sense making in mathernaîics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on 
mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 334-370). New York: Macmillan. 
Schon, D. (1 983). The reflective ~ractitioner. New York: Basic Books Inc. 
Sheppard R. (199 1, May 9). Reading, writing, 'rithmetic and refonns. The Globe and Mail, 
pp. A21. 
Shuiman, L. ( 1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational 
Researc her. 1 5 (2), 4- 14. 
Shulrnan, L. (1 987). Knowledge and teacbing; Foundations of the new reform. Harvard 
Educational Review. 57 (l), 1-22. 
Sierpinska, A. (1994). Understandino in mathematics. London: Tbe Falmer Press. 
Silver, E.A. and Kenney, P. (1995). Sources of assessment information for instructional 
guidance in mathematics. In T. Romberg (Ed.), Refonn in school mathematics and 
authentic assessment, (pp. 38-86). NY: State University of New York Ress. 
Silver, E.A. and Stein, M.K. (1996). The QUASAR Pmject: The "revolution of the 
possible" in mathematics instructional refonn in urban middle schools. Urban 
Education. 30 (4), 476- 52 1. 
S kemp, R. ( 1976). Relational understanding and instrumental understanding. Mathematics 
Teachin~. 77 20-26. 
Skemp, R. (1987). The psvchologv of leaniin~ mathematics. Hillsdale, New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. 
Srnall, P. (1996, November 2 1 ,). Our kids no maîh whizzes Ontario students lag behind 
other provinces in two subjects. The Toronto Star, pp.A3. 
Stake, R.(1988). Case study methods in educational research: Seeking sweet water. In 
R.M. Jaeger (Ed.), Comvlementary methods for research in education, (pp. 254- 
265). Washington, D.C.: American Educational Research Association. 
Stake, R.E. (1 994). Case studies. In N.K. Denzin and YS. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of 
aualitative research (pp. 236-247). CA: Sage Publications. 
Stake, R. (1995). 
The invalidity of standardized testing for measuring matheniatics 
achievement. In T. Romberg (Ed.), Reforrn in school mathematics and authentic 
assessment, (pp. 173-235). NY: State University of New York Press. 
Sztajn, P. (1995). Mathematics refomi: Looking for insights from nineteenth century 
events. School Science and Mathematics. 95 (7), 377-382. 
Talbert, J. and McLaughlin, M. (1993). Understanding teaching in context. In D. Cohen, 
M. McLaughb, J. Talbert, (Eds.), Teachinn for un der stand in^: Challenees for 
polic~ 
and practice (pp. 167-206). San Fonciico: Jossey- Bass Publishers. - 

Thipkong, S. and Davis, EJ. (1991). ReseMce elementary teachers' misconceptions in 
interpreting and applying decimals. School Science and Mathematics. 9 1 (3). 93- 
99. 
Thompson, A. (1986). The relationship of teachers' conceptions of rnathematics and 
- mathematics teaching to instructional practice. ~ducatiobl Studiu in Mathematics. 
Thornpson, A.(1992). Teachers' beliefs and conceptions: A synthesis of the research. In D. 
k Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on mathematics teachinn and leaming 
(pp. 127- 164). New York: Macmillan. 
Van Engen, H. (1953). The foxmation of concepts. In H. Fehr (Ed.). The leamine of 
mathematics. its theow and ~ractice. Twentv First Y
h
k
 of the National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (pp. 69-98). Washington, D.C.: Author. 
Wilson, S. (1990). A conflict of interests: The case of Mark Black. mucation Evaluation 
and Policv Analysis. 1 2 (3), 309-326. 
Wineburg, S. and Wilson, S.M. (1991). 
Subject matter knowledge in the teaching of 
history. In J. Brophy (Ed.). Advances in research on teaching (Voi.2, pp. 393- 
345). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press. 
Wood, T., Cobb, P. and Yackel, E. (1 990). The contextual nature of teaching: Mathematics 
and reading instruction in one second-grade classrwm. The Elementiuy School 
Journal. 90 (S), 497-5 13. 
Zieichner, M. and Gore, J (1990). Tacher socialization. 
In W.R. Houston (Ed.), 
Handbook of research on teacher education (pp. 329-3d7). New York: Macmillan 

