National Plumbing Code 
of Canada 
2020 
Issued by the 
Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes 
National Research Council of Canada 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

First Edition 1970 
Second Edition 1975 
Third Edition 1977 
Fourth Edition 1980 
Fifth Edition 1985 
Sixth Edition 1990 
Seventh Edition 1995 
Eighth Edition 2005 
Ninth Edition 2010 
Tenth Edition 2015 
Eleventh Edition 2020 
Paper: 
ISBN 978-0-660-37918-0 
NR24-29/2020E 
PDF: 
ISBN 978-0-660-37916-6 
NR24-29/2020E-PDF 
NRCC-CONST-56436E 
© National Research Council of Canada 2022 
Ottawa 
World Rights Reserved 
Printed in Canada 
First Printing 
Aussi disponible en français : 
Code national de la plomberie – Canada 2020 
NRCC-CONST-56436F 
: ISBN 978-0-660-37919-7 
Papier 
PDF : 
ISBN 978-0-660-37917-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Table of Contents 
Preface 
Relationship of the NPC to Standards Development and Conformity Assessment 
Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes and Standing Committees 
Division A 
Compliance, Objectives and Functional Statements 
Part 1 
Compliance 
Part 2 
Objectives 
Part 3 
Functional Statements 
Division B 
Acceptable Solutions 
Part 1 
General 
Part 2 
Plumbing Systems 
Division C 
Administrative Provisions 
Part 1 
General 
Part 2 
Administrative Provisions 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface 
The National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 (NPC), together with the National Building 
Code of Canada 2020 (NBC), the National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings 2020 (NECB) 
and the National Fire Code of Canada 2020 (NFC), has been developed by the Canadian 
Commission on Building and Fire Codes (CCBFC) as an objective-based national model code 
that can be adopted by provincial and territorial governments. 
In Canada, provincial and territorial governments have the authority to enact legislation that 
regulates the design and installation of plumbing systems within their jurisdictions. This may 
involve the adoption of the NPC without change or with modifications to suit local needs, 
and the enactment of other laws and regulations regarding plumbing system design and 
installation, including requirements for professional involvement. 
The NPC is a model code in the sense that it helps promote consistency among provincial 
and territorial plumbing codes. Persons involved in the design or installation of plumbing 
systems should consult the provincial or territorial jurisdiction concerned to find out which 
plumbing code is applicable. 
This edition of the NPC succeeds the 2015 edition. 
Development of the National Model Codes 
The CCBFC, an independent committee established by the National Research Council of 
Canada (NRC), is responsible for the content of the National Model Codes. The CCBFC 
is made up of volunteers from across the country and from all facets of the Codes-user 
community. Members of the CCBFC and its standing committees include builders, engineers, 
skilled trade workers, architects, building owners, building operators, fire and building 
officials, manufacturers, and representatives of general interests. 
The CCBFC is advised on scope, policy and technical issues pertaining to the Codes by the 
Provincial/Territorial Policy Advisory Committee on Codes (PTPACC), which is a committee 
of senior representatives from provincial/territorial ministries responsible for building, 
fire, plumbing, and energy regulation in their jurisdictions. The PTPACC was created by 
the provinces and territories, with provision of guidance to the CCBFC as one of its main 
functions. Through the PTPACC, the provinces and territories are engaged in every phase of 
the Codes development process. 
Codes Canada staff within the Construction Research Centre at the NRC provide technical 
and administrative support to the CCBFC and its standing committees, and coordinate the 
provision of evidence-based research to inform Codes development. The NRC publishes the 
National Model Codes and periodic revisions to the Codes to address pressing issues. 
The broader Codes-user community also makes significant contributions to the Codes 
development process by submitting requests for changes or additions to the Codes and by 
commenting on the proposed changes during the public reviews that precede each new 
edition. 
The CCBFC takes into consideration the advice received from the provinces and territories as 
well as Codes users' comments at each stage of Codes development. The scope and content of 
the National Model Codes are determined on a consensus basis, which involves the review of 
technical, policy and practical concerns and discussion of the implications of these concerns. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
v 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
More information on the Codes development process is available on the NRC's website. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
The NPC sets out technical provisions for the design and installation of new plumbing 
systems. It also applies to the extension, alteration, renewal and repair of existing plumbing 
systems. 
The NPC establishes requirements to address the following four objectives: 
• safety  
• health 
• protection of the building or facility from water and sewage damage 
• environment 
Code provisions do not necessarily address all the characteristics of buildings and facilities 
that might be considered to have a bearing on the Code's objectives. Through the extensive 
consensus process used to develop and maintain the National Model Codes (see the section 
entitled Development of the National Model Codes), the Codes-user community has decided 
which characteristics should be regulated through the NPC. 
The provisions of the NPC can be considered as the minimum acceptable measures required 
to adequately achieve the above-listed objectives, as recommended by the CCBFC. Once they 
are adopted into law or regulation by an authority having jurisdiction, the provisions become 
minimum acceptable requirements representing the minimum level of performance required 
to achieve the objectives that is acceptable to the adopting authority. 
The NPC is a model code which, when adopted or adapted by a province or territory, becomes 
a regulation. It is not a guideline on plumbing system design or installation. The design of a 
technically sound plumbing system depends upon many factors beyond compliance with 
plumbing regulations. Such factors include the availability of knowledgeable practitioners 
who have received appropriate education, training and experience and who are familiar 
with the principles of good plumbing practice and experience using reference manuals and 
technical guides. 
The NPC does not list acceptable proprietary plumbing products. It establishes the criteria 
that plumbing materials, products and assemblies must meet. Some of these criteria are 
explicitly stated in the NPC while others are incorporated by reference to material or product 
standards published by standards development organizations. Only those portions of the 
standards related to the objectives of this Code are mandatory parts of the NPC. 
Code Requirements 
Most NPC requirements address at least one of the Code's four stated objectives (safety, 
health, protection of the building or facility from water and sewage damage, and 
environment). 
In processing proposed changes or additions to any of the National Model Codes, the 
CCBFC considers many issues such as the following: 
• Does the proposed requirement provide the minimum level of performance—and 
no more than the minimum—needed to achieve the Code's objectives? 
• Will persons responsible for Code compliance be able to act on or implement the 
requirement using commonly accepted practices? 
• Will enforcement agencies be able to enforce the requirement? 
• Are the costs of implementing the requirement justifiable? 
• Have the potential policy implications of the requirement been identified and 
addressed? 
• Is there broad consensus on this requirement among Code users representing all 
facets of the plumbing system design and construction industries, as well as among 
provincial and territorial governments? 
Guidelines for requesting changes to the NPC are available on the NRC's website. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
vi 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Objective-Based Code Format 
The NPC has been published in an objective-based code format since 2005. 
As described in more detail in the section entitled Structure of the NPC, the Code comprises 
three Divisions: 
• Division A, which defines the scope of the Code and contains the objectives, the 
functional statements and the conditions necessary to achieve compliance; 
• Division B, which contains acceptable solutions (commonly referred to as “technical 
requirements”) deemed to satisfy the objectives and functional statements listed in 
Division A; and 
• Division C, which contains administrative provisions. 
Most  of  the requirements in Division B are linked to three  types of information:  
• objectives (Code objectives, such as safety or health, which individual requirements 
help to address), 
• functional statements (statements of the functions of the plumbing system that a 
particular requirement helps to achieve), and 
• intent statements (detailed statements of the specific intent of the requirement). 
Objectives 
The NPC's objectives are fully defined in Section 2.2. of Division A. 
The objectives describe, in broad terms, the overall goals that the NPC's requirements are 
intended to achieve. They serve to define the boundaries of the subject areas the Code 
addresses. However, the Code does not address all the issues that might be considered 
to fall within those boundaries. 
The objectives describe undesirable situations and their consequences, which the Code 
aims to prevent from occurring in plumbing systems. The wording of most of the 
definitions of the objectives includes two key phrases: “limit the probability” and 
“unacceptable risk.” The phrase “limit the probability” is used to acknowledge that the 
NPC cannot entirely prevent those undesirable situations from happening. The phrase 
“unacceptable risk” acknowledges that the NPC cannot eliminate all risk: the “acceptable 
risk” is the risk remaining once compliance with the Code has been achieved. 
The objectives are entirely qualitative and are not intended to be used on their own in the 
design and approval processes. 
The objectives attributed to the requirements or portions of requirements in Division B 
are  listed in a table in Section  2.8.  of  Division  B.  
Functional Statements 
The NPC's functional statements are defined in Section 3.2. of Division A. 
The functional statements are more detailed than the objectives. They describe conditions 
in the plumbing system that help satisfy the objectives. The functional statements and the 
objectives are interconnected. There may be several functional statements related to any 
one objective, and a given functional statement may describe a function of the plumbing 
system that serves to achieve more than one objective. 
Like objectives, functional statements are entirely qualitative and are not intended to be 
used on their own in the design and approval processes. 
The functional statements attributed to the requirements or portions of requirements in  
Division B are listed in a table in Section 2.8. of Division B. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
vii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Intent Statements 
Intent statements explain the basic thinking behind each Code provision contained in 
Division B. Intent statements, each of which is unique to the provision with which it is 
associated, explain how requirements help to achieve their attributed objectives and 
functional statements. Like the objectives, the intent statements are expressed in terms 
of risk avoidance and expected performance. They offer insight into the views of the 
responsible standing committee on what the Code provisions are intended to achieve. 
The intent statements serve explanatory purposes only and do not form an integral part of 
the Code provisions. As such, they are similar in function to the explanatory Notes at the 
end of each Part. Due to the sheer volume of intent statements—hundreds for the NPC 
alone—they are made available as a separate electronic document entitled “Supplement 
to the NPC 2020: Intent Statements,” which is posted on the NRC's website. 
All this additional information—objectives, functional statements and intent statements—is 
intended to facilitate the implementation of the Code in two ways: 
• Clarity of intent: The objectives, functional statements and intent statements linked 
to a Code requirement clarify the reasoning behind that requirement and facilitate 
understanding of what must be done to satisfy that requirement. This added information 
may also help avoid disputes between practitioners and officials over these types 
of issues. 
• Flexibility: The additional information allows for flexibility in Code compliance. A 
person seeking to propose a new method or material not described or covered in the 
Code will be able to use the added information to understand the expected level of 
performance that their alternative solution must achieve to satisfy the Code. 
Structure of the NPC 
The NPC is organized into three Divisions. 
Division A: Compliance, Objectives and Functional Statements 
Division A defines the scope of the NPC and presents the objectives that the Code 
addresses and the functions the plumbing system must perform to help to satisfy those 
objectives. 
Division A cannot be used on its own as a basis for designing and installing a plumbing 
system or for evaluating a plumbing system's compliance with the Code. 
Division B: Acceptable Solutions 
The term “acceptable solutions” refers to the technical requirements contained in the 
Code. It reflects the principle that plumbing codes establish an acceptable level of risk 
or performance and underlines the fact that a code cannot describe all possible valid 
design and installation options. Acceptable solutions represent the minimum level of 
performance that will satisfy the NPC's objectives and that is acceptable to an authority 
that adopts the NPC into law or regulation. 
Most of the requirements in Division B—the acceptable solutions—are linked to at least 
one objective and functional statement found in Division A. These linkages play an 
important role in allowing objective-based codes to accommodate innovation. 
It is expected that the majority of Code users will primarily follow the acceptable 
solutions presented in Division B and that they will consult Division A only when seeking 
clarification on the application of Division B's requirements to a particular situation, 
when considering an alternative solution, or when looking up the definition of selected 
terms in the context of the NPC. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
viii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Division C: Administrative Provisions 
Division C contains administrative provisions relating to the application of the Code. 
Many provinces and territories establish their own administrative provisions upon 
adopting or adapting the NPC; having all the administrative provisions in one Division 
facilitates their customization to suit jurisdictional needs. 
In addition, a separate document entitled Administrative Requirements for Use with 
the National Building Code of Canada 1985 is automatically adopted, in accordance 
with Article 2.2.1.1. of Division C, if the authority having jurisdiction does not provide 
other administrative requirements. 
Relationship between Division A and Division B 
Sentence 1.2.1.1.(1) of Division A is a very important sentence: it is a precise statement of 
the relationship between Divisions A and B and is central to the concept of objective-based 
codes. 
1) Compliance with this Code shall be achieved by 
a) complying with the applicable acceptable solutions in Division B (see Note 
A-1.2.1.1.(1)(a)), or 
b) using alternative solutions that will achieve at least the minimum level of 
performance required by Division B in the areas defined by the objectives 
and functional statements attributed to the applicable acceptable solutions 
(see Note A-1.2.1.1.(1)(b)). 
Clause (a) makes it clear that the acceptable solutions in Division B are automatically 
deemed to satisfy the linked objectives and functional statements of Division A. 
Clause (b) makes it clear that alternative solutions can be used in lieu of compliance 
with the acceptable solutions. However, to do something different from the acceptable 
solutions described in Division B, a proponent must show that their proposed alternative 
solution will perform at least as well as the acceptable solution(s) it is replacing. The 
objectives and functional statements attributed to the acceptable solution(s) identify the 
areas of performance where this equivalence must be demonstrated. 
Additional Information 
Numbering System 
A consistent numbering system has been used throughout the National Model Codes. The 
first number indicates the Part of the Code; the second, the Section in the Part; the third, 
the Subsection; and the fourth, the Article in the Subsection. The detailed provisions are 
found at the Sentence level (indicated by numbers in brackets), and Sentences may be 
broken down into Clauses and Subclauses. This structure is illustrated as follows: 
3
 Part
 
3.5. 
Section 
3.5.2. 
Subsection 
3.5.2.1. 
Article 
3.5.2.1.(2) 
Sentence 
3.5.2.1.(2)(a) 
Clause 
3.5.2.1.(2)(a)(i) 
Subclause 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
ix 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Meaning of the Words “And” and “Or” between the Clauses and Subclauses 
of a Sentence 
Multiple Clauses and Subclauses are connected by the word “and” or “or” at the end of 
the second last Clause or Subclause in the series. Although this connecting word appears 
only once, it is meant to apply to all the preceding Clauses or Subclauses within that series. 
For example, in a series of five Clauses—(a) to (e)—in a Sentence, the appearance of the 
word “and” at the end of Clause (d) means that all Clauses in the Sentence are connected 
to each other with the word “and.” Similarly, in a series of five Clauses—(a) to (e)—in a 
Sentence, the appearance of the word “or” at the end of Clause (d) means that all Clauses 
in the Sentence are connected to each other with the word “or.” 
In all cases, it is important to note that a Clause (and its Subclauses, if any) must always 
be read in conjunction with its introductory text appearing at the beginning of the 
Sentence. Moreover, the connecting words “and” and “or” must be read in the context 
of the Sentence. In particular, the use of the word “and” as a connecting word does not 
necessarily mean that all Clauses (or Subclauses) are applicable for compliance with 
the Sentence. 
Change Indication 
As a courtesy to Code users, efforts have been made to identify technical changes relative 
to the 2015 edition. Where a technical addition or revision has been made, a vertical line 
has been added in the margin next to the affected provision to indicate the approximate 
location of the new or revised content. No change indication is provided for editorial 
revisions or for renumbered or deleted content. 
Units 
All values in the NPC, other than nominal pipe sizes, are given in metric units. Some of 
the metric values in the Code have been converted and rounded from imperial values. A 
conversion table of imperial equivalents for the most common units used in plumbing 
system design and installation is located at the end of the Code. 
Complementary Publications 
The following publications are referenced in the NPC 2020 or facilitate the application 
of its requirements: 
National Building Code of Canada 2020 
Supplement to the NPC 2020: Intent Statements 
These and other Code documents published by the NRC are made available in free 
electronic format on the NRC's website. 
Commercial Reproduction 
Copyright for the NPC is owned by the NRC. All rights are reserved. Commercial 
reproduction by any means of the NRC's copyright material is prohibited without the written 
consent of the NRC. To request permission to reproduce the NPC, please contact: 
Production and Marketing Manager 
Codes Canada 
National Research Council of Canada 
1200 Montreal Road 
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R6 
E-mail: Codes@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
x 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Contact Information 
The CCBFC welcomes comments and suggestions for improvements to the NPC. Persons 
interested in requesting a change to an NPC provision should refer to the guidelines available 
on the NRC's website. 
To submit comments or suggestions, please contact: 
The Secretary 
Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes 
1200 Montreal Road 
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R6 
E-mail: CCBFCSecretary-SecretaireCCCBPI@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xi 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Relationship of the NPC to Standards 
Development and Conformity 
Assessment 
The development of many provisions in the NPC and the assessment of conformity to those 
provisions are supported by several of the member organizations of Canada's National 
Standards System (NSS). 
The NSS is a network of accredited organizations concerned with standards development, 
certification, testing and inspection that is established under the auspices of the Standards 
Council of Canada Act. Activities of the NSS are coordinated by the Standards Council of 
Canada (SCC), which accredits standards development organizations, certification bodies, 
testing and calibration laboratories, and inspection bodies, among others. 
The SCC is a non-profit federal Crown corporation responsible for the coordination of 
voluntary standardization in Canada. It also coordinates Canadian participation in voluntary 
international standardization activities. 
Canadian Standards 
Many of the standards referenced in the NPC are published by standards development 
organizations accredited in Canada. As part of the accreditation requirements, these 
organizations adhere to the principle of consensus, which generally means substantial 
majority agreement of a committee comprising a balance of producer, user and general 
interest members, and the consideration of all negative comments. The standards 
development organizations also have formal procedures for the balloting and second-level 
review of standards prepared under their oversight. 
The following organizations are accredited as standards development organizations in 
Canada: 
• Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI) 
• ASTM International 
• Bureau de normalisation du Québec (BNQ) 
• Canadian General Standards Board (CGSB) 
• CSA  Group  
• International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) 
• ULC  Standards  
• Underwriters' Laboratories Inc. (UL) 
Table 1.3.1.2. of Division B lists the standards referenced in the NPC. Standards proposed to 
be referenced in the NPC are reviewed to ensure that their content is compatible with the 
Code. Thereafter, referenced standards are reviewed as needed during each Code cycle. 
Standards development organizations are asked to provide information on any changes in the 
status of their standards referenced in the NPC—withdrawals, amendments, new editions, 
etc. This information is passed on to the CCBFC, its standing committees, the provinces and 
territories, and interested stakeholders, all of whom are given the opportunity to identify 
any problems associated with the changes. These bodies do not necessarily review in detail 
the revised standards; rather, the approach relies on the consensus process involved in the 
maintenance of the standards and on the extensive knowledge and experience of committee 
members, provincial or territorial staff, NRC staff, and consulted stakeholders to identify 
changes in the standards that might create problems in the Code. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xiii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Non-Canadian Standards 
A number of subject areas for which the standards development organizations accredited in 
Canada have not developed standards are covered in the NPC. In these cases, the Code often 
references standards developed by organizations in other countries, such as the American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) and the 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). These standards are developed using processes 
that may differ from those used by the standards development organizations accredited in 
Canada; nevertheless, the standards have been reviewed by the relevant standing committees 
and found to be acceptable. 
Conformity Assessment 
The NPC establishes minimum measures, which are set out within its own text or within 
referenced standards. However, the NPC does not set out who is responsible for assessing 
conformity to the measures or how those with this responsibility might carry it out. This 
responsibility is usually established by the governing legislation of the adopting provinces 
and territories. Provincial or territorial authorities should be consulted to determine who is 
responsible for conformity assessment within their jurisdiction. 
Those persons responsible for ensuring that materials, appliances, systems and equipment 
meet the requirements of this Code have several means available to assist them, ranging 
from on-site inspection to the use of certification services provided by accredited third-party 
organizations. Test reports or mill certificates provided by manufacturers or suppliers can 
also assist in the acceptance of products. Engineering reports may be required for more 
complex products. 
Testing 
The SCC accredits testing and calibration laboratories that are capable of reliably testing 
products to specified standards. The test results produced by these organizations can be 
used in the certification, evaluation and qualification of products for compliance with 
Code provisions. The SCC's website (www.scc.ca) lists accredited testing and calibration 
laboratories, along with their scope of accreditation. 
Certification 
Certification is the confirmation by an independent organization that a product, process, 
service or system meets a requirement. Certification may entail physical examination, 
testing as specified in appropriate standards, an initial plant inspection, and/or follow-up 
unannounced plant inspections. This procedure leads to the issuing of a formal assurance 
or declaration, by means of a certification mark or certificate, that the product, process, 
service or system is in full conformity with specified provisions. 
In some cases, a product for which no standard exists can be certified using procedures 
and criteria developed by an accredited certification body and specifically designed to 
measure the performance of that product. 
Certification bodies publish lists of certified products and companies. The SCC's website 
(www.scc.ca) lists accredited certification bodies, along with their scope of accreditation. 
Several organizations, including the Canadian Construction Materials Centre (CCMC) at 
the NRC, offer product certification services. 
Evaluation 
An evaluation is a written opinion by an independent professional organization that a 
product will perform its intended function. An evaluation is often done to determine the 
ability of an innovative product, for which no standards exist, to satisfy the intent of a 
Code requirement. Follow-up plant inspections are not normally part of the evaluation 
process. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xiv 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Preface
Qualification 
Qualification evaluates the ability of a product to perform its intended function by 
verifying that it meets the requirements of a standard. Qualification normally includes 
some follow-up plant inspection. Some organizations publish lists of qualified products 
that meet the specified requirements. Some organizations qualify product manufacturing 
and/or testing facilities for compliance with the Code and relevant standards. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xv 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xvi 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Canadian Commission on Building and 
Fire Codes and Standing Committees 
Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes 
D. Crawford (Chair) 
C. Gray 
T. Ross 
Codes Canada staff 
R. Arsenault 
K. Block 
H. Griffin 
K. Griffiths 
R. Rymell 
B. Sim 
who provided assistance 
to the Commission 
A. Borooah 
T. Harper 
S. Stinson 
M. Dumoulin 
R. Brooks 
L. Holmen 
D. Sullivan 
G. Gosselin 
J. Chauvin 
C. Joseph(1) 
A. Tabet 
A. Gribbon 
M. Cianchetti 
K. Lee 
P. Thorkelsson 
P. Jago 
T. Cochren 
B. Lorne 
M. Tovey 
A. Laroche 
V. de Passillé 
D. MacKinnon 
C. Tye 
F. Lohmann 
R. Dulmage 
M. McSweeney 
E. Whalen 
P. Rizcallah 
C. Fillingham 
G. Morinville 
G. Yoshida 
R. Tremblay 
S. Garcia 
S. Ottens 
K. Gloge 
R. Richard 
Standing Committee on HVAC and 
Plumbing 
T. White (Chair) 
R. Roberts 
H. Bouchard 
C. Roy 
F. Di Folco 
A. Spurrell 
Y. Duchesne 
G. Stasynec 
L. Gill 
S. Steele 
R. Gill 
K. Wong 
X. Hao 
E. Howard 
Codes Canada staff 
D. Hui 
who provided assistance 
to the Committee 
D. Lima 
S. Manning 
T. Achour 
R. Moulton 
D. Green 
E. Piecuch 
P. Tardif 
T. Pringle 
Technical Translation Verification 
Committee 
G. Harvey (Chair) 
Codes Canada staff 
F. Genest 
who provided assistance 
to the Committee 
B. Lagueux 
N. Lessard 
I. Bastien 
I. Wagner 
M. Gingras 
K. Le Van 
G. Mougeot-Lemay 
S. Veilleux 
(1) Resigned on September 23, 2016, due to employment 
opportunity with Codes Canada. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xvii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
xviii 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Compliance, Objectives and 
Functional Statements 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 1 
Compliance 
1.1. 
General 
1.1.1. 
Application of this Code .................. 1-1 
1.2. 
Compliance 
1.2.1. 
Compliance with this Code ............. 1-1 
1.2.2. 
Materials, Systems and 
Equipment ......................................... 1-1 
1.3. 
Divisions A, B and C of 
this Code 
1.3.1. 
General .............................................. 1-2 
1.3.2. 
Application of Division A ................. 1-2 
1.3.3. 
Application of Division B ................. 1-2 
1.3.4. 
Application of Division C ................. 1-2 
1.4. 
Terms and Abbreviations 
1.4.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases .. 1-2 
1.4.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations .. 1-8 
1.5. 
Referenced Documents 
and Organizations 
1.5.1. 
Referenced Documents ................... 1-9 
1.5.2. 
Organizations ................................... 1-9 
Notes to Part 1 ................ 1-11 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 1 
Compliance 
Section 1.1. General 
1.1.1. 
Application of this Code 
1.1.1.1. 
Application of this Code 
1) This Code applies to the design, installation, extension, alteration, renewal or 
repair of plumbing systems. 
2) This Code specifies the minimum requirements for 
a) drainage systems for water-borne wastes and storm water for buildings to the 
point of connection with public services, 
b) venting systems, 
c) water service pipes, and  
d) water distribution systems. 
3) Plumbing facilities in buildings shall be provided in accordance with Part 7 of 
Division B of the National Building Code of Canada 2020. 
Section 1.2. Compliance 
1.2.1. 
Compliance with this Code 
1.2.1.1. 
Compliance with this Code 
1) Compliance with this Code shall be achieved by 
a) complying with the applicable acceptable solutions in Division B (see 
Note A-1.2.1.1.(1)(a)), or 
b) using alternative solutions that will achieve at least the minimum level of 
performance required by Division B in the areas defined by the objectives 
and functional statements attributed to the applicable acceptable solutions 
(see Note A-1.2.1.1.(1)(b)). 
2) For the purposes of compliance with this Code as required in 
Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b), the objectives and functional statements attributed to the 
acceptable solutions in Division B shall be the objectives and functional statements 
referred to in Subsection 1.1.2. of Division B. 
1.2.2. 
Materials, Systems and Equipment 
1.2.2.1. 
Characteristics of Materials, Systems and Equipment 
1) All materials, systems and equipment installed to meet the requirements of 
this Code shall be free of defects and possess the necessary characteristics to perform 
their intended functions when installed. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.2.2.2. 
Division A 
1.2.2.2. 
Used Materials and Equipment 
1) Used materials and equipment, including fixtures, shall not be reused unless 
they meet the requirements of this Code for new materials and equipment and are 
otherwise satisfactory for their intended use. 
Section 1.3. Divisions A, B and C of this Code 
1.3.1. 
General 
1.3.1.1. 
Scope of Division A 
1) Division A contains the compliance and application provisions, objectives 
and functional statements of this Code. 
1.3.1.2. 
Scope of Division B 
1) Division B contains the acceptable solutions of this Code. 
1.3.1.3. 
Scope of Division C 
1) Division C contains the administrative provisions of this Code. 
1.3.1.4. 
Internal Cross-references 
1) Where the Division of a referenced provision is not specified in this Code, it shall 
mean that the referenced provision is in the same Division as the referencing provision. 
1.3.2. 
Application of Division A 
1.3.2.1. 
Application of Parts 1, 2 and 3 
1) Parts 1, 2 and 3 of Division A apply to all plumbing systems covered in this 
Code. (See Article 1.1.1.1.) 
1.3.3. 
Application of Division B 
1.3.3.1. 
Application of Parts 1 and 2 
1) Parts 1 and 2 of Division B apply to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. 
(See Article 1.1.1.1.) 
1.3.4. 
Application of Division C 
1.3.4.1. 
Application of Parts 1 and 2 
1) Parts 1 and 2 of Division C apply to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. 
(See Article 1.1.1.1.) 
Section 1.4. Terms and Abbreviations 
1.4.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases 
1.4.1.1. 
Non-defined Terms 
1) Words and phrases used in this Code that are not included in the list of 
definitions in Article 1.4.1.2. shall have the meanings that are commonly assigned to 
them in the context in which they are used, taking into account the specialized use of 
terms by the various trades and professions to which the terminology applies. 
2) Where objectives and functional statements are referred to in this Code, they 
shall be the objectives and functional statements described in Parts 2 and 3. 
1-2 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
1.4.1.2. 
3) Where acceptable solutions are referred to in this Code, they shall be the 
provisions stated in Part 2 of Division B. 
4) Where alternative solutions are referred to in this Code, they shall be the 
alternative solutions mentioned in Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b). 
1.4.1.2. 
Defined Terms 
1) The words and terms in italics in this Code shall have the following meanings 
(an asterisk (*) following a defined word or term indicates that the definition for that 
word or term is taken from the NBC): 
Additional circuit vent means a vent pipe that is installed between a circuit vent and a relief 
vent to provide additional air circulation. 
Air admittance valve  means a one-way valve designed to allow air to enter the drainage 
system when the pressure in the plumbing system is less than the atmospheric 
pressure. (See Note A-2.2.10.16.(1) of Division B.) 
Air break means the unobstructed vertical distance between the lowest point of an 
indirectly connected sanitary drainage pipe and the flood level rim of the fixture into 
which it discharges. (See Note A-2.3.3.11.(2) of Division B.) 
Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through air between the lowest point 
of a water supply outlet and the flood level rim of the fixture or device into which the 
outlet discharges. (See Note A-2.6.2.9.(2) of Division B.) 
Alloyed zinc means an alloy of zinc having the corrosion resistance and physical 
properties of an alloy containing 0.15% titanium, 0.74% copper and 99.11% zinc, 
and so tempered as to be capable of being formed into the shape required for 
a watertight joint. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other 
than the primary potable water supply. (See Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Backflow means a flowing back or reversal of the normal direction of the flow. 
Backflow preventer means a device or a method that prevents backflow. (See  
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-A in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Back pressure means pressure higher than the supply pressure. 
Back-siphonage means backflow caused by a negative pressure in the supply system. (See 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-B in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Back-siphonage preventer (or vacuum breaker) means a device or a method that prevents 
back-siphonage. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-C in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Backwater valve means a check valve designed for use in a gravity drainage system. 
Bathroom group means a group of plumbing fixtures installed in the same room, 
consisting of one domestic-type lavatory, one water closet and either one bathtub 
(with or without a shower) or one one-head shower. 
Branch means a sanitary drainage pipe connected at its upstream end to the junction of 2 
or more sanitary drainage pipes or to a stack, and connected at its downstream end 
to another branch, a sump, a  stack or a building drain. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-F in 
Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Branch vent means a vent pipe that is connected at its lower end to the junction of 2 or 
more vent pipes, and at its upper end, either to another branch vent or to a stack vent, 
vent stack or vent header, or terminates in open air. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-D in 
Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Building* means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use 
or occupancy. 
Building drain means the lowest horizontal piping, including any vertical offset, that  
conducts sewage, clear-water waste or storm water by gravity to a building sewer. (See  
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-F in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Building sewer means a pipe that is connected to a building drain 1 m outside a wall of a 
building and that leads to a public sewer or private sewage disposal system. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.4.1.2. 
Division A 
Building trap means a trap that is installed in a building drain or building sewer to 
prevent the circulation of air between a drainage system and a public sewer. (See 
Note A-2.4.5.4.(1) of Division B.) 
Care or detention occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or part thereof 
by persons who require special care or treatment because of cognitive or 
physical limitations or by persons who are restrained from, or are incapable of, 
self-preservation because of security measures not under their control. 
Check valve means a valve that permits flow in one direction but prevents a return flow. 
Circuit vent means a vent pipe that serves a number of fixtures and connects to the fixture 
drain of the most upstream fixture. 
Class 1 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that 
conveys water from the water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's 
outlets, is directly connected to the public water supply main only, has no pumps or 
reservoirs, and in which the sprinkler drains discharge to the atmosphere, to dry 
wells or to other safe outlets. 
Class 2 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means a Class 1 fire sprinkler/standpipe system that 
includes a booster pump in its connection to the public water supply main. 
Class 3 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that 
conveys water from the water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets 
and is directly connected to the public water supply main as well as to one or more 
of the following storage facilities, which are filled from the public water supply 
main only: elevated water storage, fire pumps supplying water from aboveground 
covered reservoirs, or pressure tanks. The water in this sprinkler/standpipe system 
must be maintained in potable condition. (See Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Class 4 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that 
conveys water from the water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets 
and is directly connected to the public water supply main (similar to Class 1 and 
Class 2 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems) and  to  an  auxiliary water supply dedicated to 
fire department use that is located within 520 m of a pumper connection. 
Class 5 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that 
conveys water from the water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets 
and is directly connected to the public water supply main and also interconnected 
with an auxiliary water supply. 
Class 6 fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that 
conveys water from the water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets 
and acts as a combined industrial water supply and fire protection system supplied 
from the public water supply main only, with or without gravity storage or pump 
suction tanks. 
Cleanout means an access provided in drainage and venting systems to provide for 
cleaning and inspection services. 
Clear-water waste means waste water with impurity levels that will not be harmful to 
health and may include cooling water and condensate drainage from refrigeration 
and air-conditioning equipment and cooled condensate from steam heating systems, 
but does not include storm water. (See Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Combined building drain means a building drain that is intended to conduct sewage and 
storm water. 
Combined building sewer means a building sewer that is intended to conduct sewage and 
storm water. 
Combined sewer means a sewer that is intended to conduct sewage and storm water. 
Combustible* means that a material fails to meet the acceptance criteria 
of CAN/ULC-S114, “Standard Method of Test for Determination of 
Non-Combustibility in Building Materials.” 
Continuous vent means a vent pipe that is an extension of a vertical section of a branch or 
fixture drain. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-E in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
1-4 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
1.4.1.2. 
Critical level means the level of submergence at which the back-siphonage preventer 
ceases to prevent back-siphonage. 
Dead end means a pipe that terminates with a closed fitting. 
Developed length means the length along the centre line of the pipe and fittings. (See 
Note A-2.5.6.3.(1) of Division B.) 
Directly connected means physically connected in such a way that water or gas cannot 
escape from the connection. 
Drainage system means an assembly of pipes, fittings, fixtures, traps and appurtenances 
that is used to convey sewage, clear-water waste or storm water to a public sewer or 
a private sewage disposal system, but does not include subsoil drainage pipes. (See  
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-F in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Dual vent means a vent pipe that serves 2 fixtures and connects at the junction of the trap 
arms. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-G in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Dwelling unit* means a suite operated as a housekeeping unit, used or intended to 
be used by one or more persons and usually containing cooking, eating, living, 
sleeping and sanitary facilities. 
Emergency floor drain means a fixture for the purposes of overflow protection that does 
not receive regular discharge from other fixtures, other than from a trap primer. 
(See Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Fire separation* means a construction assembly that acts as a barrier against the spread 
of fire. 
Fire service pipe means a pipe that conveys water from a public water main or private 
water source to the inside of a building for the purpose of supplying the fire sprinkler 
or standpipe systems. 
Fixture means a receptacle, appliance, apparatus or other device that discharges sewage 
or clear-water waste, and includes a floor drain. 
Fixture drain means the pipe that connects a trap serving a fixture to another part of 
a drainage system. 
Fixture outlet pipe means a pipe that connects the waste opening of a fixture to the trap 
serving the fixture. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-H in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Fixture unit (as applying to drainage systems) means the unit of measure based on the 
rate of discharge, time of operation and frequency of use of a fixture that expresses 
the hydraulic load that is imposed by that fixture on the drainage system. 
Fixture unit (as applying to water distribution systems) means the unit of measure based 
on the rate of supply, time of operation and frequency of use of a fixture or outlet 
that expresses the hydraulic load that is imposed by that fixture or outlet on the 
supply system. 
Flood level rim means the top edge at which water can overflow from a fixture or device. 
(See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-B in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Flow control roof drain means a roof drain that restricts the flow of storm water into the 
storm drainage system. 
Fresh air inlet means a vent pipe that is installed in conjunction with a building trap and 
terminates outdoors. (See Note A-2.4.5.4.(1) of Division B.) 
Indirectly connected means not directly connected. (See Note A-2.3.3.11.(2) of Division B.) 
Indirect service water heater* means a service water heater that derives its heat from a 
heating medium such as warm air, steam or hot water. 
Individual vent means a vent pipe that serves one fixture. 
Interceptor means a receptacle that is installed to prevent oil, grease, sand or other 
materials from passing into a drainage system. 
Leader means a pipe that is installed to carry storm water from a roof to a storm building 
drain or sewer or other place of disposal. 
Nominally horizontal means at an angle of less than 45° with the horizontal. (See 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-J in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-5 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.4.1.2. 
Division A 
Nominally vertical means at an angle of not more than 45° with the vertical. (See 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-J in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Nominal pipe size (NPS) means the nominal diameter by which a pipe, fitting, trap or 
other similar item is commercially designated. 
Noncombustible* means that a material meets the acceptance criteria of CAN/ULC-S114, 
“Standard Method of Test for Determination of Non-Combustibility in Building 
Materials.” 
Occupancy* means the use or intended use of a building or part thereof for the shelter or 
support of persons, animals or property. 
Offset means the piping that connects the ends of 2 pipes that are parallel. (See 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-K in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Offset relief vent means a relief vent that provides additional air circulation upstream and 
downstream of an offset in a stack. (See Note A-2.5.4.4.(1) of Division B.) 
Plumbing system* means a drainage system, a  venting system and a water system or parts 
thereof. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-L in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Potable means safe for human consumption. 
Private sewage disposal system* means a privately owned plant for the treatment and 
disposal of sewage (such as a septic tank with an absorption field). 
Private use (as applying to the classification of plumbing fixtures) means fixtures 
in residences and apartments, in private bathrooms of hotels, and in similar 
installations in other buildings for one family or an individual. 
Private water supply system means an assembly of pipes, fittings, valves, equipment and 
appurtenances that supplies water from a private source to a water distribution system. 
Public use (as applying to the classification of plumbing fixtures) means fixtures in 
general washrooms of schools, gymnasiums, hotels, bars, public comfort stations 
and other installations where fixtures are installed so that their use is unrestricted. 
Relief vent means a vent pipe that is used in conjunction with a circuit vent to provide 
additional air circulation between a drainage system and a venting system. 
Residential full flow-through fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes 
and fittings installed in a one- or two-family dwelling that conveys water from the 
water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets and is fully integrated 
into the potable water system to ensure a regular flow of water through all parts of 
both systems. 
Residential partial flow-through fire sprinkler/standpipe system means an assembly of pipes 
and fittings installed in a one- or two-family dwelling that conveys water from the 
water service pipe to the sprinkler/standpipe system's outlets and in which flow, 
during inactive periods of the sprinkler/standpipe system, occurs only through the 
main header to the water closet located at the farthest point of the two systems. 
Riser means a water distribution pipe that extends through at least one full storey. 
Roof drain means a fitting or device that is installed in the roof to permit storm water to 
discharge into a leader. 
Roof gutter means an exterior channel installed at the base of a sloped roof to convey 
storm water. 
Sanitary building drain means a building drain that conducts sewage to a building sewer 
from the most upstream stack, branch or fixture drain serving a water closet. 
Sanitary building sewer means a building sewer that conducts sewage. 
Sanitary drainage pipe means a pipe in a sanitary drainage system. 
Sanitary drainage system* means a drainage system that conducts sewage. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conducts sewage. 
Service water heater* means a device for heating water for plumbing services. 
Sewage means any liquid waste other than clear-water waste or storm water. 
1-6 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
1.4.1.2. 
Stack means a vertical sanitary drainage pipe that passes through one or more storeys, 
and includes any offset that is part of the stack. 
Stack vent means a vent pipe that connects the top of a stack to a vent header or to outside 
air. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-G in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Storage-type service water heater* means a service water heater with an integral hot water 
storage tank. 
Storey for the purposes of this Code, means the interval between 2 successive floor 
levels, including mezzanine floors that contain plumbing fixtures, or between a 
floor level and roof. 
Storm building drain means a building drain that conducts storm water and is connected at 
its upstream end to a leader, sump or catch basin, and at its downstream end to a 
building sewer or a designated storm water disposal location. 
Storm building sewer means a building sewer that conveys storm water. 
Storm drainage system means a drainage system that conveys storm water. 
Storm sewer means a sewer that conveys storm water. 
Storm water means water that is discharged from a surface as a result of rainfall or 
snowfall. 
Subsoil drainage pipe means a pipe that is installed underground to intercept and convey 
subsurface water. 
Suite* means a single room or series of rooms of complementary use, operated under a 
single tenancy, and includes dwelling units, individual guest rooms in motels, hotels, 
boarding houses, rooming houses and dormitories as well as individual stores and 
individual or complementary rooms for business and personal services occupancies. 
Trap means a fitting or device that is designed to hold a liquid seal that will prevent the 
passage of gas but will not materially affect the flow of a liquid. 
Trap arm means that portion of a fixture drain between the trap weir and the vent pipe 
fitting. (See Note A-2.5.6.3.(1) of Division B.) 
Trap dip means the lowest part of the upper interior surface of a trap. 
Trap seal depth means the vertical distance between the trap dip and the trap weir. (See  
Note A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3) of Division B.) 
Trap standard means the trap for a fixture that is integral with the support for the fixture. 
Trap weir means the highest part of the lower interior surface of a trap. (See  
Note A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3) of Division B.) 
Vacuum breaker (see back-siphonage preventer). 
Vent header means a vent pipe that connects any combination of stack vents or vent stacks 
to outside air. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-I in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Venting system means an assembly of pipes and fittings that connects a drainage system 
with outside air for circulation of air and the protection of trap seals in the drainage 
system. (See Figures A-1.4.1.2.(1)-F and A-1.4.1.2.(1)-G in Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Vent pipe means a pipe that is part of a venting system. 
Vent stack means a vent pipe that is connected at its upper end to a vent header or 
that terminates in outside air and is connected at its lower end to the stack at or 
below the lowest sanitary drainage pipe connection. (See Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-G in 
Note A-1.4.1.2.(1).) 
Water distribution system means an assembly of pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances 
that conveys water from the water service pipe or private water supply system to water 
supply outlets, fixtures, appliances and devices. 
Water service pipe means a pipe that conveys water from a public water main or private 
water source to the inside of the building. 
Water system means a private water supply system, a  water service pipe, a  water distribution 
system or parts thereof. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-7 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.4.2.1. 
Division A 
Wet vent means a sanitary drainage pipe that also serves as a vent pipe and extends from 
the most downstream wet-vented fixture connection to the most upstream fixture 
connection. (See Note A-2.5.8.1.(2) of Division B.) 
Yoke vent means a vent pipe that is connected at its lower end to a stack and at its upper 
end to a vent stack or to a branch vent connected to a vent stack. (See Note A-2.5.4.3. of 
Division B.) 
1.4.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1.4.2.1. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1) The symbols and other abbreviations in this Code shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in this Article and in Article 1.3.2.1. of Division B. 
ABS .............. acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene 
AL ................ aluminum 
cm2 ............... square centimetre(s) 
CPVC ........... chlorinated polyvinyl chloride 
° .................... degree(s) 
°C ................. degree(s) Celsius 
diam. ............ diameter 
DWV ............ drain, waste and vent 
h .................... hour(s) 
in. ................. inch(es) 
kg/m3 ........... kilogram(s) per cubic metre 
kPa ............... kilopascal(s) 
L ................... litre(s) 
Lpf ................ litre(s) per flush 
L/s ................ litre(s) per second 
m .................. metre(s) 
m2 ................. square metre(s) 
max. ............. maximum 
min. .............. minimum 
min ............... minute(s) 
mm ............... millimetre(s) 
n/a ................ not applicable 
No. ............... number(s) 
PE ................. polyethylene 
PE-RT ........... polyethylene of raised temperature 
PEX .............. crosslinked polyethylene 
PP-R ............. polypropylene 
PVC .............. polyvinyl chloride 
1 in 50 .......... slope of 1 vertical to 50 horizontal 
1-8 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
1.5.2.1. 
Section 1.5. Referenced Documents and 
Organizations 
1.5.1. 
Referenced Documents 
1.5.1.1. 
Application of Referenced Documents 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), the provisions of documents referenced in 
this Code, and of any documents referenced within those documents, apply only 
to the extent that they relate to 
a) plumbing systems, and  
b) the objectives and functional statements attributed to the applicable 
acceptable solutions in Division B where the documents are referenced. 
(See Note A-1.5.1.1.(1).) 
2) Where a provision of this Code references another National Model Code, the 
applicable objectives and functional statements shall include those found in that 
referenced National Model Code. 
1.5.1.2. 
Conflicting Requirements 
1) In case of conflict between the provisions of this Code and those of a referenced 
document, the provisions of this Code shall govern. 
1.5.1.3. 
Applicable Editions 
1) Where documents are referenced in this Code, they shall be the editions 
designated in Subsection 1.3.1. of Division B. 
1.5.2. 
Organizations 
1.5.2.1. 
Abbreviations of Proper Names 
1) The abbreviations of proper names in this Code shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in Article 1.3.2.1. of Division B. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-9 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1-10 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Notes to Part 1 
Compliance 
A-1.2.1.1.(1)(a) Code Compliance via Acceptable Solutions. If a plumbing system design (e.g., 
material, component, assembly or system) can be shown to meet all provisions of the applicable acceptable 
solutions in Division B (e.g., it complies with the applicable provisions of a referenced standard), it is deemed to 
have satisfied the objectives and functional statements linked to those provisions and thus to have complied 
with that part of the Code. In fact, if it can be determined that a design meets all the applicable acceptable 
solutions in Division B, there is no need to consult the objectives and functional statements in Division A to 
determine its compliance. 
A-1.2.1.1.(1)(b) Code Compliance via Alternative Solutions. Where a design differs from the 
acceptable solutions in Division B, then it should be treated as an “alternative solution.” A proponent of an 
alternative solution must demonstrate that the alternative solution addresses the same issues as the applicable 
acceptable solutions in Division B and their attributed objectives and functional statements. However, because 
the objectives and functional statements are entirely qualitative, demonstrating compliance with them in 
isolation is not possible. Therefore, Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) identifies the principle that Division B establishes the 
quantitative performance targets that alternative solutions must meet. In many cases, these targets are not 
defined very precisely by the acceptable solutions—certainly far less precisely than would be the case with 
a true performance code, which would have quantitative performance targets and prescribed methods of 
performance measurement for all aspects of building performance. Nevertheless, Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) makes it 
clear that an effort must be made to demonstrate that an alternative solution will perform as well as a design 
that would satisfy the applicable acceptable solutions in Division B—not “well enough” but “as well as.” 
In this sense, it is Division B that defines the boundaries between acceptable risks and the “unacceptable” risks 
referred to in the statements of the Code's objectives, i.e., the risk remaining once the applicable acceptable 
solutions in Division B have been implemented represents the residual level of risk deemed to be acceptable by 
the broad base of Canadians who have taken part in the consensus process used to develop the Code. 
Level of Performance 
Where Division B offers a choice between several possible designs, it is likely that these designs may 
not all provide exactly the same level of performance. Among a number of possible designs satisfying 
acceptable solutions in Division B, the design providing the lowest level of performance should generally 
be considered to establish the minimum acceptable level of performance to be used in evaluating alternative 
solutions for compliance with the Code. 
Sometimes a single design will be used as an alternative solution to several sets of acceptable solutions 
in Division B. In this case, the level of performance required of the alternative solution should be at least 
equivalent to the overall level of performance established by all the applicable sets of acceptable solutions 
taken as a whole. 
Each provision in Division B has been analyzed to determine what it is intended to achieve. The resultant 
intent statements clarify what undesirable results each provision seeks to preclude. These statements 
are not a legal component of the Code, but are advisory in nature, and can help Code users establish 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
The figures are schematic only; they depict various parts of the plumbing system but do not include details. For an 
explanation of the symbols and abbreviations used in the figures, refer to the list provided at the end of the Code. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-11 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Division A 
performance targets for alternative solutions. They are published as a separate electronic document entitled 
“Supplement to the NPC 2020: Intent Statements,” which is available on the NRC's website. 
Areas of Performance 
A subset of the acceptable solutions in Division B may establish criteria for particular types of designs (e.g., 
certain types of materials, components, assemblies, or systems). Often such subsets of acceptable solutions 
are all attributed to the same objective: OH2, Sanitation, for example. In some cases, the designs that are 
normally used to satisfy this subset of acceptable solutions might also provide some benefits that could be 
related to some other objective: OP5, Protection of the Building or Facility from Water and Sewage Damage, 
for example. However, if none of the applicable acceptable solutions are linked to Objective OP5, it is not 
necessary that alternative solutions proposed to replace these acceptable solutions provide a similar benefit 
related to Protection of the Building or Facility from Water and Sewage Damage. In other words, the 
acceptable solutions in Division B establish acceptable levels of performance for compliance with the Code 
only in those areas defined by the objectives and functional statements attributed to the acceptable solutions. 
Applicable Acceptable Solutions 
In demonstrating that an alternative solution will perform as well as a design that would satisfy the 
applicable acceptable solutions in Division B, its evaluation should not be limited to comparison with the 
acceptable solutions to which an alternative is proposed. It is possible that acceptable solutions elsewhere 
in the Code also apply. The proposed alternative solution may be shown to perform as well as the most 
apparent acceptable solution, which it is replacing, but may not perform as well as other relevant acceptable 
solutions. For example, an innovative piping material may perform adequately in a drainage system, but 
may not meet combustibility requirements elsewhere in the Code. All applicable acceptable solutions 
should be taken into consideration in demonstrating the compliance of an alternative solution. 
A-1.4.1.2.(1) Defined Terms. 
Auxiliary Water Supply 
The auxiliary water supply may include water from a secondary potable water supply or from any natural 
source, such as a well, lake, spring, stream or harbour. It may also include waste water (but not sanitary 
drainage) from industrial processes, such as cooling towers, or from storm retention ponds. These sources 
may be polluted or contaminated and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the primary 
water purveyor does not have sanitary control. It is generally accepted that there are two categories of 
auxiliary water supply: 
(a) any public potable water supply over which the primary water purveyor does not have sanitary 
control, or 
(b) any private water supply, other than the primary potable water supply, that is on or available to the 
premises. 
Class 3 Fire Sprinkler/Standpipe Systems 
In Class 3 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems, water is supplied to the storage facilities from the public water 
supply and is maintained in potable condition. Class 3 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems resemble Class 1 
fire sprinkler/standpipe systems in all other respects. 
Clear-Water Waste 
Examples of clear-water waste are the waste waters discharged from a drinking fountain, cooling jacket, air 
conditioner or relief valve outlet. 
Emergency Floor Drains 
There are two types of floor drains. One is an emergency floor drain installed to avoid flooding in a 
building from any pipe or fixture failure. The other encompasses floor drains installed to receive discharge 
from specific pieces of equipment; this type is defined as a fixture. 
1-12 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Illustrations for Defined Terms 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-A 
Backflow preventer 
Normal flow conditions 
Backflow conditions 
leakage port 
(a) Reduced pressure principle backflow 
      preventer assembly 
inlet 
water supply pipe 
valve 
check valve 
leakage port 
valve 
check valve 
EG01117A 
differential relief valve 
Assembly of differential valves and 
check valves used as a backflow preventer 
(b) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-13 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Division A 
sink or lavatory 
flood level rim 
bathtub 
flush valve water closet 
flood level rim 
flood level rim 
EG01118A 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-B 
Back-siphonage 
Notes to Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-B: 
(1) Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-B shows a situation that is fairly common in old buildings. If the bathtub is filled to a level above the faucet outlet, 
or if the flush valve of the water closet is faulty, and if the faucet at the sink or lavatory on the lower floor is opened, water can 
be drawn (siphoned) from the bathtub or the water closet into the water system when the pressure in the water system is low or 
the water supply has been shut off. 
(2) Back-siphonage can be prevented in the above situations by providing an air gap or a back-siphonage preventer (see Subsection 2.6.2. of 
Division B). 
water flowing 
under pressure 
(a)  Normal operation
       with air valve open 
pressure 
(below atmospheric) 
air 
(atmospheric pressure) 
(b)  No backflow - valve closed
       by atmospheric pressure 
EG01119B 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-C 
Back-siphonage preventer 
1-14 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
LAV 
Division A 
A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
branch vent – joins junction of circuit 
vent and individual and continuous 
vent to the vent stack 
individual and 
vent stack 
continuous vent 
This end of the branch vent 
WCs 
directly to outside air. 
EG01120B 
could be connected to a stack 
circuit vent 
vent or vent header or lead 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-D 
Branch vent 
Note to Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-D: 
(1) See also the definitions of header and drainage system in Article 1.4.1.2. 
continuous vent 
wet vent 
EG01121B 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-E 
Continuous vent 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-15 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Division A 
fixture 
drain 
(wet vent) 
fixture drain 
(wet vent) 
fixture 
drain 
fixture drain 
fixture drain 
sanitary building drain 
street 
level 
roof drain 
leader 
stack 
WCs 
WCs 
WC 
stack (wet vent) 
stack 
stack 
branch 
branch 
branch 
(wet vent) 
stack (wet vent) 
branch 
branch 
storm building 
drain 
sanitary 
building drain 
sewage sump 
discharge 
EG01122B 
cleanout 
WC 
trap arm 
fixture 
drain 
trap arm 
fixture drain 
stack (wet vent) 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-F 
Drainage system 
1-16 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
street 
level 
roof drain 
vent header 
circuit vent 
leader 
stack vent 
dual and 
continuous 
vent 
WCs 
WCs 
WC 
vent stack 
vent stack 
vent stack 
individual 
vent 
individual 
vent 
individual and 
continuous vent 
individual and 
continuous vent 
continuous 
vent 
continuous 
vent 
storm building 
drain 
sanitary 
building drain 
sewage 
sump vent 
branch vent 
EG01122C 
cleanout 
branch 
vent 
relief vent 
additional 
circuit vent 
stack vent 
WC 
individual 
vent 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-G 
Venting system 
EG01124C 
vent 
trap arm 
dip 
fixture outlet pipe 
trap weir 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-H 
Fixture outlet pipe and trap arm 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-17 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Division A 
vent header 
upper end of vent header 
terminates in outside air 
vent stacks 
or stack vents 
upper end of vent header 
vent header 
terminates in outside air 
vent stacks 
or stack vents 
stack vent 
EG01125A 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-I 
Vent header 
Note to Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-I: 
(1) Although a vent header is similar to a branch vent, it serves the special purpose of connecting the tops of stack vents or vent stacks. To 
make certain that it is adequate for that purpose, it is made larger than a branch vent. The developed length used to determine its size is 
the total length from the most distant sanitary drainage pipe to outside air, rather than the shorter length used to size a branch vent. 
1-18 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
EG01126A 
horizontal 
vertical 
nominally vertical 
nominally vertical 
nominally horizontal 
nominally horizontal 
45° 
45° 
1/8 bend (45° change in 
direction) 
nominally horizontal 
nominally vertical 
sloped to drain 
Y fitting 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-J 
Nominally horizontal and nominally vertical 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-19 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-1.4.1.2.(1) 
Division A 
nominally horizontal 
offset 
< 45° 
vertical pipe 
< 45° 
nominally vertical 
offset 
(a)  Elevation view of vertical pipe 
horizontal offset 
(b)  Plan view of horizontal pipe 
< 45° 
< 45° 
nominally vertical 
offset 
nominally horizontal 
offset 
horizontal pipe 
(c)  Elevation view of horizontal pipe 
EG01127A 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-K 
Offset 
1-20 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
A-1.5.1.1.(1) 
limit of plumbing system 
property line 
water service pipe 
water system 
venting system 
BG 
KS 
CO 
1 m 
building sewer 
building drain 
drainage system 
public water main (or private water source) 
public sewer (or private disposal system) 
EG01128B 
Figure A-1.4.1.2.(1)-L 
Plumbing system 
A-1.5.1.1.(1) Application of Referenced Documents. Documents referenced in the NPC may 
contain provisions covering a wide range of issues, including issues that are unrelated to the objectives and 
functional statements stated in Parts 2 and 3 of Division A, respectively. Sentence 1.5.1.1.(1) is intended to make 
it clear that, whereas referencing these documents in the NPC generally has the effect of making the provisions 
of those documents part of the Code, provisions that are unrelated to plumbing systems or to the objectives and 
functional statements attributed to the provisions in Division B where the document is referenced are excluded. 
Furthermore, many documents referenced in the NPC contain references to other documents, which may 
also, in turn, refer to other documents. These secondary and tertiary referenced documents may contain 
provisions that are unrelated to plumbing systems or to the objectives and functional statements of the NPC: 
such provisions—no matter how far down the chain of references they occur—are not included in the intent 
of Sentence 1.5.1.1.(1). 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 1-21 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1-22 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 2 
Objectives 
2.1. 
Application 
2.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 2-1 
2.2. 
Objectives 
2.2.1. 
Objectives ......................................... 2-1 
Notes to Part 2 .................. 2-5 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 2 
Objectives 
Section 2.1. Application 
2.1.1. 
Application 
2.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1.) 
2.1.1.2. 
Application of Objectives 
1) The objectives described in this Part apply 
a) to all plumbing systems covered in this Code (see Article 1.1.1.1.), and 
b) only to the extent that they relate to compliance with this Code as required 
in Article 1.2.1.1. 
Section 2.2. Objectives 
2.2.1. 
Objectives 
2.2.1.1. 
Objectives 
1) The objectives of this Code are as follows (see Note A-2.2.1.1.(1)): 
OS 
Safety 
An  objective of this Code is to limit  the probability  that, as a result  of  the  
design or installation of the plumbing system, a person in or adjacent to 
the building or facility will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of injury. 
OS1 Fire Safety 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result  of  the design or installation of  the  plumbing system, a  
person in or adjacent to the building or facility will be exposed to 
an unacceptable risk of injury due to fire. The risks of injury due 
to fire addressed in this Code are those caused by— 
OS1.1 – fire or explosion occurring 
OS1.4 – fire safety systems failing to function as expected 
OS2 Structural Safety 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, a person 
in or adjacent to the building will be exposed to an unacceptable 
risk of injury due to structural failure. The risks of injury due to 
structural  failure addressed in this  Code are  those caused by—  
OS2.1 – loads bearing on the building elements that exceed 
their load-bearing capacity 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 2-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.1.1. 
Division A 
OH 
OP 
OE 
OS3 Safety in Use 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result  of  the design or installation of  the  plumbing system, a  
person in or adjacent to the building or facility will be exposed to 
an unacceptable risk of injury due to hazards. The risks of injury 
due to hazards  addressed in this Code are  those caused by—  
OS3.1 – tripping, slipping, falling, contact, drowning or 
collision 
OS3.2 – contact with hot surfaces or substances 
OS3.4 – exposure to hazardous substances 
Health 
An  objective of this Code is to limit  the probability  that, as a result  of  the  
design or installation of the plumbing system, a person will be exposed 
to an unacceptable risk of illness. 
OH1 Indoor Conditions 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, a person 
in the building or facility will be exposed to an unacceptable risk 
of illness due to indoor conditions. The risks of illness due to 
indoor conditions addressed in this Code are those caused by— 
OH1.1 – inadequate indoor air quality 
OH2 Sanitation 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, a person 
in the building or facility will be exposed to an unacceptable risk 
of illness due to unsanitary conditions. The risks of illness due to 
unsanitary conditions addressed in this Code are those caused 
by— 
OH2.1 – exposure to human or domestic waste 
OH2.2 – consumption of contaminated water 
OH2.3 – inadequate facilities for personal hygiene 
OH2.4 – contact with contaminated surfaces 
OH5 Hazardous Substances Containment 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, the  
public will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of illness due to 
the release of hazardous substances from the building or facility. 
Protection of the Building or Facility from Water and 
Sewage Damage 
OP5 Protection of the Building or Facility from Water and Sewage 
Damage 
An objective of this Code is to limit the probability that, as a 
result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, the  
building or facility will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of 
damage due to the leakage of service water or sewage. 
Environment 
An  objective of this Code is to limit  the probability  that, as a result  of  the  
design or installation of the plumbing system, the environment will be 
affected in an unacceptable manner. 
2-2 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
2.2.1.1. 
OE1 Resources 
An  objective of this Code is  to limit  the probability  that,  as  
a result of the design or installation of the plumbing system, 
resources will be used in a manner that will have an unacceptable 
effect on the environment. The risks of unacceptable effect on the 
environment due to use of resources addressed in this Code are 
those caused by— 
OE1.2 – excessive use of water 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 2-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2-4 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Notes to Part 2 
Objectives 
A-2.2.1.1.(1) Objectives. 
Listing of objectives 
Any gaps in the numbering sequence of the objectives are due to the fact that there is a master list of 
objectives covering the four principal National Code Documents—the National Building Code, the 
National Energy Code for Buildings, the National Fire Code and the National Plumbing Code—but not all 
objectives are pertinent to all Codes. 
The building or facility 
Where the term “the building or facility” is used in the wording of the objectives, it refers to the building or 
facility for which compliance with the National Plumbing Code is being assessed. 
Fire Safety 
In the definition of Objective OS1, Fire Safety, the term “person” refers to any individual in or adjacent 
to the building or facility, including the occupants, the public, and emergency responders including 
firefighters when performing their duties. 
Certain technical requirements in the National Model Codes are intended to address the safety of 
emergency responders, including firefighters, when performing their duties. 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 2-5 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2-6 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 3 
Functional Statements 
3.1. 
Application 
3.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 3-1 
3.2. 
Functional Statements 
3.2.1. 
Functional Statements ..................... 3-1 
Notes to Part 3 .................. 3-3 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Part 3 
Functional Statements 
Section 3.1. Application 
3.1.1. 
Application 
3.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1.) 
3.1.1.2. 
Application of Functional Statements 
1) The functional statements described in this Part apply 
a) to all plumbing systems covered in this Code (see Article 1.1.1.1.), and 
b) only to the extent that they relate to compliance with this Code as required 
in Article 1.2.1.1. 
Section 3.2. Functional Statements 
3.2.1. 
Functional Statements 
3.2.1.1. 
Functional Statements 
1) The objectives of this Code are achieved by measures, such as those described 
in the acceptable solutions in Division B, that are intended to allow the plumbing system 
to perform the following functions (see Note A-3.2.1.1.(1)): 
F01 
To minimize the risk of accidental ignition. 
F02 
To limit the severity and effects of fire or explosions. 
F20 
To support and withstand expected loads and forces. 
F21 
To limit or accommodate dimensional change. 
F30 
To minimize the risk of injury to persons as a result of tripping, 
slipping, falling, contact, drowning or collision. 
F31 
To minimize the risk of injury to persons as a result of contact 
with hot surfaces or substances. 
F40 
To limit the level of contaminants. 
F41 
To minimize the risk of generation of contaminants. 
F43 
To minimize the risk of release of hazardous substances. 
F45 
To minimize the risk of the spread of disease through communal 
shower facilities. 
F46 
To minimize the risk of contamination of potable water. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 3-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

3.2.1.1. 
Division A 
F62 
To facilitate the dissipation of water and moisture from the 
building. 
F70 
To provide potable water. 
F71 
To provide facilities for personal hygiene. 
F72 
To provide facilities for the sanitary disposal of human and 
domestic wastes. 
F80 
To resist deterioration resulting from expected service conditions. 
F81 
To minimize the risk of malfunction, interference, damage, 
tampering, lack of use or misuse. 
F82 
To minimize the risk of inadequate performance due to improper 
maintenance or lack of maintenance. 
F130 To limit the unnecessary demand and/or consumption of water 
for fixtures. 
F131 To limit the unnecessary demand and/or consumption of water 
for fittings. 
3-2 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division A 
Notes to Part 3 
Functional Statements 
A-3.2.1.1.(1) Listing of Functional Statements. The numbered functional statements are grouped 
according to functions that deal with closely related subjects. For example, the first group deals with fire 
risks, the second group deals with the structural properties of piping materials, etc. There may be gaps in 
the numbering sequence for the following reasons: 
•  Each group  has  unused numbers  which allows for  the possible future creation of additional  functional  
statements within any one group. 
• There is a master list of functional statements covering the four principal National Code Documents—the 
National Building Code, the National Energy Code for Buildings, the National Fire Code and the National 
Plumbing Code—but not all functional statements are pertinent to all Codes. 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division A 3-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

3-4 Division A 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Acceptable Solutions 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Part 1 
General 
1.1. 
General 
1.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 1-1 
1.1.2. 
Objectives and Functional 
Statements ........................................ 1-1 
1.2. 
Terms and Abbreviations 
1.2.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases .. 1-1 
1.2.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations .. 1-2 
1.3. 
Referenced Documents 
and Organizations 
1.3.1. 
Referenced Documents ................... 1-2 
1.3.2. 
Organizations ................................... 1-8 
Notes to Part 1 ................ 1-11 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Part 1 
General 
Section 1.1. General 
1.1.1. 
Application 
1.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1. of Division A.) 
1.1.2. 
Objectives and Functional Statements 
1.1.2.1. 
Attribution to Acceptable Solutions 
1) For the purposes of compliance with this Code as required in 
Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) of Division A, the objectives and functional statements attributed 
to the acceptable solutions in Division B shall be the objectives and functional 
statements identified in Section 2.8. (See Note A-1.1.2.1.(1).) 
Section 1.2. Terms and Abbreviations 
1.2.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases 
1.2.1.1. 
Non-defined Terms 
1) Words and phrases used in Division B that are not included in the list of 
definitions in Article 1.4.1.2. of Division A shall have the meanings that are commonly 
assigned to them in the context in which they are used, taking into account the 
specialized use of terms by the various trades and professions to which the terminology 
applies. 
2) Where objectives and functional statements are referred to in Division B, they 
shall be the objectives and functional statements described in Parts 2 and 3 of Division 
A. 
3) Where acceptable solutions are referred to in Division B, they shall be the 
provisions stated in Part 2. 
1.2.1.2. 
Defined Terms 
1) The words and terms in italics in Division B shall have the meanings assigned 
to them in Article 1.4.1.2. of Division A. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.2.2.1. 
Division B 
1.2.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1.2.2.1. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1) The symbols  and other  abbreviations in Division B shall  have the  meanings  
assigned to them in Article 1.4.2.1. of Division A and Article 1.3.2.1. 
Section 1.3. Referenced Documents and 
Organizations 
1.3.1. 
Referenced Documents 
1.3.1.1. 
Effective Date 
1) Unless otherwise specified herein, the documents referenced in this Code 
shall include all amendments, revisions, reaffirmations, reapprovals, addenda and 
supplements effective to 15 July 2019. 
1.3.1.2. 
Applicable Editions 
1) Where documents are referenced in this Code, they shall be the editions 
designated in Table 1.3.1.2. 
Table 1.3.1.2. 
Documents Referenced in the National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020(1) 
Forming Part of Sentence 1.3.1.2.(1) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
ANSI/CSA 
ANSI Z21.22-2015/CSA 4.4-2015 
Relief Valves For Hot Water Supply Systems 
2.2.10.11.(1) 
ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 
63-2013 
Rainwater Catchment Systems 
A-2.7.2.4.(1) 
ASHRAE 
ASHRAE 
2011 
2013 
ASHRAE Handbook – HVAC Applications 
ASHRAE Handbook – Fundamentals 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.3.4-2018/CSA B45.9-18 
Macerating Toilet Systems and Waste-Pumping Systems 
for Plumbing Fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.4.2-2015/CSA B45.16-15 
Personal hygiene devices for water closets 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.4.14-2017/CSA B125.14-17 
Manually Operated Valves for Use in Plumbing Systems 
2.2.10.6.(7) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.18.1-2018/CSA B125.1-18 
Plumbing Supply Fittings 
2.2.10.6.(1) 
2.2.10.7.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.18.2-2015/CSA B125.2-15 
Plumbing Waste Fittings 
2.2.3.3.(1) 
2.2.10.6.(6) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.18.6-2017/CSA B125.6-17 
Flexible water connectors 
2.2.10.18.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.19.1-2018/CSA B45.2-18 
Enamelled Cast Iron and Enamelled Steel Plumbing 
Fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.19.2-2018/CSA B45.1-18 
Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.19.3-2017/CSA B45.4-17 
Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME/CSA 
ASME A112.19.7-2012/CSA B45.10-12 
Hydromassage Bathtub Systems 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
ASME 
B16.3-2016 
Malleable Iron Threaded Fittings: Classes 150 and 300 
2.2.6.6.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.4-2016 
Gray Iron Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 250 
2.2.6.5.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.5-2017 
Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: NPS ½ through NPS 
24 Metric/Inch Standard 
2.2.6.12.(1) 
1-2 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
1.3.1.2. 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
ASME 
B16.9-2018 
Factory-Made Wrought Buttwelding Fittings 
2.2.6.11.(1) 
2.2.6.14.(1) 
ASME 
B16.12-2009 
Cast Iron Threaded Drainage Fittings 
2.2.6.3.(1) 
ASME 
B16.15-2018 
Cast Copper Alloy Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 
2.2.7.3.(1) 
250 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.18-2018 
Cast Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure Fittings 
2.2.7.6.(1) 
2.2.7.6.(2) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.22-2018 
Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure 2.2.7.6.(1) 
Fittings 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.23-2016 
Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Drainage Fittings: DWV 
2.2.7.5.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B16.24-2016 
Cast Copper Alloy Pipe Flanges, Flanged Fittings, and 
Valves: Classes 150, 300, 600, 900, 1500, and 2500 
2.2.7.2.(1) 
ASME 
B16.26-2018 
Cast Copper Alloy Fittings for Flared Copper Tubes 
2.2.7.7.(1) 
2.2.7.7.(2) 
ASME 
B16.29-2017 
Wrought Copper and Wrought Copper Alloy Solder-Joint 2.2.7.5.(1) 
Drainage Fittings – DWV 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASME 
B31.9-2017 
Building Services Piping 
2.3.2.8.(1) 
ASME 
B36.19M-2018 
Stainless Steel Pipe 
2.2.6.10.(1) 
ASPE 
ASPE 
2010 
2012 
Plumbing Engineering Design Handbook, Volume 2 
Plumbing Engineering Design Handbook, Volume 4, 
Chapter 8, Grease Interceptors 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
A-2.4.4.3.(1) 
ASSE/ASME/CSA 
ASSE 1002-2015/ASME 
Anti-siphon fill valves for water closet tanks 
2.2.10.10.(2) 
A112.1002-2015/CSA B125.12-15 
ASSE 
ANSI/ASSE 1010-2004 
Water Hammer Arresters  
2.2.10.15.(1) 
ASSE/ASME/CSA 
ASSE 1016-2017/ASME 
Performance Requirements for Automatic Compensating 2.2.10.7.(1) 
A112.1016-2017/CSA B125.16-17 
Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower 
Combinations 
A-2.2.10.6.(3) 
ASSE/ASME/CSA 
ASSE 1037-2015/ASME 
Performance requirements for pressurized flushing 
2.2.10.8.(1) 
A112.1037-2015/CSA B125.37-15 
devices for plumbing fixtures 
ASSE 
1051-2009 
Individual and Branch Type Air Admittance Valves for 
Sanitary Drainage Systems 
2.2.10.16.(1) 
ASSE/ASME/CSA 
ASSE 1070-2015/ASME 
Performance requirements for water temperature limiting 2.2.10.7.(2) 
A112.1070-2015/CSA B125.70-15 
devices 
ASTM 
A53/A53M-18 
Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and 
2.2.6.7.(4) 
Hot-Dipped, Zinc-Coated, Welded and Seamless 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
A182/A182M-19 
Standard Specification for Forged or Rolled Alloy and 
2.2.6.12.(1) 
Stainless Steel Pipe Flanges, Forged Fittings, and Valves 
and Parts for High-Temperature Service 
2.2.6.13.(1) 
ASTM 
A269/A269M-15a 
Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded 
2.2.6.14.(1) 
Austenitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
A312/A312M-18a 
Standard Specification for Seamless, Welded, and 
2.2.6.10.(1) 
Heavily Cold Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
A351/A351M-18 
Standard Specification for Castings, Austenitic, for 
Pressure-Containing Parts 
2.2.6.13.(1) 
ASTM 
A403/A403M-19 
Standard Specification for Wrought Austenitic Stainless 
Steel Piping Fittings 
2.2.6.11.(1) 
ASTM 
A518/A518M-99 
Standard Specification for Corrosion-Resistant 
High-Silicon Iron Castings 
2.2.8.1.(1) 
ASTM 
B32-08 
Standard Specification for Solder Metal 
2.2.9.2.(1) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.3.1.2. 
Division B 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
ASTM 
B42-15a 
Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, 
2.2.7.1.(1) 
Standard Sizes 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
B43-15 
Standard Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, 
2.2.7.1.(2) 
Standard Sizes 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
B88-16 
Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube 2.2.7.4.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
B306-13 
Standard Specification for Copper Drainage Tube (DWV) 2.2.7.4.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
B813-16 
Standard Specification for Liquid and Paste Fluxes for 
Soldering of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube 
2.2.9.2.(3) 
ASTM 
B828-16 
Standard Specification for Making Capillary Joints by 
Soldering of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube and Fittings 
2.3.2.4.(1) 
ASTM 
C1053-00 
Standard Specification for Borosilicate Glass Pipe and 
Fittings for Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Applications 
2.2.8.1.(1) 
ASTM 
D2466-17 
Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
2.2.5.7.(2) 
Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
D2467-15 
Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
2.2.5.7.(2) 
Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
D3138-04 
Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Transition A-2.2.5.9. to 
Joints Between Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) 
and Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Piping 
Components 
2.2.5.11. 
ASTM 
D3261-16 
Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene 
(PE) Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe 
and Tubing 
2.2.5.4.(3) 
ASTM 
F628-12e2 
Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene 2.2.5.9.(1) 
(ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe 
2.2.5.11.(1) 
With a Cellular Core 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
F714-13 
Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe 2.2.5.5.(1) 
(DR-PR) Based on Outside Diameter 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
ASTM 
F3128-19 
Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
2.2.5.16.(1) 
Schedule 40 Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe with a Cellular 
Core 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
AWS 
ANSI/AWS A5.8M/A5.8:2011 
Specification for Filler Metals for Brazing and Braze 
Welding 
2.2.9.2.(4) 
AWWA 
ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4-13 
Cement-Mortar Lining for Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings 
2.2.6.4.(2) 
AWWA 
ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10-12 
Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings 
2.2.6.4.(3) 
AWWA 
ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11-12 
Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron Pressure Pipe 
and Fittings 
2.2.6.4.(4) 
AWWA 
ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51-09 
Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast 
2.2.6.4.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
AWWA 
ANSI/AWWA C228-08 
Stainless-Steel Pipe Flanges for Water Service – Sizes 2 
in. through 72 in. (50 mm through 1,800 mm) 
2.2.6.12.(1) 
AWWA 
M14-2004 
Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and 
Cross-Connection Control 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
1-4 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
1.3.1.2. 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
CCBFC 
NRCC-CONST-56435E 
National Building Code of Canada 2020 
1.1.1.1.(3)(3) 
1.4.1.2.(1)(3) 
2.1.3.1.(1) 
2.1.4.1.(1) 
2.2.5.11.(2) 
2.2.5.11.(3) 
2.2.6.7.(3) 
2.4.3.1.(1) 
2.4.10.4.(1) 
A-2.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.4.10. 
A-2.4.10.4.(1) 
A-3.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
CCBFC 
NRCC-CONST-56437E 
National Fire Code of Canada 2020 
2.5.5.2. 
A-2.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
A-3.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
CCBFC 
NRCC-CONST-56438E 
National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings 2020 
A-2.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
A-3.2.1.1.(1)(3) 
CSA 
A60.1-M1976 
Vitrified Clay Pipe 
2.2.5.3.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
A60.3-M1976 
Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints 
2.2.5.3.(2) 
CSA 
A257.1:19 
Non-reinforced circular concrete culvert, storm drain, 
2.2.5.2.(1) 
sewer pipe, and fittings 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
A257.2:19 
Reinforced circular concrete culvert, storm drain, sewer 
2.2.5.2.(1) 
pipe, and fittings 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
A257.3:19 
Joints for circular concrete sewer and culvert pipe, 
manhole sections, and fittings using rubber gaskets 
2.2.5.2.(2) 
CSA 
A257.4:19 
Precast reinforced circular concrete manhole sections, 
catch basins, and fittings 
2.2.5.2.(5) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B45 Series-02 
Plumbing Fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
CSA/IAPMO 
CSA B45.5-17/IAPMO Z124-2017 
Plastic plumbing fixtures 
2.2.2.2.(1) 
CSA 
B64.0-11 
Definitions, general requirements, and test methods for 
vacuum breakers and backflow preventers 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.1.1-11 
Atmospheric vacuum breakers (AVB) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.1.2-11 
Pressure vacuum breakers (PVB) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.1.3-11 
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breakers (SRPVB) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.2-11 
Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.2.1-11 
Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB) with manual 
draining feature 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.2.2-11 
Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB) with 
automatic draining feature 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.3-11 
Dual check valve backflow preventers with atmospheric 
port (DCAP) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.4-11 
Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow preventers 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.4.1-11 
Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers for fire 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
protection systems (RPF) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
2.6.2.4.(4) 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.5-11 
Double check valve (DCVA) backflow preventers 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-5 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.3.1.2. 
Division B 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
CSA 
B64.5.1-11 
Double check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 2.2.10.10.(1) 
systems (DCVAF) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.6-11 
Dual check valve (DuC) backflow preventers 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.6.1-11 
Dual check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
systems (DuCF) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.7-11 
Laboratory faucet vacuum breakers (LFVB) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.8-11 
Dual check valve backflow preventers with intermediate 
vent (DuCV) 
2.2.10.10.(1) 
CSA 
B64.9-11 
Single check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 2.2.10.10.(1) 
systems (SCVAF) 
2.6.2.4.(2) 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
CSA 
B64.10-17 
Selection and installation of backflow preventers 
2.6.2.1.(3) 
CSA 
B70-12 
Cast iron soil pipe, fittings, and means of joining 
2.2.6.1.(1) 
2.4.6.4.(5) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B70.1-03 
Frames and Covers for Maintenance Holes and 
Catchbasins 
2.2.6.2.(1) 
CSA 
B125.3-18 
Plumbing fittings 
2.2.10.6.(1) 
2.2.10.7.(2) 
2.2.10.7.(3) 
A-2.6.1.11.(1) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B126.0-13 
General requirements and methods of testing for water 
cisterns 
2.7.2.4.(6) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B126.1-13 
Installation of water cisterns 
2.7.2.4.(6) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B127.3-18 
Fibrocement drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings 2.2.5.1.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B128.1-06 
Design and Installation of Non-Potable Water Systems 
2.7.1.2.(1) 
A-2.7.1.1.(1) 
CSA 
B137.1-17 
Polyethylene (PE) pipe, tubing, and fittings for cold-water 2.2.5.4.(1) 
pressure services 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B137.2-17 
Polyvinylchloride (PVC) injection-moulded gasketed 
2.2.5.7.(3) 
fittings for pressure applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B137.3-17 
Rigid polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe and fittings for 
2.2.5.7.(1) 
pressure applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B137.5-17 
Crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) tubing systems for 
2.2.5.6.(1) 
pressure applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.6.(1) 
CSA 
B137.6-17 
Chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) pipe, tubing, and 
2.2.5.8.(1) 
fittings for hot- and cold-water distribution systems 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.9. to 
2.2.5.11. 
CSA 
B137.9-17 
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) 
2.2.5.12.(1) 
composite pressure-pipe systems 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.12.(1) 
CSA 
B137.10-17 
Crosslinked polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked 
2.2.5.12.(4) 
polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) composite pressure-pipe 
2.2.5.13.(1) 
systems 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.13.(1) 
1-6 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
1.3.1.2. 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
CSA 
B137.11-17 
Polypropylene (PP-R) pipe and fittings for pressure 
2.2.5.14.(1) 
applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.14.(1) 
CSA 
B137.18-17 
Polyethylene of raised temperature resistance (PE-RT) 
2.2.5.15.(1) 
tubing systems for pressure applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.15.(1) 
CSA 
B158.1-1976 
Cast Brass Solder Joint Drainage, Waste and Vent 
Fittings 
2.2.10.1.(1) 
CSA 
B181.1-18 
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) drain, waste, and 
2.2.5.9.(1) 
vent pipe and pipe fittings 
2.2.5.10.(1) 
2.2.5.11.(1) 
2.4.6.4.(5) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.9. to 
2.2.5.11. 
CSA 
B181.2-18 
Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride 2.2.5.9.(1) 
(CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings 
2.2.5.10.(1) 
2.2.5.11.(1) 
2.2.5.16.(1) 
2.2.5.16.(2) 
2.4.6.4.(5) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.5.9. to 
2.2.5.11. 
CSA 
B181.3-18 
Polyolefin and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) laboratory 
2.2.8.1.(1) 
drainage systems 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B182.1-18 
Plastic drain and sewer pipe and pipe fittings 
2.2.5.9.(1) 
2.4.6.4.(5) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B182.2-18 
PSM type polyvinylchloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings 2.2.5.9.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B182.4-18 
Profile polyvinylchloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings 
2.2.5.9.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B182.6-18 
Profile polyethylene (PE) sewer pipe and fittings for 
2.2.5.9.(1) 
leak-proof sewer applications 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
CSA 
B182.8-18 
Profile polyethylene (PE) storm sewer and drainage pipe 
and fittings 
2.2.5.9.(1) 
CSA 
B242-05 
Groove- and Shoulder-Type Mechanical Pipe Couplings 
2.2.10.4.(1) 
CSA 
B272-93 
Prefabricated Self-Sealing Roof Vent Flashings 
2.2.10.14.(2) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B356-10 
Water pressure reducing valves for domestic water 
supply systems 
2.2.10.12.(1) 
CSA 
B481.0-12 
Material, design, and construction requirements for 
grease interceptors 
2.2.3.2.(3) 
CSA 
B481.3-12 
Sizing, selection, location, and installation of grease 
interceptors 
2.2.3.2.(3) 
CSA 
B481.4-12 
Maintenance of grease interceptors 
A-2.2.3.2.(3) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-B483.1-07 
Drinking Water Treatment Systems 
2.2.10.17.(1) 
CSA 
B602-16 
Mechanical couplings for drain, waste, and vent pipe 
and sewer pipe 
2.2.10.4.(2) 
CSA/ICC 
CSA B805-18/ICC 805-2018 
Rainwater harvesting systems 
2.7.2.4.(4) 
A-2.7.2.4.(1) 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-F379 SERIES-09 (excluding 
Packaged solar domestic hot water systems 
2.2.10.13.(1) 
Supplement F379S1-11) 
(liquid-to-liquid heat transfer) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-7 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1.3.2.1. 
Division B 
Table 1.3.1.2. (Continued) 
Issuing Agency 
Document Number(2) 
Title of Document 
Code Reference 
CSA 
CSA 
CAN/CSA-F383-08 
CAN/CSA-G401-14 
Installation of packaged solar domestic hot water 
systems 
Corrugated steel pipe products 
2.6.1.8.(1) 
2.2.6.8.(1) 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
McGraw-Hill 
2009 
International Plumbing Codes Handbook 
A-2.6.3. 
NFPA 
13D-2016 
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One-
and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 
2.6.3.1.(3) 
NIST 
Building Materials and Structures Report 
BMS 79, 1941 
Water-Distributing Systems for Buildings 
A-2.6.3. 
NSF 
NSF Pro 151-8-1-95 
Health Effects from Rainwater Catchment System 
Components 
A-2.7.2.3.(2) 
TIAC 
2013 
Mechanical Insulation Best Practices Guide 
A-2.3.5.3. 
ULC 
CAN/ULC-S114:2018 
Standard Method of Test for Determination of 
Non-Combustibility in Building Materials 
1.4.1.2.(1)(3) 
Notes to Table 1.3.1.2.: 
(1) While every effort was made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this Table, the NRC is not responsible for the accuracy, timeliness or 
reliability of the content presented therein. For all purposes of interpreting and applying the referenced standards, Code users should refer to the 
most recent official versions of the referenced editions. 
(2) Some documents may have been reaffirmed or reapproved. Check with the applicable issuing agency for up-to-date information. 
(3) Code reference is in Division A. 
1.3.2. 
Organizations 
1.3.2.1. 
Abbreviations of Proper Names 
1) The abbreviations of proper names in this Code shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in this Article. 
ANSI ................. American National Standards Institute (www.ansi.org) 
ARCSA ............. American Rainwater Catchment Systems Association (www.arcsa.org) 
ASHRAE .......... American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers (www.ashrae.org) 
ASME ............... American Society of Mechanical Engineers (www.asme.org) 
ASPE ................. American Society of Plumbing Engineers (www.aspe.org) 
ASSE ................. American Society of Sanitary Engineering (www.asse-plumbing.org) 
ASTM ............... ASTM International (www.astm.org) 
AWS .................. American Welding Society (www.aws.org) 
AWWA ............. American Water Works Association (www.awwa.org) 
CAN ................. National Standard of Canada designation (www.scc.ca) 
CCBFC .............. Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes (see NRC) 
CSA ................... CSA Group (www.csagroup.ca) 
IAPMO ............. International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials 
(www.iapmo.org) 
ICC .................... International Code Council (www.iccsafe.org) 
NBC .................. National Building Code of Canada 2020 
NFC .................. National Fire Code of Canada 2020 
NFPA ................ National Fire Protection Association (www.nfpa.org) 
NIST ................. National Institute of Standards and Technology (www.nist.gov) 
NPC .................. National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
1-8 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
1.3.2.1. 
NRC .................. National Research Council of Canada (nrc.canada.ca) 
NSF ................... National Sanitation Foundation International (www.nsf.org) 
TIAC ................. Thermal Insulation Association of Canada (www.tiac.ca) 
ULC .................. ULC Standards (canada.ul.com/ulcstandards) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-9 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1-10 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Notes to Part 1 
General 
A-1.1.2.1.(1) Objectives and Functional Statements Attributed to Acceptable 
Solutions. The objectives and functional statements attributed to each Code provision are shown in 
Table 2.8.1.1. 
Many provisions in Division B serve as modifiers of or pointers to other provisions or serve other clarification 
or explanatory purposes. In most cases, no objectives and functional statements have been attributed to such 
provisions, which therefore do not appear in the above-mentioned table. 
For provisions that serve as modifiers of or pointers to other referenced provisions and that do not have any 
objectives and functional statements attributed to them, the objectives and functional statements that should be 
used are those attributed to the provisions they reference. 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 1-11 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1-12 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Part 2 
Plumbing Systems 
2.1. 
General 
2.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 2-1 
2.1.2. 
Service Connections ....................... 2-1 
2.1.3. 
Location of Fixtures ......................... 2-1 
2.1.4. 
Seismic Design ................................. 2-2 
2.2. 
Materials and Equipment 
2.2.1. 
General .............................................. 2-2 
2.2.2. 
Fixtures ............................................. 2-2 
2.2.3. 
Traps and Interceptors ..................... 2-3 
2.2.4. 
Pipe Fittings ...................................... 2-4 
2.2.5. 
Non-Metallic Pipe and Fittings ........ 2-4 
2.2.6. 
Ferrous Pipe and Fittings ................ 2-8 
2.2.7. 
Non-Ferrous Pipe and Fittings ...... 2-11 
2.2.8. 
Corrosion-Resistant Materials ...... 2-12 
2.2.9. 
Jointing Materials ........................... 2-12 
2.2.10. 
Miscellaneous Materials ................ 2-13 
2.3. 
Piping 
2.3.1. 
Application ...................................... 2-16 
2.3.2. 
Construction and Use of Joints .... 2-16 
2.3.3. 
Joints and Connections ................ 2-17 
2.3.4. 
Support of Piping ........................... 2-19 
2.3.5. 
Protection of Piping ....................... 2-21 
2.3.6. 
Testing of Drainage or Venting 
Systems ........................................... 2-21 
2.3.7. 
Testing of Potable Water 
Systems ........................................... 2-23 
2.4. 
Drainage Systems 
2.4.1. 
Application ...................................... 2-23 
2.4.2. 
Connections to Drainage 
Systems ........................................... 2-23 
2.4.3. 
Location of Fixtures ....................... 2-25 
2.4.4. 
Treatment of Sewage and Waste ... 2-25 
2.4.5. 
Traps ................................................ 2-26 
2.4.6. 
Arrangement of Drainage Piping .. 2-27 
2.4.7. 
Cleanouts ........................................ 2-28 
2.4.8. 
Minimum Slope and Length of 
Drainage Pipes ............................... 2-30 
2.4.9. 
Size of Drainage Pipes ................... 2-30 
2.4.10. 
Hydraulic Loads ............................. 2-33 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5. 
Venting Systems 
2.5.1. 
Vent Pipes for Traps ....................... 2-37 
2.5.2. 
Wet Venting ..................................... 2-38 
2.5.3. 
Circuit Venting ................................ 2-38 
2.5.4. 
Vent Pipes for Stacks ..................... 2-39 
2.5.5. 
Miscellaneous Vent Pipes ............. 2-40 
2.5.6. 
Arrangement of Vent Pipes ........... 2-41 
2.5.7. 
Minimum Size of Vent Pipes .......... 2-42 
2.5.8. 
Sizing of Vent Pipes ....................... 2-44 
2.5.9. 
Air Admittance Valves .................... 2-47 
2.6. 
Potable Water Systems 
2.6.1. 
Arrangement of Piping .................. 2-47 
2.6.2. 
Protection from Contamination .... 2-50 
2.6.3. 
Size and Capacity of Pipes ........... 2-53 
2.7. 
Non-Potable Water 
Systems 
2.7.1. 
Non-Potable Water Systems .......... 2-57 
2.7.2. 
Non-Potable Rainwater 
Harvesting Systems ....................... 2-57 
2.8. 
Objectives and 
Functional Statements 
2.8.1. 
Objectives and Functional 
Statements ...................................... 2-59 
Notes to Part 2 ................ 2-71 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Part 2 
Plumbing Systems 
Section 2.1. General 
2.1.1. 
Application 
2.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1. of Division A.) 
2.1.2. 
Service Connections 
2.1.2.1. 
Sanitary Drainage Systems 
1) Except where supplying systems that are covered in Section 2.7., sanitary 
drainage systems shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer, a public  combined sewer or 
a private sewage disposal system. 
2) A combined building drain shall not be installed. (See Note A-2.1.2.1.(2).) 
2.1.2.2. 
Storm Drainage Systems 
1) Except as provided in Section 2.7., storm drainage systems shall be connected to a 
public storm sewer, a public  combined sewer or a designated storm water disposal location. 
2.1.2.3. 
Water Distribution Systems 
1) Except as provided in Section 2.7., water distribution systems shall be connected 
to a public water main or a potable private water supply system. 
2.1.2.4. 
Separate Services 
1) Piping in any building connected to the public services shall be connected 
separately from piping of any other building, except that an ancillary building on the 
same property may be served by the same service. (See Note A-2.1.2.4.(1).) 
2.1.3. 
Location of Fixtures 
2.1.3.1. 
Lighting and Ventilation Requirements 
1) Plumbing fixtures shall not be installed in a room that is not lighted and 
ventilated in accordance with the appropriate requirements in Parts 3, 6 and 9 of 
Division B of the NBC. 
2.1.3.2. 
Accessibility 
1) Every fixture, appliance,  interceptor, cleanout, valve, device or piece of equipment 
shall be located so that it is readily accessible for use, cleaning and maintenance. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.1.4.1. 
Division B 
2.1.4. 
Seismic Design 
2.1.4.1. 
Seismic Restraints and Design 
1) Plumbing systems in buildings constructed in accordance with 
Part 3 of Division B of the NBC shall be designed and installed to accommodate 
the seismic forces addressed in Subsection 4.1.8. of Division B of the NBC. (See 
Note A-2.1.4.1.(1).) 
Section 2.2. Materials and Equipment 
2.2.1. 
General 
2.2.1.1. 
Exposure of Materials 
1) Where unusual conditions exist, such as excessively corrosive soil or water, only 
materials suited for use in such locations shall be used. 
2) Materials and equipment used in a drainage system where excessively corrosive 
wastes are present shall be suitable for the purpose. 
2.2.1.2. 
Restrictions on Re-Use 
1) Materials and equipment that have been used for a purpose other than the 
distribution of potable water shall not be subsequently used in a potable water system. 
2.2.1.3. 
Identification 
1) Every length of pipe and every fitting shall 
a) have cast, stamped or indelibly marked on it the maker's name or mark and 
the weight or class or quality of the product, or 
b) be marked in accordance with the relevant standard. 
2) Markings required in Sentence (1) shall be visible after installation. 
2.2.1.4. 
Pipe or Piping 
1) Where the term pipe or piping is used, it shall also apply to tube or tubing 
unless otherwise stated. 
2.2.1.5. 
Withstanding Pressure 
1) Piping, fittings and joints used in pressure sewer, forcemain or sump pump 
discharge applications shall be capable of withstanding at least one and one-half times 
the maximum potential pressure. 
2.2.1.6. 
Working Pressure of a Water Service Pipe 
1) The working pressure rating of a water service pipe shall not be less than the 
maximum water main pressure at their point of connection as established by the water 
supply authority. 
2.2.2. 
Fixtures 
2.2.2.1. 
Surface Requirements 
1) Every fixture shall have a smooth, hard, corrosion-resistant surface free of flaws 
and blemishes that may interfere with cleaning. 
2.2.2.2. 
Conformance to Standards 
1) Except as provided in Article 2.2.2.3., 
a) fixtures shall conform to CAN/CSA-B45 Series, “Plumbing Fixtures,” 
b) vitreous china fixtures shall conform to ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, 
“Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures,” 
2-2 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.3.1. 
c) enamelled cast-iron fixtures shall conform to ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, 
“Enamelled Cast Iron and Enamelled Steel Plumbing Fixtures,” 
d) porcelain-enamelled steel fixtures shall conform to 
ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, “Enamelled Cast Iron and Enamelled Steel 
Plumbing Fixtures,” 
e) stainless steel fixtures shall conform to ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, 
“Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures,” 
f) plastic fixtures shall conform to CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124, “Plastic plumbing 
fixtures,” 
g) hydromassage bathtubs shall conform to ASME A112.19.7/CSA B45.10, 
“Hydromassage Bathtub Systems,” 
h) macerating toilet systems shall conform to ASME A112.3.4/CSA B45.9, 
“Macerating Toilet Systems and Waste-Pumping Systems for Plumbing 
Fixtures,” and 
i) personal hygiene devices for water closets shall conform to ASME 
A112.4.2/CSA B45.16, “Personal hygiene devices for water closets.” 
2.2.2.3. 
Showers 
1) Shower receptors shall be constructed and arranged so that water cannot leak 
through the walls or floor. 
2) Not more than 6 shower heads shall be served by a single shower drain. 
3) Where 2 or more shower heads are served by a shower drain, the floor shall be 
sloped and the drain located so that water from one head cannot flow over the area 
that serves another head. (See Note A-2.2.2.3.(3).) 
4) Except for column showers, where a battery of shower heads is installed, the 
horizontal distance between 2 adjacent shower heads shall be not less than 750 mm. 
2.2.2.4. 
Concealed Overflows 
1) A dishwashing sink and a food preparation sink shall not have concealed 
overflows. (See Note A-2.2.2.4.(1).) 
2.2.2.5. 
Water Closets in Public Washrooms 
1) Where a water closet is installed in a washroom for public use, it shall  be  of  the  
elongated type and provided with a seat of the open front type. 
2.2.3. 
Traps and Interceptors 
2.2.3.1. 
Traps 
1) Except as provided for in Sentence (2), traps shall 
a) have a trap seal depth of not less than 38 mm, 
b) be so designed that failure of the seal walls will cause exterior leakage, and 
c) have a water seal that does not depend on the action of moving parts. 
(See Note A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3).) 
2) The trap seal depth on fixtures draining to an acid waste system shall be a 
minimum of 50 mm. 
3) Except for a floor-mounted service sink, every trap that serves a lavatory, a sink 
or a laundry tray shall 
a) be provided with a cleanout plug located at the lowest point of the trap and 
of the same material as the trap, except that a cast-iron trap shall be provided 
with a brass cleanout plug, or 
b) be designed so that part of the trap can be removed for cleaning purposes. 
(See Note A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3).) 
4) A bell  trap shall not be installed in a drainage system. (See Note A-2.2.3.1.(4).) 
5) A drum  trap shall not be used as a fixture trap unless required to serve as an 
interceptor and access for servicing is provided. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.3.2. 
Division B 
2.2.3.2. 
Interceptors 
1) Interceptors shall be designed so that they can be readily cleaned. 
2) Grease interceptors shall 
a) be designed so that they do not become air bound, and 
b) not have a water jacket. 
3) Grease interceptors shall be selected and installed in conformance with 
a) CSA B481.0, “Material, design, and construction requirements for grease 
interceptors,” and 
b) CSA B481.3, “Sizing, selection, location, and installation of grease 
interceptors.” 
(See Note A-2.2.3.2.(3).) 
2.2.3.3. 
Tubular Traps 
1) Tubular metal or plastic traps conforming to ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2, 
“Plumbing Waste Fittings,” shall be used only in accessible locations. 
2.2.4. 
Pipe Fittings 
2.2.4.1. 
T and Cross Fittings 
(See Note A-2.2.4.1.) 
1) A T fitting shall not be used in a drainage system, except to connect a vent pipe. 
2) A cross fitting shall not be used in a drainage system. 
2.2.4.2. 
Sanitary T Fittings 
(See Note A-2.2.4.2.) 
1) A single or double sanitary T fitting shall not be used in a nominally horizontal 
sanitary drainage pipe, except that a single sanitary T fitting may be used to connect a 
vent pipe. 
2) A double sanitary T fitting shall not be used to connect the trap arms of 
a) back outlet water closets installed back-to-back, or 
b) 2 urinals where no cleanout fitting is provided above the connection. 
2.2.4.3. 
90° Elbows 
1) Except as permitted in Sentence (2), 90° elbows of NPS 4 or less whose 
centre-line radius is less than the NPS of the pipe shall not be used to join 
2 sanitary drainage pipes. 
2) For sanitary drainage systems of NPS 4 or less, 90° elbows described in 
Sentence (1) shall only be permitted 
a) to change the direction of piping from horizontal to vertical, in the direction 
of flow, 
b) where a trap arm enters a wall, or 
c) to connect trap arms as permitted by Sentence 2.5.6.3.(2). 
2.2.5. 
Non-Metallic Pipe and Fittings 
(For a summary of pipe applications, see Note A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.) 
2.2.5.1. 
Fibrocement Pipe and Fittings 
1) Fibrocement pipe and fittings for use in a drain, waste or vent system shall 
conform to CAN/CSA-B127.3, “Fibrocement drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe 
fittings.” 
2-4 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.5.7. 
2.2.5.2. 
Concrete Pipe and Fittings 
1) Concrete pipe shall conform to 
a) CSA A257.1, “Non-reinforced circular concrete culvert, storm drain, sewer 
pipe, and fittings,” or 
b) CSA A257.2, “Reinforced circular concrete culvert, storm drain, sewer pipe, 
and fittings.” 
2) Joints with internal elastomeric gaskets shall conform to CSA A257.3, “Joints for 
circular concrete sewer and culvert pipe, manhole sections, and fittings using rubber 
gaskets.” 
3) Concrete fittings fabricated on the site from lengths of pipe shall not be used. 
(See Note A-2.2.5.2.(3).) 
4) Concrete pipe shall not be used above ground inside a building. 
5) Precast reinforced circular concrete manhole sections, catch basins and fittings 
shall conform to CSA A257.4, “Precast reinforced circular concrete manhole sections, 
catch basins, and fittings.” 
2.2.5.3. 
Vitrified Clay Pipe and Fittings 
1) Vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall conform to CSA A60.1-M, “Vitrified Clay 
Pipe.” 
2) Couplings and joints for vitrified clay pipe shall conform to CSA A60.3-M, 
“Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints.” 
3) Vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall not be used except for an underground 
part of a drainage system. 
2.2.5.4. 
Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings 
1) Polyethylene water pipe, tubing and fittings shall conform to Series 160 of CSA 
B137.1, “Polyethylene (PE) pipe, tubing, and fittings for cold-water pressure services.” 
2) Polyethylene water pipe shall not be used except for a water service pipe. 
3) Butt fusion fittings for polyethylene pipe shall conform to ASTM D3261, 
“Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Fittings for 
Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe and Tubing.” 
2.2.5.5. 
Polyethylene Pipe Used Underground 
1) Polyethylene pipe used underground outside a building for the rehabilitation 
of existing drainage systems using trenchless technology shall conform to ASTM F714, 
“Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (DR-PR) Based on Outside 
Diameter,” and shall be HDPE 3408 and SDR 11 or heavier. (See Note A-2.2.5.5.(1).) 
2.2.5.6. 
Crosslinked Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings 
1) Crosslinked polyethylene pipe and manufacturer-approved fittings used in hot 
and cold potable water systems shall conform to CSA B137.5, “Crosslinked polyethylene 
(PEX) tubing systems for pressure applications.” (See Note A-2.2.5.6.(1).) 
2.2.5.7. 
PVC Pipe and Fittings 
1) PVC water pipe, fittings and solvent cement shall 
a) conform to CSA B137.3, “Rigid polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe and fittings 
for pressure applications,” and 
b) have a pressure rating of not less than 1 100 kPa. 
2) PVC water pipe fittings shall conform to 
a) ASTM D2466, “Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40,” or 
b) ASTM D2467, “Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80.” 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-5 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.5.8. 
Division B 
3) PVC injection-moulded gasketed fittings shall conform to CSA B137.2, 
“Polyvinylchloride (PVC) injection-moulded gasketed fittings for pressure 
applications.” 
4) PVC water pipe and fittings referred to in Sentences (1), (2) and (3) shall not be 
used in a hot water system. 
2.2.5.8. 
CPVC Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cements 
1) CPVC hot and cold water pipe, fittings and solvent cements shall conform to 
CSA B137.6, “Chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) pipe, tubing, and fittings for 
hot- and cold-water distribution systems.” 
2) The design temperature and design pressure of a CPVC piping system shall 
conform to Table 2.2.5.8. 
Table 2.2.5.8. 
Maximum Permitted Pressure for CPVC Piping at Various Temperatures 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.2.5.8.(2) 
Maximum Temperature of Water, °C 
Maximum Permitted Pressures, kPa 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
82 
3 150 
2 900 
2 500 
2 100 
1 700 
1 300 
1 000 
690 
2.2.5.9. 
Plastic Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cement Used Underground 
(See Note A-2.2.5.9. to 2.2.5.11.) 
1) Plastic pipe, fittings and solvent cement used underground outside a building 
or under a building in a drainage system shall conform to 
a) ASTM F628, “Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene 
(ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe With a Cellular Core,” 
b) CSA B181.1, “Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) drain, waste, and vent 
pipe and pipe fittings,” 
c) CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride 
(CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings,” 
d) CSA B182.1, “Plastic drain and sewer pipe and pipe fittings,” with a pipe 
stiffness not less than 320 kPa, 
e) CSA B182.2, “PSM type polyvinylchloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings,” 
with a pipe stiffness not less than 320 kPa, 
f) CSA B182.4, “Profile polyvinylchloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings,” with 
a pipe stiffness not less than 320 kPa, 
g) CSA B182.6, “Profile polyethylene (PE) sewer pipe and fittings for leak-proof 
sewer applications,” with a pipe stiffness not less than 320 kPa, or 
h) CSA B182.8, “Profile polyethylene (PE) storm sewer and drainage pipe and 
fittings,” for Type 1 joints and non-perforated pipes. 
2.2.5.10. 
Transition Solvent Cement 
(See Note A-2.2.5.9. to 2.2.5.11.) 
1) Solvent cement for transition joints shall conform to 
a) CSA B181.1, “Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) drain, waste, and vent 
pipe and pipe fittings,” or 
b) CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride 
(CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings.” 
2-6 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.5.15. 
2) Transition solvent cement shall only be used for joining an ABS drainage system 
to a PVC drainage system. 
2.2.5.11. 
Plastic Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cement Used in Buildings 
(See Note A-2.2.5.9. to 2.2.5.11.) 
1) Plastic pipe, fittings and solvent cement used inside or under a building in a 
drainage or venting system shall conform to 
a) ASTM F628, “Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene 
(ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe With a Cellular Core,” 
b) CSA B181.1, “Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) drain, waste, and vent 
pipe and pipe fittings,” or 
c) CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride 
(CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings.” 
2) Requirements for combustible piping in relation to fire safety shall conform to 
Sentences 3.1.5.19.(1) and 9.10.9.8.(3), (5) and (6), and Articles 3.1.9.4., 9.10.9.7. and 
9.10.9.9. of Division B of the NBC. 
3) Where noncombustible piping pierces a fire separation or a firestop, the 
requirements for firestopping of Subsection 3.1.9., Sentence 9.10.9.6.(1) and Article 
9.10.16.4. of Division B of the NBC shall apply. 
2.2.5.12. 
Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene Composite Pipe and Fittings 
1) PE/AL/PE composite pipe and fittings shall conform to CSA B137.9, 
“Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) composite pressure-pipe systems.” 
(See Note A-2.2.5.12.(1).) 
2) Except as provided in Sentences (3) and (4), PE/AL/PE pipe and fittings shall 
not be used in hot water systems. 
3) PE/AL/PE pipe with a pressure rating of 690 kPa or greater at 82°C shall be 
permitted for hot water systems. 
4) PE/AL/PE pipe with a pressure rating of 690 kPa or greater at 82°C 
shall be used with fittings that conform to CSA B137.10, “Crosslinked 
polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) composite 
pressure-pipe systems,” in hot water systems. 
2.2.5.13. 
Crosslinked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Crosslinked Polyethylene 
Composite Pressure Pipe and Fittings 
1) PEX/AL/PEX  composite pipe and  fittings used in hot  and  
cold potable water systems shall conform to CSA B137.10, “Crosslinked 
polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) composite 
pressure-pipe systems.” (See Note A-2.2.5.13.(1).) 
2.2.5.14. 
Polypropylene Pipe and Fittings 
1) Polypropylene pipe and fittings used for hot and cold potable water systems 
shall conform to CSA B137.11, “Polypropylene (PP-R) pipe and fittings for pressure 
applications.” (See Note A-2.2.5.14.(1).) 
2.2.5.15. 
Polyethylene of Raised Temperature Tube and Fittings 
1) Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) tube and manufacturer-approved 
fittings used in hot and cold potable water systems shall conform to CSA B137.18, 
“Polyethylene of raised temperature resistance (PE-RT) tubing systems for pressure 
applications.” (See Note A-2.2.5.15.(1).) 
2) The use of PE-RT tube shall conform to Table 2.2.5.15. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-7 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.5.16. 
Division B 
Table 2.2.5.15. 
Permitted Uses of Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tube 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.2.5.15.(2) 
Type of Tube 
Plumbing Purposes(1) 
Drainage System 
Building 
Sewer 
Venting System 
Potable Water System 
Aboveground 
inside building 
Underground 
under building 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Cold 
Hot 
Under 
building 
Outside 
building 
PE-RT 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Notes to Table 2.2.5.15.: 
(1) P = permitted and N = not permitted. 
2.2.5.16. 
Cellular Core PVC Pipe and Fittings 
1) Cellular core PVC pipe shall 
a) conform to ASTM F3128, “Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) 
(PVC) Schedule 40 Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe with a Cellular Core,” and 
b) be light grey, as specified in CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and 
chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe 
fittings.” 
2) Fittings and solvent cements for cellular core PVC pipe shall conform to CSA 
B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) drain, 
waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings.” 
3) Cellular core PVC pipe shall only be used in residential buildings containing 1 or 
2 dwelling units and in row houses that do not exceed 3 storeys in height. 
2.2.6. 
Ferrous Pipe and Fittings 
(For a summary of pipe applications, see Note A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.) 
2.2.6.1. 
Cast-Iron Drainage and Vent Pipe and Fittings 
1) Drainage piping, vent piping and fittings made of cast iron shall conform to 
CSA B70, “Cast iron soil pipe, fittings, and means of joining.” 
2) Cast-iron soil pipe and  fittings  shall  not  be  used  in  a  water system. 
2.2.6.2. 
Maintenance Holes and Catch Basins 
1) Cast-iron frames and covers for maintenance holes and catch basins shall 
conform to CSA B70.1, “Frames and Covers for Maintenance Holes and Catchbasins.” 
2.2.6.3. 
Threaded Cast-Iron Drainage Fittings 
1) Threaded cast-iron drainage fittings shall conform to ASME B16.12, “Cast Iron 
Threaded Drainage Fittings.” 
2) Threaded cast-iron drainage fittings shall not be used in a water system. 
2.2.6.4. 
Cast-Iron Water Pipes 
1) Cast-iron water pipes shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51, 
“Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast.” 
2) Cement mortar lining for cast-iron water pipes shall conform to ANSI/AWWA 
C104/A21.4, “Cement-Mortar Lining for Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings.” 
3) Cast-iron fittings for cast-iron or ductile-iron water pipes shall conform to 
ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10, “Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings.” 
4) Rubber gasket joints for cast-iron and ductile-iron pressure pipe for water 
shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, “Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron 
Pressure Pipe and Fittings.” 
2-8 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.6.10. 
2.2.6.5. 
Screwed Cast-Iron Water Fittings 
1) Screwed cast-iron water fittings shall conform to ASME B16.4, “Gray Iron 
Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 250.” 
2) Screwed cast-iron water fittings used in a water system shall be cement-mortar 
lined or galvanized. 
3) Screwed cast-iron water fittings shall not be used in a drainage system. 
2.2.6.6. 
Screwed Malleable-Iron Water Fittings 
1) Screwed malleable-iron water fittings shall conform to ASME B16.3, “Malleable 
Iron Threaded Fittings: Classes 150 and 300.” 
2) Screwed malleable-iron water fittings used in a water system shall be 
cement-mortar lined or galvanized. 
3) Screwed malleable-iron water fittings shall not be used in a drainage system. 
2.2.6.7. 
Steel Pipe 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) and (3), welded and seamless steel pipe 
shall not be used in a plumbing system. 
2) Galvanized steel pipe is permitted to be used in a drainage system or a venting 
system above ground inside a building. 
3) Galvanized steel pipe and fittings shall not be used in a water distribution 
system except 
a) in buildings of industrial occupancy as described in the NBC, or 
b) for the repair of existing galvanized steel piping systems. 
(See Note A-2.2.6.7.(3).) 
4) Galvanized steel pipe and fittings shall conform to ASTM A53/A53M, 
“Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, Zinc-Coated, Welded 
and Seamless.” 
2.2.6.8. 
Corrugated Steel Pipe and Couplings 
1) Corrugated steel pipe and couplings shall conform to CAN/CSA-G401, 
“Corrugated steel pipe products.” 
2) Corrugated steel pipe shall only be used underground outside a building in 
a storm drainage system. 
3) Couplings for corrugated steel pipe shall be constructed so that when installed 
they shall 
a) maintain the pipe alignment, 
b) resist the separation of adjoining lengths of pipe, 
c) prevent root penetration, and 
d) prevent the infiltration of surrounding material. 
2.2.6.9. 
Sheet Metal Leaders 
1) A sheet metal leader shall not be used except above ground outside a building. 
2.2.6.10. 
Stainless Steel Pipe 
1) Stainless steel pipe shall conform to 
a) ASME B36.19M, “Stainless Steel Pipe,” and 
b) ASTM A312/A312M, “Standard Specification for Seamless, Welded, and 
Heavily Cold Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes.” 
2) Only grade 304/304L or 316/316L stainless steel pipe shall be used. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-9 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.6.11. 
Division B 
2.2.6.11. 
Stainless Steel Butt Weld Pipe Fittings 
1) Stainless steel butt weld pipe fittings shall conform to 
a) ASME B16.9, “Factory-Made Wrought Buttwelding Fittings,” and 
b) ASTM A403/A403M, “Standard Specification for Wrought Austenitic 
Stainless Steel Piping Fittings.” 
2) Stainless steel butt weld pipe fittings shall be made of a material that matches 
the grade  of  the pipe material used.  
2.2.6.12. 
Stainless Steel Pipe Flanges 
1) Stainless steel pipe flanges shall conform to ASME B16.5, “Pipe Flanges and 
Flanged Fittings: NPS ½ through NPS 24 Metric/Inch Standard,” and 
a) ASTM A182/A182M, “Standard Specification for Forged or Rolled Alloy 
and Stainless Steel Pipe Flanges, Forged Fittings, and Valves and Parts for 
High-Temperature Service,” or 
b) ANSI/AWWA C228, “Stainless-Steel Pipe Flanges for Water Service – Sizes 2 
in. through 72 in. (50 mm through 1,800 mm).” 
2) Stainless steel pipe flanges shall be made of a material that matches the grade of 
the pipe material used.  
2.2.6.13. 
Stainless Steel Threaded Fittings 
1) Stainless steel threaded fittings shall be schedule 40s or greater conforming to 
a) ASTM A182/A182M, “Standard Specification for Forged or Rolled Alloy 
and Stainless Steel Pipe Flanges, Forged Fittings, and Valves and Parts for 
High-Temperature Service,” or 
b) ASTM A351/A351M, “Standard Specification for Castings, Austenitic, for 
Pressure-Containing Parts.” 
2) Stainless steel threaded fittings shall be made of a material that matches the 
grade of the pipe material used. 
2.2.6.14. 
Stainless Steel Tube 
1) Stainless steel tube shall conform to 
a) ASME B16.9, “Factory-Made Wrought Buttwelding Fittings,” and 
b) ASTM A269/A269M, “Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded 
Austenitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service.” 
2) Only grade 304/304L or 316/316L stainless steel tube shall be used. 
2.2.6.15. 
Stainless Steel Pipe and Tube 
1) The use of stainless steel pipe and tube shall conform to Table 2.2.6.15. 
Table 2.2.6.15. 
Permitted Uses of Stainless Steel Pipe and Tube 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.2.6.15.(1) 
Stainless Steel Pipe 
or Tube 
Plumbing Purposes(1) 
Water Distribution System 
Drainage System 
Venting System 
Underground 
Aboveground 
Building Sewer 
Underground 
Aboveground 
Underground 
Aboveground 
Stainless steel pipe 
Stainless steel tube 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
Notes to Table 2.2.6.15.: 
(1) P = permitted and N = not permitted. 
2-10 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.7.5. 
2.2.7. 
Non-Ferrous Pipe and Fittings 
(For a summary of pipe applications, see Note A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.) 
2.2.7.1. 
Copper and Brass Pipe 
1) Copper pipe shall conform to 
a) ASTM B42, “Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, Standard 
Sizes,” and 
b) Table 2.2.7.4. 
2) Brass pipe shall conform to ASTM B43, “Standard Specification for Seamless 
Red Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes.” 
2.2.7.2. 
Brass or Bronze Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings 
1) Brass or bronze pipe flanges and flanged fittings shall conform to ASME B16.24, 
“Cast Copper Alloy Pipe Flanges, Flanged Fittings, and Valves: Classes 150, 300, 600, 
900, 1500, and 2500.” 
2.2.7.3. 
Brass or Bronze Threaded Water Fittings 
1) Brass or bronze threaded water fittings shall conform to ASME B16.15, “Cast 
Copper Alloy Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 250.” 
2) Brass or bronze threaded water fittings shall not be used in a drainage system. 
2.2.7.4. 
Copper Tube 
1) Copper tube shall conform to 
a) ASTM B88, “Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube,” or 
b) ASTM B306, “Standard Specification for Copper Drainage Tube (DWV).” 
2) Except as provided in Sentence (3), the use of copper tube shall conform to 
Table 2.2.7.4. 
3) Copper tube shall not be used for the fixture drain or the portion of the vent 
pipe below the flood level rim of a urinal. 
Table 2.2.7.4. 
Permitted Use of Copper Tube and Pipe 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.2.7.1.(1) and 2.2.7.4.(2) 
Type of Copper 
Tube or Pipe 
Plumbing Purposes(1) 
Water 
Service Pipe 
Water Distribution System 
Building 
Sewer 
Drainage System 
Venting System 
Under­
ground 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Above­
ground 
K
 
&
 
L
 
hard
 
temper
 
K & L soft temper 
M hard temper 
M soft temper 
DWV
 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P 
Notes to Table 2.2.7.4.: 
(1) P = permitted and N = not permitted. 
2.2.7.5. 
Solder-Joint Drainage Fittings 
1) Solder-joint fittings for drainage systems shall conform to 
a) ASME B16.23, “Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Drainage Fittings: DWV,” or 
b) ASME B16.29, “Wrought Copper and Wrought Copper Alloy Solder-Joint 
Drainage Fittings – DWV.” 
2) Solder-joint fittings for drainage systems shall not be used in a water system. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-11 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.7.6. 
Division B 
2.2.7.6. 
Solder-Joint Water Fittings 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), solder-joint fittings for water systems shall 
conform to 
a) ASME B16.18, “Cast Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure Fittings,” or 
b) ASME B16.22, “Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure 
Fittings.” 
2) Solder-joint fittings for water systems not made by casting or the wrought 
process shall conform to the applicable requirements of ASME B16.18, “Cast Copper 
Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure Fittings.” 
2.2.7.7. 
Flared-Joint Fittings for Copper Water Systems 
1) Flared-joint fittings for copper tube water systems shall conform to ASME B16.26, 
“Cast Copper Alloy Fittings for Flared Copper Tubes.” 
2) Flared-joint fittings for copper tube water systems not made by casting shall 
conform to the applicable requirements of ASME B16.26, “Cast Copper Alloy Fittings 
for Flared Copper Tubes.”  
2.2.7.8. 
Lead Waste Pipe and Fittings 
1) Lead waste pipe and fittings shall not be used in a water system or as a building 
sewer. 
2) When there is a change in nominal pipe size of a lead water closet bend, the 
change shall be in the vertical section of the bend or made in a manner that prevents 
the retention of liquid in the bend. 
2.2.8. 
Corrosion-Resistant Materials 
(For a summary of pipe applications, see Note A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.) 
2.2.8.1. 
Pipes and Fittings 
1) Pipes and fittings to be used for drainage and venting of acid and corrosive 
wastes shall conform to 
a) ASTM A518/A518M, “Standard Specification for Corrosion-Resistant 
High-Silicon Iron Castings,” 
b) ASTM C1053, “Standard Specification for Borosilicate Glass Pipe and 
Fittings for Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Applications,” or 
c) CSA B181.3, “Polyolefin and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) laboratory 
drainage systems.” 
2.2.9. 
Jointing Materials 
2.2.9.1. 
Cement Mortar 
1) Cement mortar shall not be used for jointing. 
2.2.9.2. 
Solders and Fluxes 
1) Solders for solder joint fittings shall conform to ASTM B32, “Standard 
Specification for Solder Metal.” 
2) Solders and fluxes having a lead content in excess of 0.2% shall not be used 
in a potable water system. 
3) Fluxes for soldered joints shall conform to ASTM B813, “Standard Specification 
for Liquid and Paste Fluxes for Soldering of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube.” 
4) Brazing alloys shall conform to ANSI/AWS A5.8M/A5.8, “Specification for Filler 
Metals for Brazing and Braze Welding,” BCuP range. 
2-12 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.10.6. 
2.2.10. 
Miscellaneous Materials 
2.2.10.1. 
Brass Floor Flanges 
1) Brass floor flanges shall conform to CSA B158.1, “Cast Brass Solder Joint 
Drainage, Waste and Vent Fittings.” 
2.2.10.2. 
Screws, Bolts, Nuts and Washers 
1) Every screw, bolt, nut and washer shall be of corrosion-resistant materials 
when used 
a) to connect a water closet to a floor flange, 
b) to anchor the floor flange to the floor, or 
c) to anchor the water closet to the floor. 
2.2.10.3. 
Cleanout Fittings 
1) Every plug, cap, nut or bolt that is intended to be removable from a ferrous 
fitting shall be of a non-ferrous material. 
2) A cleanout fitting that, as a result of normal maintenance operations, cannot 
withstand the physical stresses of removal and reinstallation or cannot ensure a 
gas-tight seal shall not be installed. 
2.2.10.4. 
Mechanical Couplings 
1) Groove- and shoulder-type mechanical couplings for pressure applications 
shall conform to CSA B242, “Groove- and Shoulder-Type Mechanical Pipe Couplings.” 
2) Mechanical couplings for non-pressure applications shall conform to CSA B602, 
“Mechanical couplings for drain, waste, and vent pipe and sewer pipe.” 
2.2.10.5. 
Saddle Hubs 
1) A saddle hub or fitting shall not be installed in drainage, venting or water systems. 
(See Note A-2.2.10.5.(1).) 
2.2.10.6. 
Valves, and Supply and Waste Fittings 
1) Supply fittings shall conform to 
a) ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1, “Plumbing Supply Fittings,” or 
b) CSA B125.3, “Plumbing fittings.” 
2) Except for lavatories in healthcare facilities, emergency eye washes, and 
emergency showers, supply fittings and individual shower heads shall have an integral 
means of limiting the maximum water flow rate to that specified in Table 2.2.10.6. 
(See Note A-2.2.10.6.(2).) 
Table 2.2.10.6. 
Water Flow Rates from Supply Fittings 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.2.10.6.(2) 
Supply Fittings 
Maximum Water Flow Rate, L/min 
Lavatory supply fittings 
private 
public 
Kitchen supply fittings (except those in industrial, commercial or institutional kitchens) 
Shower heads 
5.7 
1.9 
8.3 
7.6 
3) An automatic compensating valve serving an individual shower head 
addressed in Sentence (1) shall have a water flow rate equal to or less than the shower 
head it serves. (See Note A-2.2.10.6.(3).) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-13 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.10.7. 
Division B 
4) Where multiple shower heads installed in a public showering facility are served 
by one temperature control, each shower head shall be equipped with a device capable 
of automatically shutting off the flow of water when the shower head is not in use. 
(See Note A-2.2.10.6.(4) and (5).) 
5) Each lavatory in a public washroom shall be equipped with a device capable 
of automatically shutting off the flow of water when the lavatory is not in use. (See 
Note A-2.2.10.6.(4) and (5).) 
6) Waste fittings shall conform to ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2, “Plumbing Waste 
Fittings.” 
7) Manually operated valves of NPS 4 or less for  use in  plumbing systems shall 
conform to ASME A112.4.14/CSA B125.14, “Manually Operated Valves for Use in 
Plumbing Systems.” (See Note A-2.2.10.6.(7).) 
2.2.10.7. 
Water Temperature Control 
(See Note A-2.2.10.7.) 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) and (3), water supplied to shower heads or 
bathtubs shall be controlled by an automatic compensating valve conforming to 
a) ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1, “Plumbing Supply Fittings,” or 
b) ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16, “Performance Requirements for 
Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower 
Combinations.” 
2) The requirement in Sentence (1) is permitted to be waived where hot water 
supplied only to bathtubs is controlled by 
a) an automatic compensating valve conforming to CSA B125.3, “Plumbing 
fittings,” or 
b) a temperature-limiting device conforming to ASSE 1070/ASME 
A112.1070/CSA B125.70, “Performance requirements for water temperature 
limiting devices.” 
3) The requirement in Sentence (1) is permitted to be waived where the water is 
supplied by a single tempered water line controlled by an automatic compensating 
valve conforming to CSA B125.3, “Plumbing fittings.” 
4) Except as provided in Sentence (5), the temperature of water discharging from 
a shower head or into a bathtub shall not exceed 49°C. 
5) In healthcare facilities and seniors' residences, the temperature of water 
discharging from a shower head or into a bathtub shall 
a) not exceed 43°C, and 
b) be adjusted at the shower or bathtub controls. 
2.2.10.8. 
Direct Flush Valves 
1) Direct flush valves shall 
a) open fully and close positively under service pressure, 
b) complete their cycle of operation automatically, 
c) be provided with a means of regulating the volume of water that they 
discharge, 
d) be provided with a vacuum breaker unless the fixture is designed so that 
back-siphonage cannot occur, and 
e) conform to ASSE 1037/ASME A112.1037/CSA B125.37, “Performance 
requirements for pressurized flushing devices for plumbing fixtures.” 
2.2.10.9. 
Drinking Fountain Bubblers 
1) The orifice of drinking fountain bubblers shall 
a) be of the shielded type, and 
b) direct the water upward at an angle of approximately 45°. 
2) Drinking fountain bubblers shall include a means of regulating the flow to 
the orifice. 
2-14 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.2.10.14. 
3) Bubblers shall be installed only on drinking fountains. (See Note A-2.2.10.9.(3).) 
2.2.10.10. 
Back-Siphonage Preventers and Backflow Preventers 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), back-siphonage preventers and backflow 
preventers shall conform to 
a) CSA B64.0, “Definitions, general requirements, and test methods for 
vacuum breakers and backflow preventers,” 
b) CSA B64.1.1, “Atmospheric vacuum breakers (AVB),” 
c) CSA B64.1.2, “Pressure vacuum breakers (PVB),” 
d) CSA B64.1.3, “Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breakers (SRPVB),” 
e) CSA B64.2, “Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB),” 
f) CSA B64.2.1, “Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB) with manual 
draining feature,” 
g) CSA B64.2.2, “Hose connection vacuum breakers (HCVB) with automatic 
draining feature,” 
h) CSA B64.3, “Dual check valve backflow preventers with atmospheric port 
(DCAP),” 
i) CSA B64.4, “Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow preventers,” 
j) CSA B64.4.1, “Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers for fire 
protection systems (RPF),” 
k) CSA B64.5, “Double check valve (DCVA) backflow preventers,” 
l) CSA B64.5.1, “Double check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 
systems (DCVAF),” 
m) CSA B64.6, “Dual check valve (DuC) backflow preventers,” 
n) CSA B64.6.1, “Dual check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 
systems (DuCF),” 
o) CSA B64.7, “Laboratory faucet vacuum breakers (LFVB),” 
p) CSA B64.8, “Dual check valve backflow preventers with intermediate vent 
(DuCV),” or 
q) CSA B64.9, “Single check valve backflow preventers for fire protection 
systems (SCVAF).” 
2) Back-siphonage preventers for tank-type water closets (anti-siphon fill valves) 
shall conform to ASSE 1002/ASME A112.1002/CSA B125.12, “Anti-siphon fill valves 
for water closet tanks.” 
2.2.10.11. 
Relief Valves 
1) Temperature-relief, pressure-relief, combined temperature- and pressure-relief, 
and vacuum-relief valves shall conform to ANSI Z21.22/CSA 4.4, “Relief Valves For 
Hot Water Supply Systems.” 
2.2.10.12. 
Reducing Valves 
1) Direct-acting water-pressure-reducing valves for domestic water supply 
systems shall conform to CAN/CSA-B356, “Water pressure reducing valves for 
domestic water supply systems.” 
2.2.10.13. 
Solar Domestic Hot Water 
1) Equipment for solar heating of potable water shall conform to CAN/CSA-F379 
SERIES, “Packaged solar domestic hot water systems (liquid-to-liquid heat transfer).” 
2.2.10.14. 
Vent Pipe Flashing 
1) Flashing fabricated on-site for vent pipes shall be fabricated from 
a) copper sheet not less than 0.33 mm thick, 
b) aluminum sheet not less than 0.48 mm thick, 
c) alloyed zinc sheet not less than 0.35 mm thick, 
d) lead sheet not less than 1.73 mm thick, 
e) galvanized steel sheet not less than 0.33 mm thick, or 
f) polychloroprene (neoprene) not less than 2.89 mm thick. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-15 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.2.10.15. 
Division B 
2) Prefabricated flashing for vent pipes shall conform to CSA B272, “Prefabricated 
Self-Sealing Roof Vent Flashings.” (See Article 2.5.6.5. for location of vent pipe 
terminals.) 
2.2.10.15. 
Water Hammer Arresters 
1) Water hammer arresters shall conform to ANSI/ASSE 1010, “Water Hammer 
Arresters.” 
2.2.10.16. 
Air Admittance Valves 
1) Air admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1051, “Individual and Branch Type 
Air Admittance Valves for Sanitary Drainage Systems.” (See Note A-2.2.10.16.(1).) 
2.2.10.17. 
Water Treatment Systems 
1) Point-of-use devices, including their disposable parts, used in potable water 
treatment systems shall conform to CAN/CSA-B483.1, “Drinking Water Treatment 
Systems.” 
2.2.10.18. 
Flexible Water Connectors 
1) Flexible water connectors exposed to continuous pressure shall conform to 
ASME A112.18.6/CSA B125.6, “Flexible water connectors.” 
Section 2.3. Piping 
2.3.1. 
Application 
2.3.1.1. 
General 
1) This Section applies to the construction and use of joints and connections, and 
the arrangement, protection, support and testing of piping. 
2.3.2. 
Construction and Use of Joints 
2.3.2.1. 
Caulked Lead Drainage Joints 
1) Caulked lead drainage joints shall not be used except for  cast-iron pipe in a  
drainage system or venting system, or between such pipe and 
a) other ferrous pipe, 
b) brass and copper pipe, 
c) a caulking ferrule, or 
d) a trap standard. 
2) Every caulked lead drainage joint shall be firmly packed with oakum and 
tightly caulked with lead to a depth of not less than 25 mm. 
3) No paint, varnish or other coating shall be applied on the lead until after the 
joint has been tested. 
4) A length of hub and spigot pipe and pipe fittings in a drainage system shall be 
installed with the hub at the upstream end. 
2.3.2.2. 
Wiped Joints 
1) Wiped joints shall not be used except for sheet lead or lead pipe, or between 
such pipe and copper pipe or a ferrule. 
2) Wiped joints in straight pipe shall 
a) be made of solder, 
b) have an exposed surface on each side of the joint at least 19 mm wide, and 
c) be not less than 10 mm thick at the thickest part. 
3) Wiped flanged joints shall be reinforced with a lead flange that is not less than 
19 mm wide. 
2-16 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.3.3.3. 
2.3.2.3. 
Screwed Joints 
1) In making a screwed joint, the ends of the pipe shall be reamed or filed out to 
the size of the bore and all chips and cuttings shall be removed. 
2) No pipe-joint cement or paint shall be applied to the internal threads. 
2.3.2.4. 
Soldered Joints 
1) Soldered joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM B828, “Standard 
Specification for Making Capillary Joints by Soldering of Copper and Copper Alloy 
Tube and Fittings.” 
2.3.2.5. 
Flared Joints 
1) In making a flared joint, the pipe shall be expanded with a proper flaring tool. 
2) Flared joints shall not be used for hard (drawn) copper tube. 
2.3.2.6. 
Mechanical Joints 
1) Mechanical joints shall be made with compounded elastomeric rings that are 
held in compression by  
a) stainless steel or cast-iron clamps, or 
b) groove and shoulder type mechanical couplings. 
(See Note A-2.3.2.6.(1).) 
2.3.2.7. 
Cold-Caulked Joints 
1) Cold-caulked joints shall not be used except for bell and spigot pipe in a water 
system, a  drainage system or a venting system. 
2) Caulking compound used in cold-caulked joints shall be applied according to 
the manufacturer's directions. 
3) Cold-caulked joints in a drainage system shall be firmly packed with oakum and 
tightly caulked with cold caulking compound to a depth of not less than 25 mm. 
2.3.2.8. 
Stainless Steel Welded Joints 
1) Stainless steel welded joints shall conform to ASME B31.9, “Building Services 
Piping.” 
2) Butt weld pipe fittings shall be at least as thick as the wall of the pipe used. 
2.3.3. 
Joints and Connections 
2.3.3.1. 
Drilled and Tapped Joints 
1) Drilled and tapped joints shall not be made in a sanitary drainage pipe or vent pipe 
and fittings unless suitable provision has been made for drilling and tapping. 
2.3.3.2. 
Extracted Tees 
1) Tees may be extracted from the wall thickness of Types K and L copper tube 
used in a water distribution system, provided that  
a) a tool specifically designed for the purpose is used, 
b) the branch is at least one NPS smaller than the tube in which the tee is 
formed, 
c) the end of the branch incorporates a means to prevent it from penetrating 
into the run and thereby obstructing flow, and 
d) the joint at the tee is brazed with a filler metal having a melting point not 
below 540°C. 
2.3.3.3. 
Prohibition of Welding of Pipes and Fittings 
1) Cast-iron soil pipe and fittings shall not be welded. 
2) Galvanized steel pipe and fittings shall not be welded. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-17 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.3.3.4. 
Division B 
2.3.3.4. 
Unions and Slip Joints 
(See Note A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3).) 
1) Except as provided in Sentence 2.4.6.3.(6), running thread and packing nut 
connections and unions with a gasket seal shall not be used downstream of a trap weir 
in a drainage system or in a venting system. 
2) Slip joints shall not be used 
a) in a venting system, or  
b) in a drainage system, except to connect a fixture trap to a fixture drain in an 
accessible location. 
2.3.3.5. 
Increaser or Reducer 
1) Connections between 2 pipes of different nominal pipe sizes shall be made with 
an  increaser or a reducer  fitting installed so that it permits the system to be completely 
drained. 
2.3.3.6. 
Dissimilar Materials 
1) Adaptors, connectors or mechanical joints used to join dissimilar materials shall 
be designed to accommodate the required transition. 
2.3.3.7. 
Connection of Roof Drain to Leader 
1) Roof drains shall be securely connected to a leader and provision shall be made 
for expansion. 
2.3.3.8. 
Connection of Floor or Wall Outlet Fixtures 
1) Pedestal urinals, floor-mounted water closets and S-trap standards shall be 
connected to a fixture drain by a floor flange or other means of connection, except that a 
cast-iron trap standard may be caulked to a cast-iron pipe. 
2) Except as provided in Sentence (3), floor flanges shall be brass. 
3) Where cast-iron or plastic pipe is used, a floor flange of the same material 
is permitted to be used. 
4) Floor flanges and fixtures shall be securely set on a firm base and fastened 
to the floor or trap flange of the fixture. 
5) Water-closet bowls shall be securely attached to the floor flange, floor or wall 
carrier. 
6) Joints in a floor flange or between a fixture and the drainage system shall be 
sealed with a resilient watertight and gas-tight seal. 
7) Where a lead water-closet stub is used, the length of the stub below the floor 
flange shall be not less than 75 mm. 
2.3.3.9. 
Expansion and Contraction 
(See Note A-2.3.3.9.) 
1) The design and installation of every piping system shall include means to 
accommodate its expansion and contraction caused by temperature changes, movement 
of the soil, building shrinkage or structural settlement. (See Note A-2.3.3.9.(1).) 
2.3.3.10. 
Copper Tube 
1) Types M and DWV copper tube shall not be bent. 
2.3.3.11. 
Indirect Connections 
1) Where a fixture or device is indirectly connected, the connections shall be made 
by terminating the fixture drain above the flood level rim of a directly connected fixture to 
form an air break. 
2-18 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.3.4.5. 
2) The size of the  air break shall at least equal the NPS of the fixture drain, branch 
or pipe that terminates above the directly connected fixture, and it shall be not less than 
25 mm. (See Note A-2.3.3.11.(2).) 
2.3.3.12. 
Copper Joints Used Underground 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), joints in copper tubes installed underground 
shall be made with either flared or compression fittings, or be brazed using a brazing 
alloy within the American Welding Society's AWS-BCuP range. 
2) Compression fittings shall not be used underground under a building. 
2.3.4. 
Support of Piping 
2.3.4.1. 
Capability of Support 
1) Piping shall be provided with support that is capable of keeping the pipe in 
alignment and bearing the weight of the pipe and its contents. 
2) Wall-mounted fixtures shall be supported so that no strain is transmitted to 
the piping. 
2.3.4.2. 
Independence of Support 
1) Piping, fixtures, tanks or devices shall be supported independently of each other. 
2.3.4.3. 
Insulation of Support 
1) Where a hanger or support for copper tube or brass or copper pipe is of a 
material other than brass or copper, it shall be suitably separated and electrically 
insulated from the pipe or tube. 
2) Where a hanger or support for stainless steel pipe or tube is of a material other 
than stainless steel, it shall be suitably separated and electrically insulated from the 
pipe or tube. 
2.3.4.4. 
Support for Vertical Piping 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), vertical piping shall be supported at its base 
and at the floor level of alternate storeys by rests, each of which can bear the weight of 
pipe that is between it and the rest above it. 
2) The maximum spacing of supports shall be 7.5 m. 
2.3.4.5. 
Support for Horizontal Piping 
1) Nominally horizontal piping that is inside a building shall be braced to prevent 
swaying and buckling and to control the effects of thrust. 
2) Nominally horizontal piping shall be supported as stated in Table 2.3.4.5. 
3) Where PVC, CPVC or ABS plastic pipe is installed, 
a) the pipe shall be aligned without added strain on the piping, 
b) the pipe shall not be bent or pulled into position after being welded, and 
c) hangers shall not compress, cut or abrade the pipe. 
4) Where PEX, PE-RT, PP-R, PE/AL/PE or PEX/AL/PEX plastic pipe or tube is 
installed, hangers shall not compress, cut or abrade the pipe. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-19 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.3.4.5. 
Division B 
Table 2.3.4.5. 
Support for Nominally Horizontal Piping 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.3.4.5.(2) 
Piping Material 
Maximum Horizontal Spacing 
of Supports, m 
Additional Support Conditions 
ABS or PVC plastic pipe 
1.2 
At the end of branches or fixture drains and at 
changes in direction and elevation 
ABS or PVC plastic trap arm or fixture drain pipe > 1 m 
long 
n/a 
As  close as possible  to the  trap 
Cast-iron pipe 
3.0 
At or adjacent to each hub or joint 
Cast-iron pipe with mechanical joints that is ≤ 300 mm 
long between adjacent fittings 
1.0 
None 
Copper tube or copper and brass pipe, hard temper 
• diameter >  NPS 1 
• diameter ≤ NPS 1 
3.0 
2.5 
None 
Copper tube, soft temper 
2.5 
None 
CPVC pipe 
1.0 
None 
Galvanized iron or steel pipe 
• diameter ≥ NPS 6 
• diameter <  NPS 6 
3.75 
2.5 
None 
Lead pipe 
Throughout length of pipe 
None 
PE/AL/PE composite pipe 
1.0 
None 
PEX/AL/PEX composite pipe 
1.0 
None 
PEX plastic pipe 
0.8 
None 
PE-RT tube 
0.8 
None 
PP-R plastic pipe 
1.0 
At the end of branches and at changes in 
direction and elevation 
Stainless steel pipe 
• diameter ≥ NPS 1 
• diameter < NPS 1 
3.0 
2.5 
None 
Stainless steel tube 
• diameter ≥ NPS 1 
• diameter < NPS 1 
3.0 
2.5 
None 
5) Where hangers are used to support nominally horizontal piping, the hangers 
shall be 
a) supported by metal rods of not less than 
i) 6 mm diam to support piping of NPS 2 or less, 
ii) 8 mm diam to support piping of NPS 4 or less,  and  
iii) 13 mm diam to support piping over NPS 4, or 
b) solid or perforated metal straps not less than 
i) 0.6 mm thick and 12 mm wide to support piping of NPS 2 
or less, and 
ii) 0.8 mm thick and 18 mm wide to support piping of NPS 4 
or less. 
6) Where a hanger is attached to concrete or masonry, it shall be fastened by metal 
or expansion-type plugs that are inserted or built into the concrete or masonry. 
2-20 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.3.6.1. 
2.3.4.6. 
Support for Underground Horizontal Piping 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), nominally horizontal piping that is 
underground shall be supported on a base that is firm and continuous under the whole 
of the pipe. (See Note A-2.3.4.6.(1).) 
2) Nominally horizontal piping installed underground that is not supported as 
described in Sentence (1) may be installed using hangers fixed to a foundation or 
structural slab provided that the hangers are capable of 
a) keeping the pipe in alignment, and 
b) supporting the weight of 
i) the pipe, 
ii) its contents, and 
iii) the fill over the pipe. 
2.3.4.7. 
Support for Vent Pipe above a Roof 
1) Where a vent pipe that may be subject to misalignment terminates above the 
surface of a roof, it shall be supported or braced. (See Article 2.5.6.5. for location of 
vent pipe terminals.) 
2.3.5. 
Protection of Piping 
2.3.5.1. 
Protection of Piping 
1) Underground piping shall be protected 
a) in the absence of the pipe manufacturer's instructions for backfill, by backfill 
that is (see Note A-2.3.5.1.(1)(a)) 
i) placed and compacted to a height of 300 mm over the top 
of the pipe, and 
ii) free of stones, boulders, cinders and frozen earth or other 
material capable of damaging the piping, or 
b) by concrete that is at least 75 mm thick and at least 200 mm wider than 
the pipe. 
2.3.5.2. 
Isolation from Loads 
1) Where piping passes through or under a wall, it shall be installed so that the 
wall does not bear on the pipe. 
2.3.5.3. 
Protection Against Freezing 
(See Note A-2.3.5.3.) 
1) Where piping may be exposed to freezing conditions, it shall be protected 
from the effects of freezing. 
2.3.5.4. 
Protection from Mechanical Damage 
1) Plumbing, piping and equipment exposed to mechanical damage shall be 
protected. 
2.3.5.5. 
Protection from Condensation 
(See Note A-2.3.5.3.) 
1) Piping used as an internal leader, which may be subject to condensation, shall be 
installed in a manner that limits the risk of damage to the building due to condensation. 
2.3.6. 
Testing of Drainage or Venting Systems 
2.3.6.1. 
Tests and Inspection of Drainage or Venting Systems 
1) Except  in  the  case of  an external  leader, after a section of a drainage system or a 
venting system has been roughed in, and before any fixture is installed or piping is 
covered, a water pressure test or an air pressure test shall be conducted. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-21 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.3.6.2. 
Division B 
2) After every fixture is installed and before any part of the drainage system or 
venting system is placed in operation, a final test shall be carried out when requested. 
3) Where a prefabricated system is assembled off the building site in such a 
manner that it cannot be inspected and tested on site, off-site inspections and tests 
shall be conducted. 
4) Where a prefabricated system is installed as part of a drainage system or venting 
system, all other plumbing work shall be tested and inspected and a final test shall be 
carried out on the complete system when requested. 
5) When requested, a ball test shall be made to any pipe in a drainage system. 
2.3.6.2. 
Tests of Pipes in Drainage Systems 
1) Pipes in a drainage system, except an external leader or fixture outlet pipe, shall  
be capable of withstanding without leakage a water pressure test, air pressure test 
and final test. 
2) Pipes in a drainage system shall be capable of meeting a ball test. 
2.3.6.3. 
Tests of Venting Systems 
1) Venting systems shall be capable of withstanding without leakage a water 
pressure test, air pressure test and final test. 
2.3.6.4. 
Water Pressure Tests 
1) A water pressure test shall consist in applying a water column of at least 3 m to 
all joints. 
2) In making a water pressure test, 
a) every opening except the highest shall be tightly closed with a testing plug 
or a screw cap, and 
b) the system or the section shall be kept filled with water for 15 min. 
2.3.6.5. 
Air Pressure Tests 
1) Air pressure tests shall be conducted in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions for each piping material, and 
a) air shall be forced into the system until a pressure of 35 kPa is created, and 
b) this pressure shall be maintained for at least 15 min without a drop in 
pressure. 
(See Note A-2.3.6.5.(1).) 
2.3.6.6. 
Final Tests 
1) Where a final test is made, 
a) every trap shall be filled with water, 
b) the bottom of the system being tested shall terminate at a building trap, test  
plug or cap, 
c) except as provided in Sentence (2), smoke from smoke-generating machines 
shall be forced into the system, 
d) when the smoke appears from all roof terminals, they shall be closed, and 
e) a pressure equivalent to a 25 mm water column shall be maintained for 
15  min without  the addition of more smoke.  
2) The smoke referred to in Clauses (1)(c) and (d) is permitted to be omitted, 
provided the roof terminals are closed and the system is subjected to an air pressure 
equivalent to a 25 mm water column maintained for 15 min without the addition of 
more air. 
2.3.6.7. 
Ball Tests 
1) Where a ball test is made, a hard ball dense enough not to float shall be rolled 
through the pipe. 
2-22 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.2.1. 
2) The diameter of the ball shall be not less than 
a)  50  mm  where the  size  of  the pipe is  NPS 3 or more, or 
b) 25 mm where the size of the pipe is less than NPS 3. 
2.3.7. 
Testing of Potable Water Systems 
2.3.7.1. 
Application of Tests 
1) After a section of a potable water system has been completed, and before it 
is placed in operation, a water pressure test shall be conducted, except that an air 
pressure test may be used in freezing conditions. 
2) A pressure test may be applied to each section of the system or to the system as 
a whole.  
3) Where a prefabricated system is assembled off the building site in such a manner 
that it cannot be inspected and tested on site, off-site inspections and pressure tests 
shall be conducted. 
4) Where a prefabricated system is installed as part of a water system, 
a) all other plumbing work shall be tested and inspected, and 
b) the complete system shall be pressure tested when requested. 
2.3.7.2. 
Pressure Tests of Potable Water Systems 
1) Except as required in Sentence (2), potable water systems shall be able to  
withstand 
a) without leaking, a water pressure that is at least equal to the maximum 
in-service pressure, or 
b) an air pressure of not less than 700 kPa for at least 2 h without a drop in 
pressure. 
2) If a manufacturer states that an air pressure test is not recommended, a water 
pressure test shall be performed. (See Note A-2.3.7.2.(2).) 
2.3.7.3. 
Water Pressure Tests 
1) Where a water pressure test is made, all air shall be expelled from the system 
before fixture control valves or faucets are closed. 
2) Potable water shall be used to test a potable water system. 
Section 2.4. Drainage Systems 
2.4.1. 
Application 
2.4.1.1. 
General 
1) This Section applies to sanitary drainage systems, storm drainage systems, combined 
building drains or combined building sewers. 
2.4.2. 
Connections to Drainage Systems 
2.4.2.1. 
Connections to Sanitary Drainage Systems 
1) Fixtures shall be directly connected to a sanitary drainage system, except that 
a) drinking fountains are permitted to be 
i) indirectly connected to a sanitary drainage system, or  
ii) connected to a storm drainage system, provided that where 
the system is subject to backflow, a  backwater valve is installed 
in the fountain fixture drain (see Note A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) 
and (e)(vi)), 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-23 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.2.2. 
Division B 
b) drainage pans on heating/cooling units are permitted to be connected to a 
storm drainage system, provided that where the system is subject to backflow, 
a backwater valve is installed, 
c) a floor drain is permitted to be connected to a storm drainage system, provided 
it is located where it can receive only clear-water waste or storm water, 
d) fixtures or appliances that discharge only clear-water waste are permitted to 
be connected to a storm drainage system or be drained onto a roof, and 
e) the following devices shall be indirectly connected to a drainage system: 
i) a device for the display, storage, preparation or processing 
of food or drink, 
ii) a sterilizer, 
iii) a device that uses water as a cooling or heating medium, 
iv) a water operated device, 
v) a water treatment device, or 
vi) a drain or overflow from a water system or a heating system 
(see Note A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi)). 
2) The connection of a sanitary drainage pipe to a nominally horizontal sanitary 
drainage pipe or to a nominally horizontal offset in a stack shall be not less than 1.5 m 
measured horizontally from the bottom of a stack or from the bottom of the upper 
vertical section of the stack that 
a) receives a discharge of 30 or more fixture units, or  
b) receives a discharge from fixtures located on 2 or more storeys. 
(See Note A-2.4.2.1.(2).) 
3) No other fixture shall be connected to a lead bend or stub that serves a water 
closet. 
4) Where a change in direction of more than 45° occurs in a sanitary drainage pipe 
that serves more than one clothes washer, and in which pressure zones are created by 
detergent suds, no other sanitary drainage pipe shall be connected to it within a length 
less than 
a) 40 times the nominal pipe size of the sanitary drainage pipe or 2.44 m maximum 
vertical, whichever is less, before changing direction, and 
b) 10 times the nominal pipe size of the nominally horizontal sanitary drainage 
pipe after changing direction. 
(See Note A-2.4.2.1.(4) and (5).) 
5) Where a vent pipe is connected into the suds pressure zone referred to in 
Sentence (4), no other vent pipe shall be connected to that vent pipe within the height of 
the suds pressure zone. (See Note A-2.4.2.1.(4) and (5).) 
2.4.2.2. 
Connection of Overflows from Rainwater Tanks 
1) An overflow from a rainwater tank shall not be directly connected to a drainage 
system. 
2.4.2.3. 
Direct Connections 
1) Two or more fixture outlet pipes that serve outlets from a single fixture that is 
listed in Clause 2.4.2.1.(1)(e) are permitted to be directly connected to a branch that 
a) has a nominal pipe size of not less than NPS 1¼, and 
b) is terminated above the flood level rim of a directly connected fixture to form 
an air break. 
2) Fixture drains from fixtures that are listed in Subclauses 2.4.2.1.(1)(e)(i) and (e)(ii) 
are permitted to be directly connected to a pipe that 
a) is terminated to form an air break above the flood level rim of a fixture that is 
directly connected to a sanitary drainage system, and  
b) is extended through the roof when fixtures on 3 or more storeys are connected 
to it (see Note A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi)). 
2-24 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.4.3. 
3) Fixture drains from fixtures that are listed in Subclauses 2.4.2.1.(1)(e)(iii) to (e)(vi) 
are permitted to be directly connected to a pipe that 
a) is terminated to form an air break above the flood level rim of a fixture that is 
directly connected to a storm drainage system, and  
b) is extended through the roof when fixtures on 3 or more storeys are connected 
to it. 
2.4.3. 
Location of Fixtures 
2.4.3.1. 
Urinals 
1) Urinals shall not be installed adjacent to wall and floor surfaces that are 
pervious to water. (See Article 3.7.2.5. of Division B of the NBC.) 
2.4.3.2. 
Restricted Locations of Indirect Connections and Traps 
1) Indirect connections or any trap that may overflow shall not be located in a 
crawl space or any other unfrequented area. 
2.4.3.3. 
Equipment Restrictions Upstream of Grease Interceptors 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), equipment discharging waste with organic 
solids shall not be located upstream of a grease interceptor. (See Note A-2.4.3.3.(1).) 
2) An organic solids interceptor is permitted to be installed upstream of a grease 
interceptor. 
2.4.3.4. 
Fixtures Located in Chemical Storage Locations 
1) A floor drain or other fixture located in an oil transformer vault, a high voltage 
room or any room where flammable, dangerous or toxic chemicals are stored or 
handled shall not be connected to a drainage system. 
2.4.3.5. 
Macerating Toilet Systems 
1) A macerating toilet system shall only be installed where no connection to a 
gravity sanitary drainage system is available. 
2.4.3.6. 
Drains Serving Elevator Pits 
1) Where a drain is  provided in an  elevator  pit,  
a) it shall be connected directly to a sump located outside the elevator pit, and 
b) the drain pipe that connects the sump to the drainage system shall have a 
backwater valve. 
2.4.4. 
Treatment of Sewage and Waste 
2.4.4.1. 
Sewage Treatment 
1) Where a fixture or equipment discharges sewage or waste that may damage 
or impair the sanitary drainage system or the functioning of a public or private sewage 
disposal system, provision shall be made for treatment of the sewage or waste before it is 
discharged to the sanitary drainage system. 
2.4.4.2. 
Cooling of Hot Water or Sewage 
1) Where a fixture discharges sewage or clear-water waste that is at a temperature 
above 75°C, provision shall be made for cooling of the waste to 75°C or less before it is 
discharged to the drainage system. 
2.4.4.3. 
Interceptors 
1) Where a fixture discharges sewage that includes fats, oils or grease and is located 
in a public kitchen, in a restaurant or in a care or detention occupancy, it shall  discharge  
through a grease interceptor. (See Note A-2.4.4.3.(1).) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-25 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.4.4. 
Division B 
2) Where the discharge from a fixture may contain oil or gasoline, an oil interceptor 
shall be installed. (See Article 2.5.5.2. for venting requirements for oil interceptors.) 
3) Where a fixture discharges sand, grit or similar materials, an interceptor designed 
for the purpose of trapping such discharges shall be installed. 
4) 
Interceptors shall have sufficient capacity to perform the service for which 
it is provided. 
2.4.4.4. 
Neutralizing and Dilution Tanks 
1) Where a fixture or equipment discharges corrosive or acid waste, it shall 
discharge into a neutralizing or dilution tank that is connected to the sanitary drainage 
system through 
a) a trap, or  
b) an indirect connection. 
(See Note A-2.4.4.4.(1).) 
2) Neutralizing and dilution tanks shall have a method for neutralizing the liquid. 
2.4.5. 
Traps 
2.4.5.1. 
Traps for Sanitary Drainage Systems 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) to (5) and in Article 2.4.5.2., fixtures shall 
be protected by a separate trap. 
2) One trap is permitted to protect 
a) all the trays or compartments of a 2- or 3-compartment sink, 
b) a 2-compartment laundry tray, or 
c) 2 similar single compartment fixtures located in the same room. 
(See Note A-2.4.5.1.(2).) 
3) One trap is permitted to serve a group of floor drains or shower drains, a group 
of washing machines or a group of laboratory sinks if the fixtures 
a) are in the same room, and 
b) are not located where they can receive food or other organic matter. 
(See Note A-2.4.5.1.(3).) 
4) An indirectly connected fixture that can discharge only clear-water waste other 
than a drinking fountain need not be protected by a trap. (See Clause 2.4.2.1.(1)(e) 
for indirect connections.) 
5) An interceptor with an effective water seal of not less than 38 mm is permitted to 
serve as a trap. (See Note A-2.4.5.1.(5).) 
6) Where a domestic dishwashing machine equipped with a drainage  pump  
discharges through a direct connection into the fixture outlet pipe of an adjacent kitchen 
sink or disposal unit, the pump discharge line shall rise as high as possible to just 
under the counter and connect 
a) on the inlet side of the sink trap by means of a Y fitting, or 
b) to the disposal unit. 
2.4.5.2. 
Traps for Storm Drainage Systems 
1) Where a storm drainage system is connected to a combined building sewer or a 
public combined sewer, a  trap shall be installed between any opening in the system and 
the drain or sewer, except that no trap is required if the opening is the upper end of 
a leader that terminates 
a) at a roof that is used only for weather protection, 
b) not less than 1 m above or not less than 3.5 m in any other direction from 
any air inlet, openable window or door, and 
c) not less than 1.8 m from a property line. 
(See Note A-2.4.5.2.(1).) 
2-26 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.6.3. 
2) A floor drain that drains to a storm drainage system shall be protected by a 
trap that 
a) is located between the floor drain and a leader, storm building drain or storm 
building sewer, 
b) may serve all floor drains located in the same room, and 
c) need not be protected by a vent pipe. 
3) Where freezing conditions could cause storm drainage systems to freeze due to 
air circulation within the piping, a trap with a cleanout shall be installed in a heated 
location. 
2.4.5.3. 
Connection of Subsoil Drainage Pipe to a Sanitary Drainage System 
1) Where a subsoil drainage pipe is connected to a sanitary drainage system, the  
connection shall be made on the upstream side of a trap with a cleanout or a trapped 
sump. (See Note A-2.4.5.3.(1).) 
2.4.5.4. 
Location and Cleanout for Building Traps 
1) Where a building trap is installed, it shall 
a) be provided with a cleanout fitting on the upstream side of and directly 
over the trap, 
b) be located upstream of the building cleanout, and  
c) be located 
i) inside the building as close as practical to the place where 
the building drain leaves the building, or  
ii) outside the building in a manhole. 
(See Note A-2.4.5.4.(1).) 
2.4.5.5. 
Trap Seals 
1) Provision shall be made for maintaining the trap seal of a floor drain by 
a) the use of a trap seal primer, 
b) using the drain as a receptacle for an indirectly connected drinking fountain, 
or 
c) other equally effective means. 
(See Note A-2.4.5.5.(1).) 
2.4.6. 
Arrangement of Drainage Piping 
2.4.6.1. 
Separate Systems 
1) No vertical sanitary drainage pipe shall conduct both sewage and storm water. 
2) A combined building drain shall not be installed. (See Note A-2.1.2.1.(2).) 
3) There shall be no unused open ends in a drainage system and dead ends shall be 
so graded that water will not collect in them. 
2.4.6.2. 
Location of Sanitary Drainage Pipes 
1) A sanitary drainage pipe shall not be located directly above 
a) non-pressure potable water storage tanks, 
b) manholes in pressure potable water storage tanks, or 
c) food-handling or food-processing equipment. 
2.4.6.3. 
Sumps or Tanks 
(See Note A-2.4.6.3.) 
1) Piping that is too low to drain into a building sewer by gravity shall be drained to 
a sump or receiving tank. 
2) Where the sump or tank receives sewage, it shall be water- and air-tight and 
shall be vented. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-27 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.6.4. 
Division B 
3) Where the sump or tank receives subsurface water from a subsoil drainage pipe, it  
shall be provided with a water- and air-tight cover. 
4) Equipment such as a pump or ejector that can lift the contents of the sump or 
tank and discharge it into the building drain or building sewer shall be installed. 
5) Where the equipment does not operate automatically, the capacity of the sump 
shall be sufficient to hold at least a 24 h accumulation of liquid. 
6) Where there is a building trap, the discharge pipe from the equipment shall be 
connected to the building drain downstream of the trap. 
7) The discharge pipe from every pumped sump shall be equipped with a union, 
a backwater valve and a shut-off valve installed in that sequence in the direction of 
discharge. 
8) The discharge piping from a pump or ejector shall be sized for optimum flow 
velocities at pump design conditions. 
2.4.6.4. 
Protection from Backflow 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) and (3), where a building drain or a branch 
may be subject to backflow, a  backwater valve shall be installed on every fixture drain 
connected to them when the fixture is located below the level of the adjoining street. 
2) Where more than one fixture is located on a storey and all are connected to the 
same branch, the  backwater valve is permitted to be installed on the branch. 
3) A subsoil drainage pipe that drains into a sanitary drainage system that is subject 
to surcharge shall be connected in such a manner that sewage cannot back up into the 
subsoil drainage pipe. (See Note A-2.4.6.4.(3).) 
4) Except as permitted in Sentence (5), a backwater valve or a gate valve that would 
prevent the free circulation of air shall not be installed in a building drain or in a building 
sewer. 
5) A backwater valve is permitted to be installed in a building drain, provided that 
a) it is a “normally open” design conforming to 
i) CSA B70, “Cast iron soil pipe, fittings, and means of 
joining,” 
ii) CSA B181.1, “Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) drain, 
waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings,” 
iii) CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated 
polyvinylchloride (CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and 
pipe fittings,” or 
iv) CSA B182.1, “Plastic drain and sewer pipe and pipe 
fittings,” and 
b) it does not serve more than one dwelling unit. 
2.4.6.5. 
Mobile Home Sewer Service 
1) A building sewer intended to serve a mobile home shall be 
a) not less than NPS 4, 
b) terminated above ground, 
c) provided with 
i) a tamperproof terminal connection that is capable of being 
repeatedly connected, disconnected and sealed, 
ii) a protective concrete pad, and 
iii) a means to protect it from frost heave, and 
d) designed and constructed in accordance with good engineering practice. 
2.4.7. 
Cleanouts 
2.4.7.1. 
Cleanouts for Drainage Systems 
1) 
Sanitary drainage systems and storm drainage systems shall be provided with 
cleanouts that will permit cleaning of the entire system. 
2-28 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.7.2. 
2) A cleanout fitting shall be provided on the upstream side and directly over 
every running trap. 
3) Internal leaders shall be provided with a cleanout fitting at the bottom of the 
leader or not more than 3 m upstream from the bottom of the leader. 
4) Where a cleanout is required on a building sewer of NPS 8 or larger, it shall be a 
manhole. 
5) A building sewer shall not change direction or slope between the building and 
public sewer or between cleanouts, except that pipes not more than NPS 6 may  change  
direction 
a) by not more than 5° every 3 m, or 
b)  by  the use  of  fittings  with  a cumulative change in direction  of  not more  
than 45°. 
6) Building drains shall be provided with a cleanout fitting of NPS 4  or larger that is  
located as close as practical to the place where the building drain leaves the building. 
(See Note A-2.4.7.1.(6).) 
7) Stacks shall be provided with a  cleanout fitting 
a) at the bottom of the stack, 
b) not more than 3 m upstream of the bottom of the stack, or 
c) on a Y fitting connecting the stack to the building drain or branch. 
8) A cleanout shall be provided to permit the cleaning of the piping downstream of 
an interceptor. 
9) Cleanouts shall be installed so that the cumulative change in direction is not 
more than 90° between cleanouts in a drip pipe from a food receptacle or in a fixture 
drain serving a kitchen sink in a non-residential occupancy. (See Note A-2.4.7.1.(9).) 
10) A fixture outlet pipe, a  trap with a removable trap dip, or  a  separate  cleanout shall 
be used as a cleanout for a fixture drain. (See Note A-2.4.7.1.(10).) 
11) Building drains shall  be provided  with an additional  cleanout for each cumulative 
horizontal change in direction exceeding 135°. 
2.4.7.2. 
Size and Spacing of Cleanouts 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2), (3) and 2.4.7.1.(6), the nominal pipe size and 
spacing of cleanouts in nominally horizontal pipes of a drainage system shall conform to 
Table 2.4.7.2. 
Table 2.4.7.2. 
Permitted Size and Spacing of Cleanouts 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.4.7.2.(1) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Drainage 
Minimum Nominal Pipe Size of 
Maximum Spacing, m 
Pipe, NPS 
Cleanout, NPS 
One-Way Rodding 
Two-Way Rodding 
less than 3 
3 and  4  
over 4 
Same NPS as drainage pipe 
3 
4 
7.5 
15
 
26 
15 
30
52 
2) The spacing between manholes serving a building sewer 
a) of NPS 24 or less shall not exceed 90 m, and 
b) over NPS 24 shall not exceed 150 m. 
3) The developed length of a building sewer between the building and the first 
manhole to which the building sewer connects shall not exceed 75 m. 
4) Where a building sewer connects to another building sewer other than by a 
manhole, the developed length between the building and the building sewer to which it 
connects shall not exceed 30 m. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-29 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.7.3. 
Division B 
5) Cleanouts that allow rodding in one direction only shall be installed to permit 
rodding in the direction of flow. 
2.4.7.3. 
Manholes 
1) A manhole, including the cover, shall be designed to support all loads imposed 
upon it. 
2) A manhole shall be provided with 
a) a cover that provides an airtight seal if located within a building, 
b) a rigid ladder of a corrosion-resistant material where the depth exceeds 
1 m,  and  
c) a vent to the exterior if the manhole is located within a building. 
3) A manhole shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of 1 m, except that the 
top 1.5 m may be tapered from 1 m down to a minimum of 600 mm at the top. 
4) A manhole in a sanitary drainage system shall be channeled to direct the flow of 
effluent. 
2.4.7.4. 
Location of Cleanouts 
1) Cleanouts and access covers shall be located so that their openings are readily 
accessible for drain cleaning purposes. 
2) A cleanout shall not be 
a) located in a floor assembly in a manner that may constitute a hazard, or 
b) used as a floor drain. 
3) There shall be no change of direction between a cleanout fitting and the trap 
that it serves. 
4) The piping between a cleanout fitting and the drainage system it serves shall 
not change direction by more than 45°. 
5) Cleanouts serving fixture drains in healthcare facilities, mortuaries, laboratories 
and similar occupancies, where contamination by hazardous waste is likely, shall 
be located a minimum of 150 mm above the flood level rim of the fixture. (See  
Note A-2.4.4.4.(1).) 
2.4.8. 
Minimum Slope and Length of Drainage Pipes 
2.4.8.1. 
Minimum Slope 
1) Except as provided in Articles 2.4.10.8. and 2.4.10.9., drainage pipes that are 
NPS 3 or less shall have a downward slope in the direction of flow of at least 1 in 50. 
(See Note A-2.4.8.1.(1).) 
2.4.8.2. 
Length of Fixture Outlet Pipes 
1) Except for fixture outlet pipes installed in conformance with Sentence 2.4.5.1.(3), 
the developed length of fixture outlet pipes shall not exceed 1 200 mm. (See 
Note A-2.4.8.2.(1).) (See also Note A-2.4.5.1.(2).) 
2.4.9. 
Size of Drainage Pipes 
2.4.9.1. 
No Reduction in Size 
1) A sanitary drainage pipe shall be of a nominal pipe size not less than the NPS of 
a) a vent pipe that is connected to it, or 
b) the largest sanitary drainage pipe that drains into it. 
2.4.9.2. 
Serving Water Closets 
1) Drainage pipes that serve a water closet shall be not less than NPS 3. 
2) Branch and building drains downstream of the third water-closet fixture drain 
connection shall be not less than NPS 4. 
2-30 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.9.3. 
3) Stacks that serve more than 6 water closets shall be not less than NPS 4. 
4) Discharge pipes serving a macerating toilet system shall be not less than NPS ¾. 
2.4.9.3. 
Size of Fixture Outlet Pipes 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), the nominal pipe size of fixture outlet pipes 
shall conform to Table 2.4.9.3. 
2) The part of the fixture outlet pipe that is common to 3 compartments of a sink 
shall be one NPS larger than the largest fixture outlet pipe of the compartments that it 
serves. (See Note A-2.4.9.3.(2).) 
Table 2.4.9.3. 
Minimum Permitted Size of Fixture Outlet Pipe and Hydraulic Loads for Fixtures(1) 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.4.9.3.(1) and 2.4.10.2.(1) 
Fixture 
Minimum Nominal Pipe Size of 
Fixture Outlet Pipe, NPS 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Autopsy table 
1½ 
2 
Bathroom group 
(a) with flush tank 
(b) with direct flush valve 
n/a 
n/a 
6 
8 
Bathtub (with or without shower) 
1½ 
1½ 
Bath: foot, sitz or slab 
1½ 
1½ 
Beer cabinet 
1½ 
1½ 
Bidet 
1¼ 
1 
Clothes washer 
(a) domestic(1) 
(b) commercial 
n/a 
n/a 
2 
2 
Dental unit or cuspidor 
1¼ 
1 
Dishwasher 
(a) domestic type 
(b) commercial type 
1½ 
2 
1½ no load when connected to garbage grinder 
or domestic sink 
3 
Drinking fountain 
1¼ 
½ 
Floor drain(2) 
2 
2 with  NPS 2 trap 
3 with  NPS 3 trap 
Garbage grinder, commercial type 
2 
3 
Icebox 
1¼ 
1 
Laundry tray 
(a) single or double units or 2 single units with 
common trap 
(b) 3 compartments 
1½ 
1½ 
1½ 
2 
Lavatory 
(a) barber or beauty parlor 
(b) dental 
(c) domestic type, single or 
2 single with common  trap 
(d) multiple or industrial type 
1½ 
1¼ 
1¼ 
1½ 
1½ 
1 
1 with  NPS 1¼ trap 
1½ with NPS 1½ trap 
according to Table 2.4.10.2. 
Macerating toilet system 
¾ 
4 
Potato peeler 
2 
3 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-31 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.9.4. 
Division B 
Table 2.4.9.3. (Continued) 
Fixture 
Minimum Nominal Pipe Size of 
Fixture Outlet Pipe, NPS 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Shower drain 
Total volume of discharge from all shower heads 
and body sprays: 
(a) < 9.5 LPM 
1½ 
1½ 
(b) 9.5  LPM  to 20 LPM  
2 
3 
(c) > 20 LPM 
3 
6 
Sink 
(a) domestic and other small types with or without 
garbage grinders, single, double or 2 single with a 
common trap 
1½ 
1½ 
(b) Other sinks 
1½ 
1½ with NPS 1½ trap 
2 with  NPS 2 trap 
3 with  NPS 3 trap 
Urinal 
(a) pedestal, siphon-jet or blowout type 
2 
4 
(b) stall, washout type 
(c) wall 
2 
2 
(i) washout type 
1½ 
1½ 
(ii) other types 
2 
3 
Water closet 
(a) with flush tank 
(b) with direct flush valve 
3 
3 
4 
6 
Notes to Table 2.4.9.3.: 
(1) See Note A-Table 2.4.9.3. 
(2) No hydraulic load for emergency floor drains. 
3) Where clothes washers do not drain to a laundry tray, the trap inlet shall be not 
less than NPS 2 and be fitted with a vertical standpipe that is not less than 600 mm long 
measured from the trap weir and terminates above the flood level rim of the clothes 
washer. (See Note A-2.4.9.3.(3).) 
2.4.9.4. 
Size of Building Drain and Building Sewer 
1) Building drains and building sewers connected to the public sewer system 
downstream of the main cleanout (see Sentence 2.4.7.1.(6)) shall be not less than NPS 4. 
2.4.9.5. 
Offset in Leaders 
1) No change in the nominal pipe size of a leader with a nominally horizontal offset is 
required if the offset 
a) is located immediately under the roof, 
b) is not more than 6 m long, and 
c) has a slope of not less than 1 in 50. 
2) If the horizontal offset is more than 6 m long, the leader shall conform to 
Table 2.4.10.9. 
2-32 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.10.4. 
2.4.10. 
Hydraulic Loads 
(See Note A-2.4.10. for determination of hydraulic loads and nominal pipe sizes of drainage pipes.) 
2.4.10.1. 
Total Load on a Pipe 
1) The hydraulic load on a pipe is the total load from 
a) every fixture that is connected to the system upstream of the pipe, 
b) every fixture for which provision is made for future connection upstream 
of the pipe, and 
c) all roofs and paved surfaces that drain into the system upstream of the pipe. 
2.4.10.2. 
Hydraulic Loads for Fixtures 
1) The hydraulic load from a fixture that is listed in Table 2.4.9.3. is the number of 
fixture units set forth in the Table. 
2) Except as provided in Sentence (1), the hydraulic load from a fixture that is not 
listed in Table 2.4.9.3. is the number of fixture units set forth in Table 2.4.10.2. for the 
nominal pipe size of the trap that serves the fixture. 
Table 2.4.10.2. 
Permitted Hydraulic Load from a Fixture Based on Size of Trap 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.4.10.2.(2) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Trap, NPS 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
5 
6 
2.4.10.3. 
Hydraulic Loads from Fixtures with a Continuous Flow 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), the hydraulic load from a fixture that 
produces a continuous flow, such as a pump or an air-conditioning fixture, is  
31.7 fixture units for each litre per second of flow. 
2) Where a fixture or equipment that produces a continuous or semi-continuous 
flow drains to a combined sewer or to a storm sewer, the hydraulic load from the fixture is 
900 L for each litre per second of flow. 
2.4.10.4. 
Hydraulic Loads from Roofs or Paved Surfaces 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), the hydraulic load in litres from a roof 
or paved surface is the maximum 15 min rainfall determined in conformance with 
Subsection 1.1.3. of Division B of the NBC, multiplied by the sum of 
a) the area in square metres of the horizontal projection of the surface drained, 
and 
b) one-half the area in square metres of the largest adjoining vertical surface. 
(See Note A-2.4.10.4.(1).) 
2) Flow control roof drains may be installed, provided 
a) the maximum drain down time does not exceed 24 h, 
b) the roof structure is designed to carry the load of the stored water, 
c) one or more scuppers are installed not more than 30 m apart along the 
perimeter of the building so that 
i) up to 200% of the 15-minute rainfall intensity can be 
handled, and 
ii) the maximum depth of controlled water is limited to 
150 mm, 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-33 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.10.5. 
Division B 
d) they are located not more than 15 m from the edge of the roof and not more 
than 30 m from adjacent drains, and 
e) there is at least one drain for each 900 m2. 
3) Hydraulic loads, in litres per second, for flow control roof drains and restricted 
paved area drains shall be determined according to rain intensity-duration frequency 
curves as compiled by Environment Canada using 25-year frequencies. 
4) Where the height of the parapet is more than 150 mm or exceeds the height of 
the adjacent wall flashing, 
a) emergency roof overflows or scuppers described in Clause (2)(c) shall be 
provided, and 
b) there shall be a minimum of 2 roof drains. 
2.4.10.5. 
Conversion of Fixture Units to Litres 
1) Except as provided in Sentence 2.4.10.3.(2), where the hydraulic load is to be 
expressed in litres, fixture units shall be converted as follows: 
a) when the number of fixture units is 260 or fewer, the load is 2 360 L, and 
b) when the number of fixture units exceeds 260, the load is 9.1 L for each 
fixture unit. 
2.4.10.6. 
Hydraulic Loads to Sanitary Drainage Pipes 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), the hydraulic load that is drained to every 
stack shall conform to Table 2.4.10.6.-A. 
2) Where the nominally horizontal offset in a stack is 1.5 m or more, the hydraulic 
load that is served by it shall conform to Table 2.4.10.6.-B or Table 2.4.10.6.-C, 
whichever is the less restrictive. 
Table 2.4.10.6.-A 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Stack 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.4.10.6.(1) and 2.5.7.3.(2), and Table 2.5.8.4. 
Nominal Pipe Size of Stack, NPS 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Maximum Fixture Units Drained from any 1 Storey 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
12 
15 
2 
8 
24
 
102
 
540
 
1 400  
2
 
900
 
7
 
600
 
15 000 
26 000 
50 000 
2 
2 
6 
18
 
100
 
250  
500
 
830
 
2 700 
4 680 
9 000 
2-34 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.4.10.9. 
Table 2.4.10.6.-B 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Branch 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.4.10.6.(2), 2.4.10.7.(1) and 2.5.7.3.(2) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Branch, NPS 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
12 
2 
3 
6 
27
180
390 
700
1 600
2 500 
3 900 
Table 2.4.10.6.-C 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Sanitary Building Drain or Sewer 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.4.10.6.(2) and Article 2.4.10.8. 
Nominal Pipe 
Size of Drain or 
Sewer, NPS 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Slope 
1 in 400  
1 in  200  
1 in 133  
1 in 100  
1  in  50  
1  in  25  
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
12 
15 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
2 240 
4 800 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1 400 
2 500 
3 900 
7 000 
n/a 
n/a 
380 
600 
1 500 
2 700 
4 500 
9 300 
n/a 
180 
390 
700 
1 600 
3 000 
5 400 
10 400 
27 
240 
480 
840 
2 250 
4 500 
8 300 
16 300 
36 
300 
670 
1 300 
3 370 
6 500 
13 000 
22 500 
2.4.10.7. 
Hydraulic Loads on Branches 
1) The hydraulic load that is drained to a branch shall conform to Table 2.4.10.6.-B. 
2.4.10.8. 
Hydraulic Loads on Sanitary Building Drains or Sewers 
1) The hydraulic load that is drained to a sanitary building drain or a sanitary 
building sewer shall conform to Table 2.4.10.6.-C. 
2.4.10.9. 
Hydraulic Loads on Storm or Combined Building Drains or Sewers 
1) The hydraulic load that is drained to a storm building drain, a  storm building sewer 
or a combined building sewer shall conform to Table 2.4.10.9. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-35 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.4.10.10. 
Division B 
Table 2.4.10.9. 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Storm Building Drain or Sewer, or a Combined Building Sewer 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.4.9.5.(2) and Article 2.4.10.9. 
Nominal Pipe 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, L 
Size of Drain or 
Slope 
Sewer, NPS 
1  in  400  
1 in 200  
1 in 133  
1  in  100  
1  in  68  
1  in  50  
1  in  25  
3 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
2 770  
3 910  
4 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
4 220  
5 160  
5 970  
8 430  
5 
n/a 
n/a 
6 760 
7 650 
9 350 
10 800 
15 300 
6 
n/a 
n/a 
10 700 
12 400 
15 200 
17 600 
24 900 
8 
n/a 
18 900 
23 200 
26 700 
32 800 
37 800 
53 600 
10 
n/a 
34 300 
41 900 
48 500 
59 400 
68 600 
97 000 
12 
37 400 
55 900 
68 300 
78 700 
96 500 
112 000 
158 000 
15 
71 400 
101 000 
124 000 
143 000 
175 000 
202 000 
287 000 
2.4.10.10. 
Hydraulic Loads to Roof Gutters 
1) The hydraulic load that is drained to a roof gutter shall conform to Table 2.4.10.10. 
Table 2.4.10.10. 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Roof Gutter 
Forming Part of Article 2.4.10.10. 
Nominal Pipe Size of 
Gutter, NPS 
Area of Gutter, cm2 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, L 
Slope 
1 in 200  
1 in 100  
1  in  50  
1  in  25  
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
10 
22.8 
40.5 
63.3 
91.2 
124.1 
162.1 
253.4 
406 
838 
1 470 
2 260 
3 250 
4 700 
8 480 
559 
1 190 
2 080 
3 200 
4 600 
6 600 
12 000 
812 
1 700 
2 950 
4 520 
6 500 
9 400 
17 000 
1 140 
2 410 
4 170 
6 530 
9 190 
13 200 
23 600 
2.4.10.11. 
Hydraulic Loads on Leaders 
1) The hydraulic load that is drained to a leader shall conform to Table 2.4.10.11. 
Table 2.4.10.11. 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load Drained to a Leader 
Forming Part of Article 2.4.10.11. 
Circular Leader 
Non-Circular Leader 
Nominal Pipe Size of Leader, NPS 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, L 
Area of Leader, cm2 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, L 
2 
2½ 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
1
 
700
 
3 070 
5
 
000
 
10 800  
19 500 
31 800 
68 300 
20.3
 
31.6 
45.6
 
81.1 
126.6 
182.4 
324.3 
1
 
520
 
2 770 
4
 
500
 
9 700 
17 600 
28 700 
61 500 
2-36 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5.1.1. 
2.4.10.12. 
Hydraulic Loads from Fixtures with a Semi-continuous Flow 
1) The hydraulic load from a fixture or equipment that produces a semi-continuous 
flow shall conform to Table 2.4.10.12. 
Table 2.4.10.12. 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Load from Fixtures with a Semi-continuous Flow 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.4.10.12.(1) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Trap, NPS 
Flow, L/s 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
0.000 - 0.090 
0.091 - 0.190 
0.191 - 0.850 
0.851 - 5.700 
3 
6 
27 
180 
2.4.10.13. 
Design of Storm Sewers 
1) Except as provided in Sentences 2.4.10.4.(1) and (2), and Article 2.4.10.9., storm 
sewers may be designed in accordance with good engineering practice. 
Section 2.5. Venting Systems 
2.5.1. 
Vent Pipes for Traps 
2.5.1.1. 
Venting for Traps 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (3) and (4), traps shall be protected by a vent 
pipe. 
2) Drainage systems may require additional protection as provided in 
Subsections 2.5.4. and 2.5.5. by the installation of 
a) branch vents, 
b) vent stacks, 
c) stack vents, 
d) vent headers, 
e) fresh air inlets, 
f) relief vents, 
g) circuit vents, 
h) yoke vents, 
i) offset relief vents, 
j) additional circuit vents, 
k) wet vents, 
l) individual vents, 
m) dual vents, or  
n) continuous vents. 
3) A trap that serves a floor drain need not be protected where 
a) the nominal pipe size of the trap is not less than NPS 3, 
b) the length of the fixture drain is not less than 450 mm, and 
c) the fall on the fixture drain does not exceed its nominal pipe size. 
(See Note A-2.5.1.1.(3).) 
4) A trap need not be protected by a vent pipe 
a) where it serves 
i) a subsoil drainage pipe, or  
ii) a storm drainage system, or  
b) where it forms part of an indirect drainage system (see also 
Clause 2.4.2.3.(2)(b)). 
(See Note A-2.5.1.1.(4).) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-37 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.5.2.1. 
Division B 
2.5.2. 
Wet Venting 
2.5.2.1. 
Wet Venting 
(See Note A-2.5.2.1.) 
1) A sanitary drainage pipe is permitted to serve as a wet vent, provided 
a) the hydraulic load is in accordance with Table 2.5.8.1., 
b) the number of wet-vented water closets does not exceed 2, 
c) where 2 water closets are installed, they are connected at the same level by 
means of a double sanitary T fitting if the vent pipe is vertical and by means 
of a double Y fitting if the vent pipe is horizontal, 
d) the water closets are installed downstream of all other fixtures, 
e) trap arms and fixture drains connected to the wet vent do not exceed NPS 2, 
except for connections from emergency floor drains in accordance with 
Sentence 2.5.1.1.(3), 
f) the total hydraulic load on the wet vent does not exceed the limits stated in 
Table 2.5.8.1. when separately vented branches or fixture drains in the same 
storey, having a total hydraulic load not greater than 2 fixture units, are  
connected to the wet vent or a wet-vented water-closet trap arm, 
g) the hydraulic load of separately vented fixtures that drain into the wet vent 
are not included when sizing the continuous vent that serves the wet vent, 
h) where a wet vent extends through more than one storey, the  total discharge  
from any one storey above the first storey does not exceed 4 fixture units, 
i) there is not more than one nominally horizontal offset in the wet vent, and  
i) the offset does not exceed 1.2 m for pipes of NPS 2 or less , or  
ii) the offset does not exceed 2.5 m for pipes larger than NPS 2, 
j) the nominal pipe size of the wet-vented portion is not reduced, except for 
the portion that is upstream of emergency floor drains in accordance with 
Sentence 2.5.1.1.(3), and 
k) the length of the wet vent is not limited. 
2.5.3. 
Circuit Venting 
2.5.3.1. 
Circuit Venting 
(See Note A-2.5.3.1.) 
1) A section of horizontal branch is permitted to be circuit-vented, provided 
a) a circuit vent is connected to it, 
b) all fixtures served by the circuit vent are located in the same storey, and  
c) no stack is connected to it upstream of a circuit-vented fixture. 
2) Fixtures with fixture outlet pipes less than NPS 2 shall be separately vented or 
separately circuit-vented. 
3) Except as provided in Sentences (4) and (5), a relief vent shall be connected to 
the branch that forms part of a circuit-vented system, downstream of the connection of 
the most downstream circuit-vented fixture. 
4) A sanitary drainage pipe having a hydraulic load not greater than 6 fixture units is 
permitted to act as a relief vent for a branch that is circuit-vented. 
5) A symmetrically connected relief vent is permitted to serve as a combined relief 
vent for a maximum of 2 branches that are circuit-vented, provided there are not more 
than 8 circuit-vented fixtures connected between the combined relief vent and each 
circuit vent. 
6) Additional circuit vents shall be required 
a) where each cumulative horizontal change in direction of a branch served by 
a circuit vent exceeds 45° between vent pipe connections, or 
b) where more than 8 circuit-vented fixtures are connected to a branch between 
vent pipe connections. 
7) A sanitary drainage pipe is permitted to serve as an additional circuit vent in 
accordance with Sentence (6), provided the sanitary drainage pipe is sized as a wet vent 
in conformance with Article 2.5.8.1. and is not less than NPS 2. 
2-38 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5.4.4. 
8) Connections to circuit vents and additional circuit vents in accordance with 
Sentence (6) shall conform to Sentence 2.5.4.5.(1). 
9) A circuit-vented branch, including the fixture drain downstream of the circuit 
vent connection, shall be sized in accordance with Article 2.4.10.7., except that it shall 
be not less than 
a) NPS 2, where traps less than NPS 2 are circuit-vented, or 
b) NPS 3, where traps of NPS 2 or larger are  circuit-vented.  
10) Additional circuit vents shall be sized in accordance with Table 2.5.7.1. and 
Sentence 2.5.7.3.(1). 
11) The hydraulic load on a circuit vent shall include the hydraulic load from fixtures 
connected to the branch served by the circuit vent, but shall not include the hydraulic 
load from fixtures permitted by Sentences (3), (4) and (5). 
2.5.4. 
Vent Pipes for Stacks 
2.5.4.1. 
Stack Vents 
1) The upper end of every stack shall terminate in a stack vent. 
2.5.4.2. 
Vent Stacks 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), every stack that drains fixtures from more 
than 4 storeys containing plumbing fixtures shall have a vent stack. 
2) A stack that serves as a wet vent does not require a vent stack. 
3) The vent stack required by Sentence (1) shall be connected to a vertical section of 
the stack at or immediately below the lowest sanitary drainage pipe connected to the stack. 
4) Fixtures are permitted to be connected to a vent stack, provided 
a) the total hydraulic load of the connected fixtures does not exceed 
8 fixture units, 
b) at least one fixture is connected to a vertical portion of the vent stack and 
upstream of any other fixtures, 
c) no other fixture is connected downstream of a water closet, 
d) all fixtures are located in the lowest storey served by the vent stack, and  
e) the section of the vent pipe that acts as a wet vent conforms to the 
requirements regarding wet vents. 
2.5.4.3. 
Yoke Vents 
(See Note A-2.5.4.3.) 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (4), where a stack receives the discharge from 
fixtures located  on more  than 11  storeys, a  yoke vent shall be installed 
a) for each section of 5 storeys or part thereof counted from the top down, and 
b) at or immediately above each offset or double offset. 
2) The yoke vent shall be connected to the stack by means of a drainage fitting at 
or immediately below the lowest sanitary drainage pipe from the lowest storey of the 
sections described in Sentence (1). 
3) The yoke vent shall connect to the vent stack at least 1 m above the floor level of 
the lowest storey in  the section  described in Sentence  (1).  
4) A yoke vent need not be installed provided the stack is interconnected with the 
vent stack in each storey of the section in which fixtures are located by means of a vent pipe 
equal in nominal pipe size to the branch or fixture drain or NPS 2, whichever is smaller. 
2.5.4.4. 
Offset Relief Vents 
1) A stack that has a nominally horizontal offset more than 1.5 m long and above 
which the upper vertical portion of the stack passes through more than 2 storeys and 
receives a hydraulic load of more than 100 fixture units shall be vented by an offset relief 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-39 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.5.4.5. 
Division B 
vent connected to the vertical section immediately above the offset and by another 
offset relief vent 
a) connected to the lower vertical section at or above the highest sanitary 
drainage pipe connection, or 
b) extended as a vertical continuation of the lower section. 
(See Note A-2.5.4.4.(1).) 
2.5.4.5. 
Fixtures Draining into Vent Pipes 
1) The trap arm of a fixture that has a hydraulic load of not more than 
1½ fixture units may be connected to the vertical section of a circuit vent, additional 
circuit vent, offset relief vent or yoke vent, provided 
a) not more than 2 fixtures are connected to the vent pipe, 
b) where 2 fixtures are connected to the vent pipe, the connection is made by 
means of a double sanitary T fitting, and 
c) the section of the vent pipe that acts as a wet vent is not less than NPS 2. 
(See Note A-2.5.4.5.(1).) 
2.5.5. 
Miscellaneous Vent Pipes 
2.5.5.1. 
Venting of Sewage Sumps 
1) Every sump that receives sewage shall be provided with a vent pipe that is 
connected to the top of the sump. (See Article 2.5.7.7. for sizing of these vents.) 
2.5.5.2. 
Venting of Oil Interceptors 
(See Note A-2.5.5.2.) (See also Article 4.3.5.2. of Division B of the NFC.) 
1) Every oil interceptor shall be provided with 2 vent pipes that 
a) connect to the interceptor at opposite ends, 
b) extend independently to outside air, and 
c) terminate not less than 2 m above ground and at elevations differing by 
at least 300 mm. 
2) Adjacent compartments within an oil interceptor shall be connected to each 
other by a vent opening. 
3) Where a secondary receiver for oil is installed in conjunction with an oil 
interceptor, it shall be vented in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, 
and the vent pipe shall 
a) in no case be less than NPS 1½, 
b) extend independently to outside air, and 
c) terminate not less than 2 m above ground. 
4) The vent pipes referred to in Sentence (1) are permitted to be one NPS smaller 
than the largest connected drainage pipe but not less than NPS 1¼, or can be sized in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
5) A vent pipe that serves an oil interceptor and is located outside a building shall be 
not less than NPS 3 in areas where it may be subject to frost closure. 
2.5.5.3. 
Venting of Drain Piping and Tanks for Corrosive Waste 
1) Venting systems for drain piping, neutralizing tanks, or dilution tanks 
conveying corrosive waste shall extend independently and terminate outdoors. (See 
Article 2.5.7.7. for sizing of these vents.) 
2.5.5.4. 
Fresh Air Inlets 
1) Where a building trap is installed, a fresh air inlet not less than NPS 4 shall  be  
connected upstream and within 1.2 m of the building trap and downstream of any 
other connection. (See Note A-2.4.5.4.(1).) 
2-40 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5.6.3. 
2.5.5.5. 
Provision for Future Installations 
1) Where provision is made for a fixture to be installed in the future, the drainage 
system and venting system shall be sized accordingly and provision shall be made for 
the necessary future connections. 
2) Except as required in Sentence 2.5.7.7.(2), where a plumbing system is installed 
in a building, every  storey in which plumbing is or may be installed, including the 
basement of a single-family dwelling, shall have extended into it or passing through it 
a vent pipe that is at least NPS 1½ for the provision of future connections. 
2.5.6. 
Arrangement of Vent Pipes 
2.5.6.1. 
Drainage of Vent Pipes 
1) Vent pipes shall be installed without depressions in which moisture can collect. 
2.5.6.2. 
Vent Pipe Connections 
1) Vent pipes shall be installed in a nominally vertical position where it is practical 
to do so. 
2) Except for wet vents, where a vent pipe is connected to a nominally horizontal 
sanitary drainage pipe, the connection shall be above the horizontal centre line of the 
sanitary drainage pipe. (See Note A-2.5.6.2.(2).) 
3) Unused vent pipes installed for future connections shall be permanently capped 
with an end cleanout or an adapter and plug. 
2.5.6.3. 
Location of Vent Pipes 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) and (3), vent pipes that protect a fixture trap 
shall be located so that 
a) the developed length of the trap arm is not less than twice the NPS of the 
fixture drain, 
b) the total fall of the trap arm is not greater than its inside diameter, and 
c) the trap arm does not have a cumulative change in direction of more than 
135°. 
(See Note A-2.5.6.3.(1).) 
2) The trap arm of water closets, of S-trap standards or of any other fixture that also 
discharges vertically and depends on siphonic action for its proper functioning shall 
not have a cumulative change in direction of more than 225°. (See Note A-2.5.6.3.(2).) 
3) A vent pipe that protects a water closet or any other fixture that also depends on 
siphonic action for its proper functioning shall be located so that the distance between 
the connections of the fixture drain to the fixture and the vent pipe does not exceed 
a) 1 m in the vertical plane, and 
b) 3 m in the horizontal plane. 
(See Note A-2.5.6.3.(3).) 
4) The maximum length of every trap arm shall conform to Table 2.5.6.3. 
Table 2.5.6.3. 
Length of Trap Arm 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.5.6.3.(4) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Trap Served, NPS 
Maximum Length of Trap Arm, m  
Minimum Slope 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
1.5 
1.8 
2.4
 
3.6
 
9.8
 
1/50 
1/50 
1/50 
1/50 
1/100 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-41 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.5.6.4. 
Division B 
2.5.6.4. 
Connection of Vents above Fixtures Served 
1) Except for a wet vent, every  vent pipe shall extend above the flood level rim of 
every fixture that it serves before being connected to another vent pipe. 
2) No vent pipe shall be connected in such a manner that a blockage in a sanitary 
drainage pipe would cause waste to drain through the vent pipe to the drainage system. 
2.5.6.5. 
Terminals 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (3), the upper end of every vent pipe that is not 
terminated in outside air shall be connected to a venting system that terminates through 
a roof to outside air. 
2) The upper end of every vent pipe that is terminated in outside air, other than a 
vent pipe that serves an oil interceptor or a fresh air inlet, shall be extended above the roof. 
3) A vent pipe is permitted to be erected outside a building, provided that 
a) no single change in direction of the vent pipe exceeds 45°, 
b) all parts of the vent pipe are nominally vertical, 
c) in areas where the vent pipe may be subject  to  frost closure, it is  increased  to  
not less than NPS 3 before penetrating a wall or roof, and 
d) where the building is 4 storeys or less in height, the vent pipe terminates above 
the roof of the building. 
4) Except for a fresh air inlet, where a vent pipe is terminated in outside air, the 
terminal shall be located 
a) not less than 1 m above and not less than 3.5 m in any other direction from 
every air inlet, openable window or door, 
b) not less than 2 m above and not less than 3.5 m in any other direction from 
a roof that supports an occupancy, 
c) not less than 2 m above ground, and 
d) not less than 1.8 m from every property line. 
(See Note A-2.5.6.5.(4).) 
5) Where a vent pipe passes through a roof, it shall 
a) be terminated high enough to prevent the entry of roof drainage but not less 
than 150 mm above the roof or above the surface of storm water, which could 
pond on the roof (see Note A-2.5.6.5.(4)), and 
b) be provided with flashing to prevent the entry of water between the vent 
pipe and the roof (see Article 2.2.10.14.). 
6) Where a vent pipe passes through a roof and may be subject to frost closure, it 
shall be protected from frost closure by 
a) increasing its diameter at least one NPS, but not less than NPS 3, 
immediately before it penetrates the roof, 
b) insulating the pipe, or 
c) protecting it in some other manner. 
(See Article 2.3.4.7.) 
2.5.7. 
Minimum Size of Vent Pipes 
2.5.7.1. 
General 
1) The nominal pipe size of every vent pipe shall conform to Table 2.5.7.1. 
2-42 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5.7.7. 
Table 2.5.7.1. 
Minimum Permitted Size of Vent Pipe Based on Size of Trap Served 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.5.7.1.(1) and 2.5.8.2.(1) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Trap Served, NPS 
Minimum Nominal Pipe Size of Vent Pipe, NPS 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1¼ 
1¼ 
1½
1½
1½
2 
2 
2.5.7.2. 
Size Restriction 
1) The nominal pipe size of a branch vent, stack vent, vent stack or vent header shall be 
not less than the nominal pipe size of the vent pipe to which it is connected. 
2) Sanitary building drains shall be provided with at least one vent that is not less 
than NPS 3. 
2.5.7.3. 
Additional Circuit Vents and Relief Vents 
1) Except as provided in Article 2.5.7.1. and Sentence 2.5.3.1.(7), the minimum 
nominal pipe size of an additional circuit vent or relief vent installed in conjunction with a 
circuit vent is permitted to be one NPS smaller than the required nominal pipe size of the 
circuit vent, but need not be larger than NPS 2. 
2) The nominal pipe size of the sanitary drainage pipe acting as a relief 
vent in accordance with Sentence 2.5.3.1.(4) shall be in conformance with 
Table 2.4.10.6.-A, 2.4.10.6.-B or 2.5.8.1., and Article 2.5.7.1., whichever nominal pipe size 
is the largest considering the hydraulic load drained into the sanitary drainage pipe. 
2.5.7.4. 
Offset Relief Vents 
1) Except as provided in Article 2.5.7.1., the minimum nominal pipe size of an offset 
relief vent is permitted to be one NPS smaller than the NPS of the stack vent. 
2.5.7.5. 
Yoke Vents 
1) Yoke vents required by Sentence 2.5.4.3.(1) are permitted to be one NPS smaller 
than the NPS of  the smallest pipe to which they are connected. 
2.5.7.6. 
Vent Pipes for Manholes 
1) The minimum nominal pipe size of a vent pipe that serves a manhole within a 
building shall be NPS 2. 
2.5.7.7. 
Vents for Sewage Sumps, Neutralizing and Dilution Tanks, and 
Macerating Toilet Systems 
1) Except as provided in Sentences (2) and (3), the minimum nominal pipe size of 
the vent pipe for a sewage sump or neutralizing or dilution tank shall be one NPS smaller 
than the NPS of the largest branch or fixture drain draining to the sump. 
2) The nominal pipe size of every vent pipe for a sewage sump or neutralizing or 
dilution tank shall be not less than NPS 2, but need not be greater than NPS 4. 
3) The nominal pipe size of a vent pipe for a macerating toilet system with a sump 
shall be not less than NPS 1½. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-43 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.5.8.1. 
Division B 
2.5.8. 
Sizing of Vent Pipes 
(See Note A-2.5.8. for an explanation on the sizing of vent pipes.) 
2.5.8.1. 
Hydraulic Loads Draining to Wet Vents 
1) The hydraulic load that drains to a wet vent shall conform to Table 2.5.8.1. 
2) When determining the nominal pipe size of a wet vent, the hydraulic load from 
the most downstream fixture or symmetrically connected fixtures shall not be included. 
(See Note A-2.5.8.1.(2).) 
Table 2.5.8.1. 
Maximum Permitted Hydraulic Loads Drained to a Wet Vent 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.5.7.3.(2) and 2.5.8.1.(1) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Wet Vent, NPS 
Maximum Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Not Serving Water Closets 
Fixtures, Other Than Water Closets, That Serve 
Not More Than 2 Water Closets 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
2 
4 
12
 
36
 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
3 
8
14
18 
23 
2.5.8.2. 
Individual Vents and Dual Vents 
1) The nominal pipe size of individual vents and dual vents shall be determined using 
Table 2.5.7.1. based on the largest trap served. 
2) When sizing an individual vent or a dual vent, the length is not taken into 
consideration. 
2.5.8.3. 
Branch Vents, Vent Headers, Continuous Vents and Circuit Vents 
(See Note A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.) 
1) Branch vents, vent headers, circuit vents and continuous vents shall be sized in 
accordance with Table 2.5.8.3., unless they are individual vents or dual vents. 
2) For the purposes of Table 2.5.8.3., the length of a branch vent shall be its developed 
length from the most distant sanitary drainage pipe connection to a vent stack, stack vent, 
vent header or outside air. 
3) For the purposes of Table 2.5.8.3., the length of a vent header shall be its developed 
length from the most distant sanitary drainage pipe connection to outside air. 
4) For the purposes of Table 2.5.8.3., the length of a circuit vent shall be its developed 
length from the horizontal sanitary drainage pipe connection to a vent stack, stack vent, 
vent header or outside air. 
5) For the purposes of Table 2.5.8.3., the length of a continuous vent shall be its 
developed length from the vertical sanitary drainage pipe connection to a vent stack, stack 
vent, vent header or outside air. 
2-44 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.5.8.4. 
Table 2.5.8.3. 
Sizing of Branch Vents, Vent Headers, Circuit Vents and Continuous Vents(1) 
Forming Part of Article 2.5.8.3. 
Total Hydraulic Load 
Served by Vent Pipe, 
fixture units 
Nominal Pipe Size of Vent Pipe, NPS 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
Maximum Length of Vent Pipe, m  
2 
9 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
8 
9 
30 
61 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
20 
7.5 
15 
46 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
24 
4.5 
9 
30 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
42 
NP 
9
 30
 NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
60 
NP 
4.5 
15 
120 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
100 
NP 
NP 
11 
79 
305 
NL 
NL 
NL 
200 
NP 
NP 
9
 76
 275
 NL 
NL 
NL 
500 
NP 
NP 
6
 55
 215
 NL 
NL 
NL 
1 100  
NP 
NP 
NP 
15 
61 
215 
NL 
NL 
1 900  
NP 
NP 
NP 
6 
21 
61 
215 
NL 
2 200  
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
9 
27 
105 
335 
3 600  
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
7.5 
18 
76 
245 
5 600  
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
7.5 
18 
76 
Notes to Table 2.5.8.3.: 
(1) NP = not permitted and NL = not limited. 
2.5.8.4. 
Vent Stacks or Stack Vents 
(See Note A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.) 
1) A vent stack or stack vent shall be sized in accordance with Table 2.5.8.4. based on 
a) the length of the vent stack or stack vent, and  
b) the total hydraulic load that is drained to the lowest section of a stack served 
by the vent pipe, plus any additional vent loads connected to the vent stack 
or stack vent. 
2) For the purposes of Table 2.5.8.4., the length of a stack vent or vent stack shall 
be its developed length from its lower end to outside air. 
3) The minimum nominal pipe size of a vent stack or stack vent shall be one-half 
the NPS of the stack at its base. 
4) A stack vent serving a wet vent stack that is over 4 storeys high shall extend 
the full size of the wet vent to outside air. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-45 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.5.8.4. 
Division B 
Table 2.5.8.4. 
Size and Developed Length of Stack Vents and Vent Stacks(1) 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.5.8.4.(1) and (2) 
Nominal Pipe 
Size of Stack, 
NPS(2) 
Total 
Hydraulic 
Load Being 
Vented, 
fixture units 
Nominal Pipe Size of Stack Vent or Vent Stack, NPS 
1¼ 
1½ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
 8
 10
 12
 
Maximum Length of Stack Vent or Vent Stack, m  
1¼ 
2 
9 
15 
9 
8 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
46 
23 
15 
13 
10 
8 
7.5 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
61 
46 
46 
33.5 
28.5 
26 
10.5 
8 
7 
6.5 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
317 
247 
207 
189 
76 
61
 
52 
46 
25 
19 
16 
15 
10 
8 
6.5 
6 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
299 
229
 
195 
177 
97.5 
76 
64 
58 
39.5 
30.5 
25.5 
23.5 
9.5 
7 
6 
5.5 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
302 
232 
204 
180 
122 
94.5 
79 
73 
29 
22 
19
 
17 
9.5 
7 
6 
5.5 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
305 
238 
201 
183 
73 
58 
49
 
43 
24 
18 
15.5 
14 
9.5 
7 
6 
5.5 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NP 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
287 
219.5 
186
 
170.5 
94.5 
73 
61 
55 
36.5 
28.5 
24
 
22 
12 
9.5 
8 
7 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
292.5 
225.5 
192 
174 
116 
91 
76
 
70 
39.5 
29 
24.5
 
22.5 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
NL 
287 
219.5 
186
 
152 
94.5 
73 
61
 
55 
1½ 
8 
2 
12 
24 
3 
10 
21 
53 
102 
4 
43 
140 
320 
540 
5 
190 
490 
940 
1 400 
6 
500 
1 100 
2 000 
2 900 
8 
1 800 
3 400 
5 600 
7 600 
10 
4 000 
7 200 
11 000 
15 000 
12 
7 300 
13 000 
20 000 
26 000 
15 
15 000 
25 000 
38 000 
50 000 
Notes to Table 2.5.8.4.: 
(1) NP = not permitted and NL = not limited. 
(2) Stacks shall be sized using Table 2.4.10.6.-A. 
2-46 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.6.1.2. 
2.5.8.5. 
Lengths of Other Vent Pipes 
1) When sizing an additional circuit vent, offset relief vent, relief vent, yoke vent, and  
the vent pipe for an interceptor, dilution tank, sewage tank, sump, or manhole, length 
is not taken into consideration. 
2.5.9. 
Air Admittance Valves 
(See Note A-2.2.10.16.(1).) 
2.5.9.1. 
Air Admittance Valve as a Vent Terminal 
1) Individual vents and dual vents are permitted to terminate with a connection 
to an air admittance valve as provided in Articles 2.5.9.2. and 2.5.9.3. (See also 
Sentence 2.2.10.16.(1).) 
2.5.9.2. 
Air Admittance Valves 
1) Air admittance valves shall only be used to vent 
a) fixtures located in  island counters,  
b) fixtures that may be affected by frost closure of the vent due to local climatic 
conditions, 
c) fixtures in one- and two-family dwellings undergoing renovation, or 
d) installations where connection to a vent may not be practical. 
2) Air admittance valves  shall be located 
a) not less than 100 mm above the fixture drain being vented, 
b) within the maximum developed length permitted for the vent, and 
c) not less than 150 mm above insulation materials. 
2.5.9.3. 
Installation Conditions 
1) Air admittance valves  shall not be installed in supply or return air plenums, or in 
locations where they may be exposed to freezing temperatures. 
2) Air admittance valves shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. 
3) Air admittance valves shall be rated for the nominal pipe size of vent pipe to which 
they are connected. 
4) Installed air admittance valves  shall be 
a) accessible, and 
b) located in a space that allows air to enter the valve. 
5) Drainage systems shall have at least one vent that terminates to the outdoors in 
conformance with Sentence 2.5.6.5.(1). 
Section 2.6. Potable Water Systems 
2.6.1. 
Arrangement of Piping 
2.6.1.1. 
Design 
1) Fixtures supplied with separate hot and cold water controls shall have the hot 
water control on the left and the cold on the right. 
2) In a hot water distribution system of a developed length of more than 30 m or 
supplying more than 4 storeys, the water temperature shall be maintained by 
a) recirculation, or 
b) a self-regulating heat tracing system. 
2.6.1.2. 
Drainage 
1) A water distribution system shall be installed so that the system can be drained or 
blown out with air. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-47 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.6.1.3. 
Division B 
2.6.1.3. 
Shut-off Valves 
1) Water service pipes shall be provided with an accessible  shut-off  valve located  as  
close as possible to where the water service pipe enters the building. 
2) Pipes that convey water from a gravity water tank or from a private water supply 
system shall be fitted with a shut-off valve at the source of supply. 
3) Except for risers that serve only one dwelling unit, risers shall be provided with a 
shut-off valve located at the source of supply. 
4) Water closets shall be provided with a shut-off valve on their water supply pipe. 
5) In buildings of residential occupancy that contain more than one dwelling unit, a  
shut-off valve shall be installed where the water supply enters each dwelling unit, so  
that, when the water supply to one suite is shut off, the water supply to the remainder 
of the building is not interrupted. (See Note A-2.6.1.3.(5).) 
6) In buildings of other than residential occupancy, shut-off valves shall be provided 
on the water supply to 
a) every fixture, or  
b) any group of fixtures in the same room, except as provided in Sentence (4). 
7) Pipes that supply water to a hot water tank shall be provided with a shut-off 
valve located close to the tank. 
2.6.1.4. 
Protection for Exterior Water Supply 
1) Pipes that pass through an exterior wall to supply water to the exterior of the 
building shall be provided with 
a) a frost-proof hydrant, or 
b) a stop-and-waste cock located inside the building and close to the wall. 
2.6.1.5. 
Check Valves 
1) A check valve shall be installed at the building end of a water service pipe where 
the pipe is made of plastic that is suitable for cold water use only. 
2.6.1.6. 
Flushing Devices 
1) Flushing devices that serve water closets or urinals shall have sufficient capacity 
and be adjusted to deliver at each operation a volume of water that will thoroughly 
flush the fixture or fixtures they serve. 
2) Where a manually operated flushing device is installed, it shall serve only 
one fixture. 
3) Except as provided in Sentence (4), water closets and urinals shall have an 
integral means of limiting the maximum amount of water used in each flush cycle to 
that specified in Table 2.6.1.6. 
Table 2.6.1.6. 
Water Usage  per Flush  Cycle  
Forming Part of Sentence 2.6.1.6.(3) 
Fixtures 
Maximum Water Usage per Flush Cycle, Lpf 
Water closets – residential 
single-flush 
dual-flush: 6.0/4.1 Lpf 
Water closets – industrial, commercial, institutional 
Urinals 
4.8 
4.8 
6.0 
1.9 
4) In residential retrofits, a maximum water usage of 6.0 Lpf shall be permitted for 
single-flush water closets where it can be demonstrated that a maximum water usage of 
4.8 Lpf would be impracticable given the existing building or municipal infrastructure. 
2-48 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.6.1.8. 
5) Except where installed in buildings not intended to be occupied year-round, 
flush-tank-type urinals shall be equipped with a device capable of preventing flush 
cycles when they are not in use. (See Note A-2.6.1.6.(5).) 
2.6.1.7. 
Relief Valves 
1) In addition to the requirements in Sentence (2), the hot water tank of a 
storage-type service water heater shall be equipped with a pressure-relief valve 
a) designed to open when the water pressure in the tank reaches the rated 
working pressure of the tank, and 
b) so located that the pressure in the tank shall not exceed the pressure at the 
relief valve by more than 35 kPa under any condition of flow within the 
distribution system. 
2) The hot water tank of a storage-type service water heater shall be equipped with a  
temperature-relief valve with a temperature-sensing element 
a) located within the top 150 mm of the tank, and 
b) designed to open and discharge sufficient water from the tank to keep 
the temperature of the water in the tank from exceeding 99°C under all 
operating conditions. 
3) A pressure-relief valve and temperature-relief valve may be combined where 
Sentences (1) and (2) are complied with. 
4) Indirect service water heaters shall be equipped with 
a) a pressure-relief valve, and 
b) a temperature-relief valve on every storage tank that forms part of the 
system. 
5) Pipes that convey water from a temperature-relief, pressure-relief or combined 
temperature- and pressure-relief valve shall 
a) be of a nominal pipe size at least equal to the NPS of the outlet of the valve, 
b) be rigid, slope downward from the valve, and terminate with an indirect 
connection above a floor drain, sump, or other safe location, with an air break 
of not more than 300 mm, 
c) have no thread at their outlet, and 
d) be capable of operating at a temperature of not less than 99°C. 
(See Note A-2.6.1.7.(5).) 
6) The temperature-relief valve required in Clause (4)(b) shall 
a) have a temperature-sensing element located within the top 150 mm of the 
tank, and 
b) be designed to open and discharge sufficient water to keep the temperature 
of the water in the tank from exceeding 99°C under all operating conditions. 
7) No shut-off valve shall be installed on the pipe between any tank and the relief 
valves or on the discharge lines from such relief valves. 
8) A vacuum-relief valve shall be installed when any tank may be subject to 
back-siphonage. 
9) Storage-type service water heaters that are located in a ceiling or roof space, or over 
a floor of wood construction, shall be installed within a corrosion-resistant watertight 
drain pan, as described in Sentence (10). 
10) The drain pan referred to in Sentence (9) shall 
a) be not less than 50 mm larger than the tank and have side walls not less 
than 25 mm high, 
b) be drained by a pipe two NPS larger than the relief valve discharge pipe, and 
c) have a drain that is located directly under the relief valve discharge pipe 
and that discharges directly to a floor drain or other acceptable location. 
2.6.1.8. 
Solar Domestic Hot Water Systems 
1) Systems for solar heating of potable water shall be installed in conformance with 
CAN/CSA-F383, “Installation of packaged solar domestic hot water systems.” 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-49 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.6.1.9. 
Division B 
2.6.1.9. 
Water Hammer 
1) Provision shall be made to protect the water distribution system from the adverse 
effects of water hammer. (See Note A-2.6.1.9.(1).) 
2.6.1.10. 
Mobile Home Water Service 
1) A water service pipe intended to serve a mobile home shall 
a) be not less than NPS ¾, 
b) terminate above ground, and 
c) be provided with 
i) a tamperproof terminal connection that is capable of being 
repeatedly connected, disconnected and sealed, 
ii) a protective concrete pad, 
iii) a means to protect it from frost heave, and 
iv) a curb stop and a means of draining that part of the pipe 
located above the frost line when not in use. 
2.6.1.11. 
Thermal Expansion 
1) Where thermal expansion can occur, protection shall be provided for 
a) check valves required by Article 2.6.1.5., 
b) backflow preventers required by Sentence 2.6.2.1.(3), and 
c) pressure-reducing valves required by Article 2.6.3.3. 
(See Note A-2.6.1.11.(1).) 
2.6.1.12. 
Service Water Heaters 
1) Thermostat controls for electric storage-type service water heaters shall be set at a 
temperature of 60°C. (See Note A-2.6.1.12.(1).) 
2.6.2. 
Protection from Contamination 
2.6.2.1. 
Connection of Systems 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (2), connections to potable water systems shall 
be designed and installed so that non-potable water or substances that may render the 
water non-potable cannot enter the system. 
2) A water treatment device or apparatus shall not be installed unless it can be 
demonstrated that the device or apparatus will not introduce substances into the 
system that may endanger health. 
3) Backflow preventers shall be selected and installed in conformance with CSA 
B64.10, “Selection and installation of backflow preventers.” 
2.6.2.2. 
Back-Siphonage 
1) Potable water connections to fixtures, tanks, vats or other devices not subject to 
pressure above atmospheric and containing other than potable water shall be installed 
so as to prevent back-siphonage in conformance with Sentence (2). 
2) Except as provided in Sentence 2.6.2.10.(2), back-siphonage shall be prevented by 
the installation of  
a) an air gap, 
b) an atmospheric vacuum breaker, 
c) a pressure vacuum breaker, 
d) a spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker, 
e) a hose connection vacuum breaker, 
f) a dual check valve backflow preventer with atmospheric port, 
g) a double check valve assembly, 
h) a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, 
i) a dual check valve backflow preventer, 
j) a laboratory faucet type vacuum breaker, or  
k) a dual check valve backflow preventer with vent. 
2-50 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.6.2.4. 
2.6.2.3. 
Backflow Caused by Back Pressure 
1) Potable water connections to fixtures, tanks, vats,  boilers or  other  devices  
containing other than potable water and subject to pressure above atmospheric shall be 
arranged to prevent backflow caused by back pressure in conformance with Sentences (2) 
and (3). 
2) Except as provided in Article 2.6.2.4., backflow caused by back pressure of 
non-toxic substances into a potable water system shall be prevented by the installation of 
a) an air gap, 
b) a dual check valve backflow preventer with atmospheric port, 
c) a dual check valve backflow preventer, 
d) a dual check valve backflow preventer with vent, 
e) a double check valve assembly, or 
f) a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
3) Backflow caused by back pressure of toxic substances into a potable water system 
shall be prevented by the installation of 
a) an air gap, or  
b) a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
2.6.2.4. 
Backflow from Fire Protection Systems 
1) A backflow preventer shall not be required in residential full flow-through fire 
sprinkler/standpipe systems in which the pipes and fittings are constructed of potable 
water system materials. 
2) Except as required by Sentence (4), potable water system connections to fire 
sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be protected against backflow caused by 
back-siphonage or back pressure in conformance with Clauses (a) to (g), as applicable: 
a) residential partial flow-through fire sprinkler/standpipe systems in which the 
pipes and fittings are constructed of potable water system materials shall be 
protected by a dual check valve backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.6, “Dual check valve (DuC) backflow preventers,” 
or 
ii) CSA B64.6.1, “Dual check valve backflow preventers for fire 
protection systems (DuCF),” 
b) provided that the systems do not use antifreeze or other additives of any 
kind and that all pipes and fittings are constructed of potable water system 
materials, Class 1 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems shall be protected by a single 
or dual check valve backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.6, “Dual check valve (DuC) backflow preventers,” 
or 
ii) CSA B64.9, “Single check valve backflow preventers for fire 
protection systems (SCVAF),” 
c) provided that the systems do not use antifreeze or other additives of any 
kind, Class 1 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems not covered by Clause (b) as well 
as Class 2 and Class 3 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems shall be protected by a 
double check valve backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.5, “Double check valve (DCVA) backflow 
preventers,” or 
ii) CSA B64.5.1, “Double check valve backflow preventers for 
fire protection systems (DCVAF),” 
d) Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems in which antifreeze 
or other additives are used shall be protected by a reduced pressure 
principle backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.4, “Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow 
preventers,” or 
ii) CSA B64.4.1, “Reduced pressure principle backflow 
preventers for fire protection systems (RPF),” 
installed on the portion of the system that uses the additives and the balance 
of the system shall be protected as required by Clause (b) or (c), 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-51 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.6.2.5. 
Division B 
e) Class 4 and Class 5 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems shall be protected by a 
reduced pressure principle backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.4, “Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow 
preventers,” or 
ii) CSA B64.4.1, “Reduced pressure principle backflow 
preventers for fire protection systems (RPF),” 
f) Class 6 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems shall be protected by a double check 
valve backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.5, “Double check valve (DCVA) backflow 
preventers,” or 
ii) CSA B64.5.1, “Double check valve backflow preventers for 
fire protection systems (DCVAF),” or 
g) where a potentially severe health hazard may be caused by backflow, Class 
6 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems shall be protected by a reduced pressure 
principle backflow preventer conforming to 
i) CSA B64.4, “Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow 
preventers,” or 
ii) CSA B64.4.1, “Reduced pressure principle backflow 
preventers for fire protection systems (RPF).” 
(See Note A-2.6.2.4.(2).) 
3) Backflow preventers required by Sentence (2) shall be installed upstream of the 
fire department pumper connection. (See Note A-2.6.2.4.(3).) 
4) Where a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer is required on a water 
service pipe at a fire service connection located on the same premises as the fire service 
pipe in Class 3, 4, 5 and 6 fire sprinkler/standpipe systems, a reduced pressure principle 
backflow preventer conforming to CSA B64.4.1, “Reduced pressure principle backflow 
preventers for fire protection systems (RPF),” shall also be required on the fire service 
connection. 
2.6.2.5. 
Separation of Water Supply Systems 
1) Where a private water supply system or a non-potable water system is supplied by 
a public water supply system, the public water supply system shall be protected in 
accordance with Article 2.6.2.1. 
2.6.2.6. 
Premise Isolation 
1) In addition to the backflow preventer required by this Subsection for buildings 
or facilities where a potentially severe health hazard may be caused by backflow, the  
potable water system shall  be provided with premise  isolation by the  installation  of  a  
reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. (See Note A-2.6.2.6.(1).) 
2.6.2.7. 
Hose Bibb 
1) Where a hose bibb is installed outside a building, inside a garage or in an area 
where there is an identifiable risk of contamination, the potable water system shall be 
protected against backflow through the hose bibb. 
2.6.2.8. 
Cleaning of Systems 
1) A newly installed part of a potable water system shall be cleaned and then flushed 
with potable water before the system is put into operation. 
2.6.2.9. 
Air Gap 
1) Air gaps shall not be located in a noxious environment. 
2) Air gaps shall be not less than 25 mm high and at least twice the diameter of the 
opening of the water supply outlet in height. (See Note A-2.6.2.9.(2).) 
2-52 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.6.3.2. 
2.6.2.10. 
Vacuum Breakers 
1) Where the critical level is not marked on an atmospheric vacuum breaker, pressure 
vacuum breaker, or spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker, the  critical level shall be taken 
as the lowest point on the device. 
2) Where an atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed, it shall be located on the 
downstream side of the fixture control valve or faucet so that it will be subject to 
water supply pressure 
a) only when the valve or faucet is open, and 
b) for periods of continuous use not exceeding 12 h. 
(See Note A-2.6.2.10.(2).) 
3) An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed so that the critical level is at 
least the distance specified by the manufacturer for safe operation of the device, but 
not less than 25 mm above 
a) the flood level rim of a fixture or tank, or 
b) the highest point open to the atmosphere in an irrigation system. 
4) A pressure vacuum breaker or spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker shall be 
installed so that the critical level is not less than 300 mm above 
a) the flood level rim of a fixture or tank, or 
b) the highest point open to the atmosphere in an irrigation system. 
2.6.2.11. 
Tank-Type Water Closets 
1) Tank-type water closets shall be provided with a back-siphonage preventer in 
conformance with Sentence 2.2.10.10.(2). 
2.6.2.12. 
Backflow Preventers 
1) No bypass piping or other device capable of reducing the effectiveness of a 
backflow preventer shall be installed in a water supply system. 
2.6.3. 
Size and Capacity of Pipes 
(See Note A-2.6.3.) 
2.6.3.1. 
Design, Fabrication and Installation 
(See Note A-2.6.3.1.) 
1) Water distribution systems shall be designed to provide peak demand flow when 
the flow pressures at the supply openings conform to the plumbing supply fitting 
manufacturer's specifications. 
2) Potable water systems shall be designed, fabricated and installed in accordance 
with good engineering practice, such as that described in the ASHRAE Handbooks 
and ASPE Plumbing Engineering Design Handbooks. (See Note A-2.6.3.1.(2).) 
3) In one- and two-family dwelling units and manufactured homes, multi-purpose 
systems that combine potable water systems and residential fire sprinkler systems shall 
be designed, fabricated and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D, “Standard 
for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and 
Manufactured Homes.” 
2.6.3.2. 
Hydraulic Load 
1) Except as provided in Sentence (3), the hydraulic load of a fixture or device that 
is listed in Table 2.6.3.2.-A shall be the number of fixture units given in the  Table.  
2) Except as provided in Sentences (1) and (3), the hydraulic load of a fixture that 
is not listed in Table 2.6.3.2.-A is the number of fixture units listed in Table 2.6.3.2.-D. 
3) Where fixtures are supplied with both hot and cold water, the hydraulic loads for 
maximum separate demands shall be 75% of the hydraulic load of the fixture units given 
in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A and 2.6.3.2.-D when using a detailed engineering design method. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-53 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.6.3.2. 
Division B 
4) The hydraulic load of urinals and water closets with direct flush valves 
shall be the number of fixture units listed in Tables 2.6.3.2.-B and 2.6.3.2.-C. (See 
Note A-2.6.3.2.(4).) 
Table 2.6.3.2.-A 
Sizing of Water Distribution Systems(1)(2) 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.6.3.2.(1), (2) and (3), and 2.6.3.4.(2), (3) and (5) 
Fixture or Device 
Minimum Nominal 
Pipe Size of Supply 
Pipe, NPS 
Private Use Hydraulic Load, 
fixture units 
Public Use Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Cold 
Hot 
Total 
Cold 
Hot 
Total 
Bathroom group with 6 LPF flush tank(3) 
n/a 
2.7 
1.5 
3.6 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Bathroom group with greater than 6 LPF  
n/a 
4 
3 
6 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
flush tank(3) 
Bathroom group with more than 3 fixtures 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
(4) 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Bathtub with or without shower head 
½
 
1
 1
 1.4
 3
 3
 4
 
Bathtub with NPS ¾ spout 
¾ 
7.5 
7.5 
10 
7.5 
7.5 
10 
Bedpan washer 
1 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
7.5 
7.5 
10 
Bidet 
3/8 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Clothes washer 3.5 kg 
½ 
1 
1 
1.4 
2.25 
2.25 
3 
Clothes washer 6.8 kg 
½ 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
3 
3 
4 
Clothes washer, commercial(5) 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Dental lavatory 
3/8 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Dental unit, cuspidor 
3/8 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1 
n/a 
1 
Dishwasher, commercial(5) 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Dishwasher, domestic 
3/8 
n/a 
1.4 
1.4 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Drinking fountain or water cooler 
3/8 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
0.25 
n/a 
0.25 
Hose bibb 
½
 2.5
 
n/a 
2.5 
2.5 
n/a 
2.5 
Hose bibb 
¾ 
3 
n/a 
3 
6 
n/a 
6 
Hose bibb, combination hot and cold 
½ 
1.9 
1.9 
2.5 
1.9 
1.9 
2.5 
Lavatory, 8.3 LPM or less 
3/8 
0.5 
0.5 
0.7 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Lavatory, greater than 8.3 LPM 
3/8 
0.75 
0.75 
1 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Sink, bar 
3/8 
0.75 
0.75 
1 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Sink, clinic service faucet 
½ 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
2.25 
2.25 
3 
Sink, clinic service with direct flush valve 
1 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
6 
n/a 
6 
Sink, kitchen commercial, per faucet 
½ 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
3 
3 
4 
Sink, kitchen domestic, 8.3 LPM 
3/8 
1
 1
 1.4
 1
 1
 1.4
 
Sink, kitchen domestic, greater than 8.3 
3/8 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
LPM 
Sink, laboratory 
3/8 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Sink, laundry (1 or 2 compartments) 
3/8 
1
 1
 1.4
 1
 1
 1.4
 
Sink, service or mop basin 
½ 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
2.25 
2.25 
3 
Sink, washup, per faucet 
½ 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.5 
1.5 
2 
Shower head, 9.5 LPM or less per head 
½
 
1
 1
 1.4
 3
 3
 4
 
Shower head, greater than 9.5 LPM per 
½
 
1.5
 
1.5
 2
 3
 3
 4
 
head 
Shower, spray, multi-head, fixture unit per 
(5) 
1
 1
 1.4
 3
 3
 4
 
head 
Urinal, with direct flush valve 
¾ 
(6) 
n/a 
(6) 
(6) 
n/a 
(6) 
Urinal, with flush tank 
3/8 
3 
n/a 
3 
3 
n/a 
3 
Urinal, with self-closing metering valve 
½ 
2 
n/a 
2 
4 
n/a 
4 
Water closet, 6 LPF or less with flush tank 
3/8 
2.2 
n/a 
2.2 
2.2 
n/a 
2.2 
2-54 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.6.3.2. 
Table 2.6.3.2.-A (Continued) 
Fixture or Device 
Minimum Nominal 
Pipe Size of Supply 
Private Use Hydraulic Load, 
fixture units 
Public Use Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Pipe, NPS 
Cold 
Hot 
Total 
Cold 
Hot 
Total 
Water closet, greater than 6 LPF with flush 
tank 
Water closet, with direct flush valve 
3/8 
1 
3 
(6) 
n/a 
n/a 
3 
(6) 
5 
(6) 
n/a 
n/a 
5 
(6) 
Notes to Table 2.6.3.2.-A: 
(1) The fixture unit values in this Table are not applicable in certain assembly occupancies because of surges in use by the occupants. For such 
occupancies, refer to specific design information. 
(2) For fixtures not indicated in this Table, refer to Table 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(3) Bathroom group is  based on an  NPS ½ bathtub supply pipe. 
(4) Add additional fixture to the fixture load for bathroom group. 
(5) Refer to manufacturer's recommendations. 
(6) For fixture unit values for fixtures with direct flush valves, see Sentence 2.6.3.2.(4) and Tables 2.6.3.2.-B and 2.6.3.2.-C. 
Table 2.6.3.2.-B 
Sizing of Water Distribution Systems for Urinals with Direct Flush Valves 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.6.3.2.(4) and 2.6.3.4.(5) 
Number of Valves 
Individual Fixture Unit Assigned in 
Decreasing Values 
Fixture Units in Accumulative Values(1) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 or more  
20
 
15
 
10
 
8 
5 each 
20
35
45
53
58, plus 5 for each additional fixture in excess of 5 
Notes to Table 2.6.3.2.-B: 
(1) The accumulative fixture unit values are the total values to be used in conjunction with Table 2.6.3.2.-A. 
Table 2.6.3.2.-C 
Sizing of Water Distribution Systems for Water Closets with Direct Flush Valves 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.6.3.2.(4) and 2.6.3.4.(5) 
Number of Valves 
Individual Fixture Unit Assigned in 
Decreasing Values 
Fixture Units in Accumulative Values(1) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 or more  
40
 
30
 
20
 
15
 
10 for each public use 
and 
6 for  each  private use 
40
70
90
105
115, plus 10 for each public use 
additional fixture in excess of 5 
and 
111, plus 6 for each private use additional 
fixture in excess of 5 
Notes to Table 2.6.3.2.-C: 
(1) The accumulative fixture unit values are the total values to be used in conjunction with Table 2.6.3.2.-A. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-55 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.6.3.3. 
Division B 
Table 2.6.3.2.-D 
Hydraulic Loads of Fixtures Not Listed in Table 2.6.3.2.-A 
Forming Part of Sentences 2.6.3.2.(2) and (3) and 2.6.3.4.(5) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Supply Pipe, NPS 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
Private Use 
Public Use 
3/8 
½ 
¾ 
1 
1 
2 
3 
6 
2 
4 
6 
10
2.6.3.3. 
Static Pressure 
1) Where the static pressure at any fixture may exceed 550 kPa, a pressure-reducing 
valve shall be installed to limit the maximum static pressure at the fixture to 550 kPa. 
2.6.3.4. 
Size 
1) Water service pipes shall be sized according to the peak demand flow but shall 
not be less than NPS ¾. 
2) Except as provided in Sentence (3), the nominal pipe size of a supply pipe that 
serves a fixture shall conform to Table 2.6.3.2.-A. 
3) For fixtures listed in Table 2.6.3.2.-A that are permitted to have an NPS ⅜ supply 
pipe, a connector not more than 750 mm long and not less than NPS ¼ may  be  used  
to supply water to the fixture. 
4) No water system between the point of connection with the water service pipe or 
the water meter and the first water distribution pipe that supplies a water heater that 
serves more than one fixture shall be sized less than NPS ¾. 
5) Where both hot and cold water is supplied to fixtures in residential buildings 
containing one or two dwelling units or row houses with separate water service pipes, the  
water system may be sized in accordance with Table 2.6.3.4., where 
a) the hydraulic loads for maximum separate demands on water distribution 
system piping are not less than 100% of the total hydraulic load of the fixture 
units given in Table 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C or 2.6.3.2.-D for private 
use, 
b) the minimum water pressure at the entry to the building is 200 kPa, and 
c) the total maximum length of the water system is 90 m. 
(See Note A-2.6.3.4.(5).) 
Table 2.6.3.4. 
Water Pipe Sizing for Buildings Containing One or Two Dwelling Units or Row Houses with Separate Water Service Pipes 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.6.3.4.(5) 
Nominal Pipe Size of Water 
Pipe, NPS 
Water Velocity, m/s(1) 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Hydraulic Load, fixture units 
½ 
¾ 
1 
1¼ 
8 
21
 
43
 
83 
7 
16
 
31
 
57 
4 
9 
18
 
30 
Notes to Table 2.6.3.4.: 
(1) Table 2.6.3.4. is not intended to limit water velocities that are permitted by Sentence 2.6.3.5.(1). 
2-56 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.7.2.1. 
2.6.3.5. 
Velocity 
1) The maximum permitted water velocities shall be those recommended by the 
pipe and fitting manufacturer. 
Section 2.7. Non-Potable Water Systems 
2.7.1. 
Non-Potable Water Systems 
2.7.1.1. 
General 
(See Note A-2.7.1.1.) 
1) Non-potable water systems shall be designed, fabricated and installed in 
accordance with this Subsection and good engineering practice. (See Note A-2.7.1.1.(1).) 
2) Except as provided in Sentence (3) and Subsection 2.7.2., non-potable water 
systems shall only be used to supply water closets, urinals, trap seal primers, and 
directly connected underground irrigation systems that only dispense water below 
the surface of the ground. 
3) Non-potable water systems shall not be used to supply fixtures in healthcare 
facilities. 
4) Where a non-potable water system is supplied by a potable water system, the  potable 
water system shall be protected in accordance with Article 2.6.2.1. 
5) Where the static pressure at any fixture in a non-potable water system may exceed 
550 kPa, a pressure-reducing valve shall be installed to limit the maximum static 
pressure at the fixture to 550 kPa. 
2.7.1.2. 
Identification and Marking 
1) Non-potable water piping and outlets shall be identified and marked in 
accordance with CAN/CSA-B128.1, “Design and Installation of Non-Potable Water 
Systems.” 
2.7.1.3. 
Location of Pipes 
1) Non-potable water piping shall not be located directly above 
a) areas where food, drink or products that are intended for human 
consumption are prepared, handled, dispensed or stored, or 
b) a non-pressurized or pressurized potable water tank. 
2.7.1.4. 
Location of Outlets 
1) Except as provided in Subsection 2.7.2., an outlet from a non-potable water 
system shall not be located where it can discharge into 
a) a fixture into which an outlet from a potable water system is discharged, or 
b) a fixture that is used for the preparation, handling or dispensing of food, 
drink or products that are intended for human consumption. 
2.7.2. 
Non-Potable Rainwater Harvesting Systems 
2.7.2.1. 
General 
1) For the purposes of this Subsection, rainwater shall mean storm water discharged 
from an above-ground roof surface. (See Note A-2.7.2.1.(1).) 
2) For the purposes of this Subsection, a non-potable rainwater harvesting system 
shall mean a storage tank, a pump, pipes, fittings and other plumbing appurtenances 
used to collect and distribute rainwater, but shall not include a rain barrel not 
connected to a plumbing system. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-57 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.7.2.2. 
Division B 
2.7.2.2. 
Permitted Applications 
1) Non-potable rainwater harvesting systems are only permitted to supply 
a) water closets and urinals, 
b) clothes washers, 
c) floor-mounted service sinks and laundry trays, 
d) trap primers, 
e) irrigation systems, 
f) hydronic systems, 
g) make-up water systems for heat rejection systems, or 
h) any other application where the harvested rainwater is not expected to be 
ingested or inhaled. 
(See Note A-2.7.2.2.(1) and 2.7.2.4.(3) and (4).) 
2.7.2.3. 
Roof Design 
1) Roof surfaces that supply rainwater to a non-potable rainwater harvesting 
system shall be inaccessible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (See Note A-2.7.2.3.(1).) 
2) Roofing components and conveyance systems in contact with rainwater that is 
supplied to a non-potable rainwater harvesting system shall be constructed of materials 
that will not introduce substances into the rainwater that could adversely affect its 
intended end use. (See Note A-2.7.2.3.(2).) 
2.7.2.4. 
Non-Potable Rainwater Harvesting System Design 
1) Non-potable rainwater harvesting systems and their connections shall be 
designed, fabricated and installed in accordance with this Subsection and good 
engineering practice. (See Note A-2.7.2.4.(1).) 
2) Non-potable rainwater harvesting systems shall not collect water discharged 
from an evaporative heat rejection system. 
3) Non-potable rainwater harvesting systems shall be provided with a means 
to treat the harvested rainwater in such a manner that the quality of the delivered 
non-potable water conforms to appropriate provincial or territorial requirements or, 
in the absence of such requirements, the systems shall conform to Sentence (4). (See 
Note A-2.7.2.2.(1) and 2.7.2.4.(3) and (4).) 
4) Except as provided in Sentence (3), non-potable rainwater harvesting systems 
shall be provided with 
a) a water treatment system consisting of 
i)  a debris screen  with a mesh  size  of  not more than 6  mm  
ahead of the storage tank inlet, 
ii) a first-flush diversion system with a capacity of not less 
than 0.3 L/m2 of roof area ahead of the storage tank inlet, 
iii) a calming inlet or settling chamber ahead of the storage 
tank inlet, 
iv) a device to prevent the entrainment of sediment into the 
pump, and 
v) where the harvested rainwater is used for an indoor 
application, a filter with a mesh size of not more than 50 μm 
ahead of the storage tank inlet, or 
b) a means to treat the harvested rainwater in such a manner that the delivered 
non-potable water contains not more than the maximum acceptable levels of 
contaminants stated in CSA B805/ICC 805, “Rainwater harvesting systems.” 
(See Note A-2.7.2.2.(1) and 2.7.2.4.(3) and (4).) 
5) Where the static pressure at any fixture in a non-potable rainwater harvesting 
system may exceed 550 kPa, a pressure-reducing valve shall be installed to limit the 
maximum static pressure at the fixture to 550 kPa. 
2-58 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
6) Storage tanks in non-potable rainwater harvesting systems shall be designed 
and installed in accordance with 
a) CAN/CSA-B126.0, “General requirements and methods of testing for water 
cisterns,” and 
b) CAN/CSA-B126.1, “Installation of water cisterns.” 
7) Storage tanks in non-potable rainwater harvesting systems shall be equipped 
with an overflow that directs excess rainwater to 
a) a public storm sewer, 
b) a public combined sewer, 
c) a storm water management system, or 
d) a designated storm water disposal location. 
8) Where the storage tank outlet is located below the level of the adjoining street, 
the storage tank overflow required by Sentence (7) shall 
a) terminate with an indirect connection that is not located within the building, 
or 
b) be equipped with a backwater valve. 
9) Make-up water connections to non-potable rainwater harvesting systems shall 
a) be equipped with a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, or  
b) have an air gap. 
10) Where a fixture combines water from a non-potable rainwater harvesting system 
and potable water at the fixture supply fitting, the potable water system shall be protected 
by a backflow preventer as described in Sentence 2.6.2.1.(3). 
Section 2.8. Objectives and Functional Statements 
2.8.1. 
Objectives and Functional Statements 
2.8.1.1. 
Attribution to Acceptable Solutions 
1) For the purposes of compliance with this Code as required in 
Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) of Division A, the objectives and functional statements attributed 
to the acceptable solutions in this Part shall be the objectives and functional statements 
listed in Table 2.8.1.1. (See Note A-1.1.2.1.(1).) 
Table 2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Objectives and Functional Statements Attributed to the 
Acceptable Solutions in Part 2 
Forming Part of Sentence 2.8.1.1.(1) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.1.2.1. Sanitary Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F72-OH2.1] 
[F72-OP5] 
2.1.2.2. Storm Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F72-OP5] 
2.1.2.3. Water Distribution Systems 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
2.1.2.4. Separate Services 
(1) 
[F71-OH2.1,OH2.3] [F70-OH2.1] 
2.1.3.1. Lighting and Ventilation Requirements 
(1) 
[F40-OH1.1] Applies to the requirement for ventilation. 
[F30-OS3.1] Applies to the requirement for lighting. 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.1.3.2. Accessibility 
(1) 
[F40-OH2.1] [F41-OH2.4] [F71-OH2.3] 
[F82-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
[F71-OH2.3] [F81-OH2.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.1.4.1. Seismic Restraints and Design 
(1) 
[F20-OS2.1] 
2.2.1.1. Exposure of Materials 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.1.2. Restrictions on Re-Use 
(1) 
[F70-OH2.2] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-59 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.1.5. Withstanding Pressure 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] [F46-OH2.2] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.1.6. Working Pressure of a Water Service Pipe 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.2.1. Surface Requirements 
(1) 
[F41-OH2.4] 
2.2.2.2. Conformance to Standards 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
[F80-OS3.1,OS3.2] 
2.2.2.3. Showers 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
[F40-OP5] 
(3) 
[F45-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F45-OH2.1] 
2.2.2.4. Concealed Overflows 
(1) 
[F41,F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
2.2.2.5. Water Closets in Public Washrooms 
(1) 
[F30-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
2.2.3.1. Traps 
(1) 
[F81,F40-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OP5] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
(4) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.2.3.2. Interceptors 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3,OH2.4] [F46-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.2.3.3. Tubular Traps 
(1) 
[F82-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
[F82-OP5] 
2.2.4.1. T and Cross Fittings 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
2.2.4.2. Sanitary T Fittings 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.2.4.3. 90° Elbows 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
2.2.5.1. Fibrocement Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.2. Concrete Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(5) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
2.2.5.3. Vitrified Clay Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
2.2.5.4. Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
(3) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.5. Polyethylene Pipe Used Underground 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.5.6. Crosslinked Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.2] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.7. PVC Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(3) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(4) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.8. CPVC Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cements 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.2,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
2-60 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.5.9. Plastic Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cement Used 
Underground 
(1) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1] 
[F20,F80,F81-OP5] 
2.2.5.10. Transition Solvent Cement 
(1) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.5.11. Plastic Pipe, Fittings and Solvent Cement Used in 
Buildings 
(1) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.5.12. Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene Composite Pipe 
and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.2.5.13. Crosslinked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Crosslinked 
Polyethylene Composite Pressure Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.14. Polypropylene Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.5.15. Polyethylene of Raised Temperature Tube and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20,F70,F80-OH2.2] 
[F20,F70,F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1] 
[F20,F70,F80-OP5] 
2.2.5.16. Cellular Core PVC Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.6.1. Cast-Iron Drainage and Vent Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.2] 
2.2.6.2. Maintenance Holes and Catch Basins 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.6.3. Threaded Cast-Iron Drainage Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.6.4. Cast-Iron Water Pipes 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F20-OP5] 
(4) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.6.5. Screwed Cast-Iron Water Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.6.6. Screwed Malleable-Iron Water Fittings 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.6.7. Steel Pipe 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] [F46-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
(4) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.8. Corrugated Steel Pipe and Couplings 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F81-OP5] 
(3) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.2.6.9. Sheet Metal Leaders 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.10. Stainless Steel Pipe 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.11. Stainless Steel Butt Weld Pipe Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-61 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.12. Stainless Steel Pipe Flanges 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.13. Stainless Steel Threaded Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] Applies to drainage systems and venting 
systems. 
[F46,F80-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.6.14. Stainless Steel Tube 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.6.15. Stainless Steel Pipe and Tube 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.2.7.1. Copper and Brass Pipe 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems and 
venting systems. 
[F46-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems and 
venting systems. 
[F46-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.7.2. Brass or Bronze Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems and 
venting systems. 
[F46-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
2.2.7.3. Brass or Bronze Threaded Water Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.7.4. Copper Tube 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems and 
venting systems. 
[F46-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
2.2.7.5. Solder-Joint Drainage Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.7.6. Solder-Joint Water Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.7.7. Flared-Joint Fittings for Copper Water Systems 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OP5] 
2.2.7.8. Lead Waste Pipe and Fittings 
(1) 
[F46,F20-OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3,OH2.4] 
2.2.8.1. Pipes and Fittings 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1] 
[F80,F81-OS3.2,OS3.4] 
2.2.9.1. Cement Mortar 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.9.2. Solders and Fluxes 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F20,F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.10.1. Brass Floor Flanges 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
2.2.10.2. Screws, Bolts, Nuts and Washers 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.2.10.3. Cleanout Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems. 
[F46-OH2.2] Applies to water systems. 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
2.2.10.4. Mechanical Couplings 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2-62 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.10.5. Saddle Hubs 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.2.10.6. Valves, and Supply and Waste Fittings 
(1) 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F131-OE1.2] 
(3) 
[F30-OS3.1] 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(4) 
[F131-OE1.2] 
(5) 
[F131-OE1.2] 
(6) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(7) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F46-OH2.2] 
2.2.10.7. Water Temperature Control 
(1) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(4) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(5) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
2.2.10.8. Direct Flush Valves 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(a),(b),(e) [F81-OP5] 
2.2.10.9. Drinking Fountain Bubblers 
(1) 
[F40,F46-OH2.4] 
(2) 
[F41,F46-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F41,F46-OH2.2] 
2.2.10.10. Back-Siphonage Preventers and Backflow Preventers 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
(2) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
2.2.10.11. Relief Valves 
(1) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
[F31-OP5] 
2.2.10.12. Reducing Valves 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.2.10.13. Solar Domestic Hot Water 
(1) 
[F81-OS3.2] 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F80,F81-OP5] 
2.2.10.14. Vent Pipe Flashing 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80,F81-OP5] 
2.2.10.15. Water Hammer Arresters 
(1) 
[F20,F80-OP5] 
2.2.10.16. Air Admittance Valves 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.2.10.17. Water Treatment Systems 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F30-OS3.1] 
[F46,F70-OS3.4] 
[F20,F30-OS2.1] 
2.2.10.18. Flexible Water Connectors 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F46-OH2.2] 
2.3.2.1. Caulked Lead Drainage Joints 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.3.2.2. Wiped Joints 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1] 
[F80,F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.3.2.3. Screwed Joints 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F70-OH2.2] 
2.3.2.4. Soldered Joints 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.3.2.5. Flared Joints 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
2.3.2.6. Mechanical Joints 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.3.2.7. Cold-Caulked Joints 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH1.1] Applies to bell and spigot joints in 
venting systems. 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to bell and spigot joints 
in drainage systems or venting systems. 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20,F81-OH1.1] 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.2.8. Stainless Steel Welded Joints 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F20,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-63 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.3.3.1. Drilled and Tapped Joints 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F20,F81-OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.3.3.2. Extracted Tees 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.3.3.3. Prohibition of Welding of Pipes and Fittings 
(1) 
[F20-OH1.1] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.2] 
[F80-OP5] 
2.3.3.4. Unions and Slip Joints 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.3.5. Increaser or Reducer 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F70,F80-OH2.2] 
2.3.3.6. Dissimilar Materials 
(1) 
[F80-OH1.1] 
[F80-OP5] 
[F80-OH2.1] 
2.3.3.7. Connection of Roof Drain to Leader 
(1) 
[F21,F81-OP5] 
2.3.3.8. Connection of Floor or Wall Outlet Fixtures 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
(5) 
[F20,F43-OH2.1] 
[F20,F30-OS3.1] 
(6) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(7) 
[F21-OH2.1] 
2.3.3.9. Expansion and Contraction 
(1) 
[F21-OH1.1] 
[F21-OH2.1] 
[F21-OP5] 
2.3.3.10. Copper Tube 
(1) 
[F20-OH1.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.3.3.11. Indirect Connections 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.2,OH2.4] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.2,OH2.4] 
2.3.3.12. Copper Joints Used Underground 
(1) 
[F20,F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20,F80-OP5] 
2.3.4.1. Capability of Support 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.4.2. Independence of Support 
(1) 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.3.4.3. Insulation of Support 
(1) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F80-OS3.1] 
[F80-OP5] 
(2) 
[F80-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F80-OS3.1] 
[F80-OP5] 
2.3.4.4. Support for Vertical Piping 
(1) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
(2) 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
2.3.4.5. Support for Horizontal Piping 
(1) 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1] 
[F20-OP5] 
(3) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20,F81-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F81-OS3.1] 
(5) 
[F20,F21-OP5] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1] 
2-64 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(6) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F20-OS3.1] 
[F20-OH2.1] 
2.3.4.6. Support for Underground Horizontal Piping 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.3.4.7. Support for Vent Pipe above a Roof 
(1) 
[F81-OS3.1] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.3.5.1. Protection of Piping 
(1) 
(a) [F81-OP5] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.5.2. Isolation from Loads 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.3.5.3. Protection Against Freezing 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.5.4. Protection from Mechanical Damage 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.3.5.5. Protection from Condensation 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.3.6.1. Tests and Inspection of Drainage or Venting Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems. 
[F81-OH1.1] Applies to venting systems. 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] Applies to venting systems. 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems. 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F81-OH1.1] Applies to venting systems. 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems. 
(5) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.6.2. Tests of Pipes in Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.3.6.3. Tests of Venting Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.3.6.4. Water Pressure Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.6.5. Air Pressure Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.6.6. Final Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.6.7. Ball Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.3.7.1. Application of Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
(3) 
[F81-OP5] 
(4) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.3.7.2. Pressure Tests of Potable Water Systems 
(1) 
[F20-OP5] 
(2) 
[F20,F81-OS3.1] 
2.3.7.3. Water Pressure Tests 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F70-OH2.2] 
2.4.2.1. Connections to Sanitary Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1] Applies to fixtures that are directly connected 
to sanitary drainage systems. 
(a) [F81-OH2.2] 
(b) [F81-OH2.2] 
(c) [F81-OH2.1] 
(d) [F81-OH2.1] 
(e) [F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.2.2. Connection of Overflows from Rainwater Tanks 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
2.4.2.3. Direct Connections 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.4] 
2.4.3.1. Urinals 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.4] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-65 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.4.3.2. Restricted Locations of Indirect Connections and Traps 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.4] 
2.4.3.3. Equipment Restrictions Upstream of Grease Interceptors 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.3.4. Fixtures Located in Chemical Storage Locations 
(1) 
[F81-OS1.1] 
[F43-OH5] 
2.4.3.5. Macerating Toilet Systems 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1] 
2.4.3.6. Drains Serving Elevator Pits 
(1) 
(a) [F62-OP5] 
(b) [F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.4.1. Sewage Treatment 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.4.2. Cooling of Hot Water or Sewage 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.4.3. Interceptors 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OS1.1] 
[F43-OH5] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.4.4. Neutralizing and Dilution Tanks 
(1) 
[F80-OS3.4] 
(2) 
[F43-OH5] 
[F80-OH2.1] 
2.4.5.1. Traps for Sanitary Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(6) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.5.2. Traps for Storm Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.5.3. Connection of Subsoil Drainage Pipe to a Sanitary 
Drainage System 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.5.4. Location and Cleanout for Building Traps 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.5.5. Trap Seals 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.4.6.1. Separate Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.6.2. Location of Sanitary Drainage Pipes 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
2.4.6.3. Sumps or Tanks 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] Applies to the watertightness of sumps or 
tanks. 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH2.1] 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(6) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(7) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(8) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.6.4. Protection from Backflow 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.6.5. Mobile Home Sewer Service 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.7.1. Cleanouts for Drainage Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(6) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(7) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(8) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(9) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(10) 
[F82-OH2.1] 
[F82-OP5] 
(11) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.7.2. Size and Spacing of Cleanouts 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2-66 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.7.3. Manholes 
(1) 
[F20-OS3.1] 
(2) 
(a),(c) [F81-OH1.1] 
(a),(c) [F81-OS1.1] 
(b) [F20-OS3.1] 
(3) 
[F30-OS3.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.7.4. Location of Cleanouts 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
(a) [F81-OS3.1] 
(b) [F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] Applies to drainage piping. 
[F81-OH1.1] Applies to vent piping. 
(5) 
[F43-OH5] 
[F43-OS3.4] 
2.4.8.1. Minimum Slope 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.8.2. Length of Fixture Outlet Pipes 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.9.1. No Reduction in Size 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.9.2. Serving Water Closets 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.9.3. Size of Fixture Outlet Pipes 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.4.9.4. Size of Building Drain and Building Sewer 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.9.5. Offset in Leaders 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.4.10.1. Total Load on a Pipe 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.10.2. Hydraulic Loads for Fixtures 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.10.3. Hydraulic Loads from Fixtures with a Continuous Flow 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.10.4. Hydraulic Loads from Roofs or Paved Surfaces 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
[F20,F81-OS2.1] 
(2) 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
(a),(d),(e) [F41,F81-OH2.4] 
(b),(c) [F20,F81-OS2.1] 
(3) 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
[F20,F81-OS2.1] 
(4) 
[F21,F81-OP5] 
[F20,F81-OS2.1] 
2.4.10.5. Conversion of Fixture Units to Litres 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.4.10.6. Hydraulic Loads to Sanitary Drainage Pipes 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.4.10.7. Hydraulic Loads on Branches 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.4.10.8. Hydraulic Loads on Sanitary Building Drains or Sewers 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.4.10.9. Hydraulic Loads on Storm or Combined Building Drains 
or Sewers 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.4.10.10. Hydraulic Loads to Roof Gutters 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.10.11. Hydraulic Loads on Leaders 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.10.12. Hydraulic Loads from Fixtures with a Semi-continuous 
Flow 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.4.10.13. Design of Storm Sewers 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.5.1.1. Venting for Traps 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.2.1. Wet Venting 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-67 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.5.3.1. Circuit Venting 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(6) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(7) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(8) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(9) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(10) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(11) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.4.1. Stack Vents 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.4.2. Vent Stacks 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.4.3. Yoke Vents 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.4.4. Offset Relief Vents 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.4.5. Fixtures Draining into Vent Pipes 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.5.1. Venting of Sewage Sumps 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.5.2. Venting of Oil Interceptors 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OS1.1] 
[F72,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OS1.1] 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OS1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OS1.1] 
(5) 
[F40,F81-OS1.1] 
2.5.5.3. Venting of Drain Piping and Tanks for Corrosive Waste 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OS3.4] 
2.5.5.4. Fresh Air Inlets 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.5.5.5. Provision for Future Installations 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] Applies to venting systems. 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] Applies to drainage systems. 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.6.1. Drainage of Vent Pipes 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
[F81-OS1.1] 
2.5.6.2. Vent Pipe Connections 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.6.3. Location of Vent Pipes 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.6.4. Connection of Vents above Fixtures Served 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.6.5. Terminals 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(6) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.1. General 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.2. Size Restriction 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.3. Additional Circuit Vents and Relief Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.4. Offset Relief Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.5. Yoke Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.7.6. Vent Pipes for Manholes 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2.5.7.7. Vents for Sewage Sumps, Neutralizing and Dilution 
Tanks, and Macerating Toilet Systems 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
2-68 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
2.8.1.1. 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.8.1. Hydraulic Loads Draining to Wet Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.8.2. Individual Vents and Dual Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.8.3. Branch Vents, Vent Headers, Continuous Vents and 
Circuit Vents 
(1) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.8.4. Vent Stacks or Stack Vents 
(3) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.9.2. Air Admittance Valves 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.5.9.3. Installation Conditions 
(1) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(2) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(3) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(4) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
(5) 
[F40,F81-OH1.1] 
2.6.1.1. Design 
(1) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(2) 
[F71-OH2.3] 
2.6.1.2. Drainage 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.6.1.3. Shut-off Valves 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
(2) 
[F81-OP5] 
(3) 
[F81-OP5] 
(4) 
[F81-OP5] 
(5) 
[F70,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(6) 
[F70,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(7) 
[F70,F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.6.1.4. Protection for Exterior Water Supply 
(1) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.6.1.5. Check Valves 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
2.6.1.6. Flushing Devices 
(1) 
[F72-OH2.1] 
(2) 
[F72-OH2.1] 
(3) 
[F130-OE1.2] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(5) 
[F130-OE1.2] 
2.6.1.7. Relief Valves 
(1) 
[F31,F81-OS3.2] 
(2) 
[F81-OS3.1,OS3.2] 
(4) 
(a) [F31-OS3.2] [F81-OS1.1] 
(b) [F81-OS3.1,OS3.2] 
(5) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(b) [F81-OH2.2] Applies to the size of air breaks. 
(6) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(7) 
[F31-OS3.2] 
(8) 
[F81-OS3.2] 
(9) 
[F81-OP5] 
(10) 
[F81-OP5] 
2.6.1.8. Solar Domestic Hot Water Systems 
(1) 
[F31-OS3.2] [F81-OS3.4] 
[F70-OH2.2] 
2.6.1.9. Water Hammer 
(1) 
[F20,F81-OS3.2] 
[F20,F81-OP5] 
2.6.1.10. Mobile Home Water Service 
(1) 
[F71,F70,F46-OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.1.11. Thermal Expansion 
(1) 
[F20,F81,F46-OP5] 
2.6.1.12. Service Water Heaters 
(1) 
[F40-OS3.4] 
2.6.2.1. Connection of Systems 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F70,F81,F82-OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.2. Back-Siphonage 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.3. Backflow Caused by Back Pressure 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.4. Backflow from Fire Protection Systems 
(2) 
[F46,F70,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F46,F70,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F46,F70,F81-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.5. Separation of Water Supply Systems 
(1) 
[F46,F70,F81-OH2.2] 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-69 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.8.1.1. 
Division B 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Table 2.8.1.1. (Continued) 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
2.6.2.6. Premise Isolation 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F82-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.7. Hose Bibb 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.8. Cleaning of Systems 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.9. Air Gap 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.10. Vacuum Breakers 
(2) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.11. Tank-Type Water Closets 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.2.12. Backflow Preventers 
(1) 
[F70,F81,F46-OH2.1,OH2.2,OH2.3] 
2.6.3.1. Design, Fabrication and Installation 
(1) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F72-OH2.1] [F70-OH2.2] [F71-OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F81-OS1.4] 
[F70,F71-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.6.3.2. Hydraulic Load 
(1) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.2] 
2.6.3.3. Static Pressure 
(1) 
[F80,F81-OS3.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.6.3.4. Size 
(1) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(2) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(3) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
(4) 
[F81-OH2.3] 
(5) 
[F71,F72-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
2.6.3.5. Velocity 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.1,OH2.3] 
[F81-OP5] 
[F81-OS3.1] 
2.7.1.1. General 
(1) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
Provision 
Functional Statements and Objectives(1) 
(2) 
[F82-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F40-OH2.2] 
(4) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
(5) 
[F80,F81-OS3.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
2.7.1.2. Identification and Marking 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F81-OH2.2] 
2.7.1.3. Location of Pipes 
(1) 
[F46,F40-OH2.2] 
[F40,F81-OH2.4] 
2.7.1.4. Location of Outlets 
(1) 
[F40,F46-OH2.2] 
2.7.2.2. Permitted Applications 
(1) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
[F81-OH2.2] 
2.7.2.3. Roof Design 
(1) 
[F41-OH2.2] 
(2) 
[F41-OH2.2] 
2.7.2.4. Non-Potable Rainwater Harvesting System Design 
(1) 
[F46,F80,F81-OH2.2] 
(2) 
[F41-OH2.2] 
(3) 
[F40-OH2.2] 
(4) 
[F41-OH2.2] 
(5) 
[F80,F81-OS3.4] 
[F81-OP5] 
(6) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
(7) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
[F81-OP5] 
(8) 
[F81-OH2.2] 
[F81-OP5] 
(9) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
(10) 
[F46-OH2.2] 
Notes to Table 2.8.1.1.: 
(1) See Parts 2 and 3 of Division A. 
2-70 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
Notes to Part 2 
Plumbing Systems 
A-2.1.2.1.(2) Combined Building Drains. Combined building drains may have proven acceptable on 
the basis of past performance in some localities and their acceptance under this Code may be warranted. 
A-2.1.2.4.(1) Service Piping. The layout as shown in Figure A-2.1.2.4.(1)(c) may require special legal 
arrangements in some jurisdictions to ensure that access can be provided to all parts of the service pipes. 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
The figures are schematic only; they depict various parts of the plumbing system but do not include details. For an 
explanation of the symbols and abbreviations used in the figures, refer to the list provided at the end of the Code. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-71 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.1.4.1.(1) 
Division B 
property line 
(a)  Permitted 
(b)  Permitted 
(c)  Permitted 
water ser vice pipe 
property line 
building sewer 
public water main 
public sewer 
public sewer 
public water main 
building sewer 
water service pipe 
water service pipe 
building sewer 
public water main 
public sewer 
water service pipe 
building sewer 
public water main 
public sewer 
(d)  Not permitted 
Semi-detached 
Row housing 
Row housing 
Semi-detached 
EG01129A 
Figure A-2.1.2.4.(1) 
Service piping 
A-2.1.4.1.(1) Seismic Restraints and Design. Sentence 2.1.4.1.(1) aims to help ensure that plumbing 
systems will remain in place for a sufficient amount of time during an earthquake to allow for the safe 
evacuation of the building. 
2-72 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3) 
A-2.2.2.3.(3) Shower Drainage (Plan View). 
EG01130B 
gutter 
floor drains 
minimum 
750 mm 
shower heads* 
floor sloped to gutter 
* minimum distance between shower heads: 750 mm 
(a) Permitted 
(b) Not permitted 
floor sloped 
to drain 
FD 
Figure A-2.2.2.3.(3) 
Shower drainage (plan view) 
A-2.2.2.4.(1) Concealed Overflows. The use of concealed overflows does not preclude the use of 
a standing waste. 
A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3) Trap Seal Depth and Trap Connections. 
This joint may be a slip joint but 
not a gasket union.(1) 
EG01131B 
Because these joints are 
upstream of the trap weir, 
they may be slip joints or 
gasket unions.(1) 
cleanout plug(2) 
outlet 
trap seal depth 
trap weir 
inlet 
trap dip 
Figure A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3) 
Trap seal depth and trap connections 
Notes to Figure A-2.2.3.1.(1) and (3): 
(1) See Article 2.3.3.4. 
(2) See Clause 2.2.3.1.(3)(a). 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-73 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.2.3.1.(4) 
Division B 
A-2.2.3.1.(4) Prohibited Traps. Except for an S-trap standard, the S trap shown in Figure A-2.2.3.1.(4)(b) 
is prohibited by Clause 2.5.6.3.(1)(b), which limits the fall on fixture drains. Crown vented traps shown in 
Figure A-2.2.3.1.(4)(c) are prohibited by Clause 2.5.6.3.(1)(a), which requires that the distance from the trap 
weir to the vent be not less than twice the size of the fixture drain. 
crown vent 
(a)  Bell trap 
(b)  S trap 
(c)  Crown vented trap 
EG01132A 
Figure A-2.2.3.1.(4) 
Prohibited traps 
A-2.2.3.2.(3) Grease Interceptors. CSA B481.4, “Maintenance of grease interceptors,” is considered to 
represent good practice regarding procedures for the maintenance of grease interceptors. 
A-2.2.4.1. T Fittings in Drainage Systems. The use of a cross fitting in a drainage system is 
prohibited, but such fitting may be used in a venting system to connect 4 vent pipes. In a drainage system, a T 
fitting can only be used as shown in Figure A-2.2.4.1.(a), and cannot be used as shown in Figure A-2.2.4.1.(b) 
because the T or cross fitting would change the direction of flow in the drainage system. 
vent pipe 
vent pipe 
vent pipe 
horizontal 
sanitary 
sanitary 
sanitary drainage pipe 
drainage pipe 
drainage pipe 
(a)  Permitted 
(b)  Not permitted 
(c)  Not permitted 
EG01133B 
Figure A-2.2.4.1. 
T fittings in drainage systems 
2-74 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
A-2.2.4.2. Sanitary T Fittings in Drainage Systems. A sanitary T fitting may be used to change 
the direction of flow in a drainage system from horizontal to vertical, but may not be used to change the 
direction of flow in a nominally horizontal drainage system. A combination Y and 1/8th bend fitting may also 
be used as shown in Figure A-2.2.4.2.(b). 
This may be a vent pipe, a sanitary 
drainage pipe or a wet vent. 
vent pipe 
nominally horizontal 
drainage pipe 
nominally horizontal 
sanitary drainage pipe 
nominally vertical 
nominally horizontal 
sanitary drainage pipe 
drainage pipe 
(a)  Permitted 
(b)  Permitted 
(c) Not permitted (use 
        combination Y and 
        1/8 bend) 
EG01134A 
Figure A-2.2.4.2. 
Sanitary T fittings in drainage systems 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. Pipe and Fitting Applications. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-75 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
Division B 
Table A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.
Summary of Pipe and Fitting Applications 
NPC References 
Types of Piping and Fittings 
Standard References 
Use of Piping and Fittings(1)(2) 
Drainage System 
Venting System 
Potable Water System
Above­
ground
inside
building 
Under­
ground
under
building 
Building
sewer 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Aboveground 
Underground
Cold 
Hot 
Under
building 
Outside
building 
2.2.5.1.(1) 
Fibrocement DWV pipe
Type 1, Class 3000
Type 2, Class 4000 
CAN/CSA-B127.3 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.2. 
Concrete sewer pipe
Sewer, storm drain and
culvert 
Reinforced culvert, storm
drain and sewer 
CSA A257.1 
CSA A257.2 
N 
N 
P (3) 
P (3) 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.3. 
Vitrified clay pipe 
CSA A60.1-M 
N 
P 
P 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.4. 
PE water pipe and tubing
Series 160 sizes with
compression fittings 
Series 50, 75, 100 and 125 
CSA B137.1 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (4) 
N 
P (4) 
N 
2.2.5.5.(1) 
PE plastic pipe (DR-PR) based
on outside diameter 
ASTM F714 
N 
P 
P 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.6. 
PEX pressure tubing 
CSA B137.5 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
2.2.5.7.(1) 
PVC water pipe
Dimension ratios (DR) or
standard dimension ratios
(SDR) 14, 17, 18, 21, 25 and
26
Schedule 40 in sizes
from NPS ½ to NPS 2½
inclusively
Schedule 80 in sizes from
NPS ½ to NPS 6 inclusively 
CSA B137.3 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
N 
P (7) 
P (7) 
2.2.5.7.(2) 
PVC fittings
Schedule 40 
Schedule 80 
ASTM D2466 
ASTM D2467 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P 
2.2.5.7.(3) 
PVC pressure fittings 
CSA B137.2 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
N 
P 
P 
2.2.5.8. 
CPVC water pipe 
CSA B137.6 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6)(8) 
P (5)(6)(8) 
P (8) 
P (8) 
2-76 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
Table A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. (Continued) 
NPC References 
Types of Piping and Fittings 
Standard References 
Use of Piping and Fittings(1)(2) 
Drainage System 
Venting System 
Potable Water System
Above­
ground
inside
building 
Under­
ground
under
building 
Building
sewer 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Aboveground 
Underground
Cold 
Hot 
Under
building 
Outside
building 
2.2.5.9. 
ABS Schedule 40 DWV pipe with
a cellular core 
Plastic sewer pipe PS ≥ 320 kPa 
PVC sewer pipe (PSM type)
≤35-SDR  
Profile PVC sewer pipe
PS ≥ 320 kPa 
Profile PE sewer pipe
PS ≥ 320 kPa 
ASTM F628 
CSA B182.1 
CSA B182.2 
CSA B182.4 
CSA B182.6 
P (5)(6) 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P (5)(6) 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.9. and
2.2.5.10. 
ABS DWV pipe 
PVC DWV pipe 
CSA B181.1 
CSA B181.2 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.5.12. 
PE/AL/PE pressure pipe 
CSA B137.9 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
N 
P 
P 
2.2.5.13. 
PEX/AL/PEX pressure pipe 
CSA B137.10 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
2.2.5.14. 
PP-R pressure pipe 
CSA B137.11 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
2.2.5.15. 
PE-RT tube 
CSA B137.18 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P (5)(6) 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
2.2.5.16. 
Cellular core PVC pipe 
ASTM F3128 
P (5)(6)(9) 
P (9) 
N 
P (5)(6)(9) 
P (9) 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.6.1. 
Cast-iron soil pipe 
CSA B70 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.6.4. 
Ductile-iron water pipe 
ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.6.5. 
Screwed cast-iron fittings 
ASME B16.4 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.6.6. 
Screwed malleable-iron fittings 
ASME B16.3 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.6.7. 
Welded and seamless steel
galvanized pipe 
ASTM A53/A53M 
P 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P (10) 
P (10) 
P (10) 
P (10) 
2.2.6.8. 
Corrugated steel galvanized pipe 
CAN/CSA-G401 
N 
N 
P (11) 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.6.9. 
Sheet metal pipe(12) 
— 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.6.10. 
Stainless steel pipe 
ASTM A312/A312M 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.6.14. 
Stainless steel tube 
ASTM A269/A269M 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.7.1. 
Copper and brass pipe
Copper 
Red brass 
ASTM B42 
ASTM B43 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-77 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Table A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. (Continued) 
NPC References 
Types of Piping and Fittings 
Standard References 
Use of Piping and Fittings(1)(2) 
Drainage System 
Venting System 
Potable Water System
Above­
ground
inside
building 
Under­
ground
under
building 
Building
sewer 
Above­
ground 
Under­
ground 
Aboveground 
Underground
Cold 
Hot 
Under
building 
Outside
building 
2.2.7.3. 
Brass or bronze threaded water
fittings 
ASME B16.15 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.7.4. 
Copper tube
Types
 
K
 
and
 
L
 
hard
 
temper
 
Types K and L soft temper 
Type M hard temper 
Type M soft temper 
Type DWV 
ASTM B88 
ASTM B306 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P (13) 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
P 
N 
P (13) 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
P 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.7.5. 
Solder-joint drainage fittings 
ASME B16.23 and
ASME B16.29 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.7.6. 
Solder-joint water fittings 
ASME B16.18 and
ASME B16.22 
N 
N 
N 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
2.2.7.8. 
Lead sanitary drainage pipe 
— 
P 
P 
N 
P 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
2.2.8.1. 
Polyolefin laboratory drainage 
systems 
CSA B181.3 
P (5)(6) 
P 
P 
P (5)(6) 
P 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Notes to Table A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8.:
(1) N = not permitted and P = permitted.
(2) Where firestops are pierced by pipes, the integrity of the firestop must be maintained. 
(3) Gasketted joints required.
(4) Permitted only for water service pipe.
(5) Combustible piping in noncombustible construction is subject to the requirements of Sentence 3.1.5.19.(1) of Division B of the NBC.
(6) Combustible piping that penetrates a fire separation is subject to the requirements in Articles 3.1.9.4. and 9.10.9.7. to 9.10.9.9. of Division B of the NBC.
(7) Not permitted in hot water systems.
(8) Not to exceed design temperature and design pressure stated in Sentence 2.2.5.8.(2).
(9) Permitted only in residential buildings containing 1 or 2 dwelling units and row houses that do not exceed 3 storeys in height.
(10) Permitted only in buildings of industrial occupancy as described in the NBC, or for the repair of existing galvanized steel piping systems.
(11) Permitted underground only in a storm drainage system.
(12) Permitted only for an external leader.
(13) Not permitted for the fixture drain or vent below the flood level rim of a flush-valve-operated urinal. 
A-2.2.5. to 2.2.8. 
Division B 
2-78 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.2.10.6.(3) 
A-2.2.5.2.(3) Concrete Fittings. Concrete fittings fabricated on site from lengths of pipe may have 
proven acceptable on the basis of past performance in some localities and their acceptance under this Code 
may be warranted. 
A-2.2.5.5.(1) Polyethylene Pipe Used Underground. Joints within the high-density polyethylene 
pipe (HDPE) shall be heat-fused according to the manufacturer's instructions. Joints between HDPE pipes and 
other materials shall be made with a suitable hubless coupling. 
A-2.2.5.6.(1) Crosslinked Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings. There are some special installation 
requirements for the use of crosslinked polyethylene pipe and its associated fittings. Reference should, 
therefore, be made to the installation information in CSA B137.5, “Crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) tubing 
systems for pressure applications.” 
A-2.2.5.9. to 2.2.5.11. Solvent Cement. CSA B137.6, “Chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) pipe, 
tubing, and fittings for hot- and cold-water distribution systems,” CSA B181.1, “Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene 
(ABS) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings,” and CSA B181.2, “Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated 
polyvinylchloride (CPVC) drain, waste, and vent pipe and pipe fittings,” reference ASTM D3138, “Standard 
Specification for Solvent Cements for Transition Joints Between Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) and 
Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Piping Components,” which specifies the colour of the solvent 
cement. PVC cement shall be grey, ABS cement shall be yellow, CPVC cement shall be clear and transition 
cement shall be white. The standard colour allows Code users to readily determine if the correct solvent cement 
has been used. It should be noted that a transition cement is not an all-purpose cement. 
A-2.2.5.12.(1) Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene Composite Pipe and Fittings. There 
are some special installation requirements for the use of polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene composite 
pipe and fittings. Reference should, therefore, be made to the installation information in CSA B137.9, 
“Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) composite pressure-pipe systems.” 
A-2.2.5.13.(1) Crosslinked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Crosslinked Polyethylene Composite 
Pressure Pipe and Fittings. There are some special installation requirements for the use of crosslinked 
polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked polyethylene composite pipe and fittings. Reference should, therefore, 
be made to the installation information in CSA B137.10, “Crosslinked polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked 
polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) composite pressure-pipe systems.” 
A-2.2.5.14.(1) Polypropylene Pipe and Fittings. There are some special installation requirements for 
the use of polypropylene pipe and fittings. Reference should, therefore, be made to the installation information 
in CSA B137.11, “Polypropylene (PP-R) pipe and fittings for pressure applications.” 
A-2.2.5.15.(1) Polyethylene of Raised Temperature Tube. It should be noted that CSA B137.18, 
“Polyethylene of raised temperature resistance (PE-RT) tubing systems for pressure applications,” contains 
special installation requirements, which should be followed. 
A-2.2.6.7.(3) Galvanized Steel Pipe. The use of galvanized steel pipe and fittings in a water 
distribution system may have proven acceptable on the basis of past performance in some localities and 
its acceptance under this Code may be warranted. 
A-2.2.10.5.(1) Saddle Hubs or Fittings. Saddle hubs or fittings may have proven acceptable on the 
basis of past performance in some localities and their acceptance under this Code may be warranted. 
A-2.2.10.6.(2) Supply Fittings and Individual Shower Heads. Flow restriction devices within 
supply fittings should not be removed. 
Due to the low flow rate of public lavatory faucets, design consideration should be given to the wait time for 
hot water to be delivered to each fixture. 
A-2.2.10.6.(3) Automatic Compensating Valves. When replacing a shower head, the appropriate 
shower valve with a suitable compensating feature matching the flow rate should be chosen to decrease 
the possibility that users will suffer thermal shock. The water flow rate of automatic compensating mixing 
valves can be found in ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16, “Performance Requirements for Automatic 
Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower Combinations.” 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-79 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.2.10.6.(4) and (5) 
Division B 
A-2.2.10.6.(4) and (5) Automatic Shut-off of Water Flow. Examples of water shut-off devices 
include occupant sensors and self-closing valves. 
A-2.2.10.6.(7) Manually Operated Valves. Manually operated valves are also known in the industry 
as supply line stops. 
A-2.2.10.7. Hot Water Temperature. Hot water delivered at 60°C, a typical thermostat setting for 
storage-type service water heaters, will severely burn human skin in 1 to 5 s. Consequently, Article 2.2.10.7. 
sets an upper limit on the temperature of water discharging from shower heads and into bathtubs. The 
water temperature is maintained at or below this limit through the installation and adjustment of automatic 
compensating valves or temperature-limiting devices. Compliance with the Article reduces the risk of scalding 
in showers and bathtubs, which could result in severe burns, and the risk of thermal shock in showers, which 
could lead to falls. Children, older adults and people with disabilities are particularly at risk of scalding because 
they are not always able to remove themselves quickly from a shower or bathtub if the water becomes too hot. 
At  a water  temperature of 49°C,  the time for  a scald  burn  to  occur on an adult  is  nearly 10  min, whereas  the  
time for a scald burn to occur on an older adult is only 2 min because their skin is thinner and less vascularized. 
At a water temperature of 43°C, scald burns occur only after several hours of exposure. Therefore, setting 43°C 
as the maximum temperature for water discharging from shower heads and into bathtubs provides suitable 
protection from scald burns in healthcare facilities and seniors' residences. 
Although the temperature of water discharging into other fixtures, such as lavatories, sinks, laundry trays and 
bidets, is not addressed by Article 2.2.10.7., a risk of scalding may nonetheless exist at such fixtures. 
It should be noted that pressure-balanced valves are sensitive to seasonal changes in the temperature of the 
cold water supply and may require adjustments throughout the year to avoid exceeding the maximum water 
temperature prescribed in Article 2.2.10.7. 
A-2.2.10.9.(3) Bubblers. Bubblers installed on other than drinking fountains may have proven acceptable 
on the basis of past performance in some localities and their acceptance under this Code may be warranted. 
A-2.2.10.16.(1) Air Admittance Valve. An air admittance valve is a device that is closed by gravity 
and seals the vent terminal at zero differential pressure (no flow conditions) and under positive internal 
pressures. The valve allows air to enter the drainage system without the use of a vent extended to outside air 
and prevents trap siphonage. 
The material of the diaphragm can be damaged by exposure to acidic or corrosive fumes in the ambient 
atmosphere; therefore, air admittance valves should not be installed in locations where there is a potential for 
exposure to such fumes. 
A-2.3.2.6.(1) Mechanical Joints. Storm sewer blockage can cause mechanical joints at the base of 
leaders to fail, which results in flooding. The failure occurs because the cleanout joints at the base of the 
rainwater leaders are not able to withstand the water column pressure. To avoid such failures, it is necessary 
to ensure that storm water systems installed using mechanical joints be braced and/or restrained at the 
ends of branches, changes in direction and elevation, at dead ends and at other locations as required by the 
manufacturer to prevent the separation of joints due to internal pressure, mechanical stress or seismic events. 
Care should be taken to replace cleanouts properly after maintenance or testing. 
2-80 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.3.3.11.(2) 
A-2.3.3.9. Linear Expansion. 
1. PE (1404) 
2. PEX, PE-RT & PP-R 
3. PE (2305-3306) 
4. ABS 
5. CPVC 
6. PVC (DWV) 
7. PVC (rigid) 
8. PE/AL/PE & PEX/AL/PEX 
9. copper 
10. stainless steel 
11. concrete 
12. mild steel and cast iron 
13. brick 
6 
4 
EG00661D 
Temperature change, °C 
Linear expansion of 10 m of pipe, mm
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 
5 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
1 
2 
3 
Figure A-2.3.3.9. 
Linear expansion 
Example 1 
To determine the expansion of 20 m of ABS pipe for a temperature change from 10°C to 60°C. 
Temperature change = 60 – 10 = 50°C, 
Enter the chart at 50°C, read up to ABS line, and then across to the mm scale = 47 mm/10 m of pipe, 
∴ change in length of 20 m of pipe = 
A-2.3.3.9.(1) Expansion and Contraction. Expansion and contraction in piping systems may be 
accommodated in a number of ways including, but not limited to, piping design and layout, material selection, 
and the inclusion of expansion joints. 
A-2.3.3.11.(2) Air Break. 
indirectly connected pipe 
air break 
Not smaller than the NPS of the 
indirectly connected pipe, or 25 mm 
directly connected receptacle (fixture) 
EG01136A 
Figure A-2.3.3.11.(2) 
Air break 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-81 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
A-2.3.4.6.(1) 
Division B 
A-2.3.4.6.(1) Support for Underground Piping. See explanation for Subsection 2.3.5. for additional 
protection required for underground pipes. Permitted installations are shown in Figure A-2.3.4.6.(1)(a). The 
methods of support shown in Figure A-2.3.4.6.(1)(b) are not permitted because the base does not provide 
firm and continuous support for the pipe. 
sand, crushed rock 
or frm earth 
rock 
layer of concrete 
frm earth 
bell hole 
concrete 
encasement 
(a)  Permitted 
unstable fll 
piers 
planking 
boulder 
(b)  Not permitted 
EG01137B 
Figure A-2.3.4.6.(1) 
Support for underground piping 
A-2.3.5.1.(1)(a) Backfilling of Pipe Trench. Stronger pipes may be required in deep fill or under 
driveways, parking lots, etc., and compaction for the full depth of the trench may be necessary. 
backfill(1) 
This part of the trench should be as narrow 
as proper jointing and backfill will permit. 
EG01138B 
300 mm 
Figure A-2.3.5.1.(1)(a) 
Backfilling of pipe trench 
Note to Figure A-2.3.5.1.(1)(a): 
(1) Backfill complying with Clause 2.3.5.1.(1)(a). 
A-2.3.5.3. Protection of Piping Against Freezing. The TIAC 2013, “Mechanical Insulation Best 
Practices Guide” is a comprehensive source of information on the selection, installation and proper use of 
thermal insulation materials. (Note that Section 4 of this Guide is not included in the scope of this Note as it 
contains information on proprietary products, which are not within the mandate of the Code.) 
A-2.3.6.5.(1) Air Pressure Tests. The addition of a non-toxic indicating substance, such as an aerosol, 
fluorescent dye, smoke or an odorant, to an air pressure test may help in identifying the location of a leak. 
However, the additive must be compatible with the piping material being tested: the intent is to identify the 
leak without affecting the outcome of the test or the integrity of the plumbing system. 
2-82 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
Division B 
A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi) 
A-2.3.7.2.(2) Pressure-Testing of Potable Water Systems. The plastic piping manufacturer 
should be consulted to determine the appropriateness of using air to pressure-test the piping system. 
A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi) Indirect Connections. See Sentence 2.4.5.1.(4) for trapping 
requirements for indirectly connected fixtures. 
See Sentence 2.4.7.1.(9) for cleanouts on drip pipes for food receptacles or display cases. 
sanitary building drain 
air break 
CO 
grease interceptor 
sink 
glass filler
ice cream scoops
coffee drips
frig.
food
compartment 
food display 
CO 
air break 
discharge 
from relief valve 
stack 
DF 
DF 
DF 
leader 
clear-water 
waste 
air break 
installation of backwater valve 
recommended 
RD 
extended to outside air when 
fixtures on 3 or more storeys 
are connected 
storm building drain 
CO 
trap for leader (serves receptacles 
draining indirect connections) 
FD 
max. height 
300 mm 
EG01140B 
Figure A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi) 
Indirect connections 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-83 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
A-2.4.2.1.(2) 
Division B 
A-2.4.2.1.(2) Sanitary Drainage Pipe Connections. 
stack 
no sanitary drainage pipe 
to connect in this area 
stack 
1.5 m 
no sanitary drainage pipe 
to connect in this area 
horizontal offset 
stack 
1.5 m 
branch or building drain 
(a)  Connection to nominally 
(b)  Connection to nominally 
horizontal offset 
horizontal sanitary drainage pipe 
EG01141A 
Figure A-2.4.2.1.(2) 
Sanitary drainage pipe connections 
A-2.4.2.1.(4) and (5) Suds Pressure Zones. High sudsing detergents used in clothes washers 
produce suds that tend to disrupt the venting action of venting systems and can also spread through the lower 
portions of multi-storey drainage systems. The more turbulence, the greater the suds. One solution that avoids 
the creation of suds pressure zones involves connecting the suds-producing stack downstream of all other 
stacks and increasing the size of the horizontal building drain to achieve a greater flow of air and water. Using 
streamlined fittings, such as wyes, tends to reduce suds formation. Check valves or backwater valves in fixture 
outlet pipes have also been used to correct problem installations. 
nominally horizontal 
offset 
clothes 
washer 
clothes 
washer 
40 x stack NPS or 2.44 m 
(whichever is less) 
10 x stack NPS 
40 x stack NPS 
10 x stack NPS 
40 x branch or sanitary 
building drain NPS 
branch or sanitary 
building drain 
10 x branch or sanitary 
building drain NPS 
detergent suds zone 
EG00675A 
(1) 
40 x stack NPS or 2.44 m 
(whichever is less) 
Figure A-2.4.2.1.(4) and (5) 
Suds pressure zones 
Note to Figure A-2.4.2.1.(4) and (5): 
(1) See Sentence 2.4.2.1.(5). 
2-84 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.5.1.(2) 
A-2.4.3.3.(1) Waste with Organic Solids. Equipment such as garbage grinders and potato peelers 
produces waste with organic solids. These devices reduce most waste into small-sized particles that will flow 
easily through the drainage system. However, if they are located upstream of the interceptor, the particles 
could block the interceptor. 
A-2.4.4.3.(1) Grease Interceptors. Grease interceptors may be required when it is considered that 
the discharge of fats, oil or grease may impair the drainage system. Information on the design and sizing of 
grease interceptors can be found in ASPE 2012, “Plumbing Engineering Design Handbook, Volume 4, Chapter 
8, Grease Interceptors.” 
A-2.4.4.4.(1) Hazardous Waste. Chemically loaded and bio-hazardous wastes can be dangerous 
to private or public sewer systems and hazardous to people. The treatment of corrosive and acid waste is 
mandated by this Code. The treatment of chemically loaded effluents is usually regulated by sewage collecting 
and treatment authorities. The treatment of bio-hazardous waste should follow “good engineering practice,” 
such as that described in Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines published by Health Canada. It should be noted 
that bio-hazardous waste disposal systems require specific engineering expertise and remain outside the 
scope of this Code.  
A-2.4.5.1.(2) Trapping of Sinks and Laundry Trays. 
sink with 3 compartments 
(a) 
(c) 
sink 
sink 
(b) 
sink 
sink with 2 compartments 
EG01142B 
developed length(2) 
The fitting and trap 
are one NPS larger 
than the largest 
fixture outlet pipe.(1) 
developed 
length(2) 
developed 
length(2) 
developed 
length(2) 
Figure A-2.4.5.1.(2) 
Trapping of sinks and laundry trays 
Notes to Figure A-2.4.5.1.(2): 
(1) See Sentence 2.4.9.3.(2). 
(2) The developed length of the fixture outlet pipe must not exceed 1 200 mm. See Article 2.4.8.2. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-85 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.5.1.(3) 
Division B 
A-2.4.5.1.(3) Single Traps for Fixture Groups. 
fixture drain 
vent 
fixture outlet pipes 
CO 
CO 
(a) Laboratory sinks or washing machines 
vent(1) 
fixture outlet pipe 
floor or shower drains 
(b) Floor drains and shower drains 
EG01143A 
Figure A-2.4.5.1.(3) 
Single traps for fixture groups 
Note to Figure A-2.4.5.1.(3): 
(1) Vent not required for floor drains if the installation conforms to Sentence 2.5.1.1.(3). 
A-2.4.5.1.(5) Location of Trap or Interceptor. An interceptor that replaces a trap must be vented 
in the same way as the trap it replaces. (See Note A-2.4.2.1.(1)(a)(ii) and (e)(vi).) Where an interceptor other 
than an oil interceptor serves a group of fixtures requiring more than one trap, each fixture must be properly 
trapped and vented. (See Article 2.5.5.2. for venting of oil interceptors.) 
minimum 38 mm water seal 
vent 
developed length of 
fixture outlet pipe not 
to exceed 1 200 mm(1) 
interceptor 
EG01144B 
Figure A-2.4.5.1.(5) 
Location of trap or interceptor 
Note to Figure A-2.4.5.1.(5): 
(1) See Sentence 2.4.8.2.(1). 
A-2.4.5.2.(1) Untrapped Leader. When an untrapped leader drains to a combined building sewer, 
clearance requirements are the same as for vent terminals. (See also Note A-2.5.6.5.(4).) 
2-86 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.5.3.(1) 
A-2.4.5.3.(1) Subsoil Drainage Connections. This Code does not regulate the installation of subsoil 
drainage pipes, but does regulate the connection of such pipes to the plumbing system. The intent of this 
Article is to place a trap between the subsoil drainage pipe and the sanitary drainage system. The cleanout 
must be installed in accordance with Sentence 2.4.7.1.(2). A trap or sump may be provided specifically for 
the subsoil drains, or advantage may be taken of the trap of a floor drain or storm water sump as shown 
in Figure A-2.4.5.3.(1). 
sanitary building drain 
may require backwater valves(1) 
may require backwater 
valves(1) 
separate trap (with cleanout) for subsoil drains 
(a)  Connections to sanitary drainage system (plan view) 
trapped floor drain acts as trap 
and cleanout for subsoil drains 
stack 
EG01145B 
(b) Trapped sump 
CO 
CO 
CO 
FD 
Figure A-2.4.5.3.(1) 
Subsoil drainage connections 
Note to Figure A-2.4.5.3.(1): 
(1) See Sentence 2.4.6.4.(5). 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-87 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.5.4.(1) 
Division B 
A-2.4.5.4.(1) Location of Building Traps. 
nominal pipe size of 
fresh air inlet not to be 
less than NPS 4 
EG01146A 
cleanout required 
on building trap 
building drain 
not more than 1.2 m 
fresh air inlet 
(b) Building trap outside building 
(a) Building trap inside building 
this distance as 
short as possible 
building sewer 
accessible manhole 
1 m 
COs 
Figure A-2.4.5.4.(1) 
Location of building traps 
A-2.4.5.5.(1) Maintaining Trap Seals. Periodic manual replenishment of the water in a trap is 
considered to be an equally effective means of maintaining the trap seal in floor drains in residences. Under 
pressure differential conditions, special measures are necessary to maintain trap seals. 
EG01147A 
(a)  Flush tank 
(b)  Flush valve 
FD 
connected below 
back-siphonage 
preventer 
cold water pipe 
primer valve 
back-siphonage 
preventer 
FD 
(c)  Indirect waste 
(d)  Trap seal primer 
indirect 
clear-water 
waste 
FD 
FD 
Figure A-2.4.5.5.(1) 
Maintaining trap seals 
A-2.4.6.3. Arrangement of Piping at Sump. In most installations, controls will be installed in 
conjunction with a float to automatically empty the sump. If such controls are not provided, the capacity of the 
sump should equal the maximum inflow to the sump that is expected to occur during any 24 h period. 
2-88 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.7.1.(6) 
pump or ejector 
sump 
union 
approved pressure 
pipe and fittings 
check valve 
shut-off valve 
to building sewer (downstream 
of building trap if one is installed) 
(1) 
watertight and airtight cover to be 
provided if sump receives sewage 
sub-drainage system 
EG01148B 
Figure A-2.4.6.3. 
Arrangement of piping at sump  
Note to Figure A-2.4.6.3.: 
(1) See Article 2.5.7.7. for sizing of required vent if sump receives sewage. 
A-2.4.6.4.(3) Protection from Backflow Caused by Surcharge. The requirement in 
Sentence 2.4.6.4.(3) is intended to apply when, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, there is 
danger of backup from a public sewer. 
backwater valves 
on individual fixture 
drains(1) 
backwater valve 
on branch(2) 
backwater valve if backflow 
protection required for floor drain(1) 
subsoil drains connected to the 
upstream side of a trapped 
backwater valve or a separate 
trap and backwater valve(3) 
stack 
subsoil drains 
EG01149C 
LAV 
LAV 
LAV 
LAV 
WC 
FD 
FD 
WC 
Figure A-2.4.6.4.(3) 
Protection from backflow caused by surcharge 
Notes to Figure A-2.4.6.4.(3): 
(1) See Sentence 2.4.6.4.(1). 
(2) See Sentence 2.4.6.4.(2). 
(3) See Sentence 2.4.6.4.(3). 
A-2.4.7.1.(6) Cleanouts for Drainage Systems. To accommodate the limitations of sewer cleaning 
equipment, the cleanout should be located as close as possible to the exterior wall of the building, either inside 
or outside, and be accessible for sewer cleaning equipment. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-89 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.7.1.(9) 
Division B 
A-2.4.7.1.(9) Cleanouts for Food Receptacle Drip Pipes. 
indirect connection(1) 
sanitary drainage system 
EG01150B 
food receptacle 
drip pipe 
CO 
Figure A-2.4.7.1.(9) 
Cleanouts for food receptacle drip pipes 
Note to Figure A-2.4.7.1.(9): 
(1) See Article 2.4.2.1. 
A-2.4.7.1.(10) Cleanouts for Fixture Drains. A trap cleanout plug cannot be used as a cleanout 
for a fixture drain. 
A-2.4.8.1.(1) Minimum Slope. Although slopes below 1 in 100 are permitted for pipes over NPS 4, they 
should be used only where necessary. Steeper slopes and higher velocities will help to keep pipes clean by 
moving heavier solids that might tend to clog the pipes. 
A-2.4.8.2.(1) Island Fixture Installation. 
sink 
fixture outlet 
pipe 
floor 
trap access 
required 
vent(1) 
one NPS larger 
than NPS of trap 
counter 
sink 
floor 
fixture outlet pipe 
(a) 
(b) 
1 200 mm
CO 
CO 
A(2) 
A(2) 
A(2) 
EG02009A 
Figure A-2.4.8.2.(1) 
Island fixture installation(3) 
Notes to Figure A-2.4.8.2.(1): 
(1) Nominal pipe size of vent to be in accordance with Article 2.5.6.3. 
(2) The fall of A cannot exceed the nominal pipe size of the fixture trap and its length depends on the nominal pipe size of the fixture trap: 
•  for NPS 1½, A = 1.8 m  
• for NPS 2, A = 2.4 m  
• for NPS 3, A = 3.6 m  
(3) See also Article 2.5.1.1. 
2-90 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.10. 
A-Table 2.4.9.3. Hydraulic Loads for Laundry Traps and Floor Drains. When determining 
the hydraulic load on a pipe, no allowance need be made for a load from a domestic clothes washer when 
discharged to a laundry tray since the hydraulic load from the laundry tray is sufficient. Also no hydraulic load 
is required from a floor drain in a washroom since it is for emergency use only. 
A-2.4.9.3.(2) Continuous Wastes. Fixture outlet pipes that are common to 2 or 3 compartments or 
fixtures are sometimes referred to as continuous wastes and are not considered to be branches. (See also 
Note A-2.4.5.1.(2).) 
A-2.4.9.3.(3) Standpipe Illustration. 
clothes washer 
standpipe 
standpipe 
clothes washer 
hose 
CO 
CO 
hose 
The standpipe must extend above the flood level rim 
of the washer and measure a minimum of 600 mm. 
600 mm
600 mm 
EG02005A 
Figure A-2.4.9.3.(3) 
Standpipe installation for clothes washers 
A-2.4.10. Determination of Hydraulic Loads and Nominal Pipe Sizes of Drainage Pipes. 
Hydraulic Loads 
The hydraulic load that is imposed by a fixture is represented by a factor called a fixture unit. Fixture 
units are dimensionless and take into account the rate of discharge, time of discharge and frequency of 
discharge of the fixture. 
Confusion often arises when attempts are made to convert fixture units to litres per second because there is 
no straightforward relationship between the two. The proportion of the total number of fixtures that can be 
expected to discharge simultaneously in a large system is smaller than in a small system. For example, 
doubling the number of fixtures in a system will not double the peak flow that the system must carry, 
although of course the flow will be increased somewhat. Figure A-2.4.10.-A shows the relationship that 
was used in constructing the tables of capacities of stacks, branches, sanitary building drains and sanitary 
building sewers (Tables 2.4.10.6.-A to 2.4.10.6.-C). 
Although the curve in Figure A-2.4.10.-A was used to prepare the Code tables, it was not included in the 
National Plumbing Code. Instead, a single approximate conversion factor is given in the Code so that 
a continuous flow from a fixture may be converted from litres per second to fixture units in order to 
determine the total hydraulic load on the sanitary drainage system. The conversion factor, which is given in 
Sentence 2.4.10.3.(1), is 31.7 fixture units per litres per second. The discharge from a continuous flow fixture 
in litres per second when multiplied by 31.7 gives the hydraulic load in fixture units, and that load is added 
to the fixture unit load from other fixtures to give the total load that the sanitary drainage pipe must carry. 
The hydraulic load that is produced by storm water runoff depends both on the size of the area that 
is drained and local rainfall intensity. The capacities of storm drainage pipes and combined sewers in 
Tables 2.4.10.9., 2.4.10.10. and 2.4.10.11. have been expressed in terms of the number of litres that they can 
carry when the local rainfall intensity is 1 mm in 15 min. The hydraulic load for a particular location is 
obtained by simply multiplying the rainfall intensity figure given in Appendix C of Division B of the NBC 
by the actual area drained as specified in Sentence 2.4.10.4.(1). 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-91 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.10. 
Division B 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
0 
500 
1 000 
1 500 
2 000 
2 500 
3 000 
Fixture units 
Demand, L/s 
EG01151A 
Figure A-2.4.10.-A 
Relationship between fixture units and demand 
In the case of restricted-flow drains, the hydraulic load from storm water runoff must be calculated using 
manufacturer discharge flow rates of specific drains in the case of roofs, and water-flow restrictors in 
the case of paved areas. 
When plumbing fixtures are connected to a combined sewer, the hydraulic load from the fixtures must be 
converted from fixture units to litres or, in the case of continuous flow, from litres per second to litres so 
that these loads can be added to the hydraulic loads from roofs and paved surfaces. As already pointed out, 
the relationship between fixture units and litres per second and, consequently, the relationship between 
fixture units and litres is not straightforward, and an approximate conversion factor has been adopted. The 
conversion factor given in Sentence 2.4.10.5.(1) is 9.1 L/fixture unit, except where the load is less than 260 
fixture units  in  which case a round figure of  2  360  L  is  to  be  used. In the  case  of  continuous-flow fixtures  
that are connected to combined sewers or storm sewers, the conversion factor given in Sentence 2.4.10.3.(2) 
is 900 L per L/s. This conversion factor is not an approximation but an exact calculation. 
The conversion factors  given in Sentences  2.4.10.3.(1) and 2.4.10.5.(1) are designed to convert in one 
direction only, and must not be used to convert from fixture units to litres per second in the one instance, 
nor from litres to fixture units in the other instance. 
In summary, it should be noted that 
(a) in sanitary drainage systems, all hydraulic loads are converted to fixture units, and 
(b) in storm drainage systems or combined drainage systems, all hydraulic loads are converted to litres. 
Procedure for Selecting Nominal Pipe Sizes 
The following is an outline, with examples, of the procedures to be followed in determining the nominal 
pipe size of each section of drainage piping. 
(1) Sanitary drainage pipes, such as branches, stacks, building drains or building sewers: 
(a) Determine the load in fixture units from all fixtures except continuous-flow fixtures; 
(b) Determine the load in litres per second from all continuous-flow fixtures and multiply the 
number of litres per second by 31.7 to obtain the number of fixture units; 
(c) Add loads (a) and (b) to obtain the total hydraulic load on the pipe in fixture units; and 
(d) Consult the appropriate table from Table 2.4.10.6.-A, 2.4.10.6.-B or 2.4.10.6.-C to select the 
nominal pipe size. 
(Note that no pipe may be smaller than the NPS permitted in Subsection 2.4.9.) 
(2) Storm drainage pipes, such as gutters, leaders, horizontal pipes, building drains or building sewers: 
2-92 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.10. 
(a) Determine the area in square metres of roofs and paved surfaces according to 
Sentence 2.4.10.4.(1); 
(b) Determine the local rainfall intensity (15 min rainfall) from Appendix C of Division B of the NBC; 
(c) Multiply (a) by (b) to obtain the hydraulic load in litres; 
(d) If a fixture discharges a continuous flow to the storm system, multiply its load in litres per 
second by 900 to obtain the hydraulic load in litres; 
(e) If flow control roof drains are used, compute the discharge rate based on rain intensity, retention 
duration, accumulation height and roof area from the roof drain manufacturers' data; 
(f) Add loads (c) or (e), and (d) to obtain the total hydraulic load on the pipe in litres; and 
(g) Consult the appropriate table from Table 2.4.10.9., 2.4.10.10. or 2.4.10.11. to select the nominal 
pipe size of the pipe or gutter. 
(Note that no pipe may be smaller than the NPS permitted in Subsection 2.4.9.) 
(3) Combined drainage pipes, such as building sewers: 
(a) Determine the total load in fixture units from all fixtures except continuous-flow fixtures; 
(b) If the fixture unit load exceeds 260, multiply it by 9.1 to determine the equivalent hydraulic load 
in litres. If the fixture unit load is 260 or fewer fixture units, the hydraulic load is 2 360 L; 
(c) Obtain the hydraulic load from roofs and paved surfaces in the same manner as for storm drains 
(see 2(a), (b), (c) and (e)); 
(d) Obtain the hydraulic load in litres from any continuous-flow source that is connected to the 
sanitary or storm drainage system in the same manner as for storm drainage pipes (see 2(d)); 
(e) Add hydraulic loads (b), (c) and (d) to obtain the total hydraulic load on the pipe in litres; and 
(f) Consult Table 2.4.10.9. to select the nominal pipe size. 
(Note that no pipe may be smaller than the NPS permitted in Subsection 2.4.9.) 
Examples 
Example 1: Determination of the nominal pipe size of storm drainage components for the building shown in 
Figures 1-1 and 1-2 
Step No. 1: Determine the hydraulic load from the roofs. 
Area drained by gutter 
Area drained by roof drain 
If the local rainfall intensity is 25 mm: 
the load on the gutter (leader No. 2) is (25 × 162) 
the load on the roof drain (leader No. 1) is (25 × 230.4) 
If the local rainfall intensity is 15 mm: 
the load on the gutter (leader No. 2) is (15 × 162) 
the load on the roof drain (leader No. 1) is (15 × 230.4) 
= 162 m2 
= 230.4 m2 
= 4  050 L  
= 5 760 L 
= 2 430 L 
= 3 456 L 
Step No. 2: Determine the nominal pipe size of storm drainage components. 
Using the appropriate hydraulic loads, the nominal pipe size of storm drainage components can be determined from 
Tables 2.4.10.9., 2.4.10.10. and 2.4.10.11. These values are tabulated in Table 1-2 for rainfall intensities of 25 mm and 15 mm in 15 min. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-93 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.10. 
Division B 
RD 
area of horizontal 
projection surface 
18 x 9 = 162 m2 
gutter 
leader 
area drained by RD 
198 + 32.4 = 230.4 m2 
1/2 area of largest 
adjacent vertical surface 
1/2 x 3.6 x 18 = 32.4 m2 
area of roof 
11 x 18 = 198 m2 
9 m 
18 m 
3.6 m 
11 m 
EG01152A 
Figure 1-1 
Storm drainage areas (example 1) 
leader 1 
leader 2 
gutter 1 in 200 
storm building drain, 
1 in 100 
storm building sewer, 
162 m2 
230.4 m2 
1 in 100 
EG01153A 
Figure 1-2 
Storm drainage components (example 1) (elevation view) 
Table 1-2 
Nominal Pipe Sizes of Storm Drainage Pipes (Example 1) 
Forming Part of Note A-2.4.10. 
Storm Drainage Pipes 
Area Drained, 
m2 
15-min Rainfall Intensity, mm 
NPC 
Reference 
Table No. 
25 
15 
Hydraulic 
Nominal Pipe 
Hydraulic 
Nominal Pipe 
Load, L 
Size, NPS 
Load, L 
Size, NPS 
Roof drain leader 
230.4 
5 760 
4 
3 456 
3 
2.4.10.11. 
Gutter 
162 
4 050 
8 
2 430 
7 
2.4.10.10. 
Gutter leader 
162 
4 050 
3 
2 430 
2½ 
2.4.10.11. 
Storm building drain 
230.4 
5 760 
5 
3 456 
4 
2.4.10.9. 
Storm building sewer 
395.8 
9 895 
6 
5 936 
5 
2.4.10.9. 
2-94 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.4.10. 
Example 2: Determination of the nominal pipe size of drainage pipes for buildings 
Figure 2-1 represents an office building with washrooms for men and women, a drinking fountain and cleaner's closet on each typical floor. 
The equipment room with facilities is located in the basement. The building is 18 m by 30 m and is to be built in Kitchener, Ontario. 
A. Hydraulic Load per Typical Floor 
5 WC @ 6  
= 
30 
fixture units 
2 UR @ 1½  
= 
3 
fixture units 
4 LAV  @ 1½  
= 
6 
fixture units 
2 FD @ 3  
= 
6 
fixture units 
1 FS @  3  
= 
3 
fixture units 
1 DF @ 1  
= 
1 
fixture unit 
49 
fixture units 
The reader is left to calculate the nominal pipe size of the branches, one of which must be NPS 4 and another NPS 3 (see 
Subsection 2.4.9.). Therefore the smallest part of the stack must be NPS 4. 
B. Hydraulic Load on Stack 
5 storeys @ 49 fixture units = 245 fixture units 
Table 2.4.10.6.-A permits NPS 4 pipe. Use NPS 4 pipe. 
C. Hydraulic Load on Basement Branch 
= 
1 LAV  @  1 
1 fixture unit 
1 WC @ 6  
6 fixture units 
= 
2 FD @ 3  
6 fixture units 
= 
1 FS @  3  
3 fixture units 
= 
Semi-continuous Flow 
= 
0.23 L/s × 31.7 
7 fixture units 
23 fixture units 
Table 2.4.10.6.-B permits NPS 3 pipe. Use NPS 3 pipe. 
D. Hydraulic Load on Building Drain 
From stack 
245 
fixture units 
From basement branch 
23 
fixture units 
268 
fixture units 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.6.-C, at a slope of 1 in 50, an NPS 4 pipe will carry 240 fixture units. 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.6.-C, at a slope of 1 in 25, an NPS 4 pipe will carry 300 fixture units. 
For practical reasons, use an NPS 4 pipe at a slope of not less than 1 in 32. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-95 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.4.10. 
Division B 
FS 
DF 
WC 
WC 
UR 
LAV 
FD 
LAV 
FD 
typical floor 
configuration 
LAV 
WC 
NPS 3 FDs 
FS 
semi-continuous flow 
0.23 L/s 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
RD 
RD 
roof 18 m x 30 m 
EG01154A 
Figure 2-1 
Building drainage system (example 2) 
E. Storm Load 
Area of roof 18 × 30 = 540 m 2 
Rainfall intensity for Kitchener, taken from Appendix C of Division B of the NBC, is 28 mm in 15 min 
Total hydraulic storm load = 28 × 540 = 15 120 L 
Storm load on each roof drain = 15 120/2 = 7 560 L 
F. Nominal Pipe Size of Horizontal Leaders 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.9., at a slope of 1 in 25, an NPS 4 pipe will carry a load of 8 430 L. 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.9., at a slope of 1 in 100, an NPS 5 pipe will carry a load of 7 650 L. 
Referring to Table  2.4.10.9.,  at  a slope  of  1 in 133, an NPS  6 pipe will  carry a load  of  10  700  L.  
2-96 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.1.1.(3) 
Therefore,  use an NPS  5 pipe at a slope of 1 in  100.  
G. Nominal Pipe Size of Vertical Leader 
Table 2.4.10.11. would permit an NPS 5 pipe (19 500 L) but this nominal pipe size is not readily available. For practical reasons, 
use an NPS  6 pipe.  
H. Nominal Pipe Size of Storm Building Drains 
Since a drainage pipe cannot be any smaller than any upstream pipes, the storm building drain must be at least NPS 6 . Referring 
again to Table 2.4.10.9., an NPS 6 pipe will carry a hydraulic load of 17 600 L at a slope of 1 in 50. Therefore use an NPS 6 pipe at a 
slightly higher slope. 
I. Nominal Pipe Size of Combined Building Sewer 
(a) Total sanitary load excluding semi-continuous flow 260 fixture units converted to litres (Clause 2.4.10.5.(1)(b)) × 9.1 = 2 366 L 
(b) Semi-continuous flow 0.23 L/s converted to litres (Sentence 2.4.10.3.(2)) × 900 = 207 L 
(c) Storm load 15 120 L 
Total hydraulic load 17 693 L 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.9., at a slope of 1 in 50, an NPS 6 pipe will carry 17 600 L. 
Referring to Table 2.4.10.9., at a slope of 1 in 25, an NPS 6 pipe will carry 24 900 L. 
Therefore, use an NPS 6 pipe at a slope of not less than 1 in 32. 
A-2.4.10.4.(1) Rainfall Intensities. Climate information on rainfall intensities for various cities can 
be found in Appendix C of Division B of the NBC. 
When calculating the hydraulic load from a roof or paved surface, it should be noted that a 1 mm depth of 
water on 1 m2 of surface is equivalent to 1 L. 
A-2.5.1.1.(3) Trapping of Floor Drains. 
fixture drain, branch 
or stack 
fixture drain 
floor drain trap NPS 3 or larger 
A(1) 
(a) 
building drain, branch or 
nominally horizontal 
offset in a stack 
fixture drain 
floor drain trap NPS 3 or larger 
A(1) 
(b) 
EG01155B 
Figure A-2.5.1.1.(3) 
Trapping of floor drains 
Note to Figure A-2.5.1.1.(3): 
(1) Length of “A” must be at least 450 mm and its fall must not exceed the NPS of the pipe. See also the explanation given in Sentence 2.5.6.3.(1) 
regarding the fall on fixture drains. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-97 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.1.1.(4) 
Division B 
A-2.5.1.1.(4) Venting not Required. 
EG01156B 
subsoil drainage pipe 
basement 
sanitary building drain 
vent not required for trap serving 
subsoil drainage pipe(1) 
(a) 
storm building drain 
leader 
vent not required for trap 
serving a storm drainage 
system(2) 
sanitary building 
drain 
combined building sewer 
(b) 
vent not required for traps that form part 
of an indirect drainage system(3) 
this trap to be vented 
in an approved manner 
(c) 
Figure A-2.5.1.1.(4) 
Venting not required 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.1.1.(4): 
(1) See Subclause 2.5.1.1.(4)(a)(i). 
(2) See Subclause 2.5.1.1.(4)(a)(ii). 
(3) See Clause 2.5.1.1.(4)(b). 
A-2.5.2.1. Wet Venting. Single-storey and multi-storey wet venting has been replaced with wet venting 
(Article 2.5.2.1.) and circuit venting (Article 2.5.3.1.). 
The information and figures presented in this Note are examples of the most common installation practices that 
meet NPC requirements. However, the examples shown do not preclude other installations that would also 
conform to NPC requirements. 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
lavatory basin 
shower drain (NPS 2) 
flush tank WC 
flush tank WC 
EG02013A 
shower drain (NPS 2) 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-A 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(b) 
2-98 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.2.1. 
stack vent 
kitchen sink 
stack vent 
lavatory basin 
kitchen sink 
lavatory basin 
stack (wet vent) 
siphon jet urinal 
kitchen sink 
lavatory basin 
flush tank WC 
stack (wet vent) 
lavatory basin 
branch 
flush tank WC 
flush tank WC 
symmetrical  
connection(1) 
bathtub 
flush tank WC 
EG02014A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-B 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(c) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-B: 
(1) A symmetrical connection is accomplished with a manufactured fitting that has two or more inlets and connects two or more waste lines 
to a vent or wet vent. 
continuous vent 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
lavatory basin 
bathtub 
flush tank WC 
branch 
bathtub 
flush tank WC 
This symmetrical 
connection is acceptable. 
EG02015A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-C 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(d) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-99 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

                 
 
A-2.5.2.1. 
Division B 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
lavatory basin 
branch 
bathtub 
(wet vent) 
emergency floor 
drain (NPS 3) 
branch 
EG02016A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-D 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(e) 
continuous vent 
individual and 
lavatory basin 
fixture drain(1) (wet vent) 
continuous vent 
(4 fixture units; NPS 3; 
WC load not counted) 
bathtub 
branch (wet vent) 
flush tank WC 
branch (NPS 3) 
bathroom group = 6 fixture units
      kitchen sink = 1.5 fixture units 
Total = 7.5 fixture units 
fixture drain 
(1.5 fixture units; 
NPS 1 1/2) 
separately vented 
fixture drain 
kitchen sink 
EG02017A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-E 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(f) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-E: 
(1) The load from the separately vented kitchen sink is included when sizing this pipe. 
2-100 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
 
                              
Division B 
A-2.5.2.1. 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
individual and 
continuous vent 
branch(1) (wet vent) (9 fixture units; 
lavatory basin 
1 flush tank WC = 4 fixture units 
Total = 13 fixture units 
2-head shower 
NPS 4; WC load not counted) 
fixture drain (1 fixture 
unit; NPS 1 1/4) 
separately vented 
fixture drain 
flush tank WC 
branch (wet vent) 
branch (NPS 4) 
3 lavatory basins = 3 fixture units 
2 x 2-head showers = 6 fixture units 
2-head shower 
maximum 3 m 
EG02018C 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-F 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(f) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-F: 
(1) The load from the separately vented lavatory basin is included when sizing this pipe. 
branch or stack(1) 
(wet vent) 
(3.5 fixture units; NPS 2) 
ice box 
stack vent or 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
commercial 
dishwasher
branch or sanitary building drain (NPS 3) 
                           ice box = 1 fixture unit
                lavatory basin = 1 fixture unit
                         bar sink = 1.5 fixture units 
commercial dishwasher = 3 fixture units 
Total = 6.5 fixture units 
individual and 
continuous vent 
bar sink 
(NPS 1 1/2 trap) 
separately vented 
fixture drain 
EG02019B 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-G 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(f) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-G: 
(1) The load from the separately vented bar sink is included when sizing this pipe. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-101 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

                
A-2.5.2.1. 
Division B 
continuous vent(1) 
(6 fixture units; 
NPS 1 1/2) 
individual and 
lavatory basin 
continuous vent 
fixture drain 
(wet vent) 
bathtub 
branch (wet vent) 
flush tank WC 
branch (NPS 3) 
bathroom group = 6 fixture units 
      kitchen sink = 1.5 fixture units 
Total = 7.5 fixture units 
fixture drain 
(1.5 fixture units; NPS 1 1/2) 
kitchen sink 
separately vented 
fixture drain 
EG02020A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-H 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(g) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-H: 
(1) The load from the separately vented kitchen sink is not included when sizing this pipe. 
stack vent 
drinking fountain 
flush tank WC 
stack (wet vent) 
lavatory basin 
kitchen sink 
bathtub 
nominally horizontal 
offset(1) 
EG02022A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-I 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(i) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.2.1.-I: 
(1) “Offset” means the piping that connects the ends of 2 pipes that are parallel. 
2-102 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.2.1. 
stack (wet vent) 
(1 fixture unit; NPS 1 1/2) 
branch (2.5 fixture 
units; NPS 1 1/2) 
nominally horizontal offset 
(maximum length 1.2 m 
for pipes that are NPS 2 
or less) 
kitchen sink 
lavatory basin 
stack vent 
EG02023B 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-J 
Example of wet venting described in Subclause 2.5.2.1.(1)(i)(i) 
stack vent 
lavatory basin 
(2 fixture units; NPS 1 1/2) 
(NPS 1 1/4 trap) 
stack (wet vent) 
kitchen sink 
kitchen sink 
lavatory basin 
nominally horizontal offset 
(maximum length 2.5 m for 
pipes larger than NPS 2) 
branch (5 fixture units; NPS 2) 
EG02024B 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-K 
Example of wet venting described in Subclause 2.5.2.1.(1)(i)(ii) 
continuous vent 
lavatory basin 
lavatory basin 
branch (wet vent) 
bathtub 
(2 fixture units; NPS 1 1/2) 
(NPS 1 1/4 trap) 
emergency floor 
drain (NPS 3) 
branch (wet vent) 
(2 fixture units; NPS 3) 
branch 
EG02025C 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-L 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(j) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-103 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.3.1. 
Division B 
flush tank WC 
continuous vent 
bathtub 
lavatory basin 
length not restricted 
EG02026A 
Figure A-2.5.2.1.-M 
Example of wet venting described in Clause 2.5.2.1.(1)(k) 
A-2.5.3.1. Circuit Venting. Single-storey and multi-storey wet venting has been replaced with wet 
venting (Article 2.5.2.1.) and circuit venting (Article 2.5.3.1.). 
The information and figures presented in this Note are examples of the most common installation practices that 
meet NPC requirements. However, the examples shown do not preclude other installations that would also 
conform to NPC requirements. 
circuit vent 
relief vent 
EG02027A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-A 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(1) 
stack 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
WC 
WC 
This installation is permitted because the stack is 
downstream of the most downstream circuit-vented fixture 
(i.e., the water closet). 
EG02029A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-B 
Example of circuit venting described in Clause 2.5.3.1.(1)(c) 
2-104 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.3.1. 
circuit vent 
relief vent 
individual vent 
relief vent 
NPS 3 trap 
circuit vent 
NPS 2 trap 
NPS 1 1/2 trap 
NPS 1 1/4 traps 
circuit vent 
NPS 1 1/2 trap 
NPS 2 trap 
Example 1: This installation is permitted because 
the NPS 1 1/2 trap is separately vented. 
individual and 
continuous vent 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
circuit vent 
relief vent 
Example 2: This installation is permitted because 
the large traps and the small traps are 
separately circuit-vented. 
NPS 2 trap 
Example 3: This installation is permitted because 
the NPS 1 1/4 trap is separately vented. 
EG02030A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-C 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(2), which refers to the nominal pipe size of fixture outlets 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
circuit-vented 
branch 
A relief vent is required when fixtures 
are circuit-vented. 
EG02031B 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-D 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(3) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-105 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.3.1. 
Division B 
stack vent 
(acting as a relief vent) 
4 fixture units 
2 fixture units 
stack (wet vent 
acting as a relief vent) 
circuit vent 
Example 1 
circuit vent (20 fixture 
stack (more than 6 fixture units) 
This stack may act as the relief 
vent (a pipe acting as a relief 
vent may be vertical or horizontal). 
Example 2 
units) 
all WCs are 4 fixture units each 
branch (acting as 
a relief vent) 
continuous vent 
(acting as a relief vent) 
minimum NPS 2 
fixture drain (wet vent 
acting as a relief vent) 
stack (more than 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
6 fixture units) 
stack vent (acting as a 
Example 3 
Example 4 
relief vent) 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
bathtub (1.5 fixture units) 
circuit vents (36 fixture 
units; NPS 2) 
WC (4 fixture units) 
stack (acting as a relief vent) 
(5.5 fixture units; NPS 3) 
WCs (6 fixture units each) 
EG02032A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-E 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(4) 
2-106 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.3.1. 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
combined 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
symmetrical 
connection(1) 
circuit 
vent 
EG02033A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-F 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(5) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-F: 
(1) A symmetrical connection is accomplished with a manufactured fitting that has two or more inlets and connects two or more waste lines 
to a vent or wet vent. 
This is the preferred location 
for the additional circuit vent. 
EG02034B 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
45° 
45° 
circuit-vented branch 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-G 
Example of circuit venting described in Clause 2.5.3.1.(6)(a) 
This is the preferred location 
for the additional circuit vent. 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
circuit-vented 
branch 
branch 
EG02035B 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-H 
Example of circuit venting described in Clause 2.5.3.1.(6)(b) 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-107 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.3.1. 
Division B 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
minimum NPS 2(2) 
additional circuit vent(1) 
Example 1 
additional 
circuit vent(1) 
relief vent 
circuit vent 
minimum NPS 2(2) 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
Example 2 
stack (more than 
relief vent 
additional 
circuit vent 
circuit vent(1) 
6 fixture units) 
minimum NPS 2(2) 
45° 
45° 
Example 3 
EG02036A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-I 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(7) 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-I: 
(1) Nominal pipe size as per Article 2.5.7.1. and Sentence 2.5.7.3.(1). 
(2) See Sentence 2.5.3.1.(7). 
2-108 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.3.1. 
EG02037A 
relief vent 
circuit vent(1) 
additional circuit vent(1) 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-J 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(8) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-J: 
(1) Connections to circuit vents and to additional circuit vents in accordance with Sentence 2.5.3.1.(6) shall conform to Sentence 2.5.4.5.(1), 
which states that a maximum of 2 fixtures (1.5 fixture units each) shall be connected to the vertical section by means of a double sanitary T. 
EG02038A 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
NPS 1 1/4 trap 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
relief vent 
minimum NPS 2 
circuit vent 
drain(1) 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-K 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(9) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-K: 
(1) The drain is sized as a branch. The nominal pipe size of the drain should be increased as the load increases. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-109 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
A-2.5.3.1. 
Division B 
relief vent(1) (NPS 1 1/2) 
This is the preferred location for the 
additional circuit vent.(1)(2) (NPS 1 1/2) 
circuit-vented branch 
EG02039B 
circuit vent (44 fixture units; NPS 2; 
10-m-long circuit vent) 
branch 
all WCs are 4 fixture units each 
stack (more than 6 fixture units) 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-L 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(10) 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-L: 
(1) The relief vent and the additional circuit vent are one NPS smaller than the circuit vent. 
(2) See Sentence 2.5.7.3.(1). 
2-110 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.3.1. 
circuit vent(1) (45 fixture 
units; NPS 2) 
individual and continuous vent 
(acting as a relief vent) (NPS 1 1/2) 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
2 fixture units 
47 fixture units 
1 fixture unit 
additional circuit 
vent (NPS 1 1/2) 
minimum NPS 2 
Example 1 
all WCs are 4 fixture units each 
circuit vent 
stack (more than 
6 fixture units) 
37 fixture units 
all WCs are 4 fixture units each 
individual and continuous vent 
(acting as a relief vent) 
individual and continuous 
vent (NPS 1 1/2) 
29 fixture units 
sinks with 
NPS 1 1/2 traps 
circuit vent (6 fixture 
units; NPS 1 1/4) 
Example 2 
lavatory basin 
sink with an 
NPS 2 trap 
EG02040A 
Figure A-2.5.3.1.-M 
Example of circuit venting described in Sentence 2.5.3.1.(11) 
Note to Figure A-2.5.3.1.-M: 
(1) When sizing the circuit vent, do not include fixtures with a hydraulic load of 2 fixture units that are connected downstream of the most 
downstream water closets. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-111 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.4.3. 
Division B 
A-2.5.4.3. Yoke Vent. In Ontario, yoke vents have traditionally been referred to as modified stack vents. 
vent header 
stack vent 
12 branches 
yoke 
vent 
vent stack 
vent stack 
vent stack 
EG02041A 
Figure A-2.5.4.3. 
Yoke vent 
2-112 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.4.5.(1) 
A-2.5.4.4.(1) Offset Relief Vents. When an offset is greater than 1.5 m, it must be sized the same way as 
a branch or building drain (see Sentence 2.4.10.6.(2)). An offset relief vent is required at points A and B or A 
and C in Figure A-2.5.4.4.(1). 
EG02042A 
The stack's horizontal offset 
is greater than 1.5 m and 
receives discharge of more 
than 100 fixture units above 
the offset. 
stack 
C or B 
stack 
offset relief vents 
offset relief vent A 
vent stack 
stack 
C or B 
vent stack 
1.5 m 
offset relief vent A 
offset relief vent C 
offset relief vent B 
Figure A-2.5.4.4.(1) 
Offset relief vents 
A-2.5.4.5.(1) Fixture Connections to Vent Pipes. When one or more fixture drains are connected to 
a vent pipe, the vent pipe becomes a wet vent. It must then conform to all the requirements that can apply 
to it as a drainage pipe and a vent pipe. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-113 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
A-2.5.5.2. 
Division B 
A-2.5.5.2. Venting of Oil Interceptors. 
minimum NPS 1 1/4(1) 
inlet 
minimum NPS 1 1/4(1) 
connect to plumbing 
vent system 
outlet 
vent opening 
between 
compartments 
inside piping drops, baffles, etc. 
to be provided in accordance 
with manufacturer’s 
recommendations 
baffles 
300 mm 
cross-section of oil interceptor 
EG02006B 
Figure A-2.5.5.2. 
Venting of oil interceptors 
Note to Figure A-2.5.5.2.: 
(1) See Sentence 2.5.5.2.(4). 
A-2.5.6.2.(2) Vent Pipe Connections. Fittings used to connect vent pipes to nominally horizontal 
sanitary drainage pipes are specified in Subsection 2.2.4. 
Except for wet vents, vent pipes 
must be connected above the 
horizontal centreline. 
horizontal centreline 
of sanitary drainage pipe 
EG01164B 
Figure A-2.5.6.2.(2) 
Vent pipe connections 
2-114 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.6.3.(2) 
A-2.5.6.3.(1) Vent Connection and Location of Vent Pipes. 
trap arm/fixture drain 
vent pipe(1) 
Developed length “A” must be at least twice 
the NPS of the trap arm/fixture drain. 
Fall “B” must not be greater than the 
inside diameter of the trap arm/fixture drain. 
A 
B 
EG01165C 
Figure A-2.5.6.3.(1)-A 
Vent connection 
Note to Figure A-2.5.6.3.(1)-A: 
(1) The vent pipe must be connected in accordance with Article 2.5.6.2. 
max. fall of trap arm equal to its inside diameter 
min. developed length 2 times the size 
wet vent 
vent pipe 
FD 
90° 
45° 
sanitary T 
45° 
45° 
Y 
45° 
Total change in direction: 135° 
Total change in direction: 135° 
(a) 
(b) 
EG02830A 
Figure A-2.5.6.3.(1)-B 
Location of vent pipes that protect fixture traps and maximum change in direction of trap arms 
A-2.5.6.3.(2) Location of Vent Pipes. 
WC 
WC 
90° 
45° 
90° 
vent pipe 
90° 
wet vent 
90° 
Y 
45° 
sanitary T 
Total change in direction: 225° 
Total change in direction: 225° 
(a) 
(b) 
EG01166C 
Figure A-2.5.6.3.(2) 
Location of vent pipes and maximum change in direction of trap arms for fixtures that depend on siphonic action 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-115 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.6.3.(3) 
Division B 
A-2.5.6.3.(3) Length of Water-Closet Fixture Drain. 
wet or dry vent 
stack 
wet or dry vent 
stack 
max. 1 m 
max. 3 m 
max. 1 m 
max. 3 m 
EG01167A 
Figure A-2.5.6.3.(3) 
Length of water-closet fixture drain 
Note to Figure A-2.5.6.3.(3): 
(1) Fall and length of water-closet fixture drain applies to floor-mounted and wall-hung water closets. 
2-116 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.6.5.(4) 
A-2.5.6.5.(4) Vent Terminals. No vent pipe other than a fresh air inlet may terminate within the 
limits indicated. 
EG00664B 
property line 
vent 
openable window 
or door (typical) 
vent terminal to be 
high enough to prevent 
entry of roof drainage 
3.5 m minimum 
3.5 m minimum 
2 m 
minimum 
roof sun deck 
150 mm 
minimum 
3.5 m minimum 
air intake 
1 m minimum 
vent 
vent 
vent 
vent 
vent 
vent 
vent 
150 mm minimum 
1 m 
minimum 
1.8 m minimum 
Figure A-2.5.6.5.(4) 
Vent terminals 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-117 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.8. 
Division B 
A-2.5.8. Sizing of Venting Systems. Vent pipes are connected to the drainage system and terminate 
outside the building. They allow air to enter and circulate and they protect the trap seals in the drainage system. 
Except as permitted in Subsection 2.5.1., a trap shall always be protected by a vent pipe. 
R (6 m) 
O (1 m) 
N (5 m) 
J (4 m) 
M (3 m) 
L (1 m) 
K (1 m) 
V (3 m) 
WCs 
I (2 m) 
G (3 m) 
H (2 m) 
lavatory basin 
lavatory basins 
WC 
bathtub 
F (2 m) 
E (3 m) 
U (5 m) 
drinking fountain 
D (3 m) 
C (6 m) 
2 m 
lavatory basin 
2 m 
cleanout 
cleanout 
A (7 m) 
B (2 m) 
lavatory basin 
WC 
S (1 m) 
T (2 m) 
Q (2 m) 
P (4 m) 
drinking fountain 
WCs 
Y (2 m) 
X (1 m) 
W (3 m) 
kitchen sinks
lavatory basins 
EG02043A 
Figure A-2.5.8. 
Sizing of a venting system 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.8.: 
(1) All water closets are 4 fixture units each. 
(2) The letters in columns 1 and 3 of Table A-2.5.8. correspond to the letters in this Figure. 
2-118 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.8. 
Sizing of Vent Pipes 
The nominal pipe sizes stated in Table 2.5.7.1. take precedence over all other venting tables. 
Sizing of Relief Vents 
Length is not taken into consideration when sizing a relief vent and an additional circuit vent. A relief vent 
connected to a circuit-vented branch is sized according to Sentences 2.5.7.3.(1) and (2). 
An offset relief vent is sized according to Sentence 2.5.7.4.(1), which permits the offset relief vent to be 
one NPS smaller than the stack vent. 
Table A-2.5.8. 
Sizing of Venting Systems 
Vent Pipe(1) 
Vent Name 
Developed Length Used to 
Determine Nominal Pipe 
Size, m(1) 
Hydraulic Load Used 
to Determine Nominal 
Pipe Size, fixture units 
Code Reference 
Minimum Nominal 
Pipe Size 
A 
Continuous vent 
A + C = 13 
5 
2.5.7.1. 
1½ 
B 
Sump vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.7.(1) 
2 
C 
Branch vent 
A +  C =  13  
5 
2.5.7.7.(2) 
2 
D
 Vent
 
stack
 
2 + D + F + I  +  N + S + T = 17  
66 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.2. 
3 
E 
Individual and 
continuous vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.1. 
1¼ 
F
 Vent
 
stack 
Same as D = 17 
71 
Same as D 
3 
G 
Continuous vent 
G = 3 
6 
2.5.8.3.(5) 
2.5.7.1. 
1½ 
H 
Dual and continuous 
vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.1. 
1¼ 
I
 Vent
 
stack
 Same as D = 17 
71 
Same as D 
3 
J 
Circuit vent 
J + M = 7  
40 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.3.(4) 
1½ 
K 
Additional circuit vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.3.(1) 
1½ 
L 
Relief vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.3.(1) 
1½ 
M 
Branch vent 
J + M = 7 
40 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.2. 
1½ 
N
 Vent
 
stack
 Same as D = 17 
71 
Same as D 
3 
O  
Stack  vent  
O + Q + T = 5  
66 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.4. 
2 
P 
Circuit vent 
P =  4  
16 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.3.(4) 
1½ 
Q 
Stack vent 
Same as O = 5 
66 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.4. 
2 
R 
Stack vent  
R  + S + T = 9  
7.5 
2.5.2.1.(1)(a) 
3 
S 
Vent header 
A + C + F + I  +  N +  S + T =  25  
78.5 
2.5.8.3.(3) 
3 
T 
Vent header 
Same as S = 25 
78.5 
2.5.8.3.(3) 
3 
U 
Individual vent 
n/a 
n/a 
2.5.7.1. 
1¼ 
V 
Branch vent 
U + V + W = 11 
2 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.2. 
1¼ 
W 
Branch vent 
Same as V = 11 
3 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.7.2. 
1¼ 
X 
Stack vent 
X +  Y = 3  
4 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.4. 
1¼ 
Y 
Stack vent 
Same as X = 3 
4 
2.5.7.1. 
2.5.8.4. 
1¼ 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-119 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.5.8.1.(2) 
Division B 
Table A-2.5.8. (Continued) 
Notes to Table A-2.5.8.: 
(1) The letters in columns 1 and 3 correspond to the letters in Figure A-2.5.8. 
A-2.5.8.1.(2) Sizing of Wet Vent Systems. 
stack vent 
stack vent 
(1) 
(1) 
stack may serve 
1 or 2 water closets 
stack 
wet vent 
wet vent 
portion 
portion 
(a) 
(b) 
Not serving water closets 
Serving water closets 
EG01171B 
Figure A-2.5.8.1.(2) 
Sizing of wet vent systems 
Note to Figure A-2.5.8.1.(2): 
(1) These two fixtures are not included when determining the nominal pipe size of the wet vent portion using Table 2.5.8.1. 
2-120 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4. 
A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4. Lengths to be Considered When Sizing Vent Pipes. 
stack 
vent 
branch 
vent 
branch 
vent 
branch 
vent 
continuous 
vent 
individual 
and 
continuous 
vent 
dual and 
continuous 
vent 
dual 
vent 
vent 
H 
G 
E 
C 
F 
D 
B 
A 
0.6 m 
2.1 m 
1.2 m 
1.8 m 
2.0 m 
2.4 m 
2.7 m 
EG01172B 
Figure A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.-A 
Lengths to be considered when sizing branch, continuous, dual and individual vent pipes 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.-A: 
(1) The length of the vent pipe does not apply when sizing vent pipes A-G, D-C and F-E. See Article 2.5.8.2. 
(2) The vent pipe length to be considered when sizing vent pipes B-C, C-E, E-G and G-H is based on the length of BCEGH (i.e., 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 + 
2.0 + 0.6 = 7.7 m).  See Article  2.5.8.3.  
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-121 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.6.1.3.(5) 
Division B 
EG01173B 
stack vent 
branch vent 
branch vent 
branch vent 
branch vent 
branch vent 
branch 
branch 
roof 
building drain or branch 
L 
K 
J 
H 
G E  
F 
B 
A 
D 
C 
vent header 
I 
branch 
Figure A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.-B 
Lengths to be considered when sizing stack vent, vent stack and vent header pipes 
Notes to Figure A-2.5.8.3. and 2.5.8.4.-B: 
(1) The vent pipe lengths to be considered when sizing the vent stacks and stack vents are as follows: 
vent stack A-C: ACEGIKL 
vent stack B-C: BCEGIKL 
vent stack H-I: HIKL 
stack vent D-E: DEGIKL 
stack vent F-G: FGIKL 
stack vent J-K: JKL  
See Sentence 2.5.8.4.(2). 
(2) The vent pipe length to be considered when sizing the vent header pipe CEGIKL, or any section of it, is the length of ACEGIKL. See 
Sentence 2.5.8.3.(3). 
A-2.6.1.3.(5) Shut-off Valves. Where multiple risers convey the water supply to dwelling units, 
each dwelling unit's water distribution system shall be provided with a shut-off valve located immediately 
where the water piping enters the suite so as to isolate the fixtures as well as the water distribution piping 
serving the dwelling unit's fixtures. Fixture stopcocks or shut-off valves located immediately adjacent to 
a fixture may not be adequate to protect the water distribution piping. Where a dwelling unit is served by a 
single shut-off valve on the water supply, additional shut-off valves may be required to achieve compliance 
with Sentences 2.6.1.3.(4) and (7). 
A-2.6.1.6.(5) Flush-Tank-Type Urinals in Seasonal Buildings. Flush-tank-type urinals that are 
not in use for an extended period of time, such as those in seasonal buildings, are permitted to be set up to 
flush automatically at predetermined intervals. Automatic flushing prevents the depletion of the water seal 
due to evaporation or backflow conditions. The trap seal restricts the infiltration of gases, which can pose 
health and safety concerns. 
A-2.6.1.7.(5) Relief Valves. If the discharge piping is longer than 2 m or more than two 90° elbows are 
used, the valve manufacturer's installation instructions should be followed to ensure that the piping does not 
affect the relief valves' discharge capacity. 
2-122 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
A-2.6.1.9.(1) Water Hammer Prevention. Water hammer  is a buildup of pressure in  a  length  of  
horizontal or vertical pipe that occurs when a valve or faucet is closed suddenly. The longer the pipe and the 
greater the water velocity, the greater the pressure exerted on the pipe, which can be many times the normal 
static water pressure and be sufficient to damage the piping system. Since air chambers made from a piece of 
vertical pipe do not provide acceptable protection, pre-manufactured water hammer arresters are required 
to address this potential problem. Water hammer arresters need not be installed at every valve or faucet, nor 
in every piping system. 
A-2.6.1.11.(1) Thermal Expansion. To accommodate the increase in pressure caused by thermal 
expansion within a closed water distribution system, one of the following should be installed: 
(1) a suitably sized diaphragm expansion tank designed for use within a potable water system, 
(2) an auxiliary thermal expansion relief valve (T.E.R. valve) conforming to CSA B125.3, “Plumbing fittings,” 
set at a pressure of 550 kPa or less and designed for repeated use, or 
(3) other means acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 
A-2.6.1.12.(1) Service Water Heaters. Storing hot water at temperatures below 60°C in the hot water 
tank or in the delivery system may lead to the growth of legionella bacteria. Contemporary electric water heater 
tanks experience temperature stratification and thus tend to have legionella bacteria in the lower parts of the 
tank. Article 2.6.1.12. specifies a thermostat setting of 60°C, which addresses the concern over the growth of 
legionella bacteria in electric hot water storage tanks and is enforceable without introducing unnecessary 
complications. The growth of legionella bacteria is not a concern for other types of water heaters with different 
designs that use different fuels. 
Electrically heated water heaters are shipped with the thermostat set at 60°C. Article 2.6.1.12. is included in 
the NPC to formalize this de facto temperature setting as a requirement. The thermostats have graduated 
temperature markings to allow such a setting, which is not the case with gas- or oil-heated water heaters. 
A-2.6.2.4.(2) Backflow from Fire Protection Systems. The following document is considered to be 
good engineering practice when selecting a backflow preventer for installation on a fire protection system: 
AWWA M14, “Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control.” 
Table A-2.6.2.4.(2) 
Selection Guide for Backflow Prevention Devices on Fire Sprinkler and Standpipe Systems 
CSA Standard 
Number 
Type of Device(1) 
Systems Made with Potable Water 
System Materials(2) 
Systems Not Made with Potable Water 
System Materials(2) 
Minor Hazard — 
Residential Partial 
Flow-Through System 
Minor Hazard — Class 
1 System  
Moderate Hazard — 
Class  1, 2, 3  and  
6 Systems 
Severe Hazard — 
Any Class of System 
in which Antifreeze 
or Other Additives 
Are Used 
CSA B64.6.1 
CSA B64.9 
CSA B64.5.1 
CSA B64.4.1 
DuCF 
SCVAF 
DCVAF 
RPF 
P 
P 
P 
P 
NP
 
P 
P 
P 
NP
 
NP 
P 
P 
NP
 
NP 
NP
 
P 
Notes to Table A-2.6.2.4.(2): 
(1) The “F” indicates that the product is only recommended for use on fire sprinkler and standpipe systems. 
(2) NP = not permitted and P = permitted. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-123 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
A-2.6.2.4.(3) 
Division B 
A-2.6.2.4.(3) Fire Department Pumper Connection and Backflow Protection. 
shut-off valve 
fire department 
pumper connection 
fire sprinkler/standpipe riser 
alarm check 
or flow switch 
shut-off valve 
double check-valve assembly 
with indicating-type control valves 
fire service pipe 
Example of a Class 1 fire sprinkler/standpipe system constructed of 
non-potable water system materials with no antifreeze or other additives 
municipal water 
supply 
EG02007A 
Figure A-2.6.2.4.(3) 
Fire department pumper connection and backflow protection 
A-2.6.2.6.(1) Locations Requiring Premise Isolation. The following list is a guide to locations 
where premise isolation may be required: 
• hospital buildings with operating, mortuary or laboratory facilities 
• radioactive material processing plants 
• petroleum processing facilities 
• premises where inspection is restricted 
• sewage treatment plants 
• commercial laundries (excluding laundromats) 
• plating or chemical plants 
• docks and dockside facilities 
• food and beverage processing plants 
• steam plants 
• trackside facilities for trains 
An assessment of the hazard must be carried out to determine the need, if any, for a backflow prevention device. 
A-2.6.2.9.(2) Installation of Air Gaps. 
control valve 
air gap 
flood level rim 
water supply 
EG01176A 
Figure A-2.6.2.9.(2) 
Installation of air gaps 
2-124 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
A-2.6.2.10.(2) Installation of Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers. 
height of atmospheric 
control valve 
outlet of atmospheric vacuum 
breaker (critical level, unless 
marked otherwise by the 
overflow 
indirect 
outlet 
EG01177A 
vacuum breaker 
manufacturer) 
tank 
flood level rim 
connection(1) 
Figure A-2.6.2.10.(2) 
Installation of atmospheric vacuum breakers 
Note to Figure A-2.6.2.10.(2): 
(1) See Sentence 2.3.3.11.(1). 
A-2.6.3. Water Systems. Subsection 2.6.3. contains performance requirements for water systems. Two 
widely used references for the design of water systems are: 
NIST Building Materials and Structures Report BMS 79, “Water-Distributing Systems for Buildings,” United 
States Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D.C., and 
McGraw-Hill 2009, “International Plumbing Codes Handbook,” edited by V.T. Manas, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York, U.S.A. 
A-2.6.3.1. Water Quality. Water destined for use as potable water can originate from a variety of sources 
that are generally classified as surface waters or well waters, such as lakes, rivers, streams and aquifers. In 
some localities, there may be seasonal variations in the water supply, and surface and well waters may be 
blended at times. 
Water composition is the primary consideration in determining the cause of corrosion in potable water systems. 
If the water has corrosive characteristics, water treatment may be necessary to control its corrosiveness: this 
may be as straightforward as adjusting the pH of the water at the treatment plant, or it may involve more 
extensive corrosion-control treatment methods. Water purveyors normally consult treatment specialists to 
develop methods suitable for specific conditions. The treatment of water from private wells may also require 
expert consultation. 
The past performance of plumbing materials and products in different localities often provides insight into 
what can be expected with new installations. In areas where water-related corrosion is known to occur, 
adjustment of water chemistry may be sufficient or it may be necessary to select alternative piping and fitting 
materials or more robust products. 
It is important to note that not all corrosion can be attributed to water conditions: the improper design and 
installation of potable water systems may result in erosion corrosion, galvanic corrosion, fatigue cracking, 
and so forth. 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) Potable Water Systems. The design procedures contained in the following documents 
are considered good engineering practice in the field of potable water systems: 
(a) ASHRAE 2011, “ASHRAE Handbook – HVAC Applications,” chapter on Service Water Heating, 
(b) ASHRAE 2013, “ASHRAE Handbook – Fundamentals,” chapter on Pipe Sizing, 
(c) ASPE 2010, “Plumbing Engineering Design Handbook, Volume 2,”chapter on Cold Water Systems, and 
(d) ASPE 2010, “Plumbing Engineering Design Handbook, Volume 2,” chapter on Domestic Water Heating 
Systems. 
Alternatively, the following methods, which apply to both public and private water supplies, may be used in 
determining the size of each section of the water system using Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A (Small Building Method) 
and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F (Average Pressure Loss Method). Where these methods are considered an alternative 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-125 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Division B 
to a detailed engineering design method, the hydraulic loads shall be the sum of the total fixture units given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
Small Building Method 
Information required if using this method: 
(a) The developed length: 
(i) from the property line or private water supply system when located outside the building to the 
water service entry point to the building, and 
(ii) from the water service entry point to the building to the most remote water outlet. 
(b) Minimum static pressure: 
(i) the minimum static pressure available at the property line or other water source (private water 
supply system), or 
(ii) where there is a wide fluctuation of pressure in the main throughout the day, the minimum 
static pressure available. 
(c) Pressure losses: 
(i) losses for meters, pressure-reducing valves, backflow preventers, water treatment systems, 
and any other devices, and 
(ii) losses or gains due to changes in elevation. 
(d) The number of fixture units (FU) as determined by using the sum of the total values given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(e) The maximum velocities permitted in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for 
the pipe and fittings chosen for the installation. 
Note that a private water supply system must be capable of meeting the demands of the water distribution 
system. 
Pipe Sizing Procedures (see Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A) 
Step 1: Water Service Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-B) 
(a) Obtain the total fixture units required for  the installation using  the sum  of  the total  
values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D and consider all 
other demands on the water supply. 
(b) Determine the minimum static pressure available at the property line or private water 
supply system and consider all pressure losses for the water service. 
(c) Select the pressure range group in Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A that is consistent with the 
minimum static pressure available including any other losses. 
(d) Select the length column in Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A that is equal to or greater than the 
developed length from the property line or private water supply system to the water 
service entry point to the building. 
(e) In that column, find the fixture unit value that is equal to or greater than the fixture unit 
demand for the installation and follow the row back to the first column to locate the 
nominal pipe size of the water service pipe. 
(f) To establish the adjusted static pressure available where the water service enters the 
building for sizing the water distribution system, subtract the actual static pressure losses 
for the water service from the minimum static pressure available at the property line. 
(g) The adjusted static pressure available where a private water supply system is installed 
should be the static pressure available from such a system at the entry to the building. 
Step 2: Hot Water Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-C) 
(a)  Start  with  the most remote outlet in the  most  distant occupancy that requires hot  water.  
(b)  Use  the sum  of  the total  fixture unit values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C 
and 2.6.3.2.-D and work back toward the service water heater, adding in the fixture 
unit values as they occur. 
(c) Select the pressure range group in Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A that is consistent with the 
minimum static pressure available at the water service entry and any other losses (e.g. 
elevation or devices such as backflow preventers, etc.). Use this pressure range group for 
all portions (hot and cold) of the water distribution system. 
(d) Select the length column that is equal to or greater than the developed length from the 
water service entry point to the building to the most remote outlet served with either 
hot or cold water. 
2-126 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
(e) In that column, find the fixture unit value that is equal to or greater than the fixture 
unit demand at each pipe and follow the row back to the second column to locate the 
nominal pipe size of the water distribution system. 
Step 3: Cold Water Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-D) 
(a) Start with the most remote outlet on the cold water piping using the established total 
developed length column and pressure range group in Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and work 
through Steps 2(c), (d) and (e) for hot water piping. 
(b)  Use  the sum  of  the total  fixture unit values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C 
and 2.6.3.2.-D and work back toward the water service entry. 
(c) Where the service water heater distribution pipe occurs, add in the fixture unit demand 
of the fixtures served only with hot water and those that have not yet been added in 
as served to the cold water side of the most remote fixtures requiring both a hot and 
cold water supply. 
(d) Continue by sizing the cold water main between the service water heater distribution 
pipe and the water service entry. 
(e) Add in the fixtures served with cold water only from the main within the most remote 
occupancy as they occur and all common distribution piping serving hot and cold water 
to other occupancies as they occur. 
(f) Complete by sizing all distribution piping served by the main within the most remote 
occupancy and then the other occupancies not yet sized using the previously established 
total developed length and pressure range group in Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A. 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A 
Nominal Pipe Sizes for Water Systems Based on Number of Fixture Units Served Using the Small Building Method(1) 
Maximum Allowable Length, m 
12 
18 
24 
30 
46 
61 
76 
91 
122 
152 
183 
213 
244 
274 
305 
Number of Fixture Units Served 
Water 
Service 
Pipe, NPS 
Water Dis-
tribution 
System, 
NPS 
Flow Velocity, m/s 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Pressure Range 200 to 310 kPa 
¾ 
½ 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
¾ 
5/8 
12
 10
 9
 7
 5
 3
 3
 3
 2
 2
 1
 1
 1
 1
 0
 
¾ 
¾ 
18 
16 
14 
12 
9 
6 
5
 5
 4
 4
 3
 2
 2
 2
 1
 
1
 
1
 36
 31
 27
 25
 20
 17
 15
 13
 12
 10
 8
 6
 6
 6
 6
 
1½ 
1¼ 
83 
68 
57 
48 
38 
32 
28 
25 
21 
18 
15 
12 
12 
11 
11 
1½ 
1½ 
151 
124 
105 
91 
70 
57 
49 
45 
36 
31 
26 
23 
21 
20 
20 
2
 
1½
 151
 151
 132
 110
 80
 64
 53
 46
 38
 32
 27
 23
 21
 20
 20
 
2 
2 
359 
329 
292 
265 
217 
185 
164 
147 
124 
96 
70 
61 
57 
54 
51 
2½ 
2½ 
445 
418 
390 
370 
330 
300 
280 
265 
240 
220 
198 
175 
158 
143 
133 
Pressure Range 311 to 413 kPa 
¾ 
½ 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
¾ 
5/8 
13 
13 
12 
11 
9 
7 
5 
5 
3 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
¾ 
¾ 
21 
21 
19 
17 
14 
11 
9 
8 
6 
5 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
1 
1 
42 
42 
41 
36 
30 
25 
23 
20 
18 
15 
12 
10 
9 
8 
8 
1½ 
1¼ 
83 
83 
83 
83 
66 
52 
44 
39 
33 
29 
24 
20 
19 
17 
16 
1½ 
1½ 
151 
151 
151 
151 
128 
105 
90 
78 
62 
52 
42 
38 
35 
32 
30 
2
 
1½
 151
 151
 151
 151
 150
 117
 98
 84
 67
 55
 42
 38
 35
 32
 30
 
2 
2 
359 
359 
359 
359 
359 
318 
280 
250 
205 
165 
142 
123 
110 
102 
94 
2½ 
2½ 
611 
611 
610 
580 
535 
500 
470 
440 
400 
365 
335 
315 
285 
267 
250 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-127 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Division B 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A (Continued) 
Maximum Allowable Length, m 
12 
18 
24 
30 
46 
61 
76 
91 
122 
152 
183 
213 
244 
274 
305 
Number of Fixture Units Served 
Water 
Service 
Pipe, NPS 
Water Dis-
tribution 
System, 
NPS 
Flow Velocity, m/s 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Pressure Over 413 kPa 
¾ 
½ 
8 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
¾ 
5/8 
13 
13 
13 
13 
11 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
¾ 
¾ 
21 
21 
21 
21 
17 
13 
11 
10 
8 
7 
6 
6 
5 
4 
4 
1 
1 
42 
42 
42 
42 
38 
32 
29 
26 
22 
18 
14 
13 
12 
12 
11 
1½ 
1¼ 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
74 
62 
54 
43 
34 
26 
25 
23 
22 
21 
1½ 
1½ 
151 
151 
151 
151 
151 
151 
130 
113 
88 
73 
51 
51 
46 
43 
40 
2
 
1½
 151
 151
 151
 151
 151
 151
 142
 122
 98
 82
 64
 51
 46
 43
 40
 
2 
2 
359 
359 
359 
359 
359 
359 
359 
340 
288 
245 
204 
172 
153 
141 
129 
2½ 
2½ 
611 
611 
611 
611 
611 
611 
610 
570 
510 
460 
430 
404 
380 
356 
329 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A: 
(1) Where total fixture unit values exceed those given in this Table, the system must be designed according to a detailed engineering design method. 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-B 
Sizing of Water Service Pipe Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A(1) 
Fixture Units 
Nominal Pipe Size 
Total demand from Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-E 
Add in fixture units for fire sprinkler system, irrigation system and any other demands on 
water service 
210.8 
n/a in this example  
– 
– 
Total demand in this example 
210.8 
2 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-B: 
(1) Based on 30 m developed length and minimum static pressure at property line of 565 kPa. 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-C 
Sizing of Hot Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A with Pressure Drop(1) 
Pipe Number 
Hot Water, fixture  units  
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8 
11
 
15
 
6 
21 
¾ 
¾ 
1 
5/8 
1 
Total Fixture Units 
21 
1 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-C: 
(1) Based on 76 m developed length and adjusted static pressure at building entry of 540 kPa. 
2-128 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-D 
Sizing of Cold Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A(1) 
Pipe Letter 
Cold Water, fixture units 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
A 
11 
¾ 
B 
21 
1 
C 
21 
1 
D 
29.8 
1¼ 
E 
20 
1 
F 
49.8 
1¼ 
G 
20 
1 
H 
69.8 
1½ 
I 
20 
1 
J 
89.8 
1½ 
K 
20 
1 
L 
109.8 
1½ 
M 
60 
1¼ 
N 
169.8 
2 
O 
20 
1 
P 
189.8 
2 
Q 
21 
1 
R 
210.8 
2 
Total Fixture Units 
210.8 
2 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-D: 
(1) Based on 76 m developed length and  minimum adjusted static pressure at building entry  of  540 kPa.  
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-129 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Division B 
Pipe P = 189.8 FU 
Pipe Q +  21.0 FU 
Total = 210.8 FU 
SWH 
P/L 
indicates hot water 
indicates cold water 
(Q) 
21 FU 
(O) 
20 FU 
(K) 
20 FU 
(I) 
20 FU 
(G) 
20 FU 
(E) 
20 FU 
21 FU 
(5) 
(4) 
6 FU 
(3) 
15 FU 
(2) 
11 FU 
(1) 
8 FU 
(A)  11 FU 
Residential 
20 FU 
Residential 
20 FU 
Commercial 
44 FU 
Commercial 
16 FU 
Commercial 
21 FU 
Adjusted pressure at 
water service entry 
540 kPa (78 PSI) 
Water meter 
Minimum pressure at 
property line 
565 kPa (82 PSI) 
Pipe N = 169.8 FU 
Pipe O +  20.0 FU 
Total = 189.8 FU 
Pipe L =  109.8 FU 
Pipe M +  60.0 FU 
Total = 169.8 FU 
Pipe H = 69.8 FU 
Pipe I  + 20.0 FU 
Total = 89.8 FU 
Pipe J = 89.8 FU 
Pipe K + 20.0 FU 
Total = 109.8 FU 
(M) 
60 FU 
Pipe F = 49.8 FU 
Pipe G + 20.0 FU 
Total = 69.8 FU 
Pipe D = 29.8 FU 
Pipe E  + 20.0 FU 
Total = 49.8 FU 
Pipe C =  21.0 FU 
4 WC  +  8.8 FU 
Total =  29.8 FU 
4 WC 
6 L each 
2.2 FU each 
Pipe A = 11.0 FU 
Hot  
+ 10.0 FU 
Total = 21.0 FU 
Commercial DW = 4 FU 
(per manufacturer’s data) 
Water service 
210.8 FU 
Service sink 
3 FU 
Pipe B = 21.0 FU 
No additions 
Total =  21.0 FU 
For use with Small Building and Average Pressure Loss Methods of water pipe sizing 
EG00672A 
(R) 
(P) 
(L) 
(N) 
(J) 
(H) 
(C) 
(D) 
(B) 
(F) 
Residential 
20 FU 
3 Lavatories 
2 FU each 
2 Commercial sinks 
4 FU each 
Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A 
Example of commercial and residential development to be used with water pipe sizing methods 
Notes to Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A: 
(1) This example is a development with 4 commercial occupancies on the lower floor and 5 residential occupancies on the upper floor, all 
with separate service water heaters. 
(2) For the purpose of water pipe sizing: 
• the minimum adjusted pressure available at building entry is 540 kPa (78 PSI); 
• the developed length of the water service is 30 m (98 ft); and 
• the developed length of the water distribution system is 76 m (249 ft). 
2-130 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-E 
Fixture Units Summary for Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A Using Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D 
Fixtures 
Quantity 
100% Fixture Unit Values 
Total Demand (Quantity × 
Fixture Unit Values) 
Lavatory, 8.3 LPM or less 
Commercial sink 
Service sink 
WC, 6 LPF or less 
Commercial dishwasher 
Commercial occupancy 
Commercial occupancy 
Commercial occupancy 
Residential occupancy 
3 
2 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
2 
4 
3 
2.2
 
4 
16
 
44
 
21
 
20 
6 
8 
3 
8.8
4 
16
44
21
100 
Total Fixture Units 
210.8 
Average Pressure Loss Method 
Information required if using this method: 
(a) The developed length: 
(i) from the property line or private water system when located outside the building to the water 
service entry point to the building, and 
(ii) from the building entry of the water service to the most remote water outlet. 
(b) Minimum static pressure: 
(i) the minimum static pressure available at the property line or other water source (private water 
supply system), or 
(ii) where there is a wide fluctuation of pressure in the main throughout the day, the minimum 
static pressure available. 
(c) Pressure losses: 
(i) losses for meters, pressure-reducing valves, backflow preventers, water treatment systems, 
and any other devices, and 
(ii) losses or gains due to changes in elevation. 
(d) The number of fixture units as determined by using the sum of the total values given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(e) The maximum velocities permitted in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for 
the pipe and fittings chosen for the installation. 
Note: The private water supply system must be capable of meeting the demands of the water distribution 
system. 
To use this method, calculate the pressure available for friction loss which must be 2.6 kPa per metre or 
more; if it is less than that, the system must be designed according to a detailed engineering design method. 
Calculating Pressure Available for Friction Loss (see Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-B) 
(a) Obtain the water service size, including pressure losses, and the design of the private 
water supply system if it is separate from the water distribution system. 
(b) To calculate the total equivalent length for the water distribution system, determine 
the developed length from the water service entry point to the building to the most 
remote water outlet, and 
(i) where fitting inside diameter dimensions are at least equal to the NPS, multiply 
the developed length by 1.5 to allow for friction losses, and 
(ii) where insert fittings are used, apply additional losses in accordance with the fitting 
manufacturer's data. 
(c) To determine the adjusted pressure available at the water service entry for sizing the 
water distribution system, deduct the pressure losses for the water service from the 
minimum static pressure available at the property line or private water source. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-131 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
 
 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Division B 
(d)  To  obtain the  pressure available  for  friction  loss,  use the  minimum adjusted static  
pressure available at the water service entry and deduct the minimum operating pressure 
necessary at the most remote water outlet, and losses for meters, pressure-reducing 
valves, backflow preventers, water treatment systems, and any other devices. Include 
pressure losses or gains due to changes in elevation between the water service entry 
and the most remote water outlet. 
(e) Divide the static pressure available for friction loss by the total equivalent length to 
obtain the pressure available for friction loss per metre. 
Step 1(c) 
565 kPa 
– 
25 kPa 
= 
540 kPa 
Minimum static 
pressure 
Pressure losses 
for service 
Adjusted pressure at water 
service entry to the building 
Step 1(d) 
540 kPa 
– ( 
20 kPa 
+ 
35 kPa 
+ 
105 kPa 
) = 
380 kPa 
Adjusted pressure 
Step 1(e) 
Meter, PRV, 
BFP and 
other losses 
Losses for 
system height 
Minimum pressure 
necessary at the 
fixture for 
operation 
Total pressure 
available for friction loss 
from the water service 
entry to the most remote 
water supply outlet 
380 kPa 
÷ 
114 m 
= 
3.3 kPa per metre 
Total pressure 
available for 
friction loss 
Developed length 
x 1.5 for fittings 
and/or additional 
losses if insert 
fittings are used 
Average pressure 
loss must be 
minimum 
2.6 kPa per metre 
EG00673A 
Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-B 
Determination of pressure available for friction loss 
Pipe Sizing Procedures (see Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A) 
Step 1: Water Service Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-G) 
(a) Obtain the total fixture units required for  the installation using  the sum  of  the total  
values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D and consider all 
other demands on the water supply. 
(b) Select the water service pipe size from Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F using the velocity column 
that is consistent with the pipe and fittings chosen for the installation. 
(c) Determine the minimum static pressure available at the property line or private water 
source and consider all pressure losses for the water service. 
(d) To establish the adjusted static pressure available where the water service enters the 
building for sizing the water distribution system, subtract the actual static pressure losses 
for the water service from the minimum static pressure available at the property line. 
(e) The adjusted static pressure available where a private water supply system is installed 
should be the static pressure available from such a system at the entry to the building. 
Step 2: Hot Water Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-H) 
(a)  Start  with  the most remote outlet in the  most  distant occupancy that requires hot  water.  
(b)  Use  the sum  of  the total  fixture unit values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C 
and 2.6.3.2.-D and work back toward the service water heater, adding in the fixture 
unit values as they occur. 
(c) Size the hot water system according to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F using the velocity column 
that is consistent with the manufacturer's requirements for the pipe and fittings chosen 
when serving a hot water system. 
2-132 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.1.(2) 
Step 3: Cold Water Piping (see Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-I) 
(a) Start with the most remote outlet requiring cold water in the most distant occupancy 
and working back towards the water service entry adding in the fixture unit values 
as they occur. 
(b) Obtain the fixture units using the sum of the total fixture unit values given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(c) Size the cold water system to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F using the velocity column that is 
consistent with the manufacturer's requirements for the pipe and fittings chosen when 
serving a cold water system. 
(d) Where the service water heater distribution pipe occurs, add in the fixture unit demand 
of the fixtures served with only hot water and those that have not yet been added in 
as served to the cold water side of the most remote fixtures requiring both hot and 
cold water supply. 
(e) Continue by sizing the cold water main between the service water heater distribution 
pipe and the water service entry. 
(f) Add in the fixtures served with only cold water from the main within the most remote 
occupancy as they occur and then all common distribution piping serving hot and cold 
water to other occupancies as they occur. 
(g) Complete by sizing all distribution piping served by the main in the most remote 
occupancy and then the other occupancies not yet sized using Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F. 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F 
Nominal Pipe Sizes for Water Systems Based on Number of Fixture Units Served Using the Average Pressure Loss Method 
Nominal Pipe 
Size 
Water Velocity 
3.0 m/s (10 ft/s) 
2.4 m/s (8 ft/s) 
1.5 m/s (5 ft/s) 
1.2 m/s (4 ft/s) 
Flow and Fixture Units Served 
L/s 
Fixture Units 
L/s 
Fixture Units 
L/s 
Fixture Units 
L/s 
Fixture Units 
½ 
0.46 
8 
0.36 
7 
0.23 
3.5 
0.18 
2.5 
5/8 
0.68 
13 
0.54 
11 
0.34 
6.5 
0.27 
4.5 
¾ 
0.95 
21 
0.77 
17 
0.48 
9 
0.38 
7.5 
1 
1.62 
42 
1.26 
30 
0.81 
18 
0.65 
14 
1¼ 
2.47 
83 
1.8 
54 
1.24 
29 
0.99 
22 
1½ 
3.5 
146 
2.8 
102 
1.75 
46 
1.4 
34 
2 
6.08 
337 
4.92 
265 
3.04 
120 
2.43 
81 
2½ 
9.39 
692 
7.89 
500 
4.69 
245 
3.75 
170 
3 
13.23 
1 018 
10.73 
750 
6.7 
400 
5.36 
295 
4 
23.94 
2 480 
18.9 
1 800 
11.78 
850 
9.42 
600 
5 
37 
4 400 
29 
3 350 
18.35 
1 625 
14.68 
1 125 
6 
52.1 
6 600 
42 
4 800 
26.38 
2 875 
21.11 
2 125 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-G 
Sizing of Water Service Pipe Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F(1) 
Fixture Units 
Nominal Pipe Size 
Total demand from Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-E 
Add in fixture units for fire sprinkler system, irrigation system and any other 
demands on water service 
210.8 
n/a in this example 
– 
– 
Total demand in this example 
210.8 
2 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-G: 
(1) Based on 30 m developed length and minimum static pressure at property line of 565 kPa. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-133 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.6.3.2.(4) 
Division B 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-H 
Sizing of Hot Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F with Flow Velocity(1) 
Pipe Number 
Hot Water, fixture units 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8 
11
 
15
 
6 
21 
¾ 
1 
1 
5/8 
1¼ 
Total Fixture Units 
21 
1¼ 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-H: 
(1) Based on 1.5 m/s and adjusted static pressure at building entry of 540 kPa. 
Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-I 
Sizing of Cold Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.1.(2)-A and Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-F(1) 
Pipe Letter 
Cold Water, fixture units 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
A 
11 
5/8 
B 
21 
1 
C 
21 
1 
D 
29.8 
1 
E 
20 
1 
F 
49.8 
1¼ 
G 
20 
1 
H 
69.8 
1½ 
I 
20 
1 
J 
89.8 
1½ 
K 
20 
1 
L 
109.8 
2 
M 
60 
1½ 
N 
169.8 
2 
O 
20 
1 
P 
189.8 
2 
Q 
21 
1 
R 
210.8 
2 
Total Fixture Units 
210.8 
2 
Notes to Table A-2.6.3.1.(2)-I: 
(1) Based on 2.4 m/s velocity and adjusted static pressure at water service entry of 540 kPa. 
A-2.6.3.2.(4) Sizing for Flush Valves. Distribution piping and water mains serving flush valves may 
be sized using the values assigned in Tables 2.6.3.2.-B and 2.6.3.2.-C, beginning with the most remote flush 
valve on each section of distribution piping served by the water main. 
2-134 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.6.3.4.(5) 
A-2.6.3.4.(5) Sizing of Water Systems. Sentence 2.6.3.4.(5) and Table 2.6.3.4. present a simplified 
method of water system sizing, which is permitted in buildings containing one or two dwelling units or 
row houses with separate water services. 
Simplified Method 
This sizing method may be used in the buildings noted, where: 
(a) the total developed length from the property line to the most remote fixture is not more than 90 m, and 
(b) the static pressure available at the water service entry to the building is not less than 200 kPa. 
Where either the developed length is exceeded or the minimum static pressure required is not known, a 
detailed engineering design method must be used to size the water service piping. The design must ensure 
a minimum static pressure of 200 kPa is available at the water service entry to the building. 
Information required when using this method: 
(a) The total number of fixture units (FU) as determined by using the sum of the total fixture unit values 
given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(b) Where the water service also serves a fire sprinkler system, irrigation system, or any other system, 
these demands must be added to the water service sizing. 
Pipe Sizing Procedures 
Step 1: Water Service Pipe 
(a) Obtain the total fixture units required for  the installation using  the sum  of  the total  
values given in Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D and consider all 
other demands on the water supply. 
(b)  Determine  the water  service pipe size using  the water  velocity  column  in  Table  2.6.3.4.  
that is consistent with the pipe material chosen for the installation. 
Step 2: Hot Water Piping 
(a) Start with the most remote fixture requiring a supply of hot water and work back toward 
the service water heater, adding in the fixture unit loads as they occur. 
(b) Determine the fixture units using the sum of the total fixture unit values given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(c) Size the hot water system using the water velocity column in Table 2.6.3.4. that is 
consistent with the manufacturer's recommendations for the pipe and fittings chosen 
when serving a hot water system. 
Step 3: Cold Water Piping 
(a) Start with the most remote fixture requiring a supply of cold water and work back 
toward the water service entry, adding in the fixture unit loads as they occur. 
(b) Obtain the fixture units using the sum of the total fixture unit values given in 
Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D. 
(c) Size the cold water system using the water velocity column in Table 2.6.3.4. that is 
consistent with the manufacturer's recommendations for the pipe chosen when serving 
a cold water system. 
(d) Where the service water heater distribution pipe occurs, add in the fixture unit demand 
of  the fixtures served with only hot  water and  those that have not  yet been  added in as  
served to the cold water side of the fixtures requiring both a hot and cold water supply. 
(e) Continue sizing the cold water main between the service water heater distribution 
pipe and the water service entry by adding all fixtures served with only a cold water 
supply as they occur. 
(f) Complete by sizing all cold water distribution piping served by the main between the 
water heater distribution pipe and the water service entry. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-135 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
                  
 
A-2.6.3.4.(5) 
Division B 
fixture spout 
maximum 2.0 FU(1) 
service water 
heater 
common supply  =  2.0 FU
       1 hose bibb  +  2.5 FU 
Total  =  4.5 FU 
common supply for hot 
and cold maximum 2.0 FU(3) 
cold supply 
2.0 FU(2) 
hot supply 
2.0 FU(2) 
water service entry 
to the building 
hose bibb 
indicates hot water 
2.5 FU 
indicates cold water 
EG00671A 
Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-A 
Determining the hydraulic needs of a fixture 
Notes to Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-A: 
(1) The fixture spout delivers a maximum of 2.0 fixture units. 
(2) This would apply if only the hot side or the cold side were fully opened. 
(3) The common pipe that serves both the hot and cold sides of the faucet also delivers a maximum of 2.0 fixture units even if both the hot 
and cold valves at the faucet are fully opened at the same time. 
Table A-2.6.3.4.(5)-A 
Fixture Units Summary Using Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B and Tables 2.6.3.2.-A, 2.6.3.2.-B, 2.6.3.2.-C and 2.6.3.2.-D 
Fixtures 
Number of Fixtures 
100% Fixture Unit Values 
Total Demand 
(Quantity × Fixture Unit Values) 
Bathtub 
Clothes washer 
Dishwasher 
Hose bibb 
Lavatory, 8.3 LPM or less 
Shower, 9.5 LPM or less 
Sink, 8.3 LPM or less 
WC, 6 LPF or less 
2
 
2
 
2
 
1
 
3
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
1.4
 
1.4
 
1.4
 
2.5
 
0.7
 
1.4
 
1.4
 
2.2
 
2.8
 
2.8
 
2.8
 
2.5
 
2.1
 
1.4
 
2.8
 
6.6
 
Total Fixture Units 
23.8 
2-136 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
                              
           
             
 
               
Division B 
A-2.6.3.4.(5) 
Include load on Pipe H  = 21.3 FU
WC 
SWH 
DW 
KS 
WC 
DW 
WC 
HB 
Water service 
entry  =  23.8 FU
 Include load on Pipe G  = 19.1 FU
                  1 WC (cold)  +  2.2 FU 
Total  = 21.3 FU 
Include load on Pipe F  = 19.1 FU
   No cold-only fixtures
     occurred on Pipe J  +  0.0 FU 
Total  = 19.1 FU 
3.6 FU 
14.7 FU 
5.7 FU 
5.7 FU 
11.4 FU 
2.8 FU 
3.5 FU 
6.3 FU 
Fixtures served 
with hot and cold 
1 DW (hot only) 
Total 
= 4.9 FU 
+ 1.4 FU 
= 6.3 FU 
Include load on Pipe D 
Add fixtures on Pipe 5 (hot) 
served by Pipe F 
Add 1 DW on Pipe 3 
served by Pipe F 
(Note: Fixtures on Pipe 3 
already served by Pipe F 
on cold side not added again) 
= 11.4 FU 
+  6.3 FU 
+  1.4 FU 
= 19.1 FU 
Total 
(I) 
(J) 
BT 
LAV 
(H) 
(G) 
(F) 
(D) 
(C) 
(E) 
(B) 
(K) 
(A) 
1 
2 
3 
6 
5 
4 
2.1 FU 
2.8 FA 
LAV 
SHWR 
LAV 
CW 
BT
    Fixtures served 
with hot and cold 
2 DW (hot only) 
Total hot 
= 11.9 FU
  +  2.8 FU 
= 14.7 FU
    Fixtures served 
with hot and cold 
1 DW (hot only) 
Total 
= 7.0 FU 
+ 1.4 FU 
= 8.4 FU 
KS 
CW 
                  1 HB (cold)  +  2.5 FU 
Total = 23.8 FU 
indicates hot water 
indicates cold water 
EG00670A 
Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B 
Example of water pipe sizing for buildings containing one or two dwelling units or row houses with separate water 
services 
Table A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B 
Sizing of Water Service Pipe Using Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B and Table 2.6.3.4. 
Fixture Units 
Water Velocity, m/s 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
Total fixture units 
Fire sprinkler system 
Irrigation system 
Other 
23.8 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Total demand on water service 
23.8 
1
 1
 1¼
 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-137 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

A-2.7.1.1. 
Division B 
Table A-2.6.3.4.(5)-C 
Sizing of Hot Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B and Table 2.6.3.4. 
Pipe Number 
Hot Water 
Fixture Units 
Water Velocity, m/s 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
3.5
 
6.3
 
8.4
 
2.1
 
6.3
 
14.7
 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
½ 
¾ 
¾ 
½ 
¾ 
1 
Total Fixture Units 
14.7 
Table A-2.6.3.4.(5)-D 
Sizing of Cold Water System Using Figure A-2.6.3.4.(5)-B and Table 2.6.3.4. 
Pipe Letter 
Cold Water 
Fixture Units 
Water Velocity, m/s 
3.0 
2.4 
1.5 
Nominal Pipe Size, NPS 
A 
2.8
 ½
 ½
 ½
 
B 
5.7 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
C 
5.7 
½ 
½ 
¾ 
D 
11.4 
¾ 
¾ 
1 
E 
14.7 
¾ 
¾ 
1 
F 
19.1 
¾ 
1 
1¼ 
G 
19.1 
¾ 
1 
1¼ 
H 
21.3 
1 
1 
1¼ 
I 
23.8 
1 
1 
1¼ 
J 
2.8
 ½
 ½
 ½
 
K 
3.6
 ½
 ½
 ½
 
Total Fixture Units 
23.8 
A-2.7.1.1. Non-Potable Water System Design. There is a growing interest in Canada in using 
available non-potable water supplies in the place of potable ones for selected purposes such as flushing water 
closets and irrigating lawns and gardens. Article 2.7.1.1. applies to non-potable water systems, regardless of the 
origin of the water. The non-potable water must meet applicable water quality standards as determined by an 
authority having jurisdiction. 
A-2.7.1.1.(1) Good Engineering Practice. Examples of good engineering practice in the design, 
fabrication and installation of non-potable water systems can be found in 
• the ASHRAE Handbooks, 
• the ASPE Handbooks, and 
• CAN/CSA-B128.1, “Design and Installation of Non-Potable Water Systems.” 
A-2.7.2.1.(1) Aboveground Roof Surfaces. While it is possible to harvest  rainwater from surfaces  
other than above-ground roofs, such as patios, lawns, gardens, driveways, roadways, parking garages and 
parking lots, these surfaces are not suitable catchments for rainwater harvesting systems because of water 
quality concerns. Water collected from such surfaces may be contaminated with fertilizer, herbicides, fecal 
matter, garbage, oil or chemicals. 
2-138 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division B 
A-2.7.2.4.(1) 
The outdoor environment in the local area of the building site, including its immediate surroundings, should be 
investigated to identify contaminants that could adversely affect the quality of the non-potable water delivered 
by the rainwater harvesting system. Contaminants of concern include industrial and urban traffic emissions, 
and pesticides and other agricultural chemicals. Other factors that can influence the levels of contaminants in 
the delivered non-potable water include the building's geometry, and prevailing winds and seasonal activity in 
the local area. Design features should be incorporated in the rainwater harvesting system to mitigate the risks 
associated with any identified contaminants of concern. 
A-2.7.2.2.(1) and 2.7.2.4.(3) and (4) Treatment for Use. Harvested rainwater used in any 
permitted application must be treated appropriately for its intended end use. 
A-2.7.2.3.(1) Pedestrian Traffic. The prohibition of pedestrian traffic on roof surfaces stated in 
Sentence 2.7.2.3.(1) is not intended to include access to roof surfaces by service personnel, such as window 
washers or HVAC mechanics. 
A-2.7.2.3.(2) Roofing and Conveyance Materials. Water is considered to be the “universal solvent.” 
Accordingly, roofing components and conveyance systems that supply rainwater to a rainwater harvesting 
system should be constructed of materials that resist dissolution in water. NSF Pro 151-8-1, “Health Effects 
from Rainwater Catchment System Components,” although directed at potable water systems, is a useful 
source of information on roofing materials to consider. 
A-2.7.2.4.(1) Good Engineering Practice. Examples of good engineering practice in the design, 
fabrication and installation of rainwater harvesting systems can be found in 
• the ASHRAE Handbooks, 
• the ASPE Handbooks, 
• ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 63, “Rainwater Catchment Systems,” and 
• CSA B805/ICC 805, “Rainwater harvesting systems.” 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division B 2-139 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2-140 Division B 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Administrative Provisions 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Part 1 
General 
1.1. 
Application 
1.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 1-1 
1.2. 
Terms and Abbreviations 
1.2.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases .. 1-1 
1.2.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations .. 1-1 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Part 1 
General 
Section 1.1. Application 
1.1.1. 
Application 
1.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1. of Division A.) 
Section 1.2. Terms and Abbreviations 
1.2.1. 
Definitions of Words and Phrases 
1.2.1.1. 
Non-defined Terms 
1) Words and phrases used in Division C that are not included in the list of 
definitions in Article 1.4.1.2. of Division A shall have the meanings that are commonly 
assigned to them in the context in which they are used, taking into account the 
specialized use of terms by the various trades and professions to which the terminology 
applies. 
2) Where objectives and functional statements are referred to in Division C, they 
shall be the objectives and functional statements described in Parts 2 and 3 of Division 
A. 
3) Where acceptable solutions are referred to in Division C, they shall be the 
provisions stated in Part 2 of Division B. 
4) Where alternative solutions are referred to in Division C, they shall be the 
alternative solutions mentioned in Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) of Division A. 
1.2.1.2. 
Defined Terms 
1) The words  and terms  in  italics in Division C shall  have the  meanings  assigned  
to them in Article 1.4.1.2. of Division A. 
1.2.2. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1.2.2.1. 
Symbols and Other Abbreviations 
1) The symbols and other abbreviations in Division C shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in Article 1.4.2.1. of Division A. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division C 1-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

1-2 Division C 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Part 2 
Administrative Provisions 
2.1. 
Application 
2.1.1. 
Application ........................................ 2-1 
2.2. 
Administration 
2.2.1. 
Administration .................................. 2-1 
2.2.2. 
Plumbing Drawings and Related 
Documents ........................................ 2-1 
2.3. 
Alternative Solutions 
2.3.1. 
Documentation of Alternative 
Solutions ........................................... 2-1 
Notes to Part 2 .................. 2-3 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Part 2 
Administrative Provisions 
Section 2.1. Application 
2.1.1. 
Application 
2.1.1.1. 
Application 
1) This Part applies to all plumbing systems covered in this Code. (See 
Article 1.1.1.1. of Division A.) 
Section 2.2. Administration 
2.2.1. 
Administration 
2.2.1.1. 
Administrative Requirements 
1) This Code shall be administered in conformance with the appropriate provincial 
or territorial regulations, municipal bylaws or, in the absence of such regulations 
or bylaws, in conformance with the applicable requirements in the Administrative 
Requirements for Use with the National Building Code of Canada 1985. 
2.2.2. 
Plumbing Drawings and Related Documents 
2.2.2.1. 
Information Required on Plumbing Drawings and Related Documents 
1) Plumbing drawings and related documents submitted with the application for 
a plumbing permit shall show 
a) the location and nominal pipe size of every building drain and of every trap 
and cleanout fitting that is on a building drain, 
b)  the location and  nominal pipe size of every sanitary drainage pipe, trap and 
vent pipe, and  
c) a layout of the potable water distribution system, including nominal pipe sizes 
and valves. 
Section 2.3. Alternative Solutions 
2.3.1. 
Documentation of Alternative Solutions 
(See Note A-2.3.1.) 
2.3.1.1. 
Documentation 
1) Documentation conforming to this Subsection shall be provided by the person 
requesting the use of an alternative solution to demonstrate that the proposed 
alternative solution complies with this Code. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division C 2-1 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2.3.1.1. 
Division C 
2) The documentation referred to in Sentence (1) shall include 
a) a Code analysis outlining the analytical methods and rationales used to 
determine that the proposed alternative solution will achieve at least the 
level of performance required by Clause 1.2.1.1.(1)(b) of Division A, and 
b) information concerning any special maintenance or operation requirements, 
including any plumbing system component commissioning requirements, 
that are necessary for the alternative solution to achieve compliance with 
the Code after  the  plumbing system is installed. 
3) The Code analysis referred to in Clause (2)(a) shall identify the applicable 
objectives, functional statements and acceptable solutions, and any assumptions, 
limiting or restricting factors, testing procedures, engineering studies or performance 
parameters that will support a Code compliance assessment. 
4) The Code analysis referred to in Clause (2)(a) shall include information 
about the qualifications, experience and background of the person or persons taking 
responsibility for the design. 
5) The information provided under Sentence (3) shall be in sufficient detail to 
convey the design intent and to support the validity, accuracy, relevance and precision 
of the Code analysis. 
6) Where the design of a plumbing system includes proposed alternative solutions 
that involve more than one person taking responsibility for different aspects of the 
design, the applicant for the permit shall identify a single person to co-ordinate 
the preparation of the design, Code analysis and documentation referred to in this 
Subsection. 
2-2 Division C 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Division C 
Notes to Part 2 
Administrative Provisions 
A-2.3.1. Documentation of Alternative Solutions. Beyond the purposes of demonstrating 
compliance and acquiring an installation permit, there are other important reasons for requiring that the 
proponent of an alternative solution submit project documentation (i.e. a compliance report) to the authority 
having jurisdiction and for the authority having jurisdiction to retain that documentation for a substantial 
period following the installation of a plumbing system: 
• Most jurisdictions require that a plumbing system be maintained in compliance with the codes under 
which it was installed. Alternative solutions made possible by objective-based codes may have special 
maintenance requirements, which would be described in the documentation. 
• Documentation helps consultants perform code compliance assessments of existing buildings or facilities 
before they are sold and informs current owners or prospective buyers of existing buildings or facilities of 
any limitations pertaining to their future use or development. 
• Documentation provides design professionals with the basic information necessary to design changes to 
an existing plumbing system. 
• An alternative solution could be invalidated by a proposed alteration to a plumbing system. Designers 
and regulators must therefore know the details of the particular alternative solutions that were integral to 
the original design. Complete documentation should provide insight as to why one alternative solution 
was chosen over another. 
• Documentation is the “paper trail” of the alternative solution negotiated between the designer and the 
regulator and should demonstrate that a rational process led to the acceptance of the alternative solution 
as an equivalency. 
• It is possible that over time a particular alternative solution may be shown to be inadequate. It would be 
advantageous for a jurisdiction to know which plumbing systems included that alternative solution as 
part of their design: documentation will facilitate this type of analysis. 
• Project documentation provides important information to a forensic team that is called to investigate an 
accident or why a design failed to provide the level of performance expected. 
This subject is discussed in further detail in “Recommended Documentation Requirements for Projects Using 
Alternative Solutions in the Context of Objective-Based Codes,” which was prepared for the CCBFC Task 
Group on Implementation of Objective-Based Codes and is available on the NRC's website. 
These Notes are included for explanatory purposes only and do not form part of the requirements. The number 
that introduces each Note corresponds to the applicable requirement in this Part. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Division C 2-3 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

2-4 Division C 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Index 
A 
Abbreviations 
other abbreviations, 1.4.2.1.[A] 
proper names, 1.3.2.1. 
symbols, 1.4.2.1.[A] 
Acceptable solutions, 1.1.2.1., 1.2.1.1.[A], 1.5.1.1.[A] 
Accessibility of fixtures and equipment, 2.1.3.2. 
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) pipe and pipe 
fittings, 2.2.5.9. - 2.2.5.11., 2.3.4.5., 2.4.6.4. 
Additional circuit vents 
for branches, 2.5.3.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for fixtures, 2.5.3.1. 
for fixtures draining into vent pipes, 2.5.4.5. 
sizing, 2.5.3.1., 2.5.7.3., 2.5.8.5. 
for traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Administration of Code, 2.2.[C] 
Air admittance valves, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.10.16., 2.5.9. 
Air breaks, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.3.3.11., 2.4.2.3., 2.6.1.7. 
Air gaps, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.2., 2.6.2.3., 2.6.2.9., 2.7.2.4. 
Air pressure tests, 2.3.6.1. - 2.3.6.3., 2.3.6.5., 2.3.7.1., 
2.3.7.2. 
Alloyed zinc, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.10.14. 
Alternative solutions 
compliance with Code, 1.2.1.1.[A] 
documentation, 2.3.1.[C] 
Ancillary buildings, 2.1.2.4. 
Application of Code 
Division A, 1.3.2.[A] 
Division B, 1.3.3.[A] 
Division C, 1.3.4.[A] 
general, 1.1.1.1.[A] 
Autopsy tables, 2.4.9.3. 
Auxiliary water supply, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
B 
Backfilling of pipe trench, 2.3.5.1. 
Backflow 
caused by back pressure, 2.6.2.3., 2.6.2.4. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
from fire protection systems, 2.6.2.4. 
protection of building drains, 2.4.6.4. 
protection of drainage pans on heating/cooling 
units, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of drinking fountains, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of make-up water, 2.7.2.4. 
protection of potable water system, 2.6.2.6., 2.6.2.7., 
2.7.2.4. 
protection of rainwater storage tanks, 2.7.2.4. 
Backflow preventers 
for back-siphonage prevention, 2.6.2.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
fire protection systems, used in, 2.6.2.4. 
installation, 2.6.2.1. 
maintenance of effectiveness, 2.6.2.12. 
for premise isolation, 2.6.2.6. 
protection against thermal expansion, 2.6.1.11. 
standards for, 2.2.10.10. 
Back pressure 
backflow caused by, 2.6.2.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
fire protection systems, 2.6.2.4. 
Back-siphonage 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
with direct flush valves, 2.2.10.8. 
fire protection systems, 2.6.2.4. 
prevention, 2.6.2.2. 
with relief valves, 2.6.1.7. 
Back-siphonage preventers 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
standards for, 2.2.10.10. 
for tank-type water closets, 2.6.2.11. 
Backwater valves 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
protection of branches, 2.4.6.4. 
protection of building drains, 2.4.6.4. 
protection of drainage pans on heating/cooling 
units, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of drinking fountains, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of rainwater storage tanks, 2.7.2.4. 
protection of sumps, 2.4.3.6., 2.4.6.3. 
Ball tests, 2.3.6.1., 2.3.6.2., 2.3.6.7. 
Bathroom group, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Bathtubs, 2.2.2.2., 2.2.10.7., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Bedpan washers, 2.6.3.2. 
Beer cabinets, 2.4.9.3. 
Bell and spigot pipe, 2.3.2.7. 
Bell traps, 2.2.3.1. 
Bidets, 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Bolts, 2.2.10.2., 2.2.10.3. 
Branches 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
[A] – Reference occurs in Division A. [C] – Reference occurs in Division C. All other references occur in Division B. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.6., 2.4.10.7. 
protection from backflow, 2.4.6.4. 
serving water closets, 2.4.9.2. 
sizing, 2.4.9.2. 
Branch vents 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
protection of drainage systems, 2.5.1.1. 
sizing, 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.3. 
Brass floor flanges, 2.2.10.1. 
Brass pipe, 2.2.7.1., 2.3.4.5. 
Brass pipe flanges and flanged fittings, 2.2.7.2. 
Brass threaded water fittings, 2.2.7.3. 
Brazing alloys, 2.2.9.2. 
Bronze pipe flanges and flanged fittings, 2.2.7.2. 
Bronze threaded water fittings, 2.2.7.3. 
Building drains 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.2. 
combined, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.1., 2.4.6.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.6., 2.4.10.8., 2.4.10.9. 
protection from backflow, 2.4.6.4. 
protection from damage, 2.3.5. 
sanitary, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.6.1., 2.4.6.2. 
sizing, 2.4.9.1., 2.4.9.2., 2.4.9.4. 
storm, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.10.9. 
venting, 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.4. 
Buildings 
ancillary, 2.1.2.4. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Building sewers 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.2. 
combined, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.5.2., 2.4.10.9. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
developed length, 2.4.7.2. 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.6., 2.4.10.8., 2.4.10.9. 
mobile homes, 2.4.6.5. 
sanitary, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.7., 2.4.10.8. 
sizing, 2.4.7.2., 2.4.9.4. 
Building traps 
cleanouts, 2.4.5.4. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
fresh air inlets, 2.5.1.1., 2.5.5.4. 
location, 2.4.5.4. 
for sanitary drainage systems, 2.4.5.1., 2.4.5.3. 
seals, 2.4.5.5. 
for storm drainage systems, 2.4.5.2. 
Butt fusion fittings, 2.2.5.4. 
Butt weld pipe fittings, 2.3.2.8. 
C 
Care or detention occupancy, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.4.3. 
Cast-iron drainage and vent pipe and fittings, 2.2.6.1., 
2.2.6.3. 
Cast-iron fittings, 2.2.6.1., 2.2.6.3., 2.2.6.5. 
Cast-iron fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Cast-iron pipes, 2.3.2.1., 2.3.3.3., 2.3.3.8., 2.3.4.5. 
Cast-iron traps, 2.2.3.1., 2.3.3.8. 
Cast-iron water pipe and fittings, 2.2.6.4., 2.2.6.5. 
Catch basins 
cast-iron frames and covers for, 2.2.6.2. 
concrete, 2.2.5.2. 
Caulked lead drainage joints, 2.3.2.1. 
Caulking compounds, 2.3.2.7. 
Cellular core PVC pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.16. 
Cement mortar, 2.2.9.1. 
Cement-mortar lining, 2.2.6.4. 
Ceramic china fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Check valves, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.1.5., 2.6.1.11. 
for backflow prevention, 2.4.6.4., 2.6.2.3., 2.6.2.4. 
for back-siphonage prevention, 2.6.2.2. 
protection of drainage pans on heating/cooling 
units, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of drinking fountains, 2.4.2.1. 
protection of pumped sump, 2.4.6.3. 
Chemical storage locations, 2.4.3.4. 
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) pipe and 
fittings, 2.2.5.8., 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.11., 2.3.4.5. 
Circuit vents 
additional (see Additional circuit vents) 
for branches, 2.5.3.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for fixtures, 2.5.3.1. 
for fixtures draining into vent pipes, 2.5.4.5. 
sizing, 2.5.7.3., 2.5.8.3. 
for traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Classes of fire sprinkler/standpipe systems, 1.4.1.2.[A], 
2.6.2.4. 
Cleaning of potable water systems, 2.6.2.8. 
Cleanouts 
accessibility for cleaning and maintenance, 2.1.3.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for drainage systems, 2.4.7.1. 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
fittings, 2.2.10.3., 2.4.7.1. 
installation, 2.4.7. 
location, 2.1.3.2., 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.4. 
manholes as, 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.3., 2.5.7.6. 
rodding, 2.4.7.2., 2.4.7.4. 
sizing and spacing, 2.4.7.2. 
for traps, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.2. - 2.4.5.4., 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.4. 
Clear-water waste, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.4.2., 2.4.5.1. 
Climatic data, for hydraulic load determination, 
2.4.10.4. 
Clothes washers, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.5.1., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2., 
2.7.2.2. 
Cold-caulked joints, 2.3.2.7. 
Combined building drains 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.9. 
restrictions on use, 2.1.2.1., 2.4.6.1. 
Combined sewers 
connections, 2.1.2.1., 2.1.2.2., 2.4.5.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Combined temperature- and pressure-relief valves, 
2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
Combustible 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
piping, 2.2.5.11. 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Compliance 
with Code, 1.2.1.1.[A] 
materials, systems and equipment, 1.2.2.[A] 
Concrete pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.2. 
Condensation, protection against, 2.3.5.5. 
Conflicting requirements, 1.5.1.2.[A] 
Connections 
direct, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.2.3. 
of dissimilar materials, 2.3.3.6. 
drainage systems, 2.1.2.1., 2.1.2.2., 2.4.2., 2.4.3.4., 
2.4.5.3. 
of drains, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.2.3., 2.4.3.4., 2.4.3.6. 
of fixtures, 2.4.2.1. - 2.4.2.3., 2.4.3.4., 2.4.4.4., 2.5.4.2., 
2.5.5.5., 2.5.6.4. 
increasers, 2.3.3.5. 
indirect, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.3.3.11., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.3.2., 
2.4.4.4., 2.4.5.1. 
lead bend, 2.4.2.1. 
nominally horizontal offset, 2.4.2.1. 
nominally horizontal sanitary drainage pipe, 
2.4.2.1. 
of outlet fixtures, 2.3.3.8. 
of overflows from rainwater tanks, 2.4.2.2., 2.7.2.4. 
reducers, 2.3.3.5. 
of roof drains, 2.3.3.7. 
running thread and packing nut, 2.3.3.4. 
of separate services, 2.1.2.4. 
of storm drainage systems, 2.1.2.2., 2.4.5.2. 
of subsoil drainage, 2.4.5.3., 2.4.6.4. 
unions and slip joints, 2.3.3.4. 
of vent pipes and circuit venting, 2.4.2.1., 2.5.3., 
2.5.5.5., 2.5.6.2., 2.5.6.4. 
of water systems, 2.1.2.3., 2.6.2.1., 2.6.2.3., 2.6.2.4., 
2.7.1.1. 
Contamination protection 
hazardous waste, 2.4.7.4. 
potable water systems, 2.6.2. 
Continuous vents, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.8.3. 
Cooling of hot liquid waste, 2.4.4.2. 
Copper joints, 2.3.3.12. 
Copper pipe, 2.2.7.1., 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5. 
Copper tube, 2.2.7.4., 2.3.3.2., 2.3.3.10., 2.3.4.3. 
Corrosion-resistant materials, 2.2.2.1., 2.2.8., 2.2.10.2., 
2.4.7.3. 
Couplings 
corrugated steel, 2.2.6.8. 
mechanical, 2.2.10.4. 
CPVC (Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride) pipe and 
fittings, 2.2.5.8., 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.11., 2.3.4.5. 
Critical level, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.10. 
Cross fittings, 2.2.4.1. 
Crosslinked polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked 
polyethylene (PEX/AL/PEX) pipe and fittings, 
2.2.5.13., 2.3.4.5. 
Crosslinked polyethylene pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.6., 
2.3.4.5. 
Cuspidors, 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
D 
Dead ends in piping, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.6.1. 
Definitions 
defined terms, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
non-defined terms, 1.4.1.1.[A] 
Dental units, 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Developed length 
of branch vents, 2.5.8.3. 
of building sewers, 2.4.7.2. 
of circuit vents, 2.5.8.3. 
of continuous vents, 2.5.8.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
of fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.8.2. 
of potable water distribution systems, 2.6.1.1. 
of stack vents, 2.5.8.4. 
of trap arm for vent pipes, 2.5.6.3. 
of vent headers, 2.5.8.3. 
Dilution tanks, 2.4.4.4., 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7., 2.5.8.5. 
Direct flush valves, 2.2.10.8. 
Directly connected 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.2.3. 
fixtures, 2.4.2.1. 
Dishwashers, 2.4.5.1., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Dishwashing sinks, overflows, 2.2.2.4. 
Dissimilar materials, joints and connections for, 
2.3.3.6. 
Documents 
plumbing drawings and related documents, 
2.2.2.1.[C] 
referenced, 1.5.1.[A] 
Downspouts (see Leaders) 
Drainage equipment, 2.4.6.3. 
Drainage fittings 
cast-iron, 2.2.6.3. 
solder-joint, 2.2.7.5. 
Drainage joints, caulked lead, 2.3.2.1. 
Drainage pans, 2.4.2.1., 2.6.1.7. 
Drainage piping 
arrangement, 2.4.6. 
cast iron, 2.2.6.1. 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10. 
location, 2.4.6.2. 
minimum slope and length, 2.4.8. 
potable water distribution systems, 2.6.1.2. 
sizing, 2.4.9. 
Drainage systems 
application of Code, 1.1.1.1.[A] 
arrangement of piping, 2.4.6. 
cleanouts, 2.4.7. 
connections, 2.1.2.1., 2.1.2.2., 2.4.2., 2.4.3.4., 2.4.5.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
materials and equipment, 2.2.1.1. 
piping and fittings, 2.2.4.1., 2.2.5.3., 2.2.5.9., 2.2.6., 
2.2.7.3., 2.2.7.4. 
sanitary, 2.1.2.1., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.4.1., 2.4.5.1., 2.4.7.1. 
size of pipes, 2.4.9. 
storm, 2.1.2.2., 2.4.5.2., 2.4.7.1. 
testing, 2.3.6. 
traps, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.1., 2.4.5.2. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

treatment of sewage and wastes, 2.4.4. 
venting, 2.5.1.1., 2.5.6.4. 
Drains (see Building drains; Fixture drains; Floor 
drains; Roof drains) 
Drawings and related documents, 2.2.2.[C] 
Drilled and tapped joints, 2.3.3.1. 
Drinking fountain bubblers, 2.2.10.9. 
Drinking fountains, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.5.1., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Drum traps, 2.2.3.1. 
Dual vents, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.8.2., 2.5.9.1. 
Dwelling units, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.3.1., 2.6.3.4. 
E 
Eavestroughs (see Roof gutters) 
Ejectors for sumps, 2.4.6.3. 
Elbow (90°) fittings, 2.2.4.3. 
Electrical insulation of piping supports, 2.3.4.3. 
Elevator pits, 2.4.3.6. 
Emergency floor drains, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.2.1. 
Enamelled fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Expansion and contraction, piping system, 2.3.3.9., 
2.6.1.11. 
Exposure of materials, 2.2.1.1. 
Extracted tees, 2.3.3.2. 
F 
Ferrous pipe and fittings, 2.2.6. 
Final tests, 2.3.6.6. 
Fire protection systems, backflow, 2.6.2.4. 
Fire separations, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.5.11. 
Fire service pipes, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.4. 
Fittings 
90° elbows, 2.2.4.3. 
ABS, 2.2.5.9. 
brass or bronze, 2.2.7.2., 2.2.7.3. 
butt-fusion, 2.2.5.4. 
cast-iron, 2.2.6.1., 2.2.6.3., 2.2.6.5. 
cellular core PVC, 2.2.5.16. 
cleanouts, 2.2.10.3., 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.4. 
concrete, 2.2.5.2. 
corrosion-resistant, 2.2.8.1. 
couplings, 2.2.6.8., 2.2.10.4., 2.3.2.6. 
CPVC, 2.2.5.8. 
cross, 2.2.4.1. 
crosslinked polyethylene, 2.2.5.6. 
drainage, 2.5.4.3. 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
ferrous, 2.2.6., 2.2.10.3. 
fibrocement, 2.2.5.1. 
flanged, 2.2.7.2. 
flared-joint, 2.2.7.7. 
increasers, 2.3.3.5. 
installation of pipe, 2.3.2.1. 
lead, 2.2.7.8. 
malleable-iron, 2.2.6.6. 
marking, 2.2.1.3. 
minimum pressure, 2.2.1.5. 
non-ferrous, 2.2.7. 
non-metallic, 2.2.5. 
PE/AL/PE, 2.2.5.12. 
PE-RT, 2.2.5.15. 
PEX/AL/PEX, 2.2.5.13. 
plastic, 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.11. 
polyethylene, 2.2.5.4. 
polypropylene, 2.2.5.14. 
PVC, 2.2.5.7. 
reducers, 2.3.3.5. 
restrictions on use, 2.2.4., 2.2.5.2., 2.2.5.3., 2.2.5.16., 
2.2.6.1., 2.2.6.3., 2.2.6.5. - 2.2.6.7., 2.2.7.3. - 2.2.7.5. 
sanitary T, 2.2.4.2., 2.5.4.5. 
screwed, 2.2.6.5., 2.2.6.6. 
solder-joint, 2.2.7.5., 2.2.7.6. 
stainless steel butt weld, 2.2.6.11. 
stainless steel threaded, 2.2.6.13. 
supply and waste, 2.2.10.6. 
T, 2.2.4.1. 
used in buildings, 2.2.5.11. 
used underground, 2.2.5.9. 
vitrified clay, 2.2.5.3. 
Fixture drains 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
connections to circuit vents, 2.5.3.1. 
connections to wet vents, 2.5.2.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
directly connected, 2.4.2.3. 
fixture traps, 2.5.6.3. 
for floor outlet fixtures, 2.3.3.8. 
indirectly connected, 2.3.3.11. 
protection from backflow, 2.4.6.4. 
venting of traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Fixture outlet pipes 
as cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
developed length, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.8.2. 
directly connected, 2.4.2.3. 
size, 2.4.9.3. 
Fixtures 
in chemical storage locations, 2.4.3.4. 
conformance to standards, 2.2.2.2. 
connections, 2.3.3.8., 2.4.2.1. - 2.4.2.3. 
construction, 2.2.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design, 2.6.1.1. 
directly connected, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.2.3. 
draining into vent pipes, 2.5.4.5. 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.9.3., 2.4.10.2., 2.4.10.3., 
2.4.10.12., 2.6.3.2. 
indirectly connected, 2.3.3.11., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.5.1. 
installation, 2.1.3.1., 2.3.4.1., 2.3.4.2., 2.4.3., 2.6.1.3. 
location, 2.1.3.2., 2.4.7.4. 
maximum water use, 2.6.1.6. 
provision for future installation, 2.5.5.5. 
restrictions on re-use, 2.2.1.2. 
separately vented, 2.5.3.1. 
size of supply pipe, 2.6.3.2. 
surface requirements, 2.2.2.1. 
trap arms, 2.5.6.3. 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

vent pipes, 2.5.6.4. 
vent stacks for, 2.5.4.2. 
Fixture units 
conversion to litres, 2.4.10.5. 
definitions, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Flanges 
brass floor, 2.2.10.1., 2.3.3.8. 
brass or bronze pipe, 2.2.7.2. 
floor, 2.2.10.1., 2.2.10.2., 2.3.3.8. 
lead, 2.3.2.2. 
stainless steel pipe, 2.2.6.12. 
Flared-joint fittings, 2.2.7.7., 2.3.3.12. 
Flared joints, 2.3.2.5. 
Flashing, vent pipe, 2.2.10.14., 2.5.6.5. 
Flexible water connectors, 2.2.10.18. 
Flood level rim, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Floor drains 
in chemical storage locations, 2.4.3.4. 
connections to drainage system, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.3.4. 
emergency, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.2.1. 
size of outlet pipes, 2.4.9.3. 
traps, 2.4.5.1., 2.4.5.2., 2.5.1.1. 
Floor outlet fixtures, drain connections, 2.3.3.8. 
Flow control roof drains, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.10.4. 
Flushing devices, 2.2.10.8., 2.6.1.6. 
Fluxes, 2.2.9.2. 
Food preparation sinks, overflows, 2.2.2.4. 
Freezing 
air admittance valves, 2.5.9.3. 
protection against, 2.3.5.3. 
storm drainage systems, 2.4.5.2. 
test conditions, 2.3.7.1. 
Fresh air inlets, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.5.4., 2.5.6.5. 
Functional statements 
application, 3.1.1.2.[A] 
attribution to acceptable solutions, 2.8.1.1. 
list of, 3.2.1.1.[A] 
G 
Galvanized steel or iron pipe and fittings, 2.2.6.7., 
2.3.3.3., 2.3.4.5. 
Garbage grinders, 2.4.3.3., 2.4.9.3. 
Grease interceptors (see Interceptors) 
Groove and shoulder mechanical couplings, 2.2.10.4., 
2.3.2.6. 
Gutters, roof, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.10.10. 
H 
Hangers, pipe, 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5., 2.3.4.6. 
Healthcare facilities, 2.2.10.6., 2.2.10.7., 2.4.7.4., 2.7.1.1. 
Horizontal offsets, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.9.5., 
2.4.10.6., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.4.4. 
Horizontal piping, support, 2.3.4.5., 2.3.4.6. 
Hose bibbs, 2.6.2.7., 2.6.3.2. 
Hot water systems, 2.2.5.7., 2.2.5.12., 2.2.10.7., 
2.2.10.13., 2.4.4.2., 2.6.1.1., 2.6.1.8. 
Hot water waste, cooling of, 2.4.4.2. 
Hub and spigot pipe, 2.3.2.1. 
Hydrants, frost-proof, 2.6.1.4. 
Hydraulic loads 
circuit vents, 2.5.3.1., 2.5.8.3. 
continuous vents, 2.5.8.3. 
determination, 2.4.10. 
sizing of fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.9.3. 
sizing of water distribution systems, 2.6.3.2., 
2.6.3.4. 
vent stacks, 2.5.8.4. 
wet vents, 2.5.2.1., 2.5.8.1. 
Hydromassage bathtubs, 2.2.2.2. 
I 
Iceboxes, 2.4.9.3. 
Identification 
materials and equipment, 2.2.1.3., 2.7.1.2. 
non-potable water systems, 2.7.1.2. 
Increaser fittings, 2.3.3.5. 
Indirect connections, 2.3.3.11., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.3.2., 2.4.4.4., 
2.7.2.4. 
Indirectly connected, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.3.3.11., 2.4.2.1., 
2.4.5.1., 2.4.5.5. 
Indirect service water heaters, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.1.7., 
2.6.1.12. 
Individual vents, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.8.2., 2.5.9.1. 
Inlets, fresh air, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.5.4. 
Inspection (see Testing) 
Installation of fixtures 
connections, 2.3.3.8., 2.4.2.1. 
location, 2.1.3., 2.4.3., 2.5.3.1. 
protection with traps, 2.4.5.1. 
provision for future, 2.5.5.5. 
relief valves, 2.6.1.7. 
shut-off valves, 2.6.1.3. 
support of piping, 2.3.4.1., 2.3.4.2. 
Insulation, electrical, 2.3.4.3. 
Interceptors 
capacity, 2.4.4.3. 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design, 2.2.3.2. 
drum traps serving as, 2.2.3.1. 
gasoline, 2.4.4.3. 
grease, 2.2.3.2., 2.4.4.3. 
location, 2.1.3.2. 
oil, 2.4.4.3., 2.5.5.2. 
replacing traps, 2.4.5.1. 
restrictions on use, 2.4.3.3. 
sand or grit, 2.4.4.3. 
venting, 2.5.5.2. 
where required, 2.4.4.3. 
J 
Jointing materials, 2.2.9. 
Joints, pipe, 2.2.1.5., 2.2.5.2., 2.2.5.3., 2.2.6.4., 2.3.2., 
2.3.3. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

L 
Laboratories 
drainage systems, 2.2.8.1. 
hazardous waste cleanouts, 2.4.7.4. 
sizing of water distribution systems, 2.6.3.2. 
traps for sinks, 2.4.5.1. 
Laundry trays, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.1., 2.4.9.3., 2.7.2.2. 
Lavatories, 2.2.3.1., 2.2.10.6., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Lead content of solders and fluxes, 2.2.9.2. 
Leaders (downspouts) 
connections to roof drains, 2.3.3.7. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
external, exceptions to testing, 2.3.6.1., 2.3.6.2. 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.11. 
internal, cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
internal, protection from condensation, 2.3.5.5. 
sheet metal, 2.2.6.9. 
size, 2.4.9.5. 
traps, 2.4.5.2. 
Lead waste pipe and fittings, 2.2.7.8., 2.3.4.5. 
Lead water-closet bends, 2.2.7.8., 2.4.2.1. 
Lead water-closet stubs, 2.3.3.8. 
Lighting of rooms, 2.1.3.1. 
Loads 
hydraulic, 2.4.9.3., 2.4.10., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.3.1., 2.5.8.1., 
2.5.8.3., 2.6.3.2., 2.6.3.4. 
from walls, isolation of piping from, 2.3.5.2. 
M 
Macerating toilet systems, 2.2.2.2., 2.4.3.5., 2.4.9.2., 
2.4.9.3., 2.5.7.7. 
Maintenance holes (see Manholes) 
Malleable-iron water fittings, screwed, 2.2.6.6. 
Manholes 
cast-iron frames and covers for, 2.2.6.2. 
as cleanouts, 2.4.7.1., 2.4.7.3. 
concrete, 2.2.5.2. 
design, 2.4.7.3. 
vent pipes for, 2.5.7.6. 
Manually operated valves, 2.2.10.6. 
Marking of pipes and fittings, 2.2.1.3., 2.7.1.2. 
Materials and equipment 
characteristics, 1.2.2.1.[A] 
corrosion-resistant, 2.2.8., 2.2.10.2. 
defects, 1.2.2.1.[A] 
dissimilar, 2.3.3.6. 
exposure, 2.2.1.1. 
fixtures, 2.2.2. 
identification, 2.2.1.3., 2.7.1.2. 
for jointing, 2.2.9. 
minimum pressure, 2.2.1.5. 
miscellaneous, 2.2.10. 
pipe fittings, 2.2.4. 
pipe and fittings, ferrous, 2.2.6. 
pipe and fittings, non-ferrous, 2.2.7. 
pipe and fittings, non-metallic, 2.2.5. 
traps and interceptors, 2.2.3. 
used, 1.2.2.2.[A], 2.2.1.2. 
Mechanical couplings, 2.2.10.4. 
Mechanical damage, protection against, 2.3.5.4. 
Mechanical joints 
construction and use, 2.3.2.6., 2.3.3.6. 
pipe couplings, 2.2.10.4. 
Mobile homes 
sewer service, 2.4.6.5. 
water service pipes, 2.6.1.10. 
Moisture, protection against, 2.3.5.5. 
Mortar 
cement, 2.2.9.1. 
cement lining, 2.2.6.4. 
Mortuaries 
autopsy tables, 2.4.9.3. 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.4. 
N 
Neutralizing tanks for corrosive or acid waste, 
2.4.4.4., 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7. 
Nominally horizontal 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
offset, in stacks, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.10.6. 
pipes, sizing of cleanouts, 2.4.7.2. 
piping, 2.3.4.5., 2.3.4.6. 
sanitary drainage pipes, 2.2.4.2., 2.4.2.1., 2.5.2.1. 
Nominally vertical 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
vent pipes, 2.5.6.2., 2.5.6.5. 
Noncombustible 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
piping, 2.2.5.11. 
Non-ferrous pipe and fittings, 2.2.7. 
Non-metallic pipe and fittings, 2.2.5. 
Non-potable rainwater harvesting systems 
design, 2.7.2.4. 
meaning of terms, 2.7.2.1. 
permitted applications, 2.7.2.2. 
protection of potable water system, 2.7.2.4. 
roof surfaces and components, 2.7.2.3. 
water collected, restrictions, 2.7.2.4. 
Non-potable water systems 
connections to potable water systems, 2.6.2.1., 
2.7.1.1. 
design, 2.7.1.1. 
identification, 2.7.1.2. 
location of pipes and outlets, 2.7.1.3., 2.7.1.4. 
protection of public water system, 2.6.2.5. 
use, 2.7.1.1. 
Nuts, 2.2.10.2., 2.2.10.3. 
O 
Objectives 
application, 2.1.1.2.[A] 
attribution to acceptable solutions, 2.8.1.1. 
list of, 2.2.1.1.[A] 
Occupancy, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Offset relief vents 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for fixtures draining into vent pipes, 2.5.4.5. 
protection of drainage system, 2.5.1.1. 
sizing, 2.5.7.4., 2.5.8.5. 
for stacks, 2.5.4.4. 
for traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Offsets (in piping) 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
leaders, 2.4.9.5. 
stacks, 2.4.2.1., 2.4.10.6., 2.5.4.4. 
wet vents, 2.5.2.1. 
Oil interceptors (see Interceptors) 
Organizations, 1.3.2., 1.5.2.[A] 
Outlets from non-potable water systems, 2.7.1.2., 
2.7.1.4. 
Overflows 
rainwater storage tanks, 2.4.2.2. 
roof drain, control, 2.4.10.4. 
sinks, 2.2.2.4. 
P 
Paved surfaces, hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.1., 2.4.10.4. 
PE/AL/PE (polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene) 
pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.12., 2.3.4.5. 
Permits, plumbing, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
Personal hygiene devices, 2.2.2.2. 
PE-RT (polyethylene of raised temperature) tube and 
fittings, 2.2.5.15., 2.3.4.5. 
PEX/AL/PEX (crosslinked polyethylene/aluminum/ 
cross-linked polyethylene) composite pipe and 
fittings, 2.2.5.13., 2.3.4.5. 
Pipe 
ABS, 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.10., 2.3.4.5. 
applications, summary, 2.2.5. - 2.2.8. 
bell and spigot, 2.3.2.7. 
brass, 2.2.7.1., 2.2.7.2., 2.3.4.2., 2.3.4.5. 
cast-iron, 2.2.6.1., 2.2.6.4., 2.3.3.3., 2.3.3.8., 2.3.4.5. 
cellular core PVC, 2.2.5.16. 
combustible, 2.2.5.11. 
concrete, 2.2.5.2. 
copper, 2.2.7.1., 2.3.2.1., 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5. 
corrosion-resistant, 2.2.8. 
corrugated steel, 2.2.6.8. 
CPVC, 2.2.5.8., 2.3.4.5. 
crosslinked polyethylene, 2.2.5.6. 
ductile-iron water, 2.2.6.4. 
ferrous, 2.2.6. 
fibrocement, 2.2.5.1. 
hangers, 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5., 2.3.4.6. 
hub and spigot, 2.3.2.1. 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.1. 
joints and connections, 2.3.2., 2.3.3. 
lead, 2.2.7.8., 2.3.4.5. 
leaders, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.6.9., 2.3.5.5., 2.4.7.1., 2.4.9.5., 
2.4.10.11. 
marking, 2.2.1.3., 2.7.1.2. 
noncombustible, 2.2.5.11. 
non-ferrous, 2.2.7. 
non-metallic, 2.2.5. 
open ended, 2.4.6.1. 
PE/AL/PE, 2.2.5.12., 2.3.4.5. 
PEX/AL/PEX, 2.2.5.13., 2.3.4.5. 
plastic, 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.11., 2.3.3.8., 2.3.4.5. 
polyethylene, 2.2.5.4., 2.2.5.5. 
polypropylene, 2.2.5.14. 
protection, 2.3.5., 2.6.1.4. 
PVC, 2.2.5.7., 2.3.4.5. 
size, 2.4.9. 
steel, 2.2.6.7., 2.2.6.8., 2.2.6.10., 2.2.6.15., 2.3.3.3., 
2.3.4.5. 
subsoil drainage, 2.4.5.3., 2.4.6.4. 
underground, 2.3.4.6., 2.3.5.1. 
vitrified clay, 2.2.5.3. 
water service, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.1.6., 2.6.1.3., 2.6.1.5., 
2.6.1.10., 2.6.3.4. 
Pipe fittings (see Fittings) 
Pipe flanges 
brass or bronze, 2.2.7.2. 
stainless steel, 2.2.6.12. 
Piping 
combustible, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.5.11. 
construction and use of joints, 2.3.2. 
contraction accommodation, 2.3.3.9. 
CPVC design temperature and pressure, 2.2.5.8. 
drainage, 2.4.6. 
expansion accommodation, 2.3.3.9. 
horizontal, 2.3.4.5., 2.3.4.6. 
installation, 2.3.5.2. 
joints and connections, 2.3.3. 
minimum pressure, 2.2.1.5. 
noncombustible, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.5.11. 
protection, 2.3.5. 
service, 2.1.2.4. 
support, 2.3.4. 
vertical, 2.3.4.4. 
Plastic fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Plastic pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.9., 2.2.5.11. 
Plumbing drawings and related documents, 
2.2.2.1.[C] 
Plumbing facilities, 1.1.1.1.[A] 
Plumbing permits, drawing requirements, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
Plumbing systems 
application of Code, 1.1.1.1.[A] 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE/AL/PE) 
pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.12., 2.3.4.5. 
Polyethylene pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.4., 2.2.5.5., 2.3.4.5. 
Polyethylene water pipe, 2.2.5.4. 
Polypropylene pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.14., 2.3.4.5. 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.7., 
2.3.4.5. 
Porcelain-enamelled fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Potable, definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Potable water systems (see also Water distribution 
systems; Water service pipes; Water systems; 
Water temperature control; Water treatment 
devices) 
arrangement of piping, 2.4.6.2., 2.6.1. 
cleaning before use, 2.6.2.8. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

connections, 2.1.2.3., 2.6.2.1., 2.7.1.1. 
design, fabrication and installation, 2.6.1.1., 2.6.3.1. 
drainage, 2.6.1.2. 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
lead content, restrictions on use, 2.2.9.2. 
protection from contamination, 2.6.2., 2.7.2.4. 
size and capacity of pipes, 2.6.3. 
solar heating, 2.2.10.13., 2.6.1.8. 
testing, 2.3.7. 
Potato peelers, 2.4.3.3., 2.4.9.3. 
Premise isolation, 2.6.2.6. 
Pressure (see also Back pressure) 
CPVC piping, 2.2.5.8. 
PE/AL/PE piping in hot water systems, 2.2.5.12. 
piping, fittings and joints, 2.2.1.5. 
PVC piping, 2.2.5.7. 
static, at fixtures, 2.6.3.3., 2.7.1.1., 2.7.2.4. 
from suds, 2.4.2.1. 
testing, 2.3.6.4., 2.3.7. 
water service pipe, 2.2.1.6., 2.6.3.4. 
Pressure-reducing valves, 2.2.10.12., 2.6.1.11., 2.6.3.3., 
2.7.1.1., 2.7.2.4. 
Pressure-relief valves, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
Pressure vacuum breaker, 2.6.2.2., 2.6.2.10. 
Private sewage disposal systems, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.1., 
2.4.4.1. 
Private use, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.3.2., 2.6.3.4. 
Private water supply system, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.3., 
2.6.2.5. 
Protection of piping, 2.3.5. 
Public use, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.2.5., 2.6.3.2. 
Public washrooms, 2.2.2.5., 2.2.10.6. 
Pumps for sumps, 2.4.6.3. 
PVC (polyvinyl chloride) pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.7., 
2.3.4.5. 
R 
Rainfall, and hydraulic load, 2.4.10.4. 
Rainwater harvesting systems, 2.7.2. 
Rainwater tanks, overflows, 2.4.2.2., 2.7.2.4. 
Receiving tanks, 2.4.6.3. 
Reducer fittings, 2.3.3.5. 
Reducing valves, 2.2.10.12., 2.6.1.11. 
Referenced documents, 1.3.1., 1.5.1.[A] 
Relief valves, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
Relief vents 
connections, 2.5.3.1., 2.5.6.4., 2.5.7.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
offset, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.4.4., 2.5.4.5., 2.5.7.4., 
2.5.8.5. 
sizing, 2.5.7.3., 2.5.8.5. 
for traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Residential full flow-through fire sprinkler/standpipe 
system, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.4. 
Residential partial flow-through fire 
sprinkler/standpipe system, 1.4.1.2.[A], 
2.6.2.4. 
Risers 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
shut-off valves, 2.6.1.3. 
Roof drains 
connections to leaders, 2.3.3.7. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
flow control, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.10.4. 
Roof gutters, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.10.10. 
Roofs, hydraulic load from, 2.4.10.4. 
Rubber gasket joints, 2.2.5.2., 2.2.6.4. 
S 
Saddle hubs or fittings, 2.2.10.5. 
Sanitary building drains (see also Building drains) 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Sanitary building sewers (see also Building sewers) 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Sanitary drainage pipes 
connections, 2.4.2.1., 2.5.6.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.6. 
lead, 2.2.7.8., 2.3.4.5. 
location, 2.4.6.2. 
restrictions on use, 2.4.6.1. 
sizing, 2.4.9.1. 
vents, serving as, 2.5.2.1., 2.5.3.1., 2.5.7.3. 
Sanitary drainage systems, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.4.1., 2.4.4.4., 
2.4.5.1., 2.4.7.1. 
connections, 2.1.2.1., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.5.3. 
Sanitary sewers, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.1., 2.5.4.5. 
Sanitary T fittings, 2.2.4.2. 
Scope of Code, 1.3.1.[A] 
Screwed cast-iron water fittings, 2.2.6.5. 
Screwed joints, 2.3.2.3. 
Screwed malleable-iron water fittings, 2.2.6.6. 
Screws, 2.2.10.2. 
Service water heaters, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.1.7., 2.6.1.12. 
Sewage 
cooling of, 2.4.4.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
including corrosive or acid waste, 2.4.4.4., 2.5.5.3. 
including fats, oils or grease, 2.4.4.3. 
including oil or gasoline, 2.4.4.3. 
including sand or grit, 2.4.4.3. 
received by sumps or tanks, 2.4.6.3., 2.5.5.1., 2.5.8.5. 
treatment, 2.4.4.1. 
Sewage disposal system, private, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.1., 
2.4.4.1. 
Sewage sumps, venting, 2.5.5.1., 2.5.7.7. 
Sewers (see Building sewers) 
Sheet metal leaders, 2.2.6.9. 
Showers and shower heads 
construction and arrangement, 2.2.2.3. 
hydraulic loads, 2.6.3.2. 
size of fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.9.3. 
sizing of water distribution systems, 2.6.3.2. 
temperature control, 2.2.10.7. 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

traps, 2.4.5.1. 
water flow rates, 2.2.10.6. 
Shut-off valves, 2.4.6.3., 2.6.1.3., 2.6.1.7. 
Sinks 
dishwashing and food preparation, 2.2.2.4. 
floor-mounted service, 2.2.3.1. 
hot water temperature, 2.2.10.7. 
size of outlet pipes, 2.4.9.3. 
sizing of water distribution systems, 2.6.3.2. 
traps, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.1. 
Size 
ball, for test, 2.3.6.7. 
building drains, 2.4.9.4. 
building sewers, 2.4.9.4. 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
drainage pipes, 2.4.9. 
fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.8.2., 2.4.9.3. 
leaders, 2.4.9.5. 
traps and trap arms, 2.5.1.1., 2.5.6.3. 
vent pipes, 2.5.4.4., 2.5.5.2., 2.5.7., 2.5.8. 
water distribution systems, 2.6.3.2. 
water service pipes, 2.6.3.4. 
water supply pipes, 2.6.1.7., 2.6.3. 
Slip joints, 2.3.3.4. 
Slope of drainage pipes, 2.4.8.1. 
Soil pipe, cast-iron, 2.2.6.1., 2.3.3.3., 2.3.4.5. 
Solar domestic hot water systems, 2.2.10.13., 2.6.1.8. 
Soldered joints, 2.2.9.2., 2.3.2.4. 
Solder-joint fittings, 2.2.7.5., 2.2.7.6., 2.2.9.2. 
Solders, 2.2.9.2. 
Solvent cement, 2.2.5.7., 2.2.5.9. - 2.2.5.11. 
Sprinkler/standpipe systems, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.4., 
2.6.3.1. 
Stacks 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
connections, 2.4.2.1., 2.5.4.2., 2.5.4.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
hydraulic loads, 2.4.10.6. 
size, 2.4.9.2. 
vent pipes, 2.5.4. 
Stack vents 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
length, 2.5.8.4. 
protection of drainage systems, 2.5.1.1. 
size, 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.4. 
for stacks, 2.5.4.1. 
Stainless steel butt weld pipe fittings, 2.2.6.11. 
Stainless steel fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Stainless steel pipe, 2.2.6.10., 2.2.6.15., 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5. 
Stainless steel pipe flanges, 2.2.6.12. 
Stainless steel threaded fittings, 2.2.6.13. 
Stainless steel tube, 2.2.6.14., 2.2.6.15., 2.3.4.5. 
Stainless steel welded joints, 2.3.2.8. 
Standpipe system, 2.6.2.4. 
Static pressure, 2.6.3.3., 2.7.1.1., 2.7.2.4. 
Steel pipe 
corrugated, 2.2.6.8. 
galvanized, 2.2.6.7., 2.3.3.3., 2.3.4.5. 
stainless, 2.2.6.10., 2.2.6.15., 2.3.4.5. 
welded and seamless, 2.2.6.7. 
Stop-and-waste cocks, 2.6.1.4. 
Storage-type service water heaters, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.1.7., 
2.6.1.12. 
Storey, definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Storm building drains (see also Building drains), 
1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.5.2., 2.4.10.9. 
Storm building sewers (see also Building sewers), 
1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.5.2., 2.4.10.9. 
Storm drainage systems 
cleanouts, 2.4.7.1. 
connections, 2.1.2.2., 2.4.2.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
location, 2.4.5.2. 
traps, 2.4.5.2. 
Storm sewers, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.2., 2.4.10.13. 
Storm water, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.1.2.2., 2.4.2.1., 2.4.6.1., 
2.5.6.5., 2.7.2. 
Stubs, lead, water closet, 2.3.3.8., 2.4.2.1. 
Subsoil drainage pipes 
connections, 2.4.5.3., 2.4.6.4. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
sumps, 2.4.6.3. 
Suds pressure zones, 2.4.2.1. 
Suites, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.1.3. 
Sumps 
arrangement of drainage piping, 2.4.6.3. 
elevator pits, 2.4.3.6. 
venting, 2.5.5.1., 2.5.7.7. 
Supply and waste fittings, 2.2.10.6. 
Supports for piping, 2.3.4. 
Symbols, 1.4.2.1.[A] 
Systems, characteristics, 1.2.2.1.[A] 
T 
Tanks (drainage), 2.4.6.3. 
Tank-type water closets, 2.6.2.11. 
Tee joints, extracted, 2.3.3.2. 
Temperature controls, 2.2.10.7., 2.6.1.7., 2.6.1.12. 
Temperature-relief valves 
specifications, 2.2.10.11. 
where required, 2.6.1.7. 
Terminals, vent pipes, 2.5.6.5., 2.5.9.1. 
Testing 
drainage and venting systems, 2.3.6. 
in freezing conditions, 2.3.7.1. 
potable water systems, 2.3.7. 
T fittings, 2.2.4.1., 2.2.4.2. 
Thermal expansion of piping, 2.3.3.9., 2.6.1.11. 
Threaded cast-iron drainage fittings, 2.2.6.3. 
Transition solvent cement, 2.2.5.10. 
Trap arms, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.3.4.5., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.4.5., 2.5.6.3. 
Trap dips, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.7.1. 
Traps 
bell, 2.2.3.1. 
cleanouts, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.4., 2.4.7.1. 
connections, 2.2.3.1. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design, 2.2.3.1. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
drum, 2.2.3.1. 
for fixtures, 2.4.5.1. 
for floor drains, 2.4.5.2. 
interceptors, used as, 2.2.3.1., 2.4.5.1. 
location, 2.4.5.2., 2.4.5.4. 
materials, 2.2.3.1. 
restricted locations, 2.4.3.2. 
for sanitary drainage systems, 2.4.4.4., 2.4.5.1. 
seals, 2.4.5.5. 
size, 2.4.10.2., 2.4.10.12., 2.5.7.1. 
for storm drainage systems, 2.4.5.2. 
for subsoil drains, 2.4.5.3. 
tubular, 2.2.3.3. 
venting, 2.5.1., 2.5.6.3. 
Trap seal depth, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.3.1. 
Trap seals 
maintaining, 2.4.5.5. 
size, 2.2.3.1. 
Trap standards 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
installation, 2.3.2.1., 2.3.3.8. 
trap arms, 2.5.6.3. 
Trap weirs, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.3.3.4., 2.4.9.3. 
Treatment of sewage and wastes, 2.4.4. 
Trenchless technology, 2.2.5.5. 
Tube 
copper, 2.2.7.4., 2.3.3.2., 2.3.3.10., 2.3.4.3., 2.3.4.5. 
PE-RT, 2.2.5.15., 2.3.4.5. 
stainless steel, 2.2.6.14., 2.2.6.15., 2.3.4.5. 
Tubing (see Piping) 
U 
Underground pipes 
copper joints, 2.3.3.12. 
protection, 2.3.5.1. 
support, 2.3.4.6. 
Unions, 2.3.3.4., 2.4.6.3. 
Urinals 
connections, 2.3.3.8. 
flushing devices, 2.6.1.6. 
hydraulic loads, 2.6.3.2. 
location, 2.4.3.1. 
size of fixture outlet pipes, 2.4.9.3. 
Used materials and equipment, 1.2.2.2.[A], 2.2.1.2. 
V 
Vacuum breakers (see also Back-siphonage 
preventers), 2.2.10.8., 2.6.2.2., 2.6.2.10. 
Vacuum-relief valves, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
Valves 
accessibility, 2.1.3.2. 
air admittance, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.10.16., 2.5.9. 
automatic compensating, 2.2.10.6., 2.2.10.7. 
backflow preventers, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.10.10., 2.6.1.11., 
2.6.2.1., 2.6.2.2., 2.6.2.12., 2.7.2.4. 
backwater, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.3.6., 2.4.6.3., 
2.4.6.4., 2.7.2.4. 
check, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.4.2.1., 2.4.6.3., 2.6.1.5., 2.6.1.11., 
2.6.2.2. - 2.6.2.4. 
direct flush, 2.2.10.8., 2.4.9.3. 
manually operated, 2.2.10.6. 
pressure-reducing, 2.6.1.11., 2.6.3.3., 2.7.1.1., 2.7.2.4. 
pressure-relief, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
reducing, 2.2.10.12. 
shut-off, 2.4.6.3., 2.6.1.3., 2.6.1.7. 
temperature-relief, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
vacuum-relief, 2.2.10.11., 2.6.1.7. 
Velocity, water service pipes, 2.6.3.5. 
Vent headers, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.3. 
Ventilation of rooms, 2.1.3.1. 
Venting 
circuit, 2.5.3. 
corrosive drain piping, 2.5.5.3. 
dilution tanks, 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7. 
floor drains, 2.5.1.1. 
interceptors, 2.5.5.2. 
neutralizing tanks, 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7. 
sewage sumps, 2.5.5.1. 
wet, 2.5.2., 2.5.8.1. 
Venting systems 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design and installation, 2.5. 
piping and materials, 2.2.4. - 2.2.6., 2.2.7.4., 2.2.8.1., 
2.2.10., 2.3.2.1., 2.3.2.7., 2.3.3.4. 
provision for future installation, 2.5.5.5. 
testing, 2.3.6. 
Vent pipes 
arrangement, 2.5.6. 
cast-iron, 2.2.6.1. 
connections, 2.5.6.2. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for dilution tanks, 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7. 
drainage, 2.5.6.1. 
drawings for plumbing permit, 2.2.2.1.[C] 
flashing, 2.2.10.14. 
location, 2.5.6.3. 
for macerating toilets, 2.5.7.7. 
for manholes, 2.5.7.6. 
miscellaneous, 2.5.5. 
neutralizing tanks, 2.5.5.3., 2.5.7.7. 
for sewage sumps, 2.5.7.7. 
sizing, 2.5.7., 2.5.8. 
for stacks, 2.5.4. 
suds pressure zones, 2.4.2.1. 
support above roof, 2.3.4.7. 
terminals, 2.5.6.5. 
for traps, 2.5.1. 
Vents 
additional circuit, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.3.1., 
2.5.4.5., 2.5.7.3., 2.5.8.5. 
branch, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.3. 
circuit, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.3.1., 2.5.4.5., 2.5.7.3., 
2.5.8.3. 
continuous, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.8.3. 
dual, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.8.2., 2.5.9.1. 
Index 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

individual, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.8.2., 2.5.8.3., 
2.5.9.1. 
offset relief, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.4.4., 2.5.4.5., 
2.5.7.4., 2.5.8.5. 
relief, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.3.1., 2.5.6.4., 2.5.7.3., 
2.5.8.5. 
stack, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.4.1., 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.4. 
wet, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.8.1. 
yoke, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.4.3., 2.5.4.5., 2.5.7.5., 
2.5.8.5. 
Vent stacks 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
sizing, 2.5.7.2., 2.5.8.4. 
for stacks, 2.5.4.2. 
for traps, 2.5.1. 
Vertical piping, support, 2.3.4.4. 
Vitreous china fixtures, 2.2.2.2. 
Vitrified clay pipe and fittings, 2.2.5.3. 
W 
Washers, 2.2.10.2., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2., 2.7.2.2. 
Washing machines, 2.4.5.1., 2.4.9.3., 2.6.3.2. 
Waste, cooling, 2.4.4.2. 
Waste pipes (see Sanitary drainage pipes) 
Water closets 
connections, 2.3.3.8. 
flushing devices, 2.6.1.6. 
hydraulic loads, 2.6.3.2. 
in public washrooms, 2.2.2.5. 
screws, bolts, nuts and washers, 2.2.10.2. 
size of pipes serving, 2.4.9.2., 2.4.9.3. 
tank-type, 2.2.10.10., 2.6.2.11. 
trap arms, 2.5.6.3. 
Water coolers, 2.6.3.2. 
Water distribution systems 
connection, 2.1.2.3. 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design and installation, 2.6.1.1., 2.6.1.2. 
materials, 2.2.6.7., 2.2.6.15., 2.2.7.4. 
protection, 2.6.1.9. 
Water flow rates, 2.2.10.6. 
Water hammer arresters, 2.2.10.15. 
Water hammer, prevention, 2.6.1.9. 
Water heaters 
indirect service, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
pressure-relief valve, 2.6.1.7. 
storage-type, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
temperature controls, 2.6.1.7., 2.6.1.12. 
Water pipes 
cast-iron, 2.2.6.4. 
CPVC, 2.2.5.8. 
polyethylene, 2.2.5.4. 
PVC, 2.2.5.7. 
size and capacity, 2.6.3. 
Water pressure tests, 2.3.6.1. - 2.3.6.4., 2.3.7.1. - 2.3.7.3. 
Water service pipes 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
mobile home, 2.6.1.10. 
sizing, 2.6.3.4. 
velocity, 2.6.3.5. 
working pressure, 2.2.1.6. 
Water supply 
auxiliary, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
design, fabrication and installation, 2.6.3.1. 
private, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.6.2.5. 
protection, 2.6.1.4. 
separation of public and private systems, 2.6.2.5. 
Water systems (see also Non-potable water systems) 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
Water temperature control, 2.2.10.7. 
Water treatment devices, 2.2.10.17., 2.6.2.1. 
Water usage per flush cycle, 2.6.1.6. 
Welded joints 
restrictions on use, 2.3.3.3. 
stainless steel, 2.3.2.8. 
Welded and seamless steel pipe, 2.2.6.7. 
Wet venting, 2.5.2., 2.5.8.1. 
Wet vents, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.5.1.1., 2.5.2.1., 2.5.8.1. 
Wiped joints, 2.3.2.2. 
Y 
Yoke vents 
definition, 1.4.1.2.[A] 
for fixtures draining into vent pipes, 2.5.4.5. 
sizing, 2.5.7.5., 2.5.8.5. 
for stacks, 2.5.4.3. 
for traps, 2.5.1.1. 
Z 
Zinc, alloyed, 1.4.1.2.[A], 2.2.10.14. 
National Plumbing Code of Canada 2020 
Index 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Symbols and Abbreviations 
The following symbols and abbreviations are used in the figures: 
Water and drainage pipe _________ 
Subsoil drains __ _ __ _ 
Vent  pipe _ _ _ _  _ _ _ _  
BG 
Bathroom group 
BT 
Bathtub 
CO 
Cleanout 
CW 
Clothes washer 
DF 
Drinking fountain 
DW 
Dishwasher 
FD 
Floor drain 
FS 
Floor sink 
HB 
Hose bibb 
KS 
LAV 
LT 
RD 
SHWR 
SS 
SWH 
UR 
WC 
Kitchen sink 
Lavatory 
Laundry tray 
Roof drain 
Shower 
Slop sink 
Service water heater 
Urinals 
Water closet 
Conversion Factors 
To Convert 
To 
Multiply by 
°C 
°F 
1.8 and add 32 
kg 
lb. 
2.205 
kg/m3 
lbf/ft.3 
0.06243 
kN 
lb. 
224.81 
kN/m 
lbf/ft. 
68.52 
kN/m3 
lbf/ft.3 
6.360 
kPa 
lbf/in.2 (psi) 
0.1450 
kPa 
lbf/ft.2 
20.88 
L 
gal. (imp.) 
0.2200 
L/s 
gal./min (gpm) 
13.20 
m 
ft. 
3.281 
m2 
ft.2 
10.76 
mm 
in. 
0.03937 
m/s2 
ft./s2 
3.281 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) to Diameter Nominal (DN) 
Conversion Chart 
NPS, in. 
DN, mm 
1/8 
6 
¼ 
8 
3/8 
10 
½
 15
¾
 20
1
 25
1¼ 
32 
1½ 
38 
2
 50
2½ 
65 
3 
75 
4
 100
5 
125 
6
 150
8
 200
10 
250 
12 
300 
14 
350 
16 
400 
18 
450 
20 
500 
22 
550 
24 
600 
Copyright © NRC 1941 - 2022 World Rights Reserved © CNRC 1941-2022 Droits réservés pour tous pays

