PERSPECTIVES
PHYSICS
On the periodic solutions of the three-body problem
Shijun Liao
1,2,∗and Xiaoming Li3
The motion of three bodies that attract
each other by universal gravitation was
first investigated by Newton [1] and was
reconsidered by many great mathemati-
cians and scientists, including Euler, La-
grange, Poincar´e [2] and Hilbert. The fa-
mousthree-bodyproblemhashadagreat
influence on physics, mathematics and
non-linear dynamics. It has led to a new
field of modern science, i.e. chaotic dy-
namics. Stable periodic motion of a mul-
tiple celestial body system could provide
anecessarybackgroundintimeandspace
for the evolution of living beings, because
human beings might be a result of more
than four billion years of evolution. So, it
is important to find periodic solutions of
the three-body problem.
Surprisingly,
according
to
Mont-
gomery’s topological method [3] to
classify families of three-body orbits,
only three families of periodic solu-
tions of the three-body problem were
found in 300 years, i.e. (1) the Euler–
Lagrange family found by Euler (1767)
and Lagrange (1772); (2) the BHH
family found by Broucke (1975), Had-
jidemetriou (1975) and H´enon (1976);
and (3) the figure-eight family numer-
ically found by Moore (1993), until
2013, when ˇSuvakov and Dmitraˇsinovi´c
[4] found 11 families of new periodic
solutions of a three-body system with
equal mass by computer simulation.
Why? The mystery was revealed
in 1890 by Poincar´e [2], the father of
chaotic dynamics, who proved the non-
existence of the uniform first integral
of a three-body problem in general,
and more importantly, the sensitive
dependence to initial conditions (SDIC)
of its trajectories. Thus, Poincar´e realized
the importance of periodic solutions of
the three-body problem: ‘what makes
theseperiodicsolutionssoprecioustous,
isthattheyare,sotosay,theonlyopening
through which we can try to penetrate in
a place which, up to now, was supposed
to be inaccessiblersquo;.
The SDIC of a chaotic system was
found again by Lorenz in the 1960s with
the aid of a computer; he popularized this
concept via his famous ‘butterfly effect’,
i.e. a hurricane in North America might
be created by the flapping of wings of a
distant butterfly in South America several
weeks earlier. More importantly, Lorenz
also found later that the trajectory of a
chaotic dynamic system has sensitive
dependence not only on the initial con-
ditions but also on numerical algorithms.
Note that there are many numerical
algorithms for a chaotic system, which
could be quite different from each other!
At each time-step, different numerical
algorithms bring different truncation
errors, which increase exponentially for
a chaotic system due to the ‘butterfly
effect’. So, for a chaotic system, the
sensitive dependence on numerical algo-
rithms is an inevitable result of the SDIC.
As a result, for a chaotic system with an
exact initial condition, one mostly gains
quite different numerical trajectories,
since numerical chaotic results given
by algorithms in double precision are a
kind of mixture of the ‘true’ solution and
numerical noise at the same level! Such
divergent simulations of chaotic systems
are unacceptable for many researchers,
and inescapably cause bitter controversy.
To overcome this obstacle, a new
strategy of numerical simulation for
chaotic systems was proposed by Liao
[5], namely the clean numerical simu-
lation (CNS). The CNS is based on the
Taylor-series method at high enough
orderanddataatmultipleprecisionswith
a large enough number of digits, plus a
convergence check using an additional
simulation with less numerical noise. In
this way, both truncation and round-off
errors can be reduced to an arbitrary level
so that in theory convergent (reliable)
chaotic solutions can be obtained in an
arbitrary long (but finite) interval of
time by means of the CNS. For example,
the CNS can reduce numerical noise
to such a tiny level, much smaller than
the micro-level uncertainty of physical
quantities, that propagation of these
physical micro-level uncertainties of
chaotic dynamic systems can be precisely
investigated [6]. Thus, unlike traditional
numerical algorithms, the CNS can
provide convergent/reliable numerical
simulations of chaotic systems in quite
long intervals of time. Obviously, the
CNS provides a more reliable way to gain
the ‘true’ trajectory of the three-body
problem in general. In 2017, using the
CNS as a new tool to gain a reliable
trajectory and by means of a grid search
method for initial conditions and the
Newton–Raphson method to modify a
possible initial condition, Li and Liao
[7] successfully gained 695 families
of periodic solution of the three-body
system with equal mass by means of a
national supercomputer, including the
figure-eight family found by Moore,
the 11 families found by ˇSuvakov and
Dmitraˇsinovi´c, and in particular more
than 600 new families that have never
been reported (a few of them are shown
in Figure 1). Similarly, Li et al. [8] found
C⃝The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of China Science Publishing & Media Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly cited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/6/6/1070/5537324 by guest on 20 June 2023

PERSPECTIVES
Hu and Luo
1071
Figure 1. A few examples of new periodic orbits of a three-body system with equal mass. Red
line: first body; black line: second body; blue line: third body. Top left: periodic orbit I .Ai.c.
3 .
Top right: periodic orbit I .Ai.c.
28 . Bottom left: periodic orbit I .B i.c.
94 . Bottom right: periodic orbit
I I .C i.c.
116. Movies of more than 2000 of these new periodic orbits are given on the website:
http://numericaltank.sjtu.edu.cn/three-body/three-body.htm.
1349 new families of periodic solution
of a three-body system with only two
bodies having the same mass (http://
numericaltank.sjtu.edu.cn/three-body/
three-body-unequal-mass.htm).
Cur-
rently, Li and Liao [9] have further
successfully
gained
313
collisionless
periodic orbits of the free-fall three-body
system with some randomly chosen
values of mass ratios. This strongly sug-
gests that there should exist an infinite
number of families of periodic orbits
of the three-body system in general.
Using the CNS, these trajectories and
their corresponding periods can be at a
would precision of as many digits as one
like. These new periodic orbits [7–9]
have beenreported twice by New Scientist
(https://www.newscientist.com/article/
2170161-watch-the-weird-new-solutions
-to-the-baffling-three-body-problem/).
Surprisingly, all of these periodic
orbits approximately satisfy the so-called
generalized Kepler’s third laws [7–10].
Thissuggeststhatthereshouldexistsome
elegant structures for the three-body
system. Traditionally, a non-hierarchical
three-body system was believed to be un-
stable. However, all of the new periodic
orbits reported in [7–9] are in non-
hierarchical configurations, but many
among them are linearly or marginally
stable. This might inspire the long-term
astronomical observation of stable non-
hierarchical triple systems in practice.
All of these would enrich our knowledge
and deepen our understanding about the
three-body problem.
The success of the CNS with the
famous three-body problem illustrates its
great potential. It is quite promising that
the CNS could provide a new, precise
tool to investigate some challenging
problems, such as energy spectra of the
three-body state in quantum mechanics,
turbulence, which is one of the most
difficult problems in classical physics,
and so on.
Shijun Liao
1,2,∗and Xiaoming Li3
1Advanced Center of Computing, School of Naval
Architecture, Ocean and Civil Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2School of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, China
3MOE Key Laboratory of Disaster Forecast and
Control in Engineering, School of Mechanics and
Construction Engineering, Jinan University, China
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail: sjliao@sjtu.edu.cn
REFERENCES
1. Newton I. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathe-
matica. London: Royal Society Press, 1687.
2. Poincar´e H. Acta Math 1890; 13: 1–270.
3. Montgomery R. Nonlinearity 1998; 11: 363–76.
4. ˇSuvakov M and Dmitraˇsinovi´c V. Phys Rev Lett
2013; 110: 114301.
5. Liao SJ. Tellus A 2008; 61: 550–64.
6. Li XM and Liao SJ. Appl Math Mech 2018; 39:
1529–46.
7. Li XM and Liao SJ. Sci China Phys Mech Astron
2017; 60: 129511.
8. Li XM, Jing YP and Liao SJ. Publ Astron Soc Jpn
2018; 70: 64.
9. Li XM and Liao SJ. New Astron 2019; 70: 22–6.
10. Dmitraˇsinovi´c V and ˇSuvakov M. Phys Lett A 2015;
379: 1939–45.
National Science Review
6: 1070–1071, 2019
doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwz102
Advance access publication 24 July 2019
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/6/6/1070/5537324 by guest on 20 June 2023

