

DAVID TOOP is a musician, writer and sound curator based in London. The
author of seven books on music, sound and listening, he is currently Professor of
Audio Culture and Improvisation at London College of Communication.
Praise for Ocean of Sound
“As styles of music multiply and divide at an accelerating pace, Ocean of Sound
challenges the way we hear, and more importantly, how we interpret what we
hear around us.” Daily Telegraph
“Ocean of Sound shatters consensual reality with a cumulative force that’s both
frightening and compelling. Buy it, read it and let it remix your head.” i-D
“Its parallels aren’t music books at all, but rather Italo Calvino’s Invisible Cities,
Michel Leiris’s Afrique Phantôme, William Gibson’s Neuromancer … David
Toop is our Calvino and our Leiris, our Gibson. Ocean of Sound is as alien as the
twentieth century, as utterly Now as the twenty-first. An essential mix.” The
Wire
“An extraordinary and revelatory book, Ocean of Sound reads like an alternative
history of twentieth-century music, tracking the passage of organised sound into
strange and new environments of vapour and abstraction.” Tony Herrington
“At the end of the millennium, we can see two trends in music, one proactive,
the other reactive … Toop’s Ocean of Sound brilliantly elaborates both these
processes, like sonic fact for our sci-fi present, a Martian Chronicle from this
Planet Earth.” The Face
“This Encyclopaedia of Heavenly Music is an heroic endeavour brought off with
elegance and charm. The play of ideas is downright musical and, vitally, the
author writes like a mad enthusiast rather than a snob.” NME
“Always the rigorous pluralist, [Toop] sees no reason not to expect wisdoms
from rival cultures, tribal or club, nor emptiness or stupidity either. His sense of
the absurd, of potential darkness and madness, is a bullshit detector never turned
off.” New Statesman & Society

ALSO BY DAVID TOOP AND PUBLISHED BY SERPENT’S TAIL
Exotica: Fabricated Soundscapes in a Real World Rap Attack #3

Ocean of Sound
Ambient sound and radical listening in the age of communication
DAVID TOOP

This edition published in 2018
First published in 1995 by Serpent’s Tail an imprint of Profile Books Ltd
3 Holford Yard
Bevin Way
London
WC1X 9HD
www.serpentstail.com
Copyright © David Toop, 1995
Foreword copyright © Michel Faber, 2018
The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication
may be reproduced, stored or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission
of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
eISBN 978 1 78816 104 6

for Leslie John Toop (1913–95)
and for
Kimberley (1959–95)
… in a green sunny place …

contents
author’s note to the new edition
foreword by michel faber
prologue: fragments and mantras
1. memory
2. if you find earth boring …
3. scanning: aether talk
4. burial rites
5. content in a void
6. altered states i: landscape
7. altered states ii: fourth world
8. altered states iii: crystal world
9. altered states iv: machine
10. altered states v: lucid dreaming
11. altered states vi: nature
12. theatre of sound
13. ocean of sound
bibliography
discography
index

 
 
author’s note to the new edition
Ocean of Sound was a case of finding the propitious moment and the right vessel
for ideas that I had been developing since the late 1960s. I think of it now as a
Trojan Horse, early-90s ambient music serving as a device to disguise a far more
expansive narrative about twentieth-century experimental music of all
persuasions. In truth, it was far less calculating than that. The book was written
feverishly over a period of three or four months during a time of difficult
personal circumstances. Perhaps this was one reason – a strange one – why it
feels relatively optimistic. I was inspired by all the innovative new music
emerging in the early 1990s, when previously tight divisions between genres
seemed to be breaking down. There was a palpable feeling of social and cultural
experiment in the air that connected right back to the late nineteenth century,
allowing me to make connections between contemporary electronic tracks, the
ambient scene and all their avant-garde antecedents. This showed me a way back
into my own music making after years of working almost full time as a music
critic but I also used it to counterbalance the problems of my own life.
Immediately after I delivered the manuscript these problems became
dramatically worse and so I found myself in the curious position of struggling
for emotional survival at exactly the moment when all my ideas of the past
twenty-five years came to fruition.
The book was surprisingly well received and even now I meet many people who
tell me it changed their lives. This is gratifying, of course, but being hypercritical
of my own work and something of a sceptic it makes me inclined to go back to
the book to find out what’s wrong with it. One aspect that strikes me is the
utopian view of what were then, in 1995, very new developments: the emergence
of the internet and all its implications for globalisation, communications and the
spread of culture. It was obvious that the effect on music production and
distribution would be traumatic but with hindsight my failure to foresee a much
darker future for the web – dominated by corporate interests and overrun with
hate speech, extreme pornography and trivia, along with its decimation of
existing media – was a serious error.

The title itself – Ocean of Sound – was also criticised for a certain New Age
tinge. I feel less bothered by this.
My original title was “Aether Talk” (also a reference to the rise of the World
Wide Web) but as Serpent’s Tail founder Pete Ayrton pointed out, people might
not be able to spell it, let alone understand what I meant by it. I came to my
senses and thought up a title that was more likely to get the book into bookshops.
The question in my mind is this: was the ocean of sound an adequate metaphor
to encapsulate my conception of music? What interests me is the web of
relations, those labyrinthine connections that link the most unlikely subjects,
regardless of genre, era, geography, social class, race, language, age, sexual
preference and all the other cultural and demographic factors used to divide
music (often for commercial reasons) into neat categories.
Maybe plant and animal ecologies are a better way of expressing this, I don’t
know, but oceanic associations of wave forms, fluidity, transparency, depth and
vastness allowed me to write about music in a different way. What I do know is
that from childhood I was attracted to music, sound and acts of listening for their
intrinsic qualities, rather than because they affirmed an identity or addressed
themselves to a particular demographic. In the early 1980s I co-edited a
magazine called Collusion. Our policy was to cover any music that interested us,
regardless of whether it was hip, new or “relevant”. A few years later I was
writing a monthly music column for The Face magazine, acutely aware that I
could use my thousand words to play with and even undermine the magazine’s
fascination for fashion tribes and their musical tastes.
Ocean of Sound built on these foundations but it took me a long time – until my
mid-forties – to find a form that articulated this free-ranging approach over the
length of a book. The writing of Ocean of Sound was inspired by the cut-and-
paste possibilities of computer word processing, by speculations on hypertext
and hyperlinks and by the experimental writers who had influenced me in my
teens. In struggling to find this form I realised that I could dispense with
linearity, instead building a story from short blocks of text that connected with
bigger themes. It was a kind of free improvisation, a music I had been involved
in since the 1960s, but it also mirrored the computer-programmed music I was
making at the time and the hip-hop sampling I had written about in Rap Attack
ten years earlier.
Over time it seems this way of thinking about music became almost the norm

because of the accidental effects of technological development. Playlisting on
digital devices helped to break down existing divisions between musical genres,
illegal file sharing circumvented record company strategies and the rise of video
sharing websites like YouTube encouraged a near-random link-and-click
approach to musical discovery. Simon Reynolds wrote a very flattering essay
entitled “We Are All David Toop Now”, a title he claims came to him in a flash,
as a fully formed sentence. “Unpacked, what that slogan says,” he wrote, “is that
any kid with a broadband connection can access the sort of dizzying diversity of
listening experience that took Toop a lifetime of obsessive dedication to
accumulate.”
Reynolds’ essay came with caveats about “checklist tourism” and “frenetic
overload”, which I share. Speaking personally, I recall the music of the mid-
1990s being exciting as a kind of science fiction, anticipating a situation that was
almost upon us even though its full (and often dispiriting) implications remained
just out of sight. Is that true of now? Hard to say; the beauty of writing Ocean of
Sound when I did was that futurology could be central to a critical stance. Now,
not so much, if only because we have become wary of unpredictable futures and
the instability they create when they fully arrive. But looking back twenty-three
years to what I wrote in a very different time I feel proud of the book, not
particularly because of the writing but because I succeeded in doing something I
always assumed was impossible – to bring together all my avant-garde, arcane
knowledge, ideas and theories into one volume – and communicate them to a
reasonably broad audience. I may never repeat that trick, but within my
particular areas of expertise, once is maybe enough.
David Toop
London, 2018
 

foreword
I write this foreword at a time when I’m working on my own book about music.
Inevitably, I’m thinking about what makes such projects useful or useless. Ocean
of Sound is useful.
Growing up, I read voraciously, but felt that almost all books about music
were aimed at a coterie of readers who already knew or agreed with pretty much
everything they would find within. Biographies of The Beatles or The Doors
were like catechisms, allowing worshippers to fondle the rosary beads of the
sacred myths, while more serious tomes like The Companion to 20th-Century
Music functioned as displays of self-congratulatory taste, insinuating that the
reader should emulate the immaculate record collection of the author. David
Toop’s Ocean of Sound was one of the few music books I encountered that had a
more generous and open-minded agenda. Toop loved listening and wanted to
help other people listen with a similar joy of exploration, whether they explored
the places he’d been himself or other places unknown to him. Immensely
knowledgeable, he nevertheless came across as humbly mindful of how little any
one of us can know of the infinite world of beautiful noise.
Good writers are not necessarily good critics but Toop is both. Reading Ocean
of Sound provides some of the same aesthetic pleasures – amused dislocation, a
glimpse of uncanny wonder, a sense of being on an exotic journey – as we get
from the music he celebrates. His sonic landscape is the “alternately
disorientating and inspiring openness through which all that is solid melts into
aether”. In this terrain, dub pioneer Lee Perry emits “reptilian sibilations” and
jazz misfit Sun Ra is “dressed in robes and a hat which can best be described as
inspired extra-terrestrial Oxfam chic”. Deliciously, he observes that on Ronettes
records, “teenage life crises were amplified by Phil Spector’s production to the
scale of a major meteorological disturbance”.
Ocean of Sound is a wide-ranging and dilatory enterprise, as befits music that
can be (literally) far-fetched. Some readers may feel that the long section near
the end, where Toop details his arduous journey through the Amazon rainforests,
is too digressive, a sideways drift into Apocalypse Now derangement. But for
me, it’s actually the heart of the book, where Toop is challenged most boldly to
reconcile “native” music’s visceral, intensely territorial focus with the
disembodied contextlessness of Ambient. It’s an unsquarable circle: the grizzled,
haunted shamans with their scars, their frenzied dances, their drooling saliva,
versus our cool white dudes artificially “tinting” the environment with pleasingly

abstract sounds to help frazzled consumers screen out unwanted noise. Toop’s
aesthetic restlessness makes him the ideal candidate for attempting such
impossible reconciliations: deeply as he appreciates what he’s hearing at any
given moment, he’s equally aware of his yearning for something else, maybe
even its opposite. A very twenty-first-century sage.
Crucial to Toop’s perspective is that he has travelled, and not just in his
armchair. His feel for geographical place informs not just his love of “exotic”
sounds from the Fourth World, but also his perceptions of music closer to home:
what other critic would identify disco king Giorgio Moroder as “from the south
Tyrol, crucially placed in the centre of German, Italian and Swiss culture”?
Moroder thus becomes less a media superstar and more a form of wildlife that
can be found only in one Alpine forest.
Written at the dawn of the internet and a decade before YouTube and
Facebook, Ocean of Sound frequently seems prophetic, such as when Toop
imagines the digital world of the future not as cyberpunk but “as a high-tech
campfire, people plugging in to remind themselves of life as it was when they
were plugged out, twisting their isolation into something resembling
community”. Again, in 1995, he muses: “Music in the future will almost
certainly hybridise hybrids to such an extent that the idea of a traceable source
will become an anachronism.”
But, as with many commentators who seem prescient, his gift is not so much
for prophesy as for thinking deeply about the significance of phenomena which
are already happening but ignored by pundits preoccupied with yesterday’s
issues. Noting that hard labour seems to be disappearing from the Western
world, he adds the disclaimer: “except for a vague awareness of distant
deadening toil taking place in factories dedicated to new technology
manufacture” – an aside which applies as much to iPhones as to whatever Toop
had in mind in the mid-90s.
Most people who listen to music extremely attentively end up becoming
philosophers, or maybe it’s their philosophical bent that makes them listen so
attentively in the first place. Either way, Toop is a philosopher of the most
searching kind. On one level, Ocean of Sound is his counsel to himself, to turn
off his mind, relax and float downstream. But then, noting how ambient music
hankers for meaningful rituals, he argues that this attempt to impose
metaphysical structure on an apparently structureless space is “surely a response
to the contemporary sense that life can drift towards death without direction or
purpose”. In other words, he’s well aware that while the music he loves can
sometimes seem to be the solution to life’s big questions, it can sometimes be the

problem too.
I wonder if the ambivalent melancholy that hangs over Ocean of Sound – the
tension between wanting to float bodiless and contextless beyond the egocentric
specificities of one’s own life, but then wanting to touch base with home turf and
humanity – is partly due to the losses Toop suffered in the year he wrote the
book: the deaths of his father and wife. Dedicating Ocean of Sound to them, he
appends the phrase “… in a green and sunny place …”, as if wishing them into a
realm that is simultaneously a verdant earthly locale and a virtual Heaven. The
fact that Toop himself lies hallucinating in an Intensive Care ward at the
beginning (and end) of the book is proof enough that Ocean of Sound is aimed at
readers who are ready to perceive sound as something hugely more important
than mere entertainment.
In the decades since Toop wrote this visionary exploration of dissolved
boundaries, the continued dissolution of those boundaries has led to a Biblical
flood of sublime music and syrupy kitsch, bewilderingly intermingled. The
information ocean has become clogged with pollution, to the point where it can
be difficult to spot any beautiful fish swimming below the surface. Toop can still
guide and inspire us as we gaze into the depths.
Michel Faber

 
 
prologue: fragments and mantras
What follows is a collection of diverse views, thoughts, experiences. They trace
an expansiveness, an opening out of music during the past one hundred years,
examining some of the ways in which music has reflected the world back to
itself and to its listeners.
This is not a book about categories of music – ambient, electronic,
environmental or any of those other separations which lay claim to the creation
of order and sense but actually serve business interests. What I have followed,
starting with Debussy in 1889, is an erosion of categories, a peeling open of
systems to make space for stimuli, new ideas, new influences, from a rapidly
changing environment. Then, as now, this environment included sounds of the
world – previously unheard musics and ambient sounds of all kinds, urban noise
and bioacoustic signals – as well as experiments in presentation rituals,
technological innovations, unfamiliar tuning systems and structuring principles,
improvisation and chance.
The sound object, represented most dramatically by the romantic symphonies
of the nineteenth century, has been fractured and remade into a shifting, open
lattice on which new ideas can hang, or through which they can pass and
interweave. This is one metaphor. Landscape is another – a conjured place
through which the music moves and in which the listener can wander.
Musicians have always reflected their environments in ways which are
incorporated into the music’s structure and purpose. The unverifiable origins of
music are located by most musicologists either in bioacoustic and meteorological
sounds or language.
After a subtle examination of origin theories, Anthony Storr makes the following
conclusion in his Music and the Mind: “It will never be possible to establish the
origins of human music with any certainty; however, it seems probable that
music developed from the prosodic exchanges between mother and infant which
foster the bond between them.” So sounds which we would describe as ambient,
functional or mysteriously alien have laid the foundations of musical creativity.

But the day when Claude Debussy heard Javanese music performed at the
Paris Exposition of 1889 seems particularly symbolic. From that point – in my
view the beginning of the musical twentieth century – accelerating
communications and cultural confrontations became a focal point of musical
expression. An ethereal culture, absorbed in perfume, light, silence and ambient
sound, developed in response to the intangibility of twentieth-century
communications. Sound was used to find meaning in changing circumstances,
rather than imposed as a familiar model on a barely recognisable world.
Inevitably, some of this music has remained in fragments; some has been
moulded from fragments into mantras and other solid structures.
Much of the music I discuss could be characterised as drifting or simply
existing in stasis rather than developing in any dramatic fashion. Structure
emerges slowly, minimally or apparently not at all, encouraging states of reverie
and receptivity in the listener that suggest (on the good side of boredom) a very
positive rootlessness.
At the same time, a search for meaningful rituals recurs again and again, surely a
response to the contemporary sense that life can drift towards death without
direction or purpose. So this is a book about journeys, some actual, some
imaginary, some caught in the ambiguity between the two. Although the
narrative jumps, loses itself and digresses, my central image was signals
transmitted across the aether. This applies as much to the Javanese musicians
and Debussy in the colonial era of the nineteenth century as it applies to music in
the digital age at the turn of the millennium. This past hundred years of
expansiveness in music, a predominantly fluid, non-verbal, non-linear medium,
has been preparing us for the electronic ocean of the next century. As the world
has moved towards becoming an information ocean, so music has become
immersive. Listeners float in that ocean; musicians have become virtual
travellers, creators of sonic theatre, transmitters of all the signals received across
the aether.
August 1995
 

1
memory
sound and evocation; Muzak, ambience and aethereal culture; Brian Eno and
perfume; Bali, Java, Debussy
Sitting quietly in never-never land, I am listening to summer fleas jump off my
small female cat on to the polished wood floor. Outside, starlings are squabbling
in the fig tree and from behind me I can hear swifts wheeling over rooftops. An
ambulance siren, full panic mode, passes from behind the left centre of my head
to starboard front. Next door, the neighbours are screaming – “… fuck you … I
didn’t … get out that door …” – but I tune that out. The ambient hum of night air
and low frequency motor vehicle drone merges with insect hum called back from
the 1970s, a country garden somewhere, high summer in the afternoon. The
snow has settled. I can smell woodsmoke. Looking for fires I open the front
door, peer out into the shining dark and hear stillness. Not country stillness but
urban shutdown. So tranquil.
Truthfully, I am lying in intensive care. Wired, plugged and electronically
connected, I have glided from coma into a sonic simulation of past, and passed,
life. As befits an altered state, the memories have been superimposed, stripped of
context, conflated from seasons, times, eras, moments, even fictions, into a
concentrated essence of my existence in the soundworld.
These sounds reconnect me to a world from which I had disengaged. Sound
places us in the real universe. Looking ahead, I can see a plane enlivened by
visually represented objects. I can touch within a limited radius. I can smell a
body, a glass of beer, burning dust. But sound comes from everywhere,
unbidden. My brain seeks it out, sorts it, makes me feel the immensity of the
universe even when I have no wish to look or absorb.
There are ear plugs, but then I just hear the sound of my own shell.
Not long born, still unable to control most of my own body, I stared at colour
shapes and gripped objects as they came near. Far away, a dog barked. Then
there were two worlds.
Now I am very old, too old. A stone-deaf baby. Who am I? These people
sitting around my bed; who are they? One of them holds my hand. I press the
button. Sound pictures wash them away. I am listening to a song in a school

classroom: “Oh soldier, soldier …” Somebody is carrying a radio and an old pop
song is playing: “See the pyramids …” I can hear the metal phase echoes of
footsteps moving along an alleyway, wind in drainpipes, a tied-up dog howling.
Enfolded in the stillness of Christmas Eve, church bells, police sirens and
domestic rows. Sea sucked back over stones through the narrow rock corridor at
Clodgy Point, Cornwall. A cave down on the beach; inside, I sound the echo
with a bone trumpet, water dripping in a steady tattoo. Fences rattling in the
wind on Dartmoor. Walking after midnight down the long tunnel of an
underground station. A man walks alongside me, bright eyed with chemical joy.
Australian vowels. “Hear that? Sirens. The sound of London.” He looks down at
my feet as we stride quickly in parallel. “Squeaky boots.”
A bee trapped in a chimney flue, its buzzing amplified to room dimensions.
The fizzing drone of a street light. A hotel room in Italy and close by a man and
a woman are screaming their way to orgasm. Somebody shouts in the distance,
drunk. Toads belch in the deep night and a motorbike whines by. I have a
daughter; she is singing “Daisy, Daisy …” Sounds that have remained mysteries
for decades: walking by a railway terminal on a Saturday morning and stopped
dead by the eerie lament of a train whistle choir. All those horns and whistles
blowing at once. The air buckles. Did somebody die? Paradise is so dull. I listen
for a moment to the woomph of mortar fire in thick jungle, vultures tearing strips
from a corpse, car alarms, fire alarms, smoke detectors, house alarms and cement
mixers.
And then the comfort note of air conditioning, the slow glide of electronic
curtains. My exit, probably. But I still hear the sound of fleas jumping off my
small female cat on to the polished wood floor.
soundbites
At a conference in Cairns, Australia, a scientist member of the American Rock Art Research Association
claimed that prehistoric cave-painting sites were chosen by the artists for their reverberant acoustic
character. Steven Waller speculated that each painting site reveals a correspondence between the animals
depicted on the walls and the nature of any sound activating the echoes in that space. In caves such as
Lascaux, where large animals were painted, the echoes are overwhelmingly loud, whereas in sites where
felines adorn the walls, the decibel level of the reverberations is very low.
– New Scientist, 28 November 1992
Seals straying from the North Sea into Lincolnshire’s River Glen feast on freshwater fish stocks customarily
assumed to be the natural prey of local roach anglers. To drive the seal family back into the North Sea, the
National Rivers Authority have been playing recordings of killer-whale songs under the surface of the Glen.
“We are playing the music using hydrophones,” said a spokeswoman for the NRA.
– The Times, 31 October 1994
“The best thing that ever happened to background music was foreground music,” reported Billboard in a

special sixtieth anniversary advertising supplement devoted to Muzak®. “If you go into a store and you
think you’re hearing Muzak, it probably isn’t Muzak,” said Bruce Funkhouser, Muzak programming and
licencing VP. “There are still a couple of companies out there doing that old-style 1,001-strings, ruin-your-
favorite-song kind of thing, but we dropped all that in ’87.” Since that momentous year, Muzak has
switched 11 of its 12 music channels to so-called foreground music (the original hit record by the original
artist). The 12th is called the Environmental Music channel. This features instrumental re-recordings of
those hits. “A far cry from the ‘oceans of beautiful music’ of the past,” Billboard continued, “the new
channels are hip, current and extensively researched.”
– Billboard, 29 October 1994
pre-echoes
In his dazzling novel of Southern Californian subculture, The Crying of Lot 49
(first published in 1966), Thomas Pynchon predicted the replacement of human
musicians by digital processing. Listening to muzak in a pizzeria, a character
hears one violinist playing sharp. “They could dispense with live musicians”, he
suggests. “Put together all the right overtones at all the right power levels so it’d
come out like a violin.”
Pynchon also foresaw a world in which people would get drunk in electronic
music clubs, Stockhausen records playing on the jukebox. “We’re the only bar in
the area, you know, has a strictly electronic music policy”, brags the barman of
an LA outskirts bar called The Scope. “Come on around Saturdays, starting
midnight we have your Sinewave Session, that’s a live get-together, fellas come
in just to jam from all over the state … We got a whole back room full of your
audio oscillators, gunshot machines, contact mikes, everything man.”
In Vermilion Sands (published in 1971), J.G. Ballard celebrated leisure,
artifice, ennui and ambient drift in his portrayal of a desert resort. Among the
lotus-eating pleasures of Vermilion Sands are choro-florists selling singing plants
and sonic sculptures growing on the reefs. The latter are incorporated into
commercially available singing statues. The narrator, a sound sculptor, cheats
one of his customers by augmenting a statue’s interactive sensory mechanisms
with a tape. Then he finds that the statue has assumed the divinatory properties
of a mirror or quartz globe for the rich buyer. “I went out one dusk to the sand
reefs where the sonic sculptures grow”, the sculptor says, emptied by the
realisations that followed the sale of his fake. “As I approached, they were
creaking in the wind whenever the thermal gradients cut through them. I walked
up the long slopes, listening to them mewl and whine, searching for one that
would serve as the sonic core for a new statue.”
With startling awareness of the evolutionary links between player pianos and
simulacra (of which more later), Philip K. Dick’s We Can Build You (published
in 1972) begins in Oregon, at the headquarters of an imaginary musical-

instrument manufacturer which is falling behind in the technological race. Its
competitors, Hammerstein and Waldteufel, make keyboard instruments which
exploit brain-mapping research and directly stimulate the hypothalamus. The
book’s narrator, locked in argument with his partner in the firm, is a sceptic.
“Like most people,” he says, “I’ve dabbled at the keys of a Hammerstein Mood
Organ, and I enjoy it. But there’s nothing creative about it. True, you can hit on
new configurations of brain stimulation, and hence produce entirely new
emotions in your head which would never otherwise show up there. You might –
theoretically – even hit on the combination that will put you in the state of
nirvana. Both the Hammerstein and Waldteufel corporations have a big prize for
that. But that’s not music. That’s escape. Who wants it?”
More than twenty years later, at the close of the twentieth century, a deafening
answer roars back: “We want it.”
And at the end of the nineteenth century, a Parisian writer, clerk and dabbler in
magic named Joris-Karl Huysmans explored fin de siècle ideas of vicarious (or
virtual?) living and neurotic aestheticism through a character called Des
Esseintes. À Rebours (Against Nature, published in 1884) follows Des Esseintes
through his quintessentially Decadent immersion in scent and colour, cruelty and
eroticism, Orientalism, increasingly refined diets and strange pleasures. In one
scene, he recreates a passage from Gustave Flaubert’s The Temptation of Saint
Anthony by setting up a tableau of two miniatures – a sphinx and a chimera – in
the darkened bedroom. Lying back in reverie, he listens as a female ventriloquist
intones a rehearsed dialogue, “like voices from another world”, between the two
carvings. “I seek new perfumes, larger blossoms, pleasures still untasted”, she
chants, and Des Esseintes imagines that Flaubert’s words are addressed directly
to him, amplifying his “craving to escape from the horrible realities of life”. The
scene ends, by implication, with sex, but the pleasure is not shared by the
ventriloquist.
After reading Charles Dickens, Des Esseintes decides to travel to England.
Preparing to take the boat, he prevaricates endlessly, ricocheting between
culinary and literary flavours in taverns, deciding finally that reality is a
disappointment when compared with art. His journey progresses no further than
Paris. “After all,” he reflects, “what was the good of moving, when a fellow
could travel so magnificently sitting in a chair?” So the couch potato, the sofa
surfer, the virtual nomad, was born.
Although Des Esseintes absorbs more than he creates, he plays games with his
environment. But the intended subtlety of the games is overwhelmed by a
heaviness of execution. Epitomising the triumph of materialism over aether, a

tortoise is gilded and encrusted with unusual gem stones in order to set off a
mobile counterpoint to the iridescent colours of an Oriental carpet.
Understandably, the overloaded animal roots itself to a secluded spot. Des
Esseintes blends musical correspondences with tiny drops of liqueur from a
dispensing device he calls his mouth organ, fantasising whole ensembles from
the synaesthetic linkage of dry curaçao with clarinets, anisette with flutes and
gin with cornets. From long practice, he could recreate complex musical
compositions on his tongue.
Another of his active skills, or obsessions, is the manipulation of scents.
“After all, he argued, it was no more abnormal to have an art that consisted of
picking out odorous fluids than it was to have other arts based on a selection of
sound waves …” So, in mounting excitement, he paints an epic canvas in his
dressing room with a bewildering sequence of exotic teas, delicate perfume
sprays, sprinkled scents and rubbed pellets of odiferous substances. The final
effect of this orchestration is drastic. As he airs the room, other smells crowd
back in like a haunting of Medieval spirits. Overwrought and oppressed by his
own art, Des Esseintes finally faints across his windowsill.
Against Nature mixed observations, often satirical, of the artistic and social
atmosphere of the period with Huysmans’ own adventures in imaginal esoterica.
On the one hand, there were performances such as the total-art spectacle of Paul-
Napoléon Roinard’s Cantique des Cantiques, staged by Paul Fort at the Théâtre
Moderne in 1891, in front of an audience which included Debussy and the
occult-poet Joseph Péladan. The poetry was augmented by music, colour
projections and perfume sprayed rather ineffectually from the theatre boxes and
balcony. Fights broke out and shots were fired near the ticket office. On the other
hand, Huysmans was influenced by French occultists such as the Abbé Boullan.
At one point, he found himself caught up in a magical war. Despite defending
himself with miraculous hosts, he claimed that at bedtime he was being beaten
on the head by “fluidic blows”.
Some of these esoteric pursuits mirror the desire for “pleasures still untasted”
characteristic of our own time. “There is talk of ‘the sophisticated life’”, wrote
Italian design historian Claudia Donà in a 1988 essay entitled “Invisible
Design”, “of the ‘renaissance of subtlety’, of ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ design, of ‘fluid’
objects whose new, ‘suggestive’ pleasures, associated with smells or sounds or
lights, are supplanting the old values of aesthetic form or utility. There is talk of
the object of the future as something evanescent, light, psychic; of immaterial
objects akin to images or holograms. On the eve of the twenty-first century, we
are seeing an era focused on the heightening of sensation – a development

provoked by a more destructured use of language, but which will usher in a new
harmonics.”
suggestive pleasures
Functionalism and the ineffable meet in air. Unconscious material is coaxed into
the light with the same cunning employed by the shaman Ame-no-Uzume-no-
Mikoto (the Heavenly Alarming Female) when she danced, lewdly and loudly as
eighth-century Japanese myth relates, in order to trick the sun goddess out of her
sulk in a cave and bathe the world in light once more.
Brian Eno, better known for his successful record production of bands such as
U2 than his art installations, created a work in Hamburg called “The Future Will
Be Like Perfume”. Exhibited in February 1993, the title was a clear indicator of
the ethereality of so much contemporary experience. Also, he released Neroli
(Thinking Music Part IV), an austere album even by Eno standards. This piece,
originally recorded for installations in 1988 and lasting to within a few minutes
of one hour, was named after the orange-blossom scent and related to its
relaxing, uplifting, thought-clarifying properties. “I never intended to release that
piece originally”, he explains, “and I made it as a study. I found I very often put
it on when I was writing or sitting reading. I never really thought of it as music,
in particular. I thought it made a nice space to think in.” Paradoxically, Eno
himself failed to recognise the musical substance of Neroli until the piece was
released on compact disc. A contradiction arises.
The previous year Brian had delivered a lecture and slide installation at
Sadler’s Wells Theatre, London, entitled “Perfume, Defence & David Bowie’s
Wedding”. “A coriander king”, the Guardian called him in its post-mortem of
the event. Among the observations made and descriptions given during the
Perfume section of this lecture were the following: “Orris butter, a complex
derivative of the roots of Iris, is vaguely floral in small amounts, but almost
obscenely fleshy (like the smell beneath a breast or between buttocks) in
quantity, or Civet, from the anal gland of the civet cat, is intensely disagreeable
as soon as it is recognizable, but amazingly sexy in subliminal doses.”
Anal scents: what was their relation to a cultural shift?
In 1975, Brian had begun to talk in press interviews about the prospect of
insinuating music into chosen environments as a sort of perfume or tint. Writing
for a short-lived paper called Street Life in November of that year, he touched
briefly upon changing listening behaviour: “I believe that we are moving
towards a position of using music and recorded sound with the variety of options
that we presently use colour – we might simply use it to ‘tint’ the environment,

we might use it ‘diagramatically’, we might use it to modify our moods in
almost subliminal ways. I predict that the concept of ‘muzak’, once it sheds its
connotations of aural garbage, might enjoy a new (and very fruitful) lease of
life.” By 1978, he had shaped these ideas into a manifesto. “An ambience is
defined as an atmosphere”, he wrote for the sleevenotes of Music For Airports,
“or a surrounding influence: a tint. My intention is to produce original pieces
ostensibly (but not exclusively) for particular times and situations with a view to
building up a small but versatile catalogue of environmental music suited to a
wide variety of moods and atmospheres.” But the idea was to highlight “acoustic
and atmospheric idiosyncracies”, rather than muffle them with Muzak®.
“Ambient Music is intended to induce calm and a space to think”, he concluded.
“Ambient Music must be able to accommodate many levels of listening attention
without enforcing one in particular: it must be as ignorable as it is interesting.”
This last statement, in particular, was anathema to those who believe that art
should focus our emotions, our higher intelligence, by occupying the centre of
attention, lifting us above the mundane environment which burdens our souls.
Yet what Eno was doing, as often happens when somebody grasps the flavour of
the moment, was predicting a movement already in existence. The measurable,
graspable narrative of self-contained, highly composed, emotionally engaging
sound objects had been shattered by missiles flung from every point of the
artistic and technological compass. His words were important for projecting this
trend towards open works into the realms of design (even social design) and
popular music. Once art became design or, better still, pop design, designer pop
(or any other permutation), then a radical idea could turn into a media event.
In a sense Thomas Pynchon, J.G. Ballard and Philip K. Dick predicted Brian
Eno: Pynchon with his image of electronic sound as ambient entertainment;
Ballard with his scenes of Vermilion Sands’ cloud sculptors and sonic statue
salesmen; Dick with his musical reverie technology. And, as with any science-
fiction author, at the heart of his speculations are a collection of present-day
realities. Background music is everywhere, most of it carefully selected to reflect
the fine tribal and class divisions of leisure pursuits: a hi-tech restaurant playing
jazz recorded within a time-slice of 1955–1965; a wood and posters bar playing
so-called “roots” and “world” music; a pub playing 1970s pop; an Indian
restaurant playing Bollywood film songs; a slightly more expensive Indian
restaurant playing Enya, Sade, Kenny G, maybe even The Orb; a family theme-
park cafe playing standard tunes in pre-1987, 1001-strings Muzak style, and so
on. Cable television flickers on the edge of vision; loops of New Age music
endlessly repeat their soothing arpeggios in sealife parks to accompany the
glides and backrolls of stingrays; the sub-bass and bass drum of high-volume

jungle tracks booming from a car bulldozers the air in a mobile fifty-yard radius;
music floats around in the aether of the Worldwide Web, waiting to be
downloaded, hoping to talk to somebody.
The general lack of deep engagement with all this stimulus is disarming,
alarming or enthralling. It depends on your mood, your point of view, your
vested interest in products and solid values, or invisible, intangible, emergent,
shifting communications. “We are, in short,” Brian continued in his Perfume
lecture, “increasingly un-centred, un-moored, living day to day, engaged in an
ongoing attempt to cobble together a credible, or at least workable, set of values,
ready to shed it and work out another when the situation demands. I find myself
enjoying this more, watching us all becoming dilettante perfume blenders,
poking inquisitive fingers through a great library of ingredients and seeing which
combinations make some sense for us – gathering experience – the possibility of
making better guesses – without demanding certainty.”
What this book seeks to explore is the path by which sound (and music, in
particular) has come to express this alternately disorientating and inspiring
openness through which all that is solid melts into aether. People talking of
killer-whale communication sounds as music, or searching for long-absent
animal echoes in prehistoric cave-painting sites; recordings on which sheer
noise, minimalism or non-narrative drift is sold and used as a kind of pop music;
clubs where the peripheral status of the music, its extreme eclecticism, or its cut-
up diffusion, is regarded as an environmental enhancement; music chopped out
and laminated on to thick layered slices of seemingly incompatible sound events;
music constructed from private telephone conversations stolen out of the air (and
“private” lives) by means of a hand-held scanner; music exploring the language
of physical sensation; music in which a blankness prevails, ambient dread or
bliss, calm and near-silence, extreme minimalism, or a spacious landscape, a
tropic or frozen atmosphere in which the listener can insert her or himself,
occupy the foreground, wander the imaginary space for hours at a time.
In a 1989 essay entitled “Why Minimalism Now?”, Claire Polin paralleled the
emergence of the minimalist musical genre, particularly La Monte Young, Terry
Riley, Philip Glass and Steve Reich, with minimal American painting of the late
1950s and early 1960s exemplified by Mark Rothko’s huge slabs of muted
colour and Ad Reinhardt’s black canvases. She quotes Reinhardt’s outline of the
new aesthetic: “… no texture, no drawing, no light, no space, no movement, no
object, no subject, no symbol, no form … no pleasure, no pain.” She goes on to
say: “Followers, like Olitsky, produced works of unnameable luminous mixed
colours that appeared to float in infinite space, or in a spaceless infinity, recalling

Pascal’s words: ‘the silence of infinite space fills me with terror’. One feels a
weariness of the human spirit, a desire to escape into an enfolding quietude from
the pressures of a frenetic, discordant world, a world which, according to Carl
Andre, ‘contains too many objects, and now requires some blankness, some
tabula rasa’.”
The trance of blankness can invade us in supermarket aisles, waiting in
queues, stuck in traffic, driving fast on a motorway, watching television, working
a dull job, talking on the telephone, eating in restaurants, even making love. Jack
Gladney, narrator of Don DeLillo’s White Noise, hears “an eerie static”
emanating from plastic food wrap in his freezer. The sound makes him think of
dormant life, moving on the edges of awareness. He searches for certainties,
despite fearing them, in a sea of shifting, irrelevant information. In the evenings
he watches from the overpass as a drama of spectacular, toxically provoked
sunsets unfolds. “May the days be aimless”, he tells himself. “Let the seasons
drift.”
Blankness – at best a stillness which suggests, rightly or wrongly, political
passivity; at worst, a numbness which confirms it – may be one aspect of losing
the anchor, circling around an empty centre or whatever the condition is. But
openness, another symptom of the condition, may be more significant.
Musicians have always stolen, borrowed, exchanged or imposed influences, but
for the past one hundred years music has become voracious in its openness –
vampiric in one respect, colonial in its rabid exploitation, restless, un-centred,
but also asking to be informed and enriched by new input and the transfer of
gifts.
overtones
[H]yper-artificiality, through which design is enabled to approach more nearly to the natural, is a condition
at once super-technological and poetic, a condition of whose potential we are still too little aware. Endowed
with quasi-divine powers – speed, omniscience, ubiquity – we have become Telematic Nomads, whose
attributes approximate ever more closely to those of the ancient gods of mythology.
– Claudia Donà, “Invisible Design”
Ubud, Bali. A mist of fat raindrops. I shelter under a wooden platform in the
tropical darkness, listening to a rubbery lattice of frog voices warping in the rice
fields. Some distance away, the lighting for a gamelan performance glows in a
magic arc. Wind flurries throw slivers of gong overtones and buried drum beats
across the water, whipping them in then out of earshot. Rain and humidity,
insects and frogs, darkness and quietude.
I had seen Balinese and Javanese gamelan performances before: in a tent at the
first Womad Festival in Somerset and, rather more formally, in two London

concert halls. In 1977 I previewed a Sadler’s Wells Theatre season of Gong
Kebyar from Sebatu, central Bali, for Time Out magazine. My Venezuelan
friend, Nestor, accompanied me. We stopped for a drink after the show, as
always, and the delay awarded us the privilege of seeing a group of Balinese
musicians and dancers gathered outside a hole-in-the-wall Chinese takeaway on
the Clerkenwell Road. Not a delicate rice offering in sight.
During his Balinese sojourn shortly before the Pacific war, the Canadian-
American composer Colin McPhee experienced ambivalent feelings on hearing
the newly developing gamelan music called kebyar. “Forever changing,” he
wrote in his beautiful little book A House In Bali, “brilliant and sombre by turn,
the moody music seemed to express a new spiritual restlessness, an impatience
and lack of direction, for it was as unpredictable as the intermittent play of
sunlight from a clouded sky.”
In his time, McPhee was a pioneer among musicians who had fallen, or were
to fall, under the spell of Indonesian music. Varying degrees of gamelan
influence can be detected in the work of John Cage, Harry Partch, Lou Harrison,
Philip Corner, Olivier Messiaen, Steve Reich, Gavin Bryars, Terry Riley, Peter
Sculthorpe, Wendy Carlos, Don Cherry, Jon Hassell and, in very recent times,
Australian composer Paul Schütze and London sampling band Loop Guru. A
sound akin to Javanese and Balinese gamelan filtered through dense layers of
contemporary sources suffuses feature-film scores such as Ryuichi Sakamoto’s
Merry Christmas Mr Lawrence, Maurice Jarre’s The Year of Living Dangerously
and Shoji Yamashiro’s Akira. This last, a Carmina Burana for the electronic,
post-linear, folk-digital age, hypnotically counterpoints a relentless dark rush of
Manga apocalypse imagery with hyperactive percussion, electronics and
“Balinese Tantra” (whatever that may be), courtesy of Ida Bagus Sugata.
The CD cover hypes the score as “music for the 21st century”. Perhaps this is
not as trivial as it sounds. Music in the future will almost certainly hybridise
hybrids to such an extent that the idea of a traceable source will become an
anachronism. On a 1993 Japanese recording of Detty Kurnia, the daughter of a
Sundanese (west Java) gamelan player, the entwinement of Javanese pop,
traditional and neo-traditional styles, modern Asian pop and Hong Kong
atmospherics, Japanese studio technology and quasi hip-hop drum programming
can becalm the listener in an uncharted ocean. The experience is entrancing and
disturbing, like trying to follow a map that changes its boundaries before your
eyes.
Colin McPhee was not the first aficionado of Southeast Asian music.
Centuries before him were the seafaring explorers, traders and colonial

administrators from Holland, Portugal and England, some of whom were
affected positively by the music. Piloting The Golden Hind around the world in
1580, Sir Francis Drake dropped anchor off the coast of south Java, where he
heard “country-musick, which though it were of a very strange kind, yet the
sound was pleasant and delightfull”. Thomas Stamford Raffles, lieutenant-
governer of Java in 1811, returned from Southeast Asia with two collections of
gamelan instruments. In 1817 he wrote: “It is the harmony and pleasing sound of
all the instruments united, which gives the music of Java its peculiar character
among Asiatics.” To Raffles, some of what he heard bore “a strong resemblance
to the oldest music of Scotland”. Clearly, he sensed possibilities in this music
that in some respects extended the European traditions in which he grew up.
“The airs”, he wrote, “however simple and monotonous they may appear of
themselves, when played on the gámbang káyu, or accompanied by the other
instruments, never tire on the ear, and it is not unusual for the gamelan to play
for many days and nights in succession”. This passing comment illuminates a
particular quality of Javanese gamelan and helps to explain, perhaps, why the
music of such a small Southeast Asian archipelago has so strongly influenced
music in the twentieth century. In 1937, Leonhard Huizinga expressed the nature
of this quality more poetically. “This music does not create a song for our ears”,
he wrote. “It is a ‘state’, such as moonlight poured over the fields.”
Aside from the sound of the music – a fractal vibration of harmonics which
contains immeasurable variety – the transmission of the music introduced to
European culture the idea of performance as a kind of ambience. Colin McPhee
vividly described all-night events in Bali: he would fall asleep as fatigue
overshadowed the spirited cacophony of a barong dance, finally waking at dawn
in time to watch the concluding movement. The long rhythmic cycles and
leisurely development within performances of Indonesian music allowed
listeners to vary their concentration; intense focus, even a literal entrancement,
could be alternated with peripheral listening, eating, drinking or, ultimately,
sleep. The ambient music of Brian Eno has some origins in these ideas, since he
was influenced by the music and ideas of the American minimalists. In their
turn, they were influenced by the musical events of India, Bali, Java, Morocco
and many other parts of the world, events which might run all night and allow
for a less sharply focused style of listening.
A Balinese gamelan orchestra from Peliatan performed in Paris in 1931.
“Early in 1940”, wrote Klaus Wachsmann in a Royal Anthropological Institute
lecture entitled “Spencer to Hood: a changing view of non-European music”,
“the [Amsterdam Tropen] Museum had made use of Indonesian shore personnel,
in the employ of an Indonesian shipping line, to play gamelan music, and their

concerts drew thousands of visitors.” Then other gamelan ensembles toured
Europe and America after World War II. From the 1950s onwards, gamelan
ensembles flourished in museums and the musicology departments of American
and European universities to such an extent that a new genre of non-Indonesian
gamelan music emerged and the purchase of historic gamelans, particularly by
American institutions, was described in 1971 by R.M. Wasisto Surjodiningrat,
author of Gamelan Dance and Wayang in Jogjakarta, as a competition. “We
have to be proud that the appreciation of the outside world for our gamelan
music is increasing”, he wrote. “On the other hand we are afraid that this will
lead to the loss of our most cherished heritage for the prize of a mere couple of
thousand dollars.”
The first of the virtual explorers witnessed a gamelan performance in a similar
spirit, in exactly the city and within a few years of the moment in which
Huysmans’ Des Esseintes was discovering the advantages of armchair travel.
Claude Debussy’s father had plans for his son to become a sailor but Claude,
at the age of eight, was described by his sister as spending “whole days sitting on
a chair thinking, no one knew of what”. This dedication to a life in the
imagination was underlined by a letter to another French composer, André
Messager, in which Debussy wrote: “I have endless memories which are worth
more than reality.” In 1888 Debussy visited Bayreuth to hear Richard Wagner’s
Parsifal and The Mastersingers; the following year he went again, this time to
hear Tristan and Isolde. Still under the spell of Wagner’s German romanticism,
he visited the Paris Exposition Universelle, a colonial exhibition held in 1889 to
commemorate the centenary of the French Revolution. He heard performances
of music and dance-dramas from Japan, Cambodia, Vietnam and Java. A
drawing by René Lacker shows us the Javanese group. Five musicians sit
crosslegged in front of a fence-like structure made from bamboo. One plays a
suling flute, one plays the bowed rebab, in the centre is a man poised with his
mallet to strike a small, flat-key metallophone (perhaps a saron or slentem, the
instruments which play the melodic theme of the music); at one end of the semi-
circle a kendang drummer plays barehanded, and at the other sits a rather dazed-
looking player of a bonang, a tuned metallophone of upturned bronze kettles
which elaborates on the central melody in muted tones.
None of the instruments looks particularly ornate and the group is small,
though Lacker may have been sketching in haste. The musicians seem to be in a
state of semi-concentration, yet all of them show signs, some furtive, some
direct, of watching their watchers. According to one of Debussy’s biographers,
Edward Lockspeiser, the musicians accompanied bedaya dancers, a performance

which somebody compared with Wagner’s flower maidens in Parsifal. Never
mind the inappropriate comparison; if this is accurate, then Debussy was
fortunate. The bedaya (also bedhaya, or bedoyo) dances – Bedaya Semang and
Bedaya Ketawang – are sacred, ancient and very beautiful court dances from
Jogjakarta and Surakata. Bedaya Semang, the story of a sultan who goes to live
with an unearthly queen in her palace at the bottom of the sea, is said to have
been created at the end of the eighteenth century; Ketawang, regarded as a
sacred heirloom, may date as far back as the reign of Sultan Agung in the first
half of the seventeenth century and, according to Wasisto Surjodiningrat, was
danced exclusively within Jogjakarta palace walls until 1918. Performed by nine
female dancers who are prone to collapse from the strain of their costume
preparations, Bedaya Ketawang has a similar theme to Bedaya Semang: Sultan
Agung sees a performance in the underwater palace of the goddess of the South
Sea and converts his inspiration into a terrestrial dance.
There are other, less sacred bedaya dances, and perhaps the importation of one
of these to nineteenth-century Paris is more likely. But all bedaya music and
dances are performed with the slow, eerie grace of a loris and, to my knowledge,
all are based around watery themes. In the mid-eighteenth century, the first
sultan of Jogjakarta built a water castle of artificial lakes, tropical gardens and
ornate architecture called Taman Sari. Surely this background detail was
unknown in 1889, yet how significant it turned out to be for Debussy, who
composed liquid works such La mer, Reflets dans l’eau, Jardins sous la pluie
and Poissons d’or only a few years after his experience at the exposition.
Psychologically, these Javanese myths, along with the music itself, suggest an
emergence of dreams and unconscious desire into the tangible world of
consensus reality, the feminine other dredged up into a domain of masculine
logic and action. The compulsive, almost occult attraction of liquidity, the
floating world, the ungraspable emergence of reflections, sunlight on ripples,
waveforms, the abyssal darkness down (or up) there, was characteristic of fin de
siècle Europe, just as it is now on a global scale. Debussy found himself in
sympathy with the French symbolist writers – Mallarmé, Valéry, Rimbaud,
Huysmans, Verlaine and Victor Segalan – as well as being influenced by the
Egyptian craze that followed Napoleon’s Egyptian expedition, the Japanese
woodcuts of Hokusai and, briefly, the Pre-Raphaelites and Russian exoticists –
Mussorgsky, Borodin, who was inspired by reading an account of Japanese
tortures, and Rimsky-Korsakov the fantasist who inflated folktales into epics.
Debussy was open to a world of sound beyond rules and convention. As a
successful but rebellious composition student in 1883, he shocked members of

another class at the Conservatoire by playing a pianistic impression, full of
strange and unresolved chords, of buses travelling along the Faubourg
Poissonière. Harmony and counterpoint existed to be ignored according to whim
and intuition. His reaction to the music he heard at the exposition was
interesting, being couched in terms which appear respectful, curious, even
slightly over-awed (although he did write about “charming little peoples who
learned music as simply as one learns to breathe”). He was affected profoundly
by the simplicity and emotional power of a Vietnamese (or Annamite, as it was
known then) dance-drama. His famous comparison of Javanese with Palestrina’s
counterpoint came twenty-four years later, when he wrote about the exposition
experience to his friend, the poet and author Pierre Louys. Along with Aphrodite,
a “classic” of Orientalist soft pornography crammed with masturbation, sexual
violence, erotogenic philtres, lesbian flute players, paedophilia and fake
antiquity, Louys wrote Chanson de Bilitis, a pseudo-Greek literary hoax which
was set to music by Debussy and performed at the Paris Exposition Universelle
of 1900. Louys also held intellectual salons, and Debussy held forth on one of
these occasions with a prophetic idea: “I would like to see, and I will succeed
myself in producing, music which is entirely free from ‘motifs’, or rather
consisting of one continuous ‘motif’ which nothing interrupts and which never
turns back on itself.”
Louys and Debussy seemed to share similar dreams of a pagan cosmos of half-
human flautists fucking in forest glades. Debussy’s reverie was realised in his
gorgeous Prélude à l’après-midi d’un faune and Syrinx, a flute solo composed in
1913 which depicted Pan justifiably lamenting the transformation of his nymph
lover into an aeolian reed flute. In Aphrodite, Louys describes a garden temple of
pleasure, populated by 1400 exotic prostitutes from all over Asia, Africa and
primitive Europe. Women from the most remote regions are portrayed as “tiny,
slow-moving creatures whose language no one knew and who looked like
yellow monkeys … all their lives these girls remained as shy as stray animals”.
Others live like “a flock of sheep” or “only coupled in animal posture”. The
scene suggests a zoo, a sexual menagerie, perhaps an exposition.
The Paris expositions were enormously influential. Not only did they
introduce many forms of unknown culture and crafts to Europe, they were also a
showcase for contemporary work created closer to home. At the 1889
exposition, Rimsky-Korsakov conducted a number of Russian works; to
celebrate the exposition of 1900 a number of composers, Erik Satie among them,
were allotted a few pages for posterity in huge, leatherbound albums of officially
recognised art. A physician named Félix-Louis Regnault, a pioneer of
ethnographic documentary, made a film of a Wolof woman making pots at the

Exposition Ethnographique de l’Afrique Occidentale in 1895, the same year that
the Lumières publicly demonstrated cinématographe films of steam trains and
crying babies for the first time. Commercial cinema was born, the armchair
traveller was up and lounging, the virtual traveller was seeded and already
visible as a tiny dot on the far horizon.
In A Theory of Expositions, Umberto Eco describes collection and assemblage
throughout history as a representation of “apocalyptic insecurity and hope for the
future”. “It was only with the expositions of the nineteenth century”, he
continues, “that the marvels of the year 2000 began to be announced. And it is
only with Disneyland and Disney World that concern with the space age is
combined with nostalgia for a fairytale past.” These expositions were models of
the shopping mall, as well as being the precursors of themed entertainments,
trade shows, post-Woodstock rock festivals and the kind of fast-foods-of-the-
world “grazing” restaurant clusters that can be found in Miami malls. In Paris,
world cultures were laid out in a kind of forged map as choice fruits of empire,
living proof of conquest and self-aggrandisement in the face of imminent
decline.
Edward Said performed a comprehensive demolition job on the West’s
obsessive appropriation of the East in Orientalism. “Every European traveller or
resident in the Orient has had to protect himself from its unsettling influences”,
he wrote. Sex was particularly unsettling for the nineteenth-century Europeans,
he added. “But there were other sorts of threats than sex. All of them wore away
the European discreteness and rationality of time, space and personal identity.”
All of that sounds like a welcome effect. Debussy’s admiration for the
“unsettling influences” of Vietnamese drama or Javanese percussion and
counterpoint, despite being locked in colonial realities, was a catalyst for his
break from the powerful influence of Wagner and, by extension, Wagner’s
sinister enthusiasm for the master-race theories of Houston Stewart Chamberlain
and Arthur de Gobineau.
Strolling through the 1889 exposition, Debussy, the stay-at-home, drifted into
unknown sound zones, discovering answers to impulses which had already
percolated through his European skin. At the mid point of the twentieth century
his legacy may have been more prevalent in overblown feature-film scores than
in the cerebral experimental music of that time, but near the end of the
millennium his open, intuitive, impressionistic soundworld seems once more
inspirational.
Increasing numbers of musicians are creating works which grasp at the
transparency of water, seek to track the journeys of telematic nomads, bottle

moods and atmospheres, rub out chaos and noise pollution with quiet,
concentrate on sonic microcosms, absorb quotations and digital snapshots of
sound into themselves, avoid form in favour of impression, concoct synthetic
wilderness in urban laboratories, explore a restricted sound range or single
technological process over long durations, seek to effect physiological change
rather than pursue intellectual rigour, or depict impossible, imaginary
environments of beauty or terror. Music that aspires to the condition of perfume,
music that searches for new relationships between maker and listener, maker and
machine, sound and context. Music that leads the listener into a shifting zone
which Peter Lamborne Wilson has described as the “sacred drift”, a mode of
imaginal travel “in which the landscape will once again be invested with
meaning, or rather with a liberatory aesthetics”.
Various forms of this music have been called, with varying levels of
appropriateness, ambient, environmental, deep listening, ambient techno,
ambient dub, electronica, electronic listening music, isolationist, post-industrial
ambient, space music, beautiful music, sound art, sound design, electronic music
without beats, brainwave music, picture music, ambient jungle, steady state
music, holy minimalism, Fourth World, New Age, chill out, or, the useless one
to cap them all, new music. But no genre category adds up to much more than
media shorthand or a marketing ploy. Open music might be a more useful catch-
all name for what I am talking about, except for the fact that a proportion of this
music, sometimes a high proportion, is vacuum sealed, zipped up in a droning
Om-zone of discarnate reverie resistant to intervention and crackling quietly at
the back of the freezer.
Besides Claude Debussy and the bedaya musicians of Java, where did so-
called ambient music and all its bedfellows come from? What follows in this
book is more a personal nomadic drift than a detached chronological history.
This drift will trace a web of sources. In my biased opinion, compromised by
first-hand involvement, these are the sources that have led to a musical
environment which is, despite my reservations, a hydra of creative potentials for
now and the next century. There are other sources, but those are other books.

2
if you find earth boring …
travels in the outer imagination with Sun Ra
Everybody in the hotel lounge is sleeping; everybody except me. Over there in
the armchair is Marshall Allen, saxophonist, flautist, oboist and performer on the
self-invented morrow (as in to-), and sitting here in front of me, serene in repose,
orange-dyed beard, dressed in a long robe decorated with star shapes and dots of
distant galaxies, is Sun Ra. A quiet young man, hair matted into dreadlocks,
gently touches him on the shoulder. His eyes open. “I am listening”, he says.
Space vibrations have been keeping Sun Ra awake for the past month. “The
frequency moves so fast”, he complains.
Ra had been listening to space vibrations and painting his musical pictures of
infinity for at least thirty-five years. Sun Ra was probably seventy-six when I
met him. That same year, he suffered a stroke; refusing to allow the fire of vision
inside him to be quenched, he played concerts while sitting in a wheelchair.
Finally, he passed on to other galaxies in 1993. His life had never been easy,
either in terms of financial reward, critical support or the rigours of maintaining
a large touring Arkestra, complete with otherworldly costumes and personnel,
for decades after the big bands were supposed to have died.
His first UK performance with the Intergalactic Research Arkestra, held in the
Queen Elizabeth Hall in 1970, was one of the most spectacular concerts ever
held in this country. Not spectacular so much in terms of effects, which were low
on budget but high on strange atmosphere; spectacular in terms of presenting a
complete world view, so occult, so other, to all of us in the audience that the only
possible responses were outright dismissal or complete intuitive empathy with a
man who had chosen to discard all the possibilities of a normal life, even a
normal jazz life, in favour of an unremitting alien identity. Fire eaters, a golden-
robed dancer carrying a sun symbol, tornadoes of percussion, eerie cello
glissandi, ferocious blasts and tendrils of electronic sound from Sun Ra on
Farfisa organ and Moog synthesiser, futuristic lyrics of the advertising age sung
by June Tyson – “If you find earth boring, just the same old same thing, come on
sign up for Outer Spaceways Incorporated” – saxophone riffs repeated over and
over by Pat Patrick and Danny Thompson as they moved down the seating aisles

towards the stage while John Gilmore shredded and blistered a ribbon of
multiphonics from his tenor, film images of Africa and outer space … As
depictions of archaic futures, shamanistic theatre, images of divined worlds,
these devices of cumulative sensory overload were regarded at the time as
distractions from the music. But those who concentrated solely on the music
ignored Ra’s role as a political messenger. As with everything else in his life, the
formation of his first band in Chicago was an event surrounded by deliberate
mystification. A photograph exists, dated circa 1956, which shows a group called
Sun Ra and His Men, smiling for the camera, all dressed conventionally in dark
suits and striped ties. Marshall Allen had arrived in Chicago in 1952, 1953, he
can’t remember precisely when. He and a drummer went looking for Sun Ra’s
band. “When they played jobs,” Marshall tells me, “they always had somethin’
different, something original on, somethin’, a hat …” He joined the band and
started looking original himself. “It didn’t bother me. I had to get used to that. It
was the music, see, that music that I couldn’t just, ahh, flow with. But I said, I
spent all this time lookin’. This must be it. It was good for me. Gave me some
discipline.” He chuckles, as if to say that discipline was not his strong point at
that juncture.
Already, the song titles reflected Ra’s philosophy: “Tapestry From An
Asteroid”, “Lullaby For Realville”, “Kingdom of Not”. “I’ve done it all along”,
Ra says, “but secretly. I used to compose some songs every day for the Creator.
Just for the Creator, not for the public. I did that for years, then some got away. It
got out of hand, it got to the people and people started listening. That was it.”
Bang, a fist on the table. “I had no pre-conceived notion, just playing sounds. It
was fantastic. We was playing in the Grand Terrace, got the bandstand, got steps
on the side for the chorus girls to come out. They didn’t much approve of what I
was doing.”
He continues with a strange story about being kidnapped in Berlin many years
later. “I was gone for about an hour and the band looked for me everywhere. We
went through the Berlin Wall. Then they asked me questions about space, what
kind of fuel on the ships? Then they came back to the hotel, they televised me,
and again, asked me about space travel. Then I told them that there would come
a day when you wouldn’t have to use gasoline. You’d simply take a cassette and
put it in your car, let it run. You’d have to have the proper type of music. Like
you take two sticks, put ’em together, make fire. You take some notes and rub
’em together – dum, dum, dum, dum – fire, cosmic fire.”
Ra’s science-fiction sound paintings of alternative destiny could be linked
historically with the percussive blocks of sounds composed into dark, mythic

shapes by Edgard Varèse, or the jazz composing/arranging of Tadd Dameron and
Duke Ellington, particularly Dameron on Fontainebleau and Ellington’s
wonderful “jungle” band of the late 1920s. Sun Ra acknowledges the beauty of
pieces such as “Prelude To A Kiss” and “Day Dream” but claims that Ellington’s
musicians were not right for him. Revealingly, the judgement is based on social
difficulties within Ellington’s orchestra, rather than the musicians’ undoubted
playing abilities. Sun Ra valued his responsibilities as a guru, a benign cult
leader, more than he valued musical virtuosity.
The earliest of Ra’s recordings are marked by a strong sense of his first steps
towards an artistic rebirth, a shamanistic transformation of himself as the central
force in a bizarre and virtually self-contained universe. For this reason, he
resisted all temptations to reveal his early life in any detail. By spurning the
undermining, sacrilegious effects of biographical archaeology and its fugitive
fame, he could better maintain the sacred integrity of his magical universe. Was
he born on Saturn or in Birmingham, Alabama? critics would ask. Perhaps
Alabama was a stranger place than Saturn in 1914. As we talk he slips out
tantalising morsels: “Comic books was telling about all kinds of inventions that
they’d done today. I used to read them all the time. I go by the Bible in a lot of
things. It says God takes foolish things to dumbfound the world. So I consider
comic books as foolish things so I read all the comic books. Sure enough, they
wrote about the first atomic bomb in a comic book, TV wristwatch, all these
things in the comic books were happening.”
We walk slowly from the restaurant to the hotel, Sun Ra telling me about an
important meeting in Turkey. He and the Arkestra had performed in Moscow,
invited to celebrate the space flight of Yuri Gagarin. Following a concert in
Turkey, a group of teenagers handed him a typed manuscript. “I’ve been talking
about space all along”, he said as we dodged puddles. “Compositions talking
about space, following, you might say, intuition. Talking about things that are
totally impossible but still holding to it that it’s true. It’s just like being a
scientist. People think, ‘Impossible, couldn’t happen’. Now I’m talking even
more impossible things.” Walking with the assistance of a stick, he pulls some
papers out of a plastic carrier bag, dropping some on the wet pavement. Mindful
of the fact that these may save the planet, we scrabble to save them from the
wind. “I found this proof in Turkey. It’s more fantastic than science fiction.” My
assessment may be biased, since I can only judge the contents from Sun Ra’s
fragmentary description of the contents, but from what he passes on to me, the
general drift of this channelled wisdom is classic science fiction: superior alien
beings wish to raise the consciousness of humans because the mess we are
making is threatening the balance of the cosmos, so they transmit secret

knowledge to a place where the vibrations are right.
America, particularly America, is dotted with eccentrics, psychedelic
visionaries, conspiracy theorists and isolated crackpots who ordain themselves as
spiritual leaders of mail-order churches, pouring out philosophy on energy
streams of lunacy channelled direct from passing UFOs, predicting the end of
the world, a return of the Golden Age. How was Sun Ra different? Partly
because of his humorous self-awareness. Ra claimed in one of his drily catchy
songs that the end of the world had already been and gone, so he knew how to
play with the rules of the apocalypse business. In other respects, he matched the
profile – a folk prophet who collaged self-taught knowledge into a crazy
patchwork of profound wisdom, hokum and glossolalia. The music embraced
similar contradictions – one moment on Saturn, the next moment back down on
earth in a Chicago burlesque club. This irrational divergence was baffling to
European intellectual mystic composers such as Karlheinz Stockhausen. “It was
so highly powered”, Stockhausen enthused to Melody Maker in 1971 after seeing
Sun Ra perform. “I tell you, this first 20 minutes was first-class avant-garde
experimental music that you can’t put in any box. It was incredibly asymmetric!
… But after this piece came some saloon wishy-washy music. I didn’t like it at
all. Sort of cheap, movie music.”
One day Sun Ra may be contextualised in a mystico-political undercurrent of
black American thought alongside Marcus Garvey and the turbaned founder of
the Moorish Science Temple, prophet Noble Ali Drew. In As Serious As Your
Life, Valerie Wilmer noted that Ra led a Chicago-based nationalist organisation,
distributing pamphlets about the future importance of electronic technology, and
there are rumours of his influence on the ideas of Elijah Muhammad, the founder
of the Nation of Islam. Wilmer also passes on a story told by saxophonist Red
Holloway, who remembered Sun Ra planning to go to New York to buy some
books but then, like Des Esseintes, deciding that physical travel was
unnecessary. “He said he just sent his body …”, Holloway told Wilmer, “his –
oh, I’ve forgotten the words that he used – astral projection? Yeah, that’s it. And
he said he got the information he wanted.” When others laughed, Holloway
would challenge them: “Well, can you prove that he’s wrong?”
Mocked, belittled, patronised or written out of the jazz tradition, patient in his
role as an unwelcome prophet, Sun Ra believed in the moment of revelation, the
thunderbolt conversion. “I’ve seen incidents where people could”, he yawns,
then bangs the coffee table hard enough to blot out the next word, “… in one
second, just one chord. I met a fellow in Chicago named Sharkey. He was gonna
take an audition. He was sitting in a booth with his head on the table. I didn’t

know then he was so high. I tell you, none of the other instruments could wake
him up. But as soon as I hit the chord he sat up and say, ‘Who’s there?’ and got
up, just from that.”
The part of his message that could never be understood by Stockhausen came
from Ra’s experience as a black man in America. “Because of segregation,” he
once wrote, “I have only a vague knowledge of the white world and that
knowledge is superficial. Because I know more about black than I do white, I
know my needs and naturalness. I know my intuition is to be what it is natural to
be – that is the law of nature everywhere.” With sound, light, words, colour and
costume, Ra concocted a moving, glittering hallucination of ancient Egypt, deep
space, the kingdoms of Africa – Nubia, Ashanti, Hausa, Yoruba, Mandinka,
Songhai, Sudan, Mali, Malinke, Xhosa – a history of the future with which he
battled for the souls of his people against the legacy of slavery, segregation,
drugs, alcohol, apathy and the corrupting powers of capitalism.
An extraordinary film made in 1974 gives us the clearest insight into Sun Ra’s
perception of his purpose as well as mirroring many of the mythopoeic elements
of his life. Space Is the Place, unique as a cosmic blaxploitation Biblical sci-fi
fantasy, begins in a Chicago club, in 1943. Ra is playing piano for the floor
show. A man named The Overseer demands his dismissal. Ra plays strange
chords which almost destroy the club. The scene switches to the desert, where
Ra and The Overseer engage in a magical battle. Ra and his Arkestra then land
on earth in a spaceship and sign a promotional deal. Ra is kidnapped, rescued,
plays a concert and then leaves earth before it is shattered by a huge explosion.
One scene in which Ra visits a youth community centre, is particularly
revealing. “How we know you not some old hippie or something?” one woman
demands. “How do you know I’m real?” Ra asks in reply. “I’m not real. I’m just
like you. You don’t exist in this society. If you did, your people wouldn’t be
seeking equal rights. You’re not real. If you were, you’d have some status among
the nations of the world. I come to you as the myth, because that’s what black
people are. I came from a dream that the black man dreamed long ago.”
The periodic rediscovery of Sun Ra’s music seems to coincide with each new
phase of environmental awareness or spiritual hunger. His depiction of black
cultural history, captured as in a dream and projected into the space age, has an
appeal to anybody who yearns for a life more dignified and magical than the one
they are living. Ra was not discouraged by the peaks and dips of public
enthusiasm. “This planet has always rejected innovators”, he says. Commercial
record companies occasionally funded a recording but the majority of his album
releases – estimated to be in the hundreds – appeared under his own imprint.

Labels such as Thoth and El Saturn, sometimes recorded in Solar Fidelity or
Galacto-Fidelity, captured every phase of Sun Ra’s development. But records
cannot convey the unique blend of low-budget spectacle, gravity and sly humour
contained within a Sun Ra performance. Seated at the grand piano in his hotel
lounge, dressed in robes and a hat which can best be described as inspired extra-
terrestrial Oxfam chic, he drifts into a jet-lagged reverie and improvises a solo
piece which encompasses impressionistic tone clusters, rhapsodic runs, hints of
Harlem stride piano, all built around a melancholy jazz ballad. The image is at
once absurd and affecting. No other musician has created a myth of such dogged
thoroughness.
Little is known of Sun Ra’s background. He was born in Birmingham,
Alabama, where he received a scholarship to help his music studies. “I never
wanted to be a leader”, he says. “Even in high school they elected me a
valedictorian. I turned it down. I didn’t want that because I saw what was
happening to leaders. I thought leaders were an endangered species.” He moved
to Chicago and played in Fletcher Henderson’s band, contributing his advanced
harmonies and feel for sound. Eventually, the need to lead his own band became
too strong to ignore. During the 1960s, he recorded unparalleled music: albums
such as Art Forms From Dimensions Tomorrow, Cosmic Tones For Mental
Therapy, two volumes of The Heliocentric Worlds of Sun Ra, Atlantis, Strange
Strings and The Magic City. Every record was an apocrypha, a vibrant cosmic
map of unknown regions, lush solarised rainforests, cold domains of infinite
darkness, astral storms, paradisical pleasure zones, scenes of ritual procession,
solemn ceremony and wild celebration. Space was the place. Noise and silence
clashed in the void; the instruments of darkness squalling, rumbling, throbbing –
split-note oboe and piccolo, rolling tympani, spiral cymbals bells dragon drums
thunder drums warped in echo, trembling heterodyning of massed flutes,
electronic celestial footsteps of angels dancing on bass marimbas, hummingbird
cello, the howler-monkey belching roar of baritone saxophones and bass
clarinets, outer space explored in the extruded plastic, labour-saving, swept-fin
cockpits of the Clavioline, Rocksichord, Farfisa organ, Fender Rhodes electric
piano, Hohner Clavinet and Moog synthesiser. Music to play for 5-D readings of
mid-twentieth-century sci-fi comics and magazines such as Fantastic
Adventures, From Unknown Worlds, Wonders of the Spaceways and Tales of
Tomorrow.
spell
“The god comes in peace”, say they who are in the full moon; they have given to me appearings in glory
with Ra. Ascending to the sky, to the place where Ra is.

– Middle Kingdom Egyptian coffin text
eye of Ra/hymn to the setting sun
“Reality is too harsh,” Ra says. “Imagination makes everything nice. Use your
imagination and get out of the most drab places by simply holding on to the
imagination and making it real.” I ask him, do you feel optimistic?
“Mystic?”
“Optimistic.”
“Oh, mystic, you got opti.” He laughs. “That could mean something else.
Opti-mystic. Another word to deal with. Opti of course, you got op, that could be
eye. Optimistic, that’s very nice. That way, we got something else. You can take
a word and move it out into other planes.”
“It could turn around into mystic vision.”
“Right, that is very beautiful. It’s just like taking notes, taking them and
making something beautiful.” He reads sections from the Turkish/cosmic council
manuscript, passages about the coding of consciousness, the failings of our
leaders, the difficulties of Planet Earth. “Things are moving fast,” he murmurs,
sounding uncharacteristically bewildered, perhaps conscious that death is not so
far away. “I don’t know whether the sun’s going round faster but the days are
going by so fast.”
Sun Ra’s dream
“I had a vision that I saw some materials that defy description. I saw some
jewellery that’s like nothing you’ve got on this planet. It was like a big
supermarket that was the supermarket of the Omniverse. Everything in the
Omniverse was in this market. I didn’t see any walls. It was so big there were no
walls.
“I stopped at one counter where they had some socks. These socks were like
they were alive. They were glittering like diamonds. I wondered how that could
be. It wasn’t like sequins. This was like they were alive. I wanted to know how
much they cost. They said it was ninety dollars for one pair of socks. I said,
‘Well, I’ve never seen anything like this before. I’d better go and see about the
pants.’ I went over to the pants and they were one hundred and eighty dollars.
Finally they said, ‘Since you’re from another place, our tax here for everything
is eighty dollars.’
“I was still standing there trying to figure out whether I wanted the pants or
the socks. Then I came back here. I wondered if I had paid for them, they’d have

been in the bed with me?”

 
 
3
scanning: aether talk
ambient in the 1990s; Scanner, John Cage, acid house, disco; AMM; Telepathic
Fish, Biosphere, Mixmaster Morris, Land of Oz, The Orb, The KLF
59–73, 59–73 “… and ejaculation and all those sort of things … right, mixture …” sub-aqua dial tone triad,
low bass, hiss and crackle, Erik Satie’s Vexations running underneath as unresolved counterpoint, a ride
cymbal briefly, subliminal chatter, “oh yeah, oh yeah”, a thump like the underwater pressure from the air
guns of an oil rig, a faster rhythm, the whisper voice of professional sex, “I put two fingers inside … mmm,
nice … gently and up and down … very nice …”, “I will not be treated like a child”, “you should know
that”, “yeah, well I can sum it up now … would you respond by talking or by writing? … also you might
find it easier to write …”, a repetitive keyboard line that could have been lifted from a Terry Riley piece,
sibilant voices distorted into electronic sandpaper, radio voices, echoes, ritualistic banging, laughter, the
impression of a forest canopy arcing above us, but not trees, rather signals, transmissions, radiophonic fizz,
verbal voyages across time zones and round the curvature of the earth, a telephone rings, “and he gets upset
with me … this coat has got so beautiful” … “1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8” … crackle moving across the stereo
field, “leave it with ya, tata boy” … more radio voices, muted speech, modulated by fading signals, the
nostalgic sound of cold war espionage, a fierce burst of crackle across the flat lands, the iron grey seas,
“You’ve upset people too much, for the wrong reasons, that’s the problem”, pop song, warble, faint high
tones, string glissandi, more Vexations? then crackle, a deep, lazy voice: “naah, I just had a nice easy day
today”…
– Scanner, “Mass Observation” (twenty-four-minute ambient remix by Robin Rimbaud, Robert Hampson,
Jim O’Rourke) verbalised
 
field recordings
Robin Rimbaud snakes out a cheap television aerial across my sofa and tunes in
his hand-held scanner to the invisible, private world. Private no longer.
Somewhere nearby, a man is talking on the telephone to a woman, telling her he
is about to buy a large loaf of bread in a local baker’s. Children are singing in a
weird heterophonic chorus behind the foreground conversation. The exchange is
mundane but then he says “I always wear black to match the colour of my car”,
and banal talk is revealed as a Trojan horse carrying other levels of

communication: status, style and sexual promise.
As well as organising a London club called The Electronic Lounge, Robin
makes records based around material snooped, via the scanner, from telephone
conversations. Sounds, atmospheres and sometimes beats are added but the core
material is people talking in the mistaken knowledge that nobody else is
listening. Hearing these records is a compulsive experience. The voyeuristic urge
proves to be very strong.
But in addition to exposing the dynamics of interaction, scanners can also
track unconscious desires as they irrupt into the glue of ordinary dialogue.
Uninhibited by physical proximity, blank to the environment, focused on a
disembodied voice, the imagination relaxes and allows its less housetrained
habitués to scuttle into the light. Hearing these strange conversations plucked out
of the air makes me think of an H.P. Lovecraft short story called “From
Beyond”, in which he wrote about an electrical machine which made visible “the
creatures that form what men call the pure air and the blue sky” and that “come
out of places where aesthetic standards are – very different”. The story concludes
with the narrator shooting the machine.
“I’ve always been interested in field recordings”, says Robin. “When I was
younger, when I was thirteen or fourteen, I used to hang microphones out of the
window of my family’s house and used to record what was outside in the street.
I’ve got hours of tape – I don’t know what you would call it. A good way of
putting it with the scanner stuff is mapping the city. I don’t want to sound like I
sit in my little palace, picking up all the classes, but it’s like mapping the
movements of people during different periods of the day.
It’s fairly predictable. In the early morning, very quiet, lots of people ringing in
saying ‘be late for work’, or ‘goodbye love’, all this affection stuff; you very
quickly move into the work rota and you’re mapping out the system and the way
people interact. You get to a lunch period when things lull and people start
ringing up their friends, then it’s back to work again. Around six to seven it’s
people ringing home.
Then in the evening, that’s where the riot happens. That’s when it gets really
exciting because all hell gets let loose. The phone rates go down and people have
the most surreal conversations.
“I’ve always been interested in the spaces in these conversations. From a very
early age I’ve never liked the telephone. I talk a lot on the telephone because it’s
the only way you can communicate with many people but I just don’t like it. You

can’t have a natural pause because you just get ages of static. The etiquette’s all
gone, the organisation. Who’s going to talk next? It amazed me with mobile
phones, which are much more expensive than standard phones – you get these
enormous gaps happening.
They’re the points that really interest me. What’s happening in there. What I’ve
often done is sampled these little parts of the background as well. A big part of
the work I’ve done has been sampling a soundtrack in the background, be it
people moving around the room, a radio on or whatever, looping it, manipulating
it, using it as a texture.
But that’s the point where it really opens up. Interaction between individuals
really happens at that point, or doesn’t happen.
“It still shocks me that people have phone sex. With pornography, there is no
interaction.
They’re listening to a tape recording most times. You’re listening to somebody
listening.
If you’re talking to somebody on the phone, you usually say goodbye. The
pornographic ones are disturbing because the phone goes dead. You know that’s
it. They’ve finished up, they’ve got their Kleenex and it’s done.
“A big aspect for me is that it’s so random. You never know quite what you’re
going to pick up. When I do a live gig and I do an improvisational set, I never
know whether all I’m going to get is static. That’s just as valid. If there’s nothing
there, there’s nothing there.”
This recalls the notorious first performance of John Cage’s four-minute piece
for twelve radios – “Imaginary Landscape No. 4” – premiered at Columbia
University, New York, in 1951. Two players shared control of tone, volume and
tuning for each radio.
The performance began after midnight when the air waves were relatively quiet
and composer Henry Cowell decided that this had spoiled the piece. Cage
disagreed. His biographer, Davill Revill, quotes one of the operators, poet
Harold Norse: “The effect was similar to an automobile ride at night on an
American highway in which neon signs and patches of noise from radios and
automobiles flash into the distance.”

“I remember going to a lecture by John Cage a long time ago”, says Robin. “I
found it really liberating when he was talking about listening to music at home
and there was building work going on next door. Somebody said to him, ‘Was it
disruptive?’ and he just had to accept the fact that this was part of the sound.
Once you embrace that, then everything’s OK.”
 
orientation
What is ambient music? Calm, therapeutic sounds for chilling out or music
which taps into the disturbing, chaotic undertow of the environment? There are
two separate, quite different moments in the past twenty years which tend to
define interpretations.
The first moment is Brian Eno’s but, before I come to that, this is the second
one.
The story, or my version of it, goes as follows: Between 1986 and 1989, a
number of import 12" singles appeared in the UK, almost all of them from either
house-music clubs in Chicago, techno musicians of Detroit or garage-house
producers from New York; most of them reduced the elements of dance music to
a bare minimum in order to explore the new textures and rhythms of machine
music. Phuture’s “Acid Tracks” and “Slam”, Larry “Mr Fingers” Heard’s
“Washing Machine”, “Beyond the Clouds” and “Can You Feel It”, Model 500’s
“No UFOs” and “Night Drive (Thru-Babylon)”, Reese and Santonio’s “The
Sound”, Virgo’s “Do You Know Who You Are?”, Tyree’s “Acid Over”,
Armando’s “Land of Confusion”, Lil’ Louis’s “French Kiss”, Rythim Is Rythim’s
“Strings of Life” and “Nude Photo”, Metro’s “Angel of Mercy”, Truth’s “Open
Our Eyes” and many others contributed to an emergent movement in Britain,
now enshrined in popular mythology as rave. The full scope of that story lies
outside this book but its development is relevant since without the Ecstasy-
fuelled liberation, accompanying media circus and subsequent repressive
legislation that accompanied so-called acid house and rave, the polar opposite –
chill-out rooms and quiet clubs for ambient listening – might have remained the
pipe dreams of a few solitary explorers.
Two of the key records that helped to shake British youth into a new phase of
hedonism, self-belief and communal dissent were “Acid Tracks” (1987),

produced by Marshall Jefferson, and “Washing Machine” (1986), made entirely
by Larry Heard. Both had their origins in the black, predominantly, though not
exclusively, gay warehouse clubs of Chicago.
Accounts of how these two minimalist machine instrumentals came into being
share a similar feeling, if only because both records were a consequence of home
experiments which subverted the intended purpose of one or two pieces of music
technology. This is how Marshall Jefferson described the moment to me, when I
interviewed him in 1988: “Oh shoot, man. ‘Acid Tracks’ wasn’t preprogrammed,
man. ‘Acid Tracks’ was an accident, man. When you get an acid machine you
don’t preprogramme anything. You just hit some notes on a machine, man. DJ
Pierre, he was over and he was just messing with this thing and he came up with
that pattern, man. You know, dah-dah-dah-gwon-gwon-gyown-gagyown. So we
were listening to it, getting drunk man. ‘Hey, this is kinda hot, man. This is a
great mood, man. Let’s put it out.
What the fuck?’ You know? We played it at the Music Box, man, and everybody
was flipping.
“When I did Sleezy D, ‘I’ve Lost Control’, man that’s got screaming in it.
Really, I was trying to get a mood something like the old Black Sabbath records
or Led Zeppelin.
So that’s how it got the name Acid Tracks, because it’s supposed to put you in a
mood, you know? For one thing, the tune is eleven minutes long of the same
thing. Slight changes, but not that noticeable. Like when you listen to a real long
solo in the old days it’s the same bass line going and everybody’s doing
something different over it. That’s supposed to capture a mood. Now what
everybody thought acid house was after that was a drum machine and that acid
machine, the Roland TB-303, which was not the truth. Acid house was meant to
be the capturing of moods. You don’t have to use the same machine all the time.
You can use different instruments. I hate that machine with a passion now.
Everybody’s using it wrong. The way they’re doing it now it’s not capturing any
moods. It’s disrupting thought patterns, man. That just hurts when you listen to it
all night. It stabs your brain, man. You hear doh-doh-doh-doh-doh-dit and I hate
it, you know, when it goes dit-dit-dit-dit-dit-wheoghwowowweogh. Oh man!
It’s like scratching a chalk board with your fingernails, man! Man, I hate that.”

The basic components of “Acid Tracks” epitomise the principle of less means
more: a Roland TB-303 Bassline playing patterns which sweep up and down
through frequency and filtering as they run; the thudding, dry bass drum, hi-hat,
clap and toms playing straight disco beats from a Roland 909 drum machine; the
cowbell and whistle from a Roland 727 and some unidentifiable synthesiser
swooshes in the background. Simple, but ferociously effective, particularly if
drugs are involved.
This was music without narrative; music as function; music as a technical
process.
Jefferson may have come to regret what he, DJ Pierre, Spanky and Herbert J put
together that drunken evening in Chicago but, for disrupting thought patterns,
“Acid Tracks”
was powerfully psycho-active, black science fiction.
Larry Heard’s “Washing Machine” was even more direct: a repeating, rolling
melodic line with unusual intervals, spongy like a rubber ball in texture, bald of
recognisable emotion except for occasional moments of musical tension and a
slight suggestion of exuberance. Little touches of reverb introduce fleeting
suggestions of physical space around the sounds, there are short silences or a bar
of hi-hat cymbal. The drum programming is more eccentric than “Acid Tracks”,
perhaps a reflection of Larry Heard’s career as a drummer in Chicago bands
playing anything from R&B and jazz fusion to rock. “We did a lot of abstract
rock”, he told me when I interviewed him in 1989. “Yes, Rush and Genesis. I
was a drummer so I was really crazy about Neil Peart. It was good for me to
practise off of stuff like that.”
Both Jefferson’s enthusiasm for Black Sabbath and Heard’s idolisation of
progressive rock drummer Peart were bemusing at the time. According to
stereotypical divisions of taste by skin colour and culture, black musicians were
supposed to be listening to soul. An accumulation of personal histories has
forced an adjustment of that picture: many techno and house-music innovators
were inspired by a mixture of rock, jazz fusion, industrial music and the techno
pop of YMO, Kraftwerk, Depeche Mode and Gary Numan.
The new technology of MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface)-linked,
programmable, polyphonic synthesisers and drum machines offered an escape
route from a dying live-music scene, a chance to experiment in isolation, free
from peer pressure to conform, and a means of composing and recording without

using expensive studios. Larry began by borrowing an analogue Roland Juno 6
from a friend who had left town for the weekend.
“I had always been interested in music”, he told me. “I had four brothers and
they all played guitar. I was, like, kinda left out. So when I did finally pick up an
instrument I wanted it to be different to what they were doing. I started playing
drums but I had always tinkered around with keyboards ’cos I was fascinated by
the sounds of the synthesisers.”
While his friend was away, Larry wrote two tunes. One, called “Mysteries Of
Love”, was a moody, inspirational track. The other was an instrumental,
“Washing Machine”.
“It was just random sounds running over a beat”, said Larry. “I’ve always been
weird in my musical tastes. I always wanna hear something different from the
things you hear on the radio all the time, just wanna hear someone venture out,
take a chance when they’re making music. It sounded weird to me. In the end
my little brothers liked it. They thought it was kinda cool.” They also thought it
sounded like a washing machine, so that became the name. Never happy to be
tied down to one style, Heard was capable of writing anything from strange
compositions for drum machine, gorgeous mid-tempo ballads, tracks that
sounded like Pink Floyd, backdrops for beatnik poetry or electronic jazz-fusion
instrumentals which depicted lush environments of the imagination. With the
dance frenzy at its height at the end of the 1980s, the potential context for such a
broad sweep of quietly nonformulaic music seemed unpromising. Where did
Heard envisage people listening to his records? “In clubs, of course, but maybe
real late-night things. Some of the stuff, without the drum beats, I feel could be
soundtrack-type stuff. Just for listening, everyday listening.”
As we shall see later in this book, when Brian Eno applied the term “ambient
music”
to his activities he switched the emphasis away from making music, focusing
instead on the act of listening. Inevitably the spotlight returns to the creator, if
only for expedient reasons of maintaining a career, keeping up magazine
circulations or boosting record-company profits. But many forces were chipping
away at the hierarchical, separated roles of producers and consumers. Before
Eno’s theoretical dismantling of this relationship, early disco DJs had also
eroded fixed definitions of performance, performer and audience.

The aim of dancing your ass off, sacred or profane, was inspired by disco’s
flow motion, the seamless mix that transformed three-minute pop songs (Phil
Spector’s little symphonies for the kids) into long-form epics. Like an all-night
performance of Balinese gamelan or a Central African cult ceremony, the music
moved through dusk until dawn. This nocturnal rhythm was bisected with sexual
rhythms and the rhythms of crosstown, crosscountry, transworld movement. The
futuristic vision of hypnotic living and machine sex was imported from Europe:
from Germany came Kraftwerk with “Autobahn” and “Trans-Europe Express”;
from France came Jean-Marc Cerrone with “Supernature” and from the South
Tyrol, crucially placed in the centre of German, Italian and Swiss culture, came
Giorgio Moroder with Donna Summer’s “Love To Love You Baby” and “I Feel
Love”. Even The Bee Gees’ “Jive Talking” was inspired by the rhythm of car
wheels bumping over a railway track.
Speaking to Giorgio Moroder in 1992, I asked him why he and his co-
producer, Pete Bellotte, had decided to extend “Love To Love You Baby” into
seventeen minutes of orgasm theatre. He laid the blame on the coffin of the late
Neil Bogart, once the notorious president of Casablanca Records. “He liked the
song so much he wanted to have a long version of it”, claimed Moroder, “and
that’s when I did the seventeen-minute one. The official story is that he was
playing it at a party and people wanted to hear it over and over. I think the real
one was more like the bad story. He was doing some other thing than dancing.”
So a revolution in music was catalysed by a record executive’s desire for his own
personal sexual soundtrack.
Actually, the story was more complicated. According to Vince Aletti, writing
in Rolling Stone in 1973, some of the earliest records played in New York’s
underground of “juice bars, after-hours clubs, private lofts open on weekends to
members only, floating groups of partygoers who take over the ballrooms of old
hotels from midnight to dawn” were unusual imports from France and Spain,
hybrids of rock, jazz and Afro funk.
African, Latin and jazz influences were dissolving the boundaries of rock. In
the latter half of the 1960s, reciprocal motion agitated and enlivened music.
Miles Davis, Sly Stone, Santana, War, The Temptations, Cream, The Velvet
Underground, La Monte Young, Jimi Hendrix, Pharoah Sanders, the Grateful
Dead and Terry Riley all indulged in marathon trance grooves, rippling with
strange currents, often stretching beyond the limits of endurance into boredom,
but hunting ecstatic release through repetition.
 

Zen
One of John Cage’s many famous stories concerned a music class he gave in Oriental music. He played a
record of a Buddhist service that began with a microtonal chant and then continued with the repetitious beat
of a percussion instrument. After fifteen minutes, one woman in the class stood up, screamed, and then
shouted, “Take it off.
I can’t bear it any longer.” Cage took the record off. Then another class member – a man – got irate.
“Why’d you take it off?” he demanded. “I was just getting interested.”
– John Cage, “Silence”
Bob Dylan may have regarded Smokey Robinson as a great poet, but the effect
of Dylan on Motown was more obvious. Whatever it was that Bob Dylan, The
Beatles and The Rolling Stones had done by copying, then transforming black
music, a lot of black artists wanted the freedom to follow. Motown producer
Norman Whitfield’s response to acid rock – at least to Sly and The Family
Stone’s rainbow coalition version – was to produce psychedelic soul for The
Temptations and Undisputed Truth. In Philadelphia, another producer/songwriter
– Thom Bell – was moving in the opposite direction, enveloping a romantic
vocal group called The Delfonics in a Jacuzzi of French horns, flugelhorns,
flutes, strings, harps, tinkerbell glockenspiels and even Indian sitars. As
individual developments, both directions were destined to run themselves into
the ground. Copied ad nauseam, Whitfield’s funk-rock workouts degenerated
into a monotonous grind, while Bell’s crisp, quasi-classical arranging was
caricatured by lesser talents and eventually melted to slush. Fused, however, they
metamorphosed into a creature that conjured improbable oppositional visions of
carnality and sentimentality, motion and stasis, delicacy and brutality, earth and
aether.
If nineteenth-century composers such as Mahler, Scriabin, Mussorgsky,
Prokofiev and Richard Strauss had collaborated as equals with musicians from
the European colonies of Brazil, Cuba, Haiti, Nigeria, Ghana, Cameroon, Congo
and Indonesia, what a sound they would have made. Or what a sound they would
not have made, more likely, since whereas synthetic hybrids often match our
imaginings to perfection, human attempts at impossible collaborations often fall
short of the speculative reach of machines.
Although disco reached many high points in its romanticisation of escape, its
enduring legacy is less idealistic, yet still Utopian. Disco mixing, the merging of
records by a DJ, denied the musician as performer, denied the integrity of any
individual performance, denied the problems of mixing musical styles or cultural
difference, denied the conclusion of a work. Communication, the human

problem, could take place in the machine: first, record decks and tape editing,
then samplers, then hard-disk drives. Gradually, the DJ became the artist.
Gradually, the song, the composition, was decomposed. After its first formative
years, during which the global soundbanks were plundered for empathetic
records, disco began to work on the principle of decomposing songs into
modular and interchangeable fragments, sliced and repatched into an order
which departed from the rules of Tin Pan Alley. This new order was designed to
suit the nocturnal rhythms of a participatory, ecstatic audience, rather than any
model of consensual, concise, classic proportions demanded by pop listeners.
Songs became liquid. They became vehicles for improvisation, or source
materials, field recordings almost, that could be reconfigured or remixed to suit
the future.
In a humiliating way, musicians became technicians, alongside recording
engineers, tape ops, editors and all the other technocratic laboratory assistants
cleaning their glasses in the back room. At the front end of the medium was the
DJ, ruling the disco, playing music and people as one fluid substance. Disco
embraced the science of possession: motion codified into a biofeedback system
of sonic driving leading to a form of trance, a meeting held in the virtual space
of the spirit world. The discotheque (the literal meaning of which is record
library), evolving over two decades into the club, became an indicator of
atomised lives within the city. The club, as a generic concept, had come to
synthesise historical strands as diverse as the Cabaret Voltaire, organised in 1915
by Dadaists Hugo Ball and Emmy Hennings in Zurich, or, less than fifteen years
later, the exotic, sexually charged “jungle” floorshows of Harlem’s Cotton Club.
A gathering point and one of the most significant stages for the theatre of the
new urban speed tribes, the club is also a dark refuge where new worlds can be
tempted into the light. The DJ (often mistakenly elevated to shaman): librarian,
bricoleur, scryer.
 
chilled out …
Chill: African-American slang for murder (1940); the coldness of the dead; cool
enough to be close to the dead, detached from the consensus morality of the
living, as in Iceberg Slim, or Texas blues guitarist Albert “the Ice Man” Collins,
recordist of “Frosty”, “The Freeze”, “Sno-Cone” – the artist as coldblooded

slayer. Cool, the coolest.
At an extreme, emotionally frozen. Africa to America. In Flash of the Spirit,
Robert Farris Thompson relates the concept of cool to the West African, Yoruban
“mystic coolness” (itutu). “To the degree that we live generously and discreetly”,
he wrote, “exhibiting grace under pressure, our appearance and our acts
gradually assume virtual royal power.
And as we become noble, fully realising the spark of creative goodness God
endowed us with – the shining ororo bird of thought and aspiration – we find the
confidence to cope with all kinds of situations. This is àshe. This is character.
This is mystic coolness. All one.” By the early 1980s, New York dance records
were full of references to chilling out. Bobby Orlando recorded a bass-heavy
underground disco track – “Chill Out” – and old-school hip-hop was a forum for
juvenile storytellers who had taken a chill pill, or were chilly the most. Chilling
out was hip-hop vernacular for relaxation.
 
polaroids
1966, The Roundhouse, Chalk Farm, London. Waiting at the head of the queue,
late in the evening, then almost first into the building – an emptied, circular shell
once used for turning steam engines. The interior has the dark, soaring
atmosphere of a ruined abbey, an abandoned factory of shadowed, grim corners
and filthy alcoves. Lights are being rigged from the roof of a small hut in the
centre of the floor. On stage, men are aimlessly busy, or busily aimless. One,
wearing a short raincoat, blows soft flurries through a tenor saxophone; one, a
man with sharp cheekbones and a goatee beard, assembles a drum kit, plays
crisp rolls on the snare, then disassembles the kit and packs cymbals, stands and
drums back in their cases; two men crouch on the floor, wrestling with wires,
plugs, sockets, devices, a guitar. Loud bursts of noises are emitted, none of them
having any perceivable relationship to other sounds. Standing at the edge of the
stage, looking around me, I can see that nobody else in the audience realises that
this is a performance. I have to break through a conception of performance to
find this realisation myself. Later that night, Geno Washington & the Ram Jam
Band play musically poor but rabble-rousing versions of “Knock On Wood” and
other soul favourites, followed by the new (and first) supergroup of Eric
Clapton, Jack Bruce and Ginger Baker: Cream. Shortly after this key event,

when mod turned psychedelic, brushing against improvisation and the ideas of
John Cage as it revolved, I learned that these seemingly aimless characters on
stage were called AMM. They had names. The saxophonist was Lou Gare, the
drummer was Eddie Prévost, the two crouching men were Cornelius Cardew and
Keith Rowe. Geno Washington vanished into lost memories many years ago;
although Eric Clapton is now a global celebrity and both Jack Bruce and Ginger
Baker are still musically active, Cream is barely known by a new generation of
metal fans. One member of AMM is now dead, one has left the group, but a
track by the latest AMM incarnation was included on Virgin Records’ Ambient
4: Isolationism album in 1994.
1994, The Roundhouse, Chalk Farm, London. Chantal Passemonde, co-
organiser of Telepathic Fish ambient parties, recalls a different event (same
venue but another era): “It was cold, that’s the best description. It was traveller
people like Andy Blockhead, rather than club people, who had this idea that they
wanted to do not a Rainbow Gathering, but a Rainbow Gathering sort of thing, if
you know what I mean, in the Roundhouse on New Year’s Day. What with the
Criminal Justice Bill coming up and all that, and they felt it was really a
powerful space to do it in. I knew Andy Blockhead, just from free festivals and
partying. They’d been to Fish things and they said would we like to come and do
it with them? In the end it turned out to be totally brilliant but the first seven
hours were complete hell. I was playing with Paul and we played, we DJd, for
eight hours. At the end I had an asthma attack.
“One of the guys knew one of the Roundhouse owners and asked for
permission and he said yes. Then the day before, he said no, then yes, then no,
then they wanted a lot of money. Eventually we were saying we were going to
squat it. Fuck them, we realised we could get access into it. In the end he was all
right about it. All we saw was a fat Mercedes. “We had the owner’s permission
provided it stayed ambient, because of the potential trouble they thought they’d
get if it was a full-on rave, which they’d had when Spiral Tribe had done stuff
there. So that’s how the ambient thing came into it. The whole point was for
people to gather after where they’d been on New Year’s Eve. We were there all
night and then it started at six in the morning. By about seven or eight o’clock
that night they’d got in a big heater which made a big difference and then
everything started going insanely psychedelic and bizarre. Two bands played –
really traveller bands. Pan was one – an insane sort of progressive, psychedelic
rock thing. There was loads of shamanic drumming, you know the insanity that
occurs. Then Mixmaster Morris played and it went right through the night into
Sunday.

“It looked amazing. Do you know Nick Mindscape, the guy who does
Megatripolis visuals?
He had these unbelievably huge screens that hung round one half of the circle,
like right down, almost to the floor, and they were projected on. Then on the
other side, there were these three vertical drops that were hung so that they were
in free form, and they just moved, like billowed in the wind. There were
projections on that. That was when it was dark. Matt Black was there and he was
doing stuff. Everyone was really colourful, wearing jumpers and stuff. And
during the day it was really lovely because all the light comes through the roof. I
remember at one point we were playing the first track on B12’s Electro Soma
album, it’s all very ethereal, and people were blowing bubbles. The whole place
was full of bubbles. It did look like a really bizarre, post-apocalyptic, insane
thing.
People got so cold they were lighting fires. It was like something out of Mad
Max. The building is just a shell but it’s so powerful. Everyone was gathered in
the inner circle of pillars and there was fire juggling. I wasn’t on any drugs but it
was weird.
You just felt that there was some magic – you know that feeling you get when
something is really special and it’s miserable as well?”
 
… to chill out
Amsterdam is cold, this Friday night, October 1993. Inside the Melkweg, two
men in pyjamas are pretending to sleep standing upright. A woman in black high
heels watches television and three men wearing dark suits stand on a table at one
end of the room.
A couple encased in multi-hued, poly-vinyl Julian Clary-type outfits camp
around in a gloom lit by luminous globes wrapped in sheets and bubble lights
produced by a bank of projectors. Garden gnomes sit on green toadstools, their
pointy ears attuned to a background drone of Indian tambouras and what may be
the sound of herding songs recorded in some chilly northern climate.
Bored with this throwback to early 1970s audience participation performance
art, I wander into the other rooms to hear live performances of programmed

music. The following night, part two of Amsterdam’s first Ambient Weekend, I
peruse some of the evolving curiosities of the ambient clubbing phenomenon
from the balcony of the Melkweg. Following a live didgeridoo duet (the revenge
of the native Australian?) delivered just to one side of DJ decks ringed with
flowers, Chris and Cosey are performing.
Veterans of Throbbing Gristle’s early 1980s grey industrial electronica, they
loom behind their keyboards like a couple of monochrome mannequins. They
are static, the music is static, the place is packed and DJ Per, who has organised
the event with his brother, is very happy. He is also very amused by the irony of
the situation he sees below him. Having finally cast out its dopers’ mattress,
along with a twenty-year reputation as the hippie centre of Europe, the Melkweg
is occupied, once more, by supine catatonics skunked out on soft furnishings.
One of the frequent criticisms aimed at new ambient and electronic music is
that the music lacks stars, focal points, magazine-cover fodder, dynamic
performers. By definition, a computer-driven, preprogrammed performance is
pre-determined. Only a few operators can transcend the knowledge that they,
along with the audience, are passive witnesses to the computer’s blind need to
work through a programme from start to cut off. The only error, or danger, is that
the machine may crash.
Saturday night at the Melkweg and all this is true of Biosphere’s set. Have
Macintosh PowerBook will travel, yet with visuals and a keen sense of how to
pace the music, he conjures real excitement, mystery and tension from digital
information. Geir Jenssen, the man behind Biosphere, began his career with a
Norwegian band called Bel Canto, a Nordic answer to Australia’s post-punk,
Medievalist ambience band, Dead Can Dance.
After abandoning that ship, he recorded a promising Belgian New Beat/acid
album – The North Pole By Submarine – as Bleep in 1989, some of it sampled
from radio transmissions, and then released his first Biosphere album, Micro-
gravity, on Renaat and Sabine Vandepapeliere’s Belgian-based Apollo label in
1992.
As Biosphere performs, a time-transported punk, armed with spiked mohican
and Exploited T-shirt, sits in the lotus position in front of the stage and
meditates, while Saturday night party people scan the prospects, bug eyed,
looking to pull. A hippie lying on his back on the mattress in the centre of the
dancefloor flicks a used-up but still glowing spliff into the air, oblivious to the
inflammable people around him. A tough audience to please.
From the PA, two children’s voices loop round and round, a sample taken from

a feature film to form the basis of a Biosphere track called “Phantasm”: We had
a dream last night … we had the same dream. A nagging two-note ostinato and
these two creepy voices build tangible tension in the room. Photographs of earth
shot from a space shuttle, acquired from NASA or from Tromsø’s local science
station, fill the screen behind Geir, and when the bass drum finally kicks in, this
tough crowd goes wild.
Drinking beer with Geir in the Melkweg cafe earlier in the evening, I asked
him if his home environment in Tromsø in Norway exerts an influence on the
atmospheres in his music. On first impressions an intense, rather melancholy
soul, Geir looks like the kind of character who could have played well in
Hollywood horror movies of the 1930s. This is deceptive. Actually, he is a
wistful man who makes amusing company. Tromsø, he explains, has no sun for
two or three months of every year. Winter lasts for seven or eight months. “I feel
at my most creative when the sun is gone”, he admits. “When it’s a Christmas
feeling and it’s dark all the time, you can see the Northern Lights.
You see the houses with all the lamps inside. It’s very cosy.”
This picture strikes us as being rather funny, bearing in mind the fact that
techno avoids references to community (other than the techno “community”),
security or domesticity, so we talk about signals transmitted across great
distances, of technology and isolation and the dramatic image of invisible
connections across a void. “I think it’s great to sit in the darkness with
computers”, he muses. “I like this combination of desolate areas and hi-tech
equipment. In my home town, if a fishing boat is going under, it can send a
signal up to a satellite and they can see it on the computer where the boat is. It
happened last week. Five people were saved because of that. They can also see if
boats are spilling oil illegally.”
We think about that prospect for a second. “Green space”, laughs Geir. “You
can sit wherever you want on the planet because you can bring the technology.
You can sit on the North Pole and pick up sounds from radios and satellites. I
have this idea.
If possible, I would like to be the first one making music in the space shuttle –
composing music and weightless. Don’t tell anybody this idea or Jean-Michel
Jarre will steal it.” Before Geir goes on stage to press the first button, he wants to
lay one more ambient cliché to rest: “I hate it if people use my music as a
background.

When I was listening to Jon Hassell and Brian Eno, I was inspired to know more
about the Himalayas or astronomy, Egypt and archaeology. I want people to get
inspired to read astronomy or to get another view of the universe. To be
curious.”
Mountains, stars, satellites, space travel; weightlessness and computers, an
escape from the body. The urge to transcend the body is a dominant theme in any
conversation about the technological future. Virtual-reality fantasies and the
spectacle of the wired world express an alienated yearning to leave the biological
prison and transmute into a cyborg state. In the fin de siècle mind, immateriality,
spirituality and electronics are synonymous. The body has become dangerous. “I
also think reality is an interesting subject because I think we are all immersed all
day every day in reality”, said future designer Douglas Trumbull to future
designer Syd Mead (the visual illusionists who created a dystopian archaic-
future look for Blade Runner) in that bible for cyborgian transcendentalists,
Mondo 2000. “What we seek is super reality, or hyper reality or altered states of
some kind. I think the attractions in this area that are going to be the most
successful will be the most extreme states or out of body experiences.”
In their view, psychedelic shamanism has become a metaphorical holy grail,
not only in the quest for new identities in a fragmented world, but in the search
for the ultimate commercial, theme park, drug machine. As glamorous
compulsions of advertising surfaces spread in a sweet sticky flood over the
subterranean desires and revelations of altered states, so the future designers rave
about human brain interfaces and the direct implantation of visions into the
human mind.
 
the milky way
On the hunt for a psychedelic skinhead acid pixie bare-knuckle back-street
fighter to cast in your new computer game you could do worse than ink a
contract with Mixmaster Morris. Acting, as always, the pugnacious silver surfer
of ambient, Morris, The Irresistible Force, DJ, recording artist and tireless
advocate of ambient music, elbows the air, screws up a physiognomy that is
already mashed potatoes and narrows his eyes to Stanley blade slits.
“Who’s got some roach material?” he demands, avoiding eyelock with any of
the humans in this cold dressing room backstage at Amsterdam’s Melkweg.
Morris is not a person to whom questions are addressed. He just rolls out

soundbites for the interrogator to gather up in a shopping bag and reassemble at
leisure. A typical example: “We’ve had sixty, seventy years of making records.
That’s stage one. Now we sample them.”
We last met in Soho Ambient during the summer of ambient that was still in
progress in 1993 as autumn turned to winter. Soho Ambient was, at that point, a
hole-in-the-wall trading post. Lurking at the rear of a hippie emporium hidden
by the greengrocery of Berwick Street market, this modest enterprise with its
limited stock of CDs and vinyl was symptomatic of the peculiar rise of ambient.
The very first time we met, Morris and I talked at length in the front room of
his Camberwell flat. “My dream”, he confessed during that sunny afternoon,
“was to get a roomful of people to take psychedelic drugs and to operate
samplers and sequencers in front of them. That seemed like an impossible goal
six or seven years ago. Now it seems rather trivial.” In between playing
computer games, Morris’s other guest of the day talked to me about making
brain machines.
Back in Amsterdam, Morris and I exchange notes on our respective
bafflement. Ever since the Land of Oz chill-out nights in 1989, plus rare early
sightings of electronic fluffiness from Fingers Inc. and Virgo in Chicago or The
Orb and The KLF in London, the oxymoron of ambient house – dance music for
sitting still – had become accepted into common usage. Ambient had turned into
one of those polysemous glue words which stick wherever they land. Morris,
always on the move, saw ambient rise in Frankfurt, Hamburg, Berlin, San
Francisco, finally to survey an international movement in the making. Aside
from Holland, Belgium and the inevitable Goa, he had found embryonic scenes
in Japan, Austria, Finland, even St Petersburg and Chicago. “I’m happy there’s
an ambient movement and not just an Orb movement”, he says. At the very least,
there is a new category in the record shops. “I’m much more interested in a
revolution than a category”, he continues. “It’s definitely a window of
opportunity. I can see us taking on artists that nobody in history would have
taken on – the really crazy ones.
There’s a lot of crazy ones following me about – giving me tapes of really crazy
music and ringing me at three o’clock in the morning, saying, have you listened
to that tape yet that you got in the post this morning? It does drive me crazy but
some of these people are the next generation. Even if I never made any more
music I would be happy to have been a conduit just to let all that stuff through.”
Ambient had been one symptom of a shift in music production in the UK. Not
a revolution like the hippie movement or punk, which had songs about

revolution, but a sudden reorganisation of all the pieces into new formations. As
with psychedelia and punk, the big cash might or might not fall from the skies
after the main event had blown itself out.
But for the moment, there was a perceptible openness, a sensation of feeling
another cultural movement flex its muscles.
Something like three in the morning at the Melkweg, Friday night, and Dave
Wheels and Bobby Bird of Higher Intelligence Agency are giving a compelling
demonstration of one way in which music making is changing. In Chris Heath’s
Pet Shop Boys versus America book, Neil Tennant comes up with a phrase: “It’s
machines playing live.” That will do nicely. HIA are in there, on the floor with
the dancers like a reggae sound system.
The machines are playing live and the atmosphere is white hot. Nobody is
pretending to replace machine processes with crotch pumping and choreography.
There’s some knob twiddling, effects processing and track muting, along with a
lot of concentration, but the purism of the thing, the idea that this music happens
in real time as the machines respond to messages stored on data disks, is
imperceptible except as an intangible energy – a clarity of sound and purpose.
“Live electronics can enhance the mood of where it’s being performed”, Dave
Wheels explains, “with the energies of the people performing it being picked up
by the people they’re working with and going back out to the people they’re
getting it off.” I think I follow that. “You build it up like that”, he says. “That’s
the aim.”
Despite persistent associations of New Age values, most of the new ambient is
fiercely urban and now age. Some clubs double as marketplaces for ineffectual
and overpriced “smart” drugs, Tarot readers, luminous jewellery, masseurs,
digeridoos and “tribal” drumming, but in general these elements seem to denote
spiritual hunger, activism stemming from disillusionment, an alternative
economy or simple social discontent, rather than a withdrawal into the elite
white light of New Age evolutionism.
21 September. I talked to Future Sound of London at their studio in north-west
London.
We discussed a track called “Dead Skin Cells” from their Lifeforms album: the
huge enlargements from microscopic photographs of dust mites, the possibility
that emergent bodies lay in dusty piles of shed skin. “What we term ambient has

been misconstrued”, Gary, the talkative half of FSOL, tells me as the taciturn
half, Brian, paces the room, “because it’s like – put on a space suit – I am weird
because I come from outer space. I’m not interested in that. I think this …”
(raises eyebrows to indicate planet earth) “… is a weird place. What our music, I
think, represents is a weird perspective of this space now. It’s like a re-evaluation
of yourself in your space, rather than escapism.”
David Morley’s first track for Renaat Vandepapeliere’s rapidly expanding
Apollo label was a crackling, blue-label, lucky-if-you-own-one slab of vinyl
called “Evolution”.
David, blond, British born and self-confessedly plagued by nervousness, mixed
baby gurgles so high on one side of that particular record that Renaat objected.
“It was meant to be a bit stressful”, he admits. “That’s another thing about
ambient at the minute. It’s always considered soft, mushy, smooth, which I like
as well, but I think it can also be tense. The word – ambient – just means
anything around you that affects you in some way.” So people began to talk
about dark ambient, and then isolationism, as a contrast to the beatific German
electronic music typified by Ralf Hildenbeutel and Oliver Lieb on Sven Väth’s
Recycle Or Die label.
 
networks
For Higher Intelligence Agency, it was all about getting something going in
Birmingham.
They started their club, Oscillate, in May 1992. “The first Oscillates were above
a pub,” says Dave Wheels, “the only place we could find cheap enough to put it
on.
You know, every one was unemployed, on benefit. The first one, I seem to recall,
two people turned up. Nobody was interested. Twenty people were there. It was
so unpredictable.”
Then they moved the club to a Friday. Ultramarine played there. Mixmaster
Morris played an ambient set (nearly getting himself electrocuted by Jony
Easterby’s sound sculptures in the process) and then Orbital, one of the few
techno acts to make a successful jump from studio technocracy to outdoor rock

festivals, played a one-off to test the computer-age resolve of post-industrial
Birmingham. The club was jammed. By this time, HIA had connected to Mike
Barnett’s Birmingham-based Beyond label. “That’s another strange story”, says
Bobby. Resigned to being lone pioneers of their own hybrid genre, they suddenly
heard about a label being launched in their own city, specifically to cater for
ambient dub. His face still registers astonishment at the absurdity of it all. “We
couldn’t believe it.”
And in London, there was Spacetime and Telepathic Fish. Held in a warehouse
in Cable Street, London’s East End, in 1990–91, the Spacetime parties were
organised by techno/ambient musician Jonah Sharp and holographic clothing
designer Richard Sharpe, both of them now living in San Francisco where Jonah
runs his Reflective Records label. “They were really experimental”, says Jonah.
“We used to have Morris playing all night. The whole idea behind the music was
that people would come and talk. It allowed him to try a lot of things out. I used
to play live at them. It was people sitting in the corner, tinkling on keyboards.
The whole holographic thing is synonymous with what I’ve done.
Richard is an inventor – he invented this fabric and he’s totally into visual art.
We used to decorate the entire room with holographic foil. There was a fountain
in the middle and we had a massive dish with terrapins and a bowl of punch. The
entrance was a bottle of wine. Two hundred people maximum and it was a lot of
fun. Good conversations, which was an important thing. Instead of losing
yourself in your own little space, there was a lot of interaction. I think a lot of
people met at those parties. That was what made me aware of the possibilities of
the chill-out space. That environment within a big rave was just starting to
happen at that time. I think Alex Patterson was playing at Land of Oz but I didn’t
know about that. For me, the ambient room or chill-out room was a platform for
live music. I was never interested in DJing at all. The DJ
was someone who filled in if the keyboard blew up. Morris used to always play
live.
He had a computer and a little drum machine.” After five of these events, The
Shamen’s Mr C took over the DJ decks. “He completely ripped it up”, Jonah
laughs. “Spacetime got thrown out the building. The landlord turfed us all out.
There were people on the roof. It was mad.” Telepathic Fish grew from similar
origins as a small squat party to a growing public event with its own fanzine,

Mind Food. “It’s like being in someone’s living room”, Hex/Coldcut “Macpunk”
Matt Black said to me in October 1993 as we watched somebody step around the
inert bodies, the dogs on strings and the double baby buggies, carrying a tray of
drinks and eats. On that occasion, held in Brixton’s Cooltan Arts Centre,
Telepathic Fish ran from noon until 10 p.m. on a Sunday. You could buy Indian
tea and cheese rolls (the latter constructed in situ with a Swiss army knife) from
a low table set up in one corner of the main room. This looked for all the world
like a 1960s arts lab: bubble lights, computer graphics, inflatables, sleepers,
drone music, squat aesthetics.
My first and foolish action was to sit on a mattress which has been out in the
rain for a month. For half an hour, only professional interest keeps me from
screaming out of there in a shower of sparks but then I relax. No, it’s fine. This is
ambient in the 1990s – the 1960s/70s/80s retro future rolled into a package too
open, loose and scruffy to be anything other than a manifestation of real
commitment and enthusiasm.
Telepathic Fish was started by a group of art students and computer freaks –
Mario Tracey-Ageura, Kevin Foakes and David Vallade – who lived together in
a house in Dulwich. Later, Chantal Passemonde moved into the house, shortly
after the parties had begun. Kevin was a hip-hop fan, David liked heavy metal
and Chantal listened to the ambient end of indie music: Spacemen 3 and 4AD
label bands such as This Mortal Coil. There were no shared musical visions;
simply an idea that the environment for listening to music could be different.
“It all happened one day when Kevin went to get some dope off this real
bizarre Rastafarian in Brixton”, says Chantal. “He had this whole theory about
feeding the five thousand.
It was all very unclear, but it was about taking the fish and making it a part of
you. It becomes part of your mind and spirit, and somehow that linked up with
telepathy.
How, I still don’t know. They were all tripping at the time so we never managed
to get the complete story. What they did was this bizarre ritual of swallowing a
goldfish.”
For the first party, held in the Dulwich house, six hundred people turned up
through word of mouth and Mixmaster Morris DJd. Then they planned a May

Day teaparty. The fliers were teabags. Mixmaster Morris wanted a German
ambient DJ, Dr Atmo, to play at the party, along with Richard “Aphex Twin”
James, a recent addition to Morris’s wide circle of friends and fellow psychic
nomads. “We realised that the whole party was going to be too big for the place
we were going to have it,” explains Chantal, “which basically was a garden, so
we rushed around. Morris knew some people and we found this squat in Brixton,
which was run by these completely insane people. Just real squattie types, right
over the edge. It was from Sunday tea on May bank holiday and people just
turned up in dribs and drabs all through the night. We got Vegetable Vision in to
do the lights. We ran around and got mattresses from on the street round Brixton
and we had some of my friends doing the tea. We made lots of jelly and there
was plenty of acid about. That went on for about fourteen, fifteen hours, with
people lying around. That was the first proper Telepathic Fish, May 1st, ’93.
Then, there was no such thing. There probably was on a small scale, lots of
people chilling out in their bedrooms – the post-clubbing experience when
everyone comes round and you play tunes, but we’d never been to anything like
that. We just did what we would like. We’d all missed Land of Oz, we’d missed
everything. It felt like something big was about to happen. You could feel that
people wanted it but they didn’t quite know what it was.”
Of the clubs and parties that Telepathic Fish and Jonah Sharp missed, Land of
Oz generated the widest ripples. The convergence of influences found at this
short-lived event typified a refreshing dissolution of tribal boundaries and
behaviour. Land of Oz was a Monday night house-music club organised at a
central London club – Heaven – by DJ
Paul Oakenfold in 1989. A chill-out room was added in the upstairs VIP room.
You could chill, but you had to be a somebody on the club scene. Since there
were no ground rules for this type of event, misunderstandings could take on a
life of their own.
Steve Hillage, for example, was invited to Land of Oz because he was a friend of
the man who designed the sound system. Better known as a hippie guitarist from
Gong and a successful rock producer, Hillage was discovering that the acid-
house upsurge was capable of recharging more than one vintage of battery.
Wandering around the chill-out room upstairs, he was pleased to hear a track
from his own Rainbow Dome Musick. This was something he had recorded ten
years earlier, a sort of meditational underscore for the rainbow dome constructed
as a central feature of the 1979 Festival for Mind-Body-Spirit.

Held in the vast hall of Olympia, London, these spiritual hypermarkets were
early warnings that the Californian New Age movement was taking hold in the
UK. His collaborator on these two long pieces – “Garden of Paradise” and “Four
Ever Rainbow” – was Miquette Giraudy, a French keyboard player who had
acted in Barbet Schroeder’s 1972 film La Vallée, a confused story set in Papua
New Guinea but given some commercial impetus by Pink Floyd’s Obscured By
Clouds soundtrack.
Chiming Tibetan bells and slow electric piano arpeggios were musical
components that had been outlawed by every youth movement since punk.
Hillage was agreeably surprised, then, to find his work back in favour,
particularly adjacent to the white heat of house music. He introduced himself to
the DJ, Alex Patterson, who had no idea who Hillage was. At that time,
Patterson was working in an A&R capacity at EG Records, the King’s Road
company that specialised in ambient music in its first incarnation, releasing
records by Brian Eno, Robert Fripp, Michael Nyman, Michael Brook, Harold
Budd, Jon Hassell and, indeed, myself.
Patterson knew nobody from this generation. Brian Eno once gave him a nod
when they passed on the King’s Road but that was it. Instead, he was plugging
into the British and German dance scenes, listening to nascent techno from the
UK underground, trying to sign the publishing for A Guy Called Gerald in
Manchester, travelling to Chicago in an attempt to negotiate a publishing deal
with Larry Heard and, in the process, hearing Heard’s drumless remixes.
Patterson had met The KLF – Bill Drummond and Jimi Cauty – and had
already started a collaboration with Cauty under the name of The Orb, releasing
a single called “The Kiss” in July 1989. “Crossover potential: nil” predicted the
press release. True enough for that single, but slightly wide of the mark by the
time The Orb became one of the most successful bands in the UK. Credited to
Two Fat Belgians – perhaps a dig at the Belgian New Beat craze (dismally slow,
sample-heavy dance records that were failing to export Belgian culture with any
success) – “The Kiss” was one of a number of samplemanic, scratch ‘n’ sniff,
blip culture records released at the time: Drummond and Cauty’s Justified
Ancients of Mu Mu, Coldcut, New York and Miami hip-hop, Bomb the Bass and
M/A/R/R/S. The same approach could be applied to club DJing: throwing any
possible source into the mix and gluing together the disparity with beats. But
what if the beats were taken out, the volume pulled down, the tempo varied or
slowed down to stasis, the diversity taken to extremes? This is what Patterson

and Cauty started at the now legendary sessions at Land of Oz.
“Legendary?” muses Patterson, sitting in the chill-out room of The Orb’s
studio, tracksuited and smoking one spliff after another. “It was just like a bar, a
VIP bar upstairs. We were just given the room every Monday for about six
months. I’d met Nancy Noise, who introduced me to Paul Oakenfold. We were
talking about it with Jimi Cauty. I think he liked the idea of me and Jimi. We
spent the Sundays looping one sample from, like, 808 State or ‘Sueño Latino’, or
something that was, like, very obvious – the Hovis advert.” At this point, the
idea of ambient was not entirely an underground concept. “Sueño Latino” was an
Italian house-music single, produced in Bologna by the DFC team: Riki Persi,
Claudino Collino and Andrea Gemolotto.
The basic tune was taken from a strange electronic disco-minimalist album, E2-
E4, recorded in the early 1980s by Manuel Göttsching and released by Klaus
Schulze.
E2-E4 already had a dancefloor pedigree; it had been a part of the eclectic mix
of records played at Manhattan’s Paradise Garage club. The simple addition of
heavier drums and bass, plus loon sounds (a bird commonly spotted hiding in
digital samplers) and a multi-orgasmic monologue spoken by Carolina Damas in
Italian, was novel enough to send “Sueño Latino” into the UK charts. Even at
this early stage, the elements feeding into the ambient side of dance music were
surprisingly varied. Göttsching, for example, was the guitarist for a German rock
band named Ash Ra Tempel, co-founded in 1970 with Schulze. By 1977, Ash Ra
Tempel had slimmed down to Ash Ra. Albums such as New Age of Earth
epitomised the difference between UK and European rock; pictured on the back
of the album cover, Göttsching was still dressed like a 1969 hippie – long hair,
flowing scarf, Gibson guitar. The music titles – “Ocean of Tenderness” in
particular – were alien to the post-punk spirit of Britain and East Coast USA.
These were signals that had been consigned to the dustbin of history. But the
style rule in Britain is to adopt the opposite of whatever has become entrenched,
institutionalised or boring.
So Patterson and Cauty fused the mellow side of house with slow music,
ethereal music, hippie music (despite the denial), bioacoustic music and spliff
music, feeding them through all available montage techniques. Nothing was
sacred. Ear witnesses have reported the Eagles, Strauss waltzes, Brian Eno, BBC
birdsong albums, 10cc’s “I’m Not In Love”. “We’d build melodies up”,

Patterson explains, “and then take an eight-track, or it was a twelve-track, into
Heaven, just linking it up to three decks, loads of CD players, loads of cassettes
and this loop, which would then become an eight-hour version of ‘Sueño
Latino’, ’cause there’s a loop of it in there. We used to keep it very, very quiet.
We never used to play any drums in there. It’d be just like, you know, BBC
sound effects, really.”
What was the original reaction? “We used to get six or seven or eight or nine
kids who always used to come and sit at the front and just sit there all night and
listen to what we did. There was a hard-core of about nine, maybe ten people
listening. There wasn’t that many people stayed there all night. And then it
gradually got bigger.
It depended. If it was a bank holiday then it got packed, people just completely
off their heads escaping all the loud noises from everywhere else. But you
needed a VIP
pass to get in there, which made it weirdly special. If you could get in and listen
to it in the first place you were lucky. All the DJs, they liked it because they
could sit down and talk work, rather than being in a room crammed full of loud
music and sweaty people, trying to get a conversation going behind the DJ
booth. NME started to pick up on it – ambient house, music for the 1990s – but
there was no ambient bands around. They tried to claim there was loads of clubs
all over Britain that were on the same network. There was probably three or four
clubs, one of them being Mardi Gras in Liverpool.
“The simple reason why it was popular, or became, as you say, legendary in a
sense, was because nobody had even thought about doing that in a club since the
late sixties, early seventies. And that was playing hippie music, which we
weren’t at all. I spent four or five hours playing really early dub reggae. You
don’t have to dance to it, you just nod your head to it. It’s still ambient to me.
Some of the effects on those records – a four-track, in a hut in Orange Street,
Kingston, and they’d make sounds like that. It puts us to shame when you think
of how much we’ve got to play with.
“Land of Oz – it only lasted six months. It’s the diversity that created it. We
used to play the German version of Kraftwerk, War – Galaxy, The World Is a
Ghetto – ‘Four Cornered Room’ especially off that album. Ummm … For All
Mankind videos. We had white screens so we could put visuals up as well. We
had home movies of ducks in the park. We’d go for everything. It was all laying

on top of each other – what The Orb later became with four thousand people
standing watching. This was a little room with a hundred people in there at the
most.”
That last point is important to an understanding of why ambient music is more
a way of listening, an umbrella term for attitude, rather than a single identifiable
style.
As Patterson has suggested, the DJ came to the forefront of music. As a semi-
anonymous bricoleur, a cut-up artisan, the DJ could montage any form of music
to create a mood, an environment.
Records began to appear which reflected this cavalier approach. What had been
a process became identifiable product. As Jimi Cauty told Face magazine editor
Sheryl Garratt at the time: “People keep ringing me to ask if I want to DJ at their
New Age night, but I’ve only got four records!” The KLF released a drumless
mix of “Madriga Eterna”; still calling themselves The Orb, Patterson and Cauty
released “A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules From the Centre of
the Ultraworld” in December 1989. Ambient house for the E generation they
called it – a neat marketing phrase which happened to be exactly right for a brief
time.
The Orb single was sampladelic, rather than drumless: church bells, babies
crying, celestial choirs, relentless arpeggiated synth sequences in the style of
Tangerine Dream, a heavy breakbeat and, at the centre of the Ultraworld, the late
Minnie Riperton singing her touching but nevertheless rather sickly ballad:
“Loving You”. This was not the first time Minnie had been electronically,
unwittingly transplanted. After her death from cancer, her unfinished vocals
were built up through overdubbing and editing into a posthumous album, a
reiteration of music’s status as a shifting conglomerate of manipulable bits,
rather than a finished entity. The dead are no more immune to this process than
the living.
More links were being made here, particularly the connection between
ambient music’s calming intentions and the nice-and-easy-does-it mood of easy
listening. In 1990, The KLF released two albums which could be described as
ambient. Space was an electronic tour of planetary influences, not quite Gustav
Holst’s The Planets performed on sequenced synthesisers, but close enough in
the vastness of its cosmic rumblings and heavenly choirs to infer such Rick
Wakeman-style prog-rock concepts.

Chill Out, on the other hand, manipulated more bits and pieces with a subtlety
and focus that has not been evident in their activities either before or since. Two
significant landmarks of pop muzak were sampled into the soundscape: Acker
Bilk’s “Stranger on the Shore”
and Fleetwood Mac’s “Albatross” along with Elvis Presley’s “In the Ghetto” and
snatches of KLF singles. A sticker on the front cover instructed “file under
Ambient”. Critics received a manifesto with their copy, a list of eighteen “facts?”
which included the following:
3. Ambient house is not New Age music.
11. Ambient house does not come to you: you have to go to it.
15. Ambient house is just a Monday night clique in the VIP bar at Heaven.
16. Ambient house is the first major music movement of the Nineties.
All of which were partially true. Whatever The KLF (or K Foundation) have
done in the name of confronting musical, artistic or business conventions and
conceits, whether burning money, ridiculing art prizes, sampling The Beatles,
recording with Tammy Wynette or making hit singles, the music has been treated
as a side effect. Their early singles captured the flow of movement associated
with outdoor raves – orbital travel around the M25, searching for a field
somewhere, dancing at “3am Eternal”, life held in a perfect moment of time.
Chill Out is movement in the imagination, oscillating in a strange dream space
between radio reception and virtual travel. Listening with detachment, I feel
simultaneously as if I am moving across vast spaces, yet immobilised in one spot
in the Gobi desert, watching the world go by, tuned in to organic and synthetic
rhythms normally inaudible to the human ear without radio receivers,
hydrophones, parabolic sound reflectors, satellite listening stations. Trains
passing, a flock of sheep herded nearby, Mongolian throat singers floating in the
air above me, motorbikes and cars roaring across the soundfield, a pedal steel
guitar lament falling like dusk, a black preacher’s hoarse “Get ready, get ready
… East Coast, come back fat as a rat”, night insects buzzing, dolphins, waves on
the seashore, “Stranger on the Shore” … “A Melody From a Past Life Keeps
Pulling Me Back”, “Dream Time In Lake Jackson”, “The Lights of Baton Rouge
Pass By”, like Harold Norse in 1951, standing on a stage in New York City after
midnight, tuning a radio for John Cage and experiencing “an automobile ride at
night on an American highway in which neon signs and patches of noise from
radios and automobiles flash into the distance”.
 

 
 
4
burial rites
noise and silence, myth and reality; electrical war and the Futurists; Edgard
Varèse and Charlie Parker
In the second volume of his Introduction to a Science of Mythology, From Honey
To Ashes, Claude Lévi-Strauss associates noisemaking instruments with death,
decomposition, social disorder and cosmic disruption. The instruments of
darkness, he calls them.
He documents a ceremony of the Bororo Indians of central Brazil. When a chief
dies, his funeral and the investiture of the new chief are marked by a rite at
which individuals personifying the parabára spirits (Parabára being the inventor
of the bamboo rattling cane used in the ceremony) walk around the grave of the
dead man, carrying split bamboos. When the leader of the ritual announces his
arrival, the bamboos are rattled. Then they place their noisemakers on the grave
and leave.
Revealing and deciphering the language of myth, Lévi-Strauss analyses many
strange stories told by the Indians of Brazil’s Amazonas rainforest: jaguars
murder howling babies by farting in their faces; an Indian drums on the
distended, gas-filled belly of a dead monkey, making it fart in order to combat
the banging, crackling noises of demons; a split hollow tree trunk is thrown on
the ground – the noise is a trick designed to draw an old woman out of her house
after she has killed and eaten Indians while transformed into the guise of a
jaguar; bullroarers (whirled instruments made from narrow, flat, often fish-
shaped pieces of wood) are played in imitation of a stinking, mud-covered river
monster’s bellow – a man discovers that he will become a shaman during a
dream in which the aquatic spirit (aigé) holds him yet he feels no objections to
the filth or stink of rot which clings to its skin; in a world of permanent daylight,
a well-sealed palm nut chirps with the sound of crickets and night toads – when

the seal is broken on the nut, living things and inanimate objects are
transformed, darkness falls and two balls of thread have to be changed into
nocturnal and dawn birds to demarcate night from day.
Buried in anthropological esoterica, there are descriptions of obscure, ritual
sound makers which could match the hallucinatory design of the myth
instruments. In the early 1930s, a man named Geoffrey Christian witnessed a
demonstration of an instrument used on the Upper Purari river, Papua New
Guinea, during full-moon dances. For the ten to sixteen days of this ceremony,
the men ate very little but drank huge amounts of water through long bamboo
pipes. Five or six of them would then sit in a circle and balance large, polished
hardwood disks on their toes or knees. “Each man lifts his diaphragm”, wrote
Christian, “and the edge of the disk is thrust deeply into the pit of the stomach;
all then depress their diaphragms on to the upper surface of the circumference of
the disk and open their mouths. An old man then takes a stone-headed hammer
and gently hits the centre of the disk. The sound appears to reverberate from the
distended lungs, and issues forth from the mouths of the seated men; the effect is
a deep booming sound, similar to the sound of the big skin-headed drums of
other parts.”
Other documentations of inventive, impossible ritual instruments used for rites
of passage, cosmic transitions and the music of non-humans (spirits, ancestors,
animal familiars) include the following selection: One of the simplest of all,
called a Lion’s Roar – once found in Ethiopia – by shouting into a tapering hole
dug out of the earth; rock gong complexes found in sites as far apart as Uganda
and Wales – ringing rocks scarred by the so-called “chatter marks” of non-
random but repetitious striking; African voice disguisers, used at night to
simulate the speech of ancestral spirits, made from tubes sealed with membranes
of distorting materials such as spiders’ egg cysts or bats’ wings; a circumcision
mask named Mask That Eats Water (recorded in 1965 among the Dan people of
Côte d’Ivoire), built from a pit dug in the earth, covered with bark through which
were passed vegetable fibres which were made to groan by hand friction;
anthropomorphic wooden trumpets, carved as larger-than-lifesize human forms,
held by the arms and blown through a mouthpiece set in the back of each, used
in funeral rites with dwindling frequency in the mid-1960s by the Ba-Bembe
people of Congo; a shaman’s clay ocarina, unearthed in Hungary, moulded to the
shape of a human head with symbolic trepanation (skull perforation) marked on
the top; giant slit gongs of Cameroon – both zoomorphic slit gongs used for
funerary purposes by male secret societies in the Bamileke chiefdoms, and
monumental slit gongs of the Bamum court, some twice as high as a tall man,
used for signalling war or crisis and left to rot in the open air after the death of a

king.
One particularly imposing example was photographed in 1912. A crouching
simian, like ET with genitals, squats on top of the wooden gong. On a more
elaborate instrument, a human figure sits above crocodiles and other carvings, a
knife in one hand, human head in the other. The explorer who saw it recorded
the fact that dried leaves were wreathed around it. Two weeks later, he came
back to find the leaves gone and the figure richly encrusted with blood.
Intrigued, he asked questions. Human blood or animal?
 
purity and danger
In The Pursuit of the Millennium, Norman Cohn related the story of a millennial
messiah named Hans Böhm. A shepherd who played drum and pipes for dancing
in taverns and markets during his time off from the sheep, the Drummer of
Niklashausen (as he became known) started a minor social revolution in his
south German village. Böhm began in 1476 with a straightforward Virgin Mary
vision – stop dancing, throw away the golden necklaces and pointy shoes, start
the pilgrimages. This escalated swiftly, supported by increasingly large numbers
of followers, to that hardy perennial of possibilities, no priests, no class
divisions, no taxes, no rents, the fruits of nature ripe and available to all. But as
Cohn observed, “the bishops during the first half of the century were wildly
extravagant and could pay their debts only by levying ever heavier taxes”. With
his followers reaching a fever pitch of devotion, the Drummer had to go. An
ecclesiastical court found him guilty of heresy and sorcery. His life ended in
flames; tied to a stake, singing hymns to the Virgin, but his prophesies began
with another symbolic consumption by fire: in front of the parish church he had
burned his drum.
Away from the naked bodies, biodiversity and communal magic of the tropical
rainforest, deep in the doomed megalopolis, the urban present, noise persistently
draws on the metaphorical resource of dark powers. Fin de millénnium visions
puncture the skin. In recent times, terms such as grunge, black metal, grindcore,
jungle, the dark-side or dark ambient, have been tagged on to musics which are
fierce, distorted, morbid, malevolent or menacing. Musics for the dance of death,
in other words, rather than the music of the spheres. Heaven and hell; in some
cases both, in opposition or in balance. I am listening to two jungle tracks as I
write this: “The Burial” by Leviticus, and “Meditation” by DJ Crystl. Both play
moods of euphoria off an undercurrent of disquiet, balancing oceanic dreams

with the clattering, libidinous rush of body processes and urban movement.
Less willingly, I listen to the apocalyptic industrial grind of Skinny Puppy’s
“Dog Shit” – hoarse screams of “jaw hell piss fuck head rest pure acid hell filthy
world mutation laughing hound” – or Nine Inch Nails’ Trent Reznor shouting
into the void on “Broken”: “Dress up this rotten carcass just to make it look
alive”. In 1990 I walked from my house in north London to Konk Studios, where
Trent and his producer, Flood, were remixing an album track. Trent talked,
fragmented 
but 
intelligent, 
about 
balancing 
imbalances, 
contrasting
contradictory signals, working against stereotypical correspondences – “I think
there’s something cool about electronic music that’s aggressive … There’s
something seductive about aggression … maybe not sing about traditional
industrial death lyrics … For me, I think the key is anger-fuelled, something
other than fast or loud” – never reaching a conclusion about the symbology of
noise and silence, death and speed, purity and corruption.
 
extinguished fires
Fifty years into the first millennium, the Roman emperor Nero attempted to
improve his singing technique by lying under sheets of lead and administering
enemas into his own back passage. For pleasure, he and his male “wife” enjoyed
dressing in animal skins and attacking the genitals of men and women tied to
stakes. He also anticipated the crowd manipulation techniques of fascism and
rock music, using five thousand noise makers to influence the mood of the
people during public meetings, categorising the catalytic sounds into bombi –
like bees buzzing, imbrices – like rain or hail on a roof, and testae – like pots
crashing. In his survey of the political economy of music, Noise, Jacques Attali
quotes Adolf Hitler writing for the Manual of German Radio in 1938: “Without
the loudspeaker, we would never have conquered Germany.” We are much more
interested in the digital global transmission of combined text, sound and moving
image now, but sounds that traversed long distances or spoke with abnormal
volume once possessed a special mystique. These properties of sound – ascribed
to pagan forces – survived a Christianising influence in Europe, with bells being
rung to subdue storms at sea; during a plague in 1625 a doctor wrote the
following prescription: “Lett the bells in cities and townes be rung often, and
great ordinance discharged thereby the aire is purified.”
At the conclusion of the first volume of his mythological epic – The Raw and
the Cooked – Lévi-Strauss investigated a European custom called charivari, a din

made with cooking pots and pans, wash basins and other domestic utensils with
noise potential. The point of the racket was to express communal disapproval of
marriages made between two people of disparate ages, women having affairs
with married men and other social “crimes”.
The charivari would descend on women who beat their husbands, though not,
apparently, in reverse circumstances. None of this lies any further back in history
than Debussy’s experience at the Paris exposition or Erik Satie’s Musique
d’ameublement (more later of Satie’s furniture music). Thomas Hardy’s The
Mayor of Casterbridge was first serialised in 1893. In one section of the novel
Hardy sketches in a charivari, known in his part of the world as a skimmington
ride. “What do they mean by a skimmity-ride?”
asks a man in an inn. “Oh, sir,” said the landlady swinging her long earrings with
deprecating modesty; “’tis a old foolish thing they do in these parts, when a
man’s wife is – well, not too particularly his own.” Hardy goes on to list the odd,
archaic instruments used for a skimmington: “the din of cleavers, tongs,
tambourines, kits, crouds, humstrums, serpents, rams’-horns, and other historical
forms of music”. Challenged by a magistrate, one of the riders claims he might
have heard the wind in the trees making a “peculiar poetical-like murmur”, all
the while concealing a pair of kitchen tongs and a cow’s horn under his
waistcoat.
In a diminutive version of the Futurist idea that machines in factories would be
tuned into “intoxicating orchestras”, one of Karlheinz Stockhausen’s great
unrealised visions for Utopia was a prediction that domestic appliances – food
mixers, washing machines, perhaps even coffee grinders – would one day be
sound-designed to make pleasing combinations of tones as they whirred, spun
and masticated. Perhaps he underestimated the dark covert history of the kitchen.
The Raw and the Cooked links the practice of charivari or skimmington riding
with another noisy occasion – the eclipse of the sun – an event which has been
known to precipitate loud crashing and banging of kitchenware, drums or gongs
all over the world. “The function of noise”, writes Lévi-Strauss, “is to draw
attention to an anomaly in the unfolding of a syntagmatic sequence.” He notes
situations in which the contrast between silence and noise became dramatically
significant: “Among the Warramunga of Australia, when a sick man was on his
deathbed, noise was prescribed before his death, and silence afterward.
Correspondingly, the great Bororo rite of the visit of the souls (which is a kind of
symbolic and temporary resurrection of the ancestors) begins at night in

darkness and in total silence and after all fires have been extinguished. The souls
are frightened of noise; but their arrival is greeted by a tremendous outburst of
noise. The same thing happens when an animal that has been killed during a hunt
is brought into the village, and when the shaman invokes the spirits so that they
may take possession of him.”
 
Tipu’s tiger
Of all the noise instruments in history, one of the least equivocal in its intent is
Tipu’s Tiger. Captured in India by the British army after the defeat and death by
bullet and bayonet of Tipu Sultan in 1799, this large and amazing object is now
housed in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. The most succinct and
evocative description was written by an employee of the East India Company:
“This piece of Mechanism represents a Royal Tyger in the act of devouring a
prostrate European. There are some barrels in imitation of an Organ, within the
body of the Tyger, and a row of Keys of natural Notes. The sounds produced by
the Organ are intended to resemble the Cries of a person in distress intermixed
with the roar of a Tyger. The machinery is so contrived that while the Organ is
playing, the hand of the European is often lifted up, to express his helpless and
deplorable condition.”
John Keats saw Tipu’s Tiger in the East India Company’s offices and later
referred to it in a satire he wrote on the Prince Regent: “that little buzzing noise,
Whate’er your palmistry may make of it, Comes from a play-thing of the
Emperor’s choice, From a Man-Tiger-Organ, prettiest of his toys.” And when the
tiger was first exhibited in the newly opened Victoria and Albert Museum, the
public cranked the handle to make it roar with such sadistic, joyful frequency
that students in the adjacent library were driven half-mad by the distraction.
In a technical analysis of the instrument, Henry Willis speculated that “the
intended method of use for the keyboard organ was to run the knuckles up and
down the scale to produce the effects of a screaming man being killed by a
tiger”. Because the design and materials suggest a European rather than an
Indian maker, Willis suggested that the tiger and its victim were constructed by
either a malicious Frenchman or a renegade Englishman. But whoever made this
wonderfully macabre sculpture, Tipu certainly enjoyed it. He was obsessed with
tigers, for one thing; for another, as a Muslim whose wealth and land had been
plundered by the colonialists, he hated the British. Reportedly, he used to
circumcise them when he took prisoners. His walls were decorated with scenes

depicting soldiers being dismembered, crushed by elephants, eaten by tigers and
other fates too obscene for the British major who saw them to form a verbal
description.
“Better to die like a soldier than to live a miserable dependent on the infidels
on the list of their pensioned rajas and nabobs”, Tipu said at his last military
conference. Delicious irony: through the preservation of imperial spoils, albeit
mute and frozen in the act of mauling within a glass case, the objectification of
Tipu’s hatred endures.
 
electrical war
Throughout this century of rapid technological change, the drive of modernism
has been harnessed to the dances and songs of machines. In Italy, Filippo
Marinetti, the author in 1909 of the first Manifesto of Futurism, visualised speed,
electricity, violence and war as empowering elements. (In 1929 he portrayed
Benito Mussolini as a man of “square crushing jaws” and “scornful jutting
lips”.) “I listened to the lyric initiative of electricity flowing through the sheaths
of the quadruple turret guns”, Marinetti wrote in 1914, clearly quivering with
similar ecstasies after witnessing minor skirmishes from the trenches. For the
Futurists and their opponents, art was war. During a performance of Bralilla
Pratella’s orchestral work, supposedly depicting urban industrial noise, the
musicians were pelted with coal. As they retired hurt, Marinetti shouted “Rotten
syphilitic” and “Son of a priest”
at the perpetrators.
Marinetti was almost certainly influenced by Alfred Jarry, the Parisian “author
with pistols” and the founder of pataphysics, the science of imaginary solutions.
Following Jarry’s example, Marinetti and the other Italian Futurists stepped up
the assault on bourgeois values through the new medium of performance: words
as declaimed, intoned sounds partially freed from syntax; music as noise; body
gestures; sonic impressions of battle; the sounds of a boxing match; tirades,
insults, practical jokes and fist fights.
Multimedia, the most overworked term of the late twentieth century, began
here (or hereabouts). Valentine de Saint-Point danced her Poem of Atmosphere in
Paris, masked and Orientalist, splayed in mock-Egyptian flat relief, colour and
mathematical equations projected on to every surface around her, music by Satie

and Debussy providing the soundtrack to her celebration of sexual freedom. And
in Russia, Futurist performance was enacted on a grand scale: a spectacular
symphony of “proletarian music” was played by factory sirens, steam whistles,
foghorns, artillery, machine guns and aircraft on 7 November 1922, all of these
conducted from the rooftops of Baku.
One of the specific aims of Futurist music was the eradication of inflated
romanticism, particularly that of Wagner. “How shall we avoid Parsifal and its
cloudbursts, puddles and bogs of mystical tears?” implored Marinetti. For him,
the answer lay with electrical war and a world in which he predicted with fair
accuracy that “[t]he energy of distant winds, the rebellions of the sea,
transformed by man’s genius into many millions of Kilowatts, will penetrate
every muscle, artery and nerve of the peninsula, needing no wires, controlled
from keyboards with a fertilising abundance that throbs beneath the fingers of
the engineers”. The days of the symphony were numbered.
“Now we have had enough of them”, wrote Luigi Russolo, “and we delight
much more in combining in our thoughts the noises of trams, of automobile
engines, of carriages and brawling crowds, than in hearing again the ‘Eroica’ or
the ‘Pastorale’.”
Irrepressibly pugnacious, Marinetti had slipped his own incontinent ideas into
Pratella’s sober-sounding Technical Manifesto of Futurism. Russolo, a man
blessed with high cheekbones and eyes so intense they seemed to bore through
the camera lens and directly into the film, had been inspired by a Pratella
performance – “Perhaps,” as musician and researcher Hugh Davies has
suggested, “just as some musicians (including myself) have some of their best
ideas in the concert hall when listening to music that bores them, Russolo felt
that if this was typical Futurist music, he could do better.”
So Luigi Russolo, a painter of marked Symbolist leanings, began writing a
series of polemical essays which have come to be grouped under the general
heading The Art of Noises. In company with a painter named Ugo Piatti, he
started work also on the intonarumori. Based on the scraped string principle of
the hurdy-gurdy but also combining aspects of the slide guitar and Indian
khamak string drum (extremely unlikely that either of these would have been
known to Russolo), the intonarumori sound as if they might have been terrifying
on disc if Russolo had been able to wait until the 1950s to record them. He
divided them into categories, all variations on the basic idea, and the names
recall the instruments of darkness: the Howler, the Hummer, the Crackler, the
Burster, the Whistler and the Gurgler. Despite some remarkable research

(particularly by Davies) and even reconstructions of Russolo’s instruments, the
unavoidable truth remains that the one recording made of the instruments is
ruined by the compositional meanderings of his brother, Antonio. Even without
Antonio’s inconsequential salon music, the recording technology of 1924
was not really up to the task of capturing these growling monsters.
In a live setting, however, the noise must have been disturbing. “No more!”
the audience shouted during a performance at the London Coliseum. A critic
compared their sounds with the “rigging of a channel steamer” and Davies
quotes one witness, interviewed in 1982 at the age of ninety, whose recall of this
1914 concert was sufficiently fresh to describe the music as “funny burps” and
“like battleships pooping off”. Not very loud, though, he thought.
This combination of war sounds with the noise of human wind neatly links the
instruments of darkness of Brazil’s rainforest with their twentieth-century
equivalent. Like Marinetti, Russolo wrote about battle sounds with enthusiasm.
He was more the academic or technician, however, as he analysed and classified
the whistles of varying shell calibers, the enharmonic Doppler effect of falling
pitch as the shells flew from cannon barrel to final explosion, the tok-tok-tok-tok
of machine guns, the tek-poom of Austrian rifles, the tek-tak-trak of rifle bolts,
the tseeoo of bullets and the physics of acoustics. “Modern war cannot be
expressed lyrically without the noise instrumentation of Futurist free words”, he
wrote. These free words had been devised by Marinetti during a battle; he ranted
and raved with uncomfortably infectious verve about the hygiene of war, not a
tenable theory at the best of times, but easier to carry off after a few colonial
encounters in Libya and Bulgaria than after the horror of World War I trench
carnage and the subsequent killing grounds of the twentieth century. But, like a
film critic taking notes at a snuff movie, Russolo chills the blood more
thoroughly than Marinetti, just for the dispassionate poetry, ultimately the
pedantry, of his observations. Some of his images are affecting – soldiers
wrapping their hobnail boots in trench sacks for a silent attack – but his prime
concern is a hunger for dramatic, enharmonic sounds, particularly glissandi
which sweep across a sound field, echoes, and violent explosions.
Hugh Davies regrets the fact that none of the composers who enthused over
Russolo’s noise instruments chose to incorporate them in their work. If
Stravinsky had included growlers and hummers in Le Sacre du Printemps, for
example (my idea, not Davies’s), then Russolo’s inventions might not have
slipped into the terminal obscurity of being too avant-garde for the avant-garde. I
make the suggestion, knowing it was impossible. Stravinsky worked on Le Sacre

du Printemps from 1910, when he had a dream in which a pagan rite was
enacted: a circle of wise elders watched a young girl dance herself to death
(more sex, death, paganism and anthropology). Stravinsky was invited to
Marinetti’s house to hear the noise makers, having expressed some interest in
incorporating them in a ballet. “A Crackler crackled and sent up a thousand
sparks like a gloomy torrent. Stravinsky leapt from the divan like an exploding
bedspring, with a whistle of overjoyed excitement”, wrote Francesco Canguilo, a
Futurist poet and sculptor. But this was in 1914, a year after the notorious first
performance of Le Sacre du Printemps, the concert which set a twentieth-century
standard for violent audience reactions to modern music. Perhaps Stravinsky was
thrilled to hear something that might cause an even bigger riot than his own
work.
I disagree (very mildly) with Davies, because these grinding, humming,
growling pagan noises clamoured in the air without any help from the Futurists.
From the industrial revolution onwards, functional machines had let them loose.
Those who composed for the orchestra – particularly Stravinsky in his formative
years and Varèse throughout his life – could hear the sounds of an increasingly
noisy soundscape as music in their minds’ ears, and strained to reproduce them.
In fact, the English Vorticist Wyndham Lewis delivered a patriotic and rather
snooty dismissal of Futurism during a taxi ride with Marinetti. Machine society
was invented by the English, he said, so why should London show any
enthusiasm for machine art at such a late stage. Marinetti was apoplectic.
Russolo took a brave step, but only one. Noise, sound, musical rules, the
growing clamour of mechanised life, the lines drawn between them were
blurring, vanishing into thin air. The solid objects of European composition – the
score, the orchestra, the composer, pitch relationships, tuning and harmony, the
boundary between music and not-music – were about to be dismembered.
 
Varèse’s dream
He was in a telephone booth in New York, talking to his wife Louise, who was
in Paris.
As they spoke his body became lighter, eventually losing all substance and
disintegrating, one limb at a time. In this non-corporeal form, he flew to Paris
where he was reintegrated, the physical self that was Varèse reborn as spirit.

 
new worlds on earth
A photograph: Varèse’s basement studio in New York City. A bricked-in
fireplace, paintings by Miró, a grand piano littered with gourds, a woodblock,
beaters, an African shaker, rattles. Metal frames on castors, the kind used by the
rag trade for wheeling clothes around. Hanging from these functional frames, a
large tam-tam, smaller flat and bossed gongs from Southeast Asia. On the floor,
a Chinese drum and, overexposed on the edge of the photo frame, what could be
a long hourglass drum from New Guinea. A no smoking sign hangs from the
wall light.
Edgard Varèse had strong reasons of his own for rejecting Luigi Russolo’s
inventions.
Born in Paris in 1883, he connected to the vortex of French and Italian artistic
action as a very young man. In 1900, his grandfather took him to the Paris
Exposition Universelle; he almost certainly attended the notorious first
performance of Le Sacre du Printemps; he sat and talked with Debussy, soaking
up the fragrance of a sandalwood screen that Debussy kept in front of his fire; he
made friends with Erik Satie, met Lenin and Trotsky, Picasso and Jean Cocteau.
He also befriended Russolo, though personal empathy never stopped him from
passing harsh judgements on the intonarumori. For Varèse, the noise instruments
produced “material for the most part of terrifying intractability”. They were the
equivalent of the Ethiopian Lion’s Roar: a lot of digging, then down on hands
and knees to shout into your hole in the ground. But that was it.
Varèse had an insatiable appetite for material which reinforced his conviction
that music should be experienced physically, rather than through the
understanding and acceptance of a harmonic system. Delving into the
speculations of Leonardo da Vinci, the hermetic museum of alchemical texts,
acoustical studies from India, China, Egypt and ancient Greece, he absorbed
Professor Hermann Helmholtz’s groundbreaking study of physiological
acoustics, particularly the sections on sirens. Among his many experiments,
Helmholtz investigated the beating of combination tones, dissonance,
sympathetic resonance, the physical nature of intervals and chords, the vibrations
of very deep tones, the structure of the ear and various tuning systems, including
just intonation. On the Sensations of Tone, first published in Germany in 1862,
begins with a distinction between noises and musical tones. Wind, water

splashes and the rumbling of carriages were noise, whereas the tones of all
musical instruments were music. Helmholtz’s distinction rested upon the idea
that ambient sounds – “the rattling of a carriage over granite paving stones”
– were irregular and chaotic, but music “strikes the ear as a perfectly
undisturbed, uniform sound which remains unaltered as long as it exists”. Just in
time, science arrived at a rationalisation for art to contradict.
Critics outdid themselves in their reviews of Varèse’s music. A fire in the
Bronx Zoo, they called it, or saucepan banging and solos for flushing toilets.
Again, the recurrent resting places of musical analogy: bowels and kitchenware.
A music supermarket called Tower. Every wretched, fourth-rate composer in
history is allocated a browser bin so thick with product that browsing itself
necessitates pulling out a handful of albums to make some space. Varèse, on the
other hand, is represented by not a single CD.
Paraphrasing his hero, Edgard Varèse, Ruben Sano (aka Frank Zappa) printed
“The present-day Pachuco refuses to die!” on the sleeve of Ruben & The Jets. I
was never entirely convinced by the optimism of that statement: the present-day
composer refuses to die. At the end of the century, when strange tunings,
percussion, electronic instruments, voice and sound montages, parabolic and
hyperbolic curves of sound, monstrous growling incantations, sonic earthquakes
and rivers of noise are the basic stuff of music, Varèse, the seer who prophesied
this future, our present, has almost vanished from the narrative. Without Zappa,
this disappearance might be even more complete.
In 1967 (or was it 1968?) I sat in one of the onstage seats of the Royal Albert
Hall, London, just behind and to one side of The Mothers of Invention. They
played pieces that would shortly appear on Uncle Meat, pieces drenched in
Varèse, slimed in sleaze, a potent frothing brew of jazz orchestration, Ionisation
percussion, improvised electronics, R&B grooves, ice-cream chords, free jazz
saxophone, lyrics about hubcaps, fuzzy dice, cruising for burgers, the
iconography of Los Angeles.
A few condensed minutes from that concert are included on the album: the point
when a man jumped on stage holding a trumpet, looking to jam. Don Preston
climbed into the pipe organ loft (who would give a rock band the key to the
door?) to play “the perfect thing to accompany this man’s trumpet”: “Louie
Louie”. Another incident from the same occasion, only documented on Uncle
Meat by Zappa’s acidly sarcastic request to the audience – “Let’s hear it again
for the London Philharmonic Orchestra” – was the point when three members of

the LPO stepped from the wings, dressed in what they believed were
appropriately “zany” clothes, to play one of Zappa’s written scores with
undisguised contempt. As an oblique and misguided act of revenge on orchestral
musicians, I grabbed my opportunity to steal one of the manuscript pages after
the concert had finished.
Born too early to realise his ultimate visions, Varèse spent all his life
envisaging instruments which could express the soundworld of his imagination.
For him, music was art – science, an emotional, political and ritualistic force that
should vibrate the air, resonate the human body, stir the soul. By comparison, the
Futurists were literal-ists who doggedly searched for ways to reproduce machine
sounds which already existed and would soon become obsolete. Varèse denied
any direct connection between his music and the sounds of nature or industry.
There were subconscious links, however.
During the first performance of Hyperprism, his ominous, compact composition
for small orchestra and sixteen percussion instruments (including siren, gongs,
cymbals and lion’s roar – not the Ethiopian hole-in-the-ground but a string drum
sounded by the friction of resined fingers), he noticed that the audience giggled
nervously whenever one particular C sharp sounded. That night, working at
home, he heard the sound of a siren on the river. The pitch was identical.
Without noticing it before, he had been hearing the siren play that note for the
entire period of composing Hyperprism.
Stockhausen had his own view of the relationship between Varèse’s music and
his environment.
In one of a series of mid-1960s radio lectures entitled “Do you know a music
that can only be heard over loudspeakers?”, he added his image of a “bubbling
cauldron”
to a metaphor of urban living – the melting pot – that was increasingly
unbelievable: “New York, that prime blueprint for a world society, is without
question an indispensable experience for the contemporary artist. Ideas one
might have about possible integration, about a coherent unification, or about
possible syntheses of the influences issuing from all parts of the globe, all these
must be tested against living experience if they are to lay claim to any truth.” So
New York was not simply an opportunity to jettison the classical heritage. The
city also offered Varèse important opportunities to meet artists connected to a

glittering variety of musical traditions: Charlie Parker, black American composer
William Grant Still, Chinese composer Chou Wen-chung, Cuban novelist,
composer and music writer Alejo Carpentier (the inventor of “magic realism”
who wrote of the marvellous reality of Iberian America, where anything you
could imagine is always inferior to the magical workings of reality itself),
Russian inventor Léon Theremin and Japanese composer Michiko Toyama, who
shared Varèse’s enthusiasm for gagaku court music. He even spoke to Frank
Zappa on the telephone, telling him about the composition of a new piece called
Déserts. They never met.
Having lived in Paris, Turin, Berlin, New York, Los Angeles and New
Mexico, the furthest-reaching zones explored by Varèse were imaginary worlds.
The culmination came with his Poème électronique, a work for three-track tape.
This montage of concrete, treated and electronically generated sounds was
played on four hundred loudspeakers in Le Corbusier’s Philips pavilion at the
Brussels world fair of 1958. The architect of the pavilion was Iannis Xenakis.
Luckily for Varèse, Xenakis was also a composer and mathematician, since some
support from a fellow musician was necessary to keep the objections of Philips
at bay. Images of masks, skeletons, cities, human bodies and beasts were
projected on every surface but one critic claimed that these images were
overshadowed by the music: “By the use of moving sound they have succeeded
in liberating the score from the shackles of reality.”
 
magick paper made real
For some traditional West African societies printed memory in the form of records or books is considered
unnatural, even abhorrent. The positive and negative powers of living things, including thoughts, memories
and historical events, are understood as embodied in words but, transferred in written form, are seen as
trapped in an undesirable state of rigidity and permanence, a state contrary to life.
– Tina Oldknow, Muslim Soup
Varèse struggled to deliver music that could incorporate the whole world, that
obliterated the equal tempered scale, the written rules of harmony, the
predominance of pitch over timbre and rhythm. The ear – not numerical systems
of rhythm or pitch – was the final judge of music.
White people are conditioned out of all sense of what is true in music, Varèse
thought: “J’ai vu des nègres de l’Afrique équatoriale – venus chez moi – qui ne
connaissaient rien de notre civilisation industrielle, des Indiens, des Asiatiques,
et tous étaient plus sensibles à ma musique que des blancs, qui ont toujours vécu

dans la ville, qui ont été à l’école, qui ont été conditionnés.” [“I have seen blacks
from equatorial Africa – in my home – who know nothing of our industrial
civilisation, Indians, Asians, who were all more sensitive to my music than
whites, who have always lived in cities, been to school, been conditioned.”]
He composed with basic materials: rhythms, frequencies, intensities, blocks of
sound moving and projecting in space. His first significant work – Amériques –
he described as a symbol of “new worlds on earth, in the sky, or in the minds of
men”, and when critics interpreted his use of sirens as a kind of barbarous
programme music, a simple sound painting of urban noise pollution, he claimed
that his purpose was “the portrayal of a mood in music and not a sound picture”.
Mood, atmosphere …
what do those words mean? Debussy’s Nocturnes is an atmosphere – “the
immutable aspect of the sky and the slow, solemn motion of the clouds …
vibrating atmosphere with sudden flashes of light … music and luminous dust,
participating in the cosmic rhythm” – but so is Dr Dre’s “Nothin’ But a ‘G’
Thang” in its evocation of tyres rolling on jellied asphalt, cold beers smoking in
the fridge, the lazy promise of sex, a heavy odour of cannabis. What Varèse
sought to develop was the superior capacity of all kinds of music to capture
emergence in complex phenomena; transient, non-articulated feelings; or what
Gaston Bachelard called the Poetics of Space, whether the ambience of a room,
the ribbon of a road or the boundless envelopment of oceanic space.
One finds a bone-setting priest and he, strong in piety towards the gods, resets the bones so well one hears a
grating noise as the bones fit into one another.
– Zosimos of Panopolis, alchemist and Gnostic
Debussy believed that percussion in Europe was the art of barbarians.
Listening to recordings of Varèse’s compositions, I am often struck by the tame
precision with which they are played. Barbarians, yes, but a hopelessly meek and
fussy tribe. We hear echoes of Varèse’s vision of “masses of sound moving about
in space, each at its own speed, on its own plane, rotating, colliding, interacting,
splitting up, reuniting”.
These should be star wars, battle cries, sacrificial fanfares, escaping steam,
brooding earth tremors and crunching skulls, yet the executants are women and
men who dedicate themselves to the minutiae of playing notes at the correct
pitch and in the correct place. Imagine Nocturnal, Equatorial or Intégrales

played by Sun Ra’s Myth-Science Arkestra, particularly the one-hundred strong
ensemble Ra once gathered together for a concert in Central Park. There are
stories, perhaps apocryphal, of Charlie Parker following Varèse through the
streets of New York, plucking up courage to ask for private tuition. Varèse
played down this not entirely innocent image of the jazzman curled up at the feet
of the European master. “He stopped by my place a number of times”, Varèse
told Robert George Reisner, author of Bird: The Legend of Charlie Parker.
Parker wanted to learn structure, wanted to be taught how to write for an
orchestra and was even prepared to cook for Varèse in payment. “He was so
dramatic it was funny, but he was sincere”, said Varèse. “He spoke of being tired
of the environment his work relegated him to … ‘I’m so steeped in this and can’t
get out,’ he said.” Like Ornette Coleman ten years later, or Jimi Hendrix twenty
years later, Parker struggled for escape, not only from the harmonic limitations
of the blues or the conservatism of jazz, but from the expectations of promoters,
record companies and the suffocating embrace of fans.
Unfortunately, the closest we come to hearing Parker’s dream is “Repetition”,
the extended piece he recorded with arranger/bandleader Neal Hefti in 1948.
Some jazz critics regard this track as an aberration. They can only bear to accept
it by convincing themselves that Parker’s alto saxophone was overdubbed.
I hear it differently. Parker died five years after this session. Those last years of
his life, often suicidal, were when he came to Varèse hoping for tuition. Time
was short and Parker’s options were few. His own genius for soloing over fast
tempi and rapid chord changes undermined his hopes for absorption into the
forests of sound invoked by Varèse. As with many aspects of his life, there were
elements of his work which had moved beyond his control. After a live radio
broadcast of “Repetition”, compere Symphony Sid chats to Parker about the
titles of his tunes. “The other side you called ‘Relaxin’ With Lee’. Who’s Lee?”
asks Sid. “I don’t have the slightest idea”, replies Parker. “They name those
tunes after I leave the studio.” So he pursued a complex relationship with the
pop song and the record business, perhaps hearing beauty and potential marvels
where others heard only banality. On “Repetition”, Hefti’s scoring for strings,
reeds and brass is refined sugar, halfway between the dance band and
Hollywood. Diego Iborra’s congas and bongos clop along, so far back in the mix
that they might have been recorded with a gun mike pointing towards Cuba. But
Parker’s rhythmic sophistication is awe inspiring. He plays a tumbling line, a
long sculpted tendril of breath, intellect and passion, folding back on itself,
stretching, freezing, kinking into weird angles and then hanging in the air over a

fading chord, the last one at the party.
How could Varèse have helped Parker? As sympathetic as he was to Parker
shaking the cage that enclosed him, Varèse suffered his own frustrations,
particularly with the tools at his disposal. The symphonic orchestra possessed
advantages of flexibility and complexity, although Varèse described it as “un
éléphant hydropique” by comparison with the jazz band, which was “un tigre”.
He had turned to percussion, striving to come closer to his feeling in early life
that music should be a river of sound, currents of sound moving in chaotic flow
like the Zambezi. But ultimately, electronics held the key. Nothing, so far, had
blasted music out of its prison; not Russolo’s mechanical intonarumori, not even
Léon Theremin’s electrical Theremin, Friedrich Trautwein’s subtractive
synthesis Trautonium, Oskar Sala’s Mixtur-Trautonium, Maurice Martenot’s
Ondes Martenot or Varèse’s own experiments with phonograph turntables. In
October 1964, Robert Moog and Herb Deutsch exhibited the first handmade
Moog synthesiser modules, the sounds of which would be transformed a few
years later by Sun Ra into astro-blackness, a sea of sounds, the energy of distant
winds, the lyric initiative of electricity, new worlds on earth.
Varèse died in November 1965. A claustrophobia sufferer in childhood, he left
a request that his body should be cremated and the ashes dispersed. Inspired as a
youth by Jules Verne, later by sacred texts of the Maya, the Popol Vuh, Varèse
suggested, through his music, ecstatic travel in search for the magical body.
“Deserts mean to me”, he wrote, “not only the physical deserts of sand, sea,
mountains and snow, of outer space, of empty city streets … but also that remote
inner space no telescope can reach, where man is alone in a world of mystery
and essential loneliness.”
 

 
 
5
content in a void
Michael Mann and Tangerine Dream; Frank Sinatra; dead zone recordings;
Alice Coltrane; Roland Kirk; Jimi Hendrix; Miles Davis; Karlheinz
Stockhausen; Bow Gamelan; James
Brown; Brian Wilson; Lee Perry; dub; Brian Eno
 
dream
Sitting in a Las Vegas entertainment lounge. Despite being in Vegas, the room
looked more like a Barnsley working mens’ club: spacious with a hint of plush
but terminally
bleak, chairs lined up in long rows, bare walls, exposed stage. The quartet that
took
the stage was fronted by Elvis Presley, the only other identifiable member being
ambient
DJ Mixmaster Morris. Morris was wearing his silver holo-graphic suit, as usual,
while
Elvis looked fit, tanned and surprisingly boyish. I was amazed by his youth and
the
quality of his voice. The music sounded like “Heartbreak Hotel”-era Presley
crooned

over drifting electronic ambient sound. After a while, I became suspicious. Was
this
really Elvis? Then I noticed that his loafers were scuffed. Elvis was a fake.
 
content in a void
A number of interpretations of this dream are possible. Presley’s reluctance to
vacate the planet has become a bit of a bore, but his posthumous presence in
supermarket queues reminds us of how little we knew him when he was alive.
The
perpetual reconstruction of celebrities through revisionist biographies and
tabloid
surrealism has an odd effect. Post-war pop culture is so entwined in myth and yet
so young, that one major facelift or smear job can tilt the entire picture. As a
baby
boomer old enough to have been aware of mid-1950s rock’n’roll as it happened,
I was
misled and self-deceived into believing that the lifestyles of the rich and famous
could be deduced from their music and outward image. Jerry Lee Lewis and
Little Richard
were wild’n’crazy guys, clearly pursuing lives without shape or restraint, and
this
ebb and flow, inspired by angels and demons alike, was counterbalanced by a
grid of
placid order and white picket fences beamed out into the universe by Andy
Williams,
Perry Como and Doris Day.

Naive, of course, for what could be closer to the edge of twentieth-century
alienation (or more ambient, in their way) than the weird, hermetic, formless
existences fashioned
in late life by big shots of entertainment central USA such as Howard Hughes
and Dean
Martin and then imagined into print by, respectively, Michael Drosnin and Nick
Tosches?
“Remote control”, wrote Drosnin in Citizen Hughes. “There was no need to
venture out, not even to stand up.” Jeanne Martin, Dean Martin’s second wife,
conjures a similar image of free fall, quoted as saying in Tosches’s
Dino: “He was always content in a void.”
So did my dream resolve certain supposedly oppositional tendencies in
popular 
music 
– 
Dionysian/Apollonian, 
radical/conservative,
underground/populist, plugged/unplugged
– only to leave me stranded with the comforting spectre of fakery and illusion?
Perhaps
my unconscious was transmitting cryptic prophesy. Was this how music would
be in the
year 2000? Future music is imagined in terms of technological hybridisation –
all
winking lights and digital exchanges across alien cultures. Perhaps I was
dreaming
up some kind of impossible virtual quartet manufactured through interactive
holography, the equivalent of dream football teams, Rocky Marciano versus
Mike Tyson, imaginary all-time supergroups, Charlie Parker recording with
Edgard Varèse and so
on, or the “lost” tracks of Prince with Miles Davis, Miles with Jimi Hendrix and
other

vaunted but vaulted collaborations that pub bores would contrive themselves if
they
only had the technology.
Techno at the end of the twentieth century may come to mean inept
folksingers, lonely bigots, somnambulant fishermen and Christian monologuists
on public access cable television; the global coffee house of MTV’s Spoken
Word Unplugged (poetry for the ambient TV generation); internet conferences on
dog training; or CD storytelling. Imagine the most likely use for the wired city of
the future not
in cyberpunk or megatripolising world music frameworks then, but as a hi-tech
campfire,
people plugging in to remind themselves of life as it was when they were
plugged out,
twisting their isolation into something resembling community.
Floating, amorphous, oceanic crooning (or crooning with attitude) seems to
mirror
the feeling of non-specific dread that many people now feel when they think
about
life, the world, the future; yet it expresses a feeling of bliss. The bliss is non-
specific, also, covering a spectrum which ranges from stress management at one
end to spiritual
ecstasy at the other. So disquiet hovers in balance with the act of escapism or
liberation.
That tension between the specifics of (the) soul and the siren call of the oceanic
led to strange moments in the careers of Marvin Gaye, mind torn between
apocalypse,
sex, personal disaster and reverie in his later work, and Nona Hendryx, whose
1989

collaboration with Peter Baumann, Skindiver, delivered the intriguing, ultimately
depressing compound resulting from a laboratory experiment mixing Tangerine
Dream with Labelle. Listening to her album now is instructive, if only to
remember the ubiquity of ambient, Miami Vice, Diva, 9½ Weeks, The Big Blue
and Blade Runner style during the 1980s. Bryan Ferry, Grace Jones, Art of
Noise, Sade, Vangelis – atmosphere as style; style as mood; humidity, rainfall or
hue as content.
 
aqua
The opening sequence of Thief (1981), directed by Miami Vice creator Michael
Mann: Streetlights in sharp perspective, a downward pointing V, like a runway.
Night driving, a radio tuned to police frequencies. An interior, deep blue,
vivid ultramarine, blackness and highlights. Technical processes, James Caan is
cracking
a safe. Shards of metal, drilling, hard to read what is going on, the tension
wound
up by unrelenting sequencer music by Tangerine Dream. Exterior. More shades
of blue,
the city as aquascape, nightpeople as marine creatures, the shock of redness
when
a car ignition fires and the rear lights come on.
Another Michael Mann film, The Keep (1983). Opening shots: more driving,
the camera tracking across hillsides, vegetation texture and colour filling the
frame. More Tangerine Dream sequencers. Surface as
narrative.
Edgar Froese, Tangerine Dream founder, has this to say about the link between
their music and the Michael Mann aesthetic: “He got involved in our music by
listening to

a studio record called Force Majeure, which we recorded back in ’78. He was
listening to a piece called ‘Metamorphic Rocks’
and so he put it into one of those sequences in Thief when they open up the roof
on one of those skyscrapers. The sound mixed so well – that’s what he said –
that he called us and said, ‘Are you interested in doing the
rest?’ The thing is about Michael Mann, he’s an American guy but he worked for
about
four years in London so he was very sympathetic with the European way of
making films
and using cameras. That’s why he chose a lot of, what I would call French,
British
or early German shooting sequences in his movies. Like a man like Ridley Scott,
who
is known as a great American film maker, but in fact is very much British. He
has
given a big positive push to the American cinema by using certain European
visions.”
Froese identifies with the idea of music unrolling in a personal mind-movie for
each listener. “What your inner thoughts are, or what your subjective opinions
are, you
first create inside yourself, whether it’s a pure brain reflection, a spiritual
reflection, or whatever you wanna call it. But it’s first inside you. Then, you
somehow see it or feel it outside yourself
and start reflecting with what you experience first inside. So through that
reflection,
you somehow get those inside-outside exchanges.”
 

under my skin
A Frank Sinatra album cover – In the Wee Small Hours – recorded after Sinatra’s
breakup with Ava Gardner. Tall, grey buildings, flat and featureless, fading off
into a mist of bleached aqua air. A column, floating rather
than planted on the ground, like a stage set. Sinatra in the trance of emotional
blankness, staring at nothing. The music revels in solitude, melancholy, quietude,
night: glad
to be unhappy. In the displacement of loss, buildings look insubstantial, people
feel
unreal, life passes in a dream.
The morning before dream #2 I had been sent a copy of Bono’s duet with
Frank Sinatra.
More than any other duet in this era of improbable and financially motivated
collaborations, “I’ve Got You Under My Skin” seemed to draw together two
worlds which orbit in parallel
universes. Buried somewhere beneath the gloss of celebrity pow-wow were
distant, unspoken connections between a realm of ambient, electronic
experimentation and the nice-and-easy-does-it domain of supper-club, Las
Vegas, easy-listening entertainment which the mundane,
fuck-off surrealism of the record does nothing to dispel. Fittingly, these worlds
converged in cyberspace. “Liza was recorded in Brazil”, explained producer Phil
Ramone
in Audio Media, “Bono in Dublin, Aznavour in London, Gloria Estefan in
Miami, Tony Bennett in New York, and Aretha and Anita Baker were in
Detroit.” Through the EDNet (Entertainment
Digital Network) of fibre optic lines that connect all of these cities, Sinatra’s
recordings, made in the Capitol Records Tower studios in Hollywood, were then
overdubbed

by his duet partners in their studio location of choice.
 
body snatching
Aside from a number of romantic duet albums made by singers who never met in
the studio and allegedly despised each other – Marvin Gaye and Diana Ross
spring to mind – I
was reminded of dead zone duets: recordings of dead (or brain-dead) musicians
augmented
by extra instrumentation or new vocals, as mentioned earlier in reference to
Minnie
Riperton. For newspapers catering to a fortysome-thing readership, the hot music
story
in 1994 was that long-awaited reformation of The Beatles, united through
technology
in a completion of the late John Lennon’s unfinished song. Electronic
exhumation has
a rich history. A few years before The Beatles reunion, Natalie Cole duetted with
a recording made by her dead father. More disturbing than the record was the
video,
an electronic seance replete with Oedipal implications, during which Nat “King”
Cole
was exhumed from the archives and montaged in seamless drifting communion
with his
scantily dressed daughter. One of the pioneering works in this field was created
when
Elvis Presley was raised from the grave by a radio DJ, Ray Quinn of Baltimore’s
Radio

WCBM, to sing his 1956 “Love Me Tender” with Linda Ronstadt’s 1978
version. Then Patsy
Cline and Jim Reeves were wiggled and wobbled in the studio, despite both of
them
having departed for the afterlife after plane crashes, finally finding a mutually
agreeable key on “Have You Ever Been Lonely (Have You Ever Been Blue)?”
In the analogue age, duets were difficult, augmentation more common. MGM
were releasing embellished Hank Williams records by 1957, four years after his
death from an excess
of booze and speed. Coral Records worked the same electronic voodoo on
Buddy Holly
recordings following his death in a plane crash, although they waited just five
months
to meddle with the tapes by editing them, adding vocal backgrounds, strings or a
full
band. “Ironically enough”, wrote Holly biographer John J. Goldrosen, “with the
passage
of years and the ignorance among newer fans about the posthumous nature of
these arrangements, the songs strengthened the impression that Holly had been
turning decisively away from rock’n’roll or rockabilly and towards pop music.”
A similar impression could be gathered from Alice Coltrane’s addition of
strings to recordings made by her late husband. “Living Space” was originally
recorded in New
Jersey in 1965 by John Coltrane. Then four violins, two violas and two cellos
were
added by Alice in 1972, Los Angeles. Jazz buffs regard these sweetened tracks
with

the same revulsion aimed at Yoko Ono by Beatles fans: the integrity of
masculine art
screwed up by a woman. With more justification, drummer Rashied Ali, who
worked with
Coltrane in the later years, told Valerie Wilmer: “It’s like rewriting the Bible!”
In fact, the melodramatic Hollywood mystic soup of “Living Space” could be
the Bible
on wax, as starring Charlton Heston or James Earl Jones.
 
mystery stories
Slicing strings, spooky pizzicato, ostinato creepshow organ, a snaking clarinet.
Roland Kirk declaims over what sounds like a battery-operated toy: “the mystery
black notes
that have been stolen and camouflaged for years … Listen!” he shouts … “Open
your
ears … listen!” A glass is smashed. “I tried to get the feeling of the mystery
stories
that I heard on the radio a long time ago”, said Kirk for the sleevenotes of Left &
Right, released in 1969. Alice Coltrane plays harp on “Celestialness”, the third
section of a suite entitled “Expansions”, Kirk playing flute and thumb piano,
bells shimmering
on both sides of the stereo picture, the short piece concluded by a gong stroke
and
high, piercing flute note. The other side of the album, perhaps the right-hand
side,
features Kirk’s lyrical flute, tenor saxophone, stritch and manzello balladeering
over lush woodwind and string arrangements. Even in this romantic context,

Kirk’s
purpose was strategically political, his selection of tunes focusing attention on
black jazz composers: himself, Charles Mingus, Willie Woods, Quincy Jones,
Gil Fuller
and Dizzy Gillespie, Billy Strayhorn.
 
earth and space
For Jimi Hendrix, who was toying with notions of bigger bands and Gil Evans or
Roland Kirk collaborations shortly before his death, the orchestra signified an
expansion
of texture, a greater flexibility in the depiction of acoustic space. “I don’t mean
three harps and fourteen violins”, Hendrix told Melody Maker in 1970. “I mean a
big band full of competent musicians that I can conduct and write for. And with
the music we will paint pictures of earth and space, so that the listener
can be taken somewhere.” Unfinished Hendrix tracks were reworked
posthumously. “Cry of Love as the album ended up being called”, wrote Mitch
Mitchell in The Jimi Hendrix Experience, “was a real jigsaw puzzle to put
together. You’d find, say, a lead guitar part in one key and then a vocal and
rhythm track for the same song in a different key and
one had to be speeded up or slowed down to match the other.” In the mid-1970s,
record
producer Alan Douglas commissioned salvage jobs for two albums, Crash
Landing and Midnight Lightning. Both were constructed around substandard,
unfinished and extremely erratic performances.
Each song had to be stripped down to Hendrix’s guitar and vocals and then built
up
again with new overdubs and drop-ins. The drop-ins involved a session musician

playing
along with an original track, recorded with the same sound and style, the red
record
button being pushed only for those sections where the original drifted out of
time.
Hendrix’s playing had to be copied by another guitarist in some cases, because
he
had started a track and then left it unfinished. “I had to vari-speed tape machines
and then create little pieces to extend Jimi’s notes”, reconstruction engineer Tony
Bongiovi told the authors of Hendrix: Setting the Record Straight, memories of
impending nervous breakdown communicated through this professional
information.
“I would have to copy parts, one at a time, in increments of a quarter inch, to
extend
a note. This mechanical altering took forever.” At the conclusion of these
expensive
and arduous sessions were the tightest sounding, dullest records Hendrix ever
made.
Death is not particularly conducive to interaction, although Mitchell claimed that
his completion of Cry of Love was helped along by dream conversations with his
former boss.
No harps and violins. Hendrix made this clear. But one fusion of rock guitar
improvisation and expanded orchestration which did emerge from this period
was an Alice Coltrane
and Carlos Santana collaboration, Illuminations. At this point, both of them
(along with John McLaughlin) were followers of a guru, Sri Chinmoy, and both
were intent on resurrecting the spirit of John Coltrane. Despite

the presence of inventive improvisers such as David Holland, Jack DeJohnette
and Armando
Peraza, the results were closer to kitsch than deep spirituality, although
sporadically
enjoyable for all that. In retrospect, Illuminations comes across as a wish-
fulfilment project. Alice would have wished to orchestrate her husband’s music
in this grandiose style when he was alive; Santana and McLaughlin
both strived to play electric guitar the way Coltrane played saxophones, as their
grimly ecstatic Love, Devotion, Surrender album illustrated to excess.
Through the matchmaking of Alan Douglas and the catalytic presence of
Miles Davis,
Hendrix had jammed with McLaughlin and organist Larry Young at New York’s
Record Plant
just a few months before both of them (along with Holland and DeJohnette)
played on
Miles Davis’s Bitches Brew. Little of this fervent creativity is captured to any
satisfaction, but some finished records still encourage speculation. John
McLaughlin’s Devotion album, a Douglas release wrapped in warped Mylar
photography artwork by beat poet, trance aficionado, traveller and film-maker
Ira Cohen, touched some transcendent moments
in its exploration of stoned heavy metal. Working with drummer Buddy Miles,
bassist
Billy Rich (from Buddy Miles Express) and Larry Young, one of the most
original keyboard
players of his time, on organ and electric piano, McLaughlin subsumed his
virtuosity
under a group sound that climbed through Escher circles of disquiet, soaring
through

clouds of reverb, stereo-panned echo, phasing and distortion. Devotion was
produced by Stefan Bright, who had recorded Timothy Leary and Last Poet Jalal
Nuriddin with Hendrix, as well as an exploratory jam with Hendrix and Dave
Holland, regrettably derailed and abandoned after Bright and Hendrix found
themselves incapably dusted
on PCP. But the unfortunate Tony Bongiovi claims that the session tapes had
been damaged
in a fire, necessitating a reconstruction. This was the patch’n’paste job that
secured
him his thankless Crash Landing task.
Listen to all of this period as a patch’n’paste job and the artifice of
technological assembly is reduced in importance. The fire of Hendrix resurfaces
in the Miles Davis Osaka
and New York concerts released as Agharta, Pangaea and Dark Magus,
particularly in Pete Cosey’s scorching fire streams of guitar. “His lines sizzle
into exotic scales distorted to run subterranean channels”, wrote Greg Tate in a
sparkling critical revision of electric Miles, and in his sleevenotes to the CD
issue of Pangaea Kevin Whitehead notes that Cosey was a member of the
Chicago-based AACM (Association for the Advancement of Creative
Musicians). Cosey worked with a table of what the
Chicagoans liked to call “small instruments” – bells, water cans, maracas, sound
toys,
and so on.
Variants on the possibilities boiled up in this Afro-centrically wired cauldron
were developed in solo work by the sidemen: Joe Zawinul’s eerie tone poems –
“His Last
Journey” and “Arrival In New York”; Herbie Hancock’s Buddhist/African-
influenced albums
of the early 1970s – Sextant and Crossings – neither of which sold well, so
Hancock distilled their essence into the cool ethno-electro funk of Headhunters

and Thrust; even John McLaughlin’s unplugged (but not yet unhinged) My
Goal’s Beyond. The flexibility of the Miles Davis “insane asylums for black and
white radicals” (as Greg Tate so aptly put it) becomes transparent in moments
such as the resurfacing of McLaughlin’s Devotion licks in “Thinkin’ One Thing
and Doin’ Another” (On the Corner). McLaughlin moved on to Lifetime,
initially a trio with Larry Young, led by drummer Tony Williams. This was
improvisatory rock at its loosest. I saw them perform with
Jack Bruce on bass at London’s Marquee Club at the beginning of the 1970s. My
impression
that night was of a music that came alight only in brief sparks. Without studio
manipulation, the excitement was dissipated by misguided pitches at
commercialism and the tendency of ambitious, virtuoso musicians to forget
their improvising gifts in uncontrolled situations. The prospect outshone the
reality.
 
radio reception
… At a deeper level his attention to the upper and lower fringes of audibility suggests a further interest in
exploring the two fundamental frequency areas of human consciousness: the hiss of the nervous system and
the thump of the heart. Telemusik’s peculiar stratification of low-frequency beats, middle-frequency speech
patterns and high-frequency intermodulation anticipates Hymnen’s adventures in memory and perceptual
assimilation, and gives effective expression to the composer’s frequently drawn parallel between “stream-
of-consciousness” mental
processes and radio reception.
– Robin Maconie, The Works of Stockhausen
Miles Davis had been listening to Hendrix, Sly Stone and James Brown, but with
a little influence from Paul Buckmaster (cellist with The Third Ear Band,
purveyors of quasi-Medieval ambient to UK hippies), he had been investigating
the music and theories of Karlheinz
Stockhausen. In his autobiography, Miles makes links between the harmolodic
ideas
of Ornette Coleman, Bach’s counterpoint and Stockhausen’s use of rhythm and
space.

So On the Corner is not a tight album, rhythmically or harmonically, nor is it
meant to be. Bass or drums hold a pulse, often a very angular, irregular one, and
the other instruments
dart in and out of the openings. There were Indian influences too – the drone of
Colin
Walcott’s sitar, which created a tonal centre of its own, and additive tabla
rhythmic
cycles – alongside West African, Afro-Cuban and Brazilian rhythms, free
percussion sounds, and possibly even a deconstructing trace of UK
improvisation, gleaned from David Holland in the Filles de Kilimanjaro period
and John McLaughlin from In a Silent Way up until Jack Johnson. Tracks such
as “Black Satin”, from On The Corner, or the live tracks of that period, were
microcosms of the fascinations of their time.
“It’s faith music”, Brian Eno says. “If you believe in it, I’m sure it will work.
I can switch between minds. I can say, ‘I believe and I like them’ and I can say,
‘No I don’t, they’re just unconnected rubbish, it’s just guys jamming and not
really
knowing what they’re doing’.” The latter doubt can seem justifiable in times
when
precision and coordination is valued, but totally wrongheaded when falling apart
is
an existential imperative. There is ample evidence elsewhere that these
musicians
knew exactly what they were doing. As Miles Davis wrote for his brief but
trenchant
sleevenotes to Joe Zawinul’s first solo album: “Zawinul is extending the
thoughts
that we’ve both had for years. And probably the thoughts that most so-called

now musicians have not yet been able to express … In order to fit this music you
have to be ‘Cliché-Free’.
In order to write this type of music, you have to be free inside of yourself … ”
M’tume’s commercial recordings of the early 1980s, for example, were so tight,
rhythmically, that they risked immobility, yet his contributions to the 1972 New
York
Philharmonic Hall concert documented on Miles Davis In Concert sound
wilfully oblique. The rest of the band might be playing some kind of angular
blues and M’tume is still pattering away at not quite or more than double time on
his tuned drums.
Can this extreme perceptual subjectivity be explained? One person – the
classical
music listener – might hear the peculiar rhythmic dislocations as expressions of
Stockhausen’s “moment form” – a focus on each moment “as if it were a vertical
slice dominating
over any horizontal conception and reaching into timelessness”; another – the
funk
fan – might compare it to Sly and The Family Stone and their increasing
tendency to
flatten hierarchical rhythmic organisation in a funk band, assigning equal
importance
and discrete space to each instrument (heard to perfection on There’s A Riot
Going On and Fresh); a third person – the jazz fan – might hear Ornette
Coleman’s ideas of collective blending at work, particularly the simultaneous
soloing of his Prime Time band.
At the first jazz concert I attended – the Thelonious Monk Quartet – I felt
baffled, then dismayed, by the audience’s need to add a full stop to each solo by
applauding
when it seemed to be over, irrespective of merit or the flow of the music. By the

mid 1960s, the perpetually fragile relationship between audience and performers
had
succumbed, in certain forms of jazz at least, to a sequence of stereotypical
gestures.
This was what Davis sought to escape with his “cliché-free” music, so he felt
vindicated
by Stockhausen’s conceptions of “unending” duration and performance as a
process.
Teo Macero had begun splicing tape as early as Porgy and Bess in 1958. By the
late 1960s, Davis was catalysing and supervising open-form improvisations
which blurred the defining principles of structural organisation – improvisations
were built around one chord rather than complex resolving sequences; all
instruments
played percussively and melodically; conventions such as theme and
extemporisation, solo and accompaniment or head/solos/head were all thrown
out in favour of textural laminates and molten
fields of colour; rhythmic coordination became advanced maths. At times on
Miles Davis In Concert, everybody except the percussionists seems to be playing
through wah-wah pedals, a heteroglossolalic chorus of entombed wild cats. With
Macero chopping up this stream
of intensities, the listener might be forgiven for suffering queasy reactions to the
arbitrary element that emerged as a side effect of the openness. Music that was
once
structured like an armadillo now took the shape of a jellyfish.
 
Utopia I
Agharta and Pangaea were not just names pulled out of the air. Agharta was the

name given to a spiritual centre of power, a land of advanced races situated,
according to a bizarre collection of authorities on the unprovable, somewhere
under the earth, somewhere under Asia. The theme is a familiar one from James
Hilton’s
1930s novel Lost Horizon and its filmed versions. As Jocelyn Godwin discovers
in his exhaustive, clear-headed book Arktos: The Polar Myth in Science,
Symbolism and Nazi Survival, the Agharta legend began in the 1870s with a
French freethinker named Louis Jacolliot.
Other writers on the subject described Agharta as a place of contemplation and
good,
a land of adepts, a hidden land ruled by an Ethiopian pontiff and blessed with air
travel and gas lighting. A Christian Hermeticist named Saint-Yves d’Alveydre
described
the place in terms which help to suggest why Davis was so attracted to the myth:
“…
drowning in celestial radiances all visible distinctions of race in a single
chromatic
of light and sound, singularly removed from the usual notions of perspective and
acoustics”.
Godwin, a consistently rewarding scholar of esoteric musical ideas, also
mentions
Pangaea in Arktos, describing it as “the primordial continent into which all the
present ones are ingeniously fitted in jigsaw fashion, its shores washed by the
waves of ‘Panthalassa’, the one
primordial ocean. Later, the land masses are believed to have fragmented, first
into
super-continents with names like Gondwana and Laurentia, then eventually into
the

six or seven continents of today.” The music on Pangaea is divided, probably as
an afterthought reflecting Davis’s preoccupations of the time, into two titles:
“Zimbabwe” and “Gondwana”. So, in his mind, this was music
inspired by lost civilisations, united land masses, Utopias of the mythical future
and, as Kevin Whitehead suggests, continental drift.
 
Utopia II
With mid-1960s tape pieces such as Mixtur, Hymnen and Telemusik,
Stockhausen depicted global absorption and transmission; the passage of organic
materials into the electronic domain; music, the performer and the composer as a
satellite dish (our metaphorical equivalent of the spirit medium)
in the wired world. “Every person has all of mankind within himself”, claimed
Stockhausen.
In his notes on Telemusik, composed in Tokyo as an electronic transformation of
fragments of recorded music from Africa, the Amazon, Hungary, China, Spain,
Vietnam, Bali and Japan, he wrote:
“I wanted to come closer to an old, an ever-recurring dream: to go a step forward
towards writing, not ‘my’ music, but a music of the whole world, of all lands and
races.” On a related theme, Hymnen is a work which starts with the
“international gibberish of short-wave transmissions”
and mixes 137 anthems from around the world. Stockhausen, who was using the
term “world
music” long before any rock star, broached this vision of “music of the whole
world”
in an essay entitled “Beyond Global Village Polyphony”, written in 1973 – “The
possibility of telephoning Africa to order a tape recording, parts of which I then
combine with

electronic sounds I produce in Tokyo, is an unprecedented state of affairs,
making
it possible to create hitherto completely unknown relationships. In earlier times
it was only possible to hear music from Africa if you travelled there – and who
had
such an opportunity?” Some of his prophesies from twenty years ago are
extraordinary,
although clearly he was not thinking ahead to the transglobal duetting of Bono
and
Frank Sinatra.
 
the worm of Ejur
Bow Gamelan performance: London, 1990. Infernal shadow: a figure sits on a
bicycle and pedals steadily. The bicycle powers a huge gramophone turntable
which revolves
at snail’s pace, its giant stylus digging into the grooves of a four-foot-wide
perspex
disc. Slow music from pre-history squeals from a horn. Three crocodilian hinged
baths,
mated in pairs on top of each other, snap their jaws. A vacuum cleaner plays its
Scottish bagpipe lament for the myth of labour-saving appliances. Whirling
lights. Arrows fired at suspended beer barrels mimic the change ringing of
church bells. A thunderous Burundi drum orchestra
of upturned plastic barrels, illuminated from within and glowing in mentholated
lime
and blue like a Polynesian bar from hell. Spoons played in darkness, an echo of
that

odd scene in Roman Polanski’s Repulsion when an old man playing spoons
moves crabwise along the street. More vacuum cleaners, blowing smoke through
corrugated whirly tunes. Alarms, klaxons, car horns, colliding
metal discs, monstrous springs, musical saws attached to light bulbs,
heterodyning
sirens played at the low end of their range.
This episodic display of hypothetical grotesqueries from the Industrial
Revolution, a homage to steam engineers and mechanics whose visions have
been suffocated by our
soft electronic era, reminded me of Raymond Roussel. Something of a dandy,
this French
surrealist writer used some of his considerable fortune to travel the world.
During
these tours, he would go out of doors as little as possible, preserving his
imagination’s sense of place from the corrupting effect of sensory input.
Impressions of Africa, first published in 1910, depicted a number of brutal
scenes, strange machines and other marvels presented at the coronation of Talu
VII, Emperor of Ponukele and King
of Drelshkaf. A chord is sounded by a surgical device which connects a young
woman’s
lung to sounding tubes. In Trophies Square, Ejur, West Africa, the Hungarian
Skariofszky
demonstrates his zither, an instrument activated by a long worm resting in a mica
trough filled with water. Undulating its body in precise motions, the trained
worm
allowed drops of water to fall from the trough on to the strings of the zither to
play complex melodies.

 
animal body
A problem with Utopias is that they tend to be closed systems, frozen in their
supposed perfection and therefore boring, imprisoning and fanatical. Like any
zealot, Karlheinz Stockhausen envisages a world changed, improved, even,
according to his specifications. Body rhythms will have to go, for example,
since they arise out of the “animal body” and slow down the evolution of the
human
race. The division of musical periodicity into sound, rhythm and form is a
problem
of conditioned psychological perception anyway (if we were crickets, belugas or
replicants, things would be different), so Stockhausen proposed micro-rhythms
as a replacement.
These would tune the most gifted members of society into links with higher
beings
and assist in the imminent development of transportation for humans “through
space
on a beam of light”, their bodies reconstructed, like Dr Who, on other stars.
This relegation of macro-rhythms to a low point on the evolutionary scale
leads Stockhausen into profoundly suspect territory. Reading his essay, I was
reminded of interviewing
composer and ex-AMM improviser Cornelius Cardew, shortly before he was
knocked down
and killed by a hit-and-run driver. Cardew, whose diametrically opposed position
to
Stockhausen was underlined in his book Stockhausen Serves Imperialism, was
talking about drawing his local community into the music he was making with
the (frankly abysmal) Peoples’ Liberation Music (PLM) band. The problem for

Cardew
was living in Hackney, a solid working-class area well populated by young black
reggae
fans, which meant bass and drums powerful enough to steamroller flat the
doctrinaire
Maoism and limp music of PLM. “Those rhythms will have to go”, mused
Cardew without
a trace of irony.
A face-to-face discussion between Cardew, Miles Davis and Stockhausen
could have been very amusing. For Miles, rhythm had become the first
structuring principle of his
music, recording studio processes the second. Listening to Bitches Brew, most of
the music evolves in a similar fashion to the Hendrix jam sessions released
posthumously as Nine to the Universe. The big differences lie with pre-session
organisation (no angel dust), superb recording quality, innovative and intelligent
post-production ordering of the material by producer Teo Macero, a consistently
high level of musical inspiration, subtlety and discipline, a greater variety of
texture.
“Whoever doesn’t like what I did, twenty years from now they can go back
and redo
it”, said Teo Macero, recording collaborator with Miles Davis. “Now there’s no
‘take
one’ etc.”, he told Ian Carr, Davis’s biographer. “The recording machine doesn’t
stop
at the sessions, they never stop, except only to make the playback. As soon as he
gets in there, we start the machines rolling.” As Carr pointed out, additionally:
“Miles wouldn’t start with the idea of set pieces; instead, he would simply
explore

some fragmentary elements and edit them into a cohesive piece of music
afterwards.”
This is true of all multi-track recording and, as the Australian sound restorer
Robert Parker has proved, recorded music from all eras can be transformed
through technological
cleaning processes. The most mutable piece of music Jimi Hendrix recorded –
“1983
… (a merman I should turn to be)” – was mixed in various different versions by
Hendrix
and Eddie Kramer. An alternative, far less polished mix can be heard on a CD
called
Live & Unreleased: The Radio Show, where Kramer is heard describing the all-
night mix as a “performance”. Jimi called the track a “song painting”, but the
painting was not in the song. The chords underpinned an improvisation depicting
the abyssal movement of unidentified submarine objects,
the cries of seagulls, a descent into the maelstrom. There are lyrics, although
Hendrix,
who doubted his voice, might have come closer to the song painting by leaving
them
off. They outline a prescient theme: escape, via Noah-style Ark machine, from
war,
environmental catastrophe (and personal chaos?), rebirthing into the amniotic
fluid
of the ocean.
 
brand new bag
Despotic control and technological deceit are regarded commonly as corrupting

forces which destroy the authenticity and communality of music. I remember
fondly a cartoon printed in a magazine to which I subscribed as a young
guitarist: a drawing depicting Elvis Presley, seen from behind as he sang
and pretended to play an electric guitar in which a radio was concealed. In
February
1965, James Brown and his band interrupted their lengthy bus journey to a show
by
stopping off at a studio in North Carolina, for barely an hour, to record “Papa’s
Got a Brand New Bag”. The song dragged for nearly seven minutes as the
musicians,
including guitarist Jimmy Nolen, struggled with fatigue. The track was meant to
be
hip, dance-craze R&B on the cusp, reaching back through history to the
swinging, jazz inflections of Wynonie Harris, Little Willie John and Louis
Jordan, looking back even
further to rent parties and fish fries, but at the same time groping towards the
disco-cyborg future. Whatever was latent in those weary grooves, somebody
heard it, for as Cliff
White and Harry Weinger wrote in their notes for the James Brown Star Time
CD box of 1991: “In a brilliant post-production decision, the intro was spliced
off and the entire performance was sped up for release.”
A huge pop hit was razor-bladed out of something that started as a flatfoot
grind;
this taut amalgam of street slang, loping beats and nervous punchy accents,
arguably
the first moment of modern soul. Brown’s quoted reaction reflected his glimpse
into
a future, our present, in which songs are titles, source points, initialisations,

indicating the beginning and the reference point for a process of continual
transformation.
“It’s a little beyond me now”, he confessed. “I’m actually fightin’ the future. It’s
– it’s – it’s just out there.” The peculiar aspect of the story is that most of us have
only become aware of the unpromising origins of this fabulous, pivotal track
more than a quarter of a century
after the event. Were it not for the obsession, via CD release, for the alternate
take, and hence the release of “Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag” in its complete and
previously unreleased, unedited, slow form, we would be none the wiser. Once
amused, in a patronising sort of way, to learn that one of the guitarists from The
Ventures learned to play
by struggling to copy Les Paul’s artificially accelerated and overdubbed bionic
guitar solos, I now realise that I can be fooled just as easily. But what a privilege
to be so easily deceived
into pleasure, revelation, motivation. The beauty of exploitation overdubs or
dead
zone duets is their realisation of the potential of studio music as science fiction,
the configurations which our imaginations whisper but our bodies so rarely
concede.
A great advantage of working with dead people is that their objections, the
objections
of habit or fixed identity, go unheard. In 1988, James Brown sang in that
scorched
earth scream of his, “I’m real”, but editing equipment and tape speed controls
had
already (decades ago, in fact) thrown that desperate, insecure claim into doubt.
 

techno-glossolalia
Whilst Brian Eno and I were talking during an interview about the impact of
technology on our perception of music, he began to enthuse over the enthralling
sound of early
rock‘n’roll records, particularly Dick and Deedee’s “The Mountain’s High” and
Phil
Spector’s production of “Be My Baby”, sung by The Ronettes: “As I started
collecting
records I started noticing there were distinct trends in my collection. The biggest
trend of all was certainly towards this fascination for things that just had their
own sound picture. Like some of the late fifties, early sixties records that I had,
like ‘The Mountain’s High’. The moment you put it on, it sounds like nothing
else
that you’ve ever heard. Within the first second of that song, you’re in the place.
It’s sonically so distinctive. Then, ‘Be My Baby’, where you had this enormous,
huge
sonic picture with the thinnest voice you’ve ever heard. The voice is like a little
bee inside there. I got more and more interested in that kind of thing – and then
psychedelic music was an explosion of that kind of material.”
In passing, he mentioned Frank Sinatra, and the “eroticism” of a vocalist
singing
intimately into a microphone in front of a loud big band: “I think what happened
in
pop music, because of electronics and recording and other cultural factors as
well, was that suddenly it became possible to work with all sorts of sounds, to
put together things that could never have been

put together before. For instance, just the microphone enabling a singer to sing
very
quietly against a full orchestra. This, in itself, was an incredible revolution in
eroticism. Frank Sinatra singing in an off-hand, almost introspective way against
a big band was a fabulous breakthrough which could never have happened in
any classical
music because it’s physically impossible. He would have been drowned.” Brian
also
talked about his own production work for U2 and, coincidentally, the odd
semiosis
of mismatched vocal styles and social messages that occurs when seemingly
incompatible
singers record duets.
“Have you ever read”, Brian asked me, “or seen this book, I don’t think
anyone could ever read it, actually, by Alan Lomax, called Folk Song Style and
Culture?” The answer was yes, I knew about Lomax and his Cantometrics, his
system for measuring social structure by vocal styles. The observations which
follow are ramshackle by
normal Eno standards, but a fascinating idea is hatching within. “I think it’s a
great
book”, he continued. “It’s so interesting as a concept. One of the things there is
that he’s looking at culture and saying, one culture has very raspy nasal singing
and this correlates with the pattern of such cultures being male dominated, so on
and so on. He identifies those kinds of connections between singing style and
cultural
habits in general. But when you come to our culture, this becomes much more

complex.
You hear a record like … Joe Cocker singing with some country singer. You
hear, on
the one hand, her voice, which is very pure, very feminine, distinctly of a culture
of Western … almost prurience. Then you hear his voice, which is the lonely,
dirty,
fucking long-haired messy hunker. In the Lomax book, there’s no provision for
the
possibility that you could imagine a culture that plays with the elements of other
cultures like that. It dons them like it dons masks. They’re guises, really. The
whole
energy of a song like that – a pretty shitty song, actually – is in playing off these
two cultural pictures, which I’m sure resonate with us in exactly the way that
Alan Lomax suggested. I’m sure when we hear the Joe Cocker voice, we hear
the culture that Alan Lomax would say connects with that but then, in the next
line, we
hear this other culture in her voice. This is very fascinating to me – that we’ve
become sonic collagists. I think the energy of those kind of combinations has a
very
long life. It outlasts melodies and rhythms and so on. It’s a very deep pattern that
they’re talking about.”
Implicit, also, is the logical extension of these illusions and juxtapositions.
Performance can never be the same again. One of the first live bands I saw was
The Ronettes, supporting The Rolling Stones on their second national tour. On a
Ronettes record, teenage life
crises were amplified by Phil Spector’s production to the scale of a major

metereological disturbance. Live, encased in iridescent sheath dresses, stripped
of Spector’s awesome
production, The Ronettes (and the life crises) were reduced to human
proportions.
Technology has transformed us into giants, bionic superhumans, stateless
satellites,
omnipresent speakers-in-tongues. We become bigger than we are, louder,
displaced or
multiplied or we shrink, intimidated by the waterfall of information. We use
technology
to protect and isolate ourselves, articulating desires that have been suppressed by
technology, trying to replace alienation with techno-spirituality, using
contradictory
messages to express confusions for which our history has not prepared us.
“Who’s in
the next flat? Who’s in 14-B?” asks psychologist James Hillman in We’ve Had a
Hundred Years of Psychotherapy and the World’s Getting Worse. “I don’t know
who they are, but, boy, I’m on the phone, car phone, toilet phone, plane phone,
my mistress is in Chicago, the other woman I’m with is in D.C., my ex-wife
is in Phoenix, my mother in Hawaii, and I have four children living all over the
country.
I have faxes coming in day and night, I can plug into all the world’s stock prices,
commodity exchanges, I am everywhere, man – but I don’t know who’s in 14-
B.”
 
living space
Is the journey of a fax as interesting as (or more interesting than) the travel

journals of Marco Polo, dictated during a three-year period of incarceration at
the end of
the thirteenth century? Marco Polo “created Asia for the European mind”, wrote
John
Masefield, but fax and e-mail, what mysterious zones do they create for the
contemporary
mind? Alienation from physical community may be disturbing, yet idealists who
promote
electronic communications suggest that they are being used to rebuild shattered
communities, rather than complete their destruction. “Some aspects of life in a
small community
have to be abandoned when you move to an online metropolis; the fundamentals
of human
nature, however, always scale up”, wrote Howard Rheingold in The Virtual
Community: finding connections in a computerised world. “The fact that we
need computer networks to recapture the sense of cooperative spirit that so many
people seemed to lose when we gained all this technology is a painful
irony”, he admits in a chapter entitled Grassroots Groupminds.
As for flights from the body, or from rootedness in the body, these may turn
out to have their positive sides also. Transcendence through chemical drugs and
plant psychedelics, long stays in cyberspace via the internet, or body-crisis films
such as Tron, Videodrome and Wes Craven’s Nightmare On Elm Street could be
interpreted, in their various ways, as manifestations of a desire to redefine the
Cartesian image of divided being. By vacating the body, losing the centre in a
web of information (whether video game, electronic spectacle, audio/visual
immersion,
dream/nightmare, 
global 
information 
exchange 
or 
so-called 
plant
consciousness), the
non-corporeal part of humanness begins to question its own boundaries and to

challenge
the conventional belief that consciousness is housed somewhere within the head.
Ask musicians of a certain age a question: Who revolutionised the recording
studio?
Invariably, the response will include the following names: Phil Spector, Joe
Meek,
Brian Wilson, Lee Perry. At critical moments of their lives, one common link
between all these studio innovators was a state of mind known, for the sake of
society’s convenience, as madness. During
a Brian Wilson interview in 1986, we discussed The Four Freshmen and their
influence
on The Beach Boys. I asked one of those reflex questions that tends to pop out
during
a telephone interview with a difficult subject. Was it unusual for somebody like
yourself to be listening to The Four Freshmen at that time? “No, it wasn’t
unusual”, he replied.
“The thing was that I had no real source of spiritual love. My parents were OK
but
my dad was so hostile that he kinda screwed the family up. So he messed up the
family
vibrations, you know? So I turned to music as my love, as a source of spiritual
love.
When I heard the Freshmen, I really flipped because I liked the sound I heard, I
liked their sound. I analysed their sound and I learned to analyse their
harmonies.”
Listening back to that tape, I feel frustrated that I opted out of pursuing this
disarming connection between psychic ill health and sound. Bootleg recordings
of Brian Wilson

studio sessions from the Smile era reveal a musician completely immersed in
sound: a ravishing instrumental dub of “’Til I Die”, just bass guitar, vibraphone
and the gradual fade-up of distant organ,
then drums, then vocal harmonies, then quiet drum machine. Another session,
called
“George Fell Into His French Horn”, experiments with brass instruments, some
of which
sound like Tibetan ritual music, Varèse glissandi or free jazz, some of which fool
around with cartoonish evocations of laughter. A conversation about George
falling
into his French horn, sticking valves and other incomprehensible stuff, is
conducted
by musicians talking into their mouthpieces. Sombre growlings, smears,
pointilliste
brass blats and hee-haws are interrupted by the serious voice of Wilson, talking
from
the control room: “OK, one more time please. A little bit slower moving if we
could.”
An interesting side angle: the Smile bootleg LP included a Miles Davis/Gil
Evans track – “Here Comes De Honey Man” from Porgy and Bess – claimed by
the label copy as an extremely rare and unreleased Beach Boys instrumental
called “Holidays”.
Joe Meek was not mad. A gay man, trying to suppress all signs of his
queerness in the repressive atmosphere of post-war Britain, attempting to come
to terms with spiritual longings (he was a spiritualist who dubbed angelic voices
on to trashy instrumentals)
in the primitive context of early British rock‘n’roll, he killed his landlady, then
himself, with a shotgun. The strain of these forbidden desires pushed him

beyond the
point of rational constraints. And Spector, inventor of the “wall of sound”,
layering
instrumental textures and echoes into a sweet sickness, the depth of the sound
drawing
you down to subterranean caves of subtle wonders. Spector became a Los
Angeles recluse,
like Roderick Usher, alone and hypersensitive in the House of Usher, eventually
producing with a gun on the mixing desk. Not so far away was Brian Wilson,
grotesquely fat,
lying in bed for two years, emotionally exhausted by The Beach Boys and turned
inside
out by drugs. In Washington Gardens, Kingston, Jamaica, after years of
producing reggae
hits, Lee Perry had destroyed his Black Ark studio, first flooding it, then burning
it down. Coincidence? Or did the struggle of turning the recording studio from
its
documentary origins to a virtual chamber of wonders push the most creative
producers
past the edges of self-definition, into the void? A thin line stands between the
voices
that torment and dominate a disordered, confused personality and the not-yet-
existent
sounds from nowhere which invade the imagination in daydreams, tempting the
sonic
explorer into finding means to duplicate them in the tangible world.

 
dub dream
And he woke again, thinking he had dreamed … Aerol strapping him into a g-web in Babylon Rocker. And
then the long pulse of Zion dub.
– William Gibson, Neuromancer
Lee Perry sits next to me, fiddling with a small cassette recorder. Pieces of
plastic are breaking off, batteries disgorged. How to offer technological
assistance to a
twentieth-century master of audio recording? Not master, magician. A wiry,
wizened
man with a mischievous look about him, he was born in Jamaica, in perhaps
1935 or
’36, though nobody is sure. Festooned with coins, pendants, feathers and badges,
he
could be an Obeah man empowered with the trappings of Afro-Jamaican folk
magic, or
simply an eccentric. The ambiguity enhances his mythical status among reggae
fanatics.
He appears to enjoy the fact that people think he is quite mad, although
confusion
and unhappiness are apparent alongside the inspirational juxtapositions of his
word
play. “Rocking and reeling, having a ball, swinging and singing, strait-jacket and
all”, he sang on a tune called “Secret Laboratory”.
He belonged to three different churches in his youth: the Holiness Church, the
Church of God and the Ethiopian Orthodox, and tends to describe both musical
motivations

and the technical processes of recording with imagery that would suit an Old
Testament
prophet. What could be dismissed as mystical mumbo jumbo makes sense if
related to
Perry’s music, which has consistently drawn upon Jamaican folklore and
language. Some
of Bob Marley’s freshest work, for example, was achieved with Perry in the
years 1969
to 1971; some songs that they recorded together contain hidden meanings
referring
to the British colonialist era and the proscribed cult practices of Jamaican slaves,
including their belief in duppies (ghosts) and spirits. Later tracks transpose and
collage potent Biblical, Rastafarian, Afro-Jamaican, comic book and spaghetti-
western
imagery: the ethereal “Congo Ashanti” chant of The Congos, “Hay Fever”
chanted by
Jah Lion over the sound of a squeaking door, or Leo Graham’s “Black Candle”
(“a warning
to enemies who might seek the help of an Obeah man in order to attack the
producer”,
writes Steve Barrow).
At its heights, Perry’s genius has transformed the recording studio. If the
original purpose of recording was to document a musical performance, then
Perry’s approach,
as titles such as “Secret Laboratory”, “Station Underground News” and “Musical
Transplant” indicate, lifted the studio into virtual space, an imaginal chamber
over which presided the electronic wizard, evangelist, gossip columnist and Dr

Frankenstein that he became.
“Electricity is the eye, water is the life”, he says. “In a way, electricity reach
the high peak. The studio must be like a living thing. The machine must be live
and
intelligent. Then I put my mind into the machine by sending it through the
controls
and the knobs or into the jack panel. The jack panel is the brain itself, so you’ve
got to patch up the brain and make the brain a living man, but the brain can take
what you’re sending into it and live. Think of music as life. When I making
music
I think of life, creating life, and I want it to live, I want it to feel good and
taste good.” This is alchemist’s talk: making living matter from intractable
substances.
“When we smoke and feel nice,” he continues, “eat cornbread with butter. Then
it give
you a good appetite and new vibes. The sound might be sounding sweeter. The
sound
might be coming from the food zone.”
A substantial body of influential, extraordinary music was made in the 1970s
at Perry’s Black Ark studio, named after the Ark of the Covenant. Some of these
– Junior Murvin’s
“Police & Thieves”, Max Romeo’s “War Ina Babylon”, George Faith’s “To Be a
Lover (Have Mercy)” – were irresistibly, innovatively commercial. With their
jump-cut edits and
supernatural soundworlds, others – “7¾ Skank”, “Militant Rock”, “Roast Fish &
Cornbread”

– were more daring than anything else of their time. “I grew up reading comics”,
he
tells me. Perhaps comics, cartoons and film (and now computer games) are more
useful
tools for a musician’s self-education than books. John Zorn has helped to
legitimise
the rapid dislocations and hairpin structures of cartoon music composed by Carl
Stalling
for Warner Brothers’ cartoons such as Bugs Bunny. In his sleevenotes for The
Carl Stalling Project album, Zorn writes that Stalling’s music “implies an
openness – a non-hierarchical musical overview – typical of today’s younger
composers but all too rare before the
mid-1960s. All genres of music are equal – no one is inherently better than the
others – and with Stalling, all are embraced, chewed up and spit out in a format
closer to Burroughs’ cut ups, or Godard’s film editing of the ’60s, than to
anything happening
in the ’40s.” But listen, also, to some of Brian Wilson’s Beach Boys music of the
Smile period and after – “Fall Breaks and Back to Winter” or “Trombone Dixie”
– for evidence of cartoon music and Disney influences mutating into avant-garde
pop.
Lee Perry explored the potential of sound to hypnotise. “But still the Black
Ark was something else,” he says, “because the sound that I get out of the Black
Ark studio,
I don’t really get it out of no other studio. It was like a space craft. You could
hear space in the tracks. Something there was like a holy vibration and a godly
sensation.
Modern studios, they have different set up. They set up a business and a money-
making

concern. I set up like an ark. Studying history, I realised that the Ark of the
Covenant
is the top of everything. You have to be the Ark to save the animals and nature
and
music.” The level of inspiration was very high at this point, with Perry pushing
limited
equipment to extremes. His attitude to the sources of his inspiration is
unorthodox.
“It had something to do with the location of the studio”, he claims. “Because it
was
built on a godly plan to make holy spiritual music. I have a plan to make music
that
can make wrongs right. I was getting help from God, through space, through the
sky,
through the firmament, through the earth, through the wind, through the fire. I
got
support through the weather to make space music.”
 
Lee Perry’s spell
When I clap my hand, duppy appear to me from coast to coast, flying through
the night post and through keyholes. Sometimes they melt the key, if the key is
in the keyhole,
in a puff of smoke – Pfffffffff … When I cut a Stench-Fart, it so loud that it bring
up volcano lava, and is more dangerous than a hurricane … Say “hi” to the
lovers of Christ, and “bye” to the lovers of the devil. ’Cause I kill the devil with
my spiritual level. MXR Armagideon War. Electrical machine, computer man,
the

mighty Upsetter, the ghost in the machine. Mad Perry, lightning head master,
breaker
of doom. Dr Fu Manchu, black Fu Manchu. Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom!
Boom! Boom! Boom!
Boom! This is a musical curse. Blessed are the Poor, and cursed are the Rich.
Hic
Hoc, Hic Floe, Yak Yak. It finish. Yak Yak.
 
replicant
Dub music is like a long echo delay, looping through time. Regenerating every
few years, sometimes so quiet that only a disciple could hear, sometimes
shatteringly
loud, dub unpicks music in the commercial sphere. Spreading out a song or a
groove
over a vast landscape of peaks and deep trenches, extending hooks and beats to
vanishing
point, dub creates new maps of time, intangible sound sculptures, sacred sites,
balm
and shock for mind, body and spirit.
When you double, or dub, you replicate, reinvent, make one of many versions.
There
is no such thing as an original mix, since music stored on multi-track tape,
floppy
or hard disk, is just a collection of bits. The composition has been decomposed,
already, by the technology. Dubbing, at its very best, takes each bit and imbues it
with new
life, turning a rational order of musical sequences into an ocean of sensation.

This
musical revolution stemmed originally from Jamaica – in particular, the tiny
studio
once run by the late Osbourne Ruddock, aka King Tubby, in Kingston. “This is
the heart
of Kingston 11”, Dave Henley wrote, describing the location of Tubby’s studio
for
a reggae fanzine called Small Axe. “A maze of zinc fence, potholed roads and
suitably dilapidated bungalows. After dark, the streets become remarkably
deserted (by Kingston standards, anyway, considering
that loafing on the corner is a favourite Jamaican pastime), giving the impression
of an eerie tropical ghost town.”
Urban, rural, tropic, aquatic, lo-tech, mystical. This was the source mix from
which William Gibson drew (sentimentally, some critics think) when adding the
humanising
element of Rastafari and dub to his Neuromancer narrative of tech-Gnosis. When
King Tubby first discovered dub, the revelation came, like so many
technological discoveries, through an accident. There were other Jamaican
recording engineers, of course: Sylvan Morris, Errol T. Thompson and Lloyd
“Prince
Jammy” James helped to create the sound of albums such as Joe Gibbs’s African
Dub All-Mighty series, or Augustus Pablo’s King Tubby’s Meets Rockers Uptown
and Africa Must Be Free By 1983. But it was Tubby, cutting discs for Duke Reid
at Treasure Isle, who first discovered the thrill of stripping a vocal from its
backing track and then manipulating the instrumental arrangement with
techniques and effects: drop-out, extreme equalisation, long delay,
short delay, space echo, reverb, flange, phase, noise gates, echo feedback,
shotgun

snare drums, rubber bass, zipping highs, cavernous lows. The effects are there
for
enhancement, but for a dubmaster they can displace time, shift the beat, heighten
a mood, suspend a moment. No coincidence that the nearest approximation to
dub is
the sonar transmit pulses, reverberations and echoes of underwater echo ranging
and
bioacoustics. No coincidence, also, that dub originated in a poor section of a city
on a Caribbean island.
The first moment of dub has been pursued by reggae historian Steve Barrow
through
numerous conversations with important reggae record producers such as Bunny
Lee. In
Dub Catcher magazine, Lee conjures some of the excitement of those late-
1960s, early-1970s sessions when King Tubby began to experiment with what he
termed the “implements of sound”:
“Tubby’s, right”, recalls Lee. “With all the bass and drum ting now, dem ting just
start by accident, a man sing off key, an’ when you a reach a dat you drop out
everyting
an’ leave the drum, an’ lick in the bass, an’ cause a confusion an’ people like it
… Sometime me an’ ’im talk an’ me say, ‘Drop out now, Tubby!’ An’ ’im get
confuse
an’ me jus’ draw down the whole a the lever … you hear ‘Pluck’ an’ jus’ start
play
pure distortion. Me say, ‘Yes Tubbs, madness, the people dem like it!’ an’ just
push it right back up … An’ then Lee Perry do fe ’im share a dub too, ca’ ’im an’

Tubby’s do a whole
heap a ting … ’im an’ Niney [producer nine finger Niney ‘the Observer’] an’
musician
jus’ play, an’ ’im jus’ [makes discordant noises and laughs]. ’im drunk, drunk
yunno
– the engineer a go stop ’im an’ [he] say, ‘You no hear a vibes? Mad sound dat
man.’
An’ when ’im come the people dem like it.”
Tubby worked with equipment that would be considered impossibly limited by
today’s
standards, yet his dubs were massive, towering exercises in sound sculpting.
Legend
records that he cut four dub-plates – special, one-off mixes – for his Home Town
Hi-Fi
System at the end of the 1960s. Playing these instrumental versions at a dance,
with
U Roy toasting verbal improvisations over the music in real time, he was forced
to
repeat them all night, dubbing them up live as the crowd – went crazy. Tubby
worked
for some of Jamaica’s most creative producers: Lee Perry and Augustus Pablo,
in particular, were recording increasingly exotic and distinctive music during the
1970s. On albums
such as Perry’s Super Ape and Pablo’s East of the River Nile, the mixing board
becomes a pictorial instrument, establishing the illusion of a vast soundstage and
then dropping instruments in and out as if they were characters
in a drama. Lee Perry was a master of this technique, applying it to all his

records,
whether vocal, dub, instrumental version or talkover, all of them rich in his dub
signature of rattling hand drums and scrapers, ghostly voices, distant horn
sections,
unusual snare and hi-hat treatments, groans and reptilian sibilations, odd
perspectives
and depth illusions, sound effects, unexpected noises and echoes that repeat to
infinity.
Dub also anticipated remix culture. In 1974 Rupie Edwards, a producer of
celebrated Jamaican artists such as I Roy, The Ethiopians and Gregory Isaacs,
was the first to
compile a “version” album – Yamaha Skank, twelve different versions of the
rhythm of a song called “My Conversation”. Although these were not dubs, they
grew out of the idea of dubbing a track, shaping and reshaping
its “implements of sound” as if music was modelling clay rather than copyright
property.
 
Prince Far I’s vision
… city of nine gates, magical moon, circling clouds, marvel of miracles, twilight world, beauty unfold, in
living memory …
– Suns of Arqa, “City of Nine Gates”
 
world of echo
After the first wave of dub albums during the 1970s from King Tubby, Lee
Perry, Augustus Pablo, Yabby U, Keith Hudson and the producer stables of
Bunny Lee, Coxsone Dodd,
Joe Gibbs and Niney, many of dub’s innovations were applied to fresh contexts

in America
and the UK. New York dub emerged, almost as an inevitability, from the disco
tape
editing and remixing of DJs such as Tom Moulton and Walter Gibbons.
Moulton, whose
hectic career as the pioneer of disco mixing came to a halt after a serious heart
attack during a mix, restructured funk tracks with a razor blade, shaping for the
ecstasies and libido release of the dancefloor; a Walter Gibbons mix, on the other
hand, entered the listener into the chaotic heart of King Tubby’s “implements of
sound”.
Although many of his mixes, particularly of material from the Salsoul label,
were
relatively functional, he could also play Lee Perry-style tricks with sound
balance,
sudden track drop-outs or perspectival distortions. His long remix of Bettye
LaVette’s
“Doin’ the Best That I Can”, released on New York’s West End label in 1978,
redefined
the logical hierarchy of instrumentation.
Walter Gibbons could make a dancefloor move to a glockenspiel or a hi-hat. A
constant collaborator with the late Arthur Russell – New York singer, cellist,
percussionist
and minimalist/disco composer – he used sound relationships rather than
electronic
effects to create wonderfully strange music. These reach their apex on the Arthur
Russell 12" singles: “Let’s Go Swimming” and “Treehouse/School Bell” – songs

of innocence and experience; convoluted slitherings of sharp sounds, chopped
and dislocated; antipathetic to the modular, even-number construction of disco;
formed in the eternal shape of the self-devouring Uroborus dragon of alchemy,
a flow without beginning or end; contrasting/merging the developmental
improvisation
of Indian ragas with the hypnotic, human-interlock accretions of Fela
Anikulapo-Kuti’s
Nigerian Afro-funk.
Like Gibbons, Russell played the studio as an instrument, understanding the
freedom inherent in present-day recording. For example, sound recorded in a
studio live room
or direct on to tape is unnaturally dry (unless recorded in special reflective
rooms),
so extraordinary illusions of distance are possible through contrasting dry,
forward
sounds with the distancing effects of a huge range of echoes. Another point: the
number
of “performances” that can be permutated from a multi-track recording is
infinite.
World of Echo, Russell called one of his solo albums.
Russell studied at the Ali Akbar Khan school in San Francisco, where he
played cello.
“Cello is Ali Akbar Khan’s favourite instrument”, he told me in 1986. He
collaborated
on projects with John Cage, Laurie Anderson, Phill Niblock, Philip Glass,
François
Kevorkian, David Byrne, Steve D’Aquisto, the Ingram brothers, Peter Gordon,

Larry
Levan, Allen Ginsberg and many others; poets, film-makers, disco mixers, pop
stars,
soul musicians, contemporary composers. Forbidden border crossings. When
Russell performed his Instrumentals piece at The Kitchen in Manhattan, the use
of a drum kit caused a stir. “A lot of people turned off”, he told me. “They
thought that was a sign of some new unsophistication, a sign of increasing
commercialisation. Then if you try to do something different
in dance music you just get branded as an eccentric. Maybe I am an eccentric, I
don’t
know, but it’s basically a very simple idea. I like music with no drums, too.
Partly,
I guess, from listening to drums so much. When you hear something with no
drums it
seems very exciting. I always thought that music with no drums is successive to
music
with drums. New music with no drums is like this future when they don’t have
drums
any more. In outer space, you can’t take your drums – you take your mind.” DJs
told him that nobody would ever play “Let’s Go Swimming”. “I think eventually
that kind of thing will be commonplace”,
he said. He was right, but neither he nor Walter Gibbons lived to profit from this
new era of sound experimentation. Arthur Russell died of AIDS in 1992. Walter
Gibbons
died in 1994.
 
my life in a hole in the ground

The New Orleans torture scene conjured in hallucinogenic close up by David
Lynch in Wild At Heart: a slowed-down Adrian Sherwood production – “Far
Away Chant” by African Head Charge – adds further dimensions of hoodoo
otherness to Lynch’s trademark shadeworld of sexual
violence, Prince Far I’s warping sandblast vocals rising up from the catacombs
… in
this unholy place a steady throb of Rastafarian repeater and funde drums
somehow twisted
in the unconscious to draw on archaic fears, fear of voodoo, fear of the primeval
occult, the old unhealthy fear of Rastas as “menacing devils with snake nests for
hair”.
Working with a floating pool of musicians in London, Adrian Sherwood had
been pushing reggae deeper into the echo chamber for years, maybe running an
entire track backwards,
highlighting strange instruments, layering fugitive ambiences from the elemental
simplicity of drum, bass and vocals, creating polyrhythmic ricochets, noise
bubbles and chimerical
voices. His mixing techniques on Creation Rebel’s Starship Africa, the late
Prince Far I’s Cry Tuff Dub Encounter series of albums, and African Head
Charge’s My Life In a Hole In the Ground were epic explorations of mood,
experiments in bass as an enveloping cloud, premonitions of the marathon dub
and ambient mixes of the 1990s.
I played flute and African thumb piano on Chapter III of the Prince Far I Cry
Tuff albums, east London’s Berry Street studio boiling hot, air conditioning
broken down, Far I (like King Tubby, soon to become a murder victim of
Jamaica’s random gun law) solemn and silent, sitting by the mixing desk
wrapped in scarf, hat and jacket as if we were working in arctic conditions.
The session was a madhouse of post-punk experimentation, indicative of the role
dub

had assumed as a deconstructing agent, a locus of crosscurrents from reggae,
rock,
jazz, improvisation and the extra-human conjectures of technological processes.
Sherwood
has admitted that his initial inspiration for My Life In a Hole In the Ground was
the David Byrne and Brian Eno collaborative album, My Life In the Bush of
Ghosts: “I was reading in the paper”, Sherwood told Dub Catcher magazine,
“where he [Brian Eno] said, ‘I had a vision of psychedelic Africa’ or something
like that. So I had to laugh. The idea was to make a psychedelic, but serious,
African
dub record.”
 
bush of ghosts
More laughter, this time from Brian Eno. In the early 1970s, he was holding
forth about the genius of Lee Perry’s “Bucky Skank” to a rock journalist at the
NME, who responded with scorn. Only a year later, Brian recalls with an
allowable degree of smug satisfaction, the same journalist was sojourning in
Jamaica, smoking “trumpet-sized spliffs” and filing born-again copy in praise of
reggae. In Cyberia – Douglas Rushkoff’s celebration of cyberdelic ennui – My
Life In the Bush of Ghosts is credited as “the inspiration for the industrial, house,
and even rap and hip-hop recording artists who followed”. This reductive
determination to prove that underground
scenes (black, Hispanic, gay, whatever) must have their source in artists
recognised
by white media (i.e. mostly white people) is as odious and absurd as the opposite
claim (heard at a hip-hop seminar in 1993) that white people have made no
contribution
to twentieth-century music.
Released in 1981, My Life In the Bush of Ghosts was an interesting record

although its loose, one-chord jams, clearly influenced by Fela Kuti, have not
weathered time as well, in my opinion, as Brian’s supposedly less commercial
ambient work of that period. Some of the musicianship sounds dated, but the last
three tracks of the album sequence predicate fruitful rhythmic
possibilities – a kind of segmented, crabwise movement of unlocked rhythm
relationships
– along with the suggestion of a studio-generated music which explores ritual
gravity
(an electronic equivalent of Korean ancestral shrine music or Japanese gagaku).
The idea of sampling radio voices and tapes of global musics in a rock context,
concocting ‘ethnic’ forgeries or machine-age ceremonies, was nothing new.
Can’s bass
player and short-wave-radio ham, Holger Czukay, had been doing this since his
Canaxis album, co-produced with Rolf Dammers at the Inner Space studio,
Cologne, in 1968.
Moreover, when Czukay mixed this kind of source material into the music, he
created
integrated fictions, impossible musics from unknown worlds, rather than simply
laying
voice tapes on top of the funk.
The Byrne and Eno collaboration had a secret history, anyway. The project
was mooted during conversations between Byrne, Eno and Jon Hassell in New
York. At that time,
Hassell had formulated and was publishing advance fragments from his
future/primitive
Fourth World concept: “A proposal for a ‘coffee coloured’ classical music of the
future
– both in terms of the adoption of entirely new modes of structural organisation
(as

might be suggested by the computer ability to rearrange, dot-by-dot, a sound or
video
image) and in terms of an expansion of the ‘allowable’ musical vocabulary in
which
one may speak this structure – leaving behind the ascetic face which Eurocentric
tradition has come to associate with serious expression.”
“At that time I had done Possible Musics”, says Hassell, speaking to me from
his home in West Hollywood. “Brian was producing Talking Heads … and I
turned them on to a lot of ethnic music, in particular the Ocora
label. After Remain In Light David and Brian came up with this idea that we
should go off into the desert someplace with an eight-track recorder and make a
record that, at that time, we were thinking
would be somewhat like The Residents’ Eskimo – that is a faux tribe, invented,
that doesn’t exist.” At this opportune moment, our transatlantic telephone
discussion is interrupted by a Spanish CB radio conversation.
“So we conspired to do this together. They were going to go off to LA to look for
a place. A month or so later, I got a cassette in the mail and it was an early
version
of – was it Oum Kalsoum they used [probably Egyptian singer Samira Tewfik,
on “A Secret
Life”]? Anyway, it was enough to send me into … it was enough to be quite
disturbing.”
Hassell is proud of the fact that Hank Shocklee, co-producer of Public Enemy
with
Chuck D, has acknowledged My Life In the Bush of Ghosts as one influence on
the hectic, cut-up, collaged sound flow of Public Enemy. “We took whatever was
annoying, threw it into a pot, and that’s how we came out with this
group”, Shocklee told Keyboard magazine. “We believed that music is nothing

but organized noise. You can take anything – street sounds, us talking, whatever
you want – and make it music by organizing it.”
 
curating the world
At the dawn of audio recording, a small boy named Ludwig Koch sat under a
piano with an Edison phonograph, recording the playing of Johannes Brahms on
to a wax cylinder.
This document, made on the cusp of a new era of music and technology, was lost
when
Koch fled from Nazi Germany, but at the age of eight, he also made the first
known
recording of an animal – an Indian Shama thrush – in 1889.
Zoos, museums, expositions, cameras and microphones: collectors,
memorisers and curators of the world. “Collecting – at least in the West, where
time is thought to be linear
and irreversible – implies a rescue of phenomena from inevitable historical
decay
or loss”, writes James Clifford, professor in the History of Consciousness
Program,
University of California. “Since the mid-nineteenth century”, he continues,
“ideas
of culture have gathered up those elements that seem to give continuity and
depth
to collective existence, seeing it whole rather than disputed, torn, intertextual,
or syncretic. [Margaret] Mead’s almost postmodern image of ‘a local native
reading the index to The Golden Bough just to see if they had missed anything’ is
not a vision of authenticity.” Clifford applies the term chronotope, as used by

Russian critic Mikhail Bakhtin, to New York
City during World War II, a place where surrealist artists and anthropologists
bathed
in a “wonderland of sudden opening to other times and places, of cultural matter
out
of place”. He defines chronotope as “literally ‘time-space’ with no priority to
either
dimension. The chronotope is a fictional setting where historically specific
relations
of power become visible and certain stories can ‘take place’ (the bourgeois salon
in nineteenth-century social novels, the merchant ship in Conrad’s tales of
adventure
and empire).”
As technology has changed, so the recording studio has become increasingly
virtual.
What began as documentation moved into specialised interiors. Sounds of the
world
were collected and transmuted at the end of the 1940s by a French sound
engineer,
Pierre Schaeffer, who gave concerts of noises collected from sources such as
spinning
saucepan lids and whistling toy tops (more instruments of darkness), steam
engine
and boat sounds (the Futurist noise of movement), human voices and percussion.
Working
with composers Pierre Henry and, later, Luc Ferrari, Schaeffer pioneered

musique concrète: music made from sound. Varèse completed the electronic
section of Déserts in Schaeffer’s Paris studio. By 1951, electronic music
experiments were taking place in Germany and America, eliminating the musical
performer almost entirely; by the
mid-1950s, pop-music producers were applying echo effects with such abandon
that the
secure physical image of a band of musicians, held in the mind during listening,
began
to disintegrate. Then multi-track tape and multiple microphone recording
separated
musicians from each other, either in time or space. Electronic effects could be
applied
more easily to individual instruments or vocals. Musicians were hidden behind
baffle
boards or shut in separate rooms. Studio performances could be corrected or
updated
without changing the entire song, or the song could be remixed endlessly. For
the
best explication of multi-track recording, the upside and downside, watch Jean-
Luc Godard’s film One Plus One, in which The Rolling Stones wrestle for
eternity with the emergence of one song, “Sympathy For the Devil”. Fascinating
to think about, or describe, but boring to watch
and listen.
With the introduction of computer sequencing and digital sampling, the
tapeless studio became a possibility, though rarely a total reality. Hard-disk
recording, in which
all source sounds and effects – electronic or acoustic – could be stored and
manipulated

in the digital domain, is the current stage of this process, a point at which, in
theory, the studio and its musical output can exist in virtuality, represented in
our world through sound and a visual representation of sound on a computer
screen.
The virtual studio, then, is our chronotype, the fictional setting where stories
take
place. What a disappointing chronotype, though, by comparison with Conrad’s
merchant
ships. No saline odours, creaking timbers or screeching steam whistles, but a
facsimile
of a bloodless operating theatre, a chemist’s laboratory lacking in smells or fire.
 
hard/soft
Outside of playing with small dictaphones – recording toilets flushing and
similar primitive musique concrète experiments – my first experiences of
recording took place in eight-track studios, particularly Chalk Farm Studios,
home of one of the first eight-track machines in
England. Chalk Farm was owned by Vic Keary, a casually brilliant old-school
engineer
whose career began with tracks such as Emile Ford’s “What Do You Want To
Make Those
Eyes At Me For?”, one of the earliest black British R&B hits. Keary’s partner
was
the extraordinary Emil Shallet, a fur-coated, cigar-chewing East European
refugee
from the Nazis who fostered UK interest in supposedly marginal musics –
anything from

hillbilly, bebop and the New Orleans “Spooky Drums” of Baby Dodds on
Melodisc, to
R&B and ska, via his Blue Beat label and singles such as Prince Buster’s “Al
Capone”, central to the mod scene found in Soho’s Flamingo club in the mid
1960s.
Shallet was a record man to place alongside some of the American legends of
the business.
Notable among his business practices was the scam of selling otherwise
unsaleable
7" singles to pornographers who used them, improbably, as a way of evading
vice laws.
I lived in his Shepherd’s Bush house for one week, until he threw me out in a fit
of paranoia. In the basement, I found Charlie Parker 78s on Vogue, Haitian voo-
doo
records and Janis Joplin singles. At Chalk Farm, many reggae records – “Young
Gifted
and Black”, for example – were cut, voiced or overdubbed with strings played
by middle-aged Jewish violinists who had seen it all. There I met Jimmy Cliff,
Dandy Livingston and
producer Lesley Kong, the man who helped to launch Bob Marley’s career and
whose heart
gave out in 1971, his death rumoured to be the work of an Obeah man.
Working at Chalk Farm with percussionist Paul Burwell and a
singer/songwriter named Simon Finn, I learned to add and to redo, playing
instruments I had never touched
before, layering arrangements with the tape machine. Eight tracks were never
enough.

This was the basis of so much of the progressive rock of the early 1970s. Add,
add,
add. For musicians and sound engineers, tape, particularly the 2” wide variety
used
for twenty-four-track recording, became the equivalent of paper for a writer. I
remember
the anxiety I felt as recording began to shift from analogue tape to computer
sequencing
and digital storage. Don’t go into hard copy; stay soft. How sound could be
printed
on to tape was far from clear to me, yet this was how it was done. At least tape,
curling and uncurling past the record heads of the machine, was a linear
representation
of music’s duration. Computer sequencing packages pretended to be set up in the
same
way, but you would have to be stupid to think they were unreeling around the
monitor
screen. For a while, a psychological adjustment period, I felt the need to commit
music to tape, as if this was proof that something was taking place. For
musicians,
this represents a paradox. Music is intangible, yet recording has added flesh and
permanence, security, “continuity and depth to collective existence”, as James
Clifford wrote. Now musicians have to learn insubstantiality all over again.
All that is solid melts into aether.
“Electric circuitry, an extension of the central nervous system”, wrote
Marshall McLuhan in his 1967 text/image collaboration with Quentin Fiore, The
Medium is the Massage. “Media, by altering the environment, evoke in us

unique ratios of sense perceptions.
The extension of any one sense alters the way we think and act – the way we
perceive
the world. When these ratios change, men change.” He meant everybody
changes, not
just men, but this was the 1960s.
So many wild, poorly conceptualised claims are being made in this
enthralling, unsettling transitional period between the era of print (from
Gutenberg in 1450 to the present)
and the current dawn of electronic culture, that there is a perverse temptation to
reject them all. Some rejection, or scepticism, is pragmatic. Brian Eno is
adamant
that he will not have computers in the studio. “I don’t use any programs”, he tells
me. “Do you know why it is? More than anything else, it’s a physical reason.
I’ve
got SoundTools in my computer there, which I use as an editing system, but I get
so
fed up after working on it for a few hours. The only part of my finger that’s
engaged
is my mouse finger and eyes. My body starts to feel so … oof, I just want to hit
something or bounce around on the floor. My experience of computer mixing,
which I’ve had more
experience of than other forms of computer work, is that it creates a cautious,
perfectionistic way of working. I’ve banned computers in the studio, actually. It
isn’t because I’m
anti-computer. It’s because nobody understands them well enough. It’s happened
to

me so often that I’d be in the studio and there’s a computer there running some
sequencer aspects. You look round and the brow is knotted. Someone’s saying, I
think if we just
put the SMPTE in there. Wait a minute, I’ve got to ID channel four …’ and you
know
the session is blown. Because now the guitar player’s gone off to make a phone
call,
the drummer’s gone to the lavatory, the singer’s starting reading some magazine
article.
The whole attention of the thing has gone. For me, the most important thing in
the
studio is to retain attention.” In part, this must be generational. Brian is one year
older than me. We grew up in an age when television was a novelty, reading was
sacred, physical education was an obsession.
We may be fools to resist, but then the blind acceptance of virtuality can lead to
an airless, sexless world of cyber-utopia. Maybe the generational conflict can
remind
us of more significant struggles: the tepid image of a smart rocket floating down
a street, guided to its target in a virtual world, contrasted with photographs of
war horrors in the non-virtual domain.
So virtuality is not paradise. But then Eno describes a process which applies
conceptual ordering in the digital domain to a random sequence of ambient
sounds: “There’s an
experiment I did. Since I did it, I started to think it was quite a good exercise
that I would recommend to other people. I had taken a DAT recorder to Hyde
Park and

near Bayswater Road I recorded a period of whatever sound was there: cars
going by,
dogs, people. I thought nothing much of it and I was sitting at home listening to
it on my player. I suddenly had this idea. What about if I take a section of this
– a 3-minute section, the length of a single – and I tried to learn it? So that’s
what I did. I put it in SoundTools and I made a fade-up, let it run for 3–4 minutes
and faded it out. I started listening to this thing, over and over. Whenever I was
sitting there working, I would have this thing on. I printed it on a DAT twenty
times
or something, so it just kept running over and over. I tried to learn it, exactly
as one would a piece of music: oh yeah, that car, accelerates the engine, the revs
in the engine go up and then that dog barks, and then you hear that pigeon off to
the side there. This was an extremely interesting exercise to do, first of all
because
I found that you can learn it. Something that is as completely arbitrary and
disconnected as that, with sufficient listenings, becomes highly connected. You
can really imagine
that this thing was constructed somehow: ‘Right, then he puts this bit there and
that
pattern’s just at the exact same moment as this happening. Brilliant!’ Since I’ve
done that, I can listen to lots of things in quite a different way. It’s like putting
oneself in the role of an art perceiver, just deciding, now I’m playing that role.”
 

 
 
6
altered states i: landscape
Brian Eno; Bill Laswell; Don Cherry; Derek Bailey; Leo Smith; ambient; John
Cage; Harold Budd; Daniel Lanois; Japanese sound design
The Wall Street Journal reports a worldwide crisis amongst teachers, who claim
that The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers television show has colonised the
imaginations of their young charges more completely than any previous
children’s craze. At Kedren Headstart Preschool, Los Angeles, one
teacher now plays “soothing music” to dampen enthusiasm for kung fu kicks in
the classroom.
 
landscape
Brian Eno is talking to me about a man named Louis Sarno. He describes the
strange way in which Sarno apparently began to shrink after living with Ba-
Benjelle pygmies
in the Central African Republic rainforest. Enthusiastically, he describes
beautiful
audio tapes Sarno made of Ba-Benjelle music, recorded by the unusual method
of sitting
hidden in the trees, far away from the central sound source so that the music was
subsumed within a wider landscape of insect and bird voices, domestic sounds
from

the village, the sound of air and tape noise. Shortly after, I buy a Dutch fanzine,
devoted solely to Lee Perry. On a one-page advert for a mail-order company
selling
Perry albums, four cassettes of Bayaka pygmy music, recorded by Sarno, are
advertised.
Finally I find Sarno’s book, Song from the Forest, in one of the bookshops lining
the route between Oxford railway station and the extraordinary Pitt Rivers
Museum, home of shamanic costumes, false-face masks, fetish
objects, spirit sculptures, bullroarers from Devon and twentieth-century
witchcraft
spells, charms and curses from deepest Sussex. The first sentence of the book
says
“I was drawn to the heart of Africa by a song.” Sarno had turned on his radio in
Amsterdam and heard the liquid polyphony of Central African pygmy singing.
Out of an epiphanic
moment grew a desire to travel in search of more of this music. “One quiet night
the
deep tones of a drum came throbbing through the forest from a great distance”,
Sarno
writes. “‘Ejengi’, Mobo remarked from his hut, and we lay there in the dark,
listening to the faint tattoo that seemed to merge with the natural pulsation of the
night itself.”
For the sleevenotes to On Land (written 1982, revised 1986; music recorded
between 1978 and 1982), Brian Eno talked about a relationship between the
psychoacoustic space of the recording studio and
the depiction or evocation of landscape. The potential of using SoundTools hard-
disk
editing software for making music out of random, ambient sounds was

fomenting back
then. “When I was in Ghana,” he wrote, “I took with me a stereo microphone
and a cassette recorder, ostensibly to record indigenous music and speech
patterns. What I sometimes
found myself doing instead was sitting out on the patio in the evenings with the
microphone placed to pick up the widest possible catchment of ambient sounds
from all directions,
and listening to the results on my headphones. The effect of this simple
technological
system was to cluster all the disparate sounds into one aural frame: they became
music.”
This pushed him towards a new conception of music as a soundfield, and away
from the
objectification of sound structures into fixed compositions. But studio
technology
had grown out of performance. To Eno’s ears, the dominant trend in recording
was towards “greater proximity, tighter and more coherent meshing of sounds
with one another”.
 
eternal drift at Lizard Point
Bass player Bill Laswell remembers those On Land sessions. For one whole
summer in New York City, he worked with Brian on material that would be
improvised, edited, then processed into a part of the album. “One by
one he fired everybody and it was just me and him”, Laswell tells me. “We
would go
to Canal Street and we’d buy junk – those hoses you twirl around – and gravel,
put

it in a box and put reverb on it. All these weird things to make sounds. We’d be
in
this bathroom with these overhead mikes, making sounds for days. A friend of
mine
was a photographer from Chile [Felipe Orrego]. He got these tapes of frogs and
the
frogs sounded like an orchestra. There was like thousands of them but they had it
totally hooked up. Occasionally one would start a riff – it’s like Monkey Chant
[Balinese ketjak singing] where one voice will start and the rest will jump in.
Eno really was into that tape and that’s all over that record.”
 
theatre of signs
Don Cherry is sitting on the floor of the front room of his narrow first-floor
apartment in San Francisco wearing a maroon tracksuit and Chinese slippers. On
the walls: a
Robert Wilson poster, a photograph of the legendary Five Spot jazz club. Floor,
seats
and tables are covered with musical instruments – an electric keyboard, a tiny
pocket
trumpet, seed pods from Latin America, Indian tabla drums. Don’s mind and
body dart
from one autobiographical landmark to the next. He talks about the Watts
Towers –
tall, weirdly elegant spikes of wire, scrap steel, pottery fragments built over a
period of thirty-three years, from 1921 to 1954, by an Italian-American named
Simon
Rodia. “They said he was crazy”, laughs Cherry, “then they tried to say he was a

spy.
That it was an antenna, you know, when Mussolini got strong. He’d work at
night. I
remember when I was young I used to pass there.” He leafs through folders, a
suitcase
full of unrealised projects, notebooks, scrapbooks – photographs of Don with
Dennis Hopper, Yohji Yamamoto, John Lurie, Ornette Coleman (both of them
wearing shiny Italian suits), Manu Dibango, Carlos Santana. He taps a cigarette
incessantly but never lights it;
then his hands flutter over the tabla. You keep up or lose his interest. In the
1960s,
Don lived in Scandinavia for a while, organising communal music sessions,
eating brown
rice, living with Moki, who made banners. The music could sound like Terry
Riley,
a deep John Coltrane meditation, a SeneGambian griot’s narrative, or one of
Dollar
Brand’s (now Abdullah Ibrahim) heartlifting tunes. According to Jan Garbarek,
the
late Albert Ayler travelled to the far north of Norway and Sweden in search of
folk
music and shamanistic songs. Garbarek hears some of that music in Ayler’s spirit
hymns.
When Don visited Oslo in 1964, Garbarek and his friends were influenced by
Coltrane.
The nomadic trumpet player from America made them aware of the significance
of their

own traditions. “We were invited to do a radio recording,” Garbarek tells me,
“and
I remember Don was asking us to bring along a folk singer. Of course, we knew
these
performers and their music, but to combine it with improvisation in that way was
something we had never considered.”
For black American improvisers such as Don Cherry and the Art Ensemble of
Chicago, and at roughly the same time their European and white American
counterparts in AMM,
Musica Elettronica Viva (MEV), Joseph Holbrook, Music Improvisation
Company (MIC),
Nuova Consonanza and the Spontaneous Music Ensemble, a partial move away
from the
major instruments of jazz and classical music performance was an expression of
politics as much as music. From the mid-1960s into the disillusioned 1970s, little
instruments
and non-instruments (transistor radios, contact microphones amplifying tiny
sounds
or surface noises extracted from tables, beards, cheese graters, etc.) became
symbols
of the drive to democratise music, to allow access to unskilled players (including
children), draw sound from instruments rather than subjugate them to systems,
open
the music up to chance events and create a sense of collectively organised
community
as an attempted break from hard professionalism, particularly the star system
that afflicted both jazz groups and classical performers.

The atomisation that took place in the wake of the early improvisation groups
was interesting in itself: environmental music pursued by Alvin Curran of MEV;
music for
political resistance explored by Frederic Rzewski of MEV and AMM’s Cardew
and Rowe;
ethnomusicology by MEV’s Ivan Vandor; film music by spaghetti-western
composer Ennio
Morricone, a member of Italy’s Nuova Consonanza; Tibetan Buddhism by
MIC’s Jamie Muir
and Christine Jeffrey; radical black politics and Rastafarianism by AACM’s Leo
Smith;
open work and minimalist composing by Joseph Holbrook’s Gavin Bryars;
extraordinarily
wide-ranging composing by Anthony Braxton, another Chicago AACM
member; live electronics by MEV’s Richard Teitelbaum and a dedication to
improvisation from Derek Bailey, Evan
Parker, Eddie Prévost, Lou Gare and Tony Oxley. It was as if the ideals of open
artworks and open society converged for a moment, no matter how incompatible
their specific
intent, and then splintered into more focused, or in some cases more dogmatic,
channels which suited the individual rather than the group.
For guitarist Derek Bailey, a participant in this early development of free
improvisation as well as a documenter of its various forms in his book
Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice In Music, improvisation is distinguished
by a rare capacity to embrace such diversity. “One of the things that marks its
quality,” he says, “and in the right mood I might even
claim its superiority as a musical activity, is its scope. It can accommodate
virtually anybody. I first came to this kind of playing through working with two
musicians with

national and geographic similarities, but in every other way totally different
characters.
That was Tony Oxley and Gavin Bryars. I worked with them for nearly three
years and
I was struck throughout that time and increasingly as time went on, how
extraordinary
it was that these two guys could work together. They never have since because
their
approach to music was quite different. It struck me that the productiveness of
that
period, for me anyway, came from this disparity between aesthetic approaches.
This freely improvised aesthetic seemed not only to accommodate different
attitudes and approaches but it actually
produced better results if you had that. When you’ve got ill-fitting elements, it’s
almost as though the rubbing together of the elements in order to make it work –
the
old analogy – produces a pearl.”
Was it an accident of history that free improvisation, with its embrace of noise,
“illegitimate” instruments, elements of theatre, non-hierarchical organisation and
the chance interventions of environmental sounds, coincided with the full
emergence
of semiotics – the science of signs – as a recognised area of study? Roland
Barthes’s
Mythologies, written in 1957 but first published in Britain in 1972, Thomas A.
Sebeok’s Zoosemiotics (the study of animal sounds, ritualisations and other
communication forms), published in 1972, and Umberto Eco’s A Theory of
Semiotics, published in preliminary form in 1967 and then in English in 1976, all
dwelled upon ideas that were being enacted by improvisers: Barthes’s analysis of

toys, wrestling
and striptease, for example, or Eco’s assertion – “One can hardly conceive of a
world
in which certain beings communicate without verbal language, restricting
themselves
to gestures, objects, unshaped sounds, tunes or tap-dancing; but it is equally hard
to conceive of a world in which certain beings only utter words” – provided a
counterpoint to the reformation of music as a field in which all sounds, silences,
gestures and
actions were “the music”. In fact, Umberto Eco had written a number of essays
on open
form aesthetics in the early 1960s. These were collected in one book entitled The
Open Work. “In the modern scientific universe,” he wrote, “as in architecture and
in Baroque pictorial production, the various component parts are all endowed
with equal value
and dignity, and the whole construct expands towards a totality which is close to
the infinite. It refuses to be hemmed in by any ideal normative conception of the
world. It shares in a general urge toward discovery and constantly renewed
contact
with reality.”
The influences which led to a point where music threw aside so many
conventions have been fiercely contested and often wrongly attributed. Each
person’s contact with reality was very different yet, for a moment, similar
conclusions were being reached. With hindsight, it seems simpler to say that
established categorisations of art, science, society, nature and culture, were
inadequate to new needs. “One of the things of the time”, says Bailey, “was a
dissatisfaction

with orthodox forms of music making. They were OK, but there seemed to be a
lot of
things they weren’t saying. I think that applied to other people. They were
looking
for ways of saying things that weren’t being said. This was a time when popular
music
had exploded so it was a bit strange to be pursuing an alternative practice,
although
there was room for it as well.”
Many ideas and methods from the past were interweaving at the same time,
enabling certain barriers to be crossed and certain correspondences to be
misinterpreted, both
in their sources and their intentions. In As Serious As Your Life, Valerie Wilmer
quotes Leo Smith’s denial of any influence from John Cage. Just as Cage seemed
unaware or resistant to any correspondences between his innovations and
those in jazz, so musicians like Smith saw their experimentation – including his
use
of all kinds of sound-making devices to supplement his trumpet playing – as
being
part of a broader African-American tradition. “He also plays sealhorn, zither,
autoharp, harmonica, recorder, wooden and metal flutes and whistles”, Wilmer
writes, “and one
of those old-fashioned rubber ‘squeeze’ car-horns. He is carrying on a Southern
tradition that started with children banging on washboards and tin-cans, blowing
down pieces
of rubber-hose and strumming wires stretched between nails on a wall, a
tradition
deeply rooted in Africa.” Roscoe Mitchell’s Sound, recorded in Chicago in 1966

with a sextet that included trumpeter Lester Bowie and bass player Malachi
Favors, is an excellent example of the complete departure from
free jazz and its propulsive expressionism. “Sound” and “The Little Suite” both
explore cries and whispers at the edge of instruments, many of the sounds
allowed to develop
quietly in solo space or oblique duets, rhythm used as a colour, an emphasis, part
of an aural theatre of signs.
 
complexity
January 1975. Striated images banging up and down the screen of a portable
colour television, colour layered out of register. The smell of sour milk. Too ill to
stand
for long, Brian Eno collapses back into bed.
My first contact with Brian came in 1974, after I had edited a small book
called New/Rediscovered Musical Instruments, a brief survey of UK
experimental instrument building featuring the work of Hugh Davies, Max
Eastley, Paul Burwell, Evan Parker, Paul Lytton and myself. Madeau Stewart
contributed an introduction. As a sound archive producer for BBC radio, she
broadcast
programmes that listeners like myself found inspiring – a survey of ritual
instruments
by folk-music authority A.L. Lloyd, for example. She was also responsible for
items
that other BBC listeners found peculiar, including talks by myself and Max
Eastley,
and a project of her own which involved rowing out to sea with a glum engineer
employed to record broadcast-quality tapes of her flute duets with seals. After

the first of
my talks – a twenty-minute mix of New Guinea and Brazilian sacred flutes,
Balinese
genggong frog dance music, Amazon rainforest chants, Malaysian shamanism,
Korean ceremonial music, brain fever birds, beluga and bat sounds broadcast in
1972 – a letter came
from Africa. A man had heard the programme, presumably on the World Service,
and he
and his two dogs had been greatly puzzled. I envisaged a raddled character in
some
remote colonial outpost, something like Almayer in Joseph Conrad’s Almayer’s
Folly, one hand on the bottle, the other twiddling the radio tuner, hearing Korean
music sent from London to the African bush. Perhaps this stereotypical image
was wildly
inaccurate, yet even as recently as the early 1970s the global mix was a novelty.
“Suddenly we are enjoined to hear and listen to our present environment with
greater attention”, Madeau wrote in her introduction to New/Rediscovered
Musical Instruments. “From the materials about us we are encouraged – all of us
are encouraged – to conjure up the latent music. Some of this music would be
familiar to people on other, distant continents whose musical life we are so
successfully destroying. Where isolated tribes used insects as buzzers attached to
or trapped in some casually cut length of local wood, so the
new instrument makers – who are also composers – casually adapt a clock spring
or
an ex-army shell case as a sound maker. (Incidentally, a society surrounded by
disposable or throwaway goods is not new.)”
So Brian and I talked on the telephone and then he came to see a performance.
Max Eastley performed solo on his own sound sculptures (demonstrating, at one
point, the

spectral crackling of a Purple Ray Vitalator, a device from the 1920s which
energised
the skin with electrical sparks, allegedly); Paul Burwell and I played an
improvised
duo on percussion, flutes and electric guitar. Brian fell asleep, but claimed this
was a compliment.
For almost every musician searching for ways to step outside the boundaries,
an interest in invented or expanded sound technology is inevitable. After leaving
Roxy Music,
Eno’s approach to rock-tech had expanded beyond the VCS-3 synthesiser to
embrace the
notion that all devices used to create music, including the environment itself,
were
musical instruments. In February 1973, for example, he had contributed a
sleevenote
to Basil Kirchin’s second album, Worlds Within Worlds. Kirchin was an oddball
musician who, like painter Alan Davie, floated around the edges of Britain’s
growing free improvisation scene. He had already achieved the impossible by
persuading EMI Records to release the first volume of Worlds Within Worlds in
1971. This mixed amplified, slowed-down tapes of animal, bird and insect cries
with the playing of saxophonist Evan Parker, guitarist Derek Bailey and others.
“I,
personally, find that it helps deliberately to induce a state of self-hypnosis by
playing back somewhat louder than the norm”, Kirchin suggested on the sleeve
of the
record. “In fact, as loud as you or the equipment can stand! In this way one can
‘swim
under water’ in, and ‘breathe in’ the music.” His second album was released by

Island
Records during a period when the company was exploring proto-New Age and
ambient electronica material such as Henry Wolff and Nancy Hennings’s Tibetan
Bells and David Vorhaus’s White Noise. The raw materials for this one included
gorilla and hornbill vocalisations, noises of the docks in Hull and sounds made
by autistic children. “I first heard about Basil
Kirchin”, Brian wrote for his sleevenote, “whilst investigating the possibility of
compiling an album of music produced on hybrid instruments – handbells, steel
bands,
percussive voices, drinking glasses, etc.” That album never appeared, but the
line
between rock orthodoxy and the future was clearly visible.
Then Brian was knocked down and seriously injured by a taxi whilst crossing
the Harrow Road. While he was recovering, I visited him in his Maida Vale flat.
Judy Nylon had
visited him, he told me, and left a record of eighteenth-century harp music. He
had
put the album on the deck, dropped the stylus and fallen back into bed. Once
there,
he discovered that the volume was almost too low for him to be able to hear the
music.
One stereo channel was missing also, but since he was barely able to move, he
left
it as it was and listened. As he did so, an alternative mode of hearing unfolded.
Rather than standing out from its environment, like a ship on an ocean, the music
became part of that ocean, alongside all the other transient effects of light, shade,

colour, scent, taste and sound. So ambient was born, in its present definition at
least: music that we hear but don’t hear; sounds which exist to enable us better to
hear silence; sound which rests us from our intense compulsion to focus, to
analyse,
to frame, to categorise, to isolate.
 
silence
When Death’s chauffeur turns on the car radio in Jean Cocteau’s film Orphée, a voice from the underworld
recites disconnected lines of enigmatic poetry and strings of numbers. The first line we hear in the film is
“Silence is twice as fast backwards … three times.”
John Cage’s 4'33" was premiered in 1952. The piece required a musician to
present a timed performance at an instrument without making a sound. David
Tudor gave this first performance on
piano, using a stopwatch to time the three sections, marking the beginning and
end
of the piece by lowering and finally raising the piano lid without ever touching
the
keys. For this reason, the work is often assumed to have been composed for
piano,
whereas Cage instructed in his score that any instrument could be (not) played.
The
piano is one of the easiest options, since the exaggerated theatre of sitting and
preparing to play, practised by most concert pianists and parodied to perfection
by
comedian Max Wall, provides a clear way of showing that something is being
performed.
4'33" is often referred to colloquially as Silence, on the mistaken assumption

that this was a Zen demonstration of nothingness. But Cage had discovered the
non-existence of silence in Harvard University’s anechoic
chamber, a soundproof room without any reflective surfaces where he sat and
heard
the high singing note of his nervous system and the deep pulsing of his blood.
Nothing happens in 4'33" except for a growing awareness of the immediate
sound environment. I have a recorded version, performed by pianist Gianni-
Emilio Simonetti and released by the Italian
Cramps label in 1974. The idea seems ridiculous yet, for the first time, I listened
to the surface noise of a bad vinyl pressing from Italy with interest rather than
irritation. In his sleevenotes to Cage’s Variations IV, Joseph Byrd referred to
Morse Peckham’s book, Man’s Rage for Chaos; in particular, his definition of art
that is consistent with the rest of contemporary life as being “any perceptual
field which an individual uses as an occasion for performing the role of art
perceiver”. 4'33" directed listeners towards this situation and, in its literally quiet
influence, this work in which there is no tangible work has done so ever since.
Cage’s subtle awareness of the silence which surrounds sounds is at its most
refined in his compositions for prepared piano, an experiment which began as an
expedient
way of creating a percussion orchestra in a dance space too small for anything
other than a piano. “Mutes of various materials are placed between the strings of
the keys used,” he instructed, “thus effecting transformations of the piano sounds
with respect to all of their characteristics.”
The brief but exquisite Prelude for Meditation and Music for Marcel Duchamp,
or the longer work, Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano, sound
sometimes Javanese, sometimes Balinese. Clashing harmonics ring out, muted
wood and gong sounds hang in reverberation or shadow each other in delicate
pursuits
which quicken and slow, tumble over themselves or abruptly stop, leaving only
their

decaying echo.
The Sonatas and Interludes were written during a period when Cage first
began reading works of Japanese and Indian philosophy, so the piece was an
attempt to reflect the “permanent emotions”
of India and their “common tendency toward tranquillity”. He had also been
attending
the New School for Social Research in New York, where he became an assistant
to composer Henry Cowell for his classes in non-Western, folk and
contemporary music. It was Cowell, in fact, who had influenced Cage into
preparing the piano. Cowell had played inside
the piano, rubbing a darning egg along the strings, and Cage took this further by
filling the inside of the piano with newspapers, magazines, plates and ashtrays.
The
method had precedents in Indian and African distortions of flute, percussion,
thumb
piano and stringed instrument sounds with buzzers or rattling objects such as
bottle
tops. The voice disguiser, or mirliton, extended this principle to a materialisation
of the spirit world, transforming the ordinary human voice into something
strange
and supernatural by means of vibrating membranes or mirlitons (the instruments
of
darkness again). In a sense, Cage was subjecting the identifiable materials of art
to a process which transported them to a sacred domain. Later, he refined the
method
to a point where preparation with wood screws, bolts and weather stripping
might take

long periods of precise adjustments. “My guess is”, wrote John Tilbury for the
sleevenotes of his 1975 recording of the Sonatas and Interludes, “that Cage
simply selected his preparations from the junk he had lying about his apartment
and in his pockets. He experimented and, having obtained a pleasing sound,
measured the distances. I confess I work in this spirit.” Tilbury
also questioned the credibility of Cage’s claims for the “permanent emotions of
India”.
The claim for “permanent emotions” certainly seems false in the light of Cage’s
wider
beliefs in chance operations and non-fixity, yet his prepared piano pieces
transmit
to the listener a quality that is quite unlike his other work, and powerful in its
capacity to induce a calmness of being.
Variations IV was another prophetic composition. There are amusing parallels
with the idea of the chill-out room, the room in which multiple signals feed into
one embalming composite,
except for the fact that Cage’s piece, realised with the help of David Tudor, was
an indigestible barrage of noise. Recorded for its 1969 record release in two
rooms
of an art gallery on La Cienaga Boulevard in Los Angeles, the music is a chaotic
blitz
of distorted conversation, distant chat, disconnected musical fragments and room
ambience throughout. Traffic sounds were fed in from outside. A spoken
introduction to the
album advises us to: “Listen closely and you will hear the sounds of the audience
as well as the tinkle of glasses as the mike over the bar was in use.” (A similar
idea was used to hilarious effect for The Roxy London WC2 (Jan–Apr 77), the

first live punk album.) “Records and previous recorded tapes,” the droning voice
at the beginning of Variations IV continues, “as well as radio broadcasts, are
mixed in during the concert … as John Cage has said, ‘Music is all around us. If
only we had ears. There would be no need
for concert halls if man could learn to enjoy the sounds that envelop him, for
example, at 7th Street and Broadway, at 4 p.m. on a rainy day’ …” And Joseph
Byrd, writing
for the album cover, added the perfect synthesis of ambient theory: “What is
happening
is a synthesis of the music and sound we normally hear in snatches: the
elevator’s
ride worth of Muzak, the passing conversation, and the automobile argument all
mingle
freely with Beethoven and the Balinese gender wayang.”
Cage was probably the first to use the expression “Imaginary Landscape”,
with his series of pieces dating from 1939. These were composed for a variety of
sound-making devices: variable-speed turn-tables, frequency recordings,
percussion, radios and, in Imaginary Landscape No. 5, forty-two recordings
from any source, reassembled in fragments as an electronic tape collage
structured according to chance methods determined by the Chinese book
of changes, the I Ching.
The imaginary landscape, in Cage’s world a place in which forms and features
are allowed to emerge and coexist regardless of the personal desires of the
imaginer, has come
to be a central compositional device in the ambient music that has followed
Brian
Eno’s initiative. Imaginary landscapes figured large in his work after his
accident.
Music, if peripheral, has the key to unlock new visions in the same way that a

dream
which eludes us when we try to remember its details may be retriggered
unexpectedly
in an unfocused moment. As Brian’s songwriting fell away, so the space was
filled
by sonic landscapes, evocations of meteorology, natural forms and their
transitional
states: the second tape loop album recorded with Robert Fripp, Evening Star,
with titles such as “Wind On Water” and “Wind On Wind”; the electronic
vignettes recorded with David Bowie on Low and Heroes – particularly
“Neukoln’, “Warszawa”, a Steve Reich-influenced “Weeping Wall” and the
Orientalist “Moss Garden”; the submarine and arboreal tracks on Another Green
World; “Slow Water”, “Events In Dense Fog” and “Final Sunset” on the Music
For Films album; and his records with Jon Hassell, Harold Budd and Daniel
Lanois.
 
virgin beauty
Children, parents and grandparents gathered by the Grebe, Radiola, or Aeriola set in the radio room and
marvelled at the sounds they heard transported mysteriously
from faraway lands … Radio was hailed as the world’s greatest source of knowledge,
the creation of international harmony, and the invention that would stop all wars. Those who had radio sets
spent the better part of their days and evenings tuned in to the voices from the ether … Listeners who
bought radio sets were sometimes disappointed, though. Shrieks, grunts, groans, and cross
talks ruled the airwaves, which were described by some as a hertzian bedlam.
– Gene Fowler and Bill Crawford, Border Radio
Harold Budd was born in Los Angeles in 1936, and as children he and his
brother absorbed their father’s romantic infatuation with the western frontier.
Subsequently, they
were brought up by another family in a tiny Mojave Desert town named
Victorville;

a “dogwater town” is the way Budd describes it. “You could walk in any
direction as
long as you wanted, forever”, he says. “It isn’t like there aren’t people around,
but you’re alone enough, and it’s quiet enough, where you can stand and hear the
sound
of utterly nothing at all.” What fugitive sounds existed came from a gust of wind
or a radio picking up The Sons of the Pioneers from signals transmitted across
the
Mexican border. Some of this desertbound silence, spooked by shrieks and
crosstalk
from other worlds, was later bottled and resold in albums such as Lovely
Thunder (1986) and By the Dawn’s Early Light (1991). This was music for a
saloon abandoned save for beatnik gunslingers; William Burroughs waving a
Colt 45 at the ghost of Geronimo from a table in the corner; Gregory Corso
shuffling cards, delivering drunken monologues at the bar; the faint echo from
outside of Allen Ginsberg’s harmonium drifting with the tumble weeds. The
music is
saturated with memories of place, but with its myths, also. “I admit that’s there”,
says Harold. “I get the same feeling with the music that I do in that geographical
situation. But one doesn’t express the other. It’s not a one-to-one relationship.”
Budd’s landscapes were not necessarily Arcadian. Pieces like Dark Star and
Abandoned Cities (both 1984), for example, were cold slabs of opaque colour:
Rothko paintings as reworked by Ad Reinhardt; an ominous drift. Yet his 1978
album for Brian Eno’s Obscure label,
The Pavilion of Dreams, conjures a gorgeous, translucent mirage. Featuring
Marion Brown’s alto saxophone, and including compositions inspired by
Pharoah Sanders’s “Let Us Go Into the House

of the Lord” and John Coltrane’s “After the Rain”, this collection of five pieces
reminds us of a forgotten dimension of free jazz, the meditational point of
temporary
rest where sorrow, battered optimism, devotion and spiritual ecstasy melted
together.
Listen to John Coltrane’s “Expression”, Albert Ayler’s “Going Home” from his
1964
album of spirituals, “Venus” by Pharoah Sanders, or a much later example, the
spectral
cry of Ornette Coleman’s alto saxophone, floating over Prime Time’s strange
tunings
and decomposing drum machines, along with his own slithering violin, on
“Virgin Beauty”.
Another source for the post-minimalist improvising composer.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s Budd performed duets with tenorist Ayler
when both of them served in the same army unit in Fort Ord, California.
Describing himself as
a jazz snob who tracked down Charles Ives or Hindemith recordings only if jazz
musicians mentioned them in interview, Budd played with Ayler in the marching
band, giving weekly radio broadcasts from the base. “It seemed better to me than
shooting guns”, he says.
Two strangers in a strange land, they would make forays into the hipper clubs of
Monterey and Oakland. Budd played drums, a consequence of his father’s love
for martial music.
“My job was to make a wall of sound”, he says, “and it was exhausting but of
course,
being in the army, I was in great physical shape. Later on, when he used Sunny
Murray

as a drummer, I got a better idea about what he was after, which I couldn’t do.”
So,
in a momentary intersection of seemingly opposite musical viewpoints, Budd
spoke in
tongues with one of the elevated spirits of 1960s jazz: Albert Ayler, found
floating
in the East River, New York City, 1970, after taking his own life.
 
wilderness
A London hotel, 1990. Daniel Lanois and I sit at a cramped corner table in a
claustrophobic basement restaurant. He claps his hands. “This would be a good
place to record.”
Lanois describes The Pearl, Budd and Eno’s collaborative album, as a
“chilling record”. For Lanois, this is a great compliment, since his talent for
creating virtual landscapes in the studio
is placed at the service of strong emotional performances. “I’ve chosen to let
people
be the driving force”, he says, “rather than a machine. Recording for me these
days
can happen anywhere, as long as the place feels good.” So with Lanois
producing, or
co-producing with Eno, U2’s The Unforgettable Fire was recorded in Slane
Castle in Ireland, Peter Gabriel’s So in the studio control room and The Neville
Brothers’ Yellow Moon in a rented warehouse in New Orleans. Whatever the
setting, mysterious atmospheres – mystic forests, bayous and swamp, the echoes
from sheer cliff walls – suffuse the
finished results.
Lanois learned his trade in the basement of his mother’s house in Canada. As

teenagers, he and his brother, Bob, set up a studio underneath their mother’s
bedroom and began
recording an educational mixture of local folk, gospel, country music and
rhythm’n’blues.
At the end of the 1970s, Brian Eno heard a tape recorded by Lanois and booked
time
at the studio. It was the beginning of a fruitful partnership. Eno enjoyed the
cottage
industry atmosphere in which the brothers worked. “It had that feeling of people
doing
their best with what they had”, says Lanois, “which is a great quality in art.”
Together they worked on a number of instrumental albums, creating striking
spatial effects
by shrouding sounds in layered echoes. These techniques, developed to enhance
such
albums as The Pearl, Jon Hassell’s Dream Theory In Malaya and Brian Eno’s
Apollo sound-track (composed with Lanois and Roger Eno) to For All Mankind,
Al Reinert’s film of the Apollo space missions, later found a more commercial
setting with U2, Gabriel and Bob Dylan.
The course of U2’s musical evolution is interesting if seen as an integral part
of the studio process. Initially, the Lanois spaces and atmospheres enhance U2’s
stance as a “mythical”, fixed unit. For fans (though not me), the band
is magisterial, epic, the essence of rock. Gradually, the full implications of
opening
the music up to studio virtuality erodes this epic solidity. Under the influence of
Lanois, Eno and Flood, the band’s Achtung Baby and Zooropa albums
deconstruct, somewhat self-consciously, into lurid, lo-fi grab images of urban
dissonance and media overload, closer to Bowie’s Low than the hyperbole of The
Unforgettable Fire.

I asked Lanois if childhood images had shaped his talent for depicting ghostly
resonances and far horizons. “The railway tracks, the hydro lines, the paths that
are cut through
the forest to accommodate industrial power cables”, he answered. “You’ll be in
the
wilderness and suddenly you come to this open space where it’s almost like God
came
down with a hair clipper and just cut through the forest and laid in a power hydro
line. Those images are strong for me. Then hearing a train in the distance and
putting
pennies on the railtracks. Flattening them and going back to look at them. Kid’s
stuff
but great images. Taking the boat out on a calm lake. Smokestacks from a
distance.
In Hamilton, where I grew up, in Canada, it’s a steel city. It’s a bit like
Pittsburgh.
In the dead of winter at night this area would be lit up like a Christmas tree and
then the smoke would be blasting out of the furnaces. Fire and smoke. Because
it’s
so cold, as soon as the heat touches the sky, it just bursts into steam. I love those
images. Industrial, but still people images.”
 
nature into music
In 1989, Brian Eno was invited to compose and perform a new work for the
consecration of the Tenkawa Shinto shrine near Kyoto. The head priest of the
monastery was an admirer of Brian’s music and owned every record he had
made. In his preparatory notes for

the performance Brian considers musical equivalents for the shrine’s
significance as a receiver of spiritual energy. “It occured to me”, he wrote, “that
it would make sense to think of the performance as a way of receiving and
digesting
and then representing various acoustic phenomena in the valley.” He explores
ideas
of amplifying and mixing ambient sounds in concentric circles ranging from the
very
edge of the valley to the focus point of the shrine itself, proposing the use of
fireworks, little instruments such as clickers and whirling tubes, steam, burning
fuses, the
sounds of work and the hum of lights on dimmers. Later, he mentions the
approach used
to record On Land and finds a congruence in Joseph Campbell’s observations on
Shinto: “[L]iving Shinto is not the following of some set-down moral code, but a
living in gratitude and awe
amid the mystery of things … it is incorrect to say that Shinto lacks moral ideas.
The basic moral idea is that the processes of nature cannot be evil.”
“Maybe that’s why the head monk likes my records”, Brian muses. “He feels
there’s some Shinto in there already perhaps. Certainly the notion of the
continuum from nature into music is very appropriate.”
 
continuum
In 1977, Paul Burwell and I gave a six-hour performance in a huge Butler’s
Wharf warehouse overlooking the Thames. Now the site of expensive
restaurants and riverside apartments, Butler’s Wharf was a warren of artists’
studios during the 1970s, where Derek Jarman

filmed and musicians ranging from Michael Nyman to Wayne County & The
Electric Chairs and The Rich Kids played at parties. The freezing cold at the
time of our duo performance slowed our actions, but the knowledge that there
was no fixed duration meant that
each sound could linger in the silence, sometimes augmented by distant hooting
from
the river. Darkness closed in until the only light came from slide projections.
Paul
stretched piano wires across the empty space and suspended packing cases, milk
churns,
glass rods and waste bins from them. I don’t remember the sound, but in a
Melody Maker review, Steve Lake wrote: “Bowing and plucking the wires, or
even running the fingers along them, produces the most extraordinary noises.
Like howling feedback or the singing of sea cows (the source, you’ll recall, of
the legend of the Sirens).” Evan Parker,
then increasingly investigating extended durations and continuous music through
his
circular breathing and multiphonic techniques for soprano saxophone, came to
listen.
He proposed an idea for a twenty-four-hour concert and this was organised,
finally,
for the penultimate night of Music/Context, an environmental music festival I
organised the following year. The group – Parker, Burwell, myself, Hugh
Davies, Paul Lytton,
Paul Lovens, Annabel Nicolson and Max Eastley – played for thirteen hours
before running into a wall of exhaustion and an overwhelming feeling that there
was nothing more
to add. In hindsight, I think there were too many distractions and too many
players.

Incus Records released a single album – Circadian Rhythm – edited down from
those thirteen hours.
 
shadows
What lies within the darkness one cannot distinguish, but the palm senses the gentle movements of the
liquid, vapour rises from within forming droplets on the rim, and
the fragrence carried upon the vapour brings a delicate anticipation.
– Jun’ichirō Tanizaki, In Praise of Shadows
A small party in a Yokohama restaurant: two sound sculptors – Minoru Sato and
Max Eastley, a bass player, a theatre manageress, a traditional dancer, a Butoh
dancer,
two noise musicians – Masami Akita of Merzbow (as well as the brilliantly
named Bust
Monster and Kinbiken bondage videos) and Fumio Kosakai of Incapacitants,
plus myself.
“Mister David”, says Mr Kosakai, the black-suited gentleman kneeling opposite
me.
He bows low and wrestles with a few words of English, concluding with an
inconclusive “Circadian Rhythm”. A question?
“Incus Records”, I reply, getting drunk on sake and beer, slightly queasy after
eating natto, a fermented bean concoction of unsettling stickiness and smell.
“What do you do?”
I ask, instantly dismayed by my pathetic conversation. “Noise music”, he
answers,
miming what could be the action of dismembering a moose with a power saw.
“Maximum volume. But I love nature sounds too.”
For Westerners, this openness to extremes of noise and quietude is regarded as
a contradiction, filed under clichés: Japan, or rationalised as a consequence of

the complex ethical
and religious foundations of Japanese beliefs and behaviour; the Shinto belief
that
“the processes of nature cannot be evil”; the Confucian virtues of imitative
learning
and social cooperation; the Buddhist tenet that everything is Buddha. So moral
judgements and oppositional categorisations imposed on noise and silence, or
human and machine,
are less clear cut in Japan. Trying to understand the Otaku – young technocratic
fanatics who collect information for its own sake – in his Speed Tribes book,
Karl Taro Greenfield concludes that “the Japanese maintain a different
relationship with their technology than the West. They simply view their PC or
television as another object, like a rock or a tree or a kimono, which is of nature
and hence of themselves.”
This is why encounters with such apparent oddities as shrines piled up with
lavatory
brushes are not uncommon in Japan, or why Buddhist priests pray for worn-out
microchips.
Everything is Buddha.
Sound design plays an important role in the constant movement that
characterises Japanese street society and public spaces, but nature is encoded
within microchips and the
vaporous world whose passing was lamented by Jun’ichirō Tanizaki is blasted by
noise
levels of striking insensitivity. Traffic signals chirp ornithologically or play
synthesised folk tunes; water sounds rush along tunnels; sliding gates on the
Shinkansen “bullet
train” platforms play computer game melodies; deranged loops of hard-sell
hysteria

blare from the doorways of electronic discount shops; brief cycles of background
music
repeat endlessly in food supermarkets, as if to create a subconscious time limit
between the moment of picking up a basket, shopping and then arriving at the
checkout to pay;
in hotel rooms, easy listening muzak plays until silenced and in the corridors,
Mantovani’s “Char-maine” floats in ancient clouds of sleeping gas.
Not all Japanese greet these fractures and earsores with approval. At NADI
sound design laboratory in Kobe, Yoshihiro Kawasaki records ambient sounds,
collaborating with
sound artists such as the American Bill Fontana and Germany’s Rolf Julius, as
well
as participating in a remarkable radio project called St GIGA. “I made sound
systems
for public spaces”, says Kawasaki, explaining his entry into the sound world.
“At
the time I thought, how about sound? Music has power or force, or it says
something.
Environmental sound has some kind of force, but not so strong. I started to think
about the sound surrounding me. In Japan, there are a lot of spaces where music
plays,
like the Muzak system. It’s a kind of masking. Now I think it’s too much. Now
we must
start to think again about environmental sound. In the big station at Osaka, in the
morning they play bird singing. Sometimes it is very strange. People rush to
their
companies. They don’t speak, they walk like robots. It’s a kind of surrealistic

scene.
For me, I am thinking always about sound. When we talk about sound, most
people think
only of music. But for me, there are many, many kinds of sound. We are
surrounded.
I want to keep my consciousness at a kind of flat level so I can catch sound.” A
number of Kawasaki’s nature recordings have been released on a Japanese CD
series entitled
Sounds of the Earth. “It’s very interesting”, he says, laughing. “When I’m
making those CDs in the studio, most people fall asleep. Some sound causes
alpha waves. A young assistant had to check
for digital noise so he tried to listen very carefully with headphones, but every
time, he fell asleep for thirty minutes.”
Among the tapes made by Kawasaki for St GIGA are hours of Buddhist
chanting made in Nara, the seat of Buddhism in Japan, and Koya-san mountain,
centre of the Shingon-Mikkyō
sect of Buddhism. John Cage and Karlheinz Stockhausen both heard Buddhist
chanting in situ and found much in these prolonged sound events that confirmed
their opposed philosophies. In the Dai Hannya ceremony of the Shingon sect, for
example,
the chanting of the sutra will be modified according to seasonal influences. The
sutra is six hundred volumes in length, and so a part of the reading is
symbolically accomplished by the monks opening out their folded prayer books
and then shutting them noisily.
Evil spirits are driven away with other noises, such as door banging, hitting the
floor with wooden staffs, the clatter of running, crackling fire and the blowing of
conch shells. Kawasaki recorded the ancient Shunie (also known as Omizutori)
ceremony,

which heralds the beginning of spring in March each year. “It’s a very long
ceremony”,
he says. “For the monk it’s very hard work. It’s about fourteen days. No meat, no
fish. No one can enter this space, only monk.” He draws a diagram. “This space
is
only selected people – you ask permission, maybe you come. Woman cannot.
Here they
have screen. You can hear the sound. They walk around. At that time, they put
on wooden shoes, so it’s a very special sound. They sing, and sometimes silence,
sometimes ring
a special bell. Sometimes they sing very fast, singing all names of the gods,
including Shinto gods. At that time, it’s very, very fast. It’s like Superman.
Maybe they are
in trance. People have only imagination: ‘What are they doing?’ That screen,
they
only use candlelight, so only silhouettes come through. When they come into the
space
they bring some very big torch. The sound causes many imaginations.”
 
amniotic fluids
Devised in 1990 by Hiroshi Yokoi, a pioneer of twenty-four-hour FM radio
transmission in Japan, St GIGA was the first Japanese satellite station. The
concept was inspired
by a Kurt Vonnegut story called “The Sirens of Titan”, in which cave-dwelling
creatures called Harmoniums eat beautiful sounds and shine with light. The only
words they know
are “I’m here” and “I’m glad you’re there”, the perfect distillation of radio’s

most basic principle. Programmed according to tidal patterns, sunrise and sunset
and the changing phases of the moon, rather than Greenwich standard
time, the station works upon principles which would be regarded in the UK as
symptoms
of delusional mania.
“The cyclical patterns created by these various natural forces are combined to
form a single line which is used as the guiding line for programme scheduling”,
writes
Mr Yokoi in the radio station handbook. “The movements of this ‘guiding line’
are
irregular and, rather than conforming to the Greenwich time line, form a cyclical
pattern based on the natural rhythms that synchronise with human behaviour and
emotions.
Sounds and music which match the wave patterns of this guiding line will be
selected
and transmitted to harmonize with each cycle. By matching the wave patterns of
nature
and the melodic patterns of music in this way, a powerful and deep world of
sound
will be realised. This world of sound, filled with the vibrations of nature, will
draw people into an unusual mental space where they can experience the sweet
beginnings of life itself, reminiscent of the start of existence as an embryo within
amniotic
fluids … We are about to enter a period of major historical change not often
witnessed
in the long history of mankind. I believe that people involved in media have an
important obligation to fulfil. That is to truly grasp the spirit of the period. And

at the
same time to use their imaginative powers and practical skills to create a ‘dream
tide’.” Those who understand the St GIGA programme best, and thus its main
target
audience, Hiroshi Yokoi claims, are “unborn babies sleeping quietly in amniotic
fluids”.
A Japanese doctor was the first to release a commercial album of womb
sounds (track titles included “Aorta” and “Aorta and Vein”) mixed with the
soporific end of the
classical repertoire – Air on a G String and so on. The intention of Dr Hajime
Murooka’s Sleep Gently In the Womb, released in 1975, was to pacify crying
babies. Electronic lullaby tapes designed to calm newborn babies or ease birth
pains for women are now common, both in Mothercare and in the tape sections
of New Age bookshops; Mickey Hart of the Grateful Dead, for example, has
released a birthing tape of his own. Anecdotal evidence suggests that if rhythms
and
beats derived from heartbeat recordings are transmitted to a foetus in the womb
throughout pregnancy, then this stimulation may increase the child’s learning
capacity after
birth. Coincidentally, the music my daughter heard, or felt, just five nights before
she was born was a loud performance by Daniel Lanois, with guest vocal on one
song
by Brian Eno. The consequences are as yet unknown.
 
water streaming
In the silent meditation, the sound of the gong can be heard several times. Then the sound of a cloud-shaped
metal gong as well as a wooden drum telling the end of the
morning meditation can be heard in a unique rhythm. The sound of gongs and drums not only awakes
sleepy novices or young monks, but also it helps to awake the insight

of monks to lead them to the state of enlightenment or Satori in Japanese. All monks start to chant a
scripture in unison as a part of the morning service. Circumstances and atmosphere are so silent that one can
hear sounds of the
wind and water-streaming very clearly.
– Shoyu Hanayama, Zen: Sound & Silence
(Nippon Phonogram LP booklet)
John Cage was influenced profoundly by the lectures of Daisetz Suzuki, who
gave classes in Zen at Columbia University, New York City, from the late 1940s
through most of
the 1950s. Cage’s biographer, David Revill, wrote in The Roaring Silence that
“the teachings of Suzuki had a startling effect on Cage. He felt that they
catapulted him into conceptual and emotional adulthood.” As for Cage’s own
thoughts on the matter, the influence is apparent from his description of the
lectures: “Suzuki never spoke loudly. When the weather was good, the windows
were open, and the airplanes leaving La Guardia flew directly overhead from
time to time, drowning out whatever he had to say. He never repeated what had
been said during the passage of the airplane.”
Whilst sound sculptor Max Eastley and I are staying in Yoshihiro Kawasaki’s
Kobe apartment, he plays us his tapes of an Edo-period (1603–1867) garden
sound maker called the suikinkutsu. This is a large stone basin mounted over an
even bigger inverted pot. The pot is sunk in the earth, set in an underground
drainage system of stones. Drips collect
in the basin, fed from a bamboo pipe, and then fall into the resonating water
vessel
below. “People can hear the silence”, says Kawasaki. “That’s the point.”
Anxious to
experience the point, I travel to Kyoto in the company of Kawasaki’s assistant,
Kana
Kobayashi, who takes me on a whirlwind tour of Zen temples, stone gardens,
moss gardens and patisseries. In Ninomaru Palace, originally built by the first
Tokugawa Shōgun

Ieyasu in 1603, we leave our shoes on racks at the door to pad softly around the
famous chirping uguisu-bari, the “nightingale floor”. Designed to reveal the
presence of ninja assassins, this artful construction of cramps and nails under the
floorboards seems to squeak only when somebody else is moving, leaving me
with the eerie impression
that I am floating on Hiroshi Yokoi’s dream tide.
But the highlight of this Kyoto daytrip is the garden of Zuishun-In and its
suikinkutsu. Swapping our shoes for green garden sandals, we walk through the
garden to the water chime. The sound is minute, so quiet in fact that we deafened
creatures of the contemporary world must be provided with a bamboo listening
pole. This bamboo adds the typical
phasing drone of resonance in a cylindrical tube (the “sea” we can hear by
putting
an ear to a seashell); after a short period of listening to the pure, sparse bell
tones of random drips ringing in their underground chamber, all auditory
experiences
are heightened. We sit for an hour in the garden, eating a green jelly sweet,
drinking
Japanese tea, watching fish being fed. The tranquillity switches open a calm state
of mind. Bodily receptors tune in to a flickering microsphere: a butterfly landing
on moss, intermittent water droplets, insect drones, reflections
of water ripples on bamboo poles, the scrape of an old woman digging weeds
from a
path. Giant carp jump, then flop back into the ornamental pond. Birds flutter
loudly
as they weave through the bamboo platforms erected to train tree branches and
foliage
into pleasing shapes. A crow squaws. The environment has been carefully
designed to

draw this state of mind into becoming. A few minutes ago, we were walking
along a
noisy city street. But the garden is an aesthetic, meditational construct, an
enabling
tool which relegates foreground clutter to the edges of the picture for a brief
period
and focuses instead on fleeting patterns of light, shadow, colour, smell, sound
and
silence.
The suikinkutsu was often built near the outside toilet. To complete the
meditation on nature and bodily functions, when you came out you could wash
your hands in water collected within the stone basin and listen to its delicate
sound. Earthy as well as ethereal in his
appreciation of fugitive beauty, Jun’ichirō Tanizaki, the author of The Secret Life
of Musashi, described the pleasure of sitting in an old-fashioned Japanese
outside toilet and absorbing nature: “There one can listen with such a sense of
intimacy to the raindrops
falling from the eaves and the trees, seeping into the earth as they wash over the
base of a stone lantern and freshen the moss about the stepping stones.” This
reflection is one of many delights contained in his essay on aesthetics, In Praise
of Shadows. Written in 1933, the book captures a moment of crisis before such
extremes of subtlety, already wilting under the glare of technology, were almost
completely crushed by the
consequences of aggressive Japanese nationalism, post-war American influence
and the
brute commerce which followed economic recovery. Tanizaki believed that
recording
technology, originally developed in the West, was unsuited to capturing Japanese
music, “a music of reticence, of atmosphere”. In an uncomfortable fit of his own

nationalistic tendencies, he none the less shows an acute appreciation of
technology’s inability
to capture and reproduce the substance of silence, or the elusive aether talk of
quiet sound and acoustic space. Ironically, Japanese concentration on mass
market hi-fi and musical instrument technology has
done very little to redress this balance or indeed protect the special qualities of
non-Western scales and tuning systems against the uniformity of the octave.
Quite
rightly, Tanizaki felt that the loudspeaker diminishes certain aspects of sound by
emphasising others. Even the most secluded spots of Kyoto are not immune. At
a moss
garden temple, a shakuhachi flute plays on tape, and in the tea house of Zuishun-
In garden, a cassette player is set up to play Kawasaki’s recording of the
suikinkutsu during the tea ceremony.
Writing about the aesthetic sensibility of Japan’s Heian era (ninth century) in
Zen Culture, Thomas Hoover says: “Beauty was all the more arresting for the
certainty that it must perish.” In the land of hardware that Japan has become, this
attitude still exists, paradoxically, but only in small pockets of forward thinking
that project into a speculative, post-consumerist future. Hiroshi Yokoi’s St GIGA
project is one example. Xebec Hall,
sited on Kobe’s Port Island, is another. Here, John Cage’s absorption of Zen has
come
full circle. There are other centres for sound exploration – IRCAM in Paris and
STEIM
in Amsterdam – but Xebec is unique in its visionary linking of sound art and
consumer
research.
In the 1980s, the TOA Corporation, a company specialising in PA systems for

public spaces, celebrated its fiftieth anniversary by building a corporate
headquarters on
Port Island. Given that such buildings are required to incorporate a public space,
TOA had considered the idea of including an equipment showroom in their plans
but
eventually decided to build a concert hall, digital studio and cafe (serving
typically
excellent coffee) with exhibition space – all equipped to present experimental
music
and the kind of sound art pioneered by post-Cage composers such as Pauline
Oliveros,
Alvin Lucier, Max Neuhaus, Akio Suzuki, Alvin Curran and Annea Lockwood.
So the Xebec
Corporation, along with its unique relationship with a parent company, was born.
Travelling on the Shinkansen train between Kobe and Tokyo in April, 1993,
Nobuhisa Shimoda, planning director of Xebec’s concerts, workshops and
exhibitions, explained
to me the unusual workings of this sound centre. For him, the presentation of
sound
art, installations and music concerts (experimental, jazz, Asian classical music,
Fluxus art and so on) is the most effective and rewarding way to communicate
models
of a less product-orientated society, a society which directs income more towards
time-based enrichment than solid packages of entertainment technology. At the
time,
the ailing Japanese economy was dedicated to exaggerated demand-creation for

such
packages. Shimoda’s position seemed radical, yet Japanese economists and
policy analysts were asking fundamental questions about so-called consumer
fatigue (make houses bigger
in order to allow more room for consumer durables, suggested Yukio Ohnuma, a
general
manager of Itochu Corporation) and the collapse of Japan’s bubble economy
(create
more life-satisfaction for workers and more original products for consumers,
suggested
political writer Taichi Sakaiya). Xebec has something of a head start in this re
invention of the relationship between culture and the economy. Its parent
company, TOA, is not
a musical instrument manufacturer, but a specialist in the more intangible field
of
designing for optimum deployment of sound in space. The TOA motto is: “We
sell sound,
not equipment.”
“CD consumption doesn’t make people think how to create something inside
themselves”, says Shimoda. “Maybe about five or ten years ago in Japanese
society it looked as
if people chose goods by how good they are – goods should have a certain level
of
ability, plus good design. But it turned to the next phase. I imagine people would
like to have rich life by buying or using some goods to make their life rich.
When
I use the word rich, it’s not only for physical things but mental or spiritual. So

we have to shift.” How this possible trend connects with Xebec and its parent
company
remains nebulous. The event which opened Xebec in 1989 – a Brian Eno light
sculpture
installation – required an enormous amount of explanatory liaison between
Xebec and TOA. But the principle of this particular work exemplified a
speculative area which distinguishes between what people customarily do in the
present and what
they might benefit from doing in the future, given the opportunity. “This space
urges
people to be calm,” wrote Eno for the first Xebec document. “Regular people
almost
never sit motionless. This is one of the problems of modern society – there are
no
situations, without actually going to sleep, where people can sit quietly.”
Although there are specific situations which require the technological
expertise of TOA itself – the performance of complex digital works, for example
– the brief is
open. “We should think about art, sound, people, society”, says Nobuhisa
Shimoda.
“That will bring our parent company something new. I feel a typical point of
many
artists is they are not only making a package of sound – they are making a kind
of
system. The people who encounter that system will be reminded that there is
another
rich world there, or inside them. Like John Cage did. He made people listen to
the

world.” Where all this would lead, particularly at a time when Japan, Europe and
America were deep in economic recession, is another matter. Clearly, the sound
work itself,
along with its usually delicate, refined aesthetic, connects to Japanese customs
and
devices, such as the suikinkutsu or the insect sound sculptures of which Lafcadio
Hearn wrote at the end of the nineteenth century in Insect Musicians: “But even
today, city dwellers, when giving a party, will sometimes place cages of singing-
insects among the garden shrubbery, so that the guests may enjoy not only
the music of the little creatures, but also those memories or sensations of rural
peace which such music evokes.” As Yoshihiro Kawasaki says, “Especially after
World
War Two, most people forget those kind of things. Recently, I have talked about
these
things with sound artists from foreign countries and I saw their performances. I
find
that Japanese essence in their performance. Maybe young people in Japan don’t
know
those old things but they find that essence in sound artists of foreign countries.
It’s a kind of circle.”
Packaging is a high art form at every level in Japan, but the intangible
qualities of a process or ceremony, the substance of memories and experience,
have equally deep
roots in Japanese society. Imagining a possible future for TOA, Nobuhisa
Shimoda says,
“They might find that they don’t have to manufacture products any more. They
have

to think about the design of space for sound. That’s just one possibility. To make
this kind of thing happen, only this kind of movement like in Xebec can change
the
company thought. Maybe the company will change, we will be changed, society
will be
changed.”
 

7
altered states ii: fourth world
Jon Hassell; Pandit Pran Nath; Duke Ellington
Peeling to the lethargic beat of tumescent music, she wore vivid makeup, glitter in her hair and crystalline
clothes, all hooks, straps, sequins and secret snappers. The stripper’s art needs special garments made to tear
away like the husk of a pomegranate. So you do not notice the woman as she is, because you are looking for
fulfilment of the mind’s eye. You are examining an idea – depravity or pleasure, or their perilous symbiosis.
– David Thomson, Suspects
In a creeping, convoluted trail suggestive of plant growth, David Thomson
constructed a novel, or a lattice of biographical sketches, from the imaginary
web of lives as they might have been lived by cinematic characters outside the
frame of the cinema screen. These characters – Walker from Point Blank, Norma
Desmond from Sunset Boulevard, Evelyn Mulwray and Noah Cross from
Chinatown and so on – their previously unknown pasts and futures, snag and
pull at each other in this web, implying an invisible world occupied by the
ragged stories of every fictional identity ever invented.
A similar process of dragging icons and overlaying them, sliced translucently
thin, on to fictional histories, has been one of the key devices of technological
music. Feasibly, you could extrapolate a novel from the interweaving stories
buried within John Cage’s Variations IV, but richer possibilities unfolded in the
early 1980s when Jon Hassell began to capture, loop and laminate fragments of
sampled sound on albums such as AkaDarbari-Java. A student of Stock-hausen
who had recorded with Terry Riley (In C), La Monte Young (The Theatre of
Eternal Music), Brian Eno, Talking Heads, David Sylvian and Peter Gabriel,
Hassell formalised that process by naming his 1994 band Bluescreen, after the
cinematic technique of filming foreground action against a blue background,
“adopting this metaphor in musical ways, creating magical textures in sound,
making something familiar sound fresh and exotic by separating it from its
background and combining it with something new and startling”. Finding a
review of David Thomson’s Suspects in the LA Weekly, he hit on this as another
metaphor connecting to his own search for a music which was almost
psychotropic in its capacity to activate alien worlds in the imagination through
strange juxtapositions.
Previous Hassell albums, particularly Earthquake Island, Vernal Equinox,

Possible Musics and Dream Theory In Malaya, along with his collaborations
with Gnawa trance musicians from Morocco and the Farafina percussionists
from Burkina Faso, were made in the spirit of creative anthropology exemplified
earlier in this century by the surrealist writer, traveller, critic and documenter of
dreams Michel Leiris. Writing on ethnographic surrealism in The Predicament of
Culture, James Clifford offers an outline of the territory: “I am using the term
Surrealism in an obviously expanded sense to circumscribe an aesthetic that
values fragments, curious collections, unexpected juxtapositions – that works to
provoke the manifestations of extraordinary realities drawn from the domains of
the erotic, the exotic and the unconscious.”
That could be a précis of Jon Hassell’s oeuvre. But with AkaDarbari-Java the
perfume of ethnopoetics was supplemented by parallels with literature and the
advanced technology of hyperreality, indicated through affinities with Latin
American magic realist writing and the video technique of keying in. As for the
sound, sluggish shapes undulated in the depths of a liquid fog formed from
particles of air passed through metal > electronic transformations > the pitches of
an Indian raga > slowly turning variations of a drum cycle from Senegal
recorded in Paris > glittering spirals of noise lifted from gamelan music and an
Yma Sumac record (already a repository of colonial myths) orchestrated in
Hollywood Exotica style by one of the inventors of the exotica genre, Les
Baxter.
This was a form of music, Hassell suggested, which would leave behind “the
ascetic face which Eurocentric tradition has come to associate with serious
expression”. Taboos were transgressed, notably in the music’s sensuality, and its
free use of source material, but this was not untutored montage. The raga –
Darbari – can be heard as interpreted by one of Hassell’s teachers, the great
kirana-style vocalist Pandit Pran Nath. Recorded in New Delhi by Alan
Douglas, this was released eighteen years later on Ragas of Morning and Night.
Though hampered by age and Parkinson’s disease by the mid 1990s when he
recorded with the Kronos Quartet, Pran Nath’s approach to teaching was
formidable. “It is necessary to remain one hundred years with the guru, then
practice for one hundred years, and then you can sing for one hundred years”, he
has said. The first time Hassell and I talked, back in 1989, he tugged and worried
at the contradiction between lengthy (though not quite that lengthy) study and
the instantaneity of Xerox culture. “It’s a quandary for me”, he said, “because I
did develop a physical dexterity when I studied Indian music with Pandit Pran
Nath. I decided at that point I wanted to walk into a room and have something
that was in my nervous system which I could activate and bring with me

wherever I went. It’s a problem to know what to do with that in the age of
sampling and audio sleight of hand, because the audience is looking for the final
result, basically. They don’t care if it took you twenty years to arrive at it or
whether somebody sampled it off of a record and used it.”
He had just released City: Works of Fiction, an album produced with a lot of
digital editing, a strong influence from Hank Shocklee’s Bomb Squad
productions for Public Enemy and a vocal sample from P.E.’s “She Watch
Channel Zero?!”. City set an industry standard for digitally sliced soundtracks of
the city twitching in delirium tremens: chicken sacrifices and dog fights in the
basement, bullroarers on the bridges, camcorders at the murder scene, TVs in the
lamp posts, sex temples, knock-down kidneys at car-boot sales, fake breasts,
fake Cartier, the smell of a thousand cuisines. As Japanese bass player and
composer Motohiko Hamase wrote for the sleevenotes to his Technodrome
album: “City … provides a thorough expression of city music in one of the most
remarkable accomplishments of recent years.” The reference points for this
album were characteristically broad, mostly extra-musical, ranging from Ben
Okri’s City of Red Dust, Italo Calvino’s Invisible Cities and Jean Baudrillard’s
portrayal of America as “the primitive society of the future”, to Federico
Fellini’s custom-built celluloid city of Reggiolo, Salman Rushdie’s tropicalised
London and Ridley Scott’s Los Angeles 2019. In a long version of Blade Runner
screened in San Francisco, a scene later excised from the commercially released
director’s cut version showed two women, like Japanese Butoh dancers, moving
slowly on a nightclub stage to the liquid techno-throb that Vangelis envisaged
(prophetically, yet still miscalculated by more than twenty-five years) as music
of the next century. A fertile texture of images: body, machine, global, intimate,
expressive, emotionally withdrawn.
Like Terry Riley, playing saxophone in an electronic hall of mirrors in early
recordings such as “Poppy Nogood and the Phantom Band”, Hassell had created
an otherworldly studio sound that had become recognised as his signature. This
use of digital delay, combined with pitch shifting, created its own problems.
“When I started studying with Pran Nath,” he said, “I realised that the basic art
of raga is, as he says, the music between the notes. That’s to call attention to the
fact that if you have a grid and each one of the lines on the grid is a pitch level,
the art is in drawing precisely a beautiful curve between one level and another
level. It’s like calligraphy. Trumpet’s a lonely instrument. It’s one voice. When I
realised I could have a replica of the trumpet playing with me, then it was as
though instead of drawing the curves with one pencil I could hold a handful of
pencils and draw the curves. In trying to make these curves in raga, a very
breathy, vocal-type sound resulted. Basically, it’s playing the mouthpiece, not the

trumpet. I blow it like a conch shell – that’s the most primitive, fundamental
aspect of what I do. This is the only instrument other than the voice that works
that way. The sound is strange to start with, so when I add the electronic eye-
shadow, the mistaken conclusion is that it’s all done with mirrors, not meat.” So
a voice within seemed to be saying – as it does to most trained musicians from
time to time – to bare the expertise behind the plug-in mask. His next project
was planned as a solo album, untreated, unadorned, unplugged.
But the album that emerged, eventually, was far from the naked intimacy of a
solo acoustic trumpet. There was a naked intimacy, or should I say provocatively
dressed nakedness, but this was absorbed into the associated imagery of the
music rather than the instrumentation. As the title – Dressing For Pleasure –
indicated, this was a further footstep in the move away from ascetic aesthetics,
into hip-hop, jazz, ragga and the ritualised sex of the modern primitive
movement. Dressing For Pleasure can be placed next to all the younger hybrids
of hip-hop, jungle, trip-hop and so on, linked by a connecting thread which has
little to do with age or geography. That thread was tenuous, yet it constituted a
sonic assault on musical fundamentalism.
An avid internet user, Jon Hassell has some interesting observations on
fundamentalism, 
pertinent 
to 
the 
tensions 
between 
nationalism 
and
transglobalism. Click yourself on to the internet and you can find electronic
discussion sites devoted to heraldry and folk dancing. “Maybe it will become
convenient to redraw a map of the world according to interests and who wants to
live in which era”, he says from his home in West Hollywood as we talk on the
telephone. “We could have wars between the fifteenth century and the twenty-
first century … In the past, having been coming from the abstract, instrumental
side of things, music was metalanguage for performing. I always felt that music
took off where words stopped. Hip-hop changed that, because hip-hop allowed a
new relationship between words and music, one that I felt more comfortable
with. At the same time, every record I’ve ever done has always been some sort
of a fantasy, an erotic fantasy. They’ve always been in this same constellation of
sensuality, where the Gil Evans sound equals this sense of feeling good at a
certain place at a certain time – maybe post-orgasmic music as opposed to pre-
orgasmic. I keep asking the central question: What is it I really like? What is it
that I really want to hear? And both in the personal realm, the sex fantasy realm,
and the musical realm, it comes down to shockingly simple things. I love lush
sensual atmospheres. I love beautiful chords. I’m in love with harmony.
Strangely enough, I’ve taken the path of disciplines which didn’t have a lot to do
with that – at least in the sense of traditional chord changes – like studying raga.
Although there are vast harmonic implications. It is, in fact, very covertly

harmonic, but I’m talking about the beauty of having one note and you’ve got
these chords changing underneath. Within each chord, that note takes on a
different kind of character. It’s a different picture each time, but using the same
foreground. Brazilian pop music seemed to pick up on that right away – ‘One
Note Samba’ et cetera.
“Why did Brazilians choose this, or why did Gil Evans choose those
harmonies out of the repertoire that existed at that point. There is something
going on there, some deep essential drive towards the beautiful. The beautiful is
defined here as being that which drags you most profoundly without any abstract
constructs. Without talking yourself into what’s beautiful.” At the heart of our
emergent sense of beauty in the present is a new tonality, which Jon sees as a
development of samples being detuned and overlaid, particularly in hip-hop, to
create dense, strange harmonic dissonances. To people who don’t insist that
music must be Eurocentrically in tune, these are very pleasurable, but to those
whose first and formative listening experiences are hip-hop, this new tonality is
normal.
Jon sends me an essay from Skin Two (issue 14), written by Pat Califia and
entitled “Sex Magic: Modern Primitives, Latex Shamans & Ritual SM”.
“Modern primitives live, for the most part, in urban enclaves in the age of the
machine”, she writes. “We have to find a way to synthesise the rhythms of nature
with our electronic lives. A fuzzy-headed, sentimental longing for a bucolic
Utopia will not save us from toxic waste or nuclear weapons. We need a world
where we can have both computers and campfires.” In condemning misguided
appropriations of pre-industrial, communal ritual for the post-industrial, private
theatre of sex, this brilliant essay illuminates some of the murkier areas of Fourth
World theory.
And in Dressing For Pleasure, there were musical developments of the Fourth
World idea also. “Destination: Bakiff”, for example, sampled and chopped
snatches of Duke Ellington’s recording of “Bakiff”. Composed by trombonist
Juan Tizol, the original tune is a heady piece of exotica. “When Ellington and
Strayhorn composed the Far East Suite in 1964,” wrote Mark Tucker in his
notes for the Duke Ellington: The Blanton-Webster Band boxed set released in
1986, “they may have been inspired by their recent visit to the Orient, but surely
they drew upon memories of Juan Tizol’s earlier studies in musical exotica,
among them ‘Caravan’, ‘Pyramid’ and the atmospheric ‘Bakiff’. Tizol’s Puerto
Rican origins seem to have little to do with a piece like ‘Bakiff’, where musical
impressionism is the product of its composer’s imagination, not his first-hand
experience with indigenous Caribbean idioms.” And for Ellington, these

explorations were stimulated by an interest in Africa and the diaspora. “As a
student of Negro history,” he said, “I had, in any case, a natural inclination in
this direction.”
In the Fourth World, nothing is simple. “Possible musics, possible cultures,
possible architecture, possible lifestyles, etc.”, Hassell says. “This is an idea that
boils down to the range of possible relations between individual, tribe and nation
in the mass electronic age. Imagine a grid of national boundaries, and on to those
project a new, non-physical communications-derived geography – tribes of like-
minded thinkers. Since a situation like this has never before existed, it follows
that old, narrow-band approaches can’t work and that new approaches must be
creative. That means intuitive and improvisational. I would like the message of
Fourth World to be that things shouldn’t be diluted. This balance between the
native identity and the global identity via various electronic extensions is not one
that can be dictated or necessarily predicted. One should be very humble and
respectful of our lack of knowledge about how those things combine, and be
informed by knowledge of the way things used to be in smaller numbers – that’s
where it becomes very useful to look at other cultures, small cultures, and try to
develop a modus operandi for the new age, not New Age.”
Fourth World
The stairwell of a Tokyo department store in Shibuya. Clean. Hi-tech. Deserted.
A disembodied voice transmits information over the public address system, the
words echoing in the exit shaft. A man and a woman are kissing hard, pressed
against the wall. Time is frozen.
A downpour in Ikebukuro, rain sheeting down. Milky neon kanji glow dimly
through the mist, floating in a night sky that has scrubbed out the buildings on
which they sit.
In Atlanta, subterranean cities extend out from under the hotels. In Lake
Tahoe, the half of the town that lies in California is dark and spooky at night; the
gambling half that lies in Nevada throbs with insomniac, halogen, polyvinyl, slot
machine lust. Just beyond Tahoe city limits, birds of prey hover over the ochre
ripples of the desert.
Itsukushima Shrine on Miyajima Island near Hiroshima, a famous Shintō site
where gagaku music and bugaku dance are performed in the open air on New
Year’s Day, ultramarine sea running over the huge O-Torii grand gate, then
passing under the vermilion posts of the stage. A Shintō priest wearing stiff
white robes walks along carrying a shiny black briefcase. En route to the shrine,
some of the souvenir and cake shops are equipped with voice chips, activated by

electronic eye, which say “hello” when you enter and “thank you” when you
leave. At closing time within the shrine, the tranquillity is blasted apart by
deafening martial synthesiser music.
The Caracas rubbish dump. A graveyard for hundreds of lorries which have
been driven to death, finally abandoned at their destination, rusted, collapsing
onto their own axles, sinking into shit. The poorest of the poor pick amongst the
waste, looking for saleable scraps. Huge black vultures gather wherever a human
has passed, wings spread in cruciform.
A cardboard box lies unattended on one of the backstreet pavements behind
Akihabara’s department store cornucopias. Inside the box, six mechanical dogs,
luminous eyes protruding on stalks, their bodies transparent plastic, their heads
the colour of blood-drained skin, tumble over each other, scrabbling at the sides
of the box.
A Mexican restaurant in Hong Kong. A group of Filipino musicians dressed in
ponchos and sombreros move from table to table, singing Mexican songs to
white people who yell drunkenly through “Guantanamera”, shake maracas out of
time and throw food. Outside, the roads are gridlocked by taxis flying black
pennants from their radio aerials in protest against the Chinese government
killings in Tiananmen Square. In the night market, eels writhe in neon-lit water
tanks. Tough guys preside over fold-open card tables inlaid with magazine
photographs of fake Rolex, Cartier, Louis Vuitton, prices scrawled underneath in
felt tip. Tokyo Cat The Disco Tailor is making up suits at midnight. I buy a
Chinese pirate copy of a Japanese T-shirt. On the front is printed:
PEACE AND LOVE WORLD TRAVEL
Avant garde, sephlsticated and a little evolution of the colonial retro-mediapolis’
urban plaids and adventure-seeking worl
London’s Cavendish Square: almost deserted, a Saturday evening during the
hot, rainless July of 1994. Humidity and electrical pressure are intensifying by
the second. The air is thick with petrol, the sky darkening to a leaden blue haze
of surreal clarity. Heavy raindrops fall in isolation, like the last drops squeezed
from a dirty rag. As I walk around the square, I sense at first, then hear, a
grinding drone rising out of the underground car park. Sitting on a bench in the
middle of the square, a man is screaming a tirade of immitigable harshness to an
absent subject:
“Yaaafuckingaraaaghafuckineeearakafuckinagaafauogh…”
Candi Dasa, near Cape Bugbug, southeast Bali. Paradise, basic model,

optional drawbacks. Televisi Stasiun Denpassar begins its evening transmissions:
first a static, fixed-camera studio performance of Balinese dance-drama, then an
American sitcom: Alf (the one about the cuddly alien adopted by the all-
American family). Study this programme and use it to improve your English,
advises the TV announcer. The following morning, as the tourists begin another
day’s sunbathing, a posse of young men gather at one end of the beach. Wrapped
in black woollens and head scarves, they push huge concrete octagons along the
sand in broiling heat, then push them into the sea. Periodically, they stop to rest
and catch sneak glances of bared breasts.
On Kobe’s Port Island, Japan, the neon logo of the Portopia Hotel dominates
the skyline. After dark, the lobby is a phantasmagoric scene from an improbable
future. Water cascades in silver darts and runnels down a wall of steel; set on a
platform in front of this synthetic Niagara is a transparent grand piano. Pouring
from the basement theatre comes a crowd of Japanese ragga and rasta boys
wearing baggy jeans, high tops, tarns for non-existent locks, mingling with
another crowd of body-con girls in leather skirts, flares, high heels and see-
through tops. Across the street, a Mini Cooper is parked at an angle, doors and
windows wide open. Sitting on the pavement outside the Lawson late-open
convenience store, a bunch of reggae obsessives drink from cans and listen to
Buju and Shabba on the booming system of a black Banzai jeep. A warm spring
night. Sensuous bass, strange hybrid language, strange dreams.

 
 
8
altered states iii: crystal world
La Monte Young, Marian Zazeela; The Velvet Underground; Yoko Ono, Richard
Maxfield, West Coast jazz, Indian vocal music, Terry Riley
A theatre restaurant in London. La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela sit
together, both dressed in a strange composite of Indian and New York boho-wear
circa 1950. Having
listened to loud music for so long, La Monte is obliged to use a hearing aid. At
one
point during our conversation, he turns it down as the background opera muzak
rises
to heights of ecstasy. The conversation goes like this: I wait, pent up with my
question, until a brief chink of light parts the eternal flow of La Monte’s
fascinating, humorous
but somewhat unyielding discourse. The conversational style – fluid, detailed but
heavy on conjunctions – fits the music, since for more than thirty years, this has
concentrated on long durations of sustained pitch relationships. In Composition
1961, he gave the following instruction: “Draw a straight line and follow it.”
These are points on that line.
 
rain, wind, blues

A photograph, taken in New Jersey in 1963 – La Monte Young sits crosslegged
under a tree, wearing dark glasses, black shirt, tight black jeans, playing
sopranino saxophone.
An axe is buried in the tree just behind his head. Bottles are hung from the
branches.
The Theatre of Eternal Music, La Monte called his performing groups. Always
involving Marian Zazeela’s light and colour installations, her singing and gong
bowing, these
also included Jon Hassell, playing trumpet in the early 1970s, trombonist Garrett
List and, in the mid-1960s, Angus MacLise playing percussion, Tony Conrad on
bowed
guitar and mandola, John Cale playing modified viola and, passing through,
Walter
De Maria and conceptual artist Henry Flynt (who coined the term “concept art”
at the
end of the 1950s). So La Monte has some right to claim a proprietorial interest in
huge swathes of subsequent music. MacLise, Conrad and Cale were members of
The Primitives, The Warlocks or The Falling Spikes, all forerunners of The
Velvet Underground. Interviewed for What Goes On, The Velvet Underground
Appreciation Society magazine, Tony Conrad described promotional gigs for
“The Ostrich”, a single written and recorded by Lou Reed: “The song was very
easy as they explained it to us because all the strings were tuned to one note,
which
blew our minds. We couldn’t believe that they were doing this crap just like in a
sort of strange ethnically Brooklyn style, tuning their instruments to one note,
which
is what we were doing too (in Young’s group), so it was very bizarre. In fact we
were

tuning to two notes and they were tuning to only one.”
Musicians from The Theatre of Eternal Music can be heard together on an
unissued tape from 1964 called “Sunday Morning Blues”, a looping, exultant
trance improvisation
on which Young plays sopranino saxophone (influenced by composer-
saxophonist Terry
Jennings as much as by John Coltrane). John Cale and Tony Conrad play drones
which
sound uncannily similar to the first Velvet album, particularly “The Black
Angel’s
Death Song” and the intro to “Venus In Furs”. Marian Zazeela bows a gong and
Angus
MacLise drums in wild, complex polyrhythms.
La Monte Young has written that MacLise claimed the rain as his main
rhythmic influence.
This cemented a connection between them, since La Monte composed according
to Debussy’s
maxim: “Listen to the words of no man; listen only to the sounds of the wind and
the waves of the sea.” MacLise was sacked from The Velvet Underground by the
irascible Lou Reed. He recorded trance explorations with his various bands –
Dreamweapon, Joyous Lake, The Tribal Orchestra – and wrote poetry, made
books, acted as the green
mummy in a Jack Smith film called Normal Love. But tapes tended to be sold for
immediate money. Little survives. In 1979 MacLise died in Kathmandu, aged 41,
of hypoglycaemia and drug complications. He belongs with
a shadowy group of New York bohemians, shapers and shape-shifters of art
movements
in the 1960s before they became mass movements: poet and photographer Ira

Cohen, painter Mati Klarwein, electronic music pioneer Richard Maxfield,
vocalist Meredith Monk,
film-maker and composer Phill Niblock, film-makers Jack Smith and Ron Rice,
and all
of the Fluxus performance artists, some beginning to enjoy recognition three
decades
later.
Before the issue of a French album in 1973, La Monte’s music could only be
heard on a 7" flexi-disc issued with Aspen magazine and a limited edition LP
extract from The Tortoise, His Dreams and Journeys. In recent years, CDs have
been released of The Well-Tuned Piano, The Second Dream of The High Tension
Line Stepdown Transformer from The Four Dreams of China and, strangest of
all, the just intonation raga-blues of Just Stompin’ by The Forever Blues Band.
Not even these relatively high-profile works have dented mass public
consciousness, however, so the links which can be made between his pioneering
work and various forms of so-called minimalism, ambient, Fourth World
hybrids, the
guitar noise symphonies of Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca, the isolationist
drones
of Thomas Köner, Faust’s Kraut rock and the wide variety of guitar bands
stemming
from The Velvet Underground’s explorations of distortion – Sonic Youth, Band
of Susans,
The Jesus & Mary Chain, Main, Spiritualized, Spectrum, The Verve, Slowdive,
My Bloody Valentine, and so on – are indirect, often disputed, invariably
unwitting and unwritten.
 
dream house
In 1962, he conceived of the Dream House, an environment in which his music

could be played continuously, eventually mutating into a “living organism with a
life and
tradition of its own”.
 
La Monte’s dreams and journeys
“The concept of the Dream House was very much related to my work, The Four
Dreams of China, which I composed in 1962 and which is the first work in
which I thought about the possibility of no beginning and no end. I began to
think of the silences as including
the beginning silence and the ending silence so that musicians could take it up
and
if they worked with the same pitches and the same key, let’s say, then we could
think
of each performance as a continuation of the bigger work. To facilitate that
approach
I somehow came up with this idea of a permanent location where a work could
grow and
develop and evolve a life and tradition of its own. This was before I had begun
working
very much with electronics. So with my various groups – various sets of
performers
who comprised The Theatre of Eternal Music – I worked towards longer
performances
within an evening and towards bigger installations until it reached the point
where
we were going on tour in the early seventies with six to eight musicians, two
slide

projectionists, a technician, a road manager and two tons of electronic
equipment,
taking a week to set up, being on location for a week and taking three days to
take
it apart. It was really a big thing.”
In 1973, Young, Marian Zazeela and Pandit Pran Nath were invited to the first
of a series of Italian festivals called East West. La Monte proposed a Dream
House performance of his piece of the moment (i.e. the previous seven years),
called Map of 49’s Dream The Two Systems of Eleven Sets of Galactic Intervals
Ornamental Lightyears Tracery. The promoter asked for something new, so La
Monte laid out the deal. “This is not a supermarket”, he told him, “where you
can one day buy tomatoes and tomorrow you buy lettuce and the next day a
quart of milk. This is really
what I’m working on and this is really what I want to do.” OK, said the
promoter,
but I can’t afford it anyway. Then La Monte played him a tape of a piece that
needed
a week for setting up, tuning the piano and installing Marian’s light
environment:
The Well-Tuned Piano. Fine, said the promoter, who enjoyed the three-hour-long
Rome premiere so much that he commissioned two more concerts and bought a
piano which La Monte tuned (for perpetuity) and then signed. “Then, I became
completely absorbed in The Well-Tuned Piano,” he continues, “and for a while, it
was less expensive to produce than Dream House had been. The way we looked
at it, it was just the piano and sort of, maybe four of
us – me to play, Marian to do the lights, the tuner and a recording engineer.”
As the piece developed in performance, the duration of each concert crept past
three hours to four. Preparation time expanded to a month of tuning and practice
in the
performance space. “If you want to talk about what the pattern of some planetary

body
is, the frequency of its orbit, you not only study it for five years or ten years,
you look back into history and see what ancient astronomers were saying.
Somehow,
through the Trio For Strings and, just before Trio For Strings, in the middle
section of Four Brass, I became very inspired to begin writing long sustained
tones. I was definitely hearing Indian classical music and Japanese gagaku
music. When I got to UCLA I was a musicology major. They had a student
gagaku orchestra and also, some time at that timeframe, I heard this first
recording of Ali Akbar Khan on Angel Records with Yehudi Menuhin
announcing, and when I heard that
on the radio I literally ran out and jumped in my car and drove down to the
record
store called Music City in Hollywood and bought the record and listened to it for
hours and hours. Actually I was living at my grandmother’s house in Los
Angeles and
she used to get very upset. She used to call it opium music.
“When I was a child I used to love to stand and listen to power plants. Before I
was four years old my father had a job in Montpelier, Idaho, working for my
mother’s father, Grandpa Grandy, who owned a gas distribution centre and they
would deliver gas all around that area in big trucks, you know? But right next to
this gas plant was a power station. It was just humming. I used to love to stand
there
and listen to it and I remember even playing up on top of the big gas storage
tanks,
sitting there in the hot sun and listening to this thing hum. I remember standing
by other high tension stepdown transformers in Bern, Idaho, the town where I

was born,
and I also used to like to listen to the sound of crickets. Of course, the first early
sound experience was the sound of the wind blowing up off Bear Lake around
the log
cabin I was born in. I think what really happened was a coming together of all
this
information which was, I think, then set into place by my hearing of Eastern
music
and by the fact that the world had begun to shrink because of the electronic age.
“As an ethnomusicology minor at UCLA I got to listen to a lot of recordings
from places like Siam, pygmy music from parts of Africa, gagaku music,
Balinese and Javanese music. Then, only years later, the world was becoming
smaller in many other ways. When you think of what it meant to Debussy when
the gamelan
orchestra came to Paris and what an enormous thing it must have been for him
and then
when you think how easy it is to travel today and that I’ve been to India seven
times
and we went with Pandit Pran Nath to Iran. I think that apart from whatever
uniqueness
there may be about me, I came from a time when it was possible to absorb all
this
information and to bring it forth into a new manifestation in which the whole
was
really much more than the sum of the parts. By letting my inspiration guide me,
the
way I work, I try to not let my mind get in the way of my inspiration. It’s curious

that money gets tied up with this kind of really extraordinary spiritual and
learning
experience about the nature of universal structure. God created the body so that
the
soul could come to earth to study music so that it could have a better
understanding
of universal structure. Music can be a model for universal structure because we
perceive sound as vibration and if you believe, as I do, that vibration is the key
to universal structure you can understand why I make this statement.”
 
minimalism
“Often, I’m asked to define minimalism and I have my own definition which is
that which is created with the minimum of means. I guess I like to think in those
broader
terms. If one thinks of minimalism according to my definition, it’s able to
include
the works of Rothko and Barnett Newman, as well as the works of Webern and
haiku, and a great deal of my work.”
 
crystal world
“Just as the so-called post-Webern movement was reaching a ceiling of
complexity with flocks of notes”, Jon Hassell tells me. “I was trying to figure out
where all those
notes came from, so I went to the centre of it – La Monte Young. As a matter of
fact,
Stockhausen was the first person who ever played La Monte Young for me. I’d
never

heard of him before. La Monte highlighted the point where it’s a matter of
listening
to yourself. If you have a constant background like a drone, you can project your
own nervous system against that background. You become aware of listening
high, listening low, listening foreground, listening background. That was the
beginning from which
Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, and that whole minimalist thing – and me
to
a certain extent as well – came from. I got a lot from being around La Monte.
When
you’re playing for four hours and you’re trying to tune up perfectly on various
intervals, occasionally it happens that out of those four hours you might get ten
minutes when
everybody’s in tune. Then you feel the floor begin to lift. You hear this
wonderful
crystalline world happening in the overtones. People are slightly off, and then
you’re
getting these combination tones as they struggle to reach the same pitch, so
there’s this incredibly silvery world going on out there. Some music is not
recordable.”
“From the beginning of recorded time,” says La Monte, “people have always
wanted to understand their relationship to universal structure and to time. Even
in as simple
a way as where do we come from, why are we here and where are we going? I
point out
that our entire concept of time is dependent on an understanding of periodicity.
Time
is depending on night and day, the periodic rotations of the planets, the stars, the

periodic functions of our bodies and the seasons, all of these various periodic
events,
and without them we really have no concept of time. Time is really a very
important
aspect of universal structure. What I have learned is it goes very slowly.”
 
a swarm of butterflies encountered on the ocean
1968. A psychedelic club called Middle Earth, Covent Garden, London. An event called Float. Yoko Ono is
performing, along with a number of other London-based “happening”
artists. The only memorable performance, however, comes from artist John Latham. He
is hunched over a large, floor-standing electric saw, the kind you see used by timber merchants. This is
connected by contact microphones to an amplifier and he is passing books through the saw blade, slicing
them into chunks. A monstrous, chaotic, exhilarating drone batters the air.
1994. Disobey Club, Islington, London. For forty minutes, Richard James, the Aphex Twin, plays two
highly amplified “records” made of sanding discs. The sound is augmented by the noise of an amplified
food mixer. Sometimes the noise is so loud that it blots out all conversation in the room.
1960. A loft on Chambers Street, New York City. Yoko Ono, the occupant of the loft, is approached by
electronic composer Richard Maxfield with a view to collaborating
on a series of new music concerts curated with La Monte Young. For the first, John
Cage and David Tudor turn up. The following year, Yoko performs at Carnegie Hall.
Maxfield provides electronics and technical assistance. “Performers with contact microphones taped to their
bodies hauling heavy objects across the pitch-black stage”, wrote Robert Palmer for his booklet essay
accompanying the CD Onobox.
If Richard Maxfield had not committed suicide in 1969, and if his electronic
music pieces were not so difficult to find or to hear, then our ideas of how music
has changed and opened out during the past thirty-five years might be very
different. His influence
permeates the psychedelia of Joseph Byrd’s rock band, The United States of
America,
released on CBS in 1968. He worked with Yoko Ono, and although most rock
critics attribute a Stockhausen influence to the Lennon/Ono tape experiments of

The Beatles’ White Album and after, they are far closer to the work of Maxfield.
In 1960, La Monte Young presented Maxfield’s work to a group of Bay Area
composers which included Terry Riley. Maxfield’s
1960 piece called Amazing Grace sampled and treated the voice of a revival
preacher named James G. Brodie; Steve Reich’s far better known tape loop
pieces – It’s Gonna Rain and Come Out – both of which sample black voices,
were composed in 1965 and 1966 respectively. In 1960, Joseph Byrd and La
Monte Young enrolled in Maxfield’s electronic music classes
at the New School in New York. At the heart of avant-rock, hybrid electronics
and
plunderphonics, yet completely obscured by the vagaries of history, is Richard
Maxfield.
 
steam
Maxfield’s Steam IV (1961) was created by tape processing manipulations of
steam, recorded from radiators in Maxfield’s New York apartment. [1994. Mick
Harris, ex-drummer with Napalm Death, now
recording unsettled, unmoored electronic pieces under the names of Lull and
Scorn,
sends me a letter describing his working methods: “My sounds are source sounds
from
fridges to radiators (I’m a big fan of Eraserhead, etc., etc., that type of radiator
drone drift sound).”]
 
night music
Created from the interaction of an oscilloscope and a tape recorder. “I noticed
that the electronically generated sounds I had produced”, wrote Maxfield, “were
identical

in feeling to those made by birds and insects on summer nights in Riverside and
Central
Parks in New York City. After this discovery, I then assembled a small portion of
the material which I had made into a multi-channel composition intended to
evoke this
antiphonal chirping of birds and insects on a summer night.” [1994. Michael
Prime,
ecologist and performer of live electronics, sends me his CD – Aquifers – and a
manifesto. “In my music,” he writes, “I try to bring together sounds from a
variety of environmental sources into a performance space, particularly sounds
which
ordinarily would not be audible … traffic sound may be filtered so that it
resembles
the sound of surf, while actual sea sounds may be transformed to conjure up
images
of an interstellar dust storm … I am especially interested in organic sound
sources,
such as plants, fungi and the human nervous system … Short-wave signals
interpenetrate
our bodies at all times, and provide a vast musical resource … Many of the
characteristic effects of electronic music (such as ring modulation, filtering,
phase-shifting and
electronic drone-textures) were first heard in the interaction of early radio
broadcasts with the earth’s magnetic layer. Perhaps Gaia was the first composer
of electronic music … At a given location, plants, fungi, animals and humans
could
be used to drive sound sculptures, and receivers could be tuned to radio, gamma
and

cosmic rays … live musical interactions in a new ecology of sound.”]
 
bacchanale
Maxfield’s most remarkable piece, created in 1963. A surreal mix of spoken
poetry, read by Edward Field, who also plays clarinet, drum and typewriter; live
violin scraping noise; Korean kayagum sanjo; Spanish flamenco; treated violin
sounds; treated saxophone played by Terry Jennings; underwater clarinet sounds;
live jazz recorded at the Five Spot. This eight-minute
montage appears to begin in an overlapping series of rooms, then fall through
space
into a subterranean, slow-motion zone.
 
the blues according to …
Terry Riley, who is speaking on the telephone from his home in California, his
voice strangely reminiscent of Henry Fonda …
In their search for absolutes, a number of music critics have looked to Riley as
the definitive starting point for various trends: minimalism, extreme repetition,
all-night
trance improvisations and tape-delay systems. Pieces such as In C, A Rainbow In
Curved Air and Poppy Nogood and the Phantom Band were important in their
time because they signalled two important changes in the way the worlds of
music and commerce worked. One: a composer was writing pieces which
had grooves and improvised around modes (just like John Coltrane, Miles Davis,
Frank
Zappa and half the rock bands in psychedelia) that sounded as if psychotropics
had
been involved at some stage of the compositional process, and that explored new
technology and studio processing. Two: the albums were packaged by Columbia

as rock albums, despite being on the Masterworks series, so implying that the
razor wire dividing so-called classical, rock, jazz, art and commerce had been
cut in a few places. Never
mind the embarrassing occurrence of hippie-speak on the In C sleevenotes – “No
pre-conceptions, you just dig it” – the sort of thing that Oliver Stone might
exhume for another chapter of his 1960s revisionism. The music, as musicians
and sleevenote writers love to say, spoke for itself. Essentially modest, Riley
downplays all of this. After all, his contribution to the late twentieth-century mix
emerged
out of collaborative work and improvisations with La Monte Young, Pauline
Oliveros
and Chet Baker. After the first flush of enthusiasm for minimalism and systems
music,
Riley and Young tended to be dismissed as old hippies, past their peak, while
Philip
Glass, Steve Reich, John Adams and Michael Nyman slid with varying degrees
of compositional credibility into a new orthodoxy of avant-garde populism. But
as Riley says, life
goes in cycles. Suddenly, the open works of Riley and Young seem more
expansive, more
useful to the fractured nature of music in the 1990s than all that knitting-machine
repetitiveness and its mutations.
I am asking Riley about a 1960 composition called Mescaline Mix, mentioned
in passing in the explanatory notes for a recent piece, Cactus Rosary. Was there
any great significance in the title? “Oh yeah, the psychedelic movement was just
beginning then,” he says, “but it was definitely happening. I remember Richard
Maxfield brought me my first psilocybin mushrooms in ’62 or something like
that. He
was very into psychedelic drugs before he died. Well, all kinds of drugs,

unfortunately.
He took some very strong things and maybe his death could be explained by
that.” Riley
met him at Berkeley, where Maxfield impressed everybody with his
resourcefulness,
using simple tone generators and spliced tape to create imaginary landscapes. He
patiently edited pieces for Riley, displaying the obsessive, perfectionist nature
that goes
hand-in-hand with the skill like a curse. “He would make several splices per
inch”,
says Riley. “He was a very top-notch editor at CBS. That’s what he did. He
spliced together performances of Horowitz and all these classical artists. That’s
where he developed his technique.”
Mescaline Mix was a piece made when Riley was music director for the Ann
Halprin dance company, and was used to accompany a dance called The Three
Legged Stool. “It was recorded tape loops that were all mixed from people
playing the piano, laughing, different sounds I’d collected here and there,
explosions. I did it all by overlaying
tape loops”, he explains. After a lengthy period of composing solo piano works
in
just intonation and string quartet compositions for the Kronos Quartet, Riley’s
1993
recording of Cactus Rosary seems a return to his sources: jazz, blues, electronic
keyboards, ritual. Towards the end of the piece, a blues emerges, like a
microtonal, instrumental version of
John Lee Hooker’s “Boogie Chillun”, a trumpet peeking out from the shuffling
rhythm
every now and again. Riley tells me about the piece. “I’ve been a very close
friend

of Bruce Conner, the artist, for many years”, he says. “He sent me this magazine
which
had an interview with him and Robert Dean. Bruce started out the interview with
Robert
Dean by holding out two peyote rattles. They were both made by an Indian
shaman. One
was made with a pepper shaker, an aluminium can, and one was a traditional
gourd-type
rattle made by the same shaman. He said that something would be signified by
shaking
each rattle, instead of him giving an answer sometimes, which I thought was a
very
nice way to structure the interview. Then I started writing this piece and I
thought
of making the peyote rattle the centrepiece and having the piece kinda having the
feeling of what it would be like to be at a peyote ritual, or at least some kind of
experience like that. I notated it differently and I put it in a special tuning, using
the time-lag effect, which I used to use in some of my earlier music. I was
thinking
of a pyramid shape when I wrote it. The conducter shakes the peyote rattle. He’s
sitting in the centre in a transparent tent, which is lit theatrically, and then the
other
players are gathered around him.”
Fond of the music of Bach, Debussy, Ravel, Bartók and John Coltrane, Riley
was a piano player originally. “I started out learning honky tonk and ragtime
with Wally Rosen,” he says, “a very good dixieland player.” He played

solo piano in bars, learning how to engage an audience and expand outwards
from familiar themes into flights of imagination, taking the innocent listener
with him without
causing too much discomfort in the process. “Improvisation is important”, he
insists.
“Being able to create music on the spot and to keep it open. That was the
message
that kept coming through to me from John Cage: keep it open.” His
contemporaries –
Terry Jennings and La Monte Young – had both played saxophone since their
youth. Riley
wrote a piece for a player named Sonny Lewis but then felt the need to learn the
instrument just to play his own composition. Under the influence of La Monte
Young and John Coltrane, whose soprano playing in the mid-1960s persuaded
many tenor and alto players to add
the instrument to their repertoire, Riley took up soprano to play Dorian Reeds,
Poppy Nogood and the Phantom Band and, later, film soundtracks such as Les
yeux fermés. The straight horn has close affinities to the Indian double reed
shehnai and nadaswaram, or the Middle-Eastern flute, the ney, all of which are
played with strong vocal qualities. “When I started studying Indian music,” he
says, “I abandoned the saxophone because I wanted to sing.”
With his Persian Surgery Dervishes album, two live solo performances for
electric organ and tape delay system recorded in Los Angeles and Paris in
1971/72, Riley became the guru of trance improvisation
and meditative music. “You can get high by getting in one groove”, he says.
“You can
get high by staying on one note, there’s different ways but that’s definitely a way
to ecstasy. Things come around in cycles. I’m sure this has happened other times
in

history too, even in the West, when people try to organise their music so it can be
experienced in a different way. For instance Satie and Vexations. It probably
happens every once in a while. It’s a real need to experience music in a deeper,
more continuous way, rather than as wallpaper, or a very quick hit. I’ve
been having young kids come up here to talk to me who are involved with the
rave,
full-moon events here in California. They seem to think there’s a big connection
between the things I did then and the things they’re doing now. I think it’s fine. I
think there is a connection.”
In the repetitive keyboard figures of UK acid-house records by Baby Ford, A
Guy Called
Gerald or 808 State, back in 1988, Terry Riley’s influence seemed to have
located
itself in an arena of machine-trance and circadian ecstasy which was not always
conscious of his existence. Mixmaster Morris was well aware of his all-night
concerts, however,
and claims them as a central influence on his campaign to make listeners “lie
down
and be counted”.
Riley recalls this brief but notorious period of all-night performances: “The
first one I was asked to do was at Philadelphia College of Art. Before that I
hadn’t thought
about even doing it myself but after I’d had this experience of playing for people
over a period of eight hours and having them bring their sleeping bags and
hammocks,
people brought food and spent the whole night. It felt like a great alternative to
the ordinary concert scene. It was ’67 and ’68. By ’68 I didn’t do any more. I

was
playing Poppy Nogood and the Phantom Band and Keyboard Studies. Then later
on, Rainbow In Curved Air. It was always the same pieces, but very long, long
versions of them. It takes a sense of urgency out of music that you have
performing over a short period of time. This
way, you could have long periods where the music could be saying not
particularly
anything, just waiting for a chance to develop. I also felt very comfortable with
the audience in that situation, because they came there to hang out for a long
time
and they weren’t coming to get a hit and then walk away and go someplace else.
This
was going to be the whole night’s event so you developed a kind of feeling, like
you
were a sort of channel for the energy that was coming in from the space. You
were
all joining together, which was more of a ritual experience.” Later, during the
first
half of the 1970s, he played lengthy solo concerts in France and Italy, but none
of
these lasted all night.
Tansen’s enemies were determined to ruin him. “Make him sing Deepak Raag. He will
burn himself to death!” … “!!” …
“That’s a brilliant idea!” …
“This time I’m done for. The heat of Deepak Raag’s notes turns the body into ashes!!
No wonder the courtiers look triumphant.
“Megh Raag brings rain and cools the heat. If someone sings this raag simultaneously I have a chance to
survive … but who?? …”

– Dolly Rizvi, Tansen comic
“At that time, about 1970s,” Terry Riley says, “I got really seriously involved
with Indian classical music, which goes on all night anyway, so by that time I
had transferred interest into that. Indian classical music was doing the kind of
thing that I was
trying to produce on my own, this kind of deep modal effect that each raga has,
the
psychological effect and spiritual effect that the ragas carry, I was starting to
sense in the music I was producing. When I found Indian classical music, there
was
a great tradition already developed over several centuries by artists. There was a
large body of work I felt necessary to become acquainted with and find out how
they
did this and just how the music worked, because it seemed to assimilate what I
was
trying to do anyway.”
 
calligraphy
The Royal Albert Hall, summer 1994. Bidur Mallik and his two sons, Ramkumar
and Premkumar, can be linked to a time when the dhrupad singing style to which
they have devoted themselves was credited with supernatural powers. They
claim that their family can be traced back to 1790, when Radhakrishna
and Kartaram Mallik averted a drought by singing Megh raga, the magical raga
which brings rain and cools the heat. Those who have never seen this austere,
abstract music performed can find the experience almost comical,
yet the beauty of tone is profound. Though a small man, Bidur Mallik swooped
down to very low-pitched, sustained notes without a safety net of vibrato,
jumping through outlandish intervals as if he was engrossed in an arcane

form of audible mathematics, inscribing the physicality of his notes in the air
with
graceful hand movements. The hands seem to coax the notes, draw them out,
hold them
in one spot for incredible sustains or float them on their way. Otherworldly in its
unadorned beauty, the dhrupad style is the closest that vocal improvising comes
to calligraphy. After hearing this group, I feel that there is nothing else in the
world I need to experience. But then
Rajan and Sajan Misra explore a single raag in khyal style for more than one
hour. Khyal means fantasy. This style is lush, developed in shaded increments
that seem calculated to bring an audience to intense levels of perceptual
awareness, opening in ravishing
slow motion like the birth of a butterfly, rich in harmonic sensuality. Thickly
composed of two tambouras, electronic drone, harmonium, supporting vocals
and plucked zither,
the drone implies a universe of possibilities over which Rajan and Sajan sustain
perfectly tuned notes, holding them in the air with their hands until every
molecule has dissolved into the infinite sound pool. Tabla drums patter in
raindrops. Another world wheels
into view, an aesthetic just as enticing as the dhrupad which preceded it.
“The note: a taut bow. Syllables: true arrows. Their target: ecstasy”, Haridas
Dagar has said. The virtuosity and grace of allowing pure simplicity to flow in
unbroken
streams. Many years ago, I saw the Dagar brothers, Mohinuddin and Aminuddin,
the exalted exponents of dhrupad, singing in two very different settings. The
first, Golders Green Unitarian Church, was attended by a predominantly Indian
audience. Disturbingly, they squirmed, gesticulated, sighed and called out with
every exquisite parabola, every held note, every tremolando
and daring ornament. Despite the severity of the dhrupad style, this physical,
vocal appreciation was the response they expected. The Dagar brothers could

trace their family back to Vrija Chandra, or Daguri, a rival of Tansen,
singer to the court of the emperor Akbar in the sixteenth and early seventeenth
centuries.
I saw them sing again in a more New Age setting in Hampstead. Here, the non-
Indian audience was rapt, silent, physically inert and dutifully lotus-positioned,
hungry
for higher consciousness. At half-time, the Dagar brothers slipped out for
cigarettes,
smoked fervently in the open doorway.
 
resonant intervals
For Terry Riley, along with La Monte Young, Marian Zazeela, Jon Hassell, Don
Cherry, Lee Konitz, Jon Gibson, Henry Flynt and dancer Simone Forti, Pandit
Pran Nath was
the teacher. Riley explains the distinction between kirana style and other forms
of Indian classical vocal music: “Kirana is the most lyrical. It has the attention to
the notes that dhrupad does, but it has the imagination and lyrical effect of khyal.
Pran Nath himself is a synthesis of styles he observed and studied. He has a
unique place.” Riley reiterates Jon Hassell’s view of Pran Nath’s core teaching.
“He always
said the first lesson was you go inside the tone. You’re in the tone and the tone
is in you. To really feel, when you’re singing, like you are that note. It has a
physicality about it. That was a very big thing for me, because it was something
I was approaching
anyway.”
This concern with tone and accurate pitching dovetails with Riley’s and
Young’s move away from twelve-tone equal temperament – the system by which
semitones are slightly

adjusted in order to make all the intervals of the octave equal. Written for all the
major and minor keys, J.S. Bach’s The Well-Tempered Clavier was one of the
earliest works to explore and publicise the possibilities of equal temperament.
Allowing for modulation between keys, the system has dominated Western
music since the beginning of the eighteenth century. Fixed-pitch modern
instruments
such as the piano and organ are tuned to equal temperament, although many
synthesisers
now allow retuning; increasingly, both software writers and instrument builders
are
exploring alternatives to the out-of-tune instruments with which Westerners (and
anybody else in the world who accepts European musical standards) have
become accustomed. The American composer and instrument inventor Harry
Partch,
having himself rejected equal temperament, devoted a large section of his
weighty
but witty book Genesis of a Music to the subject. “With this tuning”, he wrote in
the mid 1940s, “the musician could rosy around all day long with completely
satisfying, undeviating monotony.” Retuned
keyboards can sound strange on first hearing, despite the fact that they have been
returned to an accord with the physical laws of nature. But the popularity of
blues,
or the musics of Africa and Asia, along with the odd tunings that can arise when
detuned digital samples are overlaid, has ensured a growing openness to music
not played in
equal temperament. “The practice of singing resonant intervals, the intervals that
are really in tune,” says Riley, “is probably more prevalent in the world than
equal

temperament. Just in the Western world in the last hundred and fifty years. It’s
not
strange really. We’ve sorta got into this black and white movie and the colour
just
for a minute there shocks us. And it is very colourful. In the coming years, the
frontier will be tuning.”
Before recording the albums which established his reputation, Riley worked
with jazz trumpeter Chet Baker in Paris. In the early 1950s, Baker had played in
the Gerry Mulligan Quartet, a pianoless group with Mulligan playing baritone
saxophone, Chico Hamilton
on drums and Bob Whitlock on bass. Recorded in Los Angeles and hugely
influential
on the West Coast “cool school”, Mulligan’s group now sounds interesting, if
slightly
tepid, for its exploration of melodic cycles, circling and weaving in improvised
counterpoint within the format of popular songs. “Jeru”, for example, can be
imagined as an acoustic
precursor to Riley’s dervish improvisions. Like Terry Riley (and the Modern
Jazz Quartet’s John Lewis), Mulligan was inspired by Bach. “I consider the
string bass to be the
basis of the sound of the group,” Mulligan wrote, “the foundation on which the
soloist
builds his line, the main thread around which the two horns weave their
contrapuntal
interplay. It is possible with two voices to imply the sound of or impart the
feeling of any chord or series of chords, as Bach shows us so thoroughly and
enjoyably in his inventions.”
This emphasis on the formal possibilities of jazz, whether small group or
orchestra, resurfaced continually among white musicians, adding another

tension, often a racial
opposition, within the music. As Miles Davis complained in his autobiography:
“What
bothered me more than anything was that all the critics were starting to talk
about
Chet Baker in Gerry Mulligan’s band like he was the second coming of Jesus
Christ.”
As is still the case, the problem was not so much the music (though that could be
bloodless), or the musicians, but the critical hype which surrounded it. Davis
himself,
George Russell, Andrew Hill, Chico Hamilton, John Lewis, Ornette Coleman
and Eric
Dolphy were all exploring areas of vaguely common interest. Dolphy, for
example, recorded tapes influenced by Indian and Japanese music before his
untimely death in 1964; his
Out To Lunch album is an enduring example of how eclectic interests can be
integrated into music which sounds at once utterly familiar yet from another
dimension. And Ornette Coleman’s
interest in Third Stream, evident on a number of compositions for supposedly
non-jazz
instrumentation, has made a lasting impact. His playing with Dolphy, Scott La
Faro,
Jim Hall and The Contemporary String Quartet on Gunther Schuller’s Variants
On a Theme of Thelonious Monk can be instructively compared with the
Coleman/Howard Shore soundtrack to David Cronenberg’s film of Naked Lunch
(the best thing about the film incidentally). What was considered an aberration, a
heresy, in 1961 becomes the main theme to a major motion picture in the 1990s.
Yet the list of cool school and so-called Third Stream white musicians whose

music could gravitate towards a kind of polite, formal experimentation, as
opposed to hard
bop’s self-conscious blues-rootedness, or the more open expression of free jazz
that
emerged at the end of the 1950s, is extraordinary: Claude Thornhill, Gil Evans,
Lennie
Tristano, Lee Konitz and Warne Marsh, cellist Fred Katz, Jim Hall, Dave
Brubeck and
Paul Desmond, Paul Horn, Stan Kenton, Bob Brookmeyer and Jimmy Giuffre,
Bill Evans, Scott LaFaro, Gil Mellé (soundtrack composer for The Andromeda
Strain), Clare Fischer (later to arrange strings for Prince, The Family and Jill
Jones at a time when Paisley Park was at a creative peak), Gunther Schuller and
Don Ellis all
leaned, with varying degrees of artistic success but a generally high level of
commercial acumen, towards colouration, impressionism, counterpoint and self-
conscious rhythmic
experimentation. This period of jazz, or this sector within this period, has given
birth to some interesting developments: film composer John Barry studying by
post
with Bill Russo, a Stan Kenton arranger, shortly before composing Beat Girl,
“The James Bond Theme” and his first Bond scores; Gavin Bryars’s admiration
for the precise, mathematical bass playing of Scott LaFaro in the Bill Evans Trio;
the
influence of cool school alto saxophonists such as Paul Desmond, Lee Konitz
and Bud
Shank on John Zorn; Jon Hassell’s extrapolations from Gil Evans and the Evans,
Mulligan, John Lewis, Miles Davis Birth of the Cool sessions; Harold Budd’s
fascination with pianist Lennie Tristano; and the aforementioned collaboration
between Prince and Clare Fischer.

Some of these players touched upon areas later developed into full-blown
movements.
Don Ellis was using sitars, clavinets and strange percussion in his orchestra,
playing
trumpet through a Conn Multivider with loop delay, Antonin Artaud’s Theatre of
Cruelty
name checked on the album sleevenotes and still sounding corny. And Lee
Konitz, who later experimented with electric saxophone and overdubbing,
participated in Lennie Tristano’s free improvisations – “Intuition”
and “Digression” – in 1949. “We had rehearsals at Tristano’s home”, Konitz told
me
in 1987. “We’d try some of that”, he said, forming his fingers into a joint-
holding
position. “Have a little taste, you know, and just start playing. We’d hit it right
away. We did some of that at the concerts and it was thrilling.” In his booklet
notes
for Ornette Coleman’s Beauty Is a Rare Thing boxed set of Atlantic recordings,
Robert Palmer assesses these early free improvisations as failures. “It was an
intriguing experiment,” he writes, “but without a firm grounding in the blues the
music tended to simply meander in counterpoint; without a basis in vernacular
rhythms, it failed to really go anywhere.” True enough, although passion existed
before the blues and besides, music not going anywhere is one of the most fertile
developments of the twentieth century. Perhaps the problem lay with Tristano’s
style (and the style of his disciples). When deeply moved, Tristano’s most
expressive response was “Wow”. His playing was gripping for being so fluently
obsessive, rather than open-heartedly expressive. Without a channel for that
obsession,
the fluency became aimless and introverted.
Not that introversion is such a bad thing either. Chet Baker’s introversion was

integral to his appeal. Like Bill Evans, a pianist whose pellucid tranquillity made
melancholy
sound like a Zen state, Chet Baker had qualities which shone through the hype.
“Chet
was a wonderful master of understatement”, says Riley. Despite the style-
fixation
romanticisation of Baker’s heroin addiction through the 1980s, the still clarity of
Chet Baker Sings and Chet Baker & Strings survives. “He has a relationship to
Pran Nath in my mind – deep lyricism, a lot of depth in the music, but immediate
appeal to the listener. Chet Baker could have been
a pop star; was to a certain degree a pop star. We came together in a very strange
way. I was working as a kind of arranger of his music, but the ideas that I had, I
started developing these looping ideas. We were working on a theatre project
together
with a director named Ken Dewey. When I worked with Chet I recorded his
quartet in
Paris at that time individually, and then I put it all together electronically and
then they played against it. It’s a very different form but when you listen to it,
you can still hear it’s Chet Baker.”
Rainbow In Curved Air, recorded in 1968, seemed like a rock record at the
time, although CBS also marketed Don Ellis’s big band albums – Shock
Treatment and Electric Bath – along with Walter Carlos’s Moog showcase,
Switched On Bach, in the same way. But Rainbow In Curved Air, in particular,
exemplified the transition from music which is interpreted from written
instructions on a score to music which emerges from a combination of composed
melodic
and rhythmic elements, improvisation and sonic manipulation through

technology. Riley played electric organ, electric harpsichord, rocksi-chord,
dumbec drum and tambourine
on the album. “The recording was made on the first eight-track machine at
CBS”, Riley
explains. “That was a chance to do a lot of stuff that I had been trying to do in
my home studio on my little stereo machine. I could expand much more in the
studio
with overlaying and overdubbing the ideas that before had been a little bit one
dimensional.
I remember they just wheeled the eight track in. We were going to do it on four
track
but the technology hit so fast, from stereo to four track to eight track. Eight
tracks
at that time seemed like the universe, you thought you’d never run out of tracks.”
He laughs at that naivety. “But I ended up feeding some live tracks into the
master.
I brought my organ into the mixing room so we fed a couple of tracks in and
mixed
them live.”
the machine becoming part of the work; encroaching on performance in real time
 

 
 
9
altered states iv: machine
Ryuichi Sakamoto; Erik Satie; Kraftwerk
Technology can reduce live performance to an anachronism. In the past decade,
computers have delivered cybernetic music into realms which reach beyond
human capabilities.
For example, a concert stage in London: Ryuichi Sakamoto is faxing messages
to friends around the globe during “Rap the World”, a song in which machines
do more of the work than the humans. But any sense of diminishment which
may come from this new role of redundant operator, tends to be compensated by
the satisfaction of feeling connected across great distances to like minds.
Sakamoto, a founder member of technopop pioneers Yellow Magic Orchestra, is
driven by the idealism of this connectedness. “I’m not
a representative of Japanese culture”, he insists. “I hate to divide the world – east
and west. Where is the edge? My music is much more melting. All the different
things are layered at the same time. It represents a sense of Utopia. My view is
always looking outside of Japan. One of my friends, he’s a philosopher and
critic. He made a word: outernationalism. Internationalism is still based on
nationality. Being outernational is like Moses in the desert. There’s no country.
There is just trade, transportation, communication and merchants, but there’s no
nationality. It’s a Utopia and I like
it. I don’t want to be Japanese. I want to be a citizen of the world. It sounds very
hippie but I like that.”
 
mad computer

A hi-tech studio in west London: blond wood, perforated metal screens, the
black padding and chrome rings of a chic S&M dungeon. A Mitsubishi TV
screen, seven computer monitors.
A lead connecting mainframe to memory is malfunctioning. Technological
ennui. The
black ice, as William Gibson called it, meditates. On one screen, moirés,
pyramids and lozenges mutate; on another, devolving linear rectangles flick
clockwise around the frame. The only sound is the soft rattle of computer
keystrokes. Outside the control room, the chef is playing table tennis with the
programmer. Inside, Ryuichi Sakamoto plays a loud distorted version of Erik
Satie’s Gymnopédies (a recurrent obsession with the Japanese: a swaggering
bouzouki version turns up during a walking scene in Beat Takeshi’s film Violent
Cop). Later, observing the creation of music for his film of The Sheltering Sky,
Bernardo Bertolucci walks into a practical joke. In the live room, a computer-
linked Yamaha grand piano is playing all by itself, the ghost of a machine.
Seeing the keys rising and falling, seemingly without human intervention,
Bertolucci appears spooked.
After the laughing has died down, he sits with assistant director Fernand
Moszkowicz, both looking glum and creased on a charcoal couch. “C’est
monstrueuse, cette computer”, says Bertolucci. “C’est fou”, Moszkowicz agrees.
They both lapse into a grumpy silence. Moszkowicz’s head drops back in sleep.
 
awkward silences
Composing music in 1917 for Parade, a ballet collaboration between Erik Satie,
Jean Cocteau, Pablo Picasso and Léonide Massine, Satie scored for typewriter,
pistol shots, steamship whistle and siren alongside more conventional
instruments. “Satie caught the harshness of contemporary life”,
wrote a Satie biographer, James Harding. “He mixed ragtime and music-hall in a
blend which expressed both the ugliness of a mechanical, commercialised age,
and the spirituality that is crushed beneath it.”
Thanks to the concise melodic charm of the Trois Gymnopédies, his best-
known piano work, Satie has been embraced by advertising, his first

Gymnopédie used in television commercials for Cadbury’s chocolate and
Strepsils throat lozenges.
But despite his accessibility and the seemingly direct (though often ironic)
humanity of his music, I think of Satie as the first machine composer. In certain
respects, he lived like a machine: wearing the same grey velvet suits every day,
then replacing these with a uniform of black-suited respectability. He drank beer,
cognac and calvados steadily in Parisian bars and cafes until cirrhosis of the liver
killed him. He even devised a precise timetable with which artists could regulate
their lives – “… inspiration from 10.23 to 11.47 … I only eat white food … I
only sleep with one eye shut … I wear a white bonnet, white stockings and white
waistcoat …”
His virtuosity with such jokes and satires has left a residue of ambiguity. Now
that some of Satie’s most affecting works – the Gymnopédies and Trois
Gnossiennes – veer dangerously close to being appropriated as clichés of
middle-class easy listening, his elaborate, deadpan jokes resonate as blueprints
for the music of our time. His Musique d’ameublement, for example, is cited
often as a visionary precursor of ambient music, Muzak, dinner party music,
interval music, Walkman music, elevator music and all the other functionary fill-
ins and backgrounds, highbrow and lowbrow, that now accompany our lives.
This “furnishing music” was devised after Satie and his friends had been driven
from their lunch by loud restaurant music. As always, Satie weaved dangerous
speculations with barbed wire. With such a self-protective, vulnerable man,
disengaging satire from
serious purpose is virtually impossible. But in building a theory of furniture
music, a neutral and utilitarian background for all spaces and all activities, Satie
suggested the second of two opposing characteristics of ambient music. On the
one hand there was Parade, a hybrid of new styles, sounds and technologies
which drew the environmental into itself; on the other there was the furnishing
music, a style of composition which blended into any environment. In the
former, the environment is transmuted by the
composer; in the latter, the composer is transmuted by the environment. “I
imagine it to be melodious”, Satie wrote of his Musique d’ameublement,
“softening the clatter of knives and forks without dominating them, without
imposing itself. It would fill up the awkward silence that occasionally descends
on guests.

It would spare them the usual commonplaces. At the same time it would
neutralise the street noises that tactlessly force themselves into the picture.”
But even the furniture music, when Satie came to present it, did not conform
to my binary formula. During the interval of a Max Jacob play staged at the
Galerie Barbazanges in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, Satie organised an
experiment in neutrality with Darius Milhaud (later to become a friend of the
Modern Jazz Quartet – a group that some might see as the ultimate in highbrow
furniture music). In this instance, the compositional method used by Satie and
Milhaud invites various descriptions – postmodern, for example, or
plunderphonic – since the music consisted of snatches taken from works by other
composers. These were repeated over and over by musicians scattered around
the room.
The idea of neutrality was ahead of its time, however, since in an irony worthy
of his own sarcastic wit, Satie had to rush around the room, commanding the
audience
to ignore what they were hearing.
 
i feel good
Del Webb’s High Sierra Casino, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, 1986. At the epicentre of
the casino, a shrill nightmare of slots, blackjack, video sports betting, craps and
all known
and legal forms of American financial haemorrhage, is a small circular bar. In
the centre of the bar is a tiny stage revolving around a thick pillar. Inexorably
circling, trance-like, in torture of blandness, of slug-like tranquillity, of morbid
cynicism, are Kenny and Wayne, who play a thin, barely recognisable
counterfeit of James Brown’s “I Feel Good” on electric keyboard and Fender
guitar. The bar is
ringed by losers, drinking to oblivion, their dead eyes registering nothing as
Kenny and Wayne pass and vanish, pass and vanish. Nobody hears a thing.
 

vexations
Satie used the device of repeating short, neutral fragments of melody for his
soundtrack to René Clair’s short film of 1924, Entr’acte. Discontinuous,
pounded ostinato cells of repetitive material which go nowhere before giving
way to the next theme, they clearly prefigure the strain of minimalism
represented by Steve Reich, Philip Glass and Michael Nyman. In his 1974 book,
Experimental Music, Nyman quoted Roger Shattuck on Satie’s Entr’acte music:
“Satie merely uses eight measures as the unit that most closely matches the
average length of a single shot in the film … The transitions are as abrupt and as
arbitrary as the cuts in the film.” In another Satie piece, Vieux sequins et vieilles
cuirasses, Satie instructs the pianist to repeat the final passage 380 times, the
early equivalent of a locking groove at the end of a vinyl record. His most
notorious (and vexed) exploration in repetition, boredom and ecstasy, however,
was Vexations.
John Cage discovered the piece in 1949 during a Parisian sojourn. Composed
in 1893, this brief passage for piano was accompanied by an instruction: “In
order to play
this piece 840 times the performer should prepare beforehand in deep silence and
serious immobility.” James Harding takes this as “exhibitionism”, a “laboured
joke”, despite the fact that so much of Satie’s work explored extremes of
simplicity or repetition, and despite the fact that Satie’s jokes invariably
concealed a serious purpose. Cage certainly regarded the piece highly, as did
London-based experimental composers like Gavin Bryars, Christopher Hobbs (a
member of AMM during the late 1960s) and Michael Nyman. Cage premiered
Vexations in 1963, in a performance played in shifts by eleven pianists, lasting
from 6 p.m. on 9 September to 12.40 on 11 September. Among the performers
were John Cale, working that year in La Monte Young’s group. Bryars and
Hobbs gave their own performance of the piece in Leicester in 1971, writing
comments during their rest periods. “Like falling asleep while driving on the
motorway”, is a note made by Hobbs and quoted by Nyman. Another strong
argument to set against sceptics is the immediate awareness, as soon as the
repetitions begin, that the psychological effect of these phrases intensifies as the
music repeats. A strange lack of resolution brings the listener back to zero at
each new beginning. Where the number 840 came from is anybody’s guess, but
to listen for a long time is more effective than listening just once. Satie had
certain interests in common with Varèse. He studied alchemy, the occult and
Medieval music forms such as plainchant. Vexations turns out to be a heading

from a work written by Paracelsus, the sixteenth-century alchemical philosopher
and physician who wrote repeatedly about “the natural light of man” and the
tranquillity of mind that would come at the conclusion of the alchemical process.
In one respect Satie’s preparatory instruction suggests a meditation through
which the ability to play this arduous piece will shine through and be rewarded
by illumination; in another respect the demands of immobility followed by a
need for
inhuman self-control and sustained repetitious action suggest an assumption of
machine characteristics, a meditation through which the body becomes robot. By
composing a work which few humans would feel capable of undertaking, Satie
gazed one hundred years ahead of himself to a time when music of all kinds
could not be played by humans without the assistance of machines.
 
ch-ch ch-ch-ch
1987. Halfway through the eighth bar of a brisk cover version of Kraftwerk’s hit
tune, “The Model”, available on a lime-green cassette published by the Saha
Kuang Heng Record and Tape Company, familiarity is shredded beyond repair.
The tempo is dragged down by about thirty-four beats per minute, the rhythm
turns Latin, a beat that in the hands of a vocalist such as Cheo Feliciano
might be a smouldering salsa montuno. The electric organ slips back a few
decades from quasi-Kraftwerk to the pop-psychedelia of The Seeds or ? and The
Mysterians. Then the singing starts. The singer wears a
white blouse with leg-o’-mutton sleeves and a mandarin collar, a white skirt, one
black earring and one white. She sings in Thai, so the reason for this drastic
segue from Kraftwerk 1978 into Thai pop 1985 via Latin garage-psychedelia
1966 is something of a mystery.
Kraftwerk’s Ralf Hütter wears a black leather coat. When he takes it off he
reveals a black jacket underneath. Black shirt, black tie, black trousers, black
shoes. The socks are white. The hair was once all black but now it’s going grey
on top. He leans forward attentively in order to hear this singular version of his
composition a little more clearly. “It’s very good”, he says in amused and clipped
English. “I like it.

We should go to Thailand.”
Kraftwerk: the original power station, the conductors, the operatives, the
sound fetishists.
For something like a decade and a half before this interview they had been
creating Düsseldorf dance music by allowing machines to speak for themselves.
“I remember we played a dance party in some arts centre in Düsseldorf in ’71”,
says Ralf. “We were not a fused group in the beginning and the drummers were
changing all the time because they were just banging and they wouldn’t do any
electronics. ‘No! Don’t touch my instruments.’
One day we had this gig at the arts centre and I had this little old drum machine.
At a certain moment we had it going with some echo loops and some feedback
and we
just left the stage and joined the dancers. It kept on going for an hour or so.”
Kraftwerk: sexual, pure concentration, edible. Constraint with humour. Camp.
Boys in uniform. Expression through proportion. Emotion through detachment.
Inspiration through work. “Machines dance, so to speak,” Ralf muses, “and
repetition, rhythm,
builds. But that’s more an artistic fiction.” Minor qualitative differences do
differentiate the Kraftwerk of Trans-Europe Express in 1977, The Man-Machine
in 1978, Computer World in 1981, Tour de France in 1983 or Electric Café in
1986. With devout classicism, the band aligned and realigned a miniature
collection of melodies and pulses.
“La Côte d’Azur et Saint-Tropez, Les Alpes et Les Pyrénées, from station to
station, Düsseldorf City, meet Iggy Pop and David Bowie, Business, Numbers,
Money, People,
I am adding and subtracting. By pressing down, a special key plays a little
melody, ein, zwei, drei, vier, funf, sechs, sieben, acht, ichi, ni, san, shi, computer
love, computer love, I call this number for a downtown date. The number you
have reached has been disconnected. Boing Boom Tschak, Boing Boom
Tschak.” The subject matter was the philosophy but deeper still was the
obsession with pure sound.

Like Fragonard painting satin, Kraftwerk indulged their appetite for the
sensuality of surfaces and their depths in a setting that was contemporary, social
and slyly
ingratiating. Are you ever seduced by sound so much that form gets lost? I ask.
“Mm”, agrees Ralf. Your main problem, I suggest. “No, not problem. Aim,” he
counters, “because form we don’t care for too much.”
Is that the reason for the “travelling” form? “Autobahn”, “Musique Non Stop”,
“Europe Endless”, “Trans-Europe Express”, “Tour de France”. “Ja, ja”, he
agrees. “Letting
yourself go. Sit on the rails and ch-ch ch-ch-ch. Just keep going. Fade in and
fade out rather than being dramatic or trying to implant into the music a logical
order which I think is ridiculous. The flow is much more … adequate. In our
society everything is in motion. Electricity goes through the cables and people –
bio-units – travel
from city to city. At one point they meet and then – phwiit. Why then should
music be at a standstill? Music is a flowing artform.”
This is benign futurism, returning us to a post-war version of Marinetti
dreaming about energy of distant winds, electrical power and the Danube
running in “a straight line at 300 kilometres an hour”, anticipating the deification
of sporting speed stars such as Juan Fangio, Ayrton Senna and cyclist Bernard
Hinault, prophesying travel manias and the fetishisation of communication
regardless of content: on the ground – the destruction of homes to make way for
roads and airports; in the aether – the intangible information infobahn, the so-
called superhighway. For their stage show, Kraftwerk’s visuals deliver a deadpan
celebration of technological Utopia, a deadly efficient parody and confirmation
of Germanic efficiency. For “Autobahn”, the screens display grainy
monochrome films of a golden dawn of motorway driving when roads were clear
and happy nuclear families made picnics on the grass verge to break their
journeys.
In the late 1980s, Atlanta International Airport was, the brochures crowed,
“the world’s largest passenger terminal and second busiest in the world. The
airport is the largest private employer in Georgia, pumping a billion dollars
annually into the local economy.”

Its internal transportation (as America describes anything that moves) was
particularly striking to the Kraftwerk fan. While the little electric train burrowed
its way from Concourse C to Baggage, a voice droned instructions and
information in a Vocoded monotone.
As the doors opened, another computer voice of a higher and less authoritarian
pitch joined in for a minor symphony of sound poetry.
When the American composer Alvin Lucier wrote his North American Time
Capsule in 1967 for a Vocoder (described by Lucier as “designed by Sylvania
Electronic Systems to encode speech sounds into digital information bits for
transmission over narrow band widths via telephone lines or radio channels”),
the results made for difficult listening. Like much of Lucier’s music, the theory
was fascinating but the sound seemed to be an inconsequential, unengaging by-
product of a conceptualisation. In the same way that Kraftwerk appropriated the
doomed art of sound poetry or evaded theory and transmuted the base metal of
German electronic music into gold, so they successfully took the new
technologies and baptised them in the mainstream of culture. “Industrial
societies are today worldwide”, says Ralf. The ideal, he suggests, is to have
“artistic presence also. Not just big corporations, business, numbers, money,
people, but art, music.” Using the innovations, both profound and trivial, of the
proliferating technological society was part of their aim to create a new
Volksmusik.
January 1984. I’m sitting in the bar of New York’s Copa Cabana with The
Fearless Four, a now long-vanished electro-hip-hop band. Their most enduring
record, “Rockin’ It”, now sampled for mid-1990s rap records, was a shameless
and highly creative reconstruction of Kraftwerk’s “The Man-Machine”.
“Kraftwerk – that’s our soul group”, mumbles The Great Peso over the muzak
that mixes into the Copa’s air conditioning.
Ralf Hütter’s response to Kraftwerk’s popularity in hip-hop reveals another
aspect of machine-age thought, a reversal of the received dictum that art should
elevate
us above our surroundings and transcend functionalism. “I’m not a
musicologist”, he says, “but I think black music is very environmental. It’s very
integrated into lifestyle.
You can do your housekeeping …” He scrubs the table energetically and
suggests that Kraftwerk music is also good for this function. “When we started”,

he says, “electronics were either science-like – university, big academic titles –
or space programmes.
Our thing was always to incorporate from everyday life. On the cover of
‘Autobahn’
is my old grey Volkswagen and the sounds also – it’s the noise from two hundred
or a thousand kilometres of the autobahn.” He beeps the pulse code on his black
digital watch and laughs. To an extent, this was a reaction against bourgeois
academic culture and the tyranny of theory. “For us it’s something that’s called
in Germany the Intellektuell Überbau – the intellectual building, so huge,
Kafkaesque. For us that was never a problem.
We came from little train sets and Elektrobaukasten – the post-war generation
with these little electric toy boxes. You immediately become child-like in your
approach.”
Ralf Hütter and Florian Schneider first met at a jazz and improvisation course
organised by the Düsseldorf Conservatory, Ralf with his electric organ and
Florian with electric woodwinds and an echo unit. They were fellow members of
what Ralf describes as the fatherless generation. “We were born after the war”,
he says. “It was not much of an incentive to respect our fathers.” The
Austrian/German heritage of Beethoven, Mozart, Wagner and Brahms was
weighty, yet the pop world of the late sixties was also restrictive, particularly for
non-English speakers. “Well organised”, Ralf recalls. “Woodstock-like.
You had to look a certain way. It was very strict and pre-programmed. We
sneaked in through the back door.” The two of them played for parties after art
gallery openings in the industrial area of the Ruhr – the Cologne, Dortmund,
Essen, Düsseldorf beat.
Sometimes they linked up with the emergent free jazz movement: musicians
such as Karlheinz Berger, Gunter Hampel and Peter Brötzmann. “We didn’t play
three-minute singles”,
says Ralf, unnecessarily. “The music would be long – building and vibrating.”
They also encountered the American avant-garde then touring a similar art
gallery circuit: La Monte Young, who in 1969 constructed a non-stop sound
environment of sine wave

oscillators for thirteen days at the Galerie Heiner Friedrich in Munich; or Terry
Riley, whose In C had attracted attention in many areas of music and who was
playing concerts of lengthy duration in Europe. It was possible for them to watch
Stockhausen at work in Cologne, as Ralf and Florian once did after taking LSD,
live-mixing performances of his own work.
This was the period when everybody began to talk about world music. One of
the lavish sideshows at the Munich Olympic Games of 1972 was a vast
exhibition – World Cultures and Modern Art – devoted to the “encounter of
nineteenth-and twentieth-century European art and music with Asia, Africa,
Oceania, Afro-and Indo-America”. So, La Monte Young in one room, Javanese
court gamelan musicians in another, with some sport and international terrorism
as the main event. For Hütter and Schneider, the opportunity to see and
hear performing musicians from Asia or Africa led them to ask themselves some
vital (though problematic) questions: “What is our ethnic culture? … Was it
bombed? We even included bomb sounds in our music at one time. What’s our
sound? What’s our environment?
Am I mute?”
In the Kling Klang studio in Düsseldorf, seemingly unproductive for many
years now, there are storerooms of historic technology. Kraftwerk ’70, Kraftwerk
’75, Kraftwerk ’81, Kraftwerk ’87. “We call it a garden situation”, says Ralf.
“New things coming in, rebuilding. The old mixing with the new depending on
the weather. We have a nearly organic mix. We are still using that old cocktail
music rhythm box and then, on the other hand, we have the Synclavier. Our
instrument is the studio. It’s our little
laboratory, our Elektro spielzimmer, our toyroom. Post-computer is the new
primitivism. Over the last five years you can print or design more low-frequency
sculpture which before wasn’t possible. It
would just be one big boom … or glue. That’s the art of studio technology. You
can sculpture the sound from 20 to 20,000 Hz. We might hammer into granite
one particular sound for an enormous amount of time but then later we think
more in terms of film.
With certain sounds we are fetishistic. One special kling then somebody else

klang. Modelling this to the utmost.” Voice recording he describes in terms of
physical impact. “They melt. It’s like talking drums. Percussions. More can be
done. I feel like we’re just about to start.” In retrospect, this was rather sad, since
nothing new emerged from the Kling Klang studio other than an album of
remixes.
My last question: Do you listen to other music? “No”, replies Ralf. “Maybe
when we wander round. Sometimes when we go out to dance. Sometimes radio.
I don’t have a stereo at home. We listen to silence. We listen to fictitious music
in our head. Think music.”
 

 
 
10
altered states v: lucid dreaming
dreams, electronics; Aphex Twin; global techno
The Marquis d’Hervey de Saint Denys, author of Dreams and How To Guide
Them in 1867, used mechanical music as a dream technique. He would dance
with women he desired during tunes which he knew were available on musical
boxes. Then he would have the music box play that piece of music as he slept, an
apparently successful method of inducing the woman to appear in his dream.
What happened, once they had appeared, is unrecorded.
 
bedroom bores
1992. I interviewed Richard James over the telephone. Still living in Kingston
Polytechnic’s halls of residence, he admitted that his electronics studies were
already slipping away as a career in the techno business began to take
precedence. He had released “Analogue Bubblebath 1”, a conversation between
simple breathy chords and a selection of rich squelches, and the follow-up,
“Digeridoo”, a fast, metallic piece of electronic minimalism built around the
over-blown upper tones produced by a didg’ (as this native Australian voice tube
is now known among legions of neo-hippie didgeridoo players and drummers).
The legend was this: Aphex Twin was a mad inventor from Cornwall who built
his own synthesisers. Surfing on sine waves, he would lead a pack of young
boffins out of the computer screen glow of their bedrooms into the public
domain of clubs, shops and charts, then back in and out of more bedrooms in a
feedback loop of infinite dimensions. So far, all true.
“One of my hobbies is looking into old analogue synthesisers”, James told me
then.

His enthusiasm for the music of other people was restricted to acid, hard techno
and experimental ambient from impeccably underground sources: Underground
Resistance, Jack Frost and the Circle Jerks, the New Composers of Leningrad. “I
just like music that sounds evil or eerie”, he said. His biggest problem in life was
the challenge of moving his instruments to club PAs. “They haven’t got cases”,
he said. “They’re just circuits. If I took them out at the moment they’d all bust
up.”
Fast-forward to January 1994. We sit in a King’s Road restaurant drinking
coffee.
Despite the cold, a fan sweeps the air above us and, when I listen back to the
tapes two days later, I hear periodic rumbles of distortion as the circulating air is
blown over my microphone. “If you’re into wild stuff, it sounds better if it’s
dirty”, Richard said, back in 1992. Working under a variety of label-hopping
pseudonyms, The Dice Man, Polygon Window, Aphex Twin, he had made a
virtue of distortion. Not since the days of Throbbing Gristle or the earliest,
crudest Chicago house tracks of Farley Funkin Keith and Sleezy D had tape
overload been redeemed so thoroughly or celebrated so fruitfully. With their
visceral twitter, clubbing percussion and stone-age moans, tracks such as “73
Yips”, “I Keata”, “Phloam” and “Flap Head” sounded like reasonably
conventional dance tracks that had been sabotaged in the cutting room by a
driller killer. Selected Ambient Works Volume II, on the other hand, was a serene,
disembodied, episodic collection, the aural equivalent to a photo album filled
with Polaroids of sunsets and seascapes. James compared them with “standing in
a power station on acid”. “Power stations are wicked”, he says.
“If you just stand in the middle of a really massive one so you get a really weird
presence and you’ve got that hum. You just feel electricity around you. That’s
totally dream-like for me.” The Cornishman comes out in him. “It’s just like a
right strange dimension.”
Broaching this subject of dreams, he becomes animated. “This album is really
specific”, he says, “because 70 per cent of it is done from lucid dreaming.” To
have lucid dreams is to be conscious of being in a dream state, even to be
capable of directing the action in a dream. The subject has been explored
intensively by Celia Green, Director of the Institute of Psychophysical Research
in Oxford. In her book Lucid Dreaming: The Paradox of Consciousness During
Sleep, produced in collaboration with Charles McCreery, she confirms that

composing music or hearing music and environmental sounds are not uncommon
in lucid dreams. Green’s relevance to musicians exploring so-called ambience,
musics aimed at stimulating ecstatic states and generated by highly speculative
machine-human relationships, was underlined by her agreement to record CDs
outlining her theories for the emit series released by Nottingham-based Time
Recordings, specialists in post-dance technological music.
She has also written on the subjects of apparitions and out-of-body experiences.
In the latter, a person can look down on her or his own body as if consciousness
had located itself suddenly outside the physical boundaries of the body. All of
these hallucinatory manifestations challenge consensus views of human
perception. Ultimately, they realign us in the environment of ourselves; in turn,
they must affect our conception of environment and ambient.
“I’ve been able to do it since I was little”, James explains, talking in a way
which indicates either a serious person who has never been taken seriously or a
practical joker who has been taken too seriously for too long. “I taught myself
how to do it and it’s my most precious thing. Through the years, I’ve done
everything that you can do, including talking and shagging with anyone you feel
that takes your fancy.
The only thing I haven’t done is tried to kill myself. That’s a bit shady. You
probably wouldn’t wake up and you wouldn’t know if it had worked anyway. Or
maybe you would.
I often throw myself off skyscrapers or cliffs and zoom off right at the last
minute.
That’s quite good fun. It’s well realistic. Eating food is quite smart. Like tasting
food.
Smells as well. I make foods up and sometimes they don’t taste of anything –
like they taste of some weird mish-mash of other things.”
This contributes handsomely to the Aphex Twin myth of the mad inventor,
rarely sleeping, lost in boyish obsessions with combat, voyeurism and the
internal workings of non-sentient, scientifically explicable machines. It also
appeals to a new generation of teenage mutant phobic white (game)boy
screenies. Judged in a more positive light, the Aphex Twin is staying true to his
intuitive sense of the world. This is a world in which words and writing are

overshadowed by more fluid, ambiguous media. His reason for playing live,
which he no longer relishes, is to hear his music loud. Soundchecking, he locates
the resonant frequencies of a room in order to ripple floors with sub-bass and
shatter glass with high pitches. The reason for not naming some tracks is related
to his synaesthetic ability. Whenever he hears music he enjoys, he sees one of his
least favourite colours, which is yellow. Rather than fix music with words (even
invented nouns or numbers), he is searching for a way to identify compositions
with colour.
“About a year and a half ago”, he says, “I badly wanted to dream tracks. Like
imagine I’m in the studio and write a track in my sleep, wake up and then write
it in the real world with real instruments. I couldn’t do it at first. The main
problem was just remembering it. Melodies were easy to remember. I’d go to
sleep in my studio.
I’d go to sleep for ten minutes and write three tracks – only small segments, not
100 per cent finished tracks. I’d wake up and I’d only been asleep for ten
minutes.
That’s quite mental. I vary the way I do it, dreaming either I’m in my studio,
entirely the way it is, or all kinds of variations. The hardest thing is getting the
sounds the same. It’s never the same. It doesn’t really come close to it. When
you have a nightmare or a weird dream, you wake up and tell someone about it
and it sounds really shit. It’s the same for sounds, roughly. When I imagine
sounds, they are in dream form. As you get better at doing it, you can get closer
and closer to the actual sounds. But that’s only 70 per cent of it.” Before he
leaves, Richard explains his fondness for electronic musician friends such as
Michael Paradinas, otherwise known as μ-Ziq – “They’ve all got these strange
personalities you’ve never seen in the pop stardom world, people in their
bedrooms all day long. They make four tracks a day”, he says. “People like me,
bedroom bores, coming into the public eye. That’s quite amusing.”
 
virtually muzak
For the sleevenotes of his first album – Tango n’ Vectif – μ-Ziq cribbed liner
notes from an album of Dutch low-to-highbrow sci-fi electronic music from a
1962 album, Song of the Second Moon, by Tom Dissevelt and Kid Baltan. “It
sounds quite good,” says Paradinas. “It’s not cheesy. It’s really jazzy. There’s

really long tracks, and short poppy ones which sound a bit like Thunderbirds
theme tunes but more jazzy. It’s a bit like Joe Meek.
That’s what Richard James said when I lent it to him. I haven’t heard Joe Meek.”
In Incredibly Strange Music Volume II, Jello Biafra describes the record as
“avant-electronic-exotica” with an “ethereal ’50s sci-fi mood” which sums it up
comprehensively. Most people who read these sleevenotes took them at face
value, an indication of some actual connection between 1990s techno recordists
and the early pioneers of musique concrète, tone generator and tape experiments.
“No longer valid is the old music-hall joke about the man who, on being asked
what musical instrument he plays, replies, ‘the gramophone’!” the notes begin.
“The cheerful melodies … are served up with an accompaniment that is a
fascinating stream of tapping sounds, hisses, bubbles, bumps, rattles, squeaks,
whistles, moans, sighs, twitters, clanks, muffled explosions and unmuffled
explosions.
This may appear to be a cosy little chaos, but these works are in fact as highly
organised as anything conceived by Schönberg.”
True to form, Paradinas in person is painfully reserved. “I’m not too into this
old electronic stuff”, he says. “Kraftwerk have got some good melodies.
Tonto’s Expanding Head Band – that’s all right. It is a bit cheesy. Cabaret
Voltaire and stuff like that I could never get into. Human League, New Order,
Depeche Mode, I used to listen to that stuff in my bedroom.” Barely a flicker of
reaction crosses his features when I pass on James’s damning new category of
techno music: the bedroom bores. He knows that all of these musical categories
– intelligent techno, intelligent dance music, electronica, electronic listening
music, artificial intelligence, ambient techno – are senseless and divisive, more
representative of the pretentious aspirations of fans and critics than the
motivations of musicians. What they do reflect, however, is an upsurge in
domestically composed and recorded electronic music, thanks to the increasing
affordability of compact, user-friendly sequencing software and digital audio
recorders during the late 1980s. Atari manufactured a computer – the 1040 ST
– fitted with in and out ports for MIDI leads, the communicating channels that
carry information to and from computer, electronic keyboards and drum
machines. It was cheap, so Atari became a standard, both for the bedroom bores
and for the studios which they frequented at times when the limitations of the

bedroom were unavoidable.
For Paradinas, the prospect of being incarcerated in a professional recording
studio with a trained recording engineer is a nightmare. “You can’t distort”, he
says, his body cringing even as he imagines the prospect. I encountered a similar
reaction in 1991, visiting the home studio of LFO – Jez Varley and Mark Bell.
Set up in the attic of a parent’s home in Lofthouse, near Leeds, the studio was
full of drum machines, digital samplers, synthesisers, a mixing desk, tape
machines, all racked and stacked alongside a personal computer. After making a
hit single called, with typical economy, “LFO”, Bell and Varley tried recording
in Sheffield’s Fon studio. Home studio hum was annoying them, but at Fon, the
results were intolerable for being “too polished”.
So the purview of electronic music, its stereotypical conceits of coldness,
detachment, mechanisation – the attributes of robot-mindedness and laboratory
clinicism in old-fashioned hard sci-fi – were displaced by a determination to
transmute machine sequencing and electronic sounds into organic, changeable,
“soft” substances. Speaking in 1989 to Manchester’s 808 State, the first UK
post-acid-house act to make a long-term pop career for itself, I found the same
attitude. “Some of the best records are shoestring”, said Graham Massey. Then,
later in the interview, key words defined the difference between the emerging
techno generation and most of its predecessors from the 1970s and early 1980s –
Gary Numan, OMD, Jean-Michel Jarre, Tomita and Vangelis. Key words and
phrases such as “alchemy”, “getting your hands in the mud”, “accident”.
 
night drive thru babylon
But techno’s machine-age coldness has a basis in mass production, mass
consumption and the human–machine interface of Henry Ford’s assembly line,
an urban workforce marshalled and entrained by heavy industry and then left
stranded by its relocation in Asia. The central inspiration for European techno
came from the black housing projects of Detroit. In the late 1980s, Kirk
Degiorgio, a London-born techno musician who has recorded under the names of
Future/Past, As One and Esoterik, travelled to Detroit as a record buyer. Anxious
to meet his idols – Derrick May, Juan Atkins, Carl Craig – he experienced a
shock of realisation. “I remember driving in from Chicago”, he says, “and seeing
the hi-tech headquarters for Ford and then I was in the most extreme poverty

I’ve ever seen in my life, five minutes later. There’s just no hope at all.
It’s just complete despair. Young girls on the street. You can really understand
the melancholy feel of a lot of those early Detroit records, the coldness people
associate with them. You can imagine Derrick May sitting up in his flat and
looking out on Detroit.
You can really see a city shaping a music.”
Having grown up with the latter-day effects of Fordism, the Detroit techno
musicians read futurologist Alvin Toffler’s The Third Wave and found that
Toffler’s soundbite predictions for change – “blip culture”, “the intelligent
environment”, “the infosphere”, “de-massification of the media de-massifies our
minds”, “the techno rebels”, “appropriate technologies” – accorded with some,
though not all, of their own intuitions. First came the George Clinton-inspired
electro-funk of Cybertron, a duo of Juan Atkins and a Vietnam vet named Rick
Davies who called himself 3070. I am a number, not a name. Their music was
explicit in its cold precision and roboticism. Track titles – “Clear”, “Techno
City”, “Cosmic Cars” – dwelled on familiar Futurist themes of transcendence
through movement and immersion in the smart city, the wired megalopolis. After
Cybertron came another Atkins recording pseudonym – Model 500 – as well as
Derrick May’s Rhythim Is Rhythim and Mayday, Kevin Saunderson’s Reese &
Santonio, Carl Craig, Kenny Larkin, Stacey Pullen, Mark Kinchin and
Underground Resistance. This was the canon, and tracks such as Derrick May’s
“Strings of Life”, Carl Craig’s “Crackdown” or Model 500’s “Info World” and
“Ocean To Ocean” established an intricate, subtle aesthetic that was difficult to
match.
The repercussions of this music rippled out to European musicians, labels and
DJs, particularly in Britain, Belgium, Germany, Holland, Scandinavia and Italy –
A Guy Called Gerald, Orbital, The Black Dog, Moody Boyz, Future Sound of
London, Dr Motte, Jam & Spoon, Carl Cox, Bandulu, Autechre, Redcell, Speedy
J, Aqua Regia, Dave Angel, The Irresistible Force, C.J. Bolland, Frank De Wulf,
Source, 
Stefan 
Robbers, 
Sun 
Electric, 
Thomas 
Fehlmann, 
Global
Communication, Higher Intelligence Agency, Sweet Exorcist, Seefeel, Bedouin
Ascent, Mouse On Mars, Sketch, Oval, and then the next generation of UK
jungle producers, whose innovations in rhythm programming and edit
experimentation swept aside the astral melancholy of techno – L.T.J. Bukem,
Goldie, Foul Play, 4 Hero, Omni Trio, Roni Size, DJ Crystl. This tidal wave of
software surfers expanded regardless of the market or major-label indifference,

their growing numbers, pseudonyms and productivity rates precluding any
possibility of keeping track. Cottage industrialisation in the digital world seemed
to be generating its own needs, its own pace, its own channels of
communication.
In Frankfurt, Peter Kuhlmann worked under the name of Pete Namlook and
ran an independent record label called Fax, releasing a series of mostly limited-
edition CDs at the rate of two a week. These were either lengthy electronic solo
pieces or collaborations and solo albums from musicians such as Tetsuo Inoue,
Ritchie Hawtin, Dr Atmo, Jonah Sharp, Robert Musso, Bill Laswell, Geir
Jenssen, Mix-master Morris, Deep Space Network and Daniel Pemberton. By
fax, I asked Namlook about the transition from an earlier musical phase, when
he had played New Age music with a band called Romantic Warrior.
“I’m basically not interested to talk too much about what you call ‘Ambient’
music”, replied Namlook, assuming that this categorisation was accepted by
everybody but himself.
“I never had an intellectual approach towards this music and I was never
inspired by any other musician to do my kind of music. This music comes from
my ‘heart’. My musical experience was more focussed on jazz and Oriental
music. What you call ‘Ambient’
was there when I learned to play my first two chords on the guitar in 1974. I
went out with my father to a journey through Turkey and sat near to the water
and ‘played’
along with it. I tried to pick up the noises and give back my feelings to the
environment through my instrument. I never stopped doing this kind of music,
which for me was very emotional and melancholic. Nature was my main
teacher.”
 

 
 
11
altered states vi: nature
bionics, shamanism and nature; singing sands; the Orinoco; holy minimalism
and whales; Pauline Oliveros; reverberation; Alvin Lucier and sound art
I’m going up on the mountain, find me a cave and talk to bears if it takes me years.
– Captain Beefheart, “Wildlife”
In an essay of film criticism called “Technophobia”, Michael Ryan and Douglas
Kellner argue that technophobic films such as THX 1138 and The Terminator use
technology fear to affirm traditional social institutions. Such institutions declare
themselves as a part of nature, the antidote to technological threat, yet
technology – from virtual reality to genetic engineering – is in the process of
reconstructing nature. “[T]echnology represents the possibility that such
discursive figures as ‘nature’
(and the ideal of free immediacy it connotes)”, they write, “might merely be
constructs, artificial devices, metaphors …”
The hard-body roboticism of Arnold Schwarzenegger (machine impersonating
nature or human in machine form?) embodies this supposedly unstoppable
technological jackboot
march. But with Predator, not referred to in the Ryan and Kellner essay, the
picture morphed into a new shape.
The predatory creature at the centre of John McTiernan’s film generates
maximum fear
when integrated into nature, a flickering presence distinguishable from the
jungle vegetation into which it merges only as an interference pattern at the edge

of perception. Not until the
end of the film, when it reveals itself as alien beast/machine in order to go mano
a mano with Schwarzenegger, does it slip into the comforting realm of ordinary
horrors.
And after that revelation, Schwarzenegger permits himself to unveil a brief
glimpse
of his own human side. About to crush the predator’s head with a rock, he is
stopped
by a mixture of compassion and curiosity. In that pause, the predator taps out a
code
and blows himself to pieces. Confused messages here: Never allow the hawk in
you to
be weakened by the dove, perhaps; some suggestion that humans are equally
frightened
of nature and machines, despite being part of one and symbiotically entwined
with
the other. Reading too much into Hollywood films is an intellectual party game
that
can shed darkness on an infinite variety of subjects.
This uneasy relationship between nature and technology was given a positive
boost in 1958 when a US Air Force major named Jack E. Steele coined the word
“bionics”.
Steele defined bionics as the science of systems whose function is based on
living
systems, or which have characteristics of living systems. The principle can still
be found in contemporary research, particularly in the development of smart
technologies and biomimetic products, some of which are based on the muscular

movements of sea
creatures such as starfish and sea cucumbers. But scientists have always learned
from
animals. Early examples of bionic engineering would include Leonardo da
Vinci’s sketch
of a flying machine based on a bat, or the post-Titanic disaster suggestion by Sir
H.S. Maxim, the inventor of the Maxim machine gun, that the echo-locating
ability
of bats could indicate ways of avoiding a similar calamity in the future.
The origins of radar date back to 1793. A professor at Padua University,
Lazzaro Spallanzani, was fascinated by the fact that bats can fly and hunt in
darkness. He began to investigate and concluded correctly that they must emit
sounds and then find their way by hearing
the reflections bounce back off objects in their flight path. These sounds are
ultrasonic, however, so radar development was delayed for more than a hundred
years, partly because later researchers believed that many of the experiments
performed on bats were cruel, and partly because they refused to believe in
sounds
that they could not hear. So they dismissed the poetic theory that bats see, or
maintain spatial awareness at least, with their ears. Until the development of an
ultrasonic
detection system in 1938, the sounds made by bats remained secrets of the
aether.
Technology has made us a party to many of the sounds which surround us, as
well as adding many more of its own. A question posed by Donald R. Griffin, an
American researcher into the use of acoustic orientation by sight-impaired
humans, bats, moths, marine
mammals and cave-dwelling birds, offers another angle on the human fear of
nature’s

alien otherness. “Twenty years ago”, he writes in Listening In the Dark, “bats
seemed from any ordinary point of view to be miniature monsters … Yet there
can be no doubt that questions of the most arresting sort were already clearly
posed
by the simple fact that these little creatures spend their active lives in rapid and
skillful flight through varying degrees of darkness. Why until so very recently
did
these intriguing questions attract so little interest? Was it because of the
superstition that surrounds the popular image of a bat …?”
“Matthew, think what it would mean if I could talk to the animals …”
– Rex Harrison, Doctor Dolittle
The desire to learn from animals and communicate with them is as old as
paradise and the hellish underworlds that counter-balance it. The ancient Chinese
seven-string
flat lute, the ch’in, sometimes appears as a passing symbolic reference to magic
and antique refinement in Hong Kong martial arts films, particularly costume
dramas such as King Hu’s Touch of Zen and Ching Siu-tung’s A Chinese Ghost
Story. Finger techniques for playing the instrument included touches described
as “a crane dancing in a deserted garden”, “the Shang-Yang bird hopping about”,
“a swimming fish moving its tail”, “white butterflies exploring flowers”,
“echo in an empty vale”, “a cold cicada bemoans the coming of autumn” and
“cold ravens
pecking at the snow”. Admittedly, the ch’in was a repository of elite esoteric
lore. One touch – ting-yin – consisted of pressing the fingertip heavily down on a
string without moving it.
According to some handbooks, vibrato was produced with the pulsation of the
player’s
circulation. Strict rules which dictated when the instrument should or should not
be played were formulated in Ming period handbooks. Sitting on a stone, in a
high

hall or boat, resting in the shadow of a forest or, rather ambiguously, meeting a
suitable person were all considered good situations. Markets and shops were
considered
to be unsuitable, and playing whilst drunk, sweaty, wearing strange clothes or
after
sex was forbidden. But, as detective novelist, diplomat and ch’in scholar Robert
Hans van Gulik has written, these rules of constraint were “much more precise
and severe, and therefore the least observed”.
Unity with nature and the uncluttered mind that came with this unity were
fundamental to the appreciation and proper playing of the instrument. Cranes,
the Chinese symbol
of longevity and, by extension, immortality, were regarded as psychopomps,
messengers
which guided souls to the domain of the dead. This shamanistic motif figured
large
in the symbology of ch’in music, particularly during the period before magical
associations were overridden by literature and aesthetics. One story, quoted by
van Gulik in The Lore of the Chinese Lute, illustrates the connection between
music, altered states and shamanistic flights to the heavens: “Chang Chih-ho
loved to drink wine, and when inebriated used to play
his lute all night long without resting. One evening there suddenly appeared a
grey
crane, which danced round about him. Chang then took his lute, and riding on its
back,
disappeared in the sky.”
Why do shamanistic images appear as survivals in so many forms of music?
Perhaps because music is so often a gateway to unusual or ecstatic states of
consciousness and because

shamans were (and occasionally still are), as Mircea Eliade put it, technicians of
ecstasy. Shamanism flourished in animistic hunter-gatherer societies, in which a
comprehensive survivor’s
knowledge of the natural world was indivisibly linked to the magical technique
of
nature mimicry. In every hallucinatory journey, shamans would transmute into
animal
forms. Travelling to spirit regions and dead zones, often carried by an eagle or
riding a drum, they would speak their own secret language – a mixture of arcane
vocabulary,
strange noises and wildlife sounds – in order to communicate with spirits and
animal
familiars. In his classic study of the subject, Shamanism, Eliade finds many
examples of this interspecies skill, interpreting it as a symbolic return to the
primordial, paradisiacal time when animals and humans spoke in a common
tongue and lived in harmony together. Like the Chinese Taoists, shamans heard
spirit
music in running water. “According to the Carib tradition”, Eliade wrote, “the
first
piai (shaman) was a man who, hearing a song rise from a stream, dived boldly in
and did not come out again until he had memorized the song of the spirit women
and received
the implements of his profession with them.” But as this story’s imagery of
death,
rebirth, the abyssal unconscious and inspirational female knowledge also
suggests,
shamans’ songs and language were demonstrations of the fluidity and
fearlessness with

which the shaman could negotiate zones of remote consciousness and profound
experience.
 
nature
December 1994. A news agency reports a significant find by Chinese
archaeologists: two xun wind instruments, estimated to be 6,500 years old, used
as decoys by hunters to attract birds and animals.
 
echo beach
I drew a nine-foot treble clef in the sand with my feet and recorded the sound on tape. The beach comprises
clean, evenly spaced Quartz granules and emits a musical
note when walked on.
– Paul Burwell, Island of Eigg 1977
“Singing sands are susceptible to changes in atmosphere”, Annabel Nicolson
wrote in Musics magazine in 1978. “On a hot dry day walking over the singing
sands of Eigg can be noisy. When it is damp the sands are silent and it is hard to
believe they could ever
be otherwise … On the cliffs of Beinn Bhuidhe, facing away from the singing
sands,
we overlooked another stretch of coast from which came strains of music at sea
level.
The purity of tone was sustained over some distance from the source. The sea
was transparently green, reflecting the light from the surface onto the sea bed.
There were rocks in
the water which seemed to be close to the source of the sand but not the cause of
it.”
January 1995. Singing sands are reported to be disappearing. These beaches,

scattered around the world, actually chirp as a person walks across them, making
a sound that
has been likened to Japanese koto music. Walking across a chirping surface also
recalls the Nightingale Floor in Kyoto.
Maybe these associations explain the fact that vanishing singing sands (nakizuni,
as they are called in Japan) have been investigated by a Japanese researcher,
Shigeo Miwa. An analysis of a sample taken from Florida’s Pensacola Beach by
Dr Miwa revealed
a high proportion of pollutants mixed with the 99.7 per cent pure silica quartz
sand,
but forty minutes of boiling in water restored the sand to full voice. Dr Miwa’s
sample is now displayed in the Niwa Sand Museum in southern Japan.
In Oriental Magic, Idries Shah claimed that the ancient Egyptians took oracles
from singing sands.
Desert people of the Middle East also believed that singing sands were portents.
Just
after World War II, Shah was told that a Libyan dervish had foretold war in
1937, advised preparation for the Western Desert campaigns and predicted
independence from Italian colonisation,
all based on oracular interpretations of singing sands.
 
dreaming up nature
1972. I am keeping two small alligators in a small tank in the garden. A loud
shrieking noise breaks out. The alligators are mating, but at the same time they
are eating
a large sea snail. Other sea snails, monstrous and white, leap in panic across the
lawn.

 
chasm
In 1950, a French explorer named Alain Gheerbrant played a Mozart record to
Venezuelan Maquiritari Indians during an expedition along the Orinoco, Ventuari
and Amazon rivers.
A photograph in Gheerbrant’s book, The Impossible Adventure, is captioned
“Listening to Mozart”. This striking portrait shows a man listening with his eyes
closed. His mouth is relaxed, blissful, but his eyes seem squeezed shut,
as if the experience is as painful as it is pleasurable. “I do not know if music is
really the universal language people often say it is”, wrote Gheerbrant, “but I
shall
never forget that it was the music of Mozart to which we owed our rare moments
when
the chasm which centuries of evolution had dug between us, civilised white men
of
the twentieth century, and them, the barbarians of the Stone Age, was almost
completely bridged.” In 1978, a similar scene was replayed. Pulled up at night
on a shelf of
flat land at the edge of the Orinoco, Nestor and I dragged out the suitcase that
contained our tape recorder, microphones, tapes, batteries and bags of silica gel.
Setting it
up, ostensibly to test the equipment, more truthfully to ground ourselves for a
few
minutes in a memory of life in London, we played a track from one of our
favourite albums, Marvin Gaye’s I Want You. The Maquiritari Indians with
whom we travelled listened, giggled and then turned away to continue discussing
the forthcoming Venezuelan election.
By the late 1970s, the racial encodement of Europeans and Indians into a neat

opposition of civilised, individualised city dwellers (culture), set against an
abstract mass
of Stone Age barbarians (nature) was no longer the kind of sentiment to be
expressed
in books. Having said that, every American missionary we encountered in
Amazonas talked openly about the devil-worshipping Indians as children, calling
their shamans witch
doctors, an expression I don’t think I had heard since the 1950s. The Maquiritari
often referred to their neighbours, the Yanomami, as banana-eating monkeys. As
for
the Yanomami, yet to be lauded as gentle forest people, they ate earth, drank
soup
made from the ashes of dead people, played humiliating practical jokes, walked
miles
along a river to find a crossing place rather than sweat over building a boat,
engaged
in perpetual warfare and spent afternoons consuming strong plant hallucinogens
which
made them vomit and drool. I rather liked them.
Writing about Debussy’s archaeologist and writer friend Victor Segalen, James
Clifford places him in a turn-of-the-nineteenth-century milieu described as “a
post-symbolist
poetics of displacement”. Also locating artist-travellers Paul Gauguin, Arthur
Rimbaud, Blaise Cendrars, Michel Leiris and Antonin Artaud within this milieu,
Clifford goes
on to say that “the new poetics rejected established exoticisms” and “the new
poetics

reckoned with more troubling, less stable encounters with the exotic”. I had read
Artaud’s account of his search for magic and collective myth in Mexico, along
with
a number of “impossible adventures”, all of which luxuriated in dire warnings of
sting
rays, piranhas and strange little barbed fish which could swim up a stream of
urine
and lodge in a man’s urethra. Nothing prepared me for the surrealism of
Amazonas,
however.
 
a journey sideways
2 November 1978. We tied up our hammocks under a roof with no walls at the
edge of the Orinoco. The night noises are intense, the sky lit by flashing tracers
of light.
I sleep fitfully. In the morning, I am woken by a loud, eerie siren chorus of
potoos,
a sound like lost souls calling to tempt unwary travellers: “Oy, oy, oy, oy.” I
knew
this strange call from a record of Venezuelan wildlife sounds released by French
bioacoustic recordist Jean C. Roché, who wrote: “The unusual musical volume
of this tropical country [Venezuela] made its impact on my arrival in town,
where the unbelievably shrill chirping of the cicadas overwhelmed me each time
I passed under a tree. At nightfall, around
even the meanest of ditches filled by the daily rain, myriads of toads and frogs
struck up a concert, which, through its sheer intensity, muffled all other
surrounding noises.

When I penetrated the forest, I could hear bird species literally by the dozen and
individuals by the hundred, all calling and singing together at dawn and at dusk.”
I never thought I would hear this chorus in situ, one of the weirdest sounds in
nature, let alone on the first morning of our journey. Its extra-human quality is
reinforced
by the character of each individual voice – a single descending note with no
front
attack, which gains in volume over its brief duration. The effect is quite
psychedelic
then, like a recording played backwards, but with an added perspectival element.
As
one bird calls, another answers in the distance, so the overall sonic picture gives
the illusion of swelling forward, but then constantly falling away into the void.
I lay in my hammock, sticky and stupefied. With the dawn, the sound gradually
fades.
The name of the Maquiritari, or Yekuana, as they are also known, means
“dugout canoe”
or “river people”. Setting off from Puerto Ayacucho, on the border of Venezuela
and
Colombia, we travelled on a craft seemingly devised for a Terry Gilliam film:
three
dugout wooden boats lashed side by side, driven by two motors and loaded with
a metal
filing cabinet and a large cupboard, thirty school chairs, two huge glass-fibre
water tanks, ten drums of gasoline, a Yanomami teenager named Pompeo, two
Maquiritari families with their luggage and a dog, and us – myself, Nestor

and Odile, the photographer – with our two enormous trunks full of food and
equipment.
The only shelter is a pitched roof woven from leaves. The bottom is awash with
water,
often writhing with foot-long threadworms.
4 November. Night falls and the gorgeous colours of a protracted sunset wash
across the sky, then melt away slowly, as if to tantalise and seduce by degrees.
The river
is still and dark as oil, birds flitting over its surface in their hunt for the insect
nightshift. A man in a canoe paddles past us very quickly. We have trouble
finding
a place to camp, since the jungle is very dense. Eventually a place is found, and
as we stop, Indians appear on top of a ridge. We cook in the dark, and Simon
Garcia,
our guide, makes a frame from which we can hang our hammocks. Simon is a
Maquiritari,
a protégé of a famously liberal priest, Padre Cocco, who took Simon and
Pompeo’s father to Rome to meet the Pope. He tells us about the time when he
took a German woman to
the mouth of the Orinoco. The work was too hard, he jokes; she insisted on
sleeping
in a bunk which had to be constructed every night. As we eat, we hear flutes
from
a nearby Jaiyibo village drifting through the forest. Simon plays us a cassette
tape
of harvest and house-building songs recorded in his own village. Once we fall
into

our hammocks, the night noises of frogs, cicadas and insects build to a swarming
complexity, but enjoying this symphony is impossible due to the itching of
countless swollen mosquito bites.
9 November. “Oh, there are sting rays everywhere in the water,” says Simon,
“but they’re all right if you don’t step on them.” We take the Ventuari river for a
while, in order
to avoid a difficult section of the Orinoco. Lianas hang down into the water.
Birds
skim the surface of the river, sometimes making contact in tiny glittering
splashes.
Silence, then a section of the jungle will come alive with the malevolent hissing
of insects. After very heavy rain, the day is overcast, the atmosphere like an
evening
of supernatural green light. Pompeo sits in the prow of the middle boat, singing
quiet guttural songs, voicing bird sounds into his cupped hands, pulling faces
and making hand signs, barking, pointing his bow and arrow towards the jungle.
We stop at a break in the trees and pull up
to a cluster of rocks buzzing with bees. Pompeo, Simon and his uncle fish and
catch
five piranhas, their tiny razor teeth jutting from bulldog jaws. Shortly after we
set off, the boats run aground. We jump out into the shallows and push but then
jump
back in as piranha fish gather around our legs. At night, we stop at some huts.
Fruit
drops in a soft tattoo from the palm trees. Simon decides to catch a crocodile.
First,
he shoots one from our boat, impaling it on an arrow tipped with a harpoon.
Then he

takes Nestor and me on to the river in a small canoe, gliding up close to the
crocodile, shining a torch on its eyes, then striking with an improvised spear
armed with the
harpoon head and dragging it back to land, still alive, where Pompeo hacks it to
pieces, kneeling on the claws as they push his knife away. The river is narrow
here, and the
trees high. Every sound echoes in the tense silence of the hunt, as if we had
drifted
into a cave in another time.
11 November. Our ninth day on the boat. Mist trails on the surface of the
water. We arrive at Tama-Tama – an American Evangelist Missionary training
camp – soon after
setting off. Deep in jungle, the scene might be transplanted from a Georgia
suburb.
Artfully arranged: mown grass, flowers, a wheelbarrow, a bicycle, a little stone
lavatory.
By six in the morning, the temperature is unbearable. Clouds of tiny mosquitoes
bite
any patch of flesh they can find, wrists, ankles, tips of ears, lower face and neck
being particular favourites. I am reminded of the ghost in Lafcadio Hearn’s
Kwaidan, which tears off the ears of a musician named Hoichi after his body,
save the unfortunate omission of his ears, is painted with the text of a holy sutra.
A loud water pump
at the hydrology station is mounted a few yards from a corrugated iron building,
so
the equilibrium of the scene is shattered by a cascade of sharp, fast echoes. The
following night, we drink the last of our rum and I record night music: a bird
which

whistles sporadically in a descending glissando; huge moths which flap close to
the microphones, their wing beats registering on tape as a low-pitched flutter.
13 November. Nine large predatory birds circle above us. We stop at a small
village, where we see the local malariology representative. In his boat are two
large turtles,
both alive, and an executive briefcase. We meet the first Yanomami group we
have seen
on the river. One of them whistles a greeting, the sound bouncing off the trees on
the opposite bank. At Ocamo, we meet a Spanish anthropologist and ethno-
botanist named
Emilio Fuentes, who agrees to help us with recording the shamans of the
Yanomami village where he is living. Three days later we reach Continamo Falls
after an arduous morning
of unloading and reloading the boat every time we reach rapids. Our time sense
is
changing dramatically. By watch time, each of these stops takes one hour, yet
our
subjective reckoning is fifteen minutes. Yellow and blue butterflies, their wing
spans
close to five inches, land on our arms and heads and sit there until disturbed. At
the Falls we find a big caterpillar which has wrapped itself in a leaf sealed with
saliva. This improvised house is dragged along and the caterpillar withdraws
inside
if danger threatens. Yellow and black mosquitoes abound here. We set off in a
small
boat, heading into rapids, the sunset behind us. The river narrows and mist rises

from the surface. Groups of turkeys take flight from the trees and flocks of small
birds skim the water in front of the boat. As mist envelops the river completely,
the perfume and colours of this place rise to a high pitch of intensity.
17 November. Another overcast day. My nausea and giddyness are not helped
by an overpowering awareness of the aliveness of this place. Small biting ants
and huge spiders are everywhere.
Every surface is wet, parasitic, almost visibly moving through states of decay
and
regeneration. We walk upwards through the jungle for four hours at speed in
dehydrating heat, crossing log bridges and looking out for snakes. By the finish,
I feel closer
to death than life, shooting pains in my chest and my heart threatening to burst.
That night in Continamo village, high in the mountains overlooking the Sierra
Parima, we drink thick beer made from fermented yucca. Simon and his uncle
make clarinets from two large bamboos and reeds. The duets they play on these
honking
tekeyë symbolise the songs and movements of a pair of mythical animals.
19 November. A Yanomami shaman arrives in the village, the lower half of his
face painted black for fierceness, the upper half painted red, the life colour. He
agrees
that we can tape his hallucinogenic ebena visions so we follow him with our
recording equipment. On the way, we cross a river in a boat but the boat sinks so
we wade the rest. On the trail I see a fly the size
of a fir cone with a five-inch span of red wings. When we arrive, the man is
lying
in his hammock. Somebody has stolen his ebena out of jealousy, he claims. A
later counter-claim suggests that his family hid it from him, frightened by our
tape recorder. Nothing to do here, so after ten minutes

we leave. On the walk back to Continamo, the rain pours and Simon’s uncle cuts
us
umbrellas from huge leaves. Wet through from the storm and wading two rivers,
we collapse into our hammocks and fall asleep. Waking up in the afternoon, we
hear a commotion.
A young Yanomami man is chanting in the village, snorting ebena from a tin
plate, dancing with his arms outstretched, making sounds of animal spirits.
That night, I dream that animals are living in my skin.
21 November. After a day of fishing with poison plants, we leave Continamo,
Simon shooting birds as we go, me carrying the two tekeyë clarinets, Nestor
carrying a long blowpipe. After nightfall we are still in the boat, now divested of
its strange cargo and outriders. The rain is pouring and a thunderstorm looms
overhead. No moon this night, the impenetrable darkness of the sky split
vertically by fork lightning. We shoot two sets of rapids in this theatrical scene, a
wave engulfing us as we pass over the second set of rocks like a funfair ride,
followed by internal
waves of energy and elation which only subside when we reach Toki. The next
morning,
I feel tormented by panic attacks of claustrophobia. All three of us look haggard,
our faces drawn and shiny with sweat, exhausted by constant travel and probably
suffering side effects from strong malaria pills. That night, we sleep in
hammocks on the boat. The dogs of Toki start barking and carry on for ten
minutes, each bark echoing at the same volume a split second later on the
opposite
side of the river. Sleep is barely possible. A bat is flying about, either in the
boat or in my imagination, and nearby I hear an animal snorting loudly like a
train.
23 November. My face is swollen to the size of a football from mosquito bites.
Emilio Fuentes has returned from Caracas with a message from anthropologist
Jacques Lizot,

a student of Claude Lévi-Strauss. The author of a beautiful book – Tales of the
Yanomami – Lizot had also made a powerful filmed document of Yanomami
shamanism – Initiation of a Shaman – in collaboration with Raoul Held. We can
visit the Yanomami groups he works with, so long as no Maquiritari go with us,
since the acculturated Maquiritari will exploit
the vulnerable Yanomami if they can. We travel towards Mavaca, and nearby
Tayari-teri,
the Yanomami village where Lizot had lived for six years and where he had shot
Initiation of a Shaman. The journey seems to take ages. We stop briefly when we
pass a group of Yanomami Indians who jump into the boat, pointing at us and
laughing. When the light fails,
we crunch to a halt on a small beach where claustrophobia creeps up on me. I eat
a
meal of rice and cabbage then walk for ten yards, half the length of this sand
spit,
to sit and look at the sky. In this void I can see nothing except myself, the faint
outline of the boat and a thousand stars. Frogs and toads puncture the stillness
with
qwok-qwok drones, bell-like chinking and bursts of machine-gun rattling. Close
by
but invisible, fish leap and fall back in the river with loud splashes. Even in this
perfect spectacle of light glimmers and sound fireworks, my head is spinning in
a
delirium of exhaustion and dislocation.
24 November. At the river’s edge near Mavaca, we visit a shaman named
Torokoiwa, recommended by Jacques Lizot. He lives in a small clearing of five
shelters with a number of women
and children. Pleased to hear that we are Lizot-teri, he agrees to chant and take

ebena. This hallucinogen is made from powdered tree bark of the Virola
elongata species, mixed with crushed seeds of Anadenanthera peregrina
containing dimethyltryptamines which bear a structural resemblance to
serotonin, a neurotransmitter naturally present in the brain. Torokoiwa is anxious
to acquire a
new hammock. We have none to spare, so a money deal is struck instead. He
strips down
to swimming trunks and squats. A small girl blows ebena powder into his nose
through a long tube, enveloping his head in a green cloud, making him wince
and dribble. He chants with a strong voice which jumps to falsetto. Growling
and shouting, he paces up and down, gesticulating, sometimes stopping to ruffle
my
hair or Nestor’s, finally squatting by one of the women to perform some healing
on
her.
After Torokoiwa has eaten some Quaker porridge oats, we travel with him to
Tayari-teri.
We have a tape from Lizot which we play to Machitowe, a young man who
recorded sound
on Initiation of a Shaman. Machitowe agrees to take us to Ocamo, where Emilio
lives, but meanwhile, we have arrived at the beginning of a group shamanising
session led by a charismatic older
shaman, the most powerful of this place. After some prevarication, they decide
we
can record and photograph. Under the shade of the shabono, a vast circular
shelter of sloping palm screens open to the sky in its centre, a group of six
shamans take ebena. In the middle of them sits their patient, a sick-looking man
wearing shorts. Blown forcibly through long cane tubes, the ebena powder
causes retching, spitting, grimaces, growling and vomiting. Subdued, sporadic
chants; the group sends imaginary missiles against their enemies with invisible

blowpipes and bows, invoking and calling under control the hekura spirits which
live within their chests; then the shaman picks up real weapons – a bow with its
seven-foot arrow, a large machete, finally an axe – and starts his dance,
marching back and forth, chanting rhythmically, voicing the sounds of spirit
animals
and birds, transforming into a hekura spirit. The rhythm erupts into screams. He
shapes his body into extreme angles, walking the path of the shorori, described
by Jacques Lizot as “water demons and masters of subterranean fire”. The
hazards of this journey break through into our world. He rolls in the dust,
rubbing his body as the demonic heat burns his skin. His chant to the motoreri,
the leaf of the whirlwind spirit, breaks down in shrieks and an eerie, quavering
falsetto.
As the ebena takes its full effect, the other shamans join in with the chanting –
glassy-eyed, spitting, retching, vomiting loudly, strands of snot hanging from
their noses and
streaking their chests. Then some of them run to the other side of the shabono,
tearing at the ground, striking at the high palm-screen walls, shouting and
screaming in a state of near hysteria. Mutual massage follows, as they calm each
other. All
aspects of this hekuramou are symbolic. The mucus is not wiped away, for
example, because this is believed to be the excrement of those spirits living in
the shaman’s chest. Demons are thieves
who are sent by enemy shamans to steal the noreshi, or spirit parts of human
souls, especially those of children. As sorcerers who can voyage through the four
levels of the universe, plunging into actualisations of myth
and history, floating in free space and time, the shamans undertake the burden of
responsibility within their community to retrieve these souls. Healing is an
intense
psychodramatic theatre of cruelty, in which the sick become a battleground for
the

gruesome antagonism of tamed and malevolent spirits. Skin burns or oozes
blood, the
wind blows as the spirits move about, the shamans massage their patient,
drawing out
evil spirits through an extremity and then throwing it or vomiting it far from the
unhealthy woman or man. This is the only form of medicine traditionally used
by the
Yanomami. As the American anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon has written:
“They rely
exclusively on the cures that the shabori [the shamans] effect, fighting
supernatural ills with supernatural medicine.”
Both the shaman and his own resident hekura spirits enjoy the effects of the
ebena. Encounters with the spirit world need not depend on hallucinogens, yet
the initiation of a shaman is a lengthy and traumatic process of death and rebirth,
a reprogramming
which introduces the human individual into secrets of an otherwise complex,
invisible
and volatile universe. The necessity for a shaman to maintain dangerous spirits
within his own body, subdued yet ready to be unleashed, has an obvious
psychological interpretation. The world is coherent but precarious,
and for human society to remain in balance with the rest of the cosmos, the
shamanic
specialists must confront and absorb images of chaos, terror, disgust, wonder,
fear,
violence and fierce beauty. Plant hallucinogens, chanting, movement, poetic and
occult
language and the framework of origin myths are the transitional gateways, the
technical means of access to a state of consciousness and an arena of action

which the young
shaman is taught as if it were a negotiable 3-D map, a synaesthetic virtual world,
complete with colour, sound, smell, danger and pain.
25 November. We leave Tayari before 5 a.m. with Machitowe and another
small boy from the village. As the light comes up, the river radiates the mystery
of a Kurosawa film.
Mist hangs in shreds from the treetops and rises off the surface of the grey river
in short columns and high wisps. We pass by Ocamo mission at speed for fear
that the
Yanomami living there might see us and attack their Tayari enemies. No signs of
human
life, but many parrots, large herons and fluorescent blue butterflies. In the hot
sun I fall asleep in the boat. Towards the end of a seven-hour journey we startle
a group of naked Yanomami women by the river’s edge. Arriving at
Wabutawiteri, we
find Emilio waiting for us. The people here are friendly and inquisitive. Where
did
Emilio find us? He tells them he found us in Ocamo, looking for music, but the
music
near the mission was so bad that he told us to come to Wabutawiteri where the
music
was very good. That night I record a circular dance, performed by the women
and young
girls for a feast. During taping, all the men gather round me, peering at the
machine.
They all shoosh each other to keep quiet but somebody farts and they all break

up
laughing. Then Emilio persuades two men to perform an improvised duo
exchange, usually
done when another group visits. The function is to exchange greetings, news and
views,
but the speed of this rhythmic vocal counterpoint is breathtaking. The recording
seems
to be going well, but Emilio bursts in angrily and stops them. What they have
been saying is that the foreigners are stupid to want to record their music and
they are going to con lots of presents from us. Keeping a straight face is very
difficult.
Then some boys step up to sing a song which alternates soloist and a chorus of
tones
pitched so closely that they generate beat frequencies. That night I go to sleep
listening to someone chanting a myth in the distance.
26 November. Emilio’s trunk full of documentary notes has been stolen so we
accompany him across the river in a search to find it. As soon as we go ashore, a
group of about
thirty Yanomami appear out of the trees. They have walked from Brazil to visit
this
village, they tell Emilio. All of them are very small, their faces so tiny that the
tobacco wads crammed under their lower lips dominate every expression. One of
them
is carrying some kind of white worm or centipede – about a foot long – on a
stick.
They pull our hair with much amusement. As we get back in the boat, an older
warrior

begins to shout at Machitowe, waving his bow and arrows. Two other men jump
in the
water and pull our boat back to shore. “What’s your family name?” the man is
shouting.
“Don’t touch the engine. Come back here to talk.” The look on Machitowe’s face
suggests that talk will lead to his death. Emilio shouts back in a mixture of
determination
and fear and we pull away before the situation can escalate. That evening we are
taken
to see ebena and the ashes of the dead being consumed in a rite of ancestral
communion. No question of recording this. We stand in awed silence at the edge
of a shelter as the porridge
of the spirits is eaten to the sound of quiet mass sobbing. Inside, the light is too
low to see anything other than silhouettes. After so much drama, this dignified
ceremony is very moving. When night falls, I record the same circular dance as
last night,
this time performed by the young men and boys. By now, nobody is interested in
the
technology. Tonight, the sky sparkles with stars. The shabono is dark save for a
few flickering fires; a frog calls qwok-qwok-qwok and insects hiss. A brief
disturbance as a big bird-eating spider runs past a fire. One of the
women snatches up a burning piece of wood and bashes it down on the spider
which will
be eaten later. The men shuffle around their wide circle, each circumnavigation
taking five minutes or so, punctuated by a swell then a fade of heterophonic
singing and high-pitched whistle.
I sit on the ground for more than one hour, wearing headphones, listening to the
sounds move to my left and diminish as they reach the far point of the circle,
then grow

louder on my right until they return to the centre. The effect is magical. Later,
I fall asleep to the sound of the chanting, the frog’s qwok-qwok, the night-insect
buzz; after dawn, I awake to birdsong, a woodpecker’s drumming and a different
chant.
28 November. Emilio is going to a petroglyph site today to collect plants so he
arranges for us to record the old shaman of Wabutawiteri taking ebena. The heat
is intense and we lie in our hammocks, sweat pouring in streams. When we take
the recording gear to the shabono we quickly realise that none of the shamans
are happy with our presence at their hekuramou so we leave. A little later, one of
the young men comes to tell us that we can record the hekuramou after all. We
pick up everything and walk back to the shabono, only to be greeted by more
hostility from the old shaman. We leave again. Then the young men come back
once more to tell us, really, this time will be fine. They can barely contain their
mirth so we stay put, listening to shamanic roaring and growling in the distance.
When Emilio returns, he investigates
and finds that the old man had changed his mind and decided that he would
agree to
recording only if Emilio was present. Our acceptance of the situation seems
prudent
when we learn that the women hide all weapons when the old man shamanises
and the
men make a circle around him as a precaution against the violence which can
erupt
when he chooses to unleash demonic spirits.
29 November. Machitowe is bored. Our last day here. Rain. An old man squats
by Emilio’s desk, holding his bow and long arrows, sucking on a tobacco wad. I
record him singing
rain songs. Despite his fierce appearance he claims to be shy, so a guard has to
be

posted on the path. Rain songs are improvised, usually sung privately in a
hammock,
the tempo changing according to the rhythm of the rain. As we leave, flocks of
birds burst from the trees above our heads, calling with a sound like sleigh bells,
wheeling in all directions; parrots scream as they take
off, their tails streaming out behind them; eagles hover above and turtles basking
on logs collapse into the water as we approach. That night we stay at the medical
station at Mavaca. Rigging up a mosquito net I disturb a huge spider, its white
body
the size of a hard-boiled egg spotted with black markings, its legs four inches in
span. Four days later we are stuck in Tama-Tama mission, forced to endure
mosquito
bites and the smell of sewage, army and missionary interrogations, Maquiritari
complaints that nobody studies their (vanishing) culture, tirades from the doctor
against Lizot,
who he claims has published “lies” about the genocide of the Yanomami. By
now, I am
deaf in one ear, my back is painful, I have ulcers on my tongue and mouth, my
feet
are blistered, my ankles are covered in bites, I want to kill all missionaries. I
lie in my hammock, watching a picture postcard tropical sunset, the sky a bruise
of
black, blue and faded yellows. Thunder, lightning and torrential rain follow. Two
Maquiritari Indians walk in, carrying a tape machine which plays The Bee Gees’
“Staying Alive” and “Boogie Oogie Oogie” by A Taste of Honey. The latter had
been a UK hit

in June, so I sink into a disco reverie of homesickness mixed with the pleasure of
total displacement.
4 December. Travelling back through rain, fog, high winds and dense clouds
of white winged flies. The boat is loaded with a consignment of bananas. As we
reach the confluence of the Orinoco and the Atabapo, the waters flow side by
side without mixing, one blue-grey, the other greenish-brown. When we stop at
San Fernando de Atabapo, we find everybody
is drunk. Herrera has won the election. We go to a shop which sells fluffy dogs,
clockwork divers, plastic mermaids, plastic cowboy boots and other essentials,
much of it veiled
by spiders’ webs. Coming through here on the way into the jungle we had seen
soldiers
water skiing on the river. Retrospective thoughts of Robert Duvall’s surfing
obsession
in Apocalypse Now (not released until the following year), or Joseph Conrad’s
Heart of Darkness, are impossible to discount. Some days later, we arrive back
at our original starting point, where we load a truck which drives us to Puerto
Ayacucho. On dry land, my perceptions seem distorted. Some ducks at the side
of the road look as if they could be four feet
tall. Any zoological aberration has become eminently feasible. In the town we
help
Simon to deliver his bananas and go with him to the shacks where Maquiritari
and Yanomami urbanites live: dank sheds lined with newsprint, prison cells
draught-proofed in spurious information. That night Soylent Green is showing at
the cinema. We kill time by drinking beer, watching soldiers armed with
automatic weapons arrest Indians. Dogs sleep in the cinema aisles, salsa booms
from the club next door, loudspeaker hum obscures the dialogue of the film, but
the
message is clear. After the breakdown of society, people subsist on a substance
called

soylent green. As Charlton Heston discovers, this compound is manufactured
from recycled corpses. Sixteen years later the prospect seems less far-fetched,
now that we know
the Japanese have perfected hamburgers made from detoxified human shit. At
the time,
however, our minds drifted back to the emotional ceremony at Wabutawe-teri,
and the
eating of human ashes mixed with hallucinogenic plants. The next morning we
leave
for the airport. The taxi is driven by a grotesquely fat man wearing a plastic
apron.
The accelerator of his car is made from wood and attached by string to the
dashboard.
He believes we are missionaries. When we arrived in this town at the end of
October,
there were no television sets. We pass a shop. Outside, another fat man is sitting
in a chair, watching television, presumably deciding whether to buy or not to
buy.
His family stand around him, waiting for his decision. When we reach the small
airport, we discover that a French entrepreneur made a deal with the Venezuelan
air force to
transport TV sets into Amazonas.
 
listening below/the surface
Nightfall. A sound recordist sits in a small cabin, isolated in the frozen wastes of
Antarctica. He drops a hydrophone through a small hole in the ice, then sits by
his tape-recorder, headphones buried under layers of thermal clothing. He

presses
the record switch and suddenly, dramatically, he is projected into a dark,
submarine,
ice-vaulted cathedral of clicks, echoes, white noise and the tumbling melismatic
whistles of high-frequency Weddell seal calls. Like time-lapse photography and
microscopy,
audio recording revealed inaccessible worlds, if not for the first time, then in
graphic and retrievable detail.
 
frozen words
In Gargantua and Pantagruel, a serial satire written by François Rabelais
between 1532 and 1534, the captain of a ship tells his crew not to be afraid when
they reach the edge of the frozen sea.
Sounds of a bloody battle between the Arimaspians and Cloud-Riders had been
frozen
and are now melting as spring approaches. Pantagruel finds some that have not
yet
thawed, frozen words and jokes which look like crystallised sweets, and throws
them
on the deck where they lie, colourful but inert. Warmed between the hands, they
melt,
sounding their words as they do so. One, a frozen cannon shot, explodes like an
unpricked chestnut thrown on to a fire. Others are battle cries which melt
together in a riot
of sound poetry – hin, crack, brededin, bou, bou, trac, trrrr – that recalls
Marinetti’s Futurist free words, fruits of the inspiration of machine war.
Sounds of nature provoke strong emotional and mythic responses in humans,

often generating strikingly similar images and stories which bridge time and
geographical location.
Sounds which originate underwater yet can be heard on land are particularly
mysterious.
During the mating season of the toadfish, the male of the species roars like a
foghorn or kazoo every thirty seconds, loudly enough to be heard above water.
Native Americans interpreted the humming as spirit voices and battle sounds
which had been frozen in air and were thawing noisily. In Sausalito, California,
sleepless and somewhat spooked houseboat owners launched a toadfish festival
– complete with
aquatic costumes and a kazoo-blowing parade – in June 1988 after being driven
to distraction by this annual droning. Prior to discovering the true source of this
nightly chorus,
the residents of Sausalito came up with a number of fanciful theories to explain
the
drone: a sunken Japanese ship loaded with electric massagers, the CIA pumping
nerve
gas into the bay, the Sausalito City Council humming into storm drains.
 
echo return
“Nature is the supreme resource”, composer Olivier Messiaen once said in a
lecture.
Few nature sounds have captured public imagination so thoroughly as the
humpback whale
songs recorded by Roger Payne. Originally available on disc by mail order from
a Del-Mar, California, address, the recordings were issued by Capitol Records on
Songs of the Humpback Whale (1970) and Deep Voices (1977). In those seven
years, the first album sold more than 100,000 copies. Not particularly

impressive, perhaps, when compared with the phenomenal sales of Gregorian
chant from Silos Monastery, shifting more than 1,000,000 units in 1994 to a neo-
spiritual market niche otherwise occupied by Enya, Le Mystère des Voix
Bulgares, Jan Garbarek
with the Hilliard Ensemble and the so-called holy minimalists – Arvo Pärt, John
Tavener and Henryk Górecki. But discounting The Singing Dogs, Pinky and
Perky, Big Bird and
other anthropomorphic oddities, these were the first non-human recording stars
to
dent the mass market. The whale songs were imitated by musicians or
incorporated into
electronic music, folk songs, contemporary classical pieces by Tavener and Alan
Hovhaness, countless feature films and television documentaries; then the New
Age movement appropriated them, almost as a central icon. The magisterial,
weightless calm of these sounds became synonymous
with technologically enhanced meditation, floatation, dolphin therapy, crystals
and
New Age videos. A new genre of functional music emerged: whale songs
augmented by
near-subliminal New Age noodling. Then the whales became fashionable again,
as post-acid rave merged with the neohippie traveller aesthetic. By 1993, their
cries could be
heard echoing under the frantic beats of otherwise resolutely urban jungle tracks,
such as L.T.J. Bukem’s “Enchanted”. Humpback whales had evolved from great
leviathans
into the cliché that could not be stopped.
Marine biologists and submarine crews had been recording underwater sounds
for decades and sailors had been hearing them for centuries before this outbreak

of whale-song
fever. “Oh yes, we used to, you know, put the wooden paddle in the water”, one
arctic
hunter has said, “and press it against our ears. That way we can hear the different
types of animal that we want to go and hunt. My people have heard it for four
thousand
years.” So why, in 1970, did these echoing flock calls capture the public
imagination?
After all, one eminent marine bioacoustician has suggested that some whale
sounds
may be non-mystical gastric rumbles. Roger Payne began his career as a
biological
acoustics researcher by studying another type of spatially sensitive animal call
that
could only be heard to its full extent through sophisticated recording technology:
the ultrasonic sonar of bats. He moved on from bats to owls, birds which use
acute
hearing abilities to catch their prey in darkness, and then a pivotal incident
shifted
his work to what became a lifelong study of whales. Working at Tufts University
in
America, he heard on the radio that a dead whale had washed ashore. Never
having seen
a whale before, he drove out to Revere Beach, Massachusetts, at night in the
rain.
There he found an eight-foot porpoise lying on the sand, its rain-slick curves

shining
in the torch beam. “Someone had hacked off its flukes for a souvenir”, Payne
wrote,
“and two other people had carved their initials deeply into its side. Someone else
had stuck a cigar butt into its blow-hole. I removed the cigar and I stood there
for a long time with feelings I can’t describe.”
Confronted with this macabre little tableau of eco-vandalism, Payne made a
decision to turn his scientific knowledge to a didactic purpose and, as he wrote,
“to use the
first possible opportunity to learn enough about whales so I might have some
effect
on their fate”. His decision was timely. In 1970, ecology, conservation and
animal
liberation were issues of growing public concern. During that year, the Institute
of Contemporary Arts in London hosted a series of twenty-two lectures entitled
Ecology In Theory and Practice, covering subjects ranging from sewage and
ocean resources to Raymond Williams’s overview of the concept of nature.
Payne’s experience on Revere Beach added a vital
component to ecology’s scientific bias. The whale songs he came to record were
mysterious and strangely moving, the sheer beauty of their solitary, echoing
moans encapsulating
that same poignant sense of loss and alienation that would drive conservation
into
mysticism, political activism and sabotage. “I am receiving mail from
spiritualists
who purport to channel dolphins in squeaky, sixteenth-century, Biblical accents”,
writes Jim Nollman in his book Spiritual Ecology. Behind the faintly weary

bemusement, he probably accepts his role as a focal point for such bizarre
correspondence. Nollman is an American musician who has founded a
company called Interspecies Communication, “the first organisation dedicated to
promoting dialogue between humans and wild animals”. Having developed
techniques and technologies (such as an electronic underwater sound system) to
cross this great divide, he has
played music with wolves, whales and many other species, and as his book
recounts,
he is sometimes embroiled in situations which give him cause to think long and
hard
about the contradictions which well-meaning ecologists can precipitate. In 1988,
for
example, Greenpeace persuaded him to join an Alaskan adventure, an attempt to
free
three gray whales stuck in an ice hole. Not entirely convinced that the whales
should
be freed to satisfy the whims of conservationists and a resulting media circus,
Nollman added his musical input to a variety of expensive and supposedly more
rational mechanical interventions and succeeded where they had failed. Informed
by shamanism, by Gregory Bateson’s insistence that the exclusion of “things”
from their context distorts our view of the interconnectedness of the
world, and by the philosophy of deep ecology, Nollman still challenges some of
the
terminology and basic assumptions of ecology’s outer fringes. “[T]hat adjective,
deep”, he writes, “has always confused me because it tries too hard to imply a
secularized version of what the deep ecologists themselves comprehend as a
spiritual relationship to nature.”
 
deep listening

“Deep Listening™ is a trademark of The Pauline Oliveros Foundation, Inc.” it
says on the cover of a CD called The Ready Made Boomerang. That sounds
serious. Luckily, there is a photograph of four members of The Deep Listening
Band – Pauline Oliveros playing an accordion, trombonist Stuart Dempster,
clarinettist
William O. Smith and sound designer Panaiotis – placed just underneath this
implicit
threat. They look like a quartet of sea dogs, just home from hunting the great
white
whale, holed up in a shoreside bunker and improvising some underworld
shanties.
Pauline Oliveros began making music as a group improviser in the early 1950s
in San Francisco, playing French horn with Terry Riley, who played piano, and
Loren Rush,
who doubled on string bass and koto. In 1961 she began making electronic
pieces, but was drawn more towards theatre, mixed-media and other expansive
environments in preference to the laboratory conditions of the
studio. “I was a young person in a field in which everybody was hiding in
technical
considerations”, she says, talking from her home in upstate New York. “Hiding
their
feelings, hiding their motivations. It still goes on – the techno-jocks that are out
there. Technocracy feels so safe. I had to prove myself, prove I could be a jock
too.”
As a logical culmination of this outward-looking orientation, she now leads
workshops
in sound, health and deep listening, and collaborates on mixed-media
presentations such as Njinga the Queen King: Return of a Warrior. In recent
years, she has also released The Ready Made Boomerang and Deep Listening,

both albums recorded in the huge underground resonating space of Fort Worden
Cistern in Port Townsend, Washington.
The musical exploitation of cavernous resonance is ancient, perhaps as ancient
as any other form of sonic experiment. At the beginning of this book I gave one
example
of an archaeologist who believes that the animistic cave paintings of prehistory
were
created in sites where there was a correspondence between the echoes and the
animal
depicted. There is some documentation of the awe induced by echoing
geological and
meteorological sounds among the rainforest Indians who lived close to the
Ecuadorian
and Peruvian Andes. The signal drum of the Jivaro was said to be an imitation of
a
giant drum played by the Iguanchi, a shaman who had died, become spirit and
caused
otherwise inexplicable booming noises within the mountain whenever he was
annoyed.
But noise – the instrument of darkness – is used to scare away the unknown and
unseen,
also. Many musics have delighted in noise, seemingly to inflate the diminutive
human
body to a scale which can cope with the vastness of its surroundings (both
physical
and spiritual). This vastness, whether natural, architectural or digital, inevitably
suggests mystery, sadness or loneliness. Many Chinese poems, for example,

were devoted
specifically to the eerie hoots of gibbons, echoing across river gorges. In his
book
The Gibbon in China Robert Hans van Gulik writes: “The graceful movements
of the gibbon and his saddening calls are referred to by nearly every poet who
wrote from the 3rd to the 7th century.”
He gives examples of some, such as Shên Yüeh’s: “I do not know whether their
calls
are near or far, for I only see mountains rising after mountain. The gibbons love
to sing on the eastern range, waiting for the answer from those on the western
cliff.”
Reverberation also invokes the sacred. Recordings of Buddhist and Gregorian
chants are made in their intended settings of monasteries, cathedrals or
mountains; some
ethnographic field recordings of ritual have been pepped up by post-production
reverb, in order to imbue them with added mystery. A fairly well-known Ocora
recording of a Burundi praise singer named
François Muduga, who accompanies his apparently sinister whispered vocal on
the inanga zither, sounds as if it was recorded in the deepest, darkest cave of
Central Africa.
In fact, a photograph shows him playing in bright sunlight in the open air, the
only
reflective surface in sight a skinny tree trunk. Since the whisper – which makes
Mr
Muduga sound like a distillation of gris-gris period Dr John, Howlin’ Wolf,
Captain Beefheart and Can’s Damo Suzuki – is a common technique for making
parity between the volume levels of voice and zither, the extra
echo can only be regarded as a sensationalist deception. But whether the echoes

are
synthetic or natural – Jamaican dub, a north African call to dawn prayer
shattering
the early morning silence as it blasts out of a tower-mounted loudspeaker, Elvis
Presley’s “Heartbreak Hotel” or a Javanese gamelan recorded under the high
roof of a royal palace – there is no escaping their power to suggest actual, virtual
and fantasy spaces.
“The instrumental items of the [Tibetan] Buddhist liturgy originally were
outdoor features”, writes Walter Kaufmann in his book, Tibetan Buddhist Chant.
Discussing the sound symbolism of Tibetan instruments, he says: “The rag-dung
drone is primarily of ritual nature, representing fearful, rumbling, and
threatening sounds related to the terror deities while its purely musical function
is of lesser
importance.” The photographs and sleevenotes to another Ocora album, Musique
Sacrée Tibetaine, paint a vivid picture of loud, outdoor instruments used
deliberately to vibrate cold air and fill every reverberant geological hollow with
sonic dread. In a description of the ceremony of welcome, sound recordist
Georges Luneau writes: “Four monks posted
at the edge of the terrace of the monastery courtyard scan the far reaches of the
valley. As soon as they glimpse the guest of honour they sound their enormous
dun-chen horns, whose deep bass tones reverberate in the steep, white heights of
the mountain.
The silent snow captures and amplifies this extension of the human voice as it
rings out to welcome the guest. Simultaneously a fire of sweet-smelling herbs is
lit. Soon afterwards the rgya-glin oboes are heard. The lama climbs slowly
upwards and the music does not cease until he has crossed the threshold of the
monastery.”
Other musicians and composers have explored the properties of acoustic
echoes. In the late nineteenth century, Charles Ives’s father, George, used to play
musical instruments over the pond in Danbury, Connecticut. He was, Frank R.
Rossiter wrote in Charles Ives & His America, “captivated by the tone quality of
the echo that returned to him across the water – an experience that his son

attempted to recapture, years later, in his chamber music
piece The Pond.” Charles Ives was inspired by Henry David Thoreau’s belief in
the “tonic of wildness”, expressing a wish to “hear the silence of the night … the
silence rings; it is musical
and thrills me”. In one of his compositions, The Housatonic at Stockridge, he
depicted the singing from a church across the river, heard through leaves, mist,
running water. As for indoor echoes, if the building is as impressive outside as
in,
then the exercise translates seamlessly from architectural acoustics into
marketing
concept. Jazz flautist Paul Horn’s Inside the Taj Mahal and Inside the Great
Pyramid are superior precursors of New Age music in their meditative, quasi-
Eastern feel.
Not only reverberations, but the buildings themselves invest the playing with
apparent
significance. In 1610, Monteverdi simulated echoes in his Vespers; Alvin
Lucier’s composition for pulses reflected by room echoes, written in 1968, was
given the same title for reasons which, as Lucier has explained, are pertinent
both to biomimetics and the awe inspired by resonance: “The title Vespers was
chosen for the dual purpose of suggesting the dark ceremony and sanctifying
atmosphere of the evening service of the Catholic religion and to pay homage to
the common bat
of North America of the family Vespertilonidae.”
Ecology, anthropology, physics, semiotics, land art and conceptual art levered
music into an area where sound and listening could take precedence over the
intention of
the composer. Alvin Curran, Evan Parker, David Dunn, Pauline Oliveros, Stuart
Dempster, Albert Mayr, Paul Burwell, Hugh Davies, Michael Parsons and the
late Stuart Marshall investigated other

aspects of echoes and the articulation or mapping of space, ranging from the
peculiarities of indoor acoustics to echoes across water and distance and natural
amphitheatres.
David Dunn has described one of his own pieces as follows: “Nexus 1 was
realized four miles into the interior of the Grand Canyon in Arizona. Three
trumpets responded to scored events in relationship to the environment resulting
in stimulation
of the extended resonance characteristics of the space and its life forms.” In
Xebec’s
Sound Arts, composer Mamoru Fujieda has written his impressions of an Alvin
Curran piece, heard at the SoundCulture 1991 audio festival, held in Sydney:
“The event that left the
deepest impression on me was the performance called Maritime Rites by the
American experimental composer Alvin Curran, which occurred on the final day
of the festival. In this one-hour performance using all of Sydney Port and its
harbour
as a backdrop, boats and ferries which happened to traverse the bay became the
instruments.
In addition to this, two boats were specially prepared with a group of musicians
playing two of Australia’s native instruments: didgeridoo and the conch shell.
From various
directions, as the sounds of the fog horns rang out in union, a magnificent sound
echoed all over the harbour.”
Stuart Marshall and I shared a work table during our first year as art students
at Hornsey in 1967–68. My conviction was that contemporary composition was
arid; his
equally fervent prejudice was that jazz equalled the commercial trad of Kenny
Ball.
So he told me about La Monte Young and I loaned him my copy of Ornette

Coleman’s This Is Our Music. Mutual listening blockages were cleansed and,
with our hearing refreshed, we went out to hear music that dwelled at that
crossroads, particularly the improvising of
AMM. During the 1970s he spent some time in America studying with Alvin
Lucier. “Western music has traditionally demanded the repression of space”,
Stuart wrote in a Studio International article called “Alvin Lucier’s Music of
Signs In Space”. “Most music is performed for an audience who are all in the
same seat. To a certain extent music performance must address itself to the
performance space but only to subjugate its specificities.” Written in 1976,
his conclusion seems more relevant than ever: “Lucier’s most recent work poses
important questions about the relationship of the subject to music as a signifying
practice.
It focuses attention literally on the position of the subject. In no sense can an
audience member be considered the mere passive recipient of musical meaning.
In these pieces the stress on the articulation of perception makes the subject
active as the place where musical meaning is created. Everything
in is motion and no one can perceive the work as totality. This is a new notion of
musical temporality which is intrinsically linked to musical space.”
Alvin Lucier presaged many current concerns with his computer simulations
of fantasy spaces (The Bird of Bremen Flies Through the House of the Burghers),
drones and harmonics (Music On a Long Thin Wire) and explorations of
biofeedback (Clocker, a piece in which the rhythm of a ticking clock is altered in
real time through electrodes connected between the performer and a lie detector,
and Music For Solo Performer, the first musical composition to use amplified
brain waves as a sound source). There is an air of dry pseudo-science about
some of these pieces, however, almost as if
they were lifted out of the gilt-edged pages of a late-Victorian acoustics
textbook.
Pauline Oliveros was one of the biofeedback activators on the recorded version
of
Music For Solo Performer. For her, there are bigger issues at stake, some of

which can be related to the sound ecology programme of Canada’s World
Soundscape Project, and some of which concern
our psychic and corporeal health. I ask her to define the Deep Listening concept.
“In 1988, that’s when we went into that big cistern and recorded. Then we
discovered
we had enough material for a CD. When I was trying to write the liner notes, I
was
trying to come to some conclusion about what it was we were actually doing in
there.
The two words came together – deep listening – because it’s a very challenging
space
to create music in, when you have forty-five seconds reverberation coming back
at
you. The sound is so well mirrored, so to speak, that it’s hard to tell direct sound
from the reflective sound. It puts you in the deep listening space. You’re hearing
the past, of sound that you made; you’re
continuing it, possibly, so you’re right in the present, and you’re anticipating the
future, which is coming at you from the past.” She laughs. “So it puts you into
the
simultaneity of time, which is quite wonderful, but it’s challenging to maintain it
and stay concentrated. So that’s what I thought we were doing, and listening to
one
another as well. The space itself becomes a very active partner in the creation
but
how you listen to it is how it gets shaped. Once I had made that discovery of
putting

those two words together – deep listening – it felt like a nice logo to make a
connection to the work I had been doing all these years and continue to do.”
She describes awesome resonant spaces as otherworldly. “Cathedrals were
constructed for that purpose, to have sound which has a supernatural presence.
We have enough
of them. Grand Central Station is a tremendous reverberant space. Railroad
stations
were built like that – big pyramids. Both Stuart Dempster and I had been
interested
in reverberant spaces over a lifetime. Both of us being horn players: I play the
French horn as well as the accordion, Stuart playing the trombone and digeridoo.
As a young
performer I was aware of the kinds of rooms I was playing my instrument in. I
noticed,
of course, that in a very dry space the tone didn’t sound so good and in a more
reverberant space, I began to get a more full, round, rich tone.”
From the early 1970s, Pauline Oliveros has been writing “sonic meditations”.
She gives me an example. “The very first one was called Teach Yourself To Fly.
The instruction goes something like this: “Observe your breath
and try to remain an observer of the breath when you feel in tune with the breath
cycle gradually let the breath become audible without trying to place your voice
just
let the breath vibrate the vocal chords naturally and gradually increase the
intensity until it comes to the point when it’s time to decrease then go back to the
breath.”
 
sonic healing/pharmaceutical method
In 1990, the manufacturer of Nurofen, a pain relief product, used two pieces of
music for a television advert in a classic “before and after” formulation. The

headache
half of the commercial was illustrated by a piece of Japanese gagaku, the elegant
court music which dates back almost unchanged to the beginning of the eighth
century. Headache relief comes when the gagaku is replaced by Mike Oldfield’s
comically twee yet distressingly clumsy slice of exotica kitsch, “Etude”, taken
from his soundtrack to The Killing Fields.
 
listening below the surface
From Pauline’s deep listening logo and the sonic meditations came another idea:
the deep listening training sessions. “Every year I lead a retreat in New Mexico,
in the
Sangre de Cristo mountains in June”, she explains. “People come to spend a
week together to do different things which I call deep listening, or we try to find
out what deep
listening is, because it opens out, you know? It implies listening below the
surface
and also listening inwardly. So in these sessions with people I try and provide
guidelines so that different forms of attention can be practised. So that you can
come away with
a fuller sense of the variety of experiences that you can have by listening and not
tuning out. That’s what it’s about.
“In these sessions I try to get into the more subtle vibrations of the body, as
close to the cellular level as possible and even the vibrations of the energy that
goes
through the body. And then also working on sounding. Sounding to increase
sensitivity
to the more subtle vibrations of the body. Sounding vocally – I always do these
sessions without instruments because it gets real fundamental with vocalising.” I

ask her if she feels
there is a relationship between these vibrational investigations and shamanic
techniques of ecstasy. She laughs. “Well, it’s the in thing right now. You can be a
weekend shaman, take a course in being a shaman. We have a spiritual
supermarket going where all these
different tastes of different traditions are being presented in different ways. It’s
not necessarily bad. It depends on the motivation. There’s a value to gaining
some
understanding of practical traditions. I think the shamanic journeying practice is
very powerful, very rewarding and rich in terms of gaining access to the inner
world
and getting valuable messages from the inner teachers that are there. I’m very
interested in that. We do journeying almost every night at the retreat –
journeying in different
ways, say journeying for oneself or journeying for a partner or journeying on a
theme.
I want to connect with listening in the broadest sense; not only listening to sound
and vibrations but understanding that we are vibrations. We’re made of it. It’s
working back to a spiritual development. Sound is the leading energy in that
development.”
 

 
 
12
theatre of sound
World Soundscape Project; Thomas Köner; Hans Jenny; plunderphonics;
progressive rock; Paul Schütze
 
digital archaeology
In a hitherto neglected museum basement a cupboard is opened. Untouched
since Victorian times, it contains the preserved drone of a mosquito. The digital
restorer gently
shifts acoustic dust and grime from this frozen moment of sound with a virtual
toothbrush.
The drone grows stronger in the surrounding silence but the sound is old and
impossibly fragile. It disintegrates suddenly and the digital restorer wakes with a
start, sitting upright in bed in a cold sweat.
 
theatre of sound
“This blurring of the edges between music and environmental sounds may
eventually prove to be the most striking feature of all twentieth-century music”,
wrote composer and World Soundscape Project founder R. Murray Schafer in his
book The Tuning of the World. Based at Simon Fraser University, British
Columbia, the World Soundscape Project was, and is, dedicated to the study and
documentation of sounds in their environment.

A double album and accompanying book released by the Project – The
Vancouver Soundscape – includes recordings of air horns and steam whistles,
mournfully blasting and hooting across cold landscapes. “One of the strangest
things happened a few years back when
we had a very cold spell”, a Vancouver lighthouse keeper told WSP researchers.
“There were patches of ice all over the Bay. When the echo came back from the
ice it sounded like somebody ripping a large sheet of cloth.”
Singular memories and vanishing sounds are the stock-in-trade of the project.
“Perhaps the only animal sound in the Vancouver area that can compare in
intensity with the
mechanical operations of the sawmill is that of the Hoolack gibbons, recorded in
the
Stanley Park Zoo, where it was measured at a peak level of 110 dBA”, say the
album
sleevenotes. Another WSP publication, European Sound Diary, notes sound
impressions garnered during a trip from Sweden through to Scotland in 1975.
The book can seem obsessional, though the fact that a written audio diary is
unusual and a photographic record is commonplace says something about our
attitude
to sound. Everything from car horns to street conversations comes under the
scrutiny
of the WSP diarists. “I think I’m going to have a heart attack”, one of the
researchers says as they emerge into the noise and dirt surrounding Liverpool
Street station in
the mid-1970s.
Didactic and conservationist, equally focused on acoustic philosophy and
practical sound design, the project under R. Murray Schafer leaned towards
nostalgic yearnings
for a pre-electronic, even pre-industrial soundscape. Throughout all WSP

material,
the strongest hatred is reserved for Muzak (or Moozak, as they term it). Schafer
must have shuddered to see himself quoted in Joseph Lanza’s proMuzak/easy
listening polemic, Elevator Music, yet the concentration on sound events is
highly subjective. Distant ambulance sirens may be one person’s purgatory and
another’s poetry. “If we have a hope of improving
the acoustic design of the world,” Schafer wrote in The Tuning of the World, “it
will be realizable only after the recovery of silence as a positive state in our
lives. Still the noise in the mind: that is the first task – then everything else will
follow in time.” Under bombardment from increasing noise pollution levels, we
can sympathise with Schafer and long for a world free of road drills and
excessively loud barcode reader bleeps without sharing his desire to return to an
Edenic state of pure, permanent quietude.
 
notation
Musicologist Samuel Akpabot notates a kara flute ensemble of the Birom people
in northern Nigeria as follows: Player 1 stops to do a little dance; player 2 stops
to blow his nose; player 3 stops to urinate and
spit; player 4 stops to laugh at player 3 and chat with the crowd; players 3 and 4
stop to argue; player 5 stops to tune his drum. Notation is the critical word.
Similar notations of musical events appear daily in newspapers and magazines,
except they
are called reviews.
 
thresholds
Intrinsically non-visual, most of Max Neuhaus’s works exist on the threshold of perception – sound sources
are placed so that they cannot be seen and the sounds become a natural element of the space – ever-present
yet almost imperceptible.
– Sonorità Prospettiche: Suono, Ambiente, Immagine (catalogue of sound art exhibited in Rimini,
1982, dedicated to Athanasius Kircher, the seventeenth-century science-magic explorer who devised

speaking statues, mechanical organs and the megaphone, studied acoustics and notated birdsong)
Paradoxically, unusually quiet music highlights the supposedly polluting sounds
of our environment. A recording studio is a quiet place until you attempt to
record sounds on the threshold of hearing. “The more you try and achieve this
mathematical impossibility, the more it recedes”, says Max Eastley, creator of
sound sculptures which can be audible but almost invisible or visible but almost
inaudible. He cites Edgar Allan Poe’s “The Tell-Tale Heart”, a story of
hypersensitive hearing, faint moans and creaking hinges in which the central
protaganist silences an old man
by murdering him, only to hear a beating sound, like a watch wrapped in cotton,
the
noise of the buried heart beating louder and louder in the acoustic space of his
guilt.
“You have to accept what’s there. To hear nothing, you have to be dead.”
Felix Hess assembled a sound installation of fifty robot “sound creatures” at
Xebec Hall, Kobe. Called Chirping and Silence, the installation was inspired by
the communication ecosystem of frog choruses. Since the sound was interrupted
by extraneous sounds, silence in the gallery was vital.
The following description appeared in A Document On Xebec: “We had
imagined that the foyer, on an afternoon when nothing was being held there, was
extremely tranquil, but not even one of them began to call out in response to
any of the others. So first we turned off the air conditioner in the room, and then
we turned off the one on the second floor. Then we turned off the refrigerator
and
the electric cooking equipment in the adjoining cafe, the power of the multi-
vision
in the foyer, and the power of the vending machine in a space about ten metres
away.
One by one we took away these continual noises, which together created a kind
of drone there … Hess was very interested in this and said things like, ‘From

now on maybe
I should do a performance of turning off sounds’. By presenting us with small,
delicate sounds, Hess’s work rapidly opened up our ears.”
“While composing and developing a piece, my passion for ‘inaudible’ sounds
is a guiding principle”, writes Thomas Köner, creator of threshold recordings
produced with gong
sound, contact microphones and studio processing. “I choose and build my
music from
elements which cannot be perceived by the normal ear. Perhaps these sounds that
are
so closely related to silence transport some of their origins into the music, like
a memory.” He talks about diffusion of light, sound sources that can’t be
localised,
which shift in focus. Another composer, Paul Schütze, wrote in The Wire
magazine about Köner’s fugitive music: “Recently listening to Thomas Köner’s
Permafrost, I found that by the end of the disc my sense of aural perspective was
so altered that the music seemed to continue in the sounds around me. Tube
trains passing beneath the building, distant boilers, the air conditioning, and the
elevator engines had
been pulled into concert. This effect lasted for about forty minutes during which
I could not get anything to return to its ‘normal position’ in the ‘mix’ of my flat.”
 
soundhouses
The leaf-hole cricket chews a pear-shaped hole near the centre of a leaf, rests its
forelegs on the surface of the leaf and scrapes its elytra, so increasing the
amplitude of its song. The mole cricket digs a loudspeaker-like burrow and then
sits inside,

rear end airwards, and stridulates, so increasing the amplitude of its song. The
howler monkey has greatly enlarged hyoid bones which form a resonating
chamber in its throat, so increasing the amplitude of its song.
 
boundary and surface
“Context is half the work”, artist John Latham once wrote, and as the terrifying
noise of an amplified electric saw ripping through books demonstrated to me
long before
I had come across this epigram, to give 50 per cent or more over to context is to
open music out into an immersive environment, a theatre of chaos and
complexity. Counterbalancing moves to rationalise music into finite, controllable
sequences of numbers (whether
digital, Pythagorean, Qabalistic or the serialism of Milton Babbitt and Pierre
Boulez), a large proportion of music made during the past hundred years has
implicitly or violently rejected absolutes: the absolutes of political or religious
dogma; the expedient absolutes of copyright; the beginning and end of a piece;
the distinction between composer and performer, performer and audience, music
and surroundings; the rejection of absolute boundaries and standards with which
one piece of music can be judged against another.
 
theatre of illusions
“The magician is assisted by a boy, to whom (in the dark) he speaks at a distance
through a tube formed of the windpipes of cranes, storks, or swans … A skull is
made
from the omentum of an ox, Etruscan wax, and gypsum and is connected with
the windpipe of a crane through which an assistant speaks. Then burning coals
and incense are put
around it, and the skull vanishes (by the wax melting).” Various magical tricks
from

nearly one thousand years ago, documented by Hippolytos in the Refutation of
all Heresies. Similar ventriloquial deceptions, primitive prophesies of the wired
city, undid the Wizard of Oz.
 
wave forms
In Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors, anthropologist Victor Turner wrote that
“man is both a structural and an anti-structural entity, who grows through anti-
structure and conserves through structure”. Open structures which begin as
revolutions often deteriorate into master plans designed to encompass the
universe and autocratically eradicate
all anomalous forms of music. So a return to listening, to hearing the world, is
the
most radical structure of all, since it is hard to envisage a master plan emerging
out of such an amorphous, uncontrollable method. This is not to say that
cosmological and social inferences cannot be drawn from observing the effects
of sound.
A Swiss scientist named Hans Jenny studied experimental periodicity for
many years, taking remarkable photographs of otherwise hidden effects of
vibration, sound, speech, even Mozart and Bach, on liquid masses and powders.
Collected in his book Cymatics (the study of wave forms), these enlarged images
of mercury drops, gases, silver salt, lycopodium powder and solidifying pastes
seem to show lunar deserts, Tantric
diagrams, bubbling viscous swamps and creatures from the notebooks of H.R.
Giger.
Hans Jenny regarded his work as part of a greater study, described as “a triadic
world model (the trinity of configuration, wave, power)”. Jenny, who died in
1972, was a
painter, musician, scientist and colour-light designer for the theatre. Inspired by
researchers such as Chladni, who vibrated sand with a violin bow in 1787 and

declared “the sound is painting”, he saw affinities between the rhythms created
by vibrating
liquids with sound and the rhythms of history, human relations, biorhythms, the
rhythms of poetry and music. “But it must be stressed”, he concluded, “that these
affinities
are not merely metaphors or analogies but involve the recognition of
homologous systems.”
Cymatics was dedicated to the memory of Rudolf Steiner, the Austrian
founder of the anthroposophic school of mystical thought, and Jenny’s work
turns up in a Steiner-published book
by Theodor Schwenk, Sensitive Chaos. Introducing his study of flow motion in
water, air and clouds, Schwenk makes suggestions for “a way on beyond pure
phenomenology, towards an ability to ‘read’ … Through watching water and air
with unprejudiced eyes, our way of thinking becomes changed and more
suited to the understanding of what is alive.” A 1960s precursor of the chaos
maths
fractals of the 1980s, Sensitive Chaos recalls the exhortations of John Cage,
Pauline Oliveros or Roland Kirk to listen (without prejudice). Even the book
jacket illustration is almost identical in its
blue colour and swirling forms to Richard Pedreguera’s cover art for Sun Ra’s
Cosmic Tones for Mental Therapy album, released on Ra’s El Saturn label at
around the same time. The only significant difference is that in Pedreguera’s
painting, a head – almost certainly Ra’s – is forming in the centre of this vortical
landscape.
Musicians can find material which matches their own discoveries in these
searches for universal harmony among vibrations and wave forms. But an art
based purely on
observing nature should make us look back to ancient China, when
Confucianists accused Taoists of immersing themselves in nature at the great
cost of ignoring the social.

There is a Rudolf Steiner school just around the corner from where I live. For a
time, paintings from the school were pinned around the walls of the park cafe –
delicate,
amorphous, controlled abstractions based on the wave forms documented by
Schwenk and
Jenny. Attractive at first viewing, these paintings began to seem oppressive to
me
in their rigid, formulaic exclusion of representation, drama, contrast, variety or
direct reference to anything more substantial than pastel-shaded aether.
 
theatre of the world
The year after Antonin Artaud wrote with delirious enthusiasm about the
Balinese dance-drama he had seen performed at the 1931 Colonial Exhibition in
Paris, he published the first manifesto of his Theatre of Cruelty. Artaud proposed
an inner theatre of dreams, fantasies and obsessions, activated by masks, lighting
like a “flight of fire arrows”, ritual
costumes, violent physical images of horrible crimes and famous personalities.
“It
must be aimed at the system by exact means”, he wrote in another manifesto, No
More Masterpieces, “the same means as the sympathetic music used by some
tribes which we admire on records but are incapable of originating ourselves.”
He also envisaged new musical
instruments, used as objects on stage and producing “an unbearably piercing
sound.”
Just as Sir Francis Bacon’s frequently quoted passage from his Utopian New
Atlantis of 1624 – “Wee have also SoundHouses, where wee practice and
demonstrate all Sounds and their Generation. Wee have Harmonies which you
have not, of Quarter-Sounds … Wee

represent and imitate all Articulate Sounds and Letters, and the Voices and Notes
of Beasts and Birds … Strange and Artificial Echoes … meanes to convey
Sounds in Trunks and Pipes, in strange Lines and Distances” – seems to us like a
prediction of music and telecommunications in the twentieth century,
so Artaud’s manifesto of cruelty sounds cruelly reminiscent of half the rock
videos
on MTV.
 
theatre of illusions II
Tokwit, female war dancer of the northwest coast Kwakiutl Indians, entered a
false-bottomed box during the winter ceremonials. She was apparently burned to
death. Making an exit into a previously dug trench, she would communicate
from the underworld through a
series of kelp (seaweed) speaking tunes.
 
the electronic forest
Media has turned the world into a theatre. Music reflects this environment (what
Jon Hassell has called the electronic forest) and, inevitably, many musicians
create work which is lost and helpless in the forest, musics from which they
disappear, leaving
a vacuum at the centre of empty formlessness. If I listen to the New Age end of
post-Fourth World/ambient composing – albums such as Steve Roach’s Dream-
time Returns or David Parsons’s Yatra – I hear a false-frontage polyvinyl
reproduction of nature and myth. The construction of this theatre is so
transparently thin that I feel I can look behind the image to
find the composer, inactive and supine, blissed out by his own airbrushed update
of
all those vulgar myths, carniverous plants, stinging bugs and natural disasters.

Research into albums that have featured Pipes and similar sounds have shown that it is the sound and the
music content that has sold the album, and it is NOT necessary to have a named artist playing the
instrument.
– PolyGram press release for Pan Pipe Moods, January 1995
Others create work which throws a stream of theoretical and ethical questions
(problems, some would say) into the mix. Sample and turntable specialists such
as John Oswald,
John Wall, Nicolas Collins, David Shea, Philip Jeck and Christian Marclay avoid
most
of the draconian copyright enforcements enacted on hip-hop and house samplers,
yet
by using the work of other musicians as raw material, they focus attention on
appropriation (or plunderphonics, as John Oswald has called it) as a, or the,
central issue of the process. Representatives for Michael Jackson and Sony
Records were incensed by Oswald’s reassembly of Jackson’s “Bad” and his use
of Jackson’s image (collaged on to a naked female body) for the cover of
Plunderphonic, his not-for-sale CD of reconfigured Stravinsky, James Brown,
The Beatles, Dolly Parton, Glenn Gould, Metallica, 101 Strings, etc. Oswald
lives in Toronto, so Jackson’s people exerted pressure on the Canadian
Recording Industry Association, which in turn compelled Oswald to give up all
remaining copies of his album to be physically crushed.
Sampling is the most extreme contemporary example of a music which
absorbs into itself the music which surrounds it. I first met Oswald in New York
City in 1979, having
travelled there with improvisers Steve Beresford and Nigel Coombes. Without
theorising it beforehand, Beresford, Coombes and I were playing music that
jumped across stylistic boundaries with little regard for synchronicity or “good
taste” – the kind of instant jump-cut improvising that some critics would call
post-modern. In New York we met
and played with other musicians who felt exactly the same way: Oswald, John
Zorn,
Eugene Chadbourne, Polly Bradfield, Charles K. Noyes, Bob Ostertag and
Toshinori Kondo among them. Eugene Chadbourne, for example, had formed a

band which combined country
music (which he loved) with manic free improvisation. Zorn has explained it as a
generational thing of growing up with a diverse record collection. As a teenager
he began taking the effects he liked from Elliot Carter or Charles Ives pieces and
slotting them into his own compositions. “It was almost like a William
Burroughs cut-up technique”, he said to me in 1988. “I’m basically a thief.
There’s no hierarchy, where if you listen to classical music you do it drinking
champagne and if you listen to
blues it’s with a shot of whisky in a dirty little bar. That kind of attitude – that
one is dirty and the other is clean – is ridiculous.”
In New York, Oswald drank beer with bourbon chasers. Although he played
slippery alto saxophone and danced, his mind was on fantasy reconstructions of
gender and identity
through technological manipulation. As early as 1975, he had snipped, restitched
and
collaged Led Zeppelin with a crazed radio preacher into a prophetic piece called
“Power”.
During a visit to London to promote his plunderphonic reconstruction of the
Grateful
Dead’s “Dark Star” on Grayfolded, we got together to talk about the issues
raised by sampling. Sampling is neither a technically nor an ideologically
homogenous process. Some composers – John Wall,
for example – manipulate CD-sourced raw material in a digital sampler to create
an
integral aesthetic that is both referential and utterly unfamiliar; others – Christian
Marclay and Philip Jeck – overlay records by other artists, exploiting the iconic
cultural significance and technical idiosyncracies of vinyl.

For Oswald, there are many conceptual parameters beneath the obvious issue
of copyright theft. “I was really interested in that idea of legitimate quotation,
which isn’t
built into the system”, he says. “You don’t have quote marks in musical notation
or
in recordings, for that matter. But you can annotate your sources. I tend to call
the portions of things that I use Electro-quotations. The thing that’s perhaps
perverse in the analogy with literature is that I’m very rarely just quoting.
Although I tend
not to filter or distort the sound, I transform it so much in time that it’s not just
free quotation. It’s some sort of elaboration. It’s like the commentary is built in.
What you usually get in journalism or literature is that the quotation doesn’t
usually represent the whole essay. It’s something that’s used as a trigger point for
a commentary or elaboration.
In music, I think you can do those kind of things simultaneously. You can have
all
sorts of things happening where the quotation is recognisable as itself, even
though
it’s been transformed in some way. So that’s when you get into this Electro-
quotation thing, when the source is still familiar. It’s Electro-quotation if you’re
making
an electronic quote of something and it’s Plunderphonics if you’re screwing
around
with that quote.”
Sampling outrages those who believe in the sanctity of authorship and
ownership. But, at the opposite extreme, musics which attempt to make a
nostalgic, exaggerated return to the nineteenth century before Debussy, the huge
symphonic expressions of the composer as a single god, at the centre of creation
and in control of all his works, can only

seem ludicrous at a time when computers think faster, clone replications at will
and
spread information over vast distances in intricate, often unidentifiable webs. In
1975, a colleague of mine – Jeffery Shaw, now a virtual artist (or artist of
virtuality, perhaps) – was commissioned to provide Rick Wakeman with
inflatable castle turrets
for his extravaganza, Myths and Legends of King Arthur, staged on ice at
Wembley. He passed me a free ticket and I can still recall my fascinated horror,
watching blade-footed damsels and unsteady knights carrying cardboard swords
circle the transported, caped Wakeman as he executed scalar flights from top to
bottom of the banked keyboards at which he – Liberace and Superman – was the
epicentre. Wakeman played the fool in this milieu, of course, but many of his
colleagues in progressive
rock and jazz rock believed in the regressive philosophies of command-centre
grandiosity, replete with lengthy solos, meaningless time-signature changes,
conspicuous 
dexterity, 
narrative 
development 
and 
the 
mystico-sexual
inevitability of symphonic climax.
The progressive ethos of the genius conducting from the mountaintop also lies
at the heart of much New Age music. Kitaro, for example, was originally
influenced by English progressive rock and the German synthesiser music of
1970s bands such as Tangerine Dream. Like most New Age musicians, he
objects to the term, though not as strongly as some European exponents and
functionaries of the genre, such as Hugo Faas, the German manager of Swiss
New
Age harpist Andreas Vollenweider. “New Age sounds not good translated into
German”,
Fass told me. “It sounds like the fascists.” Kitaro once believed that the
atmosphere of music should be created through the exclusive use of beautiful
sounds. Born into
a small farming community in central Japan, he played in Tokyo-based bands
until sick of Spinal Tap-style internal strife. After going solo, he transformed so-

called “classic rock”
into a kind of cosmic muzak, full of pomp, melodrama and titles such as “In the
Beginning”
and “The New Dawn”. In 1990, he told me that he was building a recording
studio in
America’s Rocky Mountains to escape from the noise and crowds of Japan. “I
don’t want to be a business”, he claimed. “I can spend time in a deeper place. I
want to meditate for a whole year and then after that I can compose music.”
Progressive rock drew from programme music, a type of composing which
portrays specific scenes or events. In a sense, Debussy could be described as a
programme composer,
yet like the paintings of Turner, his descriptiveness tends to dissolve the subject,
implying the non-fixity that is more characteristic of the twentieth century.
Programme music was the precursor of synthetic electronic ambience – the
Environments series of albums, for example, which were designed to insinuate
tranquil rural moods into the stress zones of indoor urban life. Among the most
famous, distinguished and
enduringly popular, not to say overworked, examples of programme music are
Mendelssohn’s Fingal’s Cave, Beethoven’s Pastoral Symphony, Vaughan
Williams’s The Lark Ascending, Sibelius’s Finlandia and Richard Strauss’s Also
sprach Zarathustra. Strauss’s “astonishing orchestral virtuosity tempted him to a
parade of realism that in its extreme form led to bathos” chides Leslie Orrey,
author of Programme Music. Bathos was mistaken for profundity by the likes of
Emerson, Lake and Palmer and even now, the most unlikely pop, rock or
swingbeat star will signal the big entry with dry ice, retina-blistering white light
and the blasting fanfares of Also sprach Zarathustra (in all probability believing
it to have been written by a film composer such as John Williams for 2001: A
Space Odyssey).
 
sound design

Despite all these caveats, the process of composing by imagining, then depicting,
inner landscapes and scenarios which remain private to the composer can create
striking results. “It’s something I do”, admits Paul Schütze, once an Australian-
based soundtrack composer for cinema, now the London-based creator of
albums such as Apart, The Surgery of Touch, The Rapture of Metals and New
Maps of Hell. “But it’s hard to know whether I do that because I spent so long
doing film or whether I gravitated to film because I do that first. Interestingly, I
think the reason I
stopped doing film is because, even though film potentially facilitates the total
design of a pan-aural event by including musical and non-musical sound, it
doesn’t
really take advantage of that. With the few exceptions that we all are acutely
aware
of, like Alan Splet’s work with David Lynch, Walter Murch’s work with Coppola
and
Scorsese, and a very few other individual isolated examples such as the Coen
brothers’
films like Blood Simple and The Hudsucker Proxy, film doesn’t allow this. It’s
logical, because film is a massively expensive medium.”
But cinema is a theatre of exaggeration in which every minute sound we hear
is foregrounded with hallucinogenic clarity: the harsh scrape of a beard as Henry
Fonda is shaved
or the interplay between tiny sound events and Ennio Morricone’s music scores
in Sergio Leone’s spaghetti westerns; the hugely amplified noise of kicks,
punches, even the
passage of arms through the air in Chinese martial arts film; the tense creak of
boat timbers, the squish of a knife into flesh, the ricochet of bullets off rocks in
countless westerns. “There’s a wonderful story about Taxi Driver”, says Schütze.
“I think it was the first and only film where, when the censors saw the film, the
only requirement they had in order to pass it for a screening certificate was a
sound cut. What completely freaked them out was the fact that Walter Murch

had taken the idea of the gun, which
is a tremendously symbolic and disturbing thing, and he put cannon fire
underneath
the gunshots. So these gunshots are not a pop; these gunshots are like your lungs
are blown out through the back of the theatre, which is probably what it would
feel
like if you were holding the gun. I think the censors realised that this was
subjective sound from the character’s perspective. You were feeling the recoil
because you were
holding the gun, therefore you were empathising with Travis Bickle which is a
deeply
disturbing thing to realise you’re doing. I think this is a controversial thing to
say, because the music score [by Bernard Herrmann] is so highly regarded, but I
think it’s almost expendable. The sound that was there is so powerful that if you
took the
music score away you would actually make the film more disturbing, not less.
“With a lot of scores, music scores interpose themselves between the visceral
quality of the film and the audience. Eraserhead is a brilliant example of running
a film on abstract sound design. What Alan Splet did for films, he took abstract
‘space’ music – the whole idea that anything abstract was airborne – and he
grounded it, rubbed its face in the wet cement and said, ‘Look, this is where you
are, this is what you know about, this is really what scares you.
This is your reality. It’s terrifying and it’s incredibly beautiful at the same time.’
So suddenly, that film gave a voice to the whole industrial, land-grounded, earth-
ambient genre – everyone from Zoviet France, to Coil, to Lustmord. There are
hundreds of them and it also provided the backdrop from a lot of industrial bands
like Front 242 and
Hoodlum Priest. I think you’d be hard-pressed to find a fully developed example

of
this that predated that film. I could be completely wrong on this and have my
theory
blown out of the water.”
Having grown up in a cinematic environment, in which film’s hyperreal
theatre of sound animates everyday noise outside the cinema, some musicians
are influenced into a prophetic form of composing which is not so much
soundtrack for an imaginary film as sound design for an imaginary life.
“I think there’s a very strong sense in a lot of contemporary music that the
formal
musical elements are the legitimate bones of the composition and the rest of it is
decoration or icing or bridge passages”, Schütze concludes. “It’s fairly rare to
hear it amalgamated in such a way as one isn’t given precedence over the other,
aside from the fact that a listener’s ear will give precedence to something that is
more structurally coherent, whatever that means. So I actually think the real
arena for this is outside film.”
 

13
ocean of sound
David Lynch; John Lilly; Kate Bush; David Sylvian; shamanism; ambient;
information ocean
“I feel a little bit strange,” says David Lynch. Well, what else? We are sitting in a
large, L-shaped room in his home. One wall, vast as a drive-in movie screen, is
glass; behind it lies the vegetal mystery and darkness of the Hollywood Hills at
night. Lynch lost his dog in this darkness, eaten by coyotes, he maintains. The
room echoes with our voices and explosive snaps from a log fire, spearing the
cold air, ricocheting off the walls and ceiling. Three items of 1950s furniture
occupy the broad expanse of floor, megalithic in their hapless, solitary
arrangement. Lynch may well have deliberately placed these few chairs at
shouting distance from each other in order to make relaxation and intimacy as
difficult as possible.
Although Twin Peaks, designed by Lynch and writer Mark Frost for ABC-TV,
degenerated into aimlessness, the original pilot contained moments of genuine
strangeness, particularly the music and the red-curtain ending. The otherworldly
quality of this latter scene came partly from the fact that it was shot in reverse.
“The whole thing was shot backwards”, says Lynch. “You start at the end and
work to the beginning. All the camera moves, therefore, are backwards. All their
walking is backwards and all their talking is backwards but the whole idea of it,
of course, is that it will not and it should not look exactly realistic but it should
look somewhat realistic. We had to rehearse all that. There were just two actors
and they had to learn their lines backwards. They had their lines printed on a
tape backwards and they’d just listen over and over to it. Some sounds
backwards are just impossible to duplicate. I wanted to do more of this thing –
it’s really a nifty look and feel. The timing is funny.”
This nifty mood, reminiscent of ectoplasmic spiritualist seances, carried over
into the music, which was sung by Julee Cruise and created by Angelo
Badalamenti with Lynch writing lyrics. Lynch sent Badalamenti a column of
forty words, written on an envelope. Badalamenti recalls this envelope when I
talk to him on the telephone. “He sent me a lyric called ‘Mysteries of Love’”,
says Badalamenti. “It was like six lines of poetry. I called him and asked him,

‘What do you want me to do with this? What kind of music?’ He said, ‘Make it
like the waves of the ocean. Make the music like a beautiful wind and like the
song chanting through time. And cosmic.’ So I said, ‘Oh, I’m glad you told
me’.” This fruitful partnership went on to produce performance pieces, television
commercials and an album – Floating Into the Night. If Chet Baker had sung
lyrics over Nino Rota orchestrations of Santo and Johnny’s “Sleepwalk” and The
Chantays’ “Pipeline” then the results might have sounded similar to Julee
Cruise’s oceanic crooning.
the mediumship of the tape recorder
Dr Konstantin Raudive, once a student of Carl Jung and a former professor of
psychology at the Universities of Uppsala and Riga, believed that a tape recorder
left running in record mode in a quiet room can capture the voices of the dead.
This phenomenon, if it exists, was prophesied by Thomas Edison, inventor of the
phonograph, but discovered by a musician and film producer named Friedrich
Jürgenson at the end of the 1950s. Taking a tape recorder out to the Swedish
countryside to record birdsong, he also picked up faint conversations which,
coincidentally or not, were discussions of nocturnal bird vocalisations. Jürgenson
published a book, Voices From the Universe, which alerted parapsychologists. In
1971, Pye Records (the same company that released many important pop and
R&B records in the 1960s) participated in experiments aimed at testing the
theory. During an eighteen-minute recording, the engineer heard nothing over his
headphones, although the VU meter indicated constant signals. At the playback,
those present heard over two hundred “voices”. These “psychophonic” voices
sound like swarms of aural garbage, the aether talk of subliminal toadfish
captured in the global babble of dead city radio transmissions that fills our so-
called silence. Perhaps they are spirits trying to tell us something. But what?
immersion
Postmodern humans swim in a third transparent medium now materialising. Every fact that can be digitized,
is.
– Kevin Kelly, Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines
Oceans and islands. Two of the most common metaphorical images at the end of
the millennium. Islamic activists in Iran seek to ban satellite dishes, alarmed by
floods of Western decadence flowing in on a sea of electronic cultural
imperialism. John Perry Barlow, cyberspace guru and Grateful Dead lyricist,
describes the emergent electronic connectedness as an ocean of information.
On our watery planet, we return to the sea for a diagnosis of our current

condition. Submersion into deep and mysterious pools represents an intensely
romantic desire for dispersion into nature, the unconscious, the womb, the
chaotic stuff of which life is made. As a genteel, chlorine-scented expression of
this primordial longing, the popularity of swimming as recreation is a relatively
modern obsession. “Ever since George III had set the mood by swimming off
Weymouth to the accompaniment of a chamber orchestra”, writes Charles
Sprawson in Haunts of the Black Masseur, “a string of resorts had grown up
along the coasts of England.” Now a replica of his bathing machine sits in
Weymouth’s Sealife Centre, and in the buildings which surround it, rays and
sharks glide and wheel in their tanks to soundtrack loops of New Age music,
divorced from the rhythms of the sea, out of time.
Kings and queens have always had their ambient music: the symbol of
ultimate power and wealth, a soundtrack orchestra to smooth transitional
moments, ease sleep and digestion, mollify the gods of disorder, dramatise rites
and pomp. This was their own personal Muzak system and sleeping pill
prescription. But with the advent of the Walkman, the Discman, the DATman,
the car radio, tape and CD player, we have all become monarchs, at least in the
sense that we can cut ourselves off from our surroundings, or, as Akio Morita
envisaged when he co-designed the Sony Walkman, our families. The image of
bathing in sound is a recurrent theme of the past hundred years: Debussy’s
Images and Ravel’s Jeux d’eau ripple around the listener; Arnold Schoenberg’s
The Changing Chord–Summer Morning By a Lake–Colours wraps us in
flickering submarine light; György Ligeti’s Atmosphères envelops us in steam;
Morton Feldman’s Durations drips down in a slowly configuring tatoo of sonic
colours; Tōru Takemitsu’s film scores bathe us in the shadow world of Jun’ichirō
Tanizaki; Gavin Bryars’s The Sinking of the Titanic sinks us into the abyss of
fading echoes, rusting treasures and bloated corpses.
In a more commercial sphere, liquid musics that fall somewhere between
experiment and easy listening teeter on the edge of formless ambience: Les
Baxter’s “Sunken City”; My Bloody Valentine’s “Loomer”; Reload’s whale
sounds and samples from The Deep on A Collection of Short Stories; Cocteau
Twins’ Echoes In a Shallow Bay EP; Holger Czukay’s “Cool In the Pool”; The
Beach Boys’ “Cool, Cool Water”, which moves from cool finger-snapping surf,
pool and suntan culture into a swirling, glossolalic drowning section, created for
Smile at a time when Brian Wilson was descending into a deep dark trench of
psychedelic incapacity and Mike Love was fasting and meditating with such
fervour that he began to believe that he might be able to talk to the birds. In fact,
of all the Beach Boys, the one who came closest to the oceanic was Dennis
Wilson, whose solo album – Pacific Ocean Blue – hovered compellingly

between surfer’s ecstasy, nature worship and alcoholic sentimentality. Six years
after that album, Dennis Wilson drowned in Marina Del Ray, his diving
capabilities blunted by alcohol, Valium and cocaine. After special dispensation
from President Ronald Reagan, he was buried in the Pacific.
In 1993, I found myself flat on my back in the total darkness of a floatation
tank, listening to ambient techno tracks by The Black Dog, B12, Derrick May,
Aphex Twin and The Orb. This promotional gimmick, dreamed up by the record
company as a way of making a compilation album into a news story, underlined
other connections between ambient music and floatation. Some years earlier, I
had written a story about a floatation centre in South London called Lux
Aeterna, named after the Ligeti piece that features in the soundtrack of Stanley
Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey. Aimed at the informed yuppie, perhaps a
person not unlike the Mickey Rourke character in 9½ Weeks with his Nakamichi
tape deck and ambient musical backdrops, this now defunct establishment
played Brian Eno albums in the background as you waited for your float sitting
on Tom Dixon chairs. And in Tokyo in 1993, a poster advertised an event
organised by Eden In the Sky Code: 05/Space Lab Yellow, called Respect To
John Lilly. “Ambient Underground Movement – party for next generation”, it
promised, with a scheduled seminar and workshop with John Lilly from 20:00 to
21:00 and then ambient dance with DJ Mooky, interactive VJ Sato and space
direction by LF-Research.
More than anybody, John Lilly forged links between dolphin intelligence,
sensory deprivation, immersion and psychedelics that have resurfaced in the
culture which surrounds ambient music. He has been caricatured in two films,
The Day of the Dolphin and Altered States. With his schemes for reprogramming
the human biocomputer, Lilly has moved from being the scientific equivalent of
Dr Doolittle to being the unscientific equivalent of Dr Spock – learning to
communicate with dolphins, then immersing himself for extended periods in
sensory deprivation tanks under the influence of powerful hallucinogenics and
finally becoming a guru for the rave New Age. A monologue by Lilly, excerpted
from his book The Centre of the Cyclone, is accompanied by the ambient
electronic music of Ryoji Ikeda and Yoshio Ojima on a Japanese CD entitled
Silence. And on a Danish CD compilation of ambient, entitled Boredom Is Deep
and Mysterious, Opiate have a track called “John Lilly In Loop”.
Immersion is one of the key words of the late twentieth century. Bass is
immersive, echoes are immersive, noise is immersive. With massive volume and
density, categories barely matter: Neil Young or Cocteau Twins heard live, Philip
Glass in his early days, Slayer, Suicide, Phill Niblock, Brian Jones’s post-

production ultra-phasing of Joujouka’s trance musicians, The Velvet
Underground’s “I Heard Her Call My Name”, Saw Throat’s Inde$troy, “And The
Gods Made Love” by Jimi Hendrix, the Burundi drummers, Peter Brötzmann’s
Machine Gun, a Jah Shaka dub session, Eric B. & Rakim heard live. Music is
felt at its vibrational level, permeating every cell, shaking every bone, derailing
the conscious, analytical mind.
Opiates, floating free (as The Byrds sang in “Dolphin’s Smile”), vibrational
bliss. Evident here is a nostalgia, or a yearning, to float free in a liquid world of
non-linear 
time, 
heightened 
sense 
perceptions 
and 
infinitely 
subtle
communications, as opposed to the everyday world of divided time, building
blocks, sequential language and objectification which we must negotiate with
our awkward, upright, two-legged stance. Psychology returns us inevitably to
our foetal condition, sleeping gently in the womb, or to a pre-mobile infant state
when the world is colour, sound, smell and touch. But does it end there? After
ten years of studying dolphin communication in the Virgin Islands and Hawaii,
Gregory Bateson, anthropologist, psychologist and cyberneticist, wrote the
following passage in a 1966 essay published in Steps To An Ecology of Mind: “I
personally do not believe that the dolphins have anything that a human linguist
would call a ‘Language’. I do not think that any animals without hands would be
stupid enough to arrive at so outlandish a mode of communication. To use a
syntax and category system appropriate for a discussion of things that can be
handled, while really discussing the patterns and contingencies of relations, is
fantastic.”
For anybody who uses a computer, things that can be handled begin to vanish
from the world, increasingly represented by 2-D icons on a screen. The panic is
on. Hard copy is disappearing. All sound – acoustic or electronic – can be
manipulated in the digital domain. Books are disappearing. Packaging and paper
are said to be disappearing (though no sign of that yet). If you live in the Western
world, then industrial-era hard labour appears to be disappearing (except for a
vague awareness of distant deadening toil taking place in factories dedicated to
new technology manufacture). At Xebec Hall in Kobe, I discover a paper
entitled “The Future Form of Visual Art” written by Toshiharu Itō. “In contrast
to human beings who have invented tools to make things and in doing so
invented a culture,” he writes, “whales and dolphins may have established a
culture without objects, consisting only of communication. More over, their
cultural structure may have a property which is sympathetic to the new media
society which has begun to surround us. This could be indicating the opening of
a new civilisation that is totally different to the conventional form. Naturally,
such a form would change the significance of art itself. An information network

is permeating into our daily life environment and new direct linkage media like
holophonics and phosphotron are advancing to the next stage of development. In
one sense, mankind which is placed in such an informational environment can be
compared with the dolphins or whales in a new kind of sea.”
a wicked voice
Singer, thing of evil, stupid and wicked slave of the voice, of that instrument which was not invented by the
human intellect, but begotten of the body, and which, instead of moving the soul, merely stirs up the dregs
of our nature! For what is the voice but the Beast calling, awakening that other Beast which all great art has
sought to chain up, as the archangel chains up, in old pictures, the demon with his woman’s face.
– Vernon Lee, “A Wicked Voice”, in Supernatural Tales
And how does the wicked body, the human voice, survive in the information
sea? Kate Bush serves me tea and toast in a private room of a London pub. I had
always felt that her music was five years behind public taste, definitely a long
way from my taste, but, in retrospect, The Dreaming album of 1982 anticipated
all that would blossom into credibility in the 1990s: didgeridoos, bullroarers,
imitations of animal vocalisations, simulations of native Australian clapstick
rhythms, Indian vocalised drum rhythms, jazz bass lines, passages of free
improvisation accompanied by insect sounds, Irish and Greek folk instruments
merged with digital technology and sampled into new alchemical compounds.
dream-text
From scattered parts of the world are also found instances of ceremonies, dances and songs which appear to
originate in the sought or unsought dreams and visions of primitive peoples.
– J. Steward Lincoln, The Dream in Primitive Cultures
As I have suggested before, recording is a dream-text, a vision of possible
worlds, with the studio (despite the mundane knobs and faders, the racks of
technology, the bland carpets and utility chairs, the teak and vinyl) as the
otherworld. I put this idea to Kate Bush. “I think that all art deals with
dreamworlds,” she responds, “because I think most of it is creating illusion. It’s
creating an illusion to affect someone in a specific way, which is to reach out to
people. Technology should be there to make things easier to translate things on
to tape, but it’s not the soul of the music. The human element – that’s the soul. I
think that computers, particularly, could lead us into a completely new age of
spiritualism. This hi-tech world can encourage and embrace very old music.
Maybe computers are going to teach us a tremendous amount about ourselves
and the planet, because in some ways it’s the first objective viewpoint we’ll be
taking that has a very high intelligence. I think it could be fantastically exciting

if we put the combination of soul and computers together.”
In Celtic mythology, the ninth wave was a boundary, a divide between
homeland and alien worlds. Beyond the ninth wave was exile. Hounds of Love,
Kate Bush’s 1985 album, was two releases in one. The first side had its hit
singles – “Cloudbursting”, “Running Up That Hill”, “Hounds of Love”; the
second side was “The Ninth Wave”, with its seven reflections on drowning,
floating on the sea or drifting in space, witch trials, exile, emergence and rebirth.
The cover photographs emphasised this schizophrenia. On the front, Kate is the
confident, sensual, “public” performer – pouting red mouth, pink skin against
violet fabric, framed by dark red hair, bedded by two sleek, soft, honeycoated
gundogs. On the back, she appears in monochrome, either drowning face-up or
emerging from water, her arms draped with seaweed, her eyes averted from the
public’s (voyeur) gaze. Also on the back cover was an extract from one of Alfred
Tennyson’s romantic eulogies for the Celtic hero of British legend, King Arthur:
Wave after wave, each mightier than the last,
’Til last, a ninth one, gathering half the deep
And full of voices, slowly rose and plunged
Roaring, and all the wave was in a flame.
Oceanic, incandescent, ecstatic. Sex and pagan spirit. Birth and death.
“Although there’s a lot of ethnic music that I find really moving,” she says,
“there’s something about Celtic music that really does touch me. The sound of
Irish pipes – it’s the sound of elation. It’s like a big wave. I do get this very
oceanic vision. Big waves rolling in.”
A correlation between ocean, islands, birds, music and the unconscious can be
found in Celtic myths dating back to before the ninth century. In The Voyage of
Maildun, the travellers hear a murmuring confusion of voices at a distance.
Following the sound, they eventually come to an island – the Isle of Speaking
Birds – where huge numbers of brown, black and speckled birds are shouting
and speaking in human tongues. In other stories there are islands of dazzlingly
colourful birds, said to be the souls of holy men, singing fairy music, and
demonic swans which chase and torment flocks of screaming birds, the souls of
people who have committed crimes. In Pagan Celtic Britain, Anne Ross makes
reference to birds whose magical music sends people to sleep so that lovers can
enjoy better sex; shrieking ravens that emerge from the sea; death coming as a
screaming black nocturnal bird or a bird without wings or feathers; raven
goddesses which could prophesy; children who transmute into swans, blessed
with the gift of singing so beautifully that those who hear their bird music fall
into deep sleep.

Ever since post-acid-house techno-paganism took hold as a lifestyle option,
shamanism has been invoked in a routine way, as if swallowing Ecstasy and
dancing all night to techno records, let alone taking a weekend course in
shamanic journeying, can transform the beleaguered, profane urban body into a
shamanic state overnight. At a Wire magazine seminar on techno, held at
London’s ICA in 1993, a memorable exchange took place between Fraser Clark,
self-proclaimed pro-psychedelic guru of the zippie (Zen-inspired professional
pagan) movement and Derrick May, guru (self-proclaimed and otherwise) to all
disciples of Detroit techno. According to Clark, rave culture (which he claims to
have invented) brought the youth of Britain closer to the earth. All-night dancing
in the open air was shamanic, he insisted. More than that, it was African. “If
that’s African dancing,” May responded, “then my ancestors needed their asses
kicked.” Without wishing to join the bootcamp of fundamentalist animal-skin
shamanic academics, I have serious doubts about automatic assumptions that the
kind of free-floating ecstatic states induced by drugs, dancing and probable
dehydration are identical to shamanism’s cosmologically centred spirit journeys.
In 1994, I was commissioned to write database material on shamanism and
associated subjects for The Shamen’s CD-i/CD-ROM. I spoke with psychedelic
plant guru Terence McKenna and The Shamen’s Colin Angus at the time that
The Shamen released “Re-evolution”, an ambient single featuring McKenna’s
monologue on shamanism, the archaic revival and plant hallucinogens. After
decades of boiling up infusions of psychotropic leaves and fungi, McKenna had
become a born-again techno freak. “You require electronic instruments to invoke
and duplicate the kinds of acoustical phenomena you encounter on
psychedelics”, he maintained (a false distinction, I think, unless he includes
software and digital sampling in his definition of “instruments”). “The
instruments are being used to invoke a nature that has almost slipped from our
cognition. We don’t live in that kind of nature. To us, nature is a park. Real
nature is very much like the ambience of dense electronic music.”
But a rock-shaman convergence goes back further. In 1988 I was asked to
write an essay for David Sylvian’s In Praise of Shamans world tour. In
conversations, Sylvian made a number of statements which suggested the
method at the root of his music’s openness. Fishing in the dark was one of them.
“I think one of the strongest qualities I have is my ability to create atmospheres”,
he said in one of these discussions. “I think that music has to enable the listeners
to reflect upon themselves. I want my imagination to be given free rein and not
be dictated to by the music. I try not to dictate with music.” So the audience is
half the work, perhaps part of the reason why Sylvian has such an obsessively
devoted fan base. Mystery tantalises the listener into believing that there are

answers somewhere at the end of the mysterious tunnel. With records such as
“Ghosts”, Brilliant Trees, Flux + Mutability and In Praise of Shamans, Sylvian
found ways to deconstruct the pop song into relatively open works, semi-
collectively created by musicians drawn from some of the key areas of music
making of the past twenty-five years – from ECM-style jazz improvising, from
Can and Azimuth, from ambient, electronic and Fourth World. Listed, the names
are revealing: Holger Czukay, Markus Stockhausen, Jaki Liebezeit, Danny
Thompson, B.J. Cole, Ryuichi Sakamoto, Kenny Wheeler, Bill Nelson, John
Taylor, Frank Perry, Mark Isham, Jon Hassell, Robert Fripp, Percy Jones and
members of Japan. It was as if Sylvian wanted to draw into himself all the
potentials suggested by these musicians and reforge them in his own image.
Shamanistic cosmologies are strikingly uniform. There is the sky, or heaven; the
earth, on which ordinary mortals live; and the underworld, the place of the dead.
Shamans can travel through all these zones, though the journeying is not
necessarily pleasant or easy. Studies of shamanism document physical illness,
psychosis, visions of dismemberment, being eaten and regurgitated by spirits,
trial by fire, drowning, mutilation, mystical death and rebirth. Shamans, as
portrayed by Oliver Stone, may gaze serenely into the middle distance as rock
stars commune with the Dionysian mysteries of beer, but archive photographs
and films of shamans from Siberia, Mongolia and Amazonas show grizzled,
haunted characters, lined with knowledge after travelling to hell and back.
Ambient music is regarded, sometimes with comic militancy, as an escape from
the unpleasant realities of raw emotion, psychological crisis, body mess and
political discontent, but if ambient means only white-light bliss, then the
musicians are mere functionaries, slaves to cool the brows of overheated urban
info-warriors, rather than shamans who travel to gruesome corpselands in order
to mug demons for wisdom.
This demand that sound should bow to escapist needs is a rejection of the
potential implicit in music’s unfolding permeability over the past hundred years.
Music – fluid, quick, ethereal, outreaching, time-based, erotic and mathematical,
immersive and intangible, rational and unconscious, ambient and solid – has
anticipated the aether talk of the information ocean.
memory
Sitting quietly in never-never land, I am listening to summer fleas hibernating on my small female cat …
– London, 1995

bibliography
Archer, Mildred, Tippoo’s Tiger, Victoria & Albert Museum, London, 1959.
Artaud, Antonin, Collected Works Volume 4, Calder & Boyars, London, 1974.
Attali, Jacques, Noise: The Political Economy of Music, Manchester University
Press, Manchester, 1985.
Bailey, Derek, Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice In Music, The British
Library, London, 1992.
Ballard, J.G., Vermilion Sands, Carroll & Graf, New York, 1988.
Barthes, Roland, Mythologies, Jonathan Cape, London, 1972.
Bateson, Gregory, Steps To An Ecology of Mind, Chandler, San Francisco, 1973;
Paladin, London, 1973.
Bharati, Agehananda (ed.), The Realm of the Extra-Human: Agents and
Audiences, Mouton, The Hague, 1976.
Budge, E.A. Wallis, The Book of the Dead, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London,
1974.
Cage, John, Silence, Marion Boyars, London, 1978.
Canto, Christophe and Faliu, Odile, The History of the Future: Images of the
21st Century, Flammarion, Paris, 1993.
Carr, Ian, Miles Davis, Paladin, London, 1984.
Chagnon, Napoleon A., Yanomamö: The Fierce People, Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, USA, 1968.
Charbonnier, Georges, Entretiens avec Edgard Varèse, Éditions Pierre Belfond,
Paris, 1970.
Clifford, James, The Predicament of Culture, Harvard University Press, 1988.
Cohn, Norman, The Pursuit of the Millennium, Paladin, London, 1970.
Conrad, Joseph, Almayer’s Folly, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992.
———, Heart of Darkness, Penguin, London, 1972.
Davis, Miles, with Troupe, Quincy, Miles: The Autobiography, Simon &
Schuster, New York, 1989.
DeLillo, Don, White Noise, Picador, London, 1985.
Dick, Philip K., We Can Build You, Daw Books, USA, 1972.
Donà, Claudia, “Invisible Design”, in Design After Modernism: Beyond the
Object, ed. John Thackera, Thames and Hudson, London, 1988.
Drosnin, Michael, Citizen Hughes, Arrow, London, 1986.

Eco, Umberto, A Theory of Semiotics, Indiana University Press, Bloomington,
1976.
———, Faith In Fakes, Secker & Warburg, London, 1986.
———, The Open Work, Hutchinson Radius, London, 1989.
Eliade, Mircea, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1964.
Fagg, William, The Raffles Gamelan: A Historical Note, The British Museum,
London, 1970.
Flaubert, Gustave, The Temptation of Saint Anthony, Secker & Warburg,
London, 1980.
Fletcher, Ian (ed.), Decadence and the 1890s, Edward Arnold, London, 1979.
Flint, R.W. (ed.), Marinetti: Selected Writings, Secker & Warburg, London,
1972.
Fowler, Gene and Crawford, Bill, Border Radio, Texas Monthly Press, 1987.
Geary, Christraud M., “Slit Gongs In the Cameroon: Sights and Sounds of
Beauty and Power”, in Brincard, Marie-Thérèse, Sounding Forms: African
Musical Instruments, The American Federation of Arts, New York, 1989.
Gérardin, Lucien, Bionics, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1968.
Gheerbrant, Alain, The Impossible Adventure, Victor Gollancz, London, 1955.
Gibson, William, Neuromancer, Victor Gollancz, London, 1984.
Godwin, Jocelyn, Arktos: The Polar Myth in Science, Symbolism and Nazi
Survival, Thames and Hudson, London, 1993.
———, Athanasius Kircher, Thames and Hudson, London, 1979.
———, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth, Thames and Hudson, London, 1987.
Goldberg, RoseLee, Performance: Live Art 1909 to the Present, Thames and
Hudson, London, 1979.
Goldrosen, John J., Buddy Holly, Charisma Books, London, 1993.
Green, Celia and MeCreery, Charles, Lucid Dreaming: The Paradox of
Consciousness During Sleep, Routledge, London, 1994.
Greenfield, Karl Taro, Speed Tribes, Box Tree, London, 1994.
Gregory, Lady, A Book of Saints and Wonders, Colin Smythe, Gerrards Cross,
1971.
Griffin, Donald R., Listening In the Dark, Dover, New York, 1974.
Harding, James, Erik Satie, Secker & Warburg, London, 1975.
Harich-Schneider, Eta, A History of Japanese Music, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1973.
Hardy, Thomas, The Mayor of Casterbridge, Oxford University Press, Oxford,

1987.
Heath, Chris, Pet Shop Boys versus America, Viking, London, 1993.
Helmholtz, Hermann, On the Sensations of Tone, Dover, New York, 1954.
Hillman, James and Ventura, Michael, We’ve Had a Hundred Years of
Psychotherapy and the World’s Getting Worse, Harper San Francisco, San
Francisco, 1992.
Hilton, James, Lost Horizon, Macmillan, London, 1933.
Hoover, Thomas, Zen Culture, Arkana, London, 1989.
Huysmans, Joris-Karl, Against Nature, Penguin, London, 1959.
Jellis, Rosemary, Bird Sounds and their Meaning, BBC Publications, London,
1977.
Jenny, Hans, Cymatics, Basilius Press, Basel, 1967.
Jung, C.G., Alchemical Studies, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1968.
Kaufmann, Walter, Tibetan Buddhist Chant, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, 1975.
Kelly, Kevin, Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Fourth Estate,
London, 1994.
Kuhn, Annette (ed.), Alien Zone, Verso, London, 1990.
Kunst, Jaap, Hindu-Javanese Musical Instruments, Martinus Nijhoff, The
Hague, 1968.
———, Music In Java, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, 1973.
Lanza, Joseph, Elevator Music, St Martin’s Press, New York, 1994.
Lee, Vernon, Supernatural Tales, Peter Owen Ltd, London, 1987.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, The Raw and the Cooked, Jonathan Cape, London, 1970.
———, Introduction to a Science of Mythology: From Honey to Ashes, Jonathan
Cape, London, 1973.
Lilly, John C., The Centre of the Cyclone, Marion Boyars, London, 1990.
———, The Scientist, Ronin, California, 1988.
Lizot, Jacques, Tales of the Yanomami, Cambridge Studies in Social
Anthropology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985.
Lockspeiser, Edward, Debussy, J.M. Dent, London, 1936.
Louys, Pierre, Aphrodite, Panther, London, 1972.
Lovecraft, H.P., “From Beyond”, in Crawling Chaos, Creation Press, London,
1992.
McDermott, John with Kramer, Eddie, Hendrix: Setting the Record Straight,
Warner Books, USA, 1994.
McLuhan, Marshall and Fiore, Quentin, The Medium is the Massage, Penguin,

London, 1967.
McPhee, Colin, A House in Bali, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1979.
Maconie, Robin, The Works of Stockhausen.
Masotti, Franco, Masotti, Roberto, Rizzardi, Veniero and Taroni, Roberto
(curators), Sonorità Prospettiche: Suono Ambiente Immagine, Commune di
Rimini, Italy, 1982.
Mitchell, Mitch and Piatt, John, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, Pyramid Books,
London, 1990.
Moyle, Alice M., Aboriginal Sound Instruments, Australian Institute of
Aboriginal Studies, Canberra, 1978.
Needham, Joseph, Science and Civilisation In China, vol. II, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1956.
Nichols, Roger, Debussy Remembered, Faber and Faber, London, 1992.
Nollman, Jim, Spiritual Ecology, Bantam New Age Books, USA, 1990.
Nyman, Michael, Experimental Music: Cage and Beyond, Studio Vista, London,
1974.
Oldknow, Tina, “Muslim Soup”, in Brought to Book, ed. Breakwell, Ian and
Hammond, Paul, Penguin, London, 1994.
Orrey, Leslie, Programme Music, Davis-Poynter, London, 1975.
Ouellette, Fernand, Edgard Varèse, Calder & Boyars, London, 1973.
Partch, Harry, Genesis of a Music, Da Capo Press, New York, 1974.
Partington, J.R., A History of Chemistry, vol. I, Part I, Macmillan, London, 1970.
Poe, Edgar Allan, Poe’s Tales of Mystery and Imagination, J.M. Dent, London,
1908.
Polin, Claire, “Why Minimalism Now?”, in Music and the Politics of Culture,
ed. Christopher Norris, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1989.
Pynchon, Thomas, The Crying of Lot 49, Bantam Books, USA, 1967.
Rabelais, François, Gargantua and Pantagruel, Penguin, London, 1955.
Reisner, Robert George, Bird: The Legend of Charlie Parker, Citadel Press, New
York, 1962.
Revill, David, The Roaring Silence, Bloomsbury, London, 1992.
Rheingold, Howard, The Virtual Community: Finding Connections in a
Computerised World, Secker & Warburg, London, 1994.
Rossiter, Frank R., Charles Ives and His America, Victor Gollancz, London,
1976.
Roussel, Raymond, Impressions of Africa, Calder & Boyars, London, 1966.
Rudorff, Raymond, Belle Epoque, Hamish Hamilton, London, 1972.

Rushkoff, Douglas, Cyberia: Life In the Trenches of Hyperspace, HarperCollins,
New York, 1994.
Russolo, Luigi, The Art of Noises, Pendragon Press, New York, 1986.
Said, Edward W., Orientalism, Penguin, London, 1985.
Sales, G. and Pye, D., Ultrasonic Communication by Animals, Chapman and
Hall, London, 1974.
Sarno, Louis, Song from the Forest, Bantam Press, London, 1993.
Schafer, R. Murray (ed.), European Sound Diary, A.R.C. Publications,
Vancouver, 1977.
———, The Tuning of the World, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1977.
———, (ed.) The Vancouver Soundscape, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver,
Canada, 1978.
Schwenk, Theodor, Sensitive Chaos, Rudolf Steiner Press, London, 1965.
Sebeok, Thomas A. (ed.), Animal Communication, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, 1968.
———, Zoosemiotics: At the Intersection of Nature and Culture, Peter De
Ridder Press, Netherlands, 1975.
Shimoda, Nobuhisa, 2010: The Centrifugal Force of Space, Sound & People: A
Document on Xebec, TOA Corporation, Japan, 1993.
Sprawson, Charles, Haunts of the Black Masseur: The Swimmer as Hero,
Jonathan Cape, London, 1992.
Steward Lincoln, J., The Dream in Primitive Cultures, The Cresset Press,
London, 1935.
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, Towards a Cosmic Music, Element Books, Dorset,
1989.
Storr, Anthony, Music & the Mind, HarperCollins, London, 1992.
Surjodiningrat, R.M. Wasisto, Gamelan Dance and Wayang in Jogjakarta,
Gadjah Mada University Press, Jogjakarta, 1971.
Tanizaki, Jun’ichirō, In Praise of Shadows, Jonathan Cape, London, 1991.
Tate, Greg, Flyboy In the Buttermilk, Fireside, New York, 1992.
Thakara, John (ed.), Design After Modernism, Thames and Hudson, London,
1988.
Thompson, Robert Farris, Flash of the Spirit, Vintage Books, New York, 1984.
Tisdall, Caroline and Angelo Bozzolla, Futurism, Thames and Hudson, London,
1977.
Thomson, David, Suspects, Secker & Warburg, London, 1985.
Torgovnick, Marianna, Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives,

University of Chicago, USA, 1990.
Tosches, Nick, Dino, Minerva, London, 1993.
Turner, Victor, Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors, Cornell University Press, Ithaca
and London, 1974.
van Gulik, Robert Hans, Hsi K’ang and his Poetical Essay on the Lute,
Sophia/Tuttle, Japan, 1968.
———, The Gibbon in China, Brill, Leiden, 1967.
———, The Lore of the Chinese Lute, Sophia/Tuttle, Japan, 1968.
Wachsmann, Klaus, Spencer to Hood: A Changing View of Non-European
Music, Proceedings of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain
and Ireland, London, 1973.
Wichmann, Siegfried (exhibition director), World Cultures and Modern Art
(catalogue), Bruckmann Publishers, Munich, 1972.
Wilmer, Valerie, As Serious As Your Life, Quartet, London, 1977.
Wilson, Peter Lamborn, Sacred Drift, City Lights, San Francisco, 1993. Worner,
Karl H., Stockhausen: Life and Work, Faber and Faber, London, 1973.
Yokoi, Hiroshi, St GIGA, Japan, 1991.
Young, La Monte and Zazeela, Marian, Selected Writings, Heiner Friedrich,
Munich, 1969.

discography
The following alphabetical list relates simply to this book. It is intended as a
selective, personal guide for readers who wish to hear some of the music I have
written about, rather than a definitive discography of supposedly essential
recordings. Where no artist name is appropriate but the nature of the recording is
obvious, I have listed the title.
African Head Charge, Great Vintage Volume 1, On-U.
Akira (soundtrack by Yamashiro Shoji), Demon.
AMM, AMM Music, Elektra.
Aphex Twin, Selected Ambient Works Volume II, Warp.
Ash Ra, New Age of Earth, Virgin.
Ayler, Albert, Swing Low Sweet Spiritual, Osmosis.
Baker, Chet, Chet Baker Sings, Pacific Jazz.
Bali: Gamelan Music from Sebatu, Archiv Produktion.
Baxter, Les, Jewels of the Sea, Capitol.
The Beach Boys, Landlocked, (bootleg).
———, Smile, (bootleg).
———, Pet Sounds, Capitol.
———, Smiley Smile, Capitol.
The Beatles, White Album, EMI.
Biosphere, Microgravity, Apollo.
The Black Dog, Temple of Transparent Balls, GPR.
Bow Gamelan Ensemble, Audio Arts cassette.
Bowie, David, Heroes, EMI.
———, Low, EMI.
Brian Jones Presents the Pipes of Pan at Joujouka, Rolling Stones Records.
Brown, James, Startime, Polydor.
Brötzmann, Peter, Machine Gun, FMP.
Bryars, Gavin, The Sinking of the Titanic, Obscure.
Budd, Harold, Abandoned Cities/The Serpent (In Quicksilver), Land Records.
———, Lovely Thunder, EG.
———, The Pavilion of Dreams, Obscure.
Burroughs, William, Break Through In Grey Room, Sub Rosa.

Bush, Kate, The Dreaming, EMI.
———, Hounds of Love, EMI.
———, The Sensual World, EMI.
Bukem, L.T.J., Music/Enchanted, Good Looking Records 12" single GLR.
Cage, John, John Cage, Cramps.
———, Mr John Cage’s Prepared Piano, Decca Headline.
———, Music For Keyboard 1935–1948, CBS.
———, Variations IV, Everest.
———, and Tudor, David, Indeterminacy, Folkways.
Cherry, Don, Organic Music, Caprice.
———, Relativity Suite, JCOA/Virgin.
Cocteau Twins, Echoes in a Shallow Bay, 4AD.
Cohen, Ira, The Poetry of Ira Cohen, Sub Rosa Aural Documents.
Coleman, Ornette, Beauty Is a Rare Thing: The Complete Atlantic Recordings,
Rhino.
———, Virgin Beauty, CBS.
Coltrane, Alice and Santana, Devadip Carlos, Illuminations, CBS. Coltrane,
John, Infinity, Impulse.
———, Transition, Impulse.
Cruise, Julee, Floating Into the Night, Warner Bros.
Curran, Alvin, Canti e Vedute del Giardino Magnetico, Ananda. Czukay, Holger
and Dammers, Rolf, Canaxis, Spoon.
The Dagar Brothers, A Musical Anthology of the Orient: India III,
BärenreiterMusicaphon.
Davis, Miles, Agharta, Columbia.
———, The Birth of the Cool, Capitol.
———, Bitches Brew, CBS.
———, In Concert, Columbia.
———, On the Corner, CBS.
———, Pangaea, CBS.
———, Sketches of Spain, CBS.
Debussy, Claude, Chansons de Bilitis, Candide.
———, Images/Estampes/Deux Arabesques, Supraphon.
———, La mer, CBS.
———, Prélude à l’après-midi d’un faune/Jeux/Nocturnes, CBS/Odyssey.

———/ Ravel, Maurice, String Quartets, Deutsche Grammophon. Deep
Listening Band, The Ready Made Boomerang, New Albion. Deep Voices: The
Second Whale Record, Capitol.
Dolphy, Eric, Other Aspects, Blue Note.
———, Out to Lunch, Blue Note BST.
Dr John, The Night Tripper, Gris-Gris, Atco.
808 State, Ninety, ZTT.
Ellington, Duke, The Blanton-Webster Band, Bluebird.
Ellis, Don, Shock Treatment, Columbia.
Eno, Brian, Ambient 4: On Land, EG.
———, Another Green World, Island.
———, Apollo: Atmospheres & Soundtracks, EG.
———, Music For Films, Editions EG.
———, Neroli, All Saints.
———, Thursday Afternoon, EG.
———, and Byrne, David, My Life In the Bush of Ghosts, EG.
Environments: The Magic of Psychoactive Sound, Syntonic Research Inc.
Evans, Bill, Spring Leaves, Milestone.
Feldman, Morton, Triadic Memories, Sub Rosa.
4-Hero, Parallel Universe, Reinforced.
Fripp, Robert/Eno, Brian, The Essential Fripp and Eno, Virgin.
Future Sound of London, ISDN, Virgin.
Le Gamelan Balinais de Lotring, CBS.
Gazzelloni, Severino, Flute Works by Debussy, Varèse, etc., Heliodor Wergo.
Göttsching, Manuel, E2-E4, Racket Records.
Hancock, Herbie, The Complete Warner Bros. Recordings, Warner Archives.
Hassell, Jon, Aka/Darbari/Java (Magic Realism), EG.
———, City: Works of Fiction, Opal/Warner Bros.
———, Dream Theory in Malaya, EG.
———, and Bluescreen, Dressing For Pleasure, Warner Bros.
———/ Eno, Brian, Possible Musics, EG.
Hassell, Jon vs. 808 State, Voiceprint, All Saints.
Hekura: Yanomamö Shamanism from Southern Venezuela, Quartz. Hendrix,
Jimi, Electric Ladyland, Track.

———, Live & Unreleased: The Radio Show, Castle Communications.
———, Nine To the Universe, Polydor.
Higher Intelligence Agency, Colourform, Beyond.
Hillage, Steve, Rainbow Dome Musick, Virgin.
Horn, Paul, Inside, Epic.
Human Arts Ensemble, Under The Sun, Universal Justice Records.
Indian Ocean (Arthur Russell), School Bell/Treehouse, Sleeping Bag.
Irresistible Force (Mixmaster Morris), Space Is the Place, Rising High.
Java: Bedoyo Ketawang, Galloway Records.
The Jesus & Mary Chain, Psychocandy, Blanco Y Negro.
King Tubby, Dub Gone Crazy, Blood & Fire.
———, King Tubby’s Special 1973–1976, Trojan.
Kirchin, Basil, Worlds Within Worlds, EMI Columbia.
———, Worlds Within Worlds, Island.
Kirk, Roland, Left & Right, Atlantic.
The KLF, Chill Out, JAMS.
Köner, Thomas, Permafrost, Barooni.
Kraftwerk, Autobahn, EMI.
———, Computer World, EMI.
———, Electric Café, EMI EMD.
———, The Man-Machine, Capitol.
———, Trans-Europe Express, EMI.
Kurnia, Detty, Coyor Panon, Flame Tree.
LFO, Frequencies, Warp.
Loop Guru, The Third Chamber, Loop.
Lucier, Alvin, Music for Solo Performer, Lovely Music. Lull, Cold Summer,
Sentrax.
Marclay, Christian, Record Without a Cover, Recycled Records.
Maxfield, Richard, Electronic Recordings, Advance Recordings.
———, Reich, Steve, Oliveros, Pauline, New Sounds In Electronic Music,
Odyssey.
May, Derrick, Craig, Carl, Atkins, Juan, Pennington, James, Relics,
Transmat/Buzz.
McLaughlin, John, Devotion, Douglas.

Meek, Joe, The Joe Meek Story, Decca.
Merry Christmas Mr Lawrence (soundtrack composed by Ryuichi Sakamoto),
Virgin.
Messiaen, Olivier, Oiseaux exotiques, Supraphon. MEV/AMM, Live Electronic
Music Improvised, Mainstream. Mr Fingers (Larry Heard), Amnesia, Jack
Trax.
Mitchell, Roscoe, Sound, Delmark.
Model 500, Night Drive (Thru Babylon), Metroplex/Macola.
The Gerry Mulligan Quartet, Gerry Mulligan Quartet, Vogue. The Music
Improvisation Company, 1968–1971, Incus.
Music of the Venezuelan Yekuana Indians, Folkways.
A Musical Anthology of the Orient: Japan V, BärenreiterMusicaphon.
Musik für Ch’in, Museum Collection Berlin. Musique du Burundi, Ocora.
Musique sacrée Tibetaine, Ocora.
μ-Ziq, Tango n’ Vectif, Rephlex.
My Bloody Valentine, Loveless, Creation.
Namlook, Pete, Silence, FAX.
Niblock, Phill, Four Full Flutes, Experimental Intermedia Foundation.
Oiseaux du Venezuela, L’Oiseau Musicien. Oliveros/Dempster/Panaiotis, Deep
Listening, New Albion.
Ono, Yoko, Onobox, Ryko.
The Orb, A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules From the
Centre of the Ultraworld, W.A.U. Mr Modo.
———, The Kiss EP, W.A.U. Mr Modo.
Oswald, John, Plunderphonic, (not-for-sale CD).
Pablo, Augustus, East of the River Nile, Rockers Production.
Parker, Charlie, Bird With Strings: Live at The Apollo, Carnegie Hall &
Birdland.
———, The Verve Years (1948–50), Verve.
Partch, Harry, The World of Harry Partch, CBS.
Perry, Lee, The Upsetter Box Set, Trojan.
Phuture, Acid Tracks, Trax.
Pink Floyd, The Piper At the Gates of Dawn, EMI.
Pran Nath, Pandit, Earth Groove, Transatlantic.
———, India’s Master Vocalist, Shandar.

———, Ragas of Morning & Night, Gramavision.
Prime, Michael, Aquifers, RRR.
Prince Far-I, Cry Tuff Dub Encounters Chapter III, Daddy Kool. Psyche (Carl
Craig), Crackdown, Kool Kat/Transmat.
Public Enemy, It Takes a Nation of Millions To Hold Us Back, Def Jam.
Reese and Santonio, The Sound, KMS/Kool Kat Kool.
Reload, A Collection of Short Stories, Infonet.
Riley, Terry, A Rainbow In Curved Air, Columbia.
———, Happy Ending, Warner Bros.
———, In C, CBS.
———, Persian Surgery Dervishes, Shanti.
———, Shri Camel, CBS.
The Ronettes, Sing Their Greatest Hits, Phil Spector International. Russell,
Arthur, Instrumental, Another Side of Les Disques Crépuscule.
———, Let’s Go Swimming, Rough Trade.
———, World of Echo, Rough Trade.
Sakamoto, Ryuichi, B-2 Unit, Island/Alfa.
Satie, Erik, Piano Music Volume 1, Decca Vox.
———, Vexations, Harlekijn Holland Produkties.
Saw Throat, Inde$troy, Manic Ears.
Scanner, Scanner, Ash.
Schoenberg, Arnold, 5 Pieces for Orchestra, Op. 16, Sony.
Schütze, Paul, Apart, Virgin.
———, New Maps of Hell, Extreme.
———, The Surgery of Touch, Sentrax.
Sequential, Prophet/The Mission, Pod.
The Sheltering Sky (soundtrack by Ryuichi Sakamoto, Richard Horowitz, etc.),
Virgin.
Shomyo – Buddhist Ritual from Japan, Dai Hannya Ceremony – Shingon Sect,
Philips.
Shore, Howard and Coleman, Ornette, Naked Lunch, Milan.
Sinatra, Frank, In the Wee Small Hours of the Morning, Capitol.
Skinny Puppy, VIVIsectVI, Capitol.
Songs of the Humpback Whale, Capitol.
Sounds and the Ultra-Sounds of the Bottle-Nose Dolphin (recorded by John
Lilly), Folkways.

Spacetime Continuum with Terence McKenna, Alien Dreamtime, Astralwerks.
Spontaneous Music Ensemble, Karyobin, Chronoscope.
St GIGA/Sound of the Earth series, Ambient Soundscape II: Prayers for the
Spirit of Nature, Disques Kinza (Japan).
Stalling, Carl, The Carl Stalling Project, Warner Bros. Stockhausen, Karlheinz,
Telemusik, DGG.
Sueño Latino, Sueño Latino, BCM Records.
Sumac, Yma, Voice of The Xtabay, Capitol.
Summer, Donna, Love To Love You Baby, GTO.
Sun Ra, Angels and Demons at Play, Saturn.
———, Art Forms of Dimensions Tomorrow, Saturn.
———, Cosmic Tones for Mental Therapy, Saturn.
———, Cosmic Visions, Blast First.
———, Heliocentric Worlds Volume 1, ESP.
———, Heliocentric Worlds Volume 2, ESP.
———, The Magic City, Saturn.
———, The Nubians of Plutonia, Saturn.
———, Strange Strings, Saturn.
———, Sun Ra Volume 1, Shandar.
Sylvian, David, Weatherbox, Virgin.
———, and Czukay, Holger, Plight & Premonition, Virgin.
Symbols and Instruments, Mood/Science of Numbers/Tear Drops of Yesterday,
Network/KMS.
Takemitsu, Tōru, Film Music by Tōru Takemitsu, JVC.
Throbbing Gristle, 20 Jazz Funk Greats, Industrial.
Tristano, Lennie/Dameron, Tadd, Crosscurrents, Affinity.
Twin Peaks (soundtrack by Angelo Badalamenti), Warner Bros.
The United States of America, The United States of America, CBS.
The Upsetters (Lee Perry), Super Ape, Mango.
U2, Achtung Baby, Island.
———, Zooropa, Island.
The Vancouver Soundscape, World Soundscape Project. Varèse, Edgard,
Nocturnal/Ecuatorial, Vanguard.
———, Intégrales, etc., Vox Candide.
———, Arcana, etc., Decca.

Various, Ambient 4: Isolationism, Virgin.
———, (Artificial Intelligence II), Warp.
———, Circadian Rhythm, Incus.
———, (Fluxus sound artists), Flux Tellus, Tellus cassette #24.
———, Futurism & Dada Reviewed, Sub Rosa.
———, Silence, Spiral Editions (Japan).
The Velvet Underground, White Light/White Heat, MGM.
Wilson, Dennis, Pacific Ocean Blue, Caribou.
Wolff, Henry and Hennings, Nancy, Tibetan Bells, Island.
Young, La Monte, The Second Dream of The High Tension
Line Stepdown Transformer from The Four Dreams of China, Gramavision.
———, 12 I 64 AM NYC the first twelve Sunday Morning Blues, (unreleased
tape).
———, and Zazeela, Marian, The Theatre of Eternal Music, Shandar.
———, and Zazeela, Marian, 31 VII 69 10:26–10:49 PM, Edition X (limited
edition) Munchen.
Young, Neil and Crazy Horse, Arc-Weld, Reprise.
Zappa, Frank, Uncle Meat, Bizarre/Transatlantic. Zawinul, Joe, Zawinul,
Atlantic.
Zorn, John, Film Works, Eva.

index
3070 (Rick Davies), 214
4 Hero, 214, 290
808 State, 63, 290
A Taste of Honey, 235
AACM, 98, 135
Adams, John, 183
African Head Charge, 122
Agharta, 102
A Guy Called Gerald, 62, 186, 214
Akpabot, Samuel, 252
Aletti, Vince, 44
Ali, Rashied, 95
Allen, Marshall, 26, 27
Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto, 11
AMM, 49, 105, 134–5, 199, 245
Anderson, Laurie, 121
Andre, Carl, 15
Angel, Dave, 214
Anikulapo-Kuti, Fela, 121
Aphex Twin (Richard James), 179, 207–8, 210, 270
Aqua Regia, 214
Armando, 40
Artaud, Antonin, 192, 223, 257–8
Art Ensemble of Chicago, 134
Art of Noise, 91
Ash Ra, 63, 287
Atkins, Juan, 213–14
Attali, Jacques, 72
Autechre, 214
Ayler, Albert, 134, 146
Azimuth, 277
B12, 50, 270

Babbitt, Milton, 254
Baby Ford, 186
Bach, J.S., 99, 184, 189–91, 256
Bachelard, Gaston, 85
Bacon, Sir Francis, 257
Badalamenti, Angelo, 267
Bailey, Derek, 135, 137, 139
Baker, Chet, 183, 190–91, 193, 267
Baker, Ginger, 49
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 126
Ball, Hugo, 47
Ballard, J.G., 8, 13
Band of Susans, 174
Bandulu, 214
Barlow, John Perry, 268
Barnett, Mike, 58
Barrow, Steve, 114, 118
Barry, John, 192
Barthes, Roland, 136
Bartók, Béla, 184
Bateson, Gregory, 271
Baudrillard, Jean, 165
Baumann, Peter, 91
Baxter, Les, 164, 269
Beach Boys, The, 112
Beatles, The, 180, 259
Bedouin Ascent, 214
Bee Gees, The, 44, 235
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 143, 262
Bel Canto, 52
Bell, Thom, 46
Bellotte, Pete, 44
Beresford, Steve, 259
Berger, Karlheinz, 205
Bertolucci, Bernardo, 196
Big Bird, 238

Bilk, Acker, 66
Biosphere, 52
Black Dog, The, 214, 270
Black, Matt, 50, 59
Black Sabbath, 41–2
Bleep, 52
Bogart, Neil, 44
Böhm, Hans, 70, 71
Bolland, C.J., 214
Bomb the Bass, 62
Bongiovi, Tony, 96, 98
Bono, 93, 103
Borodin, Alexander, 21
Boulez, Pierre, 254
Bow Gamelan, 103
Bowie, David, 11, 144, 148, 202
Bowie, Lester, 137
Bradfield, Polly, 259
Brahms, Johannes, 125, 205
Branca, Glenn, 174
Brand, Dollar (Abdullah Ibrahim), 134
Braxton, Anthony, 135
Bright, Stefan, 97
Brook, Michael, 62
Brookmeyer, Bob, 192
Brötzmann, Peter, 205, 271
Brown, James, 99, 107–8, 199, 259
Brubeck, Dave, 191
Bruce, Jack, 49, 98
Bryars, Gavin, 17, 135, 192, 199–200, 269
Buckmaster, Paul, 99
Budd, Harold, 62, 144–7, 192
Bukem, L.T.J., 214, 239
Burroughs, William, 116, 145, 260
Burundi drummers, 271
Burwell, Paul, 128, 138–9, 149, 150, 221, 245

Bush, Kate, 273–4
Byrd, Joseph (The United States of America), 141, 143, 180
Byrds, The, 271
Byrne, David, 121, 123–4
Cabaret Voltaire (band), 212
Cabaret Voltaire (club), 47
Cage, John, 49, 67, 121, 137, 141–4, 152, 155, 158, 160, 163, 180, 185, 199,
256
Cale, John, 173, 200
Califia, Pat, 167–8
Calvino, Italo, 165
Campbell, Joseph, 149
Can, 124, 243, 277
Canguilo, Francesco, 79
Captain Beefheart, 216, 243
Cardew, Cornelius, 49, 105, 135
Carlos, Wendy (Walter), 17, 193
Carpentier, Alejo, 84
Carter, Elliot, 260
Cauty, Jimi, 62–3, 65
Cendrars, Blaise, 223
Cerrone, Jean-Marc, 44
Chadbourne, Eugene, 259
Chagnon, Napoleon, 231
Chantays, The, 267
Chatham, Rhys, 174
Cherry, Don, 17, 133–4, 189
Chladni, 256
Chris and Cosey, 51
Christian, Geoffrey, 69
Clair, René, 199
Clapton, Eric, 49
Clark, Fraser, 275
Clifford, James, 125–6, 129, 163, 223
Cline, Patsy, 94
Clinton, George, 214

Cocker, Joe, 109–10
Cocteau, Jean, 81, 140, 196
Cocteau Twins, 269, 271
Cohen, Ira, 97, 174
Cohn, Norman, 70–71
Coil, 264
Coldcut, 59, 62
Cole, B.J., 277
Cole, Nat “King”, 94
Cole, Natalie, 94
Coleman, Ornette, 86, 99, 101, 134, 146, 191–2, 245
Collins, Albert, 47
Collins, Nicolas, 259
Coltrane, Alice, 95, 97
Coltrane, John, 95, 97, 134, 146, 173, 182, 185
Como, Perry, 90
Congos, The, 114
Conner, Bruce, 184
Conrad, Joseph, 126–7, 138, 235
Conrad, Tony, 173
Coombes, Nigel, 259
Corner, Philip, 17
Cosey, Pete, 98
Cotton Club, 47
Cowell, Henry, 39, 142
Cox, Carl, 214
Craig, Carl, 213–14
Craven, Wes, 111
Cream, 45, 49
Creation Rebel, 122
Cronenberg, David, 191
Cruise, Julee, 267
Curran, Alvin, 135, 158, 245
Cybertron, 214
Czukay, Holger, 124, 269, 277
Dagar Brothers, 188–9

Dameron, Tadd, 28
Dammers, Rolf, 124
Davie, Alan, 139
Davies, Hugh, 77–9, 138, 150, 245
Davies, Rick (see 3070)
Davis, Miles, 45, 91, 97–9, 100–102, 105–6, 112, 182, 191–2
Day, Doris, 90
Dead Can Dance, 52
Debussy, Claude, 1–2, 10, 19–23, 25, 73, 76, 80, 85, 86, 173, 177, 184, 223,
262, 269
Deep Space Network, 215
Degiorgio, Kirk, 213
DeJohnette, Jack, 97
Delfonics, The, 46
DeLillo, Don, 15
Dempster, Stuart, 241, 245, 247
Depeche Mode, 42, 212
Desmond, Paul, 191–2
Deutsch, Herb, 88
De Wulf, Frank, 214
Dick and Deedee, 108
Dick, Philip K., 8, 13
Dissevelt, Tom (and Kid Baltan), 211
DJ Crystl, 71, 214
DJ Mooky, 270
DJ Per, 51
DJ Pierre, 41, 42
Dodd, Coxsone, 120
Dodds, Baby, 127
Dolphy, Eric, 191
Dona, Claudia, 10, 16
Douglas, Alan, 96–7, 164
Dr Atmo, 60, 215
Dr Dre, 85
Dr John, 243
Dr Motte, 214

Drake, Sir Francis, 17
Drew, Noble Ali, 30
Drosnin, Michael, 90
Drummond, Bill, 62
Dunn, David, 245
Dylan, Bob, 45, 147
Eagles, 64
Easterby, Jony, 58
Eastley, Max, 138–9, 150, 156, 252
Eco, Umberto, 23, 136
Edison, Thomas, 267
Edwards, Rupie, 119
Eliade, Mircea, 220
Ellington, Duke, 28, 168
Ellis, Don, 192, 193
Emerson, Lake and Palmer, 262
Eno, Brian, 11, 13, 18, 40, 53, 62, 64, 100, 108, 123, 129, 131–2, 138, 144–5,
147–8, 155, 163
Eno, Roger, 147
Enya, 13, 238
Eric B. & Rakim, 271
Evans, Bill, 192–3
Evans, Gil, 96, 112, 167, 191–2
Faas, Hugo, 262
Faith, George, 115
Farafina, 163
Farley Funkin Keith, 208
Faust, 174
Favors, Malachi, 137
Fearless Four, The, 204
Fehlmann, Thomas, 214
Feldman, Morton, 269
Feliciano, Cheo, 201
Fellini, Federico, 165
Ferrari, Luc, 126

Ferry, Bryan, 91
Field, Edward, 182
Fischer, Clare, 192
Flaubert, Gustave, 9
Fleetwood Mac, 66
Fluxus, 159, 174
Fontana, Bill, 152
Forti, Simone, 189
Foul Play, 214
Four Freshmen, The, 112
Fripp, Robert, 62, 144, 277
Froese, Edgar, 92
Front 242, 264
Frost, Mark, 266
Fujieda, Mamoru, 245
Fuller, Gil, 95
Future Sound of London, 57, 214
Garbarek, Jan, 134, 238
Gardner, Ava, 93
Gare, Lou, 49, 135
Garratt, Sheryl, 65
Garvey, Marcus, 30
Gauguin, Paul, 223
Gaye, Marvin, 91, 94, 223
Genesis, 42
Gheerbrant, Alain, 222
Gibbons, Walter, 120–22
Gibbs, Joe, 118, 120
Gibson, William, 113, 118, 196
Giger, H.R., 256
Gillespie, Dizzy, 95
Gilmore, John, 27
Ginsberg, Allen, 121, 145
Giraudy, Miquette, 61
Giuffre, Jimmy, 192
Glass, Philip, 14, 121, 178, 183, 199, 271

Global Communication, 214
Godard, Jean-Luc, 116, 127
Godwin, Jocelyn, 102
Goldie, 214
Goldrosen, John J., 94
Gong, 61
Górecki, Henryk, 238
Göttsching, Manuel, 63
Graham, Leo, 114
Grateful Dead, 45, 155, 260, 268
Green, Celia, 209
Griffin, Donald R., 218
Hall, Jim, 191
Hamase, Motohiko, 165
Hamilton, Chico, 190–91
Hampel, Gunter, 205
Hampson, Robert, 37
Hancock, Herbie, 98
Hardy, Thomas, 73
Harris, Mick (Scorn, Lull, Napalm Death), 181
Harris, Wynonie, 107
Harrison, Lou, 17
Hart, Mickey, 155
Hassell, Jon, 62, 124–5, 144, 147, 163–6, 168, 173, 178, 189, 192, 258, 277
Hawtin, Richie, 215
Heard, Larry “Mr Fingers” (Fingers Inc.), 40, 42–3, 55, 62
Hearn, Lafcadio, 160, 226
Heath, Chris, 56
Hefti, Neal, 87
Helmholtz, Hermann, 81
Henderson, Fletcher, 33
Hendrix, Jimi, 45, 86, 91, 96–9, 105, 106, 271
Hendryx, Nona, 91
Hennings, Emmy, 47
Hennings, Nancy, 140
Henry, Pierre, 126

Herbert J, 42
Herrmann, Bernard, 264
Hess, Felix, 253
Higher Intelligence Agency, 56, 58, 214
Hildenbeutel, Ralf, 57
Hill, Andrew, 191
Hillage, Steve, 61–2
Hillman, James, 110
Hitler, Adolf, 72
Hobbs, Christopher, 199–200
Hokusai, 21
Holbrook, Joseph, 134–5
Holland, David, 97, 100
Holloway, Red, 30–31
Holly, Buddy, 94–5
Holst, Gustav, 66
Hoodlum Priest, 264
Hooker, John Lee, 184
Horn, Paul, 191, 244
Hovhaness, Alan, 238
Howlin’ Wolf, 243
Hudson, Keith, 120
Hughes, Howard, 90
Huizinga, Leonhard, 18
Human League, The, 212
Huysmans, Joris-Karl, 19, 21
Iborra, Diego, 87
Iceberg Slim, 47
Ikeda, Ryoji, 271
Inoue, Tetsuo, 215
I Roy, 119
Irresistible Force, The (see Mixmaster Morris)
Isham, Mark, 277
Itō, Toshiharu, 272
Ives, Charles, 146, 244, 260
Ives, George, 244

Jack Frost and the Circle Jerks, 208
Jackson, Michael, 259
Jah Lion, 114
Jah Shaka, 271
Jam & Spoon, 214
Japan, 277
Jarre, Jean-Michel, 53, 213
Jarre, Maurice, 17
Jarry, Alfred, 76
Jeck, Philip, 259–60
Jeffrey, Christine, 135
Jefferson, Marshall, 40–42
Jennings, Terry, 173, 182, 185
Jenny, Hans, 255–7
Jenssen, Geir (see Biosphere, Bleep)
Jesus & Mary Chain, The, 174
John, Little Willie, 107
Jones, Brian, 271
Jones, Grace, 91
Jones, Percy, 277
Jones, Quincy, 95
Jordan, Louis, 107
Julius, Rolf, 152
Jung, Carl, 267
Jürgenson, Friedrich, 267
Justified Ancients of Mu Mu, 62
Kalsoum, Oum, 125
Katz, Fred, 191
Kaufmann, Walter, 243
Kawasaki, Yoshihiro, 152–3, 156, 158, 160
Keary, Vic, 127
Keats, John, 74
Kelly, Kevin, 268
Kenny G, 13
Kenton, Stan, 191–2
Kevorkian, François, 121

Khan, Ali Akbar, 121, 176
Kinchin, Mark, 214
King Hu, 218
King Tubby (Osbourne Ruddock), 117–18, 120, 122
Kircher, Athanasius, 252
Kirchin, Basil, 139–40
Kirk, Roland, 95–6, 256
Kitaro, 261–2
Klarwein, Mati, 174
KLF, The (K Foundation), 55, 62, 65–6
Koch, Ludwig, 125
Kondo, Toshinori, 259
Köner, Thomas, 174, 253–4
Kong, Leslie, 128
Konitz, Lee, 189, 191–2
Kosakai, Fumio (Incapacitants), 150
Kraftwerk, 42, 44, 65, 200–204, 206, 212
Kramer, Eddie, 106
Kronos Quartet, 164, 184
Kurnia, Detty, 17
Labelle, 91
Lacker, René, 19–20
La Faro, Scott, 191
Land of Oz, 55, 59, 61–2, 65
Lanois, Daniel, 144, 147–8, 155
Lanza, Joseph, 251
Larkin, Kenny, 214
Laswell, Bill, 133, 215
Latham, John, 179, 254
LaVette, Bettye, 120
Leary, Timothy, 97
Le Corbusier, 84
Led Zeppelin, 41, 260
Lee, Bunny, 118, 120
Lee, Vernon, 273
Leiris, Michel, 163, 223

Lennon, John, 94, 180
Leone, Sergio, 263
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 68, 73, 74, 229
Leviticus, 71
Lewis, Jerry Lee, 90
Lewis, John, 190, 191, 192
Lewis, Wyndham, 79
LFO, 212
Lieb, Oliver, 57
Liebezeit, Jaki, 277
Lifetime, 98
Ligeti, György, 269–70
Lil’ Louis, 40
Lilly, John, 270–71
Little Richard, 90
Lizot, Jacques, 229–30, 235
Lloyd, A.L., 138
Lockspeiser, Edward, 20
Lockwood, Annea, 158
Lomax, Alan, 109–10
London Philharmonic Orchestra, 82
Loop Guru, 17
Love, Mike, 269
Lovecraft, H.P., 38
Lovens, Paul, 150
Louys, Pierre, 22
Lucier, Alvin, 158, 203, 244–6
Lumiere brothers, 23
Lustmord, 264
Lynch, David, 122, 263, 266–7
Lytton, Paul, 138, 150
Macero, Teo, 101, 106
MacLise, Angus, 173–4
McKenna, Terence, 276
McLaughlin, John, 97–8, 100
McLuhan, Marshall, 129

McPhee, Colin, 16–18
McTiernan, John, 216
Mahler, Gustav, 46
Main, 174
Mallik, Bidur, 187–8
Mann, Michael, 92
Mantovani, 152
Marclay, Christian, 259–60
Marinetti, Filippo, 75–9, 202, 237
Marley, Bob, 114, 128
M/A/R/R/S, 62
Marsh, Warne, 191
Marshall, Stuart, 245
Martenot, Maurice, 88
Martin, Dean, 90
Martin, Jeanne, 90
Maxfield, Richard, 174, 180–83
May, Derrick, 213–14, 270, 275
Mayr, Albert, 245
Mead, Margaret, 126
Mead, Syd, 54
Meek, Joe, 111, 113, 211
Mellé, Gil, 192
Mendelssohn, Felix, 262
Merzbow (Masami Akita), 150
Messager, André, 19
Messiaen, Olivier, 17, 238
Metro, 40
Mr C, 59
Miles, Buddy, 97
Milhaud, Darius, 198
Mingus, Charles, 95
Misra, Rajan and Sajan, 188
Mitchell, Mitch, 96–7
Mitchell, Roscoe, 137
Miwa, Shigeo, 221

Mixmaster Morris (The Irresistible Force), 54, 214
Model 500, 40, 214
Modern Jazz Quartet (John Lewis), 190, 198
Monk, Meredith, 174
Monk, Thelonious, 101, 191
Monteverdi, 244
Moody Boyz, 214
Moog, Robert, 88
Morley, David, 57
Moroder, Giorgio, xiv, 44
Morricone, Ennio, 135, 263
Mouse On Mars, 214
Moulton, Tom, 120
Muduga, François, 243
Muir, Jamie, 135
Mulligan, Gerry, 190–92
Murch, Walter, 263–4
Murooka, Dr Hajime, 154
Murray, Sunny, 146
Murvin, Junior, 115
Music Improvisation Company, 134
Musica Elettronica Viva (MEV), 135
Musso, Robert, 215
M’tume, 100
MTV, 91, 258
Muhammad, Elijah, 30
Mussolini, Benito, 76, 133
Mussorgsky, Modest Petrovich, 21, 46
My Bloody Valentine, 174, 269
Namlook, Pete (Peter Kuhlmann), 215
Nelson, Bill, 277
Nero, 72
Neuhaus, Max, 158, 252
New Composers of Leningrad, 208
New Order, 212
Newman, Barnett, 178

Niblock, Phill, 121, 174, 271
Nicolson, Annabel, 150, 221
Nine Inch Nails, 71
Nolen, Jimmy, 107
Nollman, Jim, 240–41
Noyes, Charles K., 259
Numan, Gary, 42, 213
Nuova Consonanza, 134–5
Nuriddin, Jalal, 97
Nylon, Judy, 140
Nyman, Michael, 62, 149, 183, 199–200
Oakenfold, Paul, 61, 63
Ojima, Yoshio, 271
Okri, Ben, 165
Oldfield, Mike, 248
Oldknow, Tina, 84
Olitsky, 15
Oliveros, Pauline, 158, 183, 241, 245–7, 256
OMD, 213
Omni Trio, 214
Ono, Yoko, 95, 179–80
Opiate, 271
Orb, The, 13, 55, 62–3, 65, 270
Orbital, 58, 214
Orlando, Bobby, 48
O’Rourke, Jim, 37
Ostertag, Bob, 259
Oswald, John, 259–60
Oval, 214
Oxley, Tony, 135
Pablo, Augustus, 118–20
Palestrina, Giovanni, 21
Panaiotis, 241
Pangaea, 98, 101–2
Paradinas, Michael, (μ-Ziq), 211–12

Parker, Charlie, 83, 86–7, 91, 128
Parker, Evan, 135, 138–9, 150, 245
Parsons, David, 258
Parsons, Michael, 245
Pärt, Arvo, 238
Partch, Harry, 17, 190
Passemonde, Chantal, 49, 60
Patterson, Alex, 59, 62–5
Payne, Roger, 238–40
Paul, Les, 108
Peart, Neil, 42
Peckham, Morse, 141
Pedreguera, Richard, 256
Pemberton, Daniel, 215
Peraza, Armando, 97
Perry, Frank, 277
Perry, Lee, 111, 113–17, 119–20, 123, 131–2
Pet Shop Boys, 56
Phuture, 40
Piatti, Ugo, 77
Pink Floyd, 43, 61
Pinky and Perky, 238
Poe, Edgar Allan, 253
Polanski, Roman, 104
Polin, Claire, 14
Polo, Marco, 111
Pran Nath, Pandit, 164–5, 175, 177, 189, 193
Pratella, Bralilla, 76–7
Presley, Elvis, 66, 89, 94, 107, 243
Preston, Don, 82
Prévost, Eddie, 49, 135
Prime, Michael, 181
Prince, 91, 192
Prince Buster, 128
Prince Far I, 120, 122
Prokofiev, Sergei, 46

Public Enemy, 125, 165
Pynchon, Thomas, 7, 13
? and The Mysterians, 201
Quinn, Ray, 94
Rabelais, François, 237
Raffles, Thomas Stanford, 17–18
Ramone, Phil, 93
Raudive, Dr Konstantin, 267
Ravel, Maurice, 184, 269
Redcell, 214
Reed, Lou, 173–4
Reese & Santonio, 214
Reeves, Jim, 94
Regnault, Félix-Louis, 22
Reich, Steve, 14, 17, 144, 178, 180, 183, 199
Reid, Duke, 118
Reinhardt, Ad, 14, 145
Reisner, Robert George, 86
Reload, 269
Residents, The, 124
Reznor, Trent (see Nine Inch Nails)
Rheingold, Howard, 111
Rich, Billy, 97
Rice, Ron, 174
Riley, Terry, 14, 17, 36, 45, 134, 163, 165, 178, 180, 182–7, 189–90, 193–4,
205, 241
Rimbaud, Arthur, 21
Rimbaud, Robin (Scanner), 37
Rimsky-Korsakov, Nikolai, 21–2
Riperton, Minnie, 65, 94
Robbers, Stefan, 214
Robinson, Smokey, 45
Roché, Jean C., 224
Rolling Stones, The, 45, 110, 127
Romeo, Max, 115

Ronettes, The, xiv, 108, 110
Ronstadt, Linda, 94
Ross, Anne, 275
Ross, Diana, 94
Rothko, Mark, 14, 145, 178
Roussel, Raymond, 104
Rowe, Keith, 49
Rush, 42
Rush, Loren, 241
Rushdie, Salman, 165
Russell, Arthur, 120–22
Russell, George, 191
Russo, Bill, 192
Russolo, Antonio, 77–8
Russolo, Luigi, 77–81, 88
Rythim is Rythim, 40
Rzewski, Frederic, 135
Sade, 13, 91
Said, Edward, 23
Saint-Point, Valentine de, 76
Sakamoto, Ryuichi, 17, 195–6, 277
Sala, Oskar, 88
Sanders, Pharoah, 45, 146
Santana, Carlos (Santana), 45, 97, 134
Santo and Johnny, 267
Sarno, Louis, 131–2
Satie, Erik, 22, 36, 73, 76, 80, 185, 196–200
Sato, Minoru, 150
Saw Throat, 271
Schaeffer, Pierre, 126
Schafer, R. Murray, 250–52
Schoenberg, Arnold, 269
Schroeder, Barbet, 61
Schuller, Gunther, 191–2
Schulze, Klaus, 63
Schütze, Paul, 17, 253, 263–5

Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 216–17
Schwenk, Theodor, 256–7
Scott, Ridley, 92, 165
Scriabin, Alexander, 46
Sculthorpe, Peter, 17
Sebeok, Thomas A., 136
Seeds, The, 201
Seefeel, 214
Segalan, Victor, 21
Shah, Idries, 221–22
Shallet, Emil, 127–8
Shamen, The, 59, 276
Shank, Bud, 192
Sharp, Jonah, 58, 61, 215
Sharpe, Richard, 58
Shea, David, 259
Sherwood, Adrian, 122–3
Shimoda, Nobuhisa, 159–61
Shocklee, Hank, 125, 164
Sibelius, Jean, 262
Sinatra, Frank, 93, 103, 108–9
Singing Dogs, The, 238
Siu-Tung, Ching, 218
Size, Roni, 214
Sketch, 214
Skinny Puppy, 71
Slayer, 271
Sleezy D, 41, 208
Slowdive, 174
Smith, Jack, 174
Smith, Leo,
Smith, William O., 241
Sonic Youth, 174
Source, 214
Spacemen 3, 60
Spacetime, 58–9

Spallanzani, Lazzaro, 217
Spanky, 42
Spector, Phil, xiv, 44, 108, 110–11, 113
Spectrum, 174
Spiral Tribe, 50
Spiritualized, 174
Splet, Alan, 263–4
Spontaneous Music Ensemble, 134
Sprawson, Charles, 269
Sri Chinmoy, 97
Stalling, Carl, 115–16
Steele, Jack E., 217
Steiner, Rudolf, 256–7
Steward Lincoln, J., 273
Stewart, Madeau, 138
Still, William Grant, 83
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 30–31, 73, 83, 99–103, 105, 152, 163, 178, 180, 205
Stockhausen, Markus, 277
Stone, Oliver, 183, 277
Stone, Sly (Sly and The Family Stone), 45, 100
Strauss, Johann, 64
Strauss, Richard, 46, 262
Stravinsky, Igor, 79, 259
Strayhorn, Billy, 95, 168
Sueno Latino, 63–4
Sugata, Ida Bagus, 17
Suicide, 271
Sultan Agung, 20
Sumac, Yma, 164
Summer, Donna, 44
Sun Electric, 214
Sun Ra, xiii, 26–34, 86, 88, 256
Suns of Arqa, 120
Surjodiningrat, R.M. Wasisto, 19–20
Suzuki, Akio, 158
Suzuki, Daisetz, 155–6

Suzuki, Damo, 243
Sweet Exorcist, 214
Sylvian, David, 163, 276–7
Symphony Sid, 87
Takemitsu, Tōru, 269
Takeshi, Beat, 196
Talking Heads, 124, 163
Tangerine Dream, 65, 91–2, 262
Tanizaki, Jun’ichirō, 150–51, 157–8, 269
Tansen, 186–8
Tate, Greg, 98
Tavener, John, 238
Taylor, John, 277
Teitelbaum, Richard, 135
Telepathic Fish, 49, 58–61
Temptations, The, 45–6
Tennant, Neil, 56
Tennyson, Alfred, 274
Tewfik, Samira, 125
Theremin, Léon, 84, 88
This Mortal Coil, 60
Thompson, Danny (bass), 277
Thompson, Danny (saxophones), 27
Thompson, Robert Farris, 48
Thomson, David, 162–3
Thornhill, Claude, 191
Throbbing Gristle, 51, 208
Tilbury, John, 142–3
Tipu Sultan, 74
Tipu’s Tiger, 74
Tizol, Juan, 168
Toffler, Alvin, 213–14
Tomita, 213
Tonto’s Expanding Head Band, 212
Tosches, Nick, 90
Toyama, Michiko, 84

Trautwein, Friedrich, 88
Tristano, Lennie, 191–3
Trumbull, Douglas, 54
Truth, 40
Tudor, David, 141, 143, 180
Turner, Victor, 255
Tyree, 40
Tyson, June, 27
U2, 109, 147–8
Ultramarine, 58
Underground Resistance, 208, 214
Undisputed Truth, 46
U Roy, 119
Vandepapeliere, Renaat, 52, 57
Vandepapeliere, Sabine, 52
Vandor, Ivan, 135
Vangelis, 91, 165, 213
van Gulik, Robert Hans, 219, 242
Varese, Edgard, 112, 126, 200
Väth, Sven, 57
Vaughan Williams, Ralph, 262
Velvet Underground, The, 45, 173–4, 271
Ventures, The, 107
Verne, Jules, 88
Verve, The, 174
Vinci, Leonardo da, 81, 217
Virgo, 40, 55
VJ Sato, 270
Vollenweider, Andreas, 262
Vonnegut, Kurt, 153
Vorhaus, David, 140
Xebec, 158–61, 245, 253, 272
Xenakis, Iannis, 84
Yabby U, 120
Yamashiro, Shoji, 17

Yokoi, Hiroshi, 153–4, 156, 158
YMO (Yellow Magic Orchestra), 42
Young, La Monte, 14, 45, 163, 172–80, 183, 185, 189, 200, 205, 245
Young, Larry, 97–8
Young, Neil, 271
Yüeh, Shen, 242
Wachsmann, Klaus, 18
Wagner, Richard, 19–20, 23, 76, 205
Wakeman, Rick, 66, 261
Walcott, Colin, 99
Wall, John, 259–60
Wall, Max, 141
War, 45, 65
Washington, Geno (& the Ram Jam
Band), 49
Wen-chung, Chou, 83
Wheeler, Kenny, 277
Whitfield, Norman, 45–6
Williams, Andy, 90
Williams, Hank, 94
Williams, John, 263
Williams, Tony, 98
Wilmer, Valerie, 30, 95, 137
Wilson, Brian, 111–13, 116, 269
Wilson, Dennis, 270
Wolff, Henry, 140
Woods, Willie, 95
World Soundscape Project, 246, 250
Wynette, Tammy, 66
Zappa, Frank, 82, 84, 182
Zawinul, Joe, 98, 100
Zazeela, Marian, 172–3, 175, 189
Zorn, John, 115, 192, 259
Zosimos of Panopolis, 86
Zoviet France, 264

ALSO FROM PROFILE BOOKS
As Serious as Your Life: Black Music and the Free Jazz Revolution,
1957–1977

Val Wilmer
An essential masterpiece of jazz history by renowned photographer and music historian, with a new
foreword by Richard Williams.
ISBN 978 1 78816 071 1
eISBN 978 1 78283 458 8
Rave On: Global Adventures in Electronic Dance Music Matthew
Collin
The essential account of rave culture today.
ISBN 978 1 78125 425 7
eISBN 978 1 78283 145 7
Music: Ideas in Profile Andrew Gant
The best concise introduction to an essential subject.
ISBN 978 1 78125 642 8
eISBN 978 1 78283 251 5

