See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220629420
Oliver G. Selfridge (1926-2008)
Article  in  Intelligent Systems, IEEE · January 2009
DOI: 10.1109/MIS.2009.14 · Source: DBLP
CITATIONS
0
READS
276
1 author:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
TWC Linked Open Government Data View project
Security and Privacy of performing Data Analytics in the cloud - A three-way handshake of Technology, Policy, and Management View project
James Hendler
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
471 PUBLICATIONS   41,571 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by James Hendler on 27 July 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

12 
 
1541-1672/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE 
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
field. In fact, if you’re working in machine learning, neu-
ral networks, other soft-computing approaches, or agent-
based computing, then whether you are aware or not, you 
owe a significant intellectual debt to Oliver. His seminal 
ideas in these and related areas helped define the nature 
of our work.
Beginnings of AI
He was an organizer of the 1956 Dartmouth summer 
school, which is generally seen as the origin of American 
AI. During a career that spanned over half a century, he 
worked at GTE, BBN, and the MIT Media Laboratory, 
earning various awards and honors. 
Oliver developed Pandemonium, one of the first AI 
programs to attack learning and reasoning. This system 
could recognize patterns by using what we would today 
call a self-organizing community of agents. Throughout 
the years, he continued to develop ideas about how such 
self-organizing distributed systems could work, and the 
ideas inspired a number of researchers to develop some 
of the main technologies we use in that area today. The 
AAAI, in its AI Topics page on machine learning (www.
aaai.org/AITopics/html/machine.html), chose two quota-
tions from Oliver to begin the article. 
Continuing Influence
In 2006, I invited Oliver to contribute an article to this 
magazine’s “Future of AI” issue. Instead of resting 
on his laurels and writing about his early work in the 
field, or talking about the successes of machine learn-
ing that had arisen, Oliver chose a different course. 
His article “Learning and Education: A Continuing 
Frontier for AI” (IEEE Intelligent Systems, May/June 
2006, pp. 16–23) focused on the challenges that remain 
and how what we can do today seems simple when we 
compare it to the learning tasks that humans do almost 
effortlessly. His article posed several challenges to the 
community and sought to, once again, help shape our 
field’s future.
To me, Oliver was not only one of the founders of our 
field but also a friend and mentor. Although I had met 
him before, we really got to know each other when I was 
at DARPA in the late 1990s. I invited Oliver to come 
down to DC to talk with me about the agent-based com-
puting programs I was running and to give me feedback 
on some ideas. Oliver started by presenting a few “off 
the cuff” ideas about agent-based systems based on his 
long experience as an observer in the field. It became in-
stantly clear that his ideas went well beyond what most 
people in the field, including me, were thinking, and 
we ended up talking late into the night. That and later 
discussions with Oliver significantly influenced all the 
agent programs I led at DARPA, including those that 
eventually helped lead to the Semantic Web and the use 
of agents in a number of real-world applications.
Oliver was one of the most interesting and energetic 
people I ever met, and one of the most fascinating to 
talk to. A dinner with Oliver would include anecdotes 
about early AI researchers, provocative ideas about 
what current researchers were missing, and insights 
into the field’s future, as well as reflections into life, 
family, and the world in which we live. 
I n  M e m o r i a m
Oliver G. Selfridge 
(1926–2008)
James Hendler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
I
t’s with a feeling of deep loss that I reflect on the  
recent death of Oliver Selfridge. His ideas on how 
humans learn, and how researchers could replicate this 
process with computers, profoundly affected the AI 
Photo courtesy of Caroline Selfridge

January/February 2009	
www.computer.org/intelligent	
13
A Gentleman and a Scholar
Oliver cared about people and was, in the 
best sense of the term, a real gentleman. 
One night at dinner the discussion turned 
to our families, as discussions with Oli-
ver invariably did (he never missed an 
opportunity to brag about the accom-
plishments of his children, including of 
course Mallory and Peter, both well- 
respected AI scientists in their own 
right). I mentioned in passing that my 
daughter, then in her early teens, was 
interested in mathematics, and that took 
us off into an anecdote about a famous 
mathematician whom Oliver had known 
as well as various other mathematical 
topics. About two weeks later, I received 
a package from Oliver—it included print-
outs of a couple of books about mathe-
matics aimed at teens that he had written 
but not published. The books provided 
insights into complex mathematical phe-
nomena at an appropriate level, and my 
daughter loved them. I was struck by the 
fact that not only had Oliver written such 
wonderful things but that he had also re-
membered the off-hand remark about my 
daughter’s interests and acted on them. 
That’s the kind of caring person he was.
Just a few weeks ago, I had written 
to some colleagues suggesting that we 
nominate Oliver for a major US gov-
ernment award, because he spent much 
of his career working with government 
projects, rather than promoting his ideas 
in academia. (In fact, I’m told that sev-
eral of his major accomplishments were 
done in classified domains, so he’s better 
known publicly for his early ideas than 
for his later work that helped to deliver 
on those early promises.) I pointed out 
how amazing it was that “Oliver’s work 
impacted so many different parts of the 
AI field, and yet his ideas in recent writ-
ings are as fresh as those in his seminal 
early papers.” 
It’s a very rare person who can, as Oliver 
did, provide compelling research visions 
throughout a long career. It’s also rare to 
find someone as willing as he was to men-
tor younger researchers and spend time 
helping them advance their careers. And 
it’s terribly rare to find someone as full of 
life and as interesting to talk to as Oliver 
was. Those of us practicing AI today are 
truly lucky that this was the field Oli-
ver chose to work in, and he’ll be sorely 
missed.
James Hendler is the Tetherless World Senior 
Constellation Chair at Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute, where he directs the Future of Infor-
mation project and has appointments in the De-
partment of Computer Science and the Cogni-
tive Science Department. He’s an editor in chief 
emeritus of IEEE Intelligent Systems. Contact 
him at hendler@cs.rpi.edu.
PURPOSE: The IEEE Computer Society is the world’s largest association 
of computing professionals and is the leading provider of technical 
information in the field.
MEMBERSHIP: Members receive the monthly magazine Computer,
discounts, and opportunities to serve (all activities are led by volunteer 
members). Membership is open to all IEEE members, affiliate society 
members, and others interested in the computer field.
COMPUTER SOCIETY WEB SITE: www.computer.org
OMBUDSMAN: Email help@computer.org.
Next Board Meeting: 6 Feb. 2009, Los Angeles, CA, USA
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President: Susan K. (Kathy) Land, CSDP*
President-Elect: James D. Isaak;* Past President: Rangachar Kasturi;*
Secretary: David A. Grier;* VP, Chapters Activities: Sattupathu V. 
Sankaran;† VP, Educational Activities: Alan Clements (2nd VP);* VP, 
Publications: Sorel Reisman;† VP, Standards Activities: John Harauz;†
VP, Technical & Conference Activities: John W. Walz (1st VP);*
Treasurer: Donald F. Shafer;† 2008–2009 IEEE Division V Director:
Deborah M. Cooper;† 2009–2010 IEEE Division VIII Director: Stephen 
L. Diamond;† 2009 IEEE Division V Director-Elect: Michael R. Williams;†
Computer Editor in Chief: Carl K. Chang† 
*voting member of the Board of Governors
†nonvoting member of the Board of Governors
BOARD OF GOVERNORS
Term Expiring 2009: Van L. Eden; Robert Dupuis; Frank E. Ferrante; Roger 
U. Fujii; Ann Q. Gates, CSDP; Juan E. Gilbert; Don F. Shafer
Term Expiring 2010: André Ivanov; Phillip A. Laplante; Itaru Mimura; Jon 
G. Rokne; Christina M. Schober; Ann E.K. Sobel; Jeffrey M. Voas
Term Expiring 2011: Elisa Bertino, George V. Cybenko, Ann DeMarle, 
David S. Ebert, David A. Grier, Hironori Kasahara, Steven L. Tanimoto
EXECUTIVE STAFF
Executive Director: Angela R. Burgess; Director, Business & Product 
Development: Ann Vu; Director, Finance & Accounting: John Miller;
Director, Governance, & Associate Executive Director: Anne Marie 
Kelly; Director, Membership Development: Violet S. Doan;  Director, 
Products & Services: Evan Butterfield; Director, Sales & Marketing:
Dick Price
COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICES
Washington, D.C.: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, D.C. 20036
Phone: +1 202 371 0101; Fax: +1 202 728 9614; Email: hq.ofc@computer.org
Los Alamitos: 10662 Los Vaqueros Circle, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone: +1 714 821 8380; Email: help@computer.org
Membership & Publication Orders:
Phone: +1 800 272 6657; Fax: +1 714 821 4641; Email: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific: Watanabe Building, 1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama, Minato-ku, Tokyo 
107-0062, Japan
Phone:t'BY
Email: tokyo.ofc@computer.org
IEEE OFFICERS
President: John R. Vig; President-Elect: Pedro A. Ray; Past President:
Lewis M. Terman;  Secretary: Barry L. Shoop; Treasurer: Peter W. 
Staecker; VP, Educational Activities: Teofilo Ramos; VP, Publication 
Services & Products: Jon G. Rokne; VP, Membership & Geographic 
Activities: Joseph V. Lillie;  President, Standards Association Board 
of Governors: W. Charlton Adams; VP, Technical Activities: Harold L. 
Flescher; IEEE Division V Director: Deborah M. Cooper; IEEE Division 
VIII Director: Stephen L. Diamond; President, IEEE-USA: Gordon W. Day
revised 15 Dec. 2008
View publication stats

