Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 223-237, 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
223 
On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
António Machiavelo 
(Centro de Matemática da Universidade do Porto) 
ajmachia@fc.up.pt 
 
Introduction 
The main question we here address is the following: how can we, human 
beings, deduce without any apparent recourse to experience, i.e. seemingly a 
priori, truths about the universe in which we live in? And what is the source of 
the intuitions that guide us in the quest of those truths? Our main focus here 
are mathematical truths. Therefore, we also have to deal with what exactly is 
a mathematical truth. 
Let us look at an example that will be used throughout the paper. Consider 
a graph, which is just a 
 
 
Fig. 1: A graph 
 
set of points, some of which are connected by lines (see the left side of Fig. 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
224 
1). The shape of the lines is irrelevant, all that matters is whether two points 
are or not connected by a line. In this context one usually calls vertices to the 
points, while the lines are called edges. The number of lines (edges) that 
come out a given point (vertex) is called the degree of that point (vertex). It is 
very well-known, and easy to see, that the following proposition, which we will 
henceforth call P, holds true: 
Proposition P: In any graph, the sum of the degrees of all vertices is 
equal to the double of the number of edges. 
The reason is simply that when one adds all degrees, one is adding all 
lines twice, since a line comes out of exactly two vertices (see the right side of 
Fig. 1). 
Now, this implies, for instance, that one can never connect five things so 
that each one is connected to precisely other three. Be it five branch offices of 
a business that someone wants to connect with fiber optic cables so that each 
one is connected to exactly other three, or five capitals that an airline 
company wants to connect with flights so that from each capital one can fly to 
exactly other three, or simply five rocks that one wants to connect with ropes 
so that each stone is connected to exactly other three, it just cannot be done! 
Why? Because in each one of these tasks one is looking for 
 
 
Fig. 2: It cannot be done! 
 
something that is equivalent to the construction of a graph in which the sum of 
the degrees of all vertices is 15, an odd number, which cannot be, by 
proposition P. 
In this way, one has concluded, without any doubt whatsoever, that a very 
great number of tasks cannot be done, and that was accomplished without no 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
225 
need to make a single experiment. How is this possible? And where do the 
ideas and intuitions behind the argument come from? 
1. What exactly is Mathematics? 
It is not easy to define what Mathematics is about. To simply say that it is 
the "science of numbers" is so vague and inaccurate as saying that literature 
is the "art of letters". In the first place, Mathematics deals not only with 
numbers, but with a rather extensive panoply of objects like geometric figures, 
sets, functions, algebraic structures, topological spaces, graphs, and so on, 
some of which have no connection to numbers. Secondly, as with literature, 
where one merely uses letters to convey thoughts and feelings, in 
Mathematics, when numbers are used, is mostly to convey thoughts and 
relationships. Note that, although numbers intervene in the statement of 
Proposition P, this proposition is not about numbers, but about some 
relationship among the number of points and the number of lines. 
Sometimes, it is said that Mathematics is a language, which one then 
claims to be universal, often comparing it with music. But the really interesting 
question is what does this language expresses What does Mathematics 
study? It is more or less clear that, roughly, Physics studies the laws of 
interaction of matter and energy; that Chemistry studies the interaction of 
molecules and the properties of the compounds that they form; that Biology 
studies living organisms, mainly their internal organization, and that Ethology 
studies the external, individual and social, behavior of complex living 
organisms. But, even roughly, what part of reality does Mathematics study? 
Or, is it the case that it does not study anything real? But then, how to explain 
its truly amazing descriptive and, especially, its predictive power? 
A striking example of both these powers is the discovery by James Clerk 
Maxwell (1831--1879), on paper (!) and with the paramount help of 
mathematics, around 1864, of electromagnetic waves. He realized that light is 
such a wave, and that there are many more kinds of these waves, whose 
existence was only experimentally confirmed more than two decades later, by 
Heinrich Hertz (1857--1894),1 who wrote: 
It is impossible to study this wonderful theory without feeling as if the 
mathematical equations had an independent life and an intelligence of their 
own, as if they were wiser than ourselves, indeed wiser than their discoverer, as 
                                                           
1 See [3], Chap. XX, and [4], Chap. 6. 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
226 
if they gave forth more than he had put into them... 2 
Other examples would be: the discovery, in 1900, of the quantum nature of 
the atomic world, by Max Planck (1858--1947), who was literally forced by 
mathematics to accept physical interpretations he did not like in the least;3 
Riemannian geometry, developed by Bernhard Riemann (1826--1866), 
around 1854, inspired by the work of Gauss (1777--1855), and later 
elaborated by Beltrami (1835--1900), Christoffel (1829--1900), Lipschitz 
(1832--1903), Ricci (1853--1925) and Levi-Civita (1873--1941), which played, 
more than half a century later, a crucial role in the general theory of relativity 
of Albert Einstein (1879--1955);4 the prediction in 1928 of anti-matter made by 
Paul Dirac (1902--1984),5 which was experimentally confirmed four years 
later.  
These are just some examples of what has been called by the physicist 
Eugene Wigner6 the "unreasonable effectiveness of Mathematics in the 
Natural Sciences".7 This unreasonable effectiveness does show that whatever 
the language of Mathematics expresses, it must have some real content. This 
has been eloquently articulated by Galileo, in a famous passage of his 1623 
book Il Saggiatore (Chap. 6): 
Philosophy is written in this grand book - I mean the universe - which stands 
continually open to our gaze, but it cannot be understood unless one first learns 
to comprehend the language and interpret the characters in which it is written. It 
is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, 
circles, and other geometric figures, without which it is humanly impossible to 
understand a single word of it. 
It is also often said of Mathematics that its deals only with approximations 
to reality. That since perfect triangles or perfect circles do not exist, results 
about triangles or circles can only be used within prescribed degrees of error. 
I will return to this later, but now I just wish to note that Proposition P 
presented above is not an approximation to reality, but an exact description of 
a feature of reality. It is indeed utterly impossible to connect five rocks, or any 
other five things, so that anyone of them is connected to exactly three other, 
or in any other way which violates what that proposition states. The relation 
                                                           
2 Quoted in [5], p. 101. 
3 6], p. 4. 
4 See [7], Chap. 37, and §4 of Chap. 48. 
5 See [8], p. 392. 
6 Nobel laureate in Physics, 1963. 
7 In [9]. See also [11,12]. 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
227 
stated by the proposition is absolutely necessary, as all of its instances. But 
the interesting point is that, while one can easily imagine, and even 
conceptually play with worlds that have different physical laws, like one in 
which the gravitation law would be inversely proportional to the cube of the 
distance, instead of the square, one cannot envision an universe where 
Proposition P is false. As Raymond Smullyan writes in [13, p. 47]: 
The physical sciences are interested in the state of affairs that holds for the 
actual world, whereas pure mathematics and logic study all possible state of 
affairs. 
This, to me, hints at the fact that, in Mathematics, one is studying some 
sort of deep structural laws on which the universe is built upon, something 
that underlies the physical laws of Nature, maybe even some structural laws 
that must be satisfied by any possible Universe. Pushing the point a bit 
further, it does seem that when the Universe come into existence at the so 
called "Big Bang" (a not very good name, by the way), it already come with 
some structural fabric and that, somehow, Mathematics is the area of human 
knowledge that studies precisely that fabric, a sort of logic inner fabric 
underlying everything. 
2. Mathematical Objects 
The ontological status of mathematical objects has been a source of 
philosophical debate since, at least the time of Plato. Whether mathematical 
objects are real or ideal, are discovered or created, has been discussed for 
millennia. And the controversy is pretty much alive in the 21th century, as 
shown by a series of short papers published by the Newsletter of the 
European Mathematical Society, [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Lots of 
philosophical "theories" have been conceived to try to answer those puzzling 
questions. Although all of them do make pertinent and interesting remarks on 
these matters, none of them seems to quite yield completely satisfactory 
answers. Either they do not adequately explain how can mathematics have so 
many and quite impressive applications to the "real" world, or they do not 
clearly unravel in exactly what form are mathematical objects real. 
But before we tackle this question of the status of mathematical objects, 
one should first try to make clear what exactly does one mean by "object". We 
have to be very careful here, since we humans have a more than natural 
tendency to attribute reality, or existence, overwhelmingly to material objects 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
228 
that our senses can directly detect. Now, even if one tries to restrict the notion 
of "real objects" to things that are "physical" in some sense, one immediately 
runs into some difficulties, as for example: are electromagnetic waves "real" 
objects? What about gravity? These do seem to have a form of existence that 
is quite different from, say, a rock. 
But even a "physical" object like a person, for example8,has layers of 
complexity that, although well known, are seldom thought of. To see this, let 
us consider some of the levels at which one can describe a human being (see 
Fig. 3) To a doctor, he is but a set of organs and its interrelations - let me draw 
here the reader's attention to the importance of these interrelations: 
rearranging the organs has absolutely dramatic consequences! Now, to a 
biologist, he is a set of cells and their (vital!) interrelations. To a physicist, he is 
but a set of atoms and their (crucial!) interrelations. But, and I find this 
extremely curious, according to the 1932 Nobel laureate in physics, Werner 
Heisenberg (1901--1976), elementary particles are "mathematical forms" ([6], 
p. 36) and, in general, (p. 51): 
The 'thing-in-itself' is for the atomic physicist, if he uses this concept at all, 
finally a mathematical structure. 
Human being 
↓ 
Set of organs and their interrelations 
↓ 
Set of cells and their interrelations 
↓ 
Set of atoms and their interrelations 
↓ 
Mathematical entity? 
Fig. 3: What is an object, really? 
Therefore, the question of knowing what a "real" object is, in order to 
eventually help clarify what a mathematical object might be, leads us right into 
mathematical structures! 
To complicate things even further, let us observe that a human being is a 
                                                           
8 I do not believe in things for which there is no evidence for their actual existence, so I 
am here disregarding beliefs in the existence of supernatural (whatever that means!) 
components of humans or other animals. 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
229 
set of atoms, together with their very special interrelationships, that varies 
with time! In an address to the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, in 
1955, titled The Value of Science (included in [21], pp. 240--248), Richard 
Feynman9 (1918--1988) noted: 
[the] phosphorus that is in the brain of a rat --- and also in mine, and yours --- is 
not the same phosphorus as it was two weeks ago. [...] the atoms that are in the 
brain are being replaced: the ones that were there before have gone away. 
So what is this mind of ours: what are these atoms with consciousness? Last 
week's potatoes! They now can remember what was going on in my mind a 
year ago --- a mind which has long ago been replaced. [...] the thing which I call 
my individuality is only a pattern or dance [...]. The atoms come into my brain, 
dance a dance, then go out --- there are always new atoms, but always doing 
the same dance, remembering what the dance was yesterday. 
That is, humans and animals in general are much more like rivers than like 
rocks: they are patterns, rather than "fixed" physical objects. 
From all of this, what I want here to emphasize is that relations between 
"physical" objects are as real and important as the objects themselves. And 
that there are laws and patterns ruling these interrelations which are as real 
as anything else. Mathematics seems to capture some of these inner relations 
that are just not visible to the naked eye. As Rudy Rucker, in p. 4 of [22], 
writes: 
Mathematics is the study of pure pattern, and everything in the cosmos is a kind 
of pattern. 
Numbers themselves are but representations of some special kinds of 
relationships. To make this clear, let us first point out the distinction between a 
number, e.g. 6, and its representation10. In fact, "6" is not the number six (see 
Fig. 4). 
 
Fig. 6: Several representations of the number 6 
                                                           
9 Nobel laureate in physics, 1965. 
10 The distinction between a representation and the thing being represented is 
eloquently illustrated by some paintings of René Magritte (1898--1967), namely the 
one titled "La trahison des images" (see 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Treachery_of_Images), which consists of a drawing of 
a pipe together with the sentence "this is not a pipe". This is entirely true: there is no 
pipe in the painting, only a representation of it! 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
230 
So, what is the object represented by "6"? What does it refer to? More 
precisely, what exactly is the number six? Well, it is a certain "quantity", which 
is a certain property of a collection of objects. It is actually the common 
property of all collections that have that particular number of elements, and it 
captures a certain relation that those collections all have among themselves. 
 
2
0
( 1)
     
                        
     
2
1
    These are not mathematical objects
n
x
n
e
dx
n








 
Fig. 5: Paraphrasing Magritte 
In conclusion, mathematical objects encode some subtle relationships, and 
are not to be expected to literally exist out there in the same manner as a 
physical object exists, although one should be careful, since a detailed 
analysis shows that even "physical" objects may be quite more intricate than 
realized at first glance. So, numbers, triangles, circles, and other 
mathematical entities are but constructs that represent deep, hidden relations, 
and are not to be taken verbatim. But these relations are as real as any other 
"objects". 
3. An Evolutionary Perspective 
More than two millenia ago, Plato could not explain how humans seem to 
be born with some form of knowledge --- some sort of software, as we could 
now call it ---, and could not explain how can one reach previously unknown 
truths from deductions alone, except by arguing for the existence of another 
sort of parallel world, a world of "forms", and for the pre-existence of a "soul" 
that would have inhabited that world before being "attached" to a body. Now, 
most people do not seem to realize that those mysteries were solved, in a 
much more satisfactory way, about 150 years ago. 
Before explaining how, let me rephrase what I tried to convey in the last 
section, that the "forms" of Plato do exist in this world, not in a mysterious and 
intangible ideal world. They are the laws governing the interconnections of 
matter and energy, and of more subtle properties, like "quantity" and various 
kinds of relations among things, and also the laws governing the 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
231 
interconnections between those "first-order" laws, maybe even some "higher-
order" laws. They are all part of a sort of inner structure of the Cosmos. 
Mathematical objects (not their representations!) are the elements of that 
structure. But then how do we have access to that "mathematical structure"? 
The answer was given by one of the most brilliant and diligent humans of 
all times: Charles Darwin (1809--1882), who perfectly summarized it in the so 
called "notebook M",11 in which one can find (p. 128, in an entry dated 4 
September 1838): 
Plato says in Phaedo that our "necessary ideas" arise from the preexistence of 
the soul, are not derivable from experience --- read monkeys for preexistence. 
This is just a note that Darwin wrote to himself, but after one understands 
the history of life on this planet, which was made possible by the seminal 
discovery of "natural selection and descent with slow modification'', its 
meaning becomes clear. We humans are the result of thousands of millions of 
years of selection, of real experiences made by countless generations of all 
our ancestors, from all the species of which we are descendants. There is 
therefore a vast array of experience contained in our genetic code, 
experiences that we draw upon to explore the Universe that surrounds us. So, 
when a human being is born is not some sort of blank slate, but comes 
equipped with powerful tools to understand Nature. 
Now, the discovery of the mechanism of "natural selection and descent 
with slow modification"12 or the "theory of evolution", as it is commonly 
known,13 explained so many things that were previously completely baffling, 
and made intelligible an huge array of data and observations about living 
organisms previously scattered and mystifying. It stimulated, and continues to 
stimulate, fruitful research in several areas of biology.14 However, after more 
than 150 years it is still not properly understood by many people, and there 
are too many misconceptions15 and completely wrong ideas about it. 
Among the main erroneous ideas that interfere with an understanding of 
the theory of evolution, let us mention the following: (a) life evolves purely 
randomly, which arises from not realizing that there is a sharp distinction 
between the randomness of mutations and the mechanism of natural 
                                                           
11 Available online, at http://darwin-online.org.uk. 
12 [23]. See also [24, Chaps. 3 and 4. 
13 The term "evolution" is not the best, since it gives the wrong idea of a "progress", but 
unfortunately "natural selection and descent with slow modification" was just too big. 
14 See [25], Chaps. 7-10. 
15 See [26] and http://evolution.berkeley.edu/evolibrary/misconceptions_faq.php. 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
232 
selection, which is anything but random; (b) to be "fit", meaning well adapted 
to a particular environment, implies to be ruthless and strong; (c) evolution 
implies a continuous progress from "inferior" animals to "superior" ones; (d) it 
justifies mean, cruel and immoral behaviour; (e) it justifies the "law of the 
jungle". Partly, these confusions came from the fact that there has been an 
exaggerated emphasis on competition over cooperation in descriptions and 
popular introductions of the theory of evolution. Here we limit ourselves to 
note that a human being is in fact the result of tremendously complicated 
symbiotic relationships. In our digestive tract alone there are hundreds of 
species of bacteria, essential to our survival, and their total number is ten 
times greater than the total number of human cells in the body16! 
The wrong, but very pervasive, ideas about the theory of evolution, 
together with the fact that this theory removes humans from a central pedestal 
above all other living creatures (which hurts our natural anthropocentric 
feelings), lead to an emotional denial, be it conscious or unconscious, of the 
"transcendently democratic"17and profound consequences of the insights of 
Darwin. A perfect example of this, and quite relevant for the subject of this 
essay, is the following passage from [27]18 (p.19), where Roger Penrose 
clearly states why he prefers Plato's intangible, ideal world: 
How do I really feel about the possibility that all my actions, and those of my 
friends, are ultimately governed by mathematical principles of this kind? I can 
live with that. I would, indeed, prefer to have these actions controlled by 
something residing in some such aspect of Plato's fabulous mathematical world 
than to have them be subject to the kind of simplistic base motives, such as 
pleasure-seeking, personal greed, or aggressive violence, that many would 
argue to be the implications of a strictly scientific standpoint. 
This shows that the author felt into the trap of some of the above 
mentioned misconceptions. It comes then as no surprise that he writes a little 
later:19 
it remains a deep puzzle why mathematical laws should apply to the world with 
such phenomenal precision. 
In a Darwinian perspective this mystery starts to fade away, since, as Carl 
Sagan explains in [28], pp. 232--233: 
                                                           
16 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gut_flora. 
17 See [24], p. 67. 
18 Which is, nevertheless, an amazing book, a true tour de force! 
19  [27], pp. 20--21. 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
233 
we can imagine a universe in which the laws of nature are immensely more 
complex. But we do not live in such a universe. Why not? I think it may be 
because all those organisms who perceived their universe as very complex are 
dead. Those of our arboreal ancestors who had difficulty computing their 
trajectories as they brachiated from tree to tree did not leave many 
offspring20.Natural selection has served as a kind of intellectual sieve, producing 
brains and intelligences increasingly competent to deal with the laws of nature. 
This resonance, extracted by natural selection, between our brains and the 
universe may help explain a quandary set by Einstein: The most 
incomprehensible property of the universe, he said, is that it is so 
comprehensible. 
I have always found it rather curious that everyone is so amazed with the 
extraordinary fine-tuning between some characteristics of some animals and 
their environment, and do not notice that the same applies to the human 
animal. They seem to assume, explicitly or, most of the time, implicitly, that 
there is a fundamental separation between our mental capabilities and 
Nature. The mind is the product of a natural selection that operated over a 
vast period of time, and is just as part of Nature as anything else. It contains 
remarkable adaptations of humans to their environment, including the 
capabilities of pattern detection, abstraction, and the organization of 
information. As Rudy Rucker so well puts it, in [22], p. 16: 
That our mathematics is effective for manipulating concepts is perhaps no more 
surprising than that our legs are good for walking. 
4. The Source of Intuition 
As the success of Physics in describing a huge amount of diverse 
phenomena shows, the Universe clearly seems to have a sort of inner 
mathematical "texture". Now, we humans are the product of a natural 
selection process that produced our brains, which can, through pattern 
recognition and abstraction, access at least part of that texture. This has 
allowed our species to uncover some parts of our Universe that totally escape 
detection by our senses, like radio waves, for instance. As sketched in Fig. 6, 
through an amazingly rich evolutive heritage, our brains are able to capture 
the mathematical structure of the Cosmos, and this has allowed us to enlarge 
our horizons, by uncovering parts of the Universe that were previously 
unknown to us. 
 
                                                           
20 Obviously, this is just a caricatural example. 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
234 
 
 
Fig. 6: The universe, human beings and mathematics 
One can now see that working on an open problem in Mathematics, for 
example, helps to sharpen some of our main evolutionary tools, testing our 
intellectual limits, and this effort may lead to build the tools to overcome some 
of those limits. The evolutionary advantages of this should be obvious. Of 
course, any progress in any given problem will be but a tiny and very humble 
piece of knowledge about the intimate structure of our universe, but it is still 
worthwhile. Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) said it best [29]: 
knowledge of every truth is a worthy matter in itself, even of those which seem 
unrelated to popular use; we have seen that all truths, at least those which we 
are able to understand, are so greatly connected with one another, that we 
cannot consider any one of them altogether useless without some rashness. 
And so, even if a certain proposition seems to be this way, so that regardless 
of whether it turns out to be true or false, it would be of no benefit to us anyway, 
still the method itself, by which we would established its truth or falsity, 
nevertheless may be useful in opening up the way for us to discover other, more 
useful truths. 
What I have tried to argue above is that, in order to understand what 
Mathematics is about, one must first realize that, besides physical objects 
(whatever they really are), and as importantly, the world contains some sort of 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
235 
intrinsic logical inner structure. And our brains have been selected to 
apprehend it, to some extent. Working on a mathematical problem, as 
abstract as it may be, is to uncover a tiny piece of that inner structure. The 
source of the intuitions that guide us in these investigations resides on our 
immensely rich evolutionary heritage. 
Of course, how exactly does that genetic heritage comes alive in each one 
of us is still largely unknown, and to unravel its secrets will represent a 
tremendous challenge for generations to come. In the same vain, the problem 
of knowing precisely what is the mechanism behind mathematical intuitions, 
whatever exactly that means, the problem of knowing precisely what intuitions 
are behind a result like Proposition P discussed above, remains to be 
understood. But, and this has been the central point of this paper, one simply 
cannot do that without a proper evolutionary perspective. 
References 
[1] A. Machiavelo, A Natureza dos Objectos Matemáticos, Gazeta de Matemática 161 
(2010) 7-16. 
 
[2] A. Machiavelo, On the Importance of Useless Mathematics, in Ehrhard Behrends, 
Nuno Crato, José Francisco Rodrigues (eds.), Raising Public Awareness of 
Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp. 397-408. 
 
[3] Morris Kline, Mathematics in Western Culture, Oxford University Press, 1964 
(original from 1953). 
 
[4] Robert Osserman, Poetry of the Universe: A Mathematical Exploration of the 
Cosmos, Anchor, 1996. 
 
[5] Giona Hon, Bernard Goldstein, Hertz's Methodology and its Influence on Einstein, 
pp. 95--105, in: Gudrun Wolfschmidt (ed.), Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894) and the 
Development of Communication: Proceedings of the Symposium for History of 
Science, Hamburg, October 8-12, 2007, Books on Demand, 2008. 
 
[6] Werner Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy: the Revolution in Modern Science, 
Penguin Books, 1989 (original from 1958). 
 
[7] Morris Kline, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Oxford 
University Press, 1990. 
 
[8] Werner Heisenberg, Development of Concepts in the History of Quantum Theory, 
American Journal of Physics 43 (1975) 389-394. 
 
[9] Eugene P. Wigner, The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural 
Sciences, Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics 13 (1960) 1--14. 

António Machiavelo 
 
Kairos. Journal of Philosophy & Science 6: 2013. 
Center for the Philosophy of Sciences of Lisbon University 
 
 
236 
Reimpresso em [10], vol. III, pp. 116-125. 
 
[10] Douglas M. Campbell, John C. Higgins (eds.), Mathematics: People, Problems, 
Results, Wadsworth International, 1984. 
 
[11] R. W. Hamming, The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics, The American 
Mathematical Monthly 87 (1980) 81-90. 
 
[12] Mark Colyvan, The Miracle of Applied Mathematics, Synthese 127 (2001) 265-
277. 
 
[13] Raymond Smullyan, Forever Undecided: a puzzle guide to Gödel, Oxford 
University Press, 1987. 
 
[14] E Brian Davies, Let Platonism Die, Newsletter of the European Mathematical 
Society, June 2007, pp. 24-25. 
 
[15] Ruben Hersh, On Platonism, Newsletter of the European Mathematical Society, 
June 2008, pp. 17-18. 
 
[16] Barry Mazur, Mathematical Platonism and its Opposites, Newsletter of the 
European Mathematical Society, June 2008, pp. 19-21. 
 
[17] David Mumford, Why I am a Platonist, Newsletter of the European Mathematical 
Society, December 2008, pp. 27-30. 
 
[18] Philip J Davis, Why I Am A (Moderate) Social Constructivist, Newsletter of the 
European Mathematical Society, December 2008, pp. 30-31. 
 
[19] Martin Gardner, Is Reuben Hersh 'Out there'?, Newsletter of the European 
Mathematical Society, June 2009, pp. 23-24. 
 
[20] E Brian Davies, Some Recent Articles about Platonism, Newsletter of the 
European Mathematical Society, June 2009, pp. 24-27. 
 
[21] Richard Feynman, What Do You Care What Other People Think?, Bantam Books, 
1989. 
 
[22] Rudy Rucker, Mind Tools: the Five Levels of Mathematical Reality, Houghton 
Mifflin, 1987. 
 
[23] Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection, or the 
preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life, John Murray, 1859. Available in 
The Complete Work of Charles Darwin Online, at http://darwin-online.org.uk. 
 
[24] Carl Sagan, Ann Druyan, Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors, Ballantine Books, 
1993. 
 
[25] John A. Moore, Science as a Way of Knowing: the Foundations of Modern 
Biology, Harvard University Press, 1993. 
 
[26] T. Ryan Gregory, Understanding Natural Selection: Essential Concepts and 
Common Misconceptions, Evolution: Education and Outreach 2 (2009) 156-175. 
 
[27] Roger Penrose, The Road to Reality: a Complete Guide to the Laws of the 
Universe, Vintage Books, 2005.  
 
[28] Carl Sagan, The Dragons of Eden: Speculations on the Evolution of Human 

On The Source of Mathematical Intuition 
Kairos. Revista de Filosofia & Ciência 6: 2013. 
Centro de Filosofia das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
237 
Intelligence, Hodder & Stoughton, 1977. 
 
[29] L. Euler, Theoremata circa divisores numerorum (E134). Novi Commentarii 
academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae 1, 1750, pp. 20-48. Reprinted in Opera Omnia: 
Series 1, Volume 2, pp. 62-85. Original article available online, along with an English 
translation by David Zhao, at www.eulerarchive.org. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

