
on the origin of stories


on
t h e 
or i g i n 
of 
stor i e s
E V O L U T I O N ,  C O G N I T I O N ,  A N D  F I C T I O N
Brian Boyd
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press
cambridge, massachusetts  •  london, en­gland  •  2009

Copyright © 2009 by Brian Boyd 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Boyd, Brian, 1952- 
  On the origin of stories : evolution, cognition, and fiction /  
Brian Boyd. 
    p.  cm. 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978-0-674-03357-3 (cloth : alk. paper) 
  1. Fiction–History and criticism.  2. Fiction–Authorship.   
I. Title.
  PN3451.B68  2009 
  809.3—dc22      2009007642

to bronwen


	
vii
CO N TE N TS
Illustrations  ix 
Acknowledgments  xi
Introduction: Animal, Human, Art, Story  1
Book i 
evolution, art, and fiction  13
Part 1 
Evolution and Nature
	 1	 Evolution and Human Nature?  19
	 2	 Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds  31
	 3	 The Evolution of Intelligence  42
	 4	 The Evolution of Cooperation  51
Part 2 
Evolution and Art
	 5	 Art as Adaptation?  69
	 6	 Art as Cognitive Play  80
	 7	 Art and Attention  99
	 8	 From Tradition to Innovation  113
Part 3 
Evolution and Fiction
	 9	 Art, Narrative, Fiction  129
	10	 Understanding and Recalling Events  132
	11	 Narrative: Representing Events  159

viii
Contents
	12	 Fiction: Inventing Events  177
	13	 Fiction as Adaptation  188
Book ii 
from zeus to seuss: origins of stories  209
Part 4 
Phylogeny: The Odyssey
	14	 Earning Attention (1): Natural Patterns: Character and Plot  215
	15	 Earning Attention (2): 
Open-Ended Patterns: Ironies of Structure  232
	16	 The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now  255
	17	 The Evolution of Intelligence (2): 
Beyond the Here and Now  269
	18	 The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle  287
	19	 The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment  303
Part 5 
Ontogeny: Horton Hears a Who!
	20	 Problems and Solutions: Working at Play  321
	21	 Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, and Individual  334
	22	 Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again  348
	23	 Levels of Explanation: Particular  358
	24	 Meanings  368
Conclusion 
Retrospect and Prospects: Evolution, Literature, Criticism  380
Afterword 
Evolution, Art, Story, Purpose  399
Notes  417 
Bibliography  457 
Index  509

	
ix
I L LU STR ATI O NS
Spearthrower from Mas d’Azil, France, ca. 14,000 b.c.e. 
Photo Jean Vertut	
82
Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri, Yuelamu Honey 
Ant Dreaming, 1980. © estate of the artist licensed by 
Aboriginal Artists Agency 2008	
85
Kathleen Petyarre, Mountain Devil Lizard Dreaming 
(With Winter Sandstorm), 1996. Courtesy of the artist 
and Gallerie Australis	
86
Samburu girls, Kenya: art as pattern. 
© Carol Beckwith and Angela Fisher/photokunst	
100
Surma girls, Ethiopia: art as play with pattern. 
© Carol Beckwith and Angela Fisher/photokunst	
107
Frame from Fritz Heider and Marianne Simmel film, 1944. 
Adapted from Heider and Simmel 1944, reproduced in 
Simon Baron-Cohen, Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism 
and Theory of Mind, (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1995), p. 36.	
138
Diagram of the Sally-Anne test for false belief 
(theory of mind). From S. Baron-Cohen, A. M. Leslie, and 
U. Frith, “Does the autistic child have a theory of mind?” 
Cognition, 21 (1985): 37–46, reproduced in Dan Sperber (ed)., 
Metarepresentations: A Multidisciplinary Perspective 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press 2000), p. 200.	
146
Isolated moving dots seen as people by viewers. 
From Peter Hobson, Cradle of Thought (New York: 

x
Illustrations
Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 54. (Originally published 
by Macmillan, London, 2002). By permission of 
Oxford University Press, Inc.	
164
Upside-down faces used to test children with and 
without autism. From Peter Hobson, Cradle of Thought 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 247. 
By permission of Oxford University Press, Inc. and the 
Paul Ekman Group (www.paulekman.com).	
165
Dr. Seuss: cover of Judge magazine, June 1933.	
328
Palmer Cox’s Brownies, 1887. From The Brownies: 
Their Book, 1887 (rept. New York: Dover, 1968), p. 93.	
345
Dr. Seuss, Horton Hears a Who!, 1954: Who-ville. 
©, ™ Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L. P. 1954, renewed 1982. 
Used by permission of Random House Children’s Books, 
a division of Random House, Inc.	
346
Dr. Seuss: Horton Hears a Who!, 1954: the confrontation scene. 
©, ™ Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L. P. 1954, renewed 1982. 
Used by permission of Random House Children’s Books, 
a division of Random House, Inc.	
363
Nok sculpture (Nigeria), ca. 400 b.c.e. From Bernard de Grunne, 
The Birth of Art in Africa: Nok Statuary in Nigeria 
(Paris: Adam Biro, 1999), p. 36. Photo by Louis Tirily.	
410

	
xi
AC K NOW L ED GM ENTS
My first debt is to Art Spiegelman. The very day I read about, then 
promptly bought and read, Maus­—before I had fin­ished reading it, 
even—I decided to teach a new graduate course in narrative from 
the Odyssey and Genesis, through Giotto, Shakespeare, Hogarth, 
Austen, Victorian narrative painting, Tolstoy, Joyce, film of four con-
tinents, Nabokov, Australian Aboriginal painting of the Western des-
ert, and Maus. I had no idea then that teaching this course would 
eventually goad me into searching for an evolutionary explanation 
for fiction, although preparation for the course introduced me to the 
work of David Bordwell. The theoretical acumen with which he ap-
plied a cognitive (and now also an evolutionary) approach to film 
was revelatory.
	
The invitations of a number of conference or­ga­nizers helped pre-
cipitate some of this book’s ideas. Mike Hanne asked me to give a 
keynote at his Narrative and Metaphor Conference at the University 
of Auckland in 1995, and prompted me to develop ideas emerging in 
the narrative course about the immemorial and still active role that 
other animals play in human story. Chris Price, director of the Writ-
ers and Readers Week at the Wellington International Festival of the 
Arts in 2000, invited me to join a panel on literature and science that 
returned me to thinking about evolution, art, and literature intensely 
enough to launch the writing of this book. At various stages of the 
proj­ect David Miall at the University of Alberta at Edmonton, George 
Gadanidis and Cornelia Hoogland at the University of Western On-
tario, Anthony Uhlmann at the University of Western Sydney, and 
Frans Saris at the University of Leiden invited me to give keynotes 
that forced me to marshal ideas in new ways.
	
I thank the Royal Society of New Zealand for a James Cook Fel-

xii
Acknowledgments
lowship, which allowed me to begin this proj­ect; and Dr. John Hood, 
then Vice Chancellor of the University of Auckland, for the generous 
terms of a distinguished professorship that allowed me to complete 
it while continuing to publish in other areas.
	
Among the many astute readers of versions of this book or of ar-
ticles or talks that prefig­ured it I would particularly like to thank Mi-
chael Corballis, Stephen Davies, Denis Dutton, Steven Pinker, Mi-
chelle Scalise Sugiyama, Ineke Sluiter, Blakey Vermeule, and Michael 
Wright, and above all David Bordwell, Joseph Carroll, Brett Cooke, 
Ellen Dissanayake, Jonathan Gottschall, Marcus Nordlund, Murray 
Smith, and David Sloan Wilson. David Bordwell, Joe Carroll, Brett 
Cooke, Jon Gottschall, and Marcus Nordlund all read and com-
mented astutely on the whole manuscript. It has been a rare schol-
arly plea­sure to work closely with Joe and Jon on my, their, and our 
proj­ects, and to refresh my thinking in David Sloan Wilson’s cascade 
of ideas. I am also grateful for comments from students in my “Nar-
rative,” “From Sonnets to Comics,” and “Literature and Science” 
courses at the University of Auckland, especially Janet Hunt, Stepha-
nie Miskell, Anne Ruthe, and Bruce Sheridan; and from audiences at 
the universities of Auckland, California at Berkeley, California at Los 
Angeles, Harvard, Leiden, Stanford, Texas A & M, and Wisconsin–
Madison and at conferences of the Human Behavior and Evolution 
Society. My work has ­profited from discussions with Donna Rose 
Addis, William Benzon, Leda Cosmides, Fred Crews, Nancy Easter-
lin, Philip Fisher, Patrick Colm Hogan, Roger Horrocks, Tim Hor-
vath, Anna Jackson, Mac Jackson, Edmund King, Stephen Kroon, 
Robert Nola, Zachary Norwood, Alan Richardson, Elaine Scarry, 
C. K. (Karl) Stead, John Tooby, Arie Verhagen, Julian Young, and Lisa 
Zunshine.
	
Some material has been published before, usually in different 
form and contexts, in Philosophy and Literature (Boyd 2001, 2004, 
2005b, 2007a) and in American Scholar (Boyd 2006b, 2008c, 2009b).
	
Ann Hawthorne has been an ideally sensitive and responsive edi-
tor, and Bronwen Nicholson, as always, has been an eager first reader, 
an alert editor, and an unfailing support in work and play.

We are absurdly accustomed to the miracle of a few written signs be-
ing able to contain immortal imagery, involutions of thought, new 
worlds with live people, speaking, weeping, laughing. We take it for 
granted so simply that in a sense, by the very act of brutish routine 
acceptance, we undo the work of the ages, the history of the gradual 
elaboration of poetical description and construction, from the tree-
man to Browning, from the caveman to Keats.
Vladimir Nabokov, Pale Fire (1962)

 

	
1
INTRODUCTION: ANIMAL, HUMAN, ART, STORY
Some people eat with chopsticks, some with knives and 
forks, and some with neither. Are these just discrete cultural inven-
tions, or do they have common roots? What about kabuki, Western 
opera, and Aboriginal dance ceremonies: are they local inventions 
with nothing in common, or re­flections of something we share as 
humans?
	
All people use their hands to convey food to their mouths—in fact 
all primates do—and all peoples modify some food before eating it. 
Feeding with hands is a primatewide biological adaptation, a trait 
shaped by natural selection because it offers advantages in terms of 
survival and reproduction. Modifying food before eating—cutting, 
cooking, or more—is a spe­cifi­cally human adaptation. I will suggest 
that despite its many forms, art, too, is a spe­cifi­cally human adapta-
tion, biologically part of our species. It offers tangible advantages for 
human survival and reproduction, and it derives from play, itself an 
adaptation widespread among animals with flex­i­ble behaviors. But I 
will focus most on the art of storytelling.
	
We can tell stories to explain things, from a child’s or a country’s 
pouty “They started it” to why the world is as it is, according to myth 
or science. We also tell stories just because we cannot stop, because 
they fascinate and engage us even if we know they are untrue. What 
links these different kinds of stories, observed, discovered, or in-
vented, and why has the richest explanatory story of all, the theory of 
evolution by natural selection, been so little used to explain why and 
how stories matter?
	
I recall a colleague asking, as academics do: “What are you work-

On the Origin of Stories
2
ing on?” “I’m trying to fig­ure out,” I answered, “an evolutionary—
Darwinian—approach to fiction.” Not waiting to hear more, he shut 
down his face and the conversation: “That must be very reductive.” 
“No, not reductive, but expansive,” I might otherwise have answered: 
extending the historical context from de­cades to millions of years, 
and increasing the historical precision, from de­cades down to the 
moment of choice.1
	
An evolutionary understanding of human nature has begun to re-
shape psychology, anthropology, sociology, philosophy, economics, 
history, political studies, linguistics, law, and religion.2 Can it also 
help explain even art, even human minds at their freest and most in-
ventive?
	
In art, as in so much else we had thought uniquely human, like 
tool-­using or tool-­making, counting or culture, we have begun to 
find precursors elsewhere in nature.3 But can evolution account even 
for the one human art with no known precedent, the art of fiction? 
Can it show why, in a world of necessity, we choose to spend so much 
time caught up in stories that both teller and told know never hap-
pened and never will? I want to show that it can, in ways far less re-
ductive than much recent literary scholarship, in ways both wider in 
scope and finer in detail.4
	
In literary studies, and in the humanities in general, a biological 
approach to the human has been anathematized for the last four de­
cades by the recently dominant paradigm that calls itself “Theory” or 
“Critique.” But after announcing de­cades ago first the death of the 
author and then the death of the “subject” (the individual), Theory 
has recently raised the question of its own death, and there has been 
a widespread cry in literary studies for a return to texts.5
	
A biocultural approach to literature invites a return to the rich-
ness of texts and the many-­sidedness of the human nature that texts 
evoke. But it also implies that we cannot simply go back to literary 
texts without assimilating what science has discovered about human 
nature, minds, and behavior over the last half-­century, and consider-
ing what these discoveries can offer for a first truly comprehensive 
literary theory.
	
Even some who accept evolution as the most powerful explana-
tion of living things insist that it can say little about human na-

	
Introduction
	
3
ture and behavior.6 To concede that natural selection has shaped the 
structure and function not only of our bodies but also of our minds, 
they fear, would impinge on our freedom or our capacity to trans-
form ourselves and our world. But as we shall see, their fears are mis-
placed: evolution can explain the bases not only of human behavior, 
from mating to murder, but also of culture and freedom.7
	
Art shows imaginations at their freest, shaping the world on their 
own terms, at the furthest remove from biological necessity. If evolu-
tion can help to account even for art, it can surely contribute to any 
explanation of human behavior. Of course, evolution alone cannot 
explain ev­ery feature of an art or an artist: not even Shakespeare had 
genes for writing Hamlet. But without considering fiction’s origins 
we cannot follow its full story; indeed, we start almost at the end of 
the story. Without a biocultural perspective we cannot appreciate 
how deeply surprising fiction is, and how deeply natural.
	
In answering the question why humans in all so­ci­e­ties have such 
a fascination for art, and for the art of fiction, we can appreciate not 
only why art began, but also why we feel compelled to tell and lis-
ten to stories, why we can understand them so readily, why they are 
formed as they are, why they treat what they do in human nature, 
and why they continue to break new ground.
Dolphins breathe air and blow out bubbles as they exhale. They can 
use these bubbles almost like nets to herd fish together before clos-
ing in for the kill. Untrained Amazon River dolphins sometimes play 
with the necklaces of bubbles trailing from their mouths by turning 
to swim through them or bite them. Dolphins in several marine spe-
cies have been observed in more elaborate play, releasing air from 
their blowholes to form underwater rings that hover and hold their 
form for several seconds as they expand. But like humans blowing 
smoke-­rings, dolphins must practice to master such a quirky skill.
	
In a marine park on the coast of Hawaii’s Oahu in the 1990s a 
small pod of bottlenose dolphins turned these bubble-­rings into 
their own art form. Watched but not prompted or rewarded by the 
scientists at Sea Life Park, half of the dolphins now engage in elabo-
rate air-­bubble play. They take their cue from others, practice the 
rings until they become stable, inspect their own performance, ex-

On the Origin of Stories
4
plore new possibilities, and intently monitor others’ efforts. Some 
dive through the rings as they expand. Others create vortices with 
their tail flukes, and release the rings into the swirling current so that 
they travel not upward but sideways or even downward in the water. 
An adult male, Kaiko’o, can emit two controlled bubble-­rings, one 
after the other, which he then nudges together with his rostrum to 
form a single large ring. A young female, Tinkerbell, has developed 
several unique techniques, such as creating a vortex with her dorsal 
fin as she swims across the tank, then retracing her path and releas-
ing into the vortex a stream of air that shoots out in a helical pattern 
in front of her.8
	
Is this behavior art? Would its closest human equivalent be smoke-
­rings, which we might call play or display but not art? Or rhythmic 
gymnastics, which, like fig­ure skating, loops and arches across the 
boundary between sport and art? Or dance, which we would agree 
can be art, or defi­nitely is, by the time we get to ballet or Bali? In 
many ways these dolphin air-­rings do approximate incipient art. But 
for all their playfulness dolphins seem to have no specieswide predis-
positions to “artistic” behavior. Dolphin air art blurs the boundary 
between play and art, and it is from play, widespread across the ani-
mal world, that I suggest art evolved in humans.
Like some human arts, dolphin air art involves design but not repre-
sentation. Without representation, fiction—and indeed much song 
and dance or painting and sculpture—would be impossible. Can 
animals other than ourselves represent things in ways more optional 
and open than the honeybee waggle that tells hive-­mates the direc-
tion and distance of flowers? Can they do this in nature in ways that 
serve no immediate function of reproduction or survival?
	
Dian Fossey described two groups of gorillas meeting on the slopes 
of Mount Visoke in Rwanda. The male leaders in each group strutted 
defiantly to warn the other group against attack. But when on one 
side the inexperienced leading male performed clumsily, the young-
sters in his group followed behind him, “exaggeratedly mocking his 
awkward displays of bravado.”9 Like dolphin air art, these youngsters’ 
mockery is play, but play that now involves rudimentary representa-
tion. Behavioral imitation occurs widely in social species, since indi-

	
Introduction
	
5
viduals can learn from others’ successes. But these young gorillas 
imitate not out of would-­be bravado, but in play, to hold up the 
model for their mimicry to derision and amusement.
	
The gorilla anecdote records a brief moment of mimetic mockery, 
perhaps de­pen­dent on an immediate model. But another great ape 
even closer to us can engage in deliberate and sustained play. In the 
Kibale Forest of Uganda, primatologist Richard Wrangham watched 
an eight-­year-­old chimpanzee, Kakama, “pick up and keep a small 
log for two days, hugging it, carrying it in ev­ery possible fashion, ly-
ing on his back in his nest and balancing it on his feet as mothers of-
ten do with their babies. He made a little day-­nest and laid the log in 
it while he sat beside. He retrieved the log when it fell.” Wrangham 
eventually lost the chimp’s—and the log’s—trail when he had to cir-
cumvent snorting bush-­pigs. Wrangham concluded:
My intuition suggested a possibility that I was reluctant, as a 
professionally skeptical scientist, to accept on the basis of a 
single observation: that I had just watched a young male 
chimpanzee invent and then play with a doll . . . A doll! The 
concept was novel enough that I simply filed away my notes 
without saying much about it to anyone else, and left Uganda 
the following week. Four months later, two field assistants at 
Kibale, Elisha Karwani and Peter Tuhairwe, happened to be 
following Kabarole and Kakama. Neither Karwani nor Tu-
hairwe knew of my observation. Yet for three hours they 
watched Kakama carry a log—not the same one as before, 
surely—taking it with him wherever he fed. This time they 
saw him leave it. Once they were certain Kakama had disap-
peared, they collected it, brought it to camp, and stapled to it 
a label that described their own straight-­forward interpreta-
tion of the object’s meaning: “Kakama’s Toy Baby.”10
	
We would not call Kakama’s actions art, but they do suggest a ca-
pacity for sustained imaginative imitation and for representation 
that we see in the pretend play of human children. We would not 
call pretend play art, either, but it can easily shade into mime, the-
ater, or storytelling. Imitation or representation, common in some 

On the Origin of Stories
6
arts (painting or fiction, for instance), may be absent in others (mu-
sic or decorative, abstract, or conceptual art), but two things distin-
guish Kakama’s behavior from art. Whereas play ­comes naturally to 
chimpanzees, the kind of elaborate scenario-­building observed in 
Kakama seems no normal part of a natural specieswide behavior, un-
like childhood pretend play. And unlike human art, it seems never to 
be carried out with others. Human children, by contrast, construct 
imaginary scenarios perfectly “naturally,” without training, alone or 
in company.
How close can we get to the origins of art in our own species? In a 
purely temporal dimension, not very. But we can recognize some-
thing close to the start of art in scenes not much more elaborate than 
the ones played out above by gorillas and chimpanzees. The follow-
ing incident happened among Mbuti in the Ituri Forest of central 
Africa, but it might have occurred at any time over the last 100,000 
or even million years, anywhere there were humans. In an apparently 
unstaged National Geographic special a father, talking with his infant 
son, swings him from his back to his chest, which upsets the boy. The 
father distracts him by telling the child that
this is the way monkey babies are carried. The father has an 
idea. He begins to walk like a great ape, making soft hoot-
ing noises as he does. At first he seems to be doing this for 
the bene­fit of his son, but a group of ­women sitting in front 
of a nearby shelter soon become an audience, laughing and 
shouting encouragement to the father in such a way that it is 
obvious that his portrayal is meant for them as well. Indeed, 
the cause of the appreciation is obvious: the father is doing a 
very good imitation of a mature ape with its young.11
Here imitative play shades into art, into drama. The father knows 
his son will recognize his actions as imitation, even without a model 
nearby, and presumably, like parents ev­erywhere, he knows his son 
is fascinated by animals. He knows his son will recognize the move-
ments of the ape and also recognize the imitation as playful pretense. 
Hearing the response of an audience wider than he intended, the fa-

	
Introduction
	
7
ther enjoys evoking a still richer appreciation of his play, his pretense, 
his artistry.
	
As we will see, unique aspects of human parent-­child interaction, 
a special instance of our species’ singular capacity to share attention, 
hold a major key to the origin of art. Here the father engages his 
son’s attention to change his mood. He thereby affects the mood of 
others, whose appreciation in turn alters his own mood. The feed-
back of action, attention, reaction, and the re­finement of action to 
shape further attention and reaction provide an exclusively human 
basis for art.
	
In other species we can recognize the first impulses of art but no 
more. Other animals can engage in exploratory behavior that seems 
designed to appeal to the mind, but only in isolated and incidental 
fashion. But in our own species the impulse to art develops reliably 
in all normal individuals. The isolated sparks in other species have 
become the steady current of human art. What could have caused 
the change?
	
Evidence for the origins of human art necessarily remains ex-
tremely patchy. As in exploring the origins of language, we have to 
deduce much from the way individual development often roughly 
replays the development of the species. But although spoken lan-
guage does not fossilize, and written language stretches back only a 
few millennia, full-­fledged works of art survive from tens of thou-
sands of years ago. The 1994 discovery of the drawings in France’s 
Chauvet Cave pushed back the earliest date for cave art from about 
17,000 years ago to 32,000 years ago, a leap large enough to suggest 
how much we still have to discover.12
	
We do not know all that the drawings in Chauvet Cave meant for 
those who drew them. Like the Mbuti father’s play, they represent 
animals. They may well have had magical sig­nifi­cance or conveyed 
some sense of power over the powerful prey they depict. But we can 
be sure that here we have art, that the people who drew these fig­
ures knew that they were drawing, and drawing animals, and doing 
so with skill, and that without both the likeness and their sense of 
power in achieving it any further meaning or magic would have been 
impossible.
	
Chauvet seems a sudden leap forward, presumably not because 

On the Origin of Stories
8
art had just been invented there but because only there had it be-
come so impressive that these drawings seemed worth executing in 
a  site dif­fi­cult of access but sure of preservation. The wall mark-
ings were hardly the casual doodles of idle afternoons. The grotto at 
Chauvet was no dwelling place, and the drawings were no stone-­age 
wallpaper. This remote cave, deep underground, accessible only by 
the light of a burning brand or a tallow candle, seems to have been 
selected precisely for its remoteness from disturbance, whether by 
weather, plant, or animal, expressly to preserve the art of particularly 
awe-­inspiring craftsmen. We, too, prize and preserve our art, but 
who would bet that the most trea­sured possessions of our greatest 
galleries, or the galleries themselves, will be intact in another 30,000 
years?
	
No other species ­comes near this achievement. Apes and elephants 
prove ready enough to slap paint on paper when offered the means. 
The chimpanzees whom Desmond Morris provided with paper, 
brushes, and paint in the 1950s even became committed to painting, 
for no reward but the plea­sure of the activity, and daubed with fierce 
concentration and individual flair. But for all their engagement in 
the pro­cess while it lasted, the apes lost interest in the results imme-
diately afterward and never attempted anything remotely like repre-
sentation.13
	
In some ways the art of Chauvet resembles dolphin air art or 
chimpanzee painting: not required for immediate survival, or even 
for practicing survival skills, it seems designed especially to appeal to 
the eyes and minds of the artists and others. Of course there are dif-
ferences. Unlike dolphin air art, the cave drawings endure in a per-
manent medium and present a likeness recognizable many millennia 
later. And perhaps because of the strong cognitive appeal of the like-
ness, because it moved the spirits of those who watch, it could then 
be imagined to have power over other unseen forces.
	
But unlike dolphin air art or chimpanzee painting, the drawings 
at Chauvet re­flect a human universal. Almost all psychically normal 
humans will have tried to represent animals, on a surface, or with a 
stick, or with some mud or clay, or through a mime or dance, or by 
imitation of sounds, or through a story, or in many of these ways. 
Even though both the animals depicted and the culture that encour-

	
Introduction
	
9
aged their depiction no ­longer exist, viewers from any modern soci-
ety can feel a shock of recognition at the Chauvet images, whatever 
other effects the artists may have intended.
	
By the time of the Chauvet drawings art would seem to have be-
come characteristically human. We can only presume that works as 
elaborate as this bespeak a long prior pro­cess of practice and experi-
ment on surfaces like bark or skins that have not survived. The intact 
and monumental example of Chauvet Cave, along with a few other 
isolated but much more modest relics over the preceding 30,000 
years or so, implies extensive traditions of art, as something humanly 
shared, incorporating sophisticated representation, involving expert 
practitioners, earning the ready comprehension and eliciting the ad-
miration of others around them.
Dolphins and humans last shared a common ancestor about 100 
­million years ago. Chimpanzees and humans diverged around 6 mil-
lion years ago. Chauvet Cave’s drawings date back over 30,000 years. 
Spray paint on a concrete wall brings us right into our own time.
	
A 1981 New Zealand graffiti calendar includes a photograph of an 
Auckland city scene. A man jogging on the grass indicates the scale 
of the retaining wall behind him. On it someone has spray-­painted 
in letters four feet high, in a message almost forty feet across: “Ralph, 
come back, it was only a Rash.”
	
In eight words, in nine syllables, less than a line of Shakespearean 
verse, unfolds a story, a drama, a tragedy, a joke, a wry re­flection on 
the very medium of graffiti. If you really have lost your lover because 
he thinks you have caught a sexually transmitted disease that brands 
you unfaithful, but that turns out to be no more than an innocuous 
rash, you may want to call him back, you may not know where to 
reach him, but you won’t broadcast the most intimate details of your 
emotional and physical life in a message forty feet long. This tragedy 
of jealousy, abandonment, and loss, with a poignantly desperate at-
tempt at recovery, collapses in a moment into a self-­conscious joke 
on the disparity between the intimacy of the message and the public-
ity of the medium.
	
Writing is much youn­ger than cave painting, but fictional story-
telling is far older, and a human universal. Think of this graffiti-­

On the Origin of Stories
10
writer’s behavior in terms of evolutionary costs and bene­fits, and it 
appears to make no sense: the cost in materials; the cost in time, to 
invent and re­fine the message, to spray it on that scale; the cost in 
risk, in the chance of being caught and prosecuted for defacing pub-
lic property. And for what bene­fits? The graffito remained unsigned 
and anonymous until it was removed altogether. Perhaps, like New 
York’s Keith Haring or London’s Banksy, the perpetrator won respect 
from friends and others, but she or he could equally have acted solo 
and in secret. Regardless of how circumscribed the glory that the 
graffito earned, the effort must have seemed worthwhile to the artist, 
simply for the plea­sure of the idea and the plea­sure of an audience, 
even an anonymous audience who did not know whom to thank. 
Someone was so taken by the notion that viewers could reconstruct 
a story, an implicit tragedy, and the joke that undermines it, from 
just these few words that that alone made the graffito worth the time, 
energy, and risk.
	
That is what I want to explain in evolutionary terms: our impulse 
to appeal to our own minds and reach out to others for the sheer 
plea­sure of sensing what we can share even in an unprecedented new 
move.
	
We respond with ridiculous ease to a joke that leaps right out at 
us, but how do we explain why we see the story and the joke almost 
in an instant, when we have so little to go on, not even a cue that this 
is fiction or funny? The mind is not inductive, as Shakespeare’s con-
temporary Francis Bacon suggested thinking should be. We do not 
patiently wait for all available evidence before advancing as short an 
additional distance as possible to our conclusion. Instead, we hastily 
construct inferences that reach well beyond what we find and that 
nevertheless, as in this case, thanks to the writer’s skill, hit home.
	
Storytelling lies at the heart of literature, yet literary studies all too 
rarely explore our ability as readers to construct a story on meager 
hints, to fill gaps and infer situations. We take the pro­cess for granted. 
Sometimes nothing proves more dif­fi­cult than seeing what’s just un-
der our noses.
	
We tend to consider vision immediate and transparent, but when 
ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence researchers tried to program visual comprehen-
sion into computers, they found how extraordinarily complex it is. 

	
Introduction
	
11
Narrative comprehension has proved still more dif­fi­cult to program, 
even using the flattest of stories.14 I’ll believe that computers can 
think not when they can beat a Kasparov at chess, with its rapidly 
proliferating but after all calculable permutations, but when they can 
be fed something as unexpected as the photograph of “Ralph, come 
back, it was only a Rash” daubed on a wall, and can read the words, 
deduce the story, then laugh at the joke they have recognized for 
themselves.
	
An evolutionary explanation of human behavior does not entail 
genetic determinism. We have not evolved for spray-­painting. Yet 
our impulse to engage in and respond to art, verbal, visual, musi-
cal, kinetic, exists across human cultures and develops in all normal 
children without special teaching. And it depends on the capacity of 
those around us to understand what we have done, even when we are 
absent or have devised something utterly new. How did a behavior 
so complex, often so costly in terms of time and even resources, and 
of so little apparent bene­fit in a competitive struggle for existence, 
ever become established throughout humankind?
On the Origin of Stories has two main aims: first, to offer an ac-
count of fiction (and of art in general) that takes in our widest con-
text for explaining life, evolution; and to offer a way beyond the 
­errors of thought and practice in much modern academic literary 
study, which over the last few de­cades has often stifled—and has even 
sought to stifle—the plea­sure, the life, and the art of literature.
	
After introducing evolution and human nature in Part 1, I explain 
first art in general (Part 2) and the art of fiction in particular (Part 3) 
as biological adaptations. In Parts 4 and 5 I offer two detailed exam-
ples, from different kinds of “origins” of stories: the historical origin, 
in Homer’s Odyssey, the most successful of ancient stories; and the 
individual origin, in Horton Hears a Who!, one of the finest works of 
the greatest storyteller for the very young. The Conclusion and Af-
terword suggest the implications of a biocultural perspective for un-
derstanding literature and life.

 

	
13
book i
E V O L U T I O N ,  A R T,  A N D  F I C T I O N
Everything is what it is because it got that way.
D’Arcy Thompson, On Growth and Form (1917)
In the distant future I see open fields for far more important 
­researches. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of 
the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by 
gradation. Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.
Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species (1859)
In Book i we pick up the long-­distance lenses of evolution to fo-
cus in turn on human nature, on art as a human at­tri­bute, and on 
fiction as a mode of art.
	
Part 1 considers human nature in the light of evolution. Despite 
disagreements about particular perspectives, Chapter 1 shows, a wide 
consensus has emerged that we need to see human nature, like the 
rest of life, within the framework of evolution. We are as we are be-
cause we got that way, and we have nothing to fear and much to 
gain—including a better sense of how we can change—from under-
standing ourselves better.
	
Chapter 2 explains the evolutionary concept of an adaptation, a 
feature of a species’ form or behavior especially designed by natural 
selection for the bene­fits it offers, on average, in terms of survival 

On the Origin of Stories
14
and reproduction. Chapters 3 and 4 focus on the evolution of intel-
ligence and of cooperation, two key human adaptive complexes that 
therefore naturally play a key role in art, including in the stories we 
explore in Book II.
	
Part 2 offers an evolutionary account of art in general. Could art 
be an adaptation in its own right, Chapter 5 asks, or a product of sex­
ual selection, or a byproduct of adapted minds, or an orderly series 
or an untidy assortment of in­de­pen­dent local cultural inventions al-
lowing little scope for evolutionary explanation, or perhaps even an 
in­suf­fi­ciently coherent category to permit any single description or 
explanation?
	
I propose in Chapter 6 that art is a human adaptation that derives 
from play, a behavior widespread across animal classes and perhaps 
universal in mammals. Play evolved through the advantages of flex­
ibil­ity; the amount of play in a species correlates with its flex­i­bil­ity 
of action. Behaviors like escape and pursuit, attack and defense, and 
social give-­and-­take can make life-­or-­death differences. Creatures 
with more motivation to practice such behaviors in situations of 
low urgency can fare better at moments of high urgency. Animals 
that play repeatedly and exuberantly re­fine skills, extend repertoires, 
and sharpen sensitivities. Play therefore has evolved to be highly 
­self-­rewarding. Because it is compulsive, animals engage in it again 
and again, incrementally altering muscle tone and neural wiring, 
strengthening and increasing speed in synaptic pathways, improving 
their capacity and performance.
	
Humans uniquely inhabit “the cognitive niche”:1 we gain most of 
our advantages from intelligence. We therefore have an appetite for 
information, and especially for pattern, information that falls into 
meaningful arrays from which we can make rich inferences. Infor-
mation can be costly to obtain and analyze, but because it offers 
an invaluable basis for action, nature evolves senses and minds to 
gather and pro­cess information appropriate to particular modes of 
life. Like other species, humans can assimilate information through 
the rapid pro­cessing that specialized pattern recognition allows, but 
unlike other species we also seek, shape, and share information in an 
open-­ended way. Since pattern makes data swiftly intelligible, we ac-
tively pursue patterns, especially those that yield the richest infer-

	
Evolution, Art, and Fiction
	
15
ences to our minds, in our most valuable information systems, the 
senses of sight and sound, and in our most crucial domain, social 
information.
	
We can de­fine art as cognitive play with pattern. Just as play re­
fines behavioral options over time by being self-­rewarding, so art in-
creases cognitive skills, repertoires, and sensitivities. A work of art 
acts like a playground for the mind, a swing or a slide or a merry-­go-
­round of visual or aural or social pattern. Like play, art succeeds by 
engaging and rewarding attention, since the more frequent and in-
tense our response, the more powerful the neural consequences. Art’s 
appeal to our preferences for pattern ensures that we expose our-
selves to high concentrations of humanly appropriate information 
eagerly enough that over time we strengthen the neural pathways 
that pro­cess key patterns in open-­ended ways.
	
Much play is social, and much of the most intense play is most so­
cial. Biologists have termed humans ultrasocial.2 Our extreme social-
ity amplifies our predilection for the cognitive play of art, through 
both competitive and cooperative pro­cesses, especially through our 
unique inclination to share and direct the attention of others. Chap-
ters 7 and 8 show how the individual and social bene­fits of art cre-
ate a positive feedback pro­cess that amplifies individual and collec-
tive invention. Art generates a con­fi­dence that we can transform the 
world to suit our own preferences, that we need not accept the given 
but can work to modify it in ways we choose; and it supplies skills 
and models we can re­fine and recombine to ensure our ongoing cu-
mulative creativity.
	
Part 3 presents a naturalistic account of fiction as a human behav-
ior related to but also moving radically beyond what other animals 
can do in understanding one another (Chapter 10), communicating 
with one another (Chapter 11), and playing with one another (Chap-
ter 12).
	
Chapter 9 establishes that true stories need little special explana-
tion: many animals share information, and language allows humans 
to share information about the past. But the pseudo-­information of 
fiction poses an evolutionary puzzle: why do we not prefer only true 
information?
	
Evolutionary adaptation involves design for spe­cific functions, for 

On the Origin of Stories
16
spe­cific bene­fits in terms of survival and reproduction. Chapters 
10–12 show the evidence for the biological origin and design of fic-
tion. Chapter 10 investigates first the origins of our capacities for un-
derstanding events in the evolutionary past and in human infancy, 
and especially in the uniquely human levels of theory of mind, our 
capacity to understand one another in terms of beliefs as well as in 
terms of desires and intentions. It then explores our capacities for re­
calling events. Recent research strongly suggests that our memories 
of past experience saturate our present thought: cognition partially 
reactivates, almost simulates, the multimodal nature of our prior ex-
perience. Still more importantly, the apparent weakness of memory, 
in reconstructing rather than passively recording experience, seems 
an evolved design that allows us to recombine freely our past experi-
ence so that we can imagine or presimulate our future. Chapter 11 
shows how the unique human capacity for narrative emerges from 
animal capacities for representing events but adds spe­cifi­cally hu-
man capacities for joint attention, imitation, and language. It also 
shows how narrative as strategy re­flects the tension between cooper-
ation and competition in social life. Chapter 12 explains fiction as an 
art, a form of cognitive play with patterns of social information, es-
pecially in terms of the emergence of pretend play in human in-
fancy.
	
Chapter 13 then considers the biologically adaptive functions of 
fiction, including the complex interrelation between fictions recog-
nized as such and the often more powerful fictions of religion.

part 1
E V O L U T I O N  A N D  N AT U R E
Our ancestors have been human for a very long time. If a normal 
baby girl born forty thousand years ago were kidnapped by a time 
traveler and raised in a normal family in New York, she would be 
ready for college in eigh­teen years. She would learn En­glish (along 
with—who knows?—Spanish or Chinese), understand trigonometry, 
follow baseball and pop music; she would probably want a pierced 
tongue and a couple of tattoos. And she would be unrecognizably 
different from the brothers and sisters she left behind.
Kwame Anthony Appiah, Cosmopolitanism (2006)

 

	
19
1
EVOLUTION AND HUMAN NATURE?
Hamlet tells the actors at Elsinore not to overact, for do-
ing so would pervert the “purpose of playing, whose end, both at the 
first and now, was and is to hold as ’twere the mirror up to nature”—
by which he means human nature. As he says, “both at the first and 
now” people have thought that literature re­flects nature, especially 
human nature.1 “At the first,” at least from Plato’s unease at litera-
ture’s power to mimic human life and Aristotle’s admiration for lit-
erature’s mimetic power, to Stendhal’s image of a novel as a mirror 
passing along a roadway, and beyond.
	
But not “now,” at least not in university literature departments. 
There, many have denounced the notion of a human nature as “es-
sentialism,” a belief in a human essence. For many in the modern 
humanities and social sciences, there is no human nature, only the 
constructions of local culture, and to think otherwise can only en-
danger hopes for changing what we are and do.
	
This position is confused. Even to deny a universal human nature 
and insist only on local cultural difference already constitutes a claim 
about human nature: that the minds and behavior of all humans, 
and only humans, depend solely on culture.2 This happens to be 
false: our minds and behavior are always shaped by the interac-
tion of nature and nurture, or genes and environment, including the 
cultural environment. And false, too, about other species, many of 
which have culture, and at least one other, chimpanzees, have a dif-
ferent culture in ev­ery group observed in the wild and could not sur-
vive without their local culture.3 Even on an ev­eryday level we could 
not engage with other humans without an implicit theory of human 

On the Origin of Stories
20
nature. We do not respond to other people as if they were dogs, mice, 
or chimpanzees. Bared teeth on a Rottweiler mean one thing but 
something very different on a smiling human face.
	
If many in literature departments reject the idea of a human na-
ture, let alone of evolution’s power to explain it, many in other fields 
from anthropology to religion and sociology have recently recog-
nized that the deep past that shaped our species can help to explain 
our present and our recent past.4 Evolutionary aspects of mind may 
not be as accessible in the fossil record as we would like, but evidence 
has converged from many sources across species, cultures, eons, and 
life-­stages—from evolutionary theory; from observation and experi-
ment with animals and human infants, children, and adults; from 
game theory, ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence, and computer simulations; from 
clinical and cognitive psychology and neuroimaging—that many as-
pects of our minds and behavior have been con­fig­ured over evolu-
tionary time. By nature we have much in common before and even 
after local culture shapes us.
	
No one who has open-­mindedly considered the evidence doubts 
that evolution produced humans as it did our near relatives, chim-
panzees, bonobos, and other great apes. Yet many who accept the fact 
of our physical evolution nevertheless resist seeing human minds 
and behavior as shaped in any way by our deep past. Let me try to 
remove misunderstandings and allay misgivings behind this resis-
tance.
Human Differences
Although an evolutionary view of human nature will often focus 
on “universals,” on common features of our brains and behavior, it 
does not ignore or deny the enormous cultural differences between 
peoples.
	
Human differences have been exaggerated in contrasting ways 
over the century and a half since the publication of On the Origin of 
Species, first in a racist, then in an antiracist direction. In the late 
nineteenth century, in the heyday of Western imperialist expansion 
and laissez-­faire cap­italism, Darwinism and especially the notion of 
“the survival of the fittest” (not initially Darwin’s term) were seized 

	
21
	
Evolution and Human Nature?
on by Social Darwinists to justify the idea that the strong deserve to 
win, since their success in competition “proves” their superiority. 
They and others used this to rationalize a “science” of human racial 
difference—and, unsurprisingly for the times, of European racial su-
periority. The result was “the mismea­sure of man”:5 a program to 
mea­sure “racial” differences to “prove” the superiority of some hu-
man “races” and the inferiority of others.
	
Modern evolutionary approaches to human nature have nothing 
in common with this program. Science itself shows that despite dif-
ferences strikingly visible to us, humans are genetically an unusually 
uniform species (three humans selected from around the world will 
differ genetically much less on average than three chimpanzees se-
lected from any of their shrinking African habitats) and that there 
is  more variation within a local ethnically homogeneous popula-
tion than between one ethnic population and another.6 Aware of the 
ghastly consequences of racism in the twentieth century, modern 
evolutionary psychologists stress “the psychic unity of humankind”7 
and focus more on what human minds have in common than on dif-
ferences.
	
The nineteenth-­century Western assumption that the West em-
bodied the standards by which all peoples should be judged caused 
a reaction among early twentieth-­century cultural anthropologists. 
To reject the idea that observed differences in behavior arise from 
biological differences and to show that they do not prove superiority 
or inferiority, cultural anthropologists and sociologists stressed the 
malleability of human nature under the pressure of culture. Early 
twentieth-­century anthropologists insisted on the power and va­ri­ety 
of culture, but although they claimed an almost limitless diversity of 
human behaviors, the behaviors they observed ac­tually remained 
within narrow boundaries. No human culture, for instance, “even 
begins to compare with the social system” of any of our closest pri-
mate relatives.8 Physiology renders visible the huge differences be-
tween human and great-­ape sociosexual systems: all adult male chim­
panzees try to couple with all adult females in their group, their 
massive testicles testifying to the intensity of male sexual competi-
tion; among bonobos, the other species closest to us, fervent and fre-
quent female-­female couplings result not only in enlarged clitorises 

On the Origin of Stories
22
but also in female alliances holding the balance of power; among go-
rillas no other male dares attempt to contest the dominant silver-
back’s sexual control of all the adult females, and in the absence of 
direct male sexual competition, these huge apes have tiny testicles.
	
In the late 1960s the anthropologists’ insistence on human differ-
ence began to permeate the humanities as well as the human sci-
ences, and to seem like a moral crusade, a rejection of the hegemony 
of a Western sense of human nature. Roland Barthes, for example, 
criticized “the mystification which transforms petit-­bourgeois cul-
ture into a universal nature.”9 Many in the humanities and social sci-
ences began to deny human nature and to excoriate “essentialism.”10
	
But as some anthropologists realized late in the century, their 
stress on human diversity had led them to overlook human univer-
sals.11 On the receiving end, a Samoan scholar bemoaned Margaret 
Mead’s enormously in­flu­en­tial depiction of her people: she “took 
away our oneness with other human beings . . . We are no different 
from you.”12 To insist only on difference and deny commonality ac­
tually frustrates the commendable motives that led to the rejection 
of narrowly Western standards of human nature. Without any sense 
of all that we share in what the Ghanaian-­American philosopher 
Kwame Anthony Appiah calls “the one race to which we all belong,”13 
what can be the basis for our special concern for human beings, for 
human justice?
	
A critique of unquestioned Western assumptions about human 
nature was needed, but the anthropological critique extended by Bar­
thes and Michel Foucault in the 1960s and dogmatized over the fol-
lowing de­cades was shortsighted. It did not look nearly far enough. 
While structuralism and its more or less rebellious offspring contin-
ued in the direction set by early twentieth-­century social sciences, 
the natural sciences moved in the opposite direction, toward the first 
comprehensive sci­en­tific attempt to understand human nature in the 
context of evolution and human, animal, and ar­ti­fi­cial cognition and 
behavior. The best way to critique Western bourgeois assumptions 
about human nature is not to deny that human nature exists, but to 
apply the hard tests of science, examining humans against other spe-
cies; in many cultures, from hunter-­gatherer bands to modern indus-

	
23
	
Evolution and Human Nature?
trialized states; in many ages, in their history and their arts, especially 
the arts of orature (oral literature) and literature: to investigate hu-
man universals and human particulars, similarities and differences.
	
Far from denying cultural difference, an investigation of human 
nature that takes into account our evolutionary past makes it pos­
sible to explain cultural difference in a way that insisting that hu-
mans are completely “culturally constructed” cannot. Constructed 
out of what, in any case?14 The argument that people are culturally 
different because of their culture, or because humans are shaped just 
by culture, is merely circular.15 Moreover, explanations of differences 
in, say, male and female behavior in terms of “our culture” or “their 
culture” look empty when we realize that similar systematic differ-
ences exist not only across human cultures but also in hundreds of 
animal species.16
	
An evolutionary account of human nature can show the advan-
tages of sociality, and of social learning, in many species, culminat-
ing in the unique human susceptibility to culture. The extent of hu-
man cultural differences has been made possible by the evolution of 
the mind. Without the complex shared architecture of the mind, cul-
ture could not exist. Because of that shared design, there are many 
universals across cultures: there is a human nature.
Biological or Genetic Determinism
Many fear that accepting the idea of an evolved human nature means 
accepting that our minds and actions are biologically or genetically 
determined. This fear is so mistaken and muddled that I hardly know 
where to start dispelling it.
	
You could call it “genetic determinism” that you were born a hu-
man being and not a creature of some other species. Does this fact 
restrict your freedom? Again, you could call it “genetic determinism” 
that you were born the unique individual you are, like and unlike 
your siblings and parents, and unprecedented in the history of the 
universe. Is this unwelcome? The notion that genes shape us is less 
deterministic than the notion that we are the product of our envi-
ronment, since the complexity and randomness of genetic recombi-

On the Origin of Stories
24
nation in sexual reproduction means that we are each the result of an 
unpredictably generated variation unique to each of us rather than 
of anything imposed from without.
	
We should see genes less as constraints than as enablers.17 A single 
mutation in a regulatory gene compels our neurons to continue the 
pro­cess of cell division several times more than in chimpanzees, so 
that our brains end up with several times the cell count of chimpan-
zee brains.18 Mirror neurons in the primate line proliferate to such 
an extent in humans that in our relations with others we have “a 
deeply felt mirroring that moves people closer to each other and 
makes emotional connectedness possible.”19
	
Our genes determine that, unlike other mammals, we walk on two 
legs, not four. We cannot slither like snakes or fly like swallows, but 
does the fact that our genes determine that we walk dictate where 
we walk, or how? Because we walk rather than gallop, over time our 
forelimbs became free to knap stone tools and hence, eventually, 
even to construct and play computer games. And the fact that we 
walk does not stop us from using two legs to skip, surf, or ski.
	
Richard Dawkins called it “a simple lie” to claim that an evolved 
human nature entails inevitable genetic determinism.20 Genes do not 
dictate “always do this.” Even in organisms without minds, even in 
single-­celled organisms, they build in sets of if-­then rules sensitive 
to context. All the more so in creatures with even simple minds, let 
alone in creatures with intelligence. We should see genes not as de-
niers of the role of the environment but as devices for extracting in-
formation from the environment.21
	
Dawkins notes that our sexual desires presumably derive from 
our genes, yet we usually manage to curb them when doing so is so-
cially necessary. We can readily accept “that genes exert a statistical 
in­flu­ence on human behavior while at the same time believing that 
this in­flu­ence can be modi­fied, overridden or reversed by other in­
flu­ences”22—including other genetic capacities, like the widespread 
capacity for empathy or the human capacity to inhibit and consider. 
Janet Radcliffe Richards explains: “Evolutionary psychology claims 
that various aspects of our character are deep in our genes, but it 
does not suggest for a moment that any particular emotion is over-
whelming to the extent of preventing self-­control or rational judge-

	
25
	
Evolution and Human Nature?
ment. Its claims are about the origins and depth of particular tenden-
cies, not about pathological force.”23
	
A biological view of human nature stresses that individuals are 
free agents endowed with the flex­i­bil­ity that evolution provides and 
active strategic choosers rather than passive products of their place 
and time.
Nature versus Culture?
A biocultural view of human nature does not exclude or slight the 
social or the cultural. It makes no sense to set biology in opposition 
to society or culture. Sociality occurs only within living species, and 
hence within the biological realm, through genes that encourage so-
cial animals to associate. Culture occurs only within the social and 
therefore, again, the biological realm.24 And far from being unique to 
humans, culture—the nongenetic transmission of behavior, includ-
ing local customs and even fashions—has been discovered over the 
last few de­cades in many social species, in birds as well as mammals.
	
Evolution has allowed humans to develop our singular capacity 
for culture because culture helps us track changes in the environ-
ment more rapidly than genes do.25 Genetic change normally takes 
many generations to pervade a population; culture can enable ad-
vantageous options to spread rapidly in a single generation and to be 
passed on to successive generations. I therefore use “biocultural” and 
“evolutionary” almost interchangeably to characterize an approach 
to human nature that takes full note of biology and of the culture 
that evolution has made possible.
Nature versus Nurture?
That our minds re­flect evolution’s design does not mean that all is 
nature and not nurture, that genes are ev­ery­thing and environment 
nothing. In any sophisticated biological thinking these oppositions 
have been thoroughly discredited.26 Biologists stress that phenotypes 
(whole organisms) are not determined solely by genotypes (the ge-
netic recipe in each cell’s DNA) but are always inextricably codeter-
mined by the interacting of genes and the environment. Nature “ver-

On the Origin of Stories
26
sus” nurture is not a zero-­sum game, in which nature’s x percent is 
100 minus nurture’s y percent. Rather, it is a product, x times y, na-
ture activated at each stage according to its input from nurture.
The Natural as Right
To argue that biology provides a base for human life does not mean 
that it must impose a model for human morality. There is no reason 
why an origin must predetermine a particular end; biology in any case 
offers a vast array of different models; and culture is itself a part of 
biology and has the power to generate a cascade of new possibilities.
Nature as Selfish
Genes are “selfish” only in the sense that they prosper according to 
what bene­fits them in successive reproductive rounds, and not nec-
essarily according to what bene­fits the organisms in which they re-
side, let alone other organisms with which they happen to interact. 
Yet most genes bene­fit from the health of the whole organism, or 
even from the success of a whole group of individuals, many or all 
of which carry those genes. Dawkins points out that he could with 
equal validity, though with less impact, have called his famous first 
book not The Selfish Gene but The Cooperative Gene.27
	
Those uneasy about applying evolution to human behavior often 
assume that doing so must require stressing selfish­ness and competi-
tion at the expense of altruism and cooperation. In fact sociobiolo-
gy’s central preoccupation has been cooperation, or more precisely 
the complex mix of cooperation and competition in any society, and 
evolutionary psychology and evolutionary economics have placed 
far more emphasis on generosity, trust, and fairness than nonevolu-
tionary psychology or economics ever had.
Nature versus Freedom
An evolutionary view of human nature, far from threatening free-
dom, offers a reason to resist the molding of our minds by those who 
think they know best for us. The cultural constructionist’s view of 

	
27
	
Evolution and Human Nature?
the mind as a blank slate is “a dictator’s dream.”28 If we were entirely 
socially constructed, our “society” could mold us into slaves and 
masters, and there would be no reason to object, since those would 
henceforth be our socially constructed natures.
Nature as Fixed and Unchangeable
Many who resist applying evolution to human nature associate it, 
curiously, with the fixed and inalterable, even though the theory 
shows species in constant change. Darwin’s and Wallace’s core dis-
covery was that species are not rigid but in continuous transforma-
tion, slow if conditions are stable, swifter if they alter. And evolution 
has itself evolved a series of ways for organisms to respond more and 
more diversely to rapid change: sexual reproduction, nervous sys-
tems, flex­i­ble intelligence, social learning, culture. Biologist David 
Sloan Wilson argues that because of the unique role of culture in 
humans, “We have not escaped evolution, as so commonly assumed. 
We experience evolution in hyperdrive.”29
	
Many suppose that to see people as the product of nurture alone 
offers more hope for changing them, as if they can be readily changed 
by cultural means. But “some environmentally caused characteristics 
are quite impossible to undo. Nobody can unbake a baked potato.”30 
Seeing the world as discourse, as text, as many in the humanities con-
vinced themselves they did in the late twentieth century, encouraged 
the idea—comforting for professional readers of texts—that they 
could transform the world just by reading it differently. But no, there 
is a world outside language, and that world does call out for substan-
tive social change.
	
An evolutionary view allows for informed social change. Under-
standing biological conditions, what causes lead to what effects, 
makes it more possible to change conditions to achieve desired ef-
fects. When we discover which “if”-­conditions produce which 
“then”-­out­comes, we can look for ways to institute the conditions 
likeliest to lead to our preferred out­comes.31 Owen Jones com-
pares the law to a le­ver to change human behavior, and an informed 
knowledge of human nature to the fulcrum the le­ver needs to exert 
its force.32

On the Origin of Stories
28
Nature and Power
Some think that the idea of “Nature, red in tooth and claw” must val­
orize power and class. In fact evolutionary anthropology and biol-
ogy increasingly stress that a major difference between humans and 
other mammals is that they have found ways to control the urge for 
dominance, by collaborating to resist being dominated, and that this 
capacity has unleashed the unique power of human cooperation.33 
Multilevel selection theory (see Chapter 4) stresses that any group 
can compete more effectively against other groups by minimizing 
within-­group fitness differences.34
Nature versus Human Singularity?
Humans have language, advanced technology, and high culture. 
­Doesn’t trying to see human lives in terms of evolution ignore all 
that differentiates us from the rest of the biological world?
	
No. Evolution can explain both our substantial continuity with 
other forms of life, in things as important as our social emotions, 
and our substantial difference. Evolution has passed through a num-
ber of major transitions, from inorganic chemistry to life, from non-
nucleated (bacterial) cells to nucleated (eukaryotic: animal, plant, 
and fungal) cells, from single-­celled to multicellular organisms, from 
individual organisms to so­ci­e­ties. Each has involved new forms of 
cooperation at one level, making possible radically new and more 
complex possibilities at a higher level. Biologists now see the coop-
eration that makes human culture possible as the latest major transi-
tion in evolution.35
Nature and Knowledge
Many in the humanities reject an evolutionary account of human 
nature partly because they think it must presuppose a naïve empiri-
cism, a view of knowledge that assumes we see just what’s out there. 
Most in the humanities, by contrast, consider knowledge as not ob-
jective but culturally constructed, apparently “true” only within the 
terms of a particular culture.36

	
29
	
Evolution and Human Nature?
	
Vision can serve as a shorthand example to explain not only why a 
commonsense account of human knowledge fails but why the cul-
tural constructivist rejection of that account also fails. In ev­eryday 
experience the mind seems transparent, something we can under-
stand just by looking into ourselves; it seems all of a piece, seamless, 
put­ting us into direct touch with reality, when in fact it integrates 
many built-­in subroutines that we remain unaware of because they 
deliver results to us so fast and automatically. We look out and ef-
fortlessly see a world of space and objects and our place in it; our 
eyes seem to offer immediate access to the world.
	
But constructivists challenge that account, saying: “What we see 
is what we, through cultural experience, have learnt to see.”37 Since 
some peoples have only two words for color (the equivalent of light 
and dark or white and black), and since most cultures did not de-
velop perspectival drawing, color and perspective, for instance, have 
been claimed as arbitrary and conventional.38 In the mid-­twentieth 
century, tribesmen not previously exposed to Western culture were 
said to be unable to interpret photographs because of their Western 
“conventions” (perspective, black-­and-­white)—a typically insulting 
and offensive consequence of the denial of human nature.39 In fact 
even pigeons can read photographs and recognize human individu-
als from them.
	
Whatever their language, people see the same things, agree on the 
same colors as central to particular hues, and so on.40 But vision does 
not transfer all the space, movement, shape, surface, and color out 
there into the mind in any immediate or transparent way, nor is hu-
man vision finer, as we had often smugly assumed, than many other 
kinds. We supposed for a long time that we were unique in having 
color vision; in fact we cannot see ultraviolet light as bees do, infra-
red light as pit vipers do, colors at night as some moths do, polarized 
light as many birds, insects, and even plants can; we have trichro-
matic vision, better than the dichromatic of many species, but pi-
geons have tetrachromatic vision. But although human vision misses 
out on much potential information, it effortlessly does far more than 
we realize, unconsciously integrating some fifty different brain areas 
to make complex, real-­time sense of visual input. Specialized cells 
respond to edges, or speed of movement, or direction of movement, 

On the Origin of Stories
30
or animate but not inanimate movement; others respond to not just 
human faces but only faces at a particular angle, or a particular face 
that they then give an automatic emotional weighting to via the 
brain’s emotional router, the amygdala. We have different day and 
night visual systems, different where and what visual systems, differ-
ent unconscious early-­warning visual systems and conscious visual 
systems.
	
As in so many other aspects of the human mind and human na-
ture, such as our social cognition and social emotions, we err in 
­supposing that we know what we see, think, or are, either through 
immediate introspection or through the mediation of local culture. 
Nature has built far more into vision and into the mind in general 
than we can know without science, and it has done so in ways that 
are the same in normal human minds of whatever ethnic or cultural 
origin.

	
31
2
EVOLUTION, ADAPTATION, AND ADAPTED MINDS
Evolution by natural selection is a simple principle with 
staggeringly complex and unpredictable results. At its simplest, the 
principle says only that what works well enough in life gets passed 
on, and what works best gets passed on most frequently.1 Yet, ob-
serves Richard Dawkins, “Never were so many facts explained by so 
few assumptions.”2
	
Since distinguished biologists, like Dawkins himself in The Blind 
Watchmaker and Climbing Mount Improbable, have written excellent, 
accessible introductions to evolution, I will not attempt to cover their 
ground, but will merely prepare a path toward an evolutionary ac-
count of art and the art of fiction in particular. I outline here the ba-
sic principle of evolution, introduce the notion of biological adapta-
tion, then show how human minds can be explained as adapted to 
the kinds of problems they have recurrently had to solve.
	
Everything here will prove relevant in chapters to come. Not only 
have our bodies evolved from simpler forms; so, too, have our minds 
and behaviors. Since evolution challenges deeply held intuitions 
about our special place in the world and about how complexity 
arises, since the controversies have been sharp and the confusions 
and misrepresentations profuse, we have to tread carefully.
	
As I will argue in Parts 2 and 3, our predispositions to engage in art 
of all kinds, including the art of fiction, have evolved and now con-
stitute human psychological and behavioral adaptations. We need to 
know what that term means, what criteria have been proposed to 
identify adaptations, and what tests can decide whether we should 

On the Origin of Stories
32
explain a feature as a biological adaptation, or as a byproduct of 
other adaptations, or primarily in cultural terms.
Evolution
Evolution by natural selection revolves like a perpetual-­motion ma-
chine through cycle after cycle of reproduction. Darwin could arrive 
at the principle of evolution by reapplying the insights of Charles 
Lyell, the founder of modern geology. The mountains and plains 
around us seem almost to de­fine solidity and stability, but geology 
shows them to be in flux and to contain the detailed record of their 
own past, if we can dig deep enough and look closely enough. So, 
too, with species. Seemingly stable species change form and function 
dramatically over hundreds, thousands, or millions of generations. 
Just as seabeds can become mountaintops, the descendants of fish 
can become Komodo dragons or hummingbirds.
	
The modern theory of evolution (essentially Darwin’s theory of 
natural selection plus a modern understanding of genes) is as well 
supported as the theory of gravity and, like it, simple in outline but 
com­pli­cated in detail: (1) if there is inheritance, and we know there is 
(a child resembles its parents more than a random stranger, let alone 
a treefrog or a toadstool); (2) if there is variation, and we know there 
is (a child never exactly resembles its parents, and indeed by defi­ni­
tion one child could never be exactly like two different parents); and 
(3) if some variations are more successful than others, and we know 
they are (the ability to run a little faster or think your way out of dif­
fi­culties a little more often, for instance), then in a world of limited 
resources and competing interests, not all will be equally successful 
in producing offspring that themselves produce reproductively via-
ble offspring. Over time those who leave more offspring will come to 
predominate within their populations, and the variants that they 
embody will therefore become either fixed, like two legs in humans, 
or polymorphic, one of a stable set of options, like the colors of hu-
man eyes or hair.
	
In one sense the principle of evolution seems almost tautological: 
the features of those that can outreproduce others will come to pre-
dominate within their species. Yet in another sense evolution meant 

	
Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds
	
33
revolution. For until Darwin and Wallace, scientists assumed that the 
complexity of organisms in the living world could be explained only 
by deliberate design. The explanation Darwin and Wallace offered 
showed that even intricately elaborate structures could emerge with-
out conscious design, without any foreplanning, merely as a conse-
quence of repeated generation, selection, and regeneration. Evolu-
tion accounts for the living world as “generated from the ground up 
rather than from the heavens down.”3
	
Enormous complexity, Darwin showed, could happen through a 
pro­cess that appears almost random. But although chance often en-
ters the living world, evolution’s power does not derive from chance 
alone. Which genes recombine with which others in meiosis, the di-
vision of the genome in fertilization, does depend on pure chance, 
and allows for an astronomical number of new combinations in each 
generation—in the human case, trillions of options even from the 
same parents. But selection criteria exert consistent pressures that al-
low favorable combinations to accumulate. As Dawkins insists, “Dar-
winism is not a theory of random chance. It is a theory of random 
mutation plus non-­random cumulative natural selection.”4
	
Selective retention accumulates success, a little more, on average, 
in each feature in each cycle. It accretes even minute advantages, so 
that in the next cycle the most advantageous features in the previous 
cycle will become the basis for new recombinations. If the selection 
pressures remain relatively stable, success compounds, and although 
the pro­cess has no forethought it can rapidly arrive at highly effec-
tive design. Eyes, a decided advantage in negotiating the world, have 
evolved in­de­pen­dently perhaps over sixty times.5 Their complexity 
and ef­fi­ciency often seem a trump to those who think the cards are 
stacked against evolution: “What use is half an eye?” In his brilliant 
rejoinder, Dawkins not only shows how even the feeblest capacity to 
register light could have been of bene­fit, but also describes a com-
puter simulation demonstrating that a fish-­eye lens could evolve 
from a simple structure of three cell layers, transparent over photo-
sensitive over opaque, in as little as 364,000 generations, less than 
half a million years for organisms that reproduce at a year old.6
	
In complex real-­world environments, selection pressures never re-
main the same forever. As one organ or organism grows larger and 

On the Origin of Stories
34
more effective at its role, it competes for energy with others, within a 
body, a species, or an ecosystem. Even without atmospheric or topo-
graphical change, the competitive environment shifts in many small 
systematic directions over generations. Predators and prey, parasites 
and hosts, sexual pursuers and the sexually pursued continually 
evolve in a series of arms races that push evolutionary design to its 
furthest ex­tremes.
Adaptation
Not all evolution is adaptation—there are other factors, such as non-
biological “chance” events (asteroids, volcanoes, climate or geologi-
cal change) or genetic drift—but only natural selection can produce 
complex design for biologically advantageous functions.7 Catastro-
phes may cause the extinction of whole taxa and have a massive im-
pact on the biota that endure, but they are too severe and rare to 
shape species except by eliminating their competition or reconfigur-
ing their environment. Genetic drift—chance changes in frequency 
in genes not under strong selection pressure—can have conse-
quences, especially in small, isolated populations, but drift is direc-
tionless, as much back or sideways as forward, unlike the steady 
compounding of advantages under selection pressure. Adaptation is 
not all there is to evolution, but for good reason it is the core of mod-
ern evolutionary biology. Since only natural selection can give rise to 
adaptation, to functional biological design, “adapted” is often used 
as almost equivalent to “evolved.”
	
An adaptation is any trait modi­fied by natural selection that en-
hances fitness, the capacity to survive and produce viable offspring.8 
An adaptive trait need not be perfectly adapted to its environment; it 
need only have given organisms that possess it some advantage over 
their kindred that lack this trait to the same degree.
	
The concept of adaptation drives so much research in modern 
evolutionary biology and psychology because it prompts us to ask 
“Why?” Rather than merely accepting a trait, even an apparently 
insig­nifi­cant or decorative one, as part of an organism, we can ask: 
“Is it an adaptation? Why does the organism have this feature, with 
this value, and not some other in its stead? How does it help the or-

	
Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds
	
35
ganism to survive or reproduce better than its competitors without 
these spec­i­fi­ca­tions?”
	
Often traits assumed to be accidental or trivial, mere grace notes 
in the species design, have been properly understood for the first 
time only once researchers asked whether they had some fitness-­
enhancing function. A. J. Cain singled out as “the most remarkable 
functional interpretation of a ‘trivial’ character . . . [Sidnie] Manton’s 
work on the diplopod Polyxenus, in which she has shown that a char-
acter formerly described as an ‘ornament’ (and what could sound 
more useless?) is almost literally the pivot of the animal’s life.”9 Reli-
gion, an elaborate set of beliefs in and behaviors toward beings with 
no reality outside the minds of particular human believers, and art, 
an elaborate set of practices designed to appeal only to human pref-
erences, might equally seem “ornaments” in our species. Others have 
suggested that religion is an adaptation;10 I will try to show that art 
in general and storytelling in particular are also adaptations in our 
species.11 Far from being ornaments, they too, often, become a pivot 
of human lives.
	
When Karl von Frisch proposed that honeybees dance to com­
municate to their hive-­mates the location of nectar-­bearing flowers 
in the vicinity, some biologists challenged him, while others dem­
onstrated not only that the bees dance to express information about 
food, direction, and distance, but also that their hive-­mates act on 
that information. As Dawkins comments: “An adaptationist could 
not have rested happy with the idea of animals performing such a 
time-­consuming, and above all complex and statistically improba-
ble, activity for nothing.”12 Religious and artistic practices, from the 
Owerri Igbo of Nigeria’s constructing mbari houses over years but 
leaving them immediately to decay as soon as the construction has 
ended,13 to Lorenzo Ghiberti’s half-­century of work on Florence’s 
Baptistery doors, still there for all to admire more than a half millen-
nium later, are nothing if not complex and improbable—and also, I 
suggest, part of behaviors as adaptive to humans as the waggle-­dance 
is to honeybees. But this is to anticipate.
George Williams, who clarified the modern concept of biological 
­adaptation, sees it as a powerful but strict and demanding notion, 

On the Origin of Stories
36
not to be used without warrant. Nevertheless he asks: “Is it not rea-
sonable to anticipate that our understanding of the human mind 
would be greatly aided by knowing the purpose for which it was de-
signed?”14
	
Applying the principle of adaptation to human minds and behav-
ior arouses strong reactions. Even those who not merely accept but 
actively champion the adaptationist program in human psychology 
can doubt that it applies to activities like religion or art.15 Others 
doubt that the adaptationist program applies to human psychology 
at all, and still others that adaptation plays as wide a role anywhere in 
biology as has been proposed.
	
Stephen Jay Gould led the attack on adaptationism. He charged 
adaptationists with erroneously supposing that all organic features 
are adaptive. In fact they suppose nothing of the sort. There are in-
evitably many organic traits that no one will claim to be adaptive: 
that daisies float, that elephants have fewer eyes than legs, that hu-
man flesh can be tasty to lions or even other humans.16 Many prop-
erties of biologically adaptive features, like the redness of blood or 
the whiteness of bone, are not themselves adaptive but byproducts of 
features especially selected for.
	
Nor do adaptationists assume, as critics charge, that adaptation 
will show perfection of design, and for three reasons. First, the func-
tion that an adaptation serves cannot be achieved from scratch but 
only from whatever the organism has available. Speech, an invalu-
able human adaptation, had to start from the mammalian respira-
tory tract. Humans therefore have a jerry-­built larynx that must si-
multaneously serve the ends of digestion, respiration, and speech, 
with the result that we choke more and can swallow less than 
other species.17 Indeed the mix of “astonishing adaptive sophistica-
tion and botched improvisation” in biological design—including 
human voices, eyes, and minds—offers conclusive evidence against 
so-­called Intelligent Design and for evolution by natural selection.18
	
Second, an adaptation need not be perfect to establish itself; it 
needs only to perform better on average than the available competi-
tion. If further variation can generate a still better re­finement, this 
will in turn predominate, so that design may continue to improve. 
But any design improvement must not only start with what is al-

	
Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds
	
37
ready at hand but also be advantageous at ev­ery step. “No future use-
fulness is ever relevant,” as Williams points out,19 because although 
on a drawing board this potential could lead to more elegant design, 
natural selection has no foreknowledge and records only what out-
performs the existing competition one round at a time.
	
Third, adaptationists do not assume the current adaptiveness of 
any adaptation. Evolution built into dung beetles a craving for the 
smell and taste of dung. That still serves them well. Likewise it built 
into humans cravings for sweet and fat, preferences adaptive when 
high-­energy food sources were hard to obtain but worth the effort, 
but now, with candy stores and burger bars so temptingly close, mal-
adaptive, raising the risk of obesity, heart attack, and diabetes.
	
The key elements of adaptation are design for some function. The 
function need not be a single one, especially since evolution often 
turns existing traits into the basis for continued selection: as biolo-
gists say, “one ancestral, many derived functions.”20 Subsequent func-
tions may modify the design features of the original adaptation, not 
usually erasing the initial function but adding an ever-­wider range of 
uses.21 Eyes evolved for vision, but we also use them for communica-
tion: hence our contrastive white sclera, which highlight the direc-
tion of another’s gaze, and our highly re­fined capacities for register-
ing and inferring attention and intention from others’ eye direction.22 
That we can now intimidate others with our stare does not refute the 
fact that eyes evolved for vision. Art and storytelling may be adapta-
tions, we will see, but their functions in the video age need not all 
have developed in the ice age.
Research into adaptations can work in two directions, from design to 
function (reverse engineering) or from function to design.
	
Given a particular design, what could its function be? In the case 
of physical features, these may be easily manipulated experimentally, 
a marking obliterated or highlighted, a tail cut shorter or ar­ti­fi­cially 
lengthened, and the effect on fitness—on the number of offspring 
—tabulated. One of the breakthroughs in twentieth-­century biology 
was the realization that a behavior, too, can be an adaptation. A par-
ticular bird species lays n eggs per clutch. Why? By experimental ma-
nipulation, by removing eggs from some nests and adding them to 

On the Origin of Stories
38
others, it can be shown that a larger clutch size would strain the pa-
rental resources and lead to too few chicks’ surviving, while a smaller 
clutch size would let parental food-­gathering capacity go to waste. 
The precise mechanisms by which the bird lays the right number of 
eggs for its species may remain to be discovered, but this clutch size 
can be shown to be optimal, and therefore adaptive, for this species 
in its normal conditions.
	
The complementary question proves no less powerful. Given this 
apparent function, what design could underlie such behavior? For 
instance, given that as a highly social species we can bene­fit from so-
cial exchange, what design features would human minds need to en-
able this exchange and ensure that on average it was ben­e­fi­cial?
	
But perhaps the human mind is not a hierarchy of adaptive func-
tions? Gould argued that many purportedly adaptive features of our 
minds are mere byproducts of our large brains, and that attempts 
to explain the adaptive function of this or that aspect of mind or 
­behavior sink to the level of “Just-­So” stories. Others counter that 
Gould’s claims that mental or behavioral traits are mere “spandrels” 
(unintended side effects) of big brains are “mostly opaque ‘it-­just-­
happened’ stories” with no explanatory power.23
	
The human brain exacts high costs, constituting only 2 percent 
of our body weight but demanding roughly 20 percent of our rest-
ing energy.24 Natural selection will always seek to cut costs that pro-
vide no bene­fits. It has reduced or eliminated sight in cave-­dwelling 
and burrowing animals and wings in many New Zealand birds that 
evolved without mammalian predators. It dispenses with the brains 
of sea-­squirts once they assume their fixed adult position and shrinks 
the brains of domesticated animals that no ­longer need fend for 
themselves. Had ev­ery part of our brain’s design not served an adap-
tive function, evolution would have reduced our surplus brain mass 
—an observation that will prove crucial for explaining art.
Evolutionary Psychology 
and evolutionary psychology
Darwin was the first to propose, in On the Origin of Species, that we 
should seek to understand human nature by taking evolution seri-

	
Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds
	
39
ously into account, and the first to undertake such research, espe-
cially in The Descent of Man and The Expression of the Emotions in 
Man and Other Animals. For a long time little came of his hopes, but 
over the last half-­century many research programs have begun to in-
vestigate human nature in light of our origins.
	
The evidence ­comes from many fields, at first tilled separately, but 
now often cross-­fertilizing: from evolutionary theory, ethology, lin-
guistics, ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence, game theory, evolutionary anthropol-
ogy, evolutionary economics, neurophysiology, analytic and experi-
mental philosophy, evolutionary epistemology, and many branches 
of psychology—clinical, comparative, developmental, evolutionary, 
personality, and social. The broad research program to which all 
these more focused programs contribute centrally or peripherally 
can be called evolutionary psychology, which I, like others, will dis-
tinguish from the narrower school of Evolutionary Psychology (EP).
	
Evolutionary psychology, in both broad and narrow senses, 
stresses that the mind is not just a large, powerful, general-­purpose 
information mechanism that can apply standard content-­neutral 
reasoning and local cultural reasons to any problem. It takes seri-
ously the frame problem in ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence, the dif­fi­culty of de­
fin­ing what information or inferences may be relevant or irrelevant 
to a problem. In order for us to do what we do, our minds must have 
been prepared before birth to learn the information spe­cifi­cally rele-
vant to human problems. Henry Plotkin explains the dif­fi­culty in 
general terms:
the world can be partitioned, described and learned about in 
an infinitely large number of ways. If you let loose in the 
world a truly general-­purpose learning device that learns en-
tirely without constraint, it will, by chance, set off acquiring 
information in what is an infinitely large search space along 
any one of an infinitely large number of search paths. The 
chances of such a device learning anything that is biologi-
cally useful within a single lifetime is vanishingly small . . .
	 There is really only one way to solve . . . [the] almost in-
tractable [frame] problem. This is indeed to have vast reaches 
of time in which to search and the ability to conserve selec-

On the Origin of Stories
40
tively knowledge gained over such massive search spaces. 
And that is what evolution does. It gains knowledge of the 
world across countless generations of organisms, it conserves 
it selectively relative to criteria of need, and that collective 
knowledge is then held within the gene pools of species. Such 
collective knowledge is doled out to individuals, who come 
into the world with innate ideas and predispositions to learn 
only certain things in spe­cific ways. Every human, ev­ery 
learner of any species, begins its life knowing what it has to 
learn and be intelligent about—we all come into the world 
with the search space that we have to work in quite narrowly 
de­fined. There is empirical evidence to support this view in a 
whole range of species.25
Plotkin adds that if this were not the case, if we all were blank slates 
at birth, “we would all of us enter into some individual and probably 
unique part of the search space and hence have little shared knowl-
edge in common” and little chance of “understanding that there are 
experiences and minds other than our own.”26 This outcome could 
hardly be more different from ac­tual human experience. Under ex-
perimental conditions human infants have been shown to imitate 
adult smiles within an hour of birth, a task that involves singling out 
the adult’s face and the smile in particular, the motivation to imitate 
or respond to that smile, and the knowledge of which muscles to call 
on and in what way to produce a smile on its own face, even before it 
has ever seen it itself.27 We come into this world prepared especially 
to learn from and share with each other—and that, as we will see, of-
fers a powerful start for art.
Many of the most telling criticisms of narrow EP come from biolo-
gists. They note that EP hypothesizes adaptations on the basis of theo­
retical information-­pro­cessing problems confronting human minds 
in an abstract Pleistocene and does not pay enough heed to real ani-
mals in real and testable situations; or that it remains too close to ar­
ti­fi­cial intelligence and underrates the natural intelligence in other 
species and the gradation between human capacities and others.28
	
Biologists accept that any full biological explanation of a behavior 

	
Evolution, Adaptation, and Adapted Minds
	
41
needs to answer four questions: why? (fitness: what is its ultimate 
function?); how? (mechanism: how does it operate, what stimuli cause 
it to occur?); whence? (phylogeny: what are its evolutionary prede-
cessors, what did it evolve from?); and when? (ontogeny: when does 
the adaptation develop and change in the individual?).29 As some have 
noted, EP has often focused too exclusively on the first question, and 
needs to take the other three seriously—as indeed its best work often 
does, and as I hope to do in accounting for storytelling. Evolutionary 
Psychologists are themselves aware that proposing a functional ad-
aptation in the mind is not an endpoint but an opening gambit, an 
invitation to test the proposal by any means available, such as cross-­
cultural and cross-­species comparisons, clinical studies of selective 
mental defi­cits, and neuroimaging of normal and damaged minds.
	
Yet even most of the biologists, psychologists, and philosophers 
who have critiqued EP in the strict sense accept the necessity of 
studying human nature in the context of evolution. Though a critic 
of EP, primatologist Frans de Waal has no doubts about the future of 
evolutionary psychology: there is “no way around an evolutionary 
approach to human behavior,” he declares, predicting that in another 
half-­century all psychology departments will have a portrait of Dar-
win on their wall.30 As psychologists and others note, psychology and 
the social sciences are full of unconnected minitheories or empirical 
find­ings with no theoretical framework, which an evolutionary psy-
chology could supply.31 Evolutionary psychology can ask why or how 
questions all too often ignored in earlier psychology. Why do we have 
this mental capacity or bias, or this behavior? Why has it been advan­
tageous enough to become established in the species? How were we 
able to establish this aspect of human behavior? What information-­
pro­cessing or motivational capacities would it have required?
	
Some of the answers proposed in an evolutionary explanation of 
human nature may be premature, but they will be tested, sifted, and 
re­fined in due course. But incorporating deep time into our knowl-
edge of the species adds a dimension whose absence had distorted all 
our thinking.
	
Literature has been the great repository of our detailed knowledge 
of human nature in the past. It will be illuminated by, and it will il-
luminate, our knowledge of an even deeper past.

42
3
THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENCE
If human minds and behavior have been adapted by evo­
lution, how are they adapted?1 Here we have room to consider only 
two major lines of development: mind in terms of the evolution of 
intelligence, and in the next chapter behavior in terms of the evolu-
tion of cooperation. We later follow both lines in our two case studies 
from Homer and Dr. Seuss, both because intelligence and coopera-
tion matter so much in life and literature, and because some doubt 
that evolution can explain either.
	
Often those wary of Darwinism suppose that the more we see evo-
lution as shaping minds, the less room we leave for flex­i­bil­ity. But 
flex­i­ble behavior requires more, not less, genetic underpinning, just 
as a computer can do more, not less, the more software it has in-
stalled.2
	
The core argument over evolutionary psychology is about how 
much evolution has shaped human minds.3 Have our minds, as 
Gould claimed, evolved beyond evolution, becoming so large and 
powerful that we can now cope with the world through culture and 
language in almost endlessly flex­i­ble ways?4 Has general-­purpose 
conscious reasoning overridden the more spe­cific functions of ani-
mal minds and set us free?
	
Or is the mind, as Leda Cosmides and John Tooby, the leading 
theorists of Evolutionary Psychology, claim, like a Swiss army knife, 
full of particular mechanisms that evolved to solve different adap-
tive problems in different domains, like choosing mates, avoiding 
dangers, maintaining sta­tus, or seeking food?5 Nature has never be-
fore evolved an organism with massive spare capacity or a general-­

	
The Evolution of Intelligence
	
43
purpose organism; there are no general organs because there are no 
general problems.6 Our minds, like ev­ery other organ, have surely 
evolved in response to spe­cific problems: we do not seek information 
of the same sort, or respond to it in the same ways, when we are hun-
gry, or frightened, or sexually aroused.
	
Are all or most human mental pro­cesses shaped by evolution to 
deal with spe­cific problems, so that the human mind operates mostly 
through domain-­spe­cific mechanisms or “modules”? Or does it 
function in a primarily domain-­general way?
	
David Geary’s The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition, 
and General Intelligence (2005) offers a resolution of this debate that 
allows room for both perspectives. Geary integrates neuroscience 
and evolution to show how the earliest-­evolving “hard” modular sys-
tems were complemented first by “soft” modular systems modifiable 
by experience and then, especially in humans, by conscious and de-
liberate decision-­making in novel situations.7
	
Brains evolved to allow organisms to respond to relevant features 
in their environments. These features span a spectrum from phe-
nomena unvarying across time, like three-­dimensional space or the 
motion of light and sound through air or water, to the more change-
able, like biological kinds, local flora and fauna, to still more vola-
tile phenomena, like the intentions and reactions of others: preda-
tors, prey, and conspe­cifics like allies or rivals, mates or offspring. As 
brains evolved to track these more changeable features, they included 
mechanisms that became less automatic, more complexly integrated 
for specialized combinations of functions, and more likely, as pres-
sure for behavioral novelty increased, to feed into more deliberate 
systems of control.
	
Senses evolved first to react to comparatively invariant features of 
the environment, like space, light, or sound. The neural systems in-
terpreting low-­level visual or other sensory information can be auto-
matic and unconscious, operating rapidly through massively parallel 
networks. We need not be aware how our minds interpret incoming 
light signals to cope with changing illumination, horizontal or verti-
cal motion, or gradients in intensity and color that sig­nify surfaces 
or edges and therefore objects. Such systems are self-­enclosed, im-
pervious to introspection, “modular” in the classic sense.8

On the Origin of Stories
44
	
Light and sound operate similarly ev­erywhere, but each local en-
vironment has its unique flora and fauna. Geary proposes that to 
cope with such variability, brains evolved a more flex­i­ble modularity 
that permits plasticity (modifiability) in brain development.9 We can 
conceive of modularity as having a hard exoskeleton, like a crab’s, 
for those cognitive systems that pro­cess invariant patterns, and a soft 
internal structure of systems modifiable by experience, accommo-
dating local differences within the constraints of the exoskeleton.10 
Within the exoskeleton each species will be predisposed to assign bi-
ologically relevant information into categories according to simple 
rules. To the degree that species can learn, brains automatically real-
locate costly mental resources, expanding or shrinking neural space 
in response to the inputs of experience.
	
Let us focus again on vision, the clearest example, and on ques-
tions of survival, where the most intense selection pressures occur. 
Even before they have seen a real hawk, chicks fear a bird-­shaped kite 
that experimenters tow one way, as if with wings near the head (a 
schematic bird of prey), but not when towed in the reverse direc-
tion, as if with wings toward the tail (a schematic duck or goose). 
If chicks feared all large bird shapes fly­ing above, they would waste 
energy running for cover and time for foraging. But if they had to 
wait for experience to distinguish between a predator and a grazing 
bird, they might never survive their first lesson. Over time evolution 
therefore selected for chicks that could from the first distinguish one 
broad category of bird from another, the potentially harmful from 
the harmless, and react appropriately. Even this hard-­wired system 
complexly integrates visual pro­cessing, emotional response, and mo-
tor reaction.
	
Although evolution can partly prepare us for whatever may help 
or hinder our particular needs, it cannot build into different kinds 
of minds instructions precise enough to cope with all they may en-
counter. Humans have a wide range of habitats, predators, and prey, 
so we need to learn the species of most relevance, and as children’s 
early fascination with animal kinds shows, we have a strong disposi-
tion to do so. But as for young birds, so for children, certain animal 
kinds have particular evolutionary sig­nifi­cance and emotional value. 
Even in modern urban environments children still fear lions, tigers, 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence
	
45
and monsters—an open category of large threatening creatures—
without ever having encountered them.
	
Being highly social, we have a strong innate predisposition to at-
tend to one particular species: Homo sapiens. We respond with de-
cided emotional biases: infants smile in answer to smiles and show 
fear if they meet unflinching stares or unresponsive faces. But within 
our innate schema for human faces, we need to learn individual faces. 
We categorize faces as human very rapidly, in 100 milliseconds, and 
recognize individual faces still rapidly, through even more special-
ized mechanisms, but a little slower, in 170 milliseconds, through 
neurons trained to respond to particular faces.11 And for faces we 
know well, a positive or negative emotional loading automatically 
accompanies each face we recognize.
	
For social species like dolphins, chimpanzees, or humans, the so-
cial world fluc­tu­ates far more subtly than the rest of the biological 
world. A chimpanzee will have much the same reaction to any colo-
bus monkey or any leopard, but its reaction to another chimpanzee 
varies according to the other’s size, sex, age, personality, sta­tus, alli-
ances, and situation. Relating to other conspe­cifics places heavy de-
mands on mental flex­i­bil­ity.
	
Most researchers accept the social intelligence hypothesis: that the 
greatest pressures for advanced intelligence arise from the need to 
track the identities, sta­tus, powers, and intentions of conspe­cifics and 
to respond to them to best advantage.12 Animals like dogs, dolphins, 
and primates have to cooperate with conspe­cifics subtly enough to 
earn the resources obtainable only together. But they also need to 
compete with them to maximize their share of socially earned re-
sources without risking prospects for future cooperation. This shift-
ing balance of competition and cooperation exacts high computa-
tional demands. Individuals must track other individuals and their 
predispositions and relations to themselves and others, a complex 
task in species with changeable hierarchies and fluid alliances.
	
In human evolution, social selection pressures on intelligence have 
been unusually intense. Both humans and chimpanzees coordinate 
flexibly in ways that make them effective hunters—presumably a 
trait of their common ancestor. After hominids became fully bipedal, 
some time after the split from the common ancestor, and before their 

On the Origin of Stories
46
rapid growth in brain size, they learned to wield sticks, stones, and 
fire. They gained such environmental dominance that they became 
superpredators, eradicating much of the megafauna in new regions 
into which they ventured before these animals had time to evolve 
wariness of these not especially powerful-­looking new neighbors.13
	
Hominid brain size then experienced the kind of rapid growth 
that usually results from an evolutionary arms race, a competitive 
feedback cycle either between species (as antelopes and cheetahs in-
creased in speed to outrun each other) or within species. Once the 
advantages of belonging to a hominid band had become overwhelm-
ing, the main pressure for our forebears became to secure their share 
of the resources obtained through the band’s efforts. They bene­fited 
by maximizing their own gains without alienating others, by allying 
with them strategically, outwitting them strategically, and resisting 
being outwitted in return. The complexity of such pressures seems 
to have caused the rapid growth in hominid brain size over the last 
two million years, and especially the development, as we will see, of 
an advanced theory of mind, a capacity to infer the beliefs, de-
sires, and intentions of others, and a self-­awareness that allows us to 
understand how others might infer our motives and react to our 
moves.
	
Geary explains the neurological consequences of the increasing 
brain size needed to cope with such demands. The area that ex-
panded most in the hominid brain, the neocortex, lies on the outside 
of the brain. The neocortex could not double in size merely by dou-
bling the size of its neurons, since to maintain conduction proper-
ties, like the speed of transmission, any dendrites (the short signal-­
receiving branch fibers of neurons) that doubled in length would 
have to quadruple in diameter. The expanded regions in the hu-
man neocortex are therefore less densely packed with neurons (cell 
bodies, gray matter), but they have a higher proportion of axons 
(white matter), the signal-­transmitting nerve fibers, long enough to 
loop into other brain regions. Each neuron in the neocortex there-
fore communicates with proportionately fewer neighboring neurons 
than before the expansion. The reduced density of neurons resulted 
in the “increased specialization of interconnected clusters of neu-
rons. Stated somewhat differently, the microarchitecture of expanded 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence
	
47
regions of neocortex necessarily be­comes more modularized and 
specialized for pro­cessing finer-­grained pieces of information.”14
	
But because of the higher proportion of axons relative to neurons, 
and the increased folding of the new outer lobes of the brain, the 
neocortex in humans is more highly interconnected with other more 
distant brain regions than in other species. This structure permits 
more integration of information and more top-­down control of the 
rest of the brain than in other species, more capacity to inhibit auto-
matic response and attend to and manipulate information in search 
of novel responses.15
	
The combination of expansion of the neocortex and the altered 
proportion of axons to neurons therefore allows for the emergence 
of relatively new brain systems or the mod­i­fi­ca­tion of older ones. 
In particular, our brains can maintain better attentional focus and 
control and stop “task-­irrelevant information from entering con-
scious awareness,”16 while new subroutines can engage in controlled 
problem-­solving and generate mental models to cope with new or 
con­flicting information.
Geary contrasts the neural responses possible at the invariant and 
variant ends of the information continuum. At the invariant end, 
pro­cessing information from the world of physics, responses can 
move rapidly and automatically along parallel channels. Toward the 
variant end, especially in subtle interactions with other conspe­cifics, 
ready-­made rules no ­longer suf­fice to handle complex and unpre-
dictable situations. A quite different response is required.
	
When a problem cannot be solved automatically, the output of 
the modular networks can be bumped up into consciousness, to be 
addressed in working memory, the space within the mind that con-
sciously attends to and manipulates information, the active window, 
as it were, on the mind’s computer screen. There the brain’s central 
executive maintains attentional control. Deliberate attention ampli-
fies information relevant to the problem and inhibits the irrelevant. 
In the severely limited space of working memory, we pro­cess infor-
mation not unconsciously or implicitly, but consciously or “explic-
itly,” and not in parallel but in series, through representations—per-
ceptions, memories, pro­jec­tions—in one of our central executive’s 

On the Origin of Stories
48
slave systems, via images (in our mind’s eye), words (in our mind’s 
ear), or episodic memories.17 The ability to use working memory for 
controlled problem-­solving in response to novel or complex situa-
tions correlates strongly with mea­sures of general intelligence.
	
Another example from vision can show the kind of problem we or 
our ancestors have often had to face, and the relation between visual 
and other cognitive subsystems. We are born primed, through the 
exoskeleton of these mental modules, to attend to human faces and 
voices and to respond in particular ways to the gross features of ei-
ther. Over our lifetimes, we learn subtler re­finements of facial and 
vocal expression. If, say, we detect a mismatch between the words or 
tone of a person’s speech and facial expressions or eye movements, 
we may suspect deception.18 Attention and emotion will alert us to 
search for relevant information: we may look for other signs in the 
present, or recall our sense of this person in the past, or particular 
past encounters that now throw new light on his or her character, 
or other situations relevantly similar to this. We can sketch possible 
courses of action if we think we can con­firm deception—such as ei-
ther revealing or concealing our suspicions—and the other’s likely 
response to our actions in either case. Our emotional reaction to 
these sketchily pro­jected scenes will often guide our next move.
	
To sum up: First, organisms evolve simple neural systems as they 
become sensitive to relatively constant sources of environmental in-
formation. Second, animals develop minds that can respond to the 
less constant, more diverse features of the biological world in rough-
­and-­ready ways, through networks of more or less modifiable mod-
ules, innate or developed through experience. Third, advanced, so-
cially honed minds, especially human minds, access an even larger 
network of modules, but in problematic or novel situations con-
sciously attend to information and run inferences and scenarios that 
they assess via evolved emotional systems. In mind, as throughout 
evolution, the more complex does not supplant the simpler but 
builds on and integrates it in new ways that allow remarkable new 
functions to develop.19
Geary explicitly associates the invariant-­variant continuum, from 
(a) light or sound at one end through (b) plants and animals in the 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence
	
49
middle to (c) other conspe­cifics at the other end, with what develop-
ment psychologists call (a) folk physics, (b) folk biology, and (c) folk 
psychology. As we will see in Part 3, these evolved mental systems 
prove essential to our capacity to understand events and therefore 
narrative.
	
As experience makes us more familiar with situations, we can re-
spond to them in ways that require less of the effortful pro­cessing 
of conscious attention operating within working memory.20 With in-
creasing familiarity, situations can be pro­cessed in older, more poste-
rior regions of the brain in faster, parallel, and less effortful ways, 
leaving more room in working memory to handle real novelty. I will 
suggest that this is one function of storytelling: that it makes us more 
expert in social situations, speeding up our capacity to pro­cess pat-
terns of social information, to make inferences from other minds 
and from situations fraught with dif­fi­cult or subtle choices or to run 
complex scenarios. Childhood play and storytelling for all ages en-
gage our attention so compulsively through our interest in event 
comprehension and social monitoring that over time their concen-
trated information patterns develop our facility for complex situa-
tional thought.21
	
In order to assess novel or problematic situations human minds 
can draw not only on our individual present and our species’ past, 
as  all minds can do, but also on their individual pasts, even on 
­particular episodes, and can consider pro­jected futures, as they 
turn ideas around through a possibility space enlarged by the di­
mensions of the hypothetical and the counterfac­tual. Thanks to 
­theory of mind, which we will explore in Part 3, we can also in-
fer the beliefs as well as the desires and intentions of others, and 
have enough self-­awareness to run scenarios in which we can test 
our own possible courses of action against the possible reactions of 
others.
	
For the great bulk of the 600-­million-­year evolution of mind on 
Earth, this ability to think in sustained fashion beyond the here and 
now has not been available to any species. But humans not only have 
this ability; we also have a compulsion to tell and listen to stories 
with no relation to the here and now or even to any real past. As we 
will see, our compulsion for story improves our capacity to think in 

On the Origin of Stories
50
the evolutionarily novel, complex, and strategically invaluable way 
sketched above. By developing our ability to think beyond the here 
and now, storytelling helps us not to override the given, but to be less 
restricted by it, to cope with it more flexibly and on something more 
like our own terms.

	
51
4
THE EVOLUTION OF COOPERATION
Halfway through high school I discovered Cracked com-
ics, edgier than the better-­known Mad. I painstakingly copied onto 
my school briefcase, in light green house paint, an image I found 
there: Albert the Alligator from Pogo (as I retrospectively realize) 
with a two-­yard-­long screw skewering his midriff, framed in the cap-
tion: “Do Unto Others . . . Then Cut Out.” Forty years on I can’t res-
urrect the impulse that made this image so irresistible. I can only 
suppose that a standing alligator blithely sporting a gigantic screw 
tickled my fancy, and that at fif­teen and chafing at adult proprieties I 
liked even more the parodic affront to the Golden Rule, “Do unto 
others as you would have them do unto you,” the implicit “Screw 
you,” in slang new to me. I must have copied out image and text in 
what I thought a protest against conformity. But not for a moment 
did I call into question the Golden Rule itself. Precisely because it 
made such universal good sense, pretending to subvert it seemed to 
my teenage self a perfect provocation.
	
Why does the Golden Rule make such sense to us all? Why do we 
cooperate, even when we might also itch to rebel?
	
Cooperation has been a prime focus of sociobiology and its off-
shoot evolutionary psychology. In the mid-­1960s William Hamilton 
and George Williams transformed evolutionary theory by turning 
sociality from an accepted fact into a sci­en­tific problem.1 Darwin, 
always aware of dif­fi­culties his theory needed to confront, had been 
troubled by eusociality in ants and bees, in whose colonies most 
­renounce their reproductive rights. But before Hamilton and Wil-
liams, others less inclined to confront dif­fi­culties had been able to 

On the Origin of Stories
52
think that individuals could easily evolve to act for the good of their 
group or species, a position now known as “naïve group selection-
ism.” Hamilton and Williams made clear how hard it was to explain 
the cooperation necessary for social life. If one animal behaves for 
the good of others—draws attention to predators or fights them off, 
for instance, at risk to itself, or forgoes a share of food because others 
are hungry—but another does not, the second will be more likely to 
survive. Its more selfish genes will be more likely to pass to the next 
generation than the genes of the more selfless. Over time, coopera-
tive genes should therefore die out and uncooperative genes come to 
dominate in any population.
	
Biology rules out invariably unstinting altruism. Any creature that 
never, regardless of context, behaved first for itself could be easily 
exploited by others. It would be unlikely to last long enough to reach 
the age of reproduction, and if it lasted that far, it would get no fur-
ther. The ultimate unconditional altruist would be a male who re-
frained from sex in favor of other males, to help their genes, rather 
than his own, into the next generation.2 He could have no heirs. Yet 
if unconditional altruism is impossible, conditional cooperation ex-
ists. But how could it establish itself?
	
The challenge to explain rather than merely to accept sociality, 
and to do so in terms of strict genetic accounting, led to the new 
­disciplines of sociobiology in the 1970s and, in the 1980s, evolution-
ary psychology, which has particularly probed the psychological 
mechanisms enabling sociality. Much of the energy of early socio­
biology drove research programs (Hamilton’s inclusive fitness the-
ory, Dawkins’ selfish gene theory, John Maynard Smith’s evolution-
ary game theory) proposed as alternatives to group selectionism. 
Recently however these programs and their leading proponents 
have come to accept the need for multilevel selection theory, which 
rests on one key postulate: “Selfishness beats altruism within single 
groups. Altruistic groups beat selfish groups.”3 Other things being 
equal, selfish­ness—reaping a bene­fit without contributing a full 
share of the cost—pays most in the short term. But in the long term 
cooperation can often yield more, enabling a group to achieve more 
than the sum of what its members could achieve individually, 
whether that be building hives or dams, for bees or beavers, or hunt-

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
53
ing large prey, for hyenas or humans, and thereby to outcompete 
other groups.
	
Multilevel selection theory retains the competitiveness that drives 
natural selection, and like early sociobiology rejects naïve “for-­the-­
good-­of-­the-­group” thinking.4 It explains how cooperation, like 
other traits impossible to establish at a given level, can in principle 
establish itself, can earn its competitive keep, by offering advantages 
in competition between higher-­level units. In principle: but it also 
requires that any adaptive trait be assessed on a case-­by-­case basis, to 
see which levels of selection have been most powerful in shaping that 
particular trait: the individual or some higher-­level group.
	
Multilevel selection theory also makes it more possible to see the 
history of life as a series of major transitions in which cooperation 
has been established (or competition suppressed) at one level, en-
abling greater cooperation and complexity at another level: the coor-
dination of complex molecules to produce the first self-­replicating 
organisms, the first life; the symbiosis of two bacterial cells, without 
nuclei, into the eukaryotic or nucleated cell; the integration of cells 
into multicellular organisms; the cooperation of individuals in social 
groups; and the special cases of eusociality—ant colonies, beehives, 
termite mounds, and the like, which function in effect as superor-
ganisms—and human ultrasociality.5 Human cooperation enables 
millions of individuals and myriad groups with distinct purposes to 
cooperate on a more-­than-­local and sometimes a global scale.
	
Our increased cooperativeness, many researchers now believe, 
may also be the key to the runaway growth of human intelligence. 
Through greater motivation to share emotions, attention, intentions, 
and information, we have learned to understand other perspectives 
and to detach thought from the immediate; we have developed lan-
guage and what we could call human ultraculture.6 Culture easily 
amplifies group differences, and hence the force of group selection, 
since although genetic mutations can spread only over generations, 
cultural changes with sig­nifi­cant effects on the relative fitness of 
groups can spread within a single generation.7
But how could cooperation begin, if evolution operates on only im-
mediate rather than future advantages, and if in the short term 

On the Origin of Stories
54
selfish­ness offers greater rewards than cooperation does? Coopera-
tion poses a dif­fi­cult engineering problem,8 but since its advantages 
can be so substantial, and since nature has had so much time for trial 
and error, natural selection has found a suite of partial but surpris-
ingly effective solutions.9
	
Biologists call the first solution mutualism: individuals help one 
another merely as each pursues its own interests.10 If I watch for 
predators as I forage for food, I can bene­fit from the vigilance, and 
be alerted by the alarm, of my neighbors if they are close enough 
to face the same threat. In prey species natural selection gradually 
favored those most inclined to stay together. To restate in design 
terms: evolution engineered a first step to sociality by inculcating in 
animals with few natural defenses a sense of comfort in the presence 
of conspe­cifics and of unease at straying far from them. An isolated 
monkey will repeatedly pull a le­ver with no other reward than to 
glimpse another.11 We, too, are “intrinsically a group-­living ape” and 
dread the thought of being excluded from our group.12
	
The sense of empathy with others of one’s kind, the positive feel-
ing of shared purposes, underlies all sociality, but it can readily be 
overridden by the need to compete for resources like space and food 
that become scarcer with group living. How, then, can sociality de-
velop still further?
	
The next step, active cooperation, could come as natural selection 
favored those whose behavior helped promote their genes not only 
in themselves but in others. In the most obvious case, parents pre­
disposed to care for their offspring improve the chances that their 
own genes will survive and reproduce. Their offspring will inherit a 
high proportion of their genes, and therefore also their predisposi-
tion to promote their survival and reproduction. That genes for pa-
rental care should be powerfully selected for seems a no-­brainer to 
us precisely because evolution has designed parental care so well that 
we take it for granted.
	
Hamilton generalized the principle at work here as inclusive fit-
ness (or kin selection), a sort of selfish­ness slightly beyond the self, 
not only for ourselves but also for copies of our genes in others. This, 
the “central theorem of selfish gene theory,” has been con­firmed in 
hundreds of species.13 If the cost to me of producing a bene­fit to a 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
55
relative is less than the bene­fit to the other divided by its relation to 
me (if Ca < Bb/r), then evolution should favor my offering the bene­
fit, since it will have a net ben­e­fi­cial effect on my genes, albeit within 
the bodies of others.
	
By now caring for kin seems not quite such a no-­brainer. It does 
not mean however that I have to calculate the formula, whether I 
happen to be a tree shrew or a human hunter-­gatherer; rather it 
means that natural selection has run the calculation over many gen-
erations and built it into my emotions: we “execute evolutionary 
logic not via conscious calculation, but by following [our] feelings, 
which were designed as logic executers.”14 Natural selection, by fa-
voring us if we favor our close kin, thereby also selects for the genes 
that incline us to such helping behavior, via, for instance, neurotrans-
mitters like oxytocin, which in mammals fosters social recognition 
and bonding. On average we have been designed by evolution to 
feel strongly attached to our parents, offspring, and siblings (to each 
of whom we are related by, on average, 50 percent of our variable 
genes),15 less strongly attached to grandparents or grandchildren (25 
percent), and still less to aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces (12.5 percent), 
and should on average feel inclined to help each according to the 
coef­fi­cient of relatedness.
	
The theory of parental investment among other things explains 
family con­flict as well as cooperation in terms of genetic relatedness.16 
Parental investment includes any expenditure of resources on one 
offspring that would take from the resources (time, energy, food, and 
so on) needed to rear others. Parents can produce many children, 
and it will be in their interest to do so unless intense investment in 
fewer children would produce better results in terms of survival and 
eventual reproduction, as in mammalian rather than reptilian repro-
ductive systems.
	
In diploid species such as mammals, parents are genetically related 
by 50 percent to each of their children, but each child is related 100 
percent to itself and only 50 percent to its ac­tual or potential siblings. 
Each child should therefore prefer parents to invest in it, unless the 
same investment would bene­fit at least two other ac­tual or potential 
siblings by at least the same amount or bene­fit one other by at least 
twice as much. Each offspring should therefore prefer to concentrate 

On the Origin of Stories
56
its parents’ investment in itself—in mammals, for instance, through 
continued breast-­feeding—while its parents should prefer to maxi-
mize their genetic transmission to the next generation by offering, 
on average, equal investment in each of their present and future off-
spring. Here we see why even in the most cooperative of relation-
ships competition is inevitable, and why the powerful emotions en-
gendered by family loyalty and con­flict saturate stories from Genesis 
to The Sopranos.
	
If cooperation is fairly easy to establish, yet already fraught, among 
close kin, how can it extend even among non-­kin? Game theory 
studies interactions in which one party’s success depends to some 
extent on moves made by others with competing interests. In a zero-­
sum game like chess or tennis, your gain is my loss. In a non-­zero-­
sum game, both of us can gain or lose different amounts. The 
­prisoner’s dilemma is the classic non-­zero-­sum model of the com-
plications of cooperation.17
	
Imagine, Peter Singer asks, that you and another prisoner are sit-
ting in separate cells of a Ruritanian prison, charged with plotting 
against the state. There is too little evidence to convict either of you. 
If you confess and the other prisoner does not, he will get twenty 
years and you will go free, and vice versa. If both of you confess, each 
of you will get ten years. If neither confesses, both of you will be held 
for six months under emergency regulations.
The prisoner’s dilemma is whether to confess or not. Assum-
ing that the prisoner wishes to spend the minimum time in 
prison, it would seem rational to confess. No matter what the 
other prisoner does, that will be to the advantage of the con-
fessing prisoner. But each prisoner faces the same dilemma, 
and if they are both to follow their own individual interests 
and confess, they will end up serving ten years, when they 
could have been out in six months!
	 There is no solution to this dilemma. It shows that the 
outcome of rational, self-­interested choices by two or more 
individuals can make all of them worse off than they would 
have been had they not pursued their own short-­term self-­
interest.18

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
57
If each cooperates with the other, if each trusts the other enough, 
both can save years in prison, but if either assumes that the other can 
be trusted, but is wrong (the other “defects”), he or she gets the suck-
er’s payoff, twenty years. Cooperation may be best, but how can the 
trust on which it depends be established securely enough to make 
the risks worthwhile? Singer offers an ev­eryday modern example. If 
we all took buses to work, the roads would be unclogged, and we 
would get there faster. But since we do not trust that enough others 
will opt for buses, we continue to drive our cars, since if the roads 
remain clogged, cars will at least be faster than buses.
	
To explain how cooperation in non-­kin evolves, we need to com-
bine Hamilton’s gene-­centered view of evolution with game theory 
to generate reciprocal altruism: I help you in the expectation that you 
may help me later.19 Such cooperation can extend far beyond rela-
tives, and therefore bring many more of the bene­fits of cooperation, 
but like the prisoner’s dilemma, it faces the risks of defection by the 
party that owes the return favor.
	
In a single prisoner’s-­dilemma situation, it always pays to defect. 
But in indefi­nitely repeated encounters, players may see that both 
will lose unless they trust each other. If you and I live in close prox-
imity and are likely to encounter each other repeatedly, we have rea-
son to develop the trust that can earn us the bene­fits of active coop-
eration. Reciprocal altruism can most readily begin, therefore, among 
individuals living in small, settled groups—where many may also be 
related.20
	
Even so, there still lurks the danger of defection, of failing to repay. 
Cheaters will thrive in exchanges with altruists unless altruists dis-
criminate against—refuse further exchange with, or actively punish 
—cheaters. If they discriminate against cheaters, altruists will ex-
change only with other altruists and bene­fit from their cooperation, 
while cheaters will be left to deal with other cheaters and reap no net 
bene­fit. On this condition altruists can outcompete cheaters and, in 
evolutionary terms, ultimately outreproduce them.
	
For altruism to work robustly a whole suite of motivations has to 
be in place: sympathy, so that I am inclined to help another; trust, so 
that I can offer help now and expect it will be somehow repaid later; 
gratitude, to incline me, when I have been helped, to return the fa-

On the Origin of Stories
58
vor; shame, to prompt me to repay when I still owe a debt; a sense of 
fairness, so that I can intuitively gauge an adequate share or repay-
ment; indignation, to spur me to break off cooperation with or even 
in­flict punishment on a cheat; and guilt, a displea­sure at myself and 
fear of exposure and reprisal to deter me from seeking the short-­
term advantages of cheating. We can reverse-­engineer the social and 
moral emotions so central to our engagement with others in life and 
in story.21 Rather than merely taking these emotions as givens, we 
can account for them as natural selection’s way of motivating wide-
spread cooperation in highly social species.22
	
Reciprocal altruism among non-­kin has since been documented 
in vampire bats, which share surplus blood with other sharers but 
withhold from nonsharers,23 and has been tested experimentally 
among primates. Capuchin monkeys will share more with partners 
who have helped them with food or grooming.24 Baboons offer so-
cial support.25 Chimpanzees and bonobos tally ser­vices they have re-
ceived, return favors (food, sex, grooming, support, or noninterven-
tion in power struggles), and can even show indignation when an 
ally who owes them support fails to deliver.26
	
Apart from theory, observation, and behavioral experiments, those 
studying the evolution of cooperation have found another way to 
clarify how cooperation could emerge. Computer simulations using 
weighted costs and bene­fits in iterated prisoner’s-­dilemma encoun-
ters make it possible to test multiple strategies against one another, 
over hundreds or thousands of cycles, to see which fares best in com-
petition against whatever other strategies, nice or nasty, simple or 
complex, programmers can devise.
	
Academics from around the world have devised computer-­
programmed strategies to test the constraints on cooperation and 
pitted them against one another in computer tournaments.27 Sur-
prisingly, the simplest strategy, Tit for Tat, won the first such tour­
nament: cooperate on the first move, then copy your partner’s last 
move. If the partner cooperates, cooperate; if it defects, defect. In a 
second tournament even strategies designed spe­cifi­cally to counter 
Tit for Tat’s success could not do so, although variations on this basic 
design (like Contrite Tit for Tat, Generous Tit for Tat, Suspicious Tit 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
59
for Tat) have since been shown to fare even better under some condi-
tions:
as we carefully develop these models, adding complications 
one by one, a profile of traits emerges that many would re-
gard as uniquely human—niceness, retaliation, forgiveness, 
contrition, generosity, commitment . . . and self-­destructive 
revenge. It is amazing that such a human profile of traits 
emerges so naturally from such simple models based entirely 
on the survival of the fittest.
	 . . . The capacity to forgive should extend far beyond us 
and our primate ancestors to any creature with suf­fi­cient 
brainpower to employ TFT-­like rules. Even guppies have 
been shown to qualify . . . They recognize their social part-
ners as individuals, behave according to their own disposi-
tions at the start of relationships, and become less altruistic 
in response to selfish partners. They try to associate with al-
truistic partners regardless of their own degree of altruism.28
	
Building on the work of Hamilton and others, psychologist Leda 
Cosmides realized that if humans are to bene­fit from social exchange, 
we must always be alert for cheating. She saw that this requirement 
might offer a test of how our minds work. Do we assess informa-
tion in a content-­in­de­pen­dent, general-­purpose way, or do we assess 
it, when facing problems recurrent throughout our past, in ways 
shaped by evolution to deal with these particular situations?
	
Cosmides showed that a common test of purely logical reasoning, 
the Wason Selection Task, normally dif­fi­cult for most to solve, turns 
out to be very easy to pass when it takes the form of a problem in-
volving cheating in social exchange.29 In the Wason test we are asked 
which of four cards we must turn over to test whether a proposition 
is valid. For instance, if the proposition is “If a person is a Leo, then 
that person is brave” and there are four cards with an astrological 
sign on one side and a rating of courage on the other, the face-­up 
sides being “Leo,” “brave,” “Aries,” and “coward,” then most of us real-
ize we have to turn over the “Leo” card, many think we also have to 

On the Origin of Stories
60
turn over the “brave” card, and considerably fewer realize that in fact 
we need to turn over both the “Leo” and the “coward” cards and no 
more. If we had special circuits for logical reasoning, we would see 
that If P then Q needs to be tested against both P and not-­Q, but usu-
ally “fewer than 10% of subjects spontaneously realize this.”30
	
When the content of the question changes so that it requires us to 
look for cheaters in social exchange, the performance jumps dramat-
ically, to 70–90 percent, the highest ever recorded for the test, even 
when the situation described is culturally unfamiliar and deliber-
ately bizarre (for instance: “If a man eats cassava root, then he must 
have a tattoo on his face”). Success remains high even with these un-
familiar scenarios, but only if they are set up as social contracts, not 
if they are presented as noncontrac­tual situations based on the same 
bizarre condition. Cosmides then “tested unfamiliar social contracts 
that were switched” so that the correct social-­contrac­tual result was 
now the wrong logical response. Seventy-­one percent still answered 
with “the ‘look for cheaters’ response, not-­P and Q, . . . even though 
this response is illogical according to the propositional calculus.”31
	
People who cannot usually detect violations of “if-­then” rules can 
do so easily when the violation involves cheating in social exchange.32 
No one had thought, until evolutionary theory showed the con-
straints on evolving social exchange, to expect minds prepared to 
identify cheating, and colleagues thought Cosmides crazy even to in-
vestigate.33
	
Cosmides and her husband and coworker John Tooby ascribe the 
results to a cheater-­detection module. I would prefer to call it a sub-
routine and to de­fine its role as emotional highlighting rather than 
detection. We are indeed wary of cheating, and discrepancies be-
tween voice tone and facial expression or posture may place us on 
guard, but we have no sure way of detecting concealed cheating. Evo-
lution has not made us Sherlock Holmeses, but when we recognize 
behavior that crosses a social rule, it springs out to our attention.
	
That quibble aside, Cosmides’ find­ings are so striking that they 
have been repeatedly challenged and tested by those inside and out-
side evolutionary psychology. The debate still continues, as it does at 
the forefront of any science, but in ev­ery case so far Cosmides and 
Tooby and their colleagues have rerun or extended the tests, from 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
61
logic students to hunter-­gatherers, and have shown that proposed al-
ternative explanations cannot account for their results.34 Neuroim-
aging experiments also show activation in brain areas used for rea-
soning about social exchange rather than in areas used for reasoning 
about logically similar behavioral rules.35 It really does seem that 
even on what might appear to be higher-­level and domain-­general 
problems, even on the logic of the Wason test, even in highly con-
scious mental problem-­solving, our thoughts can be strongly guided 
by evolved predispositions.
	
Not only three-­year-­old humans, but even animals with tiny 
brains, like guppies or cleaner fish, seem to be able to solve such 
problems—obviously not via Wason tests, but as observed by biolo-
gists. This predisposition seems an element of social behavior that 
stretches far back into social exchange between unrelated individu-
als, and for that reason this highly focused system works more ef­fi­
ciently than our general-­purpose logical reasoning: the answers pop 
out to our attention.
	
Across human cultures and in many other species individuals in-
cline to punish others for cheating. In our case at least, our emotions 
not only alert us to register unfairness but also motivate us to pun-
ish it, because in the long run doing so improves the chances of our 
bene­fiting from cooperation.
	
Recent work in evolutionary economics has shown that in other 
respects, too, we, like other species, work less by reason, the econo-
mists’ assumption of “rational individuals,” than through emotions 
primed by evolution. In neoclassical economics, individuals are as-
sumed to behave “rationally,” to seek to maximize their gains. This 
assumption would predict that if we are offered real money for noth-
ing, we will not turn it down. But in experiments people repeatedly 
reject ­profit in order to satisfy their sense of justice.36
	
In one experiment, the dictator game, two strangers play for (usu-
ally real) money, say $100. I, as dictator, must offer you a share. If you 
accept the division, both of us keep our agreed portions. If you reject 
the offer, neither of us receives anything. In terms of strict economic 
rationality, an offer of a dollar, even a cent, would leave the second 
par­tic­i­pant better off, and should therefore be accepted. But even as 
you read this, I expect you recoil at the thought of such measly of-

On the Origin of Stories
62
fers. Participants in the experiment behave the same way. No dictator 
proposes such token sums but tends to offer amounts closer to $50. 
Often if the sum offered is only a little under $40, the respondent 
rejects it. A sense of fairness in social exchange overrides the rational 
calculation of gain. We have evolved not to be “rational individuals,” 
­profit maximizers, but social animals, holding others to fair dealings 
even at our own cost.
	
Culture inflects the results of these experiments. In fif­teen dif­
ferent so­ci­e­ties, the average amount the dictators offered varied be-
tween 15 percent (in a low-­trust society) and 58 percent (in a society 
sustained by the intense cooperation necessary for dangerous com-
munal deep-­sea fishing), but in ten out of fif­teen so­ci­e­ties the av­
erage was 50 percent. Local ecological and cultural conditions can 
modify the parameters, yet ev­erywhere we act on a sense of fairness 
rather than on a “rational” pursuit of pure ­profit.37
	
The same sort of “irrationality” exists for the same reasons in 
­creatures with much smaller brains than ours. Capuchin monkeys 
are known to be good cooperators. Experimenters gave each monkey 
a token, then, with hand outstretched, palm up, solicited the token 
in return for a slice of cucumber. The monkeys happily exchanged a 
token each time for cucumber, although it is not their favorite food. 
But then unfairness was introduced. In sight of one monkey, another 
was given for its token not a slice of cucumber but a much more 
­appealing juicy big grape. When the other was then offered a slice 
of cucumber for its token, it reacted angrily in 40 percent of trials. 
When one monkey received a grape without even needing to pay a 
token, the other, four times out of five, refused to hand over its token 
or to take the proffered cucumber unless to toss it away in disgust.38
	
Humans have far more complex cooperative relationships than 
capuchins or chimpanzees. We cooperate enough to live in cities 
of millions. How have we managed to extend cooperation not only 
beyond nonrelatives but even to complete strangers? How is this 
­possible, especially, when the best conditions for the emergence of 
reciprocal altruism are indefi­nitely repeated encounters between in-
dividuals settled close to one another?
	
Of course human cooperation does often break down. Crime sim-
mers or seethes in all large cities. Nevertheless we have achieved re-

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
63
markable results through building on our evolved dispositions, both 
our positive and our punitive feelings, our desire to punish cheats. 
But free-­riding, taking bene­fits without paying the full cost, persists 
as the fundamental problem of social life.39 Yet a real if imperfect 
­solution has come through social control—in terms of multilevel 
­selection theory, suppressing within-­group selection—rather than 
through highly self-­sacrificial altruism: through second-­order pun-
ishment, discriminating against and punishing not only cheaters but 
also those who fail to discriminate against or punish them.40
	
Detecting and punishing others incurs real and substantial costs, 
as taxpayers paying for police or prisons know. This was the case 
even before there were detectives and detention centers. Discovering 
a transgression when someone aims to hide it or confronting some-
one who has cheated can be costly in time, energy, and risk. Just as 
we face a first-­order temptation to take the bene­fits of cooperation 
without the costs, so we can face a second-­order temptation to hang 
back, to reap the bene­fits of the cooperativeness that others main-
tain by enforcing the detection and punishment of cheaters. But if 
I fail to notice or punish cheaters but am noticed and punished for 
my failure, the advantages of my second-­order free-­riding rapidly 
­diminish. Soon few will avoid playing their part in detecting and 
punishing cheaters. Second-­order punishment in turn rapidly dis-
courages first-­order cheating and makes the second-­order cost of 
monitoring it relatively light, since ev­ery­body contributes. So long as 
people share similar notions of what constitutes cheating, the need 
for vigilance, and ways it should be dealt with, few will dare step out 
of line. The social monitoring already intense elsewhere in the pri-
mate line be­comes still more intense for humans—and a powerful 
prompt for storytelling.41
	
To extend cooperation through still larger and looser populations, 
however, we need additional mea­sures, especially cultural ones like 
shared norms and institutions. You and I need not only to share 
norms but also to know we share them, so that we feel the pressure 
not only to resist the temptation to cheat but also to resist the temp-
tation not to slacken in dealing with others who cheat.
	
In small-­scale so­ci­e­ties, uncooperative acts were often punished 
through personal revenge, motivated by an evolved sense of out-

On the Origin of Stories
64
rage but often leading to destructive cycles of vengeance. Especially 
in larger so­ci­e­ties, better means were needed. Centralized systems 
of justice, and eventually a police force, could detect transgressions, 
assess charges, and administer punishment. Depersonalizing justice 
could dampen incendiary emotions and diminish vendettas.
But even before such cultural systems were invented, other ways of 
motivating cooperation emerged. One was through story. Stories 
arose, as we will see, out of our intense interest in social monitor-
ing. They succeed by riveting our attention to social information, 
whether in the form of gossip—indirect but real and relevant social 
information—or fiction—admittedly invented and heightened ver-
sions of the behaviors we naturally monitor. Modern hunter-­gatherer 
so­ci­e­ties preserve their strong egalitarianism by gossip, sharing re-
ports of anyone seeking sta­tus, and by admonitory stories warning 
against violating egalitarian norms.42 And in so­ci­e­ties of any size, 
stories involving agents with unusual powers capture attention and 
commandeer memory, and stories with unseen agents who can 
monitor our behavior and administer punishment or reward—the 
stories we call religion—permeate and persist partly because they 
­offer such powerful ways of motivating and apparently monitor-
ing  cooperative behavior. Religious stories establish a secret spirit 
­police.43
	
In both fac­tual and fictional forms, stories can consolidate and 
communicate norms, providing us with memorable and shared 
models of cooperation that stir our social emotions, our desire to as-
sociate with altruists (like Dr. Seuss’s Horton), and our desire to dis-
sociate ourselves from cheats and freeloaders (like the suitors whom 
the Odyssey repudiates and Odysseus routs). Such memorable im-
ages of pro-­ and antisocial characters and actions common to whole 
communities can not only de­fine and communicate shared stan-
dards but ensure that all know what others know of these standards.44 
As we will see, stories have multiple origins and functions, but among 
them not least is that they have so often discouraged defection and 
aided cooperation. Graphing Jane Austen, a recent inter­net study of 
readers’ responses to the characters of nineteenth-­century British 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation
	
65
novels, con­firms our folk sense of the polarizing power of the goodie-
­baddie axis and its centrality in our responses to fiction.45
	
Our continually re­fined methods of prevention, detection, con-
viction, and punishment allow us to coexist in so­ci­e­ties of many mil-
lions. Let us hope we will continue to find even better solutions. But 
we could not have started on this path without evolved dispositions 
for cooperation or have advanced as far as we have without elaborat-
ing them through culture.
Research of the last few de­cades in evolutionary theory and game 
theory, in biological field study and experiment, and in evolution-
ary psychology and economics shows how cooperation can evolve in 
creatures with different genes and, to that extent, different interests. 
It emerges from shared needs, in mutualism; from shared genes, in 
inclusive fitness; from shared impulses, in empathy; from common 
interests over time, in reciprocal altruism; and from a shared recogni-
tion of the bene­fits of cooperation, even on a large scale, incorpo-
rated by nature into our emotions, our sense of fairness, our wariness 
against cheating, our indignation and readiness to punish cheaters, 
and incorporated by culture into our norms, institutions, and narra-
tives.
	
Some who look at human nature through evolutionary lenses ar-
gue that our intelligence allows us to overcome—to say no to—our 
genes. It does: we can inhibit ourselves through conscious re­flection, 
through cultural norms, through the fear of social sanctions. Others 
argue that our genes themselves give rise to the suite of moral emo-
tions that we partly share with other social animals and motivate us 
to want to inhibit our more selfish impulses.46 They, too, are right. 
Although our genes compete with one another, many of our evolved 
emotions also point us toward cooperation, because its bene­fits are 
so substantial, and we can use our intelligence and our sociality—
also aspects of our evolved nature—to devise still better solutions to 
the problems of cooperation.
	
Evolution offers a much more complex and nuanced view of the 
social world than the ar­ti­fi­cial model of the rational individual of 
economics, or the romantic idea, common since Rousseau, of good 

On the Origin of Stories
66
people perverted by evil systems, or the paranoid Nietzschean or 
Foucauldian suspicion that all moral claims mask a lust for power. 
An evolutionary view of cooperation allows us to look at the social 
world without inordinate hopes, but with real con­fi­dence that we 
can continue to find better solutions, even to the new problems that 
the very successes of our cooperation create.

part 2
E V O L U T I O N  A N D  A R T
But perhaps the most remarkable functional interpretation of a 
“trivial” character is given by [Sidnie] Manton’s work on the 
­diplopod Polyxenus, in which she has shown that a character formerly 
described as an “ornament” (and what could sound more useless?) 
is almost literally the pivot of the animal’s life.
A. J. Cain, “The Perfection of Animals” (1964)


	
69
5
ART AS ADAPTATION?
Evolution may help explain copulation and even coopera-
tion, but can it account for the creative side of human life? Can it 
explain art? I will suggest that it can—and that an evolutionary ac-
count of art, far from being reductive or deterministic, can do more 
than any other to explain art’s force and freedom.
	
On the Origin of Stories focuses on one art in particular, the art of 
fiction. Why can we not discuss fiction solely in terms of narrative, 
without considering art as a general behavior? An evolutionary anal-
ysis of narrative, of true stories (see Chapter 11), will prove straight-
forward, precisely because it does not require art at all. But the more 
we gain from sharing the information in true stories, the less need we 
would seem to have for the false information of fiction. How can we 
explain our human compulsion to invent or enjoy stories we know 
to be untrue?
	
To account for the art of fiction, we need first to consider the hu-
man tendency to engage in any art. Although each of the arts has 
unique features and functions, there are also features common to all 
forms of art that need a common explanation.
	
Not ev­ery­one agrees. Let us consider some alternative positions.
Position 1: Art is not even a meaningful category. Examples 
of “art” ranging from “Hickory dickory dock” to the Great 
Sphinx at Giza do not form a coherent class.
	
But while art is indeed a fuzzy category, so is much else that mat-
ters in life, like love, which there is also reason to think has a biologi-

On the Origin of Stories
70
cal origin, mechanism, and function.1 An evolutionary explanation 
of art needs to account for art from the infant to the expert or from 
ocher face-­painting to O’Keeffe.
Position 2: Art is not a human universal. There is no universal 
notion of art. The Western conception of art arose only in 
eigh­teenth-­century Europe.
	
Art as a behavior exists in all known human cultures.2 Some phi-
losophers of art claim that other times and cultures cannot have art 
because they lack “our” Western notion of art, the distinction drawn 
in eigh­teenth-­century Europe between fine art for detached contem-
plation and mere craft. But the very concept that there is no non-­
Western art is a Western one, and there have in fact been many other 
traditions of fine art, in the Middle East, India, China, Indonesia, and 
Japan.3 Neither the ancient Greeks nor Sepik carvers in Papua New 
Guinea have had a single word to match the modern Western word 
“art,” but both peoples have practiced and have had concepts of art akin 
to some of the many notions of art currently available in the West.4
	
Most of us struggle to learn another language, but we can read-
ily appreciate art across cultures. Dürer in the 1520s, encountering 
trea­sures from Mexico, commented that he had never in all his life 
“seen . . . anything that has moved my heart so much.” Goethe, read-
ing Chinese novels, observed: “These people think and feel much as 
we do.” Chinese and Japanese audiences respond to Shakespeare and 
Beethoven with rapture.5 And if audiences appreciate, artists appro-
priate. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries Maori and Papua 
New Guinea carvers ­adopted Western tools and techniques as eagerly 
as Gauguin or Picasso borrowed from non-­Western cultures.
	
The notion of art we need to work with, if we are to understand 
the evolutionary origins of art, has to run from lullabies to Led Zep-
pelin. If we accept art in this sense, as a behavior common across our 
species, how do we explain it?
	
We can attempt to do so without taking account of evolution.
Position 3: Art can be explained entirely by culture, by cultural 
traditions and cultural diversity. Humans exist within and are 

	
Art as Adaptation?
	
71
shaped by their own particular culture, rather than by some 
universal human nature. Behaviors that we may call art hap-
pen to be engaged in—but may not necessarily be considered 
art—in all known cultures, but within the culture the role of 
these activities can be radically different from case to case.
	
All human art indeed takes place within particular cultures or at 
the intersection of cultures; and no art can be explained without cul-
ture, without considering both particular art traditions and the soci-
ety within which artists deploy them. Yet a purely cultural approach 
does not suf­fice. Culture cannot explain culture. Culture does not 
shield humans from biological explanation, since other species also 
have culture, behaviors transmitted by nongenetic means across 
populations. Birds and whales have traditions, dialects, fashions, and 
individual styles in their song. All known chimpanzee groups have 
their own distinct suites of cultural practices yet have nothing like 
human art.
	
Culture cannot explain why some species have culture, why some 
have it more than others, why it takes partly similar, partly differ-
ent shapes across a given species, and, in the human case, why art 
forms such a central part of all cultures.6 If art were entirely cultural, 
and culture not shaped in part by nature, art would occur in some 
groups and not in others—as I said at the outset, like chopsticks or 
forks. Instead it seems more like the universal human use of hands to 
prepare food and convey it to the mouth.
	
Most who accept art as needing more explanation than its be-
ing a product of culture alone have tried to explain it in functional 
terms.7
Position 4: Art can be explained in terms of its function or func-
tions. The functions of art that have been proposed outside 
an evolutionary framework are as diverse and con­flicting as 
providing direct, immediate experience—or offering an in­
direct re­flection of the world; as a mode of individual dis-
play—or a means of group iden­ti­fi­ca­tion; as a re­flection of 
the familiar8—or as preparation for the unfamiliar9—or as 
defamiliarization;10 or as providing a sense of order in the 

On the Origin of Stories
72
world—or access to a supramundane world beyond. There 
could hardly be less agreement.
	
In order to cope with the vast range of options, philosophers often 
group the most common theories of art into the mimetic, expressive, 
formal, and communicative.11
	
Mimetic theories stress art’s function as representing the world. 
But they cannot account easily for most music (what do Bach’s Pre-
ludes and Fugues represent?). Nor can they account for abstract vi-
sual art, which has been part of art from the first (in scarification 
and tattooing, for instance), has persisted in decorative art through-
out the ages, and became the dominant mode of high visual art in, 
for instance, Islamic calligraphy and design and twentieth-­century 
abstract painting. Even in the case of representational arts, mimetic 
theories do not explain why one species has evolved to develop a 
compulsive delight in fictional representations.
	
Expressive theories see art’s function in terms of artists’ compul-
sion to express themselves in their art—although, as Karl Popper 
has noted, this claim is tautologous or trivial, since ev­ery­thing we 
do by defi­ni­tion expresses our selves.12 The most eloquently expres-
sive artist of all, Shakespeare, expresses himself so much through the 
mouths of others that we find it dif­fi­cult to judge his stance on any-
thing.
	
Communicative theories find art’s function in the responses art 
engenders. But humans already communicate more effectively and 
richly in nonartistic ways, including nonverbally, than any other spe-
cies. What in spe­cifi­cally artistic “communication” makes it useful 
enough or pleasurable enough for us to devote time to it that we 
could devote to other things, including nonartistic communication?
	
Theories of artistic form focus on the structure of a work of art 
as the product of the artist’s design and the cause of the audience’s 
response. But they find it dif­fi­cult to explain why a letter by Keats, 
Pushkin, or Flaubert, or even Johnson’s or Coleridge’s table talk, may 
seem so much more artistic than a penny-­dreadful novel.
	
In response to the challenge to defi­ni­tions of art posed by modern 
art, from the urinal Duchamp called Fountain to Warhol’s Camp-
bell’s Soup cans or more recent conceptual, installation, and perfor-

	
Art as Adaptation?
	
73
mance art, philosophers of art have for some time been as preoccu-
pied as artists have with the boundaries of art, and have proposed 
not functional but institutional or historical theories.13 Art, the insti-
tutionalists claim, must exist within some institution of regarding 
certain kinds of things as art. But, as many note, this reasoning is 
circular and does not answer the key question: how did things begin 
to be considered as art? A historical account of art attempts to evade 
the circularity, a fatal weakness in defi­ni­tion but not in history. Yet it 
also fails to account for the origins of art either in the human species 
or in the individual infant attracted by and eager to par­tic­i­pate in 
pattern. An evolutionary account of art can clarify why the history of 
art runs so deep that it has been ingrained in the psyche of the spe-
cies and the individual.
There are good reasons to suspect that we may need biology as well 
as culture to explain art: (1) it is universal in human so­ci­e­ties;14 (2) 
it has persisted over several thousand generations;15 (3) despite the 
vast number of ac­tual and possible combinations of behavior in all 
known human so­ci­e­ties, art has the same major forms (music and 
dance; the manual creation of visual design; story and verse) in all; 
(4) it often involves high costs in time, energy, and resources;16 (5) it 
stirs strong emotions, which are evolved indicators that something 
matters to an organism; (6) it develops reliably in all normal hu-
mans without special training, unlike purely cultural products such 
as reading, writing, or science. The fact that it emerges early in indi-
vidual development—that young infants respond with special plea­
sure to lullabies and spontaneously play with colors, shapes, rhythms, 
sounds, words, and stories—particularly supports evolutionary 
against nonevolutionary explanations.17
Art’s ubiquity and antiquity and its persistence across cultures in 
distinct established modes suggest that its roots may be biological. 
But maybe art’s uselessness, not its usefulness, can explain art even in 
biological terms?
Position 5: Art is a product not of natural selection for survival 
but of sexual selection for reproductive advantage. Art’s very 

On the Origin of Stories
74
uselessness, its ornamental extravagance, shows that it has 
arisen not because of any survival advantage but because it 
appeals to members of the opposite sex.
	
Art can seem as showy and superfluous as a peacock’s tail. That 
flamboyant fan costs its bearer energy to produce and maintain and 
makes the peacock both more conspicuous to enemies and less able 
to elude them. How could ornaments like that have evolved in a 
competitive world?
	
Darwin realized that such extravagant caprices appeared to chal-
lenge his theory of natural selection, but he explained them through 
his additional theory of sexual selection.18 Males can compete for sex 
by repelling rival males or by attracting females. In the first case, if 
sexual selection persists, males evolve for fight­ing one another, devel­
oping in size (like a bull elephant seal) or armaments (like the horns 
of a stag or a stag beetle). In the second case the mere sensory biases 
of females can, over many generations, shape the appearance or ac-
tions of males as they compete to display to females through strik-
ing colors or forms (like the peacock’s tail) or behaviors like song 
(in many songbirds), dance (in lekking birds), and bower-­making 
(in bowerbirds). And indeed the history of art seems to re­flect a 
greater male urge to display: it shows a preponderance of males 
among leading artists, and the evidence of musicians, classical, rock, 
and jazz, suggests that they are at their most productive in their most 
sexually fertile years.19 But art is not con­fined to professional art for 
public display in highly specialized so­ci­e­ties.
	
Sexual selection theory was extended and clarified in the twenti-
eth century.20 The theory of parental investment explains why fe-
males, not males, tend to be the choosier sex. Whichever sex invests 
more time and energy in producing offspring (usually the female, 
since by defi­ni­tion the female is the sex with the larger gamete) has 
more to lose in producing offspring with a partner with poor genes. 
Whichever sex has the lesser investment (usually the male) has more 
to gain by being chosen by as many partners as possible. Males cho-
sen by many females can have huge reproductive success, since their 
investment in any partner can be brief and they can move on to oth-
ers; but males chosen by none may fail to produce offspring at all. 

	
Art as Adaptation?
	
75
Because of the great variance in male success, males face intense 
pressure for obtaining access to females, whether by repelling other 
males or by attracting females.21
	
Darwin had little to say about the origins of human art but 
thought that in humans as in other species “high cost, apparent use-
lessness, and manifest beauty usually indicated that a behavior had a 
hidden courtship function.”22 He ventured (“not too plausibly,” com-
ments Steven Pinker) that music developed “for the sake of charm-
ing the opposite sex” and that body adornments formed a beginning 
of human visual art.23 Although others have suggested that art may 
owe something to sexual selection,24 Geoffrey Miller was the first to 
propose in detail that sexual selection has been the driving force be-
hind the expansion of the human mind and higher human behavior: 
intelligence, inventiveness, art, humor, kindness.25
	
Miller argues that the human brain is far more powerful than nec-
essary for mere survival on the savannah. Brains consume energy 
out of all proportion to their size, and no other animal needs so large 
a brain merely to survive. Therefore, he argues, human brains must 
have been sexually selected. Within that overall hypothesis, he pro-
poses that art was sexually selected as a social entertainment system 
for the savannah. But we do not need sexual selection as an expla­
nation if a good functional explanation already exists. The human 
brain is not biologically superfluous. Many species lack wings, legs, 
arms, or eyes, but that does not prove these organs superfluous to 
the survival of the species that have them.26 Large brains with par-
ticularly large neocortexes have enabled humans to fill many niches 
and become the dominant macrofauna around the world, in a way 
that has ev­ery­thing to do with survival.
	
And as parental investment theory explains, males can compete 
over anything, even over who can pee highest or belch loudest.27 
With so many potential means of display at hand, males’ capacity for 
competitive display explains little about behavior as biologically im-
probable as carving likenesses or composing epics.
	
Miller notes that “male pigeons harass female pigeons with re­
lentless cooing and strutting. If the females go away, the male dis-
plays stop. If the female ­comes back, the males start again.”28 The 
very difference between pigeon pouting and human art should give 

On the Origin of Stories
76
him pause. If art were sexually selected, this would predict that it is 
overwhelmingly male and directed to females, developing rapidly at 
puberty, peaking just before mate selection, and diminishing drasti-
cally afterward. Miller does adduce statistics to show that rock and 
jazz musicians produce most records in early ma­tu­ri­ty. But mothers 
of all cultures sing to infants; infants prefer their mother’s singing 
to their father’s; infants of both sexes engage in cooing and singing, 
clapping, and dancing as soon as they can; adolescent girls go wild 
over all-­female bands like the Spice Girls or Destiny’s Child; Hokusai 
in his seventies and eighties ­adopted the nom de plume GakyÃ-­rÃjin, 
Old Man Mad with Painting, was still producing masterpieces in his 
ninetieth year, and pleaded on his deathbed for more time: “with 
even five more years . . . I could become a true artist.”29
	
In insisting on fitness, Miller rejects questions of origins.30 But in 
fact any complete evolutionary explanation needs to identify a path-
way. The path suddenly be­comes vividly visible in the cave paintings 
of Chauvet, dating to over 30,000 years ago, but these elaborate and 
accomplished images testify to a much ­longer track behind them, ex-
tending “probably hundreds of thousands of years.”31 The oldest of 
arts is likely to be music, since song occurs widely in many different 
lineages, in birds, in cetaceans (dolphins and whales), and in other 
primates (especially gibbons), and therefore stretches back deep into 
evolutionary time, and since song needs only the body’s own re-
sources.
	
Steven Brown shows that the most complex song outside humans, 
both in songbirds and in other primates, arises not through court-
ship, but through the maintenance of territory and relationships by 
several species of monogamous duetting tropical songbirds and by 
gibbons. He notes that duetting resembles human music in several 
ways that courtship cannot account for: (1) “responsorial, antipho-
nal, polyphonic and homophonic singing .  .  . [which] greatly in-
creases the potential complexity of acoustic signals”; (2) both sexes 
sing to a more or less equivalent extent; (3) duetting is cooperative 
and coordinated, not competitive or disjoint: “Gibbon couples place 
a high premium on maintaining tight coordination and restart a 
duet if the appropriate level of coordination is not achieved . . . Du-
etting is not a contest but a display of cooperative strength”; (4) 

	
Art as Adaptation?
	
77
­duetting serves to defend year-­round territories, as in many human 
tribes and bands, acting as “a highly ritualized ‘keep out’ signal ac-
companied by exaggerated physical displays”; (5) it plays “a sig­nifi­
cant role not only in defending territories but in maintaining social 
bonds.” Brown adds that “none of the known primate calls is thought 
to be directly involved in courtship. Primates do not seem to exploit 
vocalization for courtship purposes, but instead rely on visual, olfac-
tory and kinetic cues. Courtship calls are rare to nonexistent in hom-
inoids, whereas territorial calls are ancestral to the entire group of 
species.”32
	
Not only does Brown’s ethological approach respect biological de-
tail, and analogues to and precursors of human behaviors in other 
animals; it also respects the peculiarities of a human art.33 He can 
show that qualities like pitch blending and isometric rhythms, cen-
tral to music, can be explained by the need to coordinate sound be-
tween more than one par­tic­i­pant, not by individual display.34 Recent 
evidence even suggests that music reduces sexual inclination: singing 
lowers men’s testosterone levels, a result compatible with a coopera-
tive, not a competitive, account of music’s origins.35
Both Miller’s search for evidence in support of his hypothesis, and 
the search for counterevidence that his statistical work has inspired 
in Brown and others, are welcome ongoing programs. Sexual selec-
tion no doubt operates in some ways that have altered human forms. 
Wodaabe men in Nigeria and Niger are chosen by their ­women in 
the human equivalent of a lek dance, and are unusually tall, with 
strikingly big eyes, white teeth, and straight noses.36 Such an example 
presents a stark difference from the human norm, but over thou-
sands of generations sexual selection surely has played an important 
part in human life, especially, as Darwin and Richard Dawkins sug-
gest, in the differentiation of superficial racial characteristics, like 
face and hair;37 and it may also serve as one factor in human art, es-
pecially visual art, likely to be the next major form of art to have ap-
peared after music and dance.
	
Ocher appears to have been sought for body decoration from as 
early as 120,000 years ago (indeed, evidence suggests that pigments 
have been ground for twice as long),38 and other body mod­i­fi­ca­tions, 

On the Origin of Stories
78
such as hairstyling, tattooing, scarification, and body-­piercing have 
been practiced around the world for tens of thousands of years.39 
As the recent fashions for body-­piercing and tattooing in Western 
countries highlight, such activity peaks at the ages of maximum re-
productive opportunity. It makes biological sense that the visual arts 
should have started with the kind of bodily display most likely to 
have a sexual payoff. But notice here the difference from sexual selec-
tion in other species. In prehistoric times, before mirrors, and even 
now in tattooing and other mod­i­fi­ca­tions, body and facial adorn-
ment often had to be not an individual practice but a social one. 
Songbirds do not chorus in support of their rivals, and bowerbirds 
do not assist other males to construct their showhomes. But from 
an early time, even in bodily adornment, the closest that human arts 
come to sexual selection, cooperation seems also to have been pres-
ent in our highly social species. And elaborate body decoration in 
most so­ci­e­ties serves primarily as a mark of af­fili­a­tion and group 
iden­ti­fi­ca­tion.40
	
There may be an even earlier, and sexually selected, precursor of 
human visual art in the simple stone tools known as hand-­axes. The 
first stone tools, of the so-­called Oldowan industry, from over 2 mil-
lion years ago until about 780,000 years ago, were roughly flaked on 
one side. About 1.4 million years ago, a new technology appeared: 
­so-­called Acheulean hand-­axes, tools expertly knapped from flint 
or quartz into a shape like a flattened, two-­faced teardrop, with a 
­cutting edge right around. The sheer number of hand-­axes found 
in some sites, the proportion that under microscopic examination 
show little or no sign of use, the high and perhaps excessive degree of 
symmetry and fin­ish, the occasional selection and highlighting of in-
corporated fossils, and the existence of forms too large or small for 
apparent use—all suggest strongly that hand-­axes may often have 
been re­fined to a degree far beyond need, in a way best explained in 
terms of sexual or social selection: as a display to others of prowess 
and judgment. Notice that this proposal, which Miller endorses, has 
a spe­cificity absent in Miller’s own arguments, and reveals an aware-
ness of the slow increments by which the first impulse toward the 
visual arts may have developed.41
	
Art as sexual display does not explain nothing about art. But the 

	
Art as Adaptation?
	
79
very flex­i­bil­ity of human behavior suggests that sexual selection has 
been an extra gear for art, not the engine itself. Yet young men and 
­women have one strong reason to look for what Miller calls a social 
“entertainment system” in each other:42 the playful interaction be-
tween infants and mothers or others that arises from and ingrains 
more deeply in us the plea­sures of patterned play and the unique 
importance of human shared attention (see Chapters 6–7). With that 
disposition taken into account, and admitted as an impetus for art, 
then sexual selection may explain an escalation of adaptations for so-
ciality and for art.
	
Differential parental investment—higher male competitiveness, 
higher female choosiness—can then hint at part of the reason for 
the preponderance of males over females in art for public display, 
although ­women seem always to have par­tic­i­pated in song, dance, 
weaving, and storytelling, especially near the home, as much as or 
more than men. In The Tale of Genji, Genji wins a painting contest 
against his friend TÃ no ChÄjÃ, and as a result the adulation of many 
­women.43 But this novel, the world’s first, still considered the pearl of 
Japanese literature, was written by a woman—and a mother. Sexual 
selection can help explain the fact that most public art has been 
­produced by men—although this weighting of course also re­flects 
the protracted history of restricted opportunities for ­women, be-
cause of their greater average commitment to childrearing, and be-
cause of males’ inclination to limit female freedoms.44 But sexual se-
lection cannot explain why men and ­women, boys and girls, in the 
home and outside, engage so compulsively in art as both artists and 
audiences.

80
6
ART AS COGNITIVE PLAY
To focus on High Art—on classic works of literature, music, 
and visual art, or on modernist challenges to classical modes—is to 
begin near the end of the story of art. Explanations need to start 
much further back: with chant or ocher, or with a timeless scene like 
a father playfully distracting his child by miming an ape and hap-
pening to amuse, and then choosing to play up to a few casual on-
lookers. Art stretches back far in time, spreads widely in space, recurs 
in cross-­culturally consistent modes, and starts early enough in each 
child to suggest the need for some explanation beyond the purely 
cultural. How can we account for art in biocultural terms?
	
So far we have considered five positions: (1) art is not even a mean-
ingful category; (2) art is not a human universal; (3) art is universal 
but entirely explicable by cultural traditions and cultural diversity; 
(4) art can be explained in terms of its function(s), without recourse 
to evolution; (5) art can be explained in evolutionary terms by its 
lack of function, through sexual selection.
	
Most nonevolutionary theories of art offer functional explana-
tions but propose functions too vague and mutually contradictory 
to satisfy the stringent cost-­bene­fit criteria required in biological ex-
planation. Evolutionary accounts of art can try to explain art by their 
functional uselessness, as Geoffrey Miller does via sexual selection, 
or in terms of evolved functions, as an adaptive behavior.
	
An evolutionary adaptation, recall, is a feature of body, mind, or 
behavior that exists throughout a species and shows evidence of 
good design for a spe­cific function or functions that will ultimately 
make a difference to the species’ survival and reproductive success.1 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
81
If art is a human adaptation, it has been established throughout the 
species because it has been selected as a behavior for the advantages 
it offers in terms of survival and reproduction. It may offer one ad-
vantage, like echolocation in bats, or many, like an elephant’s trunk, 
which evolved to sniff, dislodge, grasp, pull, deliver, push, twist, ca-
ress, trumpet, siphon, and squirt.
Steven Pinker, the most prominent proponent of the adapted mind 
—the mind as shaped in detail by evolution—has also been the fore-
most critic of claims that art is an adaptation. He throws down a 
stiff challenge to those who regard art as more than an evolution-
ary byproduct: “For the same reason that it is wrong to write off 
­language, stereo vision, and the emotions as evolutionary acci- 
dents—namely their universal, complex, reliably-­developing, well-­
engineered, reproduction-­promoting design—it is wrong to invent 
functions for activities that lack design merely because we want to 
ennoble them with the imprimatur of biological adaptiveness.”2
	
Here we come to Position 6: Art is a byproduct of adaptive features 
of the human mind.
	
Pinker accepts that narrative may be adaptive in enabling our 
minds to develop scenarios testing possible courses of action and 
their consequences. Otherwise, he considers art an evolutionary by-
product deploying our capacity for design to deliver high-­energy 
treats to our cognitive tastes, concocting “cheesecake” for the mind, 
or developing “a useless technology for pressing our plea­sure but-
tons” by “defeat[ing] the locks that safeguard” them.3
	
In explaining art as design skills working to gratify evolved human 
preferences, Pinker assumes that our ability to design developed only 
in purely instrumental modes. But why? Atop a Paleolithic spear­
thrower found at Mas d’Azil in France sits the carving of an ibex 
turning her head to look at two birds already perching on the turd 
she is extruding—an exquisitely intricate and playful carving that re-
quired far more design skill than the spearthrower itself. It seems at 
least arguable, and in fact highly likely, that art has helped ratchet up 
our interest in, our capacity for, and our con­fi­dence in design. A 
­society whose members wove elaborate and superfluous designs be-
cause they were pleasing could more easily think up a woven eel trap 

On the Origin of Stories
82
than a putative society focused exclusively on utilitarian technologi-
cal ­solutions could think up decoration for clothing, containers, or 
­coverings.
	
Pinker’s metaphors (cheesecake, plea­sure buttons, music as “a 
cocktail of recreational drugs that we ingest through the ear”),4 like 
his conclusion that art is a byproduct, depend on seeing art as con-
sumption. Gleefully offending the devotees of high art, he suggests 
that for an evolutionary account of art we need to think black velvet 
painting.5 But before we respond to art we have to generate it. In 
modern society we can avail ourselves of ready-­made art like black-­
velvet Elvises almost as easily as we buy ready-­made cheesecake. But 
for most of human history and in most so­ci­e­ties, art results from the 
efforts of all, as people weave and carve, sing and dance, tell and re-
enact stories. The compulsion to engage in art needs to explain the 
compulsion to make art as well as to enjoy it.
	
Art has usually involved intense effort. It began when there were 
Spearthrower from Mas d’Azil, 
France, ca. 14,000 b.c.e.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
83
no art-­supplies stores, when ocher had to be extracted or traded, 
when there were only stone carving tools that themselves had to be 
laboriously fashioned. Early visual art such as scarification, tattoo-
ing, and body-­piercing often caused acute personal pain. Even with 
the comforts and con­ve­niences of city life, creating art can involve 
prodigious investments of time and energy: Michelangelo’s years on 
his back painting the Sistine Chapel ceiling, or the more than a cen-
tury that has still not brought Gaudí’s design for Barcelona’s Sagrada 
Familia to completion. The cheesecake metaphor fails to explain why 
in ev­ery society the elaborate and often arduous efforts required to 
produce art have seemed worthwhile.
	
By stating so pungently the hypothesis of art as a byproduct, 
Pinker does the evolutionary explanation of art a great ser­vice. For 
the hypothesis fails—and therefore contributes to the case for art as 
not a byproduct but an adaptation: If art involved no bene­fit, if it 
only mimicked biological advantage, as drugs do, by delivering un-
earned plea­sure, yet it had high costs in time, energy, and resources, 
then a predisposition to art would be a weakness that would long ago 
have been weeded out by the intensity of evolutionary competition. 
Nature selects against a cost without a bene­fit, as when it dispenses 
with sight in burrowing or cave-­dwelling animals.
	
If the byproduct hypothesis were correct, then over thousands of 
generations and millions of births, individuals, and so­ci­e­ties with a 
lesser disposition to art would have prospered because they did not 
incur the high costs of producing it and either simply had more op-
portunity to rest and harbor resources—like other top predators, 
such as big cats6—or had more to time and energy to devote to activ­
ities that did yield bene­fits, such as producing new resources or com-
peting to acquire the resources of others. As Richard Dawkins notes: 
“natural selection is a predictive theory. The Darwinian can make 
the con­fi­dent prediction that, if dams were a useless waste of time, 
rival beavers who refrained from building them would survive better 
and pass on genetic tendencies not to build.”7 Likewise with art: if 
and only if art were useless, more ruthlessly utilitarian and competi-
tive realists with a lesser inclination to art would have survived and 
reproduced in greater numbers, and over evolutionary time their 
­descendants would have supplanted those with a disposition to art. 

On the Origin of Stories
84
Societies without any inclination to create their own dress, song, and 
story would have ousted those that did have these things. Individuals 
and groups without art—without shared songs and dance (including 
anthems and war-­dances), without their own styles of dress and de-
sign (including face-­paint, scarification, tattoos, uniforms, emblems, 
flags, or monumental architecture), without shared stories and say-
ings (including myths, heroic legends, proverbs)—would fare better 
than those with all these things, which art makes possible. But that 
seems never to have been the case. No human society lacks art, and 
the most successful so­ci­e­ties have more art than ever before.
	
Social living offers advantages—it has been rightly called “our 
most powerful survival tool”;8 but it also produces tensions. Cities, 
social living at the extreme, offer the formidable bene­fits of special-
ization and concentration of labor and ser­vices, but they also have 
high costs in crowding, control, and coordination. If the byprod-
uct  hypothesis were true, if art offers only illusory bene­fits, peo-
ple could live more successfully in cities, could cope better with the 
strains of urban life, without the plea­sures of art: with only sterile 
ser­viceableness rather than aesthetically appealing design in dress, 
interior decoration, and architecture, without music, stories, parades, 
carnivals, concerts, shows. A bleak civic environment would outdo a 
vibrant one.
	
An obvious rejoinder would be that art has become possible be-
cause human technology has allowed us a surplus that provides a 
protective buffer against the selective pressures of evolution. But this 
argument cannot explain the persistence and the centrality of art 
(song, dance, story, design) among, for instance, the Aborigines, who 
have survived so long in the relentlessly harsh conditions of the Aus-
tralian desert—and who, when given the opportunity to contribute 
to the world of modern specialized art, have produced, in the work 
of Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri, Kathleen Petyarre, and others, some 
of the most sublime and haunting paintings of the last few de­cades.9
	
Or if art had no role to play in human survival, if it were useless in 
those terms, and its uselessness were the proof that art resulted solely 
from sexual selection, as Miller suggests, then we would engage in art 
overwhelmingly in our fertile years, and only so long as fertile indi-
viduals of the opposite sex were among their audience. An infant’s 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
85
delight in hearing nursery rhymes or lullabies, a mother’s in croon-
ing them, a grandmother’s pride in weaving designs in flax, wool, or 
cotton, anyone’s silent reading of fiction or keen interest in the work 
of long-­dead artists would be impossible to explain.
	
The implausible implications of both hypotheses suggest strongly 
that art has been designed by evolution to serve some survival func-
tion. But what?
Before offering my own answer, let me first characterize art as a be-
havior. I suggest that we can view art as a kind of cognitive play, the 
set of activities designed to engage human attention through their 
appeal to our preference for inferentially rich and therefore patterned 
information.
	
With the help of this notion I propose two principal functions for 
Clifford Possum Tjapalt-
jarri, Yuelamu Honey 
Ant Dreaming, 1980.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

On the Origin of Stories
86
art. First, it serves as a stimulus and training for a flex­i­ble mind, as 
play does for the body and physical behavior. The high concentra-
tions of pattern that art delivers repeatedly engage and activate indi-
vidual brains and over time alter their wiring to modify key human 
perceptual, cognitive, and expressive systems, especially in terms of 
sight, hearing, movement, and social cognition. All of art’s other 
functions lead from this. Second, art be­comes a social and individual 
system for engendering creativity, for producing options not con­
Kathleen Petyarre, Mountain Devil Lizard Dreaming (With Winter 
Sandstorm), 1996.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
87
fined by the here and now or the immediate and given. All other 
functions lead up to this.
	
I would draw a distinction between the cognitive play of art, in 
which people engage in cooperative and open-­ended ways, whether 
as creators, performers, or audiences, and closed games like chess or 
poker, or puzzles like crosswords or Sudoku. Play and art are non-­
zero-­sum—that is, one side’s gain is not another’s loss, unlike in 
­tennis, football, backgammon, or go—and that makes all the differ-
ence: the difference between competition, however playful, and the 
mutually amplifying effects of cooperation, ably summed up in the 
title of Robert Wright’s Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny (“In-
deed, in highly non-­zero-­sum games the players’ interests overlap 
entirely”).10 Even in collective works of art, in which collaborators 
may have partially competing interests, like studio films, all involved 
aim to further the work of art, though perhaps according to different 
values; or jazz combos, in which all spontaneously react to one an-
other’s play, but for the sake of the work and the audience, not for 
the sake of a victory and the support of a partisan fraction of the au-
dience. Not only is art non-­zero-­sum, but its effects are not closed, as 
in mathematical or verbal puzzles, but open-­ended. The cooperative 
amplification and the open-­endedness make all the difference to art.
Before we reach play, what do we mean by “pattern”? The Oxford En­
glish Dic­tio­nary de­fines it as “an arrangement . . . order or form dis-
cernible in things, actions, ideas, situations, etc.”11 Pattern tends to 
signal regularities in the world rather than mere chance: the pattern 
that my head and my feet turn up in the same neighborhood is no 
quirk but part of the regularity that is me.
	
Because space teems with regularities from quarks to quasars and 
because life builds from the simple to the complex by endless recom-
bination, we live in a world that swarms with patterns at ev­ery level, 
beside or within or across one another. Computers still fare dis-
mally at pattern recognition, but because predicting what may come 
next can make life-­or-­death differences to living things, organisms—
even unicellular animals, even bacteria and plants—have evolved to 
be pattern extractors, and at least the more intelligent animals, like 

On the Origin of Stories
88
higher primates and corvids, decidedly prefer regular, symmetrical, 
or rhythmic patterns.12 In both space and time, in sight and sound, 
we therefore sense beauty in “the rule of order over randomness, of 
pattern over chaos.”13
	
Information can be costly to obtain and analyze, but because it 
­offers such an invaluable basis for action, nature evolves senses and 
minds to gather and pro­cess information patterns appropriate to 
particular modes of life, from sonar in bats or electroception in fish 
to touch in the star-­nosed mole. Even plants that can detect the sea-
sons or nearby growth can make informed “decisions” about how to 
react. Animals need much more rapid responses, and therefore have 
evolved minds to detect swiftly patterns meaningful to their kind of 
organism in their kind of environment—smells, for ants or dogs, ul-
trasound for bats, magnetic fields or nocturnal skies for migrating 
birds—and to coordinate the inferences the patterns allow.
	
Pattern occurs at multiple levels, from the stable information of 
spatial conditions and physical pro­cesses to highly volatile informa-
tion about individuals and their moods, actions, and intentions. Pat-
tern recognition lets us distinguish animate from inanimate, human 
from nonhuman, this individual from all others, this attitude or ex-
pression from another. The capacity to identify not only individuals 
but also higher-­order tendencies in their behavior, personality, and 
powers allows for invaluably precise prediction.
	
Pattern recognition need not be explicit. Take “that all-­important 
pattern, the face.”14 My computer’s screensaver shuffles through 
thousands of photographs I have stored. Two of my young grand-
children, born two years apart, look uncannily alike, but even in the 
same baby clothes in photographs taken when each was the same age 
I can identify which is which the moment each ­comes on screen, al-
though I could not say how I can identify them. Nor do I need to 
know. Pattern recognition does it for me, sifting data effortlessly and 
almost instantly into the forms that matter most to me: in this case, 
identifying a con­figu­ra­tion of color patches on the flat screen not 
just as a person and as an infant, but as Emily or Ben.
	
Like other species, humans can assimilate information through 
the rapid pro­cessing that specialized pattern recognition allows, but 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
89
we uniquely inhabit “the cognitive niche”: we gain most of our ad-
vantages from intelligence. We therefore have what the Nobel phys-
ics laureate Edward Purcell has called an “avidity for pattern,”15 for 
information that forms arrays from which we can make rich infer-
ences. For that reason we like bright, distinct colors, crisp outlines, 
complex shape or surface design: think of our special fondness for 
butterflies and flowers. Zoologist Paul Weiss noted that our sense of 
beauty depends on our sense “of pattern over chaos . . . the beauty of 
forms rests on the lawfulness of their formation.”16 And we have an 
appetite for open-­ended pattern, not only the forms we have evolved 
to detect automatically. Frogs react with an automatic flick of the 
tongue to small objects fly­ing across their field of vision. That makes 
them swifter than you or I at catching insects, but they cannot re-
spond to new kinds of patterns. Humans can. In addition to the 
­con­figu­ra­tions that evolution has programmed us to track, like the 
shapes or locations of objects, we search for patterns of many kinds, 
like, eventually, the chemical structures of insecticides that can make 
us more ef­fi­cient killers of insects than even frogs have been designed 
to be.
	
We crave patterns because they can tell us so much: as chemist 
Peter Atkins noted, they are “the lifeblood of science and the seeds 
of theories.”17 Stephen Jay Gould has written of our penchant for 
pattern: “No other habit of thought lies so deeply within the soul of 
a small creature trying to make sense of a complex world not con-
structed for it.”18 Only humans have the curiosity to seek out pattern 
in the open-­ended way that once led our ancestors to see constella-
tions in the skies, then to infer first the revolution of the Earth from 
the motion of the stars and planets, then the expansion of the uni-
verse, then possibilities beyond our patch of our multiverse.
	
If information is chaotic it lacks meaningful pattern and we can-
not understand. Extreme informational chaos, the absence of pat-
tern, as in complete whiteout or dense fog, can even cause distress 
and loss of sensory function.19 But valuable information can be con-
cealed in the world’s welter, like the causal con­figu­ra­tions that medi-
cal researchers tease out to link particular chemicals or conditions to 
particular cancers. If on the other hand information is completely 

On the Origin of Stories
90
patterned, we need not continue to attend: if a stimulus remains un-
changing, if the pattern can be predicted, the psychological pro­cess 
of habituation automatically switches off attention.20 The most pat-
terned novel possible would repeat one letter, say, q, over and over 
again—a queue no reader would want to wait in. But an unpredict-
able combination of patterns repays intense attention and can yield 
rich inferences, although find­ing how to ascertain all the patterns 
and all the meaning they imply may not be easy.
Art concentrates and plays with the world’s profusion of interrelated 
or intersecting patterns. Take music:
Whenever a noise exceeds our pro­cessing abilities—we can’t 
decipher all the different sound waves hitting our hair cells—
the mind . . . stops trying to understand the individual notes 
and seeks instead to understand the relationships between the 
notes. The human auditory cortex pulls off this feat by using 
its short-­term memory for sound (in the left posterior hemi-
sphere) to uncover patterns at the large level of the phrase, 
motif, and movement. This new approximation lets us ex-
tract order from all those notes haphazardly fly­ing through 
space, and the brain is obsessed with order . . .
	 It is this psychological instinct—this desperate neuronal 
search for a pattern, any pattern, that is the source of mu-
sic . . . We continually abstract on our own inputs, inventing 
patterns in order to keep pace with the onrush of noise. And 
once the brain finds a pattern, it immediately starts to make 
predictions . . . It proj­ects imaginary order into the future . . .
	 The structure of music re­flects the human brain’s pen-
chant for patterns . . . But before a pattern can be desired by 
the brain, that pattern must play hard to get.21
	
Or, to shift mental gears and artistic modes, take, for instance, 
Shakespeare’s Henry IV Part 1. We respond almost immediately to 
patterns of character—Falstaff’s shameless exuberant ebullience, 
Hal’s controlled wildness, Hotspur’s impetuousness, Glendower’s 
impassioned boastfulness, and much more—and to patterns of ac-

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
91
tion, like the plot and counterplot of the Gad’s Hill robbery. Patterns 
set up expectations, which they may satisfy, overturn, or revise—es-
pecially, in this case, the mounting expectation that events will lead 
to a climactic battlefield confrontation between Hal and Hotspur.
	
By far the most salient patterns for us in story will involve agents 
and actions, character and plot, intentions and out­comes. Shake-
speare offers such immediate patterns but incorporates others that 
emerge at different rates and levels, from the local and linguistic—
like his attention-­catching deviations from standard En­glish phras-
ing, or the rhythms of his iambic pentameter, or the idiosyncratic 
stamp of his characters’ speech, Falstaff’s largesse, Hal’s nimble-­
minded quickness, Hotspur’s fiery gallop, Pistol’s fustian ranting, 
Mistress Quickly’s endearingly unruffled confusions, and much 
more—to larger-­scale patterns of character or scenic contrast, of im-
age, idea, or structure, like the motifs of rebellion or of the robber 
robbed: patterns suf­fi­ciently compacted and overlaid that some have 
taken centuries to tease out explicitly. Some patterns we can easily 
understand and describe; others, like patterns of meter and struc-
ture, may remain unconscious yet still shape our response.
	
Our perception of pattern and of deviation from pattern produces 
strong emotional reactions.22 Art appeals to our appetite for pattern 
at multiple levels, in producing or perceiving bodily movement, 
shapes, surfaces, sounds, words, or miniature worlds. Like play it 
therefore provokes us to continue the activities it offers long enough 
and to resume them often enough to modify our neural circuitry 
over time.
	
As searching human intelligence evolved out of curiosity in other 
animals, so human art, I propose, has evolved from animal play.23 
Play occurs not only in ev­ery mammal species in which it has been 
looked for, and in many birds, but even in some fish and reptiles, and 
perhaps even in invertebrates (octopi).24 Especially in animals with 
protracted parental care, like birds and mammals, offspring can be 
comparatively secure in the presence of parents.25 Nature has made 
the most of juvenile dependency by having species with flex­i­ble be-
havior play repeatedly and intensely when young.
	
Although much remains to be discovered about the biology of 
play, almost all researchers concur that a behavior involving so much 

On the Origin of Stories
92
energy expenditure and risk of predation and injury, yet so highly 
motivated and so widely conserved across species, must serve power-
ful functions. Pinker rightly stresses that “to demonstrate that X is an 
adaptation, one can’t simply show that people like doing X.” Rather, 
one has to specify functions—survival and reproductive bene­fits—in 
advance, as if in engineering terms, rather than in terms of how they 
matter to us.26 Let me describe play in these terms.
	
Evolution can install general guidelines for action—nature’s fac-
tory settings—but for some behaviors fine-­tuned choices and wider 
ranges of options that can be deployed at short and context-­sensitive 
notice make a decisive difference. This applies particularly to the 
­volatile sphere of social relations, and especially to the most urgent 
situations, flight and fight. Such behaviors can be fine-­tuned by ex-
perience and the range of options extended by exploratory action. 
Creatures with stron­ger motivations to practice such behaviors and 
to explore new options in advance, in situations of low danger and 
adequate resources, will fare better than those without. The more 
plea­sure that creatures have in play in safe contexts, the more they 
will happily expend energy in mastering skills needed in urgent or 
volatile situations, in attack, defense, and social competition and co-
operation. This explains why in the human case we particularly en-
joy play that develops skills needed in flight (chase, tag, running) and 
fight (rough-­and-­tumble, throwing as a form of attack at a distance), 
in recovery of balance (skiing, surfing, skateboarding), and in indi-
vidual and team games.
	
The more often and the more exuberantly animals play, the more 
they hone skills, widen repertoires, and sharpen sensitivities. Play 
therefore has evolved to be highly self-­rewarding. Through the com-
pulsiveness of play, animals incrementally alter muscle tone and neu­
ral wiring, strengthen and increase the pro­cessing speed of synaptic 
pathways, and improve their capacity and potential for performance 
in later, less forgiving circumstances.27 Since scientists cannot yet 
probe inside the skulls of children at play, their research focuses on 
other species. All animals they have so far studied grow more neural 
tissue in enriched than in impoverished environments, with more 
friends, toys, ladders, and wheels to play with.28 Monkeys trained on 
a particular task develop in the relevant neurons finer discrimina-

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
93
tion, more rapid response, faster pro­cessing, swifter recovery times, 
better coordination, and clearer signaling.29 Play is more dif­fi­cult 
to monitor than directed training, but scientists have recently dis-
covered that in young rats play generates a spe­cific compound that 
drives genetic transcription in the amygdala and frontal cortex, rap-
idly growing areas of the social brain—and we can expect further 
such discoveries.30
	
In order to fine-­tune actions for rapid activation in emergencies, 
play often involves exaggerated or extreme behavior, like losing bal-
ance and then recovering, or risking defeat in play-­fight­ing until at-
tacker and defender swap roles.31 (Aptly, the name of the Japanese 
kabuki theater derives from the obsolete verb kabuku, “to lose one’s 
balance,” “to be playful.”) The amount and intensity of play in differ-
ent species correlate closely with the species’ intelligence and flex­i­bil­
ity of behavior.32
	
Animals eagerly initiate, solicit, and persist in play. Chimpanzees 
that learn sign language use it mostly to ask for what they want: es-
pecially food—and play.33 Play stimulates the release of the neu-
rotransmitter do­pa­mine (central to the brain’s reward system and a 
key motivator of evolutionarily positive actions like eating and sex), 
which encourages further play.34 But like curiosity, play has its built-
­in stopping routines, including fatigue and loss of interest.35 Animals, 
especially adults, with less to learn from the mental and bodily train-
ing that play offers, can therefore avoid expending too much energy 
in play.
	
By the time of the first massive expansion of hominid brains, 
about two million years ago, our ancestors had already evolved 
uniquely long childhoods and therefore the long stretch of security 
under parental care that we still enjoy. Within such security, play af-
fords us the opportunities to acquire routines that we can make ef-
fortless or almost automatic by practice, repetition, and experiment, 
freeing our minds to cope with more novelty at a higher level.
	
As for play, so for the cognitive play of art we can specify the de-
sign conditions in advance. If there are cognitive capacities in which 
flex­i­ble fine-­tunings and widening the range of options deployed at 
short and context-­sensitive notice can make decisive differences—
and our aural, visual, vocal, manual, and social skills all qualify—

On the Origin of Stories
94
then individuals with stron­ger motivations to practice such behav-
iors in situations of low danger and adequate resources will fare 
better. A predisposition toward the patterned cognitive play of art 
will establish itself in a species in which cognitive skills are para-
mount.
	
Art as a kind of cognitive play stimulates our brains more than 
does routine pro­cessing of the environment.36 It offers what biolo-
gists call a supernormal stimulus, an incentive more intense than 
usual, in this case a rush of the kinds of patterned information that 
our minds particularly crave. Because neural connections establish 
themselves piecemeal through experience, and because we find art 
self-­rewarding, because we engage in it eagerly and repeatedly, art 
can over time fine-­tune our minds for rapid response in the infor-
mation modes that matter most to us.
	
Michael Merzenich, a neuroscientist famous for his studies of 
brain plasticity and for developing successful brain-­training soft-
ware, remarks that “the Inter­net is just one of those things that con-
temporary humans can spend millions of ‘practice’ events at, that the 
average human a thousand years ago had absolutely no exposure to. 
Our brains are massively remodeled by this exposure—but so, too, 
by reading, by television, by video games, by modern electronics, by 
contemporary music, by contemporary ‘tools,’ etc.”37 But our pre­
disposition for art has long ensured that we have grown up in and 
constructed our own especially enriched environments. For tens of 
thousands of years our play with the intense patterns of intricate arts 
like weaving and carving, song, dance, verse, and story has enticed us 
to repeat “practice” events and so remodeled human minds.
	
Only focused attention and incremental remodeling can make the 
most of the brain’s plasticity,38 and art can recon­fig­ure minds only so 
long as it rewards us enough, like play, to hold our attention again 
and again.
	
To see the close relationship between art and play, and the self-­
rewarding nature of both, consider chimpanzee painting. In the 
1950s, when Desmond Morris supplied chimpanzees in his care with 
paint, brushes, and paper, they threw themselves into painting pro-
vided they received no external reward. Those who were offered food 

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
95
would make a few perfunctory strokes and break off quickly to seek 
another tasty morsel. But those whose motivation remained uncor-
rupted by “payment” developed a fierce commitment to painting. 
They painted intensely, persisting, while the session lasted, until they 
thought a sheet fin­ished, though they would never glance at their 
work later.39 But whereas chimpanzees engage in art only if the mate-
rials are supplied, even infant humans will seek out ways to stimulate 
themselves through art.
	
Human art often remains or returns close to the play from which 
it emerged. Comedy verges on and even aims at play. Music, too, can 
shade into play. The Kalinga of the northern Philippines par­tic­i­pate 
in a repetitive modulatory game with bamboo sticks in the shape of 
tuning forks that generates music of a kind—but par­tic­i­pants seem 
to regard the activity as more game than performance. Few filmmak-
ers have produced such searing explorations of the human condition 
as Ingmar Bergman, but he described filmmaking as like returning 
to childhood, a game, a kind of play.40
	
Art be­comes compulsive because it arouses plea­sure, and it arouses 
plea­sure because, like play, it fine-­tunes our systems. In small-­scale 
so­ci­e­ties—including most of the human past—all par­tic­i­pate in the 
arts of the community, in song and dance, weaving and carving, 
makeup and costume. In large-­scale so­ci­e­ties with considerable spe-
cialization of labor, professional artists can achieve new levels of per-
formance by dint of highly focused practice and effort. After child-
hood, most adults in such so­ci­e­ties may become consumers rather 
than producers of most kinds of art, except in singing and storytell-
ing for their children. For both those who produce and those who 
consume it, art staves off boredom—itself an emotion that evolved 
to reactivate curiosity—and counters habituation.41
	
Art as cognitive play augments our capacities so that we can, at 
least in the domain on which each art focuses, ef­fi­ciently produce 
ideas or actions: sounds, movements, visualizations, or representa-
tions, and, in the case of story, scenarios for reasoning about our own 
and others’ plans and actions.
	
Art’s origin in self-­rewarding cognitive play explains its therapeu-
tic power. John Carey answers the title question of his What Good 

On the Origin of Stories
96
Are The Arts? mostly in the negative. High art, he claims, serves no 
particular good, certainly not the exalted functions claimed for it. 
But art practiced by prisoners offers them a sense of accomplishment 
that they have rarely had.42 And art, as practiced by all in the days 
before it could become a sta­tus badge or a consumer product, re-
warded all, because it sharpened minds and skills.
Just where does art start? We enjoy the patterned cognitive play 
we  call art because our unique predilection for pattern combines 
with the widespread mammalian impulse to play. As children and 
throughout life we are each internally driven to engage in art. But we 
are also reliably prompted in this direction, in a uniquely human 
manner, by the behavior of others, especially our parents.
	
Parental care extends throughout the mammalian and avian lines. 
Parental responsiveness to infants is an elaborate and necessary 
evolved behavior in mammals, where usually only the female engages 
in sustained parenting, as well as in birds, where often both parents 
play an active role in rearing their young. In the human case, too, 
parenthood involves sustained contributions from both parents. It is 
also uniquely intimate in a way that bootstraps infant brains and 
fast-­tracks their predisposition to shared and patterned play.
	
From infancy humans seek to command the attention of oth-
ers, to shape it more finely, and to share it more fully, than do any 
other species. Unlike other primates, humans have eyes whose elon-
gated shape and whose color contrast between iris and sclera make 
eye direction easy to see: in short, humans have evolved eyes that re-
veal rather than conceal their direction.43 Monkey babies lack the 
stimulus tools to capture and hold their mothers’ attention.44 Chim-
panzee mothers rarely gaze into their babies’ eyes or communicate 
with them, though they will respond when babies initiate play by bit-
ing, and will tickle and laugh in tender reply.45 But human mothers 
and infants attend to one another from the first. Infants’ eyes after 
birth can focus only about eight inches away, the distance between 
the mother’s breast and her face, and unlike infants in any other spe-
cies they maintain eye contact while suckling. Newborns prefer to 
attend to faces more than to any other visual stimulus, and under 
laboratory conditions they have been shown to be capable of imitat-

	
Art as Cognitive Play
	
97
ing humans, but not animated models, within an hour of birth.46 At 
only a day old they will wriggle their limbs and orient their faces in 
time with taped female speech, but not with disconnected vowel or 
tapping sounds.47
	
So it continues. For the first six months, infants have a love affair 
with human faces, voices, and touch, a factor that allows adults to 
bootstrap their children’s intelligence by focusing their attention.48 
Across the world older humans instinctively address infants in 
“motherese,” whose higher-­pitch appeals and whose simple but ex-
aggerated emotional contours, coupled with highly contrastive visual 
signing, can be decoded without language and can therefore recruit 
and maintain attention.49 Minds find more attractive what they can 
pro­cess more easily,50 and the highly patterned and stylized language 
of motherese sim­pli­fies understanding and invites attention.
	
By about eight months, parent-­infant “protoconversations”—
“more like a song than a sentence”51—set the scene for the special 
nature of human sociality and for art. Aptly described as multimedia 
performances, since they use eyes and faces, hands and feet, voice 
and movement, these protoconversations consist of rhythmic, finely 
attuned turn-­taking and mutual imitation, involving elaboration, 
exaggeration, repetition, and surprise, with each partner anticipat-
ing the other’s response so as to coordinate their emotions in pat-
terned sequence.52 Though taking different forms in different cul-
tures, protoconversation in all human cultures resembles a duet in 
which child and adult “seek harmony and counterpoint on one beat 
to create a melody.”53 If art offers the mental stimulation of patterned 
cognitive play, it begins reliably for individuals in normal environ-
ments through the social scaffolding provided by playful, patterned 
parental prompting.
	
From about nine to twelve months, infants tune into the attention 
and behavior of adults in new ways, and try to have adults tune into 
theirs. Although all apes note where others look, on the basis of head 
direction, only humans, from a year old, track eye gaze as well as 
head movement.54 Human one-­year-­olds engage in joint attention—
following others’ hands or eyes and checking to see that the others 
follow theirs—and in protodeclarative pointing—indicating objects 
or events simply for the sake of sharing attention to them, something 

On the Origin of Stories
98
that apes never do.55 They expect others to share interest, attention, 
and response: “This by itself is rewarding for infants—apparently in 
a way it is not for any other species on the planet.”56
	
The presence of an infant releases special tenderness in human 
mothers. Infants prefer recordings of lullabies sung by mothers while 
a child was present to those recorded without children present, and 
adults also judge these versions more loving.57 Although all female 
primates find babies fascinating, and the youn­ger the better, they are 
not automatically nurturing, so that infants will fare better the more 
they are attuned to mothers or others.58 A care­giver in turn will be 
able to stimulate an infant most aptly, in ways neither too simple nor 
too complex, neither too familiar nor too new, when simply having 
fun with the child.59
	
The unprecedented attunement of human infants’ attention to 
that of adults, inside and outside play, and even before language, 
­re­flects familiar quirks of human evolution. The human infant is 
unique in being born so undeveloped, partly as a result of the nar-
rowing of the female pelvic canal because of permanent bipedalism 
in early hominids, partly as a result of the first rapid enlargement of 
the brain in archaic Homo about two million years ago, and partly as 
a result of the general change in developmental rates, leaving hu-
mans with by far the longest infancy and childhood of any animal, 
presumably as a consequence of selection for increasing sociality, 
flex­i­bil­ity, and intelligence.60 Mothers and others provide a social en-
tertainment system for infants, apparently because evolution has se-
lected for both adults and children who can turn childhood depen-
dency into mutual delight.
	
The behavior of older humans that reliably prompts infants’ dis-
position toward patterned play, like motherese, protoconversation, 
and lullabies, owes something to culture but is too similar across cul-
tures, too interculturally recognizable, and especially too spontane-
ously engaged in, without any need for training, to be understood 
only in terms of culturally acquired behaviors. Just as evolution has 
designed parents to respond in species-­appropriate ways to the phys-
ical needs of infants, it has designed human parents (and grandpar-
ents and siblings) to respond in the ways that help ensure that infants 
develop their predilection for the patterned cognitive play of art.

	
99
7
ART AND ATTENTION
Social Cohesion and Individual Status
In the 1950s psychiatrist Cathy Hayes raised a young chimp 
in her own home. In late infancy Viki, the chimp, began to trail an 
arm behind her as if pulling a toy on a string, and would even pre-
tend to catch the string on obstructions and then release it again. 
After several weeks of this behavior, Viki one day appeared to entan-
gle the imaginary toy around the knob of the toilet, and cried for 
help. Hayes pantomimed untangling the rope and returning it to her, 
to be rewarded with what could have been either “a look of sheer de-
votion” or “just a good hard stare.” A few days later, when Hayes de-
cided to invent a make-­believe pull-­toy of her own that clacked on 
the floor and swooshed on the carpet, “Viki stared at the point on the 
floor where the imaginary rope would have met the imaginary toy, 
uttered a terrified ‘oo-­oo-­oo,’” leaped into Cathy’s arms, and never 
played that game again.1 For all Cathy’s quasi-­maternal care, Viki’s 
playfulness, and Cathy’s playful engagement with her, Viki was to-
tally unprepared to share attention with Cathy.
	
In Viki the sharing of attention so natural in humans, even in an 
infant’s protoconversation with its parents, seems still far away. Pro-
toconversation in turn seems a long way from the Mahabharata or 
Mozart. Yet sharing attention, if not quite the start of art, proves in-
dispensable.
	
To explain art we need to attend to attention. Art dies without at-
tention, as people since Aristotle have noted, both within and out-
side evolutionary explanation.2 Art alters our minds because it en-

On the Origin of Stories
100
gages and reengages our attention from nursery rhymes to rest-­home 
singalongs. But art has rarely been considered in terms of the special 
role that engaging attention has evolved to play in human lives.3
	
Art begins in infants’ predisposition to engross themselves in pat-
terned cognitive play. But the unique pull of human shared attention 
also compels parents to engage infants in protoconversation, which 
directs their children’s predilection for pattern toward the rudiments 
of song, music, and dance. Without shared attention, the sustained 
self-­stimulation of cognitive play could lead into hermetic private 
worlds like Viki’s that would be disastrous for creatures whose 
strength lies in their sociality. But with the force of human shared at-
tention, the bene­fits of cognitive play ramp up in powerful ways, so-
cial and individual, to produce a plethora of functions.
Samburu girls, Kenya: 
art as pattern.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Art and Attention
	
101
Sharing Attention: Art and Attunement
Art offers us social bene­fits by encouraging us to share attention in 
coordinated ways that improve our attunement with one another.
	
Evolution is competition, at multiple levels: one gene or organ-
ism or group against another. Nevertheless nature has also repeat-
edly evolved cooperation, since genes, cells, and organisms working 
together can often achieve much more than they can acting individ-
ually. But competition remains, including competition for coopera-
tion (within groups) and cooperation (at the group level) for com­
petition (against other groups).
	
All social species prosper more together than alone, or they would 
not remain social, but humans take this to another level, ultrasocial-
ity,4 the most intense cooperativeness of all individualized animal 
so­ci­e­ties. Not endowed by nature with formidable strength or speed, 
we have been able for hundreds of thousands of years to coordi-
nate our activity suf­fi­ciently to kill large prey—and, for thousands of 
years, to construct pyramids or cathedrals and settlements of thou-
sands or even millions.
	
Social life offers rewards but engenders strains. Conflicts arise 
from purposes not quite shared or even radically opposed, and the 
advantages of cooperation can always be exploited by those who ac-
cept the bene­fits without paying their share of the costs. The larger 
the group, the harder the problem of maintaining cooperation. Yet 
the larger the group, the more chance it has of overcoming smaller 
groups, provided it can ensure its own cohesion. Substantial rewards 
await groups that can somehow solve better the fundamental prob-
lem of social life, preventing cooperation from being infiltrated and 
undermined by the short-­term advantages of selfish­ness.5
	
Partly through language, humans have learned to coordinate their 
activities in precise and flex­i­ble ways. But they have also been able to 
motivate continued cooperation on larger scales and in greater detail 
than other species. Art has played a key role in training and motivat-
ing us to share our attention in ever more finely-­tuned forms.
	
Attention has been central to the rise of sociality. An initial reason 
for adopting a social existence lies in the vigilance of others, in at-

On the Origin of Stories
102
tending to others’ sudden attention to threats.6 Survival rates plum-
met for social creatures that stray from the shoal, flock, or herd, since 
these loners become much more vulnerable. In tighter kinds of soci-
ality, from honeybees to apes, attention to the attention of others be­
comes pro­gres­sively more important. First, animals read others’ at-
tention to resources as well as risks: a patch of pollen-­rich flowers or 
ripe fruit, a route to reaching it, a technique to access or pro­cess it, a 
safe territory. Then, as the advantages of social living multiply, crea-
tures attend to others in the group and their mutual attention in or-
der to monitor af­fili­a­tion and alliance and the rank needed to avoid 
constant con­flict over access to resources.7
	
As social relationships become still more flex­i­ble, as in corvids, 
dolphins, or chimpanzees, shared attention makes possible open-­
ended coordination within groups and against rivals or prey.8 Groups 
that coordinate swiftly and freely can outdo other groups. To do so, 
they need to share and check attention and intention as they pursue 
flex­i­ble goals: as Frans de Waal notes, “The selection pressure on pay-
ing attention to others must have been enormous.”9 And in order to 
motivate complex cooperation, animals need to derive interest and 
plea­sure from attending to each other, as dolphins do in their syn-
chronized play. Yet even near the top of this cline, in chimpanzees, 
attention to others remains far coarser than in humans, who can fol-
low and direct others’ attention with unmatched precision in order 
to learn, teach, plan, cooperate, or stimulate.
How do we understand the bene­fits of the closest social attunement? 
Biologists often use analogy to clarify functions by comparing them 
across multiple species or lineages: flight, for instance, among in-
sects, birds, and bats, or vision, intelligence, or sociality in many ani-
mal lines. They also use homology, similarities in structure, to estab-
lish lines of descent, such as the four-­limbed pattern of amphibians, 
reptiles, birds, and mammals. Analogies and homologies help illu-
minate the role of fine social attunement.
	
Groups become more cooperative through selection for the co­
operative dispositions of their members. Coyote pups disinclined to 
play bond less tightly to others in the group, strike out more often on 
their own, and prove three times more likely to die young.10 In the 

	
Art and Attention
	
103
human case, those who do not follow local traditions can become 
outcasts: acceptance matters for social animals as much as do oxy-
gen and food.11 Conversely, creatures that wish to cooperate attune 
themselves to one another. Parrots, duetting songbirds, gibbons, and 
humans tend to act and sound like those they wish to ally with.12 
Dolphins have individual signature whistles, but male dolphins in 
close cooperative bonds, an advantage both in hunting prey and in 
pursuing females, converge toward each other’s signature whistles as 
their bond strengthens.13
	
Social attunement reaches its closest analogy to human art in 
other highly social species that also bene­fit from close, but open-­
ended, coordination. Dolphins work together in stable alliances in 
synchronized behaviors like releasing air bubbles to herd fish toward 
the ocean surface, where they consume them in mass. They appear to 
take plea­sure in coordination, in swimming, diving, and leaping in 
tight unison, or even, as we have seen, in toying with air bubbles 
in ways that serve only the psychological and social purpose of inter-
esting themselves and others, in a kind of protoart. Chimpanzees, 
too, can work in concert, whether hunting monkeys or charging to-
gether against other chimpanzee groups.14 They can also act in play-
ful or artlike ways that appear to generate intense and even frenetic 
excitement from the sheer plea­sure of coordination, as when they 
brachiate, dance, pant-­hoot, stamp, or drum in rowdy carnivalesque 
unison.15
	
Since humans bene­fit from collaboration far more complex and 
on a far larger scale than that of dolphins or chimpanzees, we have a 
much greater need to motivate cooperation and master coordination. 
We achieve much of our advanced cooperation through language, 
but even language emerges from the increasingly flex­i­ble and finely-­
tuned attention to others evolved among highly social mammals.16
	
Although language permits us to share intentions, we can also use 
it for competitive rather than cooperative ends. But a system of un-
conscious emotional contagion that works before language and be-
low conscious awareness and has evolved along with sociality allows 
us to coordinate genuinely cooperative intentions. Mirror neurons, 
whose function was discovered only in the early 1990s, fire when we 
see others act or express emotion as if we were making the same ac-

On the Origin of Stories
104
tion, and allow us through a kind of automatic inner imitation to 
understand their intentions and attune ourselves to their feelings.17 
Summarizing much recent work on social intelligence, psychologist 
Daniel Goleman notes:
Empathy—sensing another’s emotions—seems to be as phys­
iological as it is mental . . . the more similar the physiological 
state of two people at a given moment, the more easily they 
can sense each other’s feelings . . . When people are in rap-
port, they can be more creative together and more ef­fi­cient 
in making decisions . . . Shared attention is the first essential 
ingredient. As two people attend to what the other says and 
does, they generate a sense of mutual interest, a joint focus 
that amounts to perceptual glue. [The second ingredient 
needed is good feeling, cooperative intent; the third] coordi-
nation, or synchrony . . . We coordinate most strongly via 
subtle non-­verbal channels like the pace and timing of a con-
versation and our body movements.18
	
Animals learn best to attune themselves to one another through 
the plea­sures of play, taking turns, checking to see that their partners 
still seek the “high” of intense mutual engagement.19 Humans, more 
flex­i­ble in behavior and de­pen­dent for much ­longer in childhood, 
broaden and lengthen social play, not only in childhood but right 
throughout adult life. And they extend it, crucially, into the cognitive 
play of art.
	
Art allows us another dimension for minds and emotions to meet. 
Although children play with words, movements, and pretense on 
their own, art from the first, from the protoart of protoconversation, 
can be social.
	
Our unique predisposition to social learning makes art a matter 
of attunement as well as of self-­stimulation. Learning from others 
bene­fits many species with flex­i­ble behavior, but humans take mat-
ters much further. From an early age we imitate and practice more 
than any other species.20 Even in a schoolless hunter-­gatherer society, 
individuals learn more than 99 percent of fifty core skills with help 
from others.21

	
Art and Attention
	
105
	
Social learning can greatly reduce the time it takes to find suc­
cessful strategies. In the case of art, social learning starts with proto-
conversation and continues as children swiftly recognize and replay 
rhymes, songs, dance, designs, and stories as they become initiated 
into the art modes of their group. They saturate themselves in super-
normal stimuli vivid enough to engage and reengage their attention, 
and compulsively request or reenact the same stories or songs. They 
enjoy the freedom of cognitive play without needing to begin from 
scratch, as infectious cultural models like dragons and monsters or 
fairies and genies lower the costs of invention and help them master 
fears or understand the gap between wishes and ac­tualities.
	
We play with sound and image and story on our own; we learn ef­
fi­ciently from one another; and we enjoy sharing the plea­sures of art 
with others. Engagement in art, as par­tic­i­pant or as spectator, has the 
same self-­rewarding nature as play, and since its very goal is to cap-
ture and reward attention, it can succeed to the point of compulsive-
ness. In the days before professionalized art and mechanized repro-
duction, we served as one another’s social entertainment systems, 
and if we can now pick up an iPod or a novel, we still do so to enjoy 
engaging with other minds. And despite video and sound recording 
we still respond more intensely if we form part of a large audience 
that listens, claps, sings, sways, dances, laughs, or cries together.
	
Each of the main modes of art builds social coordination in its 
own way from the foundation laid by protoconversation. Just as the 
impulses within a single nervous system must mesh with millisec-
ond accuracy if a creature is to move smoothly toward its goal, so 
creatures working in close cooperation need split-­second timing and 
flawless synchrony to pursue joint aims ef­fi­ciently.22 But organisms 
with open minds can attend at any moment to a vast number of fea-
tures of the external world or their own internal states. In order to 
prepare for action toward common goals, individuals need to syn-
chronize actions and check intentions. Close cooperators like mo-
nogamous gibbons or grebes signal back and forth in the patterns 
of arboreal song or aquatic dance to con­firm their joint purpose. 
In the same way in the time-­based arts of human music and dance, 
we synchronize feeling and movement, learn how to coordinate in 
time and tone, and draw comfort and strength from our physical 

On the Origin of Stories
106
and emotional attunement.23 In visual art the architecture, costume, 
textiles, pottery, sculpture, and iconographic traditions of a group—
not to mention body adornments like hairstyles, scarification, and 
tattoos—serve as an omnipresent reinforcement of shared norms.24 
And through pretend play and fiction we learn to try out the posi-
tions of others, we attune ourselves spontaneously to the shifting 
emotions of an unfolding story, and we encounter story after story 
that embodies prosocial values in memorable, emotionally compel-
ling images, actions, and out­comes (for more detail, see Part 3).
	
Art, even if it diverts energy from immediate survival or repro-
ductive needs, can improve cooperation within a group enough for 
the group to compete successfully against others with less inclina-
tion to art. We should think in the first place not of art galleries 
or concert halls (though these too raise community con­fi­dence and 
lower alienation), but of chants, drums, dance, body-­markings, cos-
tumes, banners, and the like.25* But art also simply fosters more in-
tense sociality within the group, before it enters into competition or 
even active con­flict with other groups. Individuals more motivated 
to catch the attention and stir the responses of others through care-
fully designed appeals to shared preferences, and individuals more 
motivated to respond to these appeals, are more likely to want and 
to be able to form more tightly coordinated and therefore more suc-
cessful groups.
In the case of chimpanzees celebrating community through excited 
cries or matching movements, we recognize both analogy and ho-
mology. Like us, our closest evolutionary relatives can also engage in 
flex­i­ble cooperation against others and derive a rich emotional re-
sponse from harmonizing attention among themselves through pat-
tern and rhythm, chant and dance. Human chant and dance still fire 
up group spirit. Historian William McNeill, who himself recalls the 
“sense of pervasive well-­being” that he experienced in the army dril-
lyard in 1941—“a strange sense of personal enlargement; a sort of 
* David La Chapelle’s 2005 documentary, Rize, on the South Central Los Angeles dance 
forms known as clowning and krumping, invented in the 1990s, offers a striking recent ex-
ample of the power of art to bind groups, especially in competition with other groups.

	
Art and Attention
	
107
swelling out, becoming bigger than life, thanks to par­tic­i­pa­tion in 
collective ritual”—has shown how human so­ci­e­ties “since the begin-
ning of recorded history have used synchronized movement to cre-
ate harmony and cohesion within groups.”26 The day after September 
11, 2001, the U.S. Congress assembled on the steps of the Capitol to 
sing “God Bless America.” Song and dance “rouse the emotions and 
stimulate like nothing else the production of opiates to bring about 
states of elation and euphoria” and a swelling sense of kinship with 
those around us.27
	
Humans can fine-­tune the emotional impact of shared attention 
on cooperation. We can draw on explicit shared models, exemplars, 
and admonitions, on myth, stories, and ritual reenactments. As 
Kwame Anthony Appiah writes, “The Iliad and the Odyssey, the Epic 
of Gilgamesh, the Tale of Genji, the Ananse stories I grew up with in 
Asante, ­weren’t just read or recited; they were discussed, appraised, 
referred to in ev­eryday life.”28 Stories not only make norms explicit, 
Surma girls, Ethiopia: art as play with pattern. From an early age Surma 
children imitate their elders’ fanciful body-painting in chalk and earth. Best 
friends often show their close bonds by painting their faces with identical 
designs: art as social cohesion.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

On the Origin of Stories
108
but also invite us to attend, rouse emotions amplified by our social 
attunement, and solve what economists call the problem of common 
knowledge (I will do something only if you will, and vice versa: but 
how do I know you will, and how do I know that you know that I 
will?) by making us feel that we share these values and react in much 
the same way.29 Humans who play together stay together, like the 
Didinga ­women of Uganda singing as they work—“We mold a pot 
as our mothers did”30—and af­firming and reinforcing, in the plea­
sure of song, their commitment to their tribe and tradition.
	
Stephen Jay Gould reported feeling overwhelmed when he sang in 
a full performance of Berlioz’s Requiem. Conceding that his reaction 
could conceivably be explained by neurobiology or sociobiology, he 
insisted that neither could ever capture “anything of importance 
about the meaning of that experience.”31 An objective explanation 
necessarily differs from a subjective sensation, but surely it can only 
add to rather than detract from the emotional impact of the experi-
ence to view it in the light of the ecstatic carnival choruses of chim-
panzees, frenziedly hooting, drumming, and running or swinging 
about together—or in the steady glow of our own need for shared 
attention, from the moment we are born, and the emotional charge 
that nature has therefore built, on top of social sympathy in other 
mammals, into human shared attention.
Shaping Attention: Art and Status
Sharing attention makes all the difference to the social consequences 
of art, but it also opens new routes for individual consequences. In-
dividuals can bene­fit from social life both by belonging to successful 
groups and by maintaining or raising their sta­tus or prestige within 
their groups.32 The social advantages of art involve both: getting 
along (improved cooperation, and therefore par­tic­i­pa­tion in more 
successful groups) and getting ahead (improved sta­tus within one’s 
own group).33
	
Our human de­pen­dence on cooperation does not eliminate com-
petition. Cooperation allows many bene­fits that we cannot obtain 
individually, but we will then compete for those bene­fits: indeed, as 
Darwin pointed out, “competition should be most severe between 

	
Art and Attention
	
109
allied forms, which fill nearly the same place in the economy of na-
ture.”34
	
Social hierarchy relaxes the tension between cooperation and 
competition by reducing con­flict over precedence—expensive in 
terms of time, energy, and injury. Since after a hierarchy has been 
established those of higher sta­tus have better access to resources and 
hence usually enjoy greater reproductive success, the desire for sta­tus 
often intensifies over evolutionary time.35 Humans naturally pursue 
sta­tus with ferocity: we all relentlessly, if unconsciously, try to raise 
our own standing by impressing peers, and naturally, if uncon-
sciously, evaluate others in terms of their standing.36
	
Yet because no one prefers inferior positions, we often cooperate 
to resist hierarchy. Hunter-­gatherer so­ci­e­ties manage this well, since 
without agriculture no one can easily accumulate resources or con-
centrate power. All known hunter-­gatherer so­ci­e­ties remain more or 
less egalitarian, not because their members lack the desire for higher 
sta­tus, but because none of them wants lower sta­tus and because 
they can act together to ensure that no one else establishes ascen-
dancy. Although they notice differences in strength and skills, they 
use ridicule, ostracism, and even expulsion to thwart any individual’s 
attempt to earn special treatment for special qualities, in a strategy 
that anthropologists call reverse dominance.37
	
But in so­ci­e­ties with agriculture, surpluses can be hoarded and 
disparities grow. Status differences can deepen to produce chiefdoms, 
kingdoms, and empires, until people slowly discover new routes to 
reverse dominance—riots, revolutions, representative government—
in order to resist the steepest hierarchies. These routes tend to prove 
serpentine, for where resources can be accumulated, even attempts 
at ruthlessly redistributing them still result in sta­tus differences. Sta-
tus continues to matter more to humans than to many other species.
	
In most species, sta­tus correlates simply with size, but in primates 
it can be attained in other ways, especially through the capacity to 
earn social cap­ital, through grooming, for instance, or through the 
ability to interpret and relate to others and to cultivate alliances, es-
pecially with those of higher sta­tus or prestige in socially valued 
qualities.38 De Waal reports that the chimpanzee Dandy, when he was 
the youngest male in the Arnhem chimpanzee colony,

On the Origin of Stories
110
did not always gain access to food if housed at night with the 
other adult males. The others would threaten him away.
	 After a few months the keeper reported that in the twenty 
minutes or so between entering the cage and feeding time, 
Dandy was always unusually playful and often engaged the 
whole male band in play. Arriving with food, the keeper 
would find them romping around, piling straw on each other 
and “laughing” [hoarse guttural sounds associated with 
play]. In this relaxed atmosphere Dandy would eat undis-
turbed, side by side with the others.39
This example, incidentally, aptly answers Miller’s contention that so-
cial selection has negligible force compared with sexual selection.40
	
The more dominant a primate, the more attention others direct 
toward him or her. Primatologist Michael Chance recognized that 
subordinates pay disproportionate attention to dominants, glancing 
at them far more than the dominants at the subordinates. He de­fined 
dominance in terms of being the focus of attention of subordinates, 
and proposed that the social or­ga­ni­za­tion of attention has been a 
crucial factor in human evolution.41 He observed that hierarchy es-
tablishes itself rapidly among children, whose sta­tus can be ranked 
accurately according to the frequency with which they are looked 
at  by three other children simultaneously.42 The technology has 
changed, and the degree of political power, but the special attention 
earned by Elizabeth II or Bill Clinton or Bill Gates is little different 
from that earned by Elizabeth I or Ramses I or II.
	
We all seek attention as a mark of the acceptance, respect, and 
even sta­tus it betokens. But attention is at a premium. Each of us 
needs to attend to what matters for us now. The emotions sensitively 
track changes in our environment, awarding a positive or negative 
valence to events (the smell of food or smoke, say), overriding what-
ever we might be doing and ordering us to “pay attention now!”43 We 
do not want to have our attention diverted by others unless the dis-
traction proves its worth.
	
So not only do we seek to win others’ attention; we also resist our 
own being commandeered by others without good reason. A chim-
panzee uncertain that it can gain rank through force or threat “can 

	
Art and Attention
	
111
often improve its sta­tus by other attention-­getting devices—doing 
tricks and ‘showing off.’ Children do the same thing, often accompa-
nied by cries of ‘Look at me.’”44 But children also soon learn about 
others’ emotional resistance to the undeserved usurpation of atten-
tion, and our consequent dislike of showoffs or bores.
	
In conversation we do not typically offer information to others in 
the hope that they will eventually offer us some in return. Instead, we 
often seek sta­tus through what we say, according to its relevance and 
value to others. We may impart information in conversation less as a 
ser­vice than in order to be accorded sta­tus by listeners; we “reward 
one another in the currency of sta­tus.”45
	
In spontaneous conversation, we earn acceptance, respect, and 
sta­tus for the relevance to the situation of what we say. Often we may 
do little more than establish or maintain polite sociality or relaxed 
camaraderie. In art, by contrast, we work at forms specially elabo-
rated to hold attention in ways that appeal enough to override the 
criterion of relevance. No musician or writer can know just who 
will hear his potential hit tune or read her blockbuster, or where. 
Art’s special capacity to earn and hold attention despite the diverse 
situations of audiences makes it a potent means of earning the cur-
rency of sta­tus. Michelangelo had commissions from popes and 
princes, and died with as much gold under his bed as in a duke’s 
stronghold.46 Shakespeare was able to buy one of the largest houses 
in Stratford and a family coat of arms. Both attracted attention in 
their day and, four or five centuries later, earn the attention of mil-
lions ev­ery day. Only religious leaders like Christ, Buddha, and Mo-
hammed keep a stron­ger and ­longer hold on more minds. And in 
more mundane currency, J. K. Rowling has captured the imagination 
of enough people in ten years of writing fiction to earn more than 
Queen Elizabeth II.
	
We crave acceptance and, if possible, respect, prestige, and sta­tus 
because of the difference they can make. Since the attention art can 
command offers both a first payout of sta­tus and a base for later divi­
dends, artists can be strongly driven by the desire for wide, high, or 
long-­lasting attention. As H. G. Wells observed, “A mad millionaire 
who commissioned masterpieces to burn would find it impossible 
to buy them. Scarcely any artist will hesitate in the choice between 

On the Origin of Stories
112
money and attention.”47 The tradition from Horace’s “Exegi monu-
mentum aere perennius” (I have erected a monument more durable 
than brass) through Shakespeare’s “Not marble nor the gilded mon-
uments / Shall outlive my powerful rhyme” to Pushkin’s “Ya pamyat-
nik sebe vozdvig nerukotvorniy” (I raised a monument to myself not 
made by hand) testifies to artists’ craving for attention and sta­tus not 
merely during their lifetime, but for long after, a kind of earthly im-
mortality. If seeking posthumous canonization seems unrelated to 
any possible biological advantage, it is “no more surprising that we 
crave respect when there is no reward than that we should have sex 
when it won’t lead to babies.”48 In fact artists may earn a very con-
crete biological reward: if they continue to reap respect even after 
death, their descendants, and hence their own genes, can bene­fit di-
rectly from the enduring prestige of their art.
If art can engage the attention of the artist, its appeal to our com-
mon appetite for pattern may also attract the attention of others. But 
one person’s ploy for attention can be rapidly redeployed by others, 
because we all seek the sta­tus that attention confers, and because we 
all have an innate capacity for imitation. One of our main cues for 
social learning is “Imitate the successful.” We also have a strong dis-
position to conformism, which enables us to learn from what others 
have discovered and to operate within a cohesive group: our other 
key heuristic is “Imitate the most common.”49 A new individual ini-
tiative therefore can become first a model, then a fashion, then a tra-
dition, and eventually even a jealously enforced norm, especially if it 
finds itself co-­opted by the powerful social cohesive of religion. To 
this we turn next: to the perplexing nexus of art and religion.

	
113
8
FROM TRADITION TO INNOVATION
Adaptations can have multiple functions. Human hands 
evolved from primate forelimbs that began to be used not only for 
locomotion, for scurrying up trees or along branches, but also for 
reaching for fruit and for grooming. Our common ancestors with 
chimpanzees also used their hands to knuckle-­walk, brachiate, and 
fight. As our immediate ancestors became bipedal, they could no 
­longer easily walk on all fours or swing through trees, but their hands 
evolved to manipulate objects finely, to wield or throw them as weap-
ons, to create and use complex tools, and to point and signal. Like 
hands, art has multiple functions, some re­flect­ing its origins in long-
­established animal behavior like play or social coordination, others 
leading toward functions hitherto unknown.
	
Some of the older functions re­flect art’s once intimate alliance 
with religion. In Western so­ci­e­ties we now tend to think of art in 
secular terms. Even in the West, that was not the case when cathe-
drals towered over towns, when stained glass enshrined society’s 
most hallowed stories and illuminated manuscripts augmented the 
preciousness of sacred scripture. For the distinguished film scholar 
David Bordwell, preoccupied with a recent art form, the close asso-
ciation of art and religion may at first seem questionable.1 But for 
thousands of generations art has not only continually served religion 
but has also deepened its impact on human minds and so­ci­e­ties 
through religion’s power to in­ten­sify intragroup cooperation and in-
tergroup competition.2 We cannot understand the force of art in the 
past, and in many small-­scale so­ci­e­ties even its force in the present, 
without understanding its close relationship to religion and the re-

On the Origin of Stories
114
sultant pressure to conformity. We cannot understand the changing 
functions of art in more modern times, its increasing association 
with creativity and innovation rather than with conformity and tra-
dition, without taking note of its past. And without recognizing art’s 
relation to religion we cannot understand why it remains linked with 
an emotion like elevation—which modern psychology has only be-
gun to take seriously,3 despite its importance in religion and art—or 
why, as the West became increasingly secular, religions of art arose in 
Romanticism at the end of the eigh­teenth century, in Symbolism at 
the end of the nineteenth, and in Modernism at the beginning of the 
twentieth.
Art and Religion
Art’s power to strengthen social cohesion, discussed in Chapter 7, ac-
counts for the close connection between art and religion in cultures 
throughout history and in explanations of art. Many object to apply-
ing the Western term “art” to objects and practices in other cultures 
that see them in a religious rather than an artistic context. And many 
simply maintain that art grew out of religion.4
	
This claim seems highly unlikely. Although archeological evidence 
is inevitably patchy, no one has found signs of grave ritual, the earli-
est plausible hints of religion so far discovered, much older than 
90,000 years ago.5 But ocher seems to have been used for body deco-
ration for 120,000 years or perhaps twice as long, Acheulean hand-­
axes have been re­fined beyond practical needs and in impractical 
display sizes for hundreds of thousands of years, and chanting, 
drumming, dance, and song, which have analogues among chim-
panzees or gibbons, may have formed part of the human repertoire 
for even ­longer. Art appears to have long preceded religion.
	
Indeed those who claim that art derives from religion do not ex-
plain how it could do so. If a group of early humans had begun to 
believe in supernatural forces, why would and how could they then 
have invented art to serve the purposes of religion? Why would they 
have thought of art as a next step, if there had not already been ways 
of embellishing surfaces and altering shapes and producing sounds 
and movements that elicited a deep response in human eyes and 

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
115
ears? Religion, on the other hand, needs art as a precursor. With-
out the existence of stories that diverge from the true, without the 
first fictions, religion could not have arisen. Religion depends on the 
power of story.
	
We crave one another’s attention, but no one savors stories con­
fined to the banal and expected: we know we would be better off at-
tending to the real world. To merit attention, stories select the strik-
ing, unusual characters or events or both. Recent research shows we 
remember best those stories with characters that violate our cate-
goric expectations, crossing one animal kind with another, or com-
bining human and animal, or separating the psychological from its 
usual physical constraints.6 Even now we earn attention in stories by 
confounding categories, in aliens, mutants, robots, and vampires. 
And creatures with psychological powers but not limited to normal 
physical laws—spirits or gods—have been central to story from as 
far back as we can tell.
	
We see our own agency as our prototype of cause: we want to 
move something, and we do.7 As we will find in more detail in chap-
ters to come, we make an early and lasting distinction between agents 
and nonagents, between the animate and the inanimate, and we are 
prone to overat­tri­bute agency: it is safer to suppose a bush a bear 
than the other way around.8 And because we pay such close attention 
to one kind of agent, our own species, we have evolved an under-
standing of false belief—a capacity to see that others, or we ourselves, 
may conceive a situation differently from the way it really is.9 Be-
cause we understand false belief, because we can appreciate that we 
might not know the full situation, we seek the whole story; we want 
an explanation that sees behind the visible. Spiritual agents as un-
seen causes not only make stories memorable but also appear to 
promise the extra explanation we have accidentally evolved to seek.
To retrace art and religion, we need to keep in mind a distinction 
long central to human understanding: the distinction between the 
physical and the nonphysical—the psychological, in modern terms, 
or the spiritual, in older ones. In one sense, this distinction is crum-
bling as science investigates the intricate connection between mind 
and brain. In another sense, cognitive anthropologists and develop-

On the Origin of Stories
116
mental psychologists now explore it in new ways as a key to human 
apprehension of the world, even before language. New techniques 
make it possible to study how infant minds distinguish the ontologi-
cal domains of inanimate and animate. They bring different expecta-
tions to and draw different inferences from the two different do-
mains, called “folk physics” and “folk psychology” in one set of terms, 
“theory of things” and “theory of mind” in another.10
	
From this and other recent find­ings, sig­nifi­cant implications fol-
low for seeing art in relation to religion and ritual. Art has no imme-
diate physical function, but only an immediate psychical one. A dec-
oration on a bowl does not change the bowl’s physical capacity but 
does change its psychological appeal; a harvest song does not by it-
self gather crops but alters the attitude of the harvesters; a story does 
not bring about its own outcome but causes an audience to feel and 
respond in some ways as if they had witnessed the events.
	
In the initial and default case, across the world, art affects human 
beings. But many peoples believe that it will also affect other kinds of 
beings, unseen spirits or gods, presumed to respond in ways similar 
enough to human spirits that they, too, will be moved—and moved, 
perhaps, to intervene for, or not intervene against, those who have 
made the artwork or who accord it respect. Two points need to be 
stressed here. First, the impact on human beings is there from the 
first: songs, shapes, and stories are after all designed for human atten-
tion. Second, the impact on imagined other beings also depends on 
art, on the prior existence and power both of story and of the spiri-
tual forces it conjures up.
	
Because we are moved by song, images, and stories, we may sup-
pose that these unseen forces will also be moved. Trobriand Island-
ers, for example, decorate their canoe prows to attract and hold the 
attention of humans and spirits—who they assume perceive as hu-
mans do.11 And because we can envisage the future vividly enough to 
become anxious about uncertainties, we may be ready to move the 
unseen spirits to act more in our favor, or less in our disfavor, with 
the help of the art that so effectively catches our attention and stirs 
our response.12
	
Even if we can’t see spirits, they may we watching us at any mo-
ment. A societywide belief in such supernatural surveillance can help 

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
117
solve the problems of cooperation inherent in any individualized so-
ciety.13 According to the anthropologist Malidoma Patrice Somé, el-
ders in his own Dagara culture (West Africa) say that the “real police 
in the village is Spirit that sees ev­ery­body. To do wrong is to insult the 
spirit realm. Whoever does this is immediately punished by Spirit.”14 
As recent research has shown, large-­scale cooperation can be fragile 
in the absence of punishment yet relatively easily established and 
maintained with punishment.15 A human society uni­fied by religion, 
especially if it believes in supernatural vigilance and punishment, 
can therefore usually solve problems of cooperation more readily 
than another without.16 Unreal beliefs in unseen forces acting for or 
against one’s group, and for or against oneself insofar as one sup-
ports or contravenes the collective good, are much more likely to 
motivate action than are modestly real beliefs.17 Since religion has 
much stron­ger effects on social cohesion than art alone can pro-
duce, and since cohesion amplifies the advantages of sociality, reli-
gion tends to appropriate to itself much of the power of earthly art.
	
If religion strengthens social cooperation, a society will seek to en-
sure that its members genuinely commit to shared beliefs. One way 
of doing this can be through what biologists have studied in animals 
as “costly signaling,” behavioral signals that incur high costs. Costly 
signals can be used in sexual competition but can also have a power-
ful impact in many species in reinforcing group cooperation.18 If a 
signal has low cost (as in the case of a mere display, promise, or 
claim), it can be easy to fake. High cost in terms of time, effort, or 
resources can serve as a guarantee of allegiance (only those genuinely 
committed to the group will be prepared to undertake what the rit-
ual requires), and biological and historical human case studies show 
that groups that cement their cohesion by costly ritual can outcom-
pete groups without such ritual.19
	
Costly signaling theory alone does not explain why such a costly 
activity as religious ritual should take an artistic form in humans. 
After all, ritualization of practices with high cost but little sensory 
appeal—prostration, prayer, recitation, offerings, tithes, fasting, sac­
ri­fice, mutilation, pilgrimage—can also serve as cohesive social sig-
nals. But ritual with art has several advantages over ritual without. 
Art may increase the time and energy costs in ritual preparation, and 

On the Origin of Stories
118
therefore the signal value of the commitment: cathedrals can take a 
century or more to build. Art promises plea­sure, commands atten-
tion, stirs the senses and emotions, and arouses pride and awe at the 
effects produced and the mastery exhibited. The very improbability 
of artistic practices—the fact that they could hardly be generated by 
chance—makes art a distinct marker, a contrast to the natural and to 
other rival groups, and hence in both respects a source of pride.
	
Art begins in engaging human attention but can readily be de-
ployed both to engage the attention of putative spirits and to en-
sure social cooperation at the human level, whether in the ser­vice of 
the gods or not.20 Traditional art can be far from nonutilitarian: it 
can have what seems the highest practical purpose possible, securing 
both the goodwill of the spiritual world and the group’s focus on 
these powerful unseen agents. And as we have just seen, this “practi-
cality” is not an illusion: case studies con­firm that the advantages of 
social cohesion can easily repay the effort invested in ritual practice 
and outweigh the disadvantages of belief in nonexistent spirits.21
Religion and ritual cannot explain the origin of art, but once art be-
gan, traditions of artistic elaboration, including ritual, could be co-­
opted for social cohesion. This could become a powerful sustainer of 
art and indeed perhaps its main function, even in strict evolutionary 
terms, in many small-­scale so­ci­e­ties without specialist artists. Indeed, 
the very power of art to move the spirit—a Dogon sculptor reported 
that he occasionally created a work “that made ev­ery­one who saw 
it ‘stop breathing’ for a moment”22—makes art natural to associate 
with religion and ritual. Art has played a central function in human 
lives not only in itself but also in giving rise to religion and then rein-
forcing religion’s power to cement group cohesion by augmenting 
the impact of ritual.
	
Yet even in traditional so­ci­e­ties art also persists in modes closer to 
play or trade than ritual. Tribal so­ci­e­ties distinguish between invio-
lable core myths and stories that they call, like the Kuranko of Sierra 
Leone, “play” (tan) stories, made-­up stories, which offer room for in­
dividual initiative and invention.23 Especially as so­ci­e­ties expand and 
diversify, as the division of labor spreads, and as other cultural forms 
develop to solve problems of cooperation in other ways (improved 

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
119
communication, trade, policing, and justice, for instance) and it be­
comes possible to tolerate a greater range of religious options, art 
can become professionalized and secularized as well as communal-
ized and spiritualized. At its highest, even secular art may retain reli-
gious art’s sense of offering not just intense interest but also deep 
explanation and exaltation, and of drawing upon a spiritual power 
somehow linking us through our artistic heritage. Or art may remain 
closer to a less exalted, less spiritualized, more playful form of catch-
ing attention, in popular and folk arts and crafts. Or in a highly 
­specialized world it may lead even to avant-­garde art, to questioning 
and debunking traditional values and traditional ways of earning 
­attention.
Art and Creativity
I have proposed that (1) art begins as solitary and shared patterned 
cognitive play whose self-­rewarding nature reshapes human minds, 
and that it intensifies its impact by raising (2) the sta­tus of individual 
artists and (3) our general inclination to cooperate closely with one 
another, with or without religion. Out of these three functions, I fur-
ther propose, there gradually emerges another major function of art, 
at odds with the social-­cohesive role of traditional art: (4) creativity. 
That art leads to creativity will seem obvious, almost axiomatic or 
tautological, to modern sensibilities—though much less so in tradi-
tional so­ci­e­ties, in which art appears to embody time-­honored, god-­
given, or ancestor-­approved forms.24 But that nature has evolved art 
to create creativity will seem anything but obvious.
	
Creativity may seem to us like a purpose of life and especially 
of art, but it cannot be a purpose of evolution, merely a surprising 
consequence of the way evolution’s blind logic has worked on Earth. 
Evolution has no foresight or purpose, it does not aim at creativity or 
even diversity, and in natural selection no future usefulness counts.25 
We may appreciate the scores of thousands of orchid species, but na-
ture could get by without them. We may value the wide diversity of 
styles of European painting in the 1910s—Cubism, Futurism, Vor­
ticism, Constructivism, residual academicism, Impressionism, Fau-
vism, and so on—but humanity could have survived had they never 

On the Origin of Stories
120
been invented. Yet evolution spawns not only diversity but also com-
plexity, intelligence, and, in art, at last, creativity.
	
Steven Pinker observes that despite its competitive basis natural 
selection does not forbid cooperation, but only makes it a dif­fi­cult 
engineering problem.26 Creativity poses a still more challenging en-
gineering task. Creativity for what? By what criteria?
	
Most novelty matters little. Every move we make is in some sense 
new, yet unlikely to be of lasting moment.27 But the steady logic of 
evolution allows for the accumulation of successful novelty. A system 
that generates blind variations on existing forms, tests them against 
their environment, generates further variations from those that have 
survived so far, and continues the pro­cess indefi­nitely, gradually 
­accumulates lineages of pro­gres­sively more successful design. Note 
that designs need not remain successful, since even apart from un-
predictable catastrophe the new variations in each round, in art as 
in  nature, themselves alter the environment in which all forms 
­contend.
Evolution itself has evolved in numerous ways.28 Not least, it has 
given rise to subsidiary pro­cesses of “blind variation and selective re-
tention” or subcycles of “generate-­test-­regenerate,” especially valu-
able when the environment proves predictably unpredictable, chang-
ing in ways too fast to be tracked by selection on genes.29 One such 
second-­order pro­cess is the human immune system, built to cope 
with the swift evolution of pathogens that can reproduce through 
many generations in a day. Another is the overproduction and selec-
tive retention of synaptic connections within the growing human 
brain, a pro­cess that allows it to be fine-­tuned by the unforeseeable 
particulars of individual experience.30 Such systems of evolutionary 
pro­cesses built by evolution have been called “Darwin machines.”31 
They cannot find the right answer beforehand: there is no single right 
form of life, no single right antibody, no single right synaptic link, 
no single right move.32 But they can generate possibilities that the 
environment tests. Survivors generate new variations and face new 
rounds of tests, so that even without preplanning, success accumu-
lates.

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
121
	
Art constitutes another Darwin machine, an evolutionary subsys-
tem effectively designed, in this case, for creativity. Art shows evi-
dence of good design to generate and accumulate successful novelty:
	
1.	 “Darwin machines” or evolutionary pro­cesses depend on the 
blind generation of variation. Randomness, nature’s way of exploring 
new possibilities, seems an intrinsic part of brain function.33
	
2.	 But without selective retention, randomness alone could not 
generate creativity that accumulates in force: as in dreams, a cascade of 
new ideas would take and lose shape almost without trace. Art involves 
not just private ideas but patterned external forms, sound, surface, 
shape, story, durable or at least replicable, like the patterns of melodies 
and rhymes that make music and verse memorable and transmissible. 
Pure imagination, on the other hand, alters unstably and irretrievably as 
brain activation spreads.
	
3.	 Because art appeals to our cognitive preferences for pattern, it is 
self-­motivating: we carry innate incentives to engage in artistic activity.
	
4.	 A testing as well as a generating mechanism operates within art-­
makers’ minds. The low cost of testing increases our opportunities to 
re­fine what we do through online feedback. And unlike all or almost all 
other species, we have a capacity for self-­monitoring and rehearsal in 
order to achieve desired results.34
	
5.	 Since we pay close attention to others, art can earn interest and 
esteem and hence offers an incentive to override the stopping routines 
in other goal-­directed activities. You do not continue to kill your prey 
once it is dead, but if you know that your work can impress an audience 
you may keep honing your Acheulean hand-­ax or your sonnet and see-
ing new possibilities as you do so.
	
6.	 Because art involves external forms, the testing mechanism op­
erates also in the minds of other humans, in terms of their interest. At-
tention provides the selective mechanism of art. If a work of art fails 
to earn attention, it dies. If it succeeds, it can last even for millennia. 
	Criticism can smart, but art is selected against much less brutally than 
attempts at creativity in the wider, nonhuman world, from making new 
potions to launching new pro­jec­tiles (more people were killed design-
ing the V-­2 than in the rocket’s attacks). Nevertheless external audiences 

On the Origin of Stories
122
provide art with an ef­fi­cient testing mechanism undistorted by the self-­
deceiving biases of the artist.
	
7.	 Unlike other species, we can imitate closely and therefore follow 
established forms. Crucially, we need to imitate in order to innovate. 
Building on what came before underlies all creativity, in biology and 
culture. Starting again from scratch wastes too much accumulated ef-
fort: far better to recombine existing design successes. Even adopting a 
high mutation rate, changing many features at once, would rapidly dis-
mantle successful design.35
	
8.	 Established artistic forms reduce invention costs by posing well-­
de­fined problems and offering partial solutions.
	
9.	 The existence of established forms also reduces audience atten-
tion and comprehension costs, since familiar forms carry both an open 
invitation (“Come and join the play of art”) and a formal or generic set 
of instructions, a prefocusing of expectations (“Listen to this song/son-
net/sonata/story”).36
	
10.	 In a system designed to secure attention, habituation (the loss of 
attention through the persistence or repetition of a stimulus) encour-
ages innovation.37 Since repeating exactly the same thing over and over 
again guarantees it will lose its impact, art faces a consistent pressure 
for novelty. Over generations traditions hone their attention-­grabbing 
power (the symphony, the murder mystery, the computer game), but 
new successes raise the bar for still newer entrants and reward still fur-
ther novelty.
	
11.	 We appreciate even minor variations within established forms as 
worthy of attention and response. With our senses highly tuned to ba-
sic patterns, we enjoy repetitions and variations on a theme in art as in 
play.38
	
For all these reasons, art ef­fi­ciently generates cumulative novelty. 
A Lamarckian or instructionist model of evolution envisions the en-
vironment as somehow instructing organisms to fit it, as if there 
were some foreknown optimum. A Darwinian system, by contrast, 
remains open, unpredictable, and free. It cannot presuppose a best 
option, an ideal fit, a goal that can be precisely determined before-
hand. It gropes in the unknown in the vastness of possibility space. 
Organisms blindly produce—from within themselves, and not from 

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
123
the environment39—new possibilities from which they select and on 
which they build. In art understood as a Darwin machine, works are 
not somehow created to fit the cultural environment. Instead they 
are generated, unpredictably, in the minds or actions of artists, and 
selected first by them in accordance with their intuitions about their 
social world, and then by this world itself.40
	
Art is superbly designed for creativity, but not for generating ma-
terially useful new moves. If cognitive stimulation, social cohesion, 
and individual sta­tus were not already in place as the start of art, 
then a “useless” creativity in itself would be in­suf­fi­cient to establish 
art as a behavior. But with these individual and group functions al-
ready operative, then art’s additional function of creativity can also 
develop gradually, especially as traditions compound and lineages 
lengthen.
	
Individual artistic moves have slight practical consequence in 
comparison with discoveries in technology or science. But they exist 
robustly enough to extend the adaptive functions of art. And art’s 
creativity can have additional consequences that over time become 
sig­nifi­cant even in solely material terms.
	
Art has long provided incentives for social exchange. Ocher em-
ployed in the first body decoration was traded over 120,000 years 
ago. Early long-­distance trade, when transport was still dif­fi­cult, as in 
the Natufian culture of the Near East shortly before 10,000 years ago, 
was in small prestige items with a high ratio of value to mass, like 
jewelry, tapestry, and other “splendid and trifling” goods, in Edward 
Gibbon’s phrase about later antiquity.41 The modern book, music, 
film, and recreational software industries drive vast economies. Art 
has repeatedly provided incentives for discovery, in materials, pro­
cesses, products: in weaving and pottery, for instance, in the inven-
tion of new techniques, looms, furnaces, dyes, glazes, and textiles. 
Art can encourage creative habits of mind like drawing or model-­
building that help technological discovery, and itself bene­fits from 
technology (fiction from print, drama from film, music from record-
ing and electronic amplification, cartooning from computer anima-
tion) in a positive feedback loop.42
	
For us, artistic creativity offers a good in itself. The diversity of 
forms of music, design, and story across cultures and times, and 

On the Origin of Stories
124
the achievement of the most outstanding works—those that take the 
breath away, in the Dogon sculptor’s terms, or make the hairs on the 
spine stand on end, in A. E. Housman’s—amply justify themselves. 
And art intensifies creativity throughout human culture.
	
Art develops in us habits of imaginative exploration, so that we 
take the world as not closed and given, but open and to be shaped on 
our own terms. In and through art, we readily turn the ac­tual around 
within the much larger space of the possible, the conditional, and the 
impossible. Art opens up new dimensions of possibility space and 
populates it with imaginative particulars. To revise Lewis Mumford: 
“If man had not encountered dragons and hippogriffs in stories, he 
might not have conceived of the atom.”43
	
By fostering our inclination to think about possible worlds, art al-
lows us to see the ac­tual world from new vantage points. It therefore 
enables science, both in general, as Robert Root-­Bernstein has per-
suasively argued (“artistic thinking produces possibilities that scien-
tists can evaluate for efficacy in the here and now”),44 and in many 
spe­cific instances. Among the instances Root-­Bernstein cites in re-
cent science are anamorphosis in art—distorting a shape in painting 
so that it can be readily seen from only one point, most famously in 
the skull in Hans Holbein the Younger’s The Ambassadors—which 
has helped biologists D’Arcy Thompson in On Growth and Form and 
Julian Huxley in Problems of Relative Growth understand evolution-
ary and embryological pro­cesses as anamorphic distortions; pointil-
lism, in Georges Seurat and others, which sowed the seeds for com-
puter pixillation; and the technique of false-­coloring objects, which 
began with Émile Bernard, Paul Gauguin, and the Fauvists at the end 
of the nineteenth and the start of the twentieth centuries, and which 
scientists now use “to emphasize inobvious elements of data.”45
	
Art builds our con­fi­dence, at the individual and the group levels, 
in shaping our own destinies. In art we can choose simply what 
moves us. Slumdwellers or impoverished sharecroppers can af­firm 
with a picture on the wall that they can shape at least a part of their 
lives to please.46 In the dark days of Hitler, psychologist Wolfgang 
Köhler wrote a newspaper article against the purges of the univer­
sities. He and friends spent the night after its publication playing 
chamber music together, in an avowal of ultimate value and order 

	
From Tradition to Innovation
	
125
and control, as they waited for the fatal knock on the door—which, 
luckily, did not come.47 The sense of individual and collective mas-
tery that art provides—in composition, performance, and the mere 
comprehension of its complex patterns—stands at the opposite pole 
of experience from the will-­sapping dysfunctionality of learned 
helplessness, the belief that we have no control over our situation.48
	
By refining and strengthening our sociality, by making us readier 
to use the resources of the imagination, and by raising our con­fi­
dence in shaping life on our own terms, art fundamentally alters our 
relation to our world. The survival consequences may be dif­fi­cult to 
tabulate, but they are profound. We have long felt that art matters to 
us. It does, objectively as well as subjectively. By focusing our atten-
tion away from the given to a world of shared, humanly created pos-
sibility, art makes all the difference.

 

part 3
E V O L U T I O N  A N D  F I C T I O N
	
“Suppose we get the Professor to tell us a story.” 
	
Bruno ­adopted the idea with enthusiasm. “Please do,” he cried 
eagerly. “Sumfin about tigers—and bumble-bees—and robin 
red-breasts, oo knows!” 
	
“Why should you always have live things in stories?” said the 
Professor. “Why ­don’t you have events, or circumstances?” 
	
“Oh, please invent a story like that!” cried Bruno. 
	
The Professor began flu­ently enough. “Once a coincidence was 
taking a walk with a little accident, and they met an explanation— 
a very old explanation—so old that it was quite doubled up, and 
looked more like a conundrum—” He broke off suddenly. 
	
“Please go on!” both children exclaimed. 
	
The Professor made a candid confession. “It’s a very dif­fi­cult sort 
to invent, I find. Suppose Bruno tells one first.” 
	
Bruno was only too happy to adopt the suggestion. 
	
“Once there were a Pig, and a Accordion, and two jars of 
Orange-marmalade—”
Lewis Carroll, Sylvia and Bruno Concluded (1893)


	
129
9
ART, NARRATIVE, FICTION
Why do we spend so much of our time telling one another sto-
ries that neither side believes?
	
To explain fiction fully we cannot merely explain narrative. First, 
because narrative depends heavily on understanding events, and 
event sequences, before we cast them into narrative. As we will see, 
we share much of that understanding with other species, but it takes 
important new forms in humans.
	
Second, because narrative requires our unique capacity for 
metarepresentation: not only to make and understand representa-
tions, but also to understand them as representations.1 This develops 
in children, without training, between their second and fifth years. 
Our representations are not con­fined to language: they may involve 
action and objects or images and music rather than, or as well as, 
language.
	
Third, because our predisposition for fiction seems at first glance 
counterproductive in biological terms, unlike our capacity for true 
narration. In any natural data-­gathering system like the human mind 
we might expect an “appetite for the true.” Narrative extends the 
kinds, depth, and value of true information we can have at our dis-
posal, and we reap obvious advantages from informing one another 
about the activities of others in the group, about recent challenges or 
opportunities, or about old solutions to newly recurring conditions. 
Gossip and history make immediate biological sense, but why do we 
find fiction just as compelling? The “appetite for the true” model 
“spectacularly fails to predict large components of the human appe-
tite for information.”2 In modern so­ci­e­ties, most people prefer novels 

On the Origin of Stories
130
to textbooks, fiction films to documentaries. Not that we do not care 
to distinguish true information from false: in communication pro-
fessing truthfulness, we remain vigilant against being misled. But we 
often simply prefer fiction to fact.
	
Fiction, like art in general, can be explained in terms of cogni-
tive play with pattern—in this case, with patterns of social informa-
tion—and in terms of the unique importance of human shared at-
tention. Music and visual art each appeal directly to one of our main 
senses, and therefore have antecedents in other animals, in the song 
of humpback whales or nightingales, in the bodily or architectural 
displays of birds of paradise or bowerbirds. But since fiction appeals 
to our craving for higher-­order information, it has slighter precur-
sors in other species. Even more than other social species, we depend 
on information about others’ capacities, dispositions, intentions, ac-
tions, and reactions. Such “strategic information”3 catches our atten-
tion so forcefully that fiction can hold our interest, unlike almost 
anything else, for hours at a stretch.
	
A biocultural approach to fiction will focus especially on the 
shared understandings that make us able and eager to tell and listen 
to stories. It therefore operates upon prem­ises different from other 
approaches current in literary studies. It suggests that the most fruit-
ful research program will consist not in looking for codes in the lan-
guage of narrative, in the structuralist mode, or in analyzing how 
ideology or the contestation of ideologies determines narrative, in 
the poststructuralist mode, or in erecting a taxonomy of possibili-
ties (of communicative positions, temporal relations, or character 
roles), in narratology. It will focus instead on the deep, specieswide 
competences that enable us, first, to understand events in ways simi-
lar to but richer than those of other animals (Chapter 10); second, 
to form and follow representations of events, or narratives (Chapter 
11); third, to invent stories as a kind of cognitive play, in this case with 
social information (Chapter 12). It will show how these capacities 
and inclinations build up slowly from simpler predecessors but alter 
markedly as they pass through the major evolutionary transition of 
human ultrasociality.
	
Despite the “linguistic turn” of thought late in the twentieth cen-
tury, narrative does not depend on language. It can be expressed 

	
Art, Narrative, Fiction
	
131
through mime, dance, wordless picture books, or movies. And al-
though such narratives are often predicated on or elaborated through 
language, they need not be. Languageless adults in Mexico—deaf, 
never taught sign language, living together on the fringes of society 
—mime narratives for one another.4 They can do so only because 
even without language humans share an ability to understand and 
represent events in complex ways.
	
Narrative be­comes easier with language, and we can certainly test 
people’s comprehension of and response to narratives most easily in 
verbal form. But over recent de­cades comparative and developmen-
tal psychologists have found ways to test event comprehension in 
animals and infants.
	
We can understand events through competences dif­fi­cult to detect 
because they usually work so ef­fi­ciently and rapidly that we remain 
unaware of them. Our responses seem automatic and immediate, as 
if we read events straight off the evidence. In fact we understand so 
much only through the specialized efforts of elaborate but largely 
unconscious inference systems. It has taken the dif­fi­culty of pro-
gramming computers to construe natural-­language narratives and of 
analyzing how human infants and other animals understand events 
before language to clarify just how com­pli­cated the task is and yet 
how ef­fi­ciently evolved minds manage.5
	
Throughout Part 3 I stress that neither event nor narrative com-
prehension can be primarily a matter of convention.6 Such conven-
tions as we find in narrative tend to re­flect the regularities most 
­important to human lives and minds. We are not taught narrative. 
Rather, narrative re­flects our mode of understanding events, which 
appears largely—but with crucial exceptions—to be a generally 
mammalian mode of understanding. The many culturally local con-
ventions of human behavior and explanation tend to be adjustable 
parameters within common cognitive systems.
	
Only after establishing the biological roots of narrative and fiction 
can we take the next step and consider the functions of fiction, to 
which we turn in Chapter 13.

132
10
UNDERSTANDING AND RECALLING EVENTS
Can we understand events from birth? Do we learn to do 
so along pathways prepared for by evolution? Or do we learn only 
from scratch, piecemeal, through individual experience? Can we un-
derstand events only once we acquire language and local narrative 
conventions?
	
Under controlled conditions, as rated by in­de­pen­dent observ-
ers, experimenters have been able to induce babies as early as forty-­
five minutes after birth to imitate simple actions like opening their 
mouths or eyes wide and closing them; sticking out their tongues; 
or making aah sounds. Human infants can see and act on such sim-
ple actions performed by a human model (but not a robot) almost 
from birth. Within two days, they can imitate surprised, sad, and 
happy faces.1 Such responses require perceptual, motor, emotional, 
and motivational areas in newborns’ brains somehow to coordinate, 
even within bodies that can barely act, in a world they barely know. 
We come preequipped to attend to, relate to, take our lead from, and 
understand other humans and, along with other animals, to under-
stand a world new to the individual but long familiar to the species.
Understanding Observed Events: 
Intuitive Ontologies
Beginning with Locke in the seventeenth century and Hume in the 
eigh­teenth, associationist psychology has considered minds to be 
equally open to any potential associations between whatever the 
senses perceive. These early investigators argued that repeated con-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
133
junctions of phenomena create and strengthen mental connections 
that suf­fice for us to learn to understand our world. Much later, be-
haviorist psychologists in the first two-­thirds of the twentieth cen-
tury assumed that associating any two percepts, like a bell and food, 
could “condition” a response like the salivation famously demon-
strated in dogs by Pavlov.
	
But a series of experiments by John Garcia and colleagues in the 
mid-­1960s showed that rats could develop an aversion to drinking 
harmless colored water in a single exposure, if the experimenters in-
duced nausea afterward, but would not associate drinking colored 
water and electric shock after any number of tries.2 Behaviorists 
sneered: “No more likely than birdshit in a cuckoo clock.”3 But despite 
the scornful response, it makes sound evolutionary sense that oppor­
tunistic omnivores like rats should associate new foods and negative 
bodily reactions on a first encounter, even if the ill effects begin hours 
after eating: such a dedicated learning channel lets them link a food 
with danger without needing to run the perhaps fatal risk of “repeated 
associations.” But since it makes no natural sense to pair drinking 
water with electric shock, rats cannot associate these factors even after 
endless repetitions. Animals cannot build up associations of any kind 
in the course of their exposure to their world. Instead minds within a 
given lineage evolve to learn regularities relevant to their mode of life.
	
Evolution builds many spe­cific learning tracks into minds, pre-
paring them to expect certain kinds of situations and to understand 
them by making rich inferences from particular information pat-
terns. Objects will be important to many species, so senses and minds 
recognize the edges of objects (many mammalian visual systems have 
specialized edge detectors) or deduce the whole of an object from 
seeing it at an angle or in part. Minds are “bundles of expectations, 
preferences, ways of inference,” “geared to the greatest possible cog-
nitive result for the smallest pro­cessing effort.”4 And because evolu-
tion has shaped minds to leap to complex conclusions from slight or 
ambiguous information, we can understand even others’ unpredict-
able behavior.
Event comprehension builds up through a nested hierarchy of cog-
nitive pro­cesses, as information that sat­is­fies one pattern meets in-

On the Origin of Stories
134
formation satisfying another at a neural convergence zone, and in-
formation satisfying patterns at this level meets other higher-­level 
information at convergence regions.5 The evidence seems strongly 
against explaining this system merely through repeated individual 
associations. Even with massive mental computing power, uncon-
strained mental associations would not suf­fice to construct a system 
of event comprehension in the course of an individual’s develop-
ment or to pro­cess event comprehension in real time. A mind equally 
open to all possible links would have no way of deciding what infor-
mation would prove useful: the color of people’s eyes or their socks? 
the shape of their noses or their shoes? the number of syllables in 
their name?6
	
Minds exist to predict what will happen next. They mine the pres-
ent for clues they can re­fine with help from the past—the evolu­
tionary past of the species, the cultural past of the population, and 
the experiential past of the individual—to anticipate the immedi-
ate future and guide action.7 To understand events as they happen, 
with limited time, knowledge, and computational power, minds have 
evolved to register the regularities pertinent to particular species and 
to infer according to rough-­and-­ready heuristics.8
	
We cannot study such inference systems by introspection, because 
like many mental pro­cesses they are so rapid, automatic, and reliable 
that we think we simply read ready-­made facts and do not realize 
how much we infer. Wittgenstein wrote: “‘We see emotion’ . . . We 
do not see facial contortions and make the inference that he is feel-
ing joy, grief, boredom. We describe a face immediately as sad, radi-
ant, bored, even when we are unable to give any other description of 
the features.”9 He was correct that we need not make conscious infer-
ences; but our evolved pattern-­matching neural pro­cessing does the 
inferring for us, rapidly and automatically linking perceptual, motor, 
and emotional networks in the brain to provide immediate recogni-
tion and evaluation. Even in higher-­level pro­cessing, when tested on 
our reactions as readers, we find it hard to distinguish between what 
we have ac­tually read and what we have only inferred.10
	
We understand events especially through our intuitive ontologies, 
our implicit theories of different classes of things. Evidence for intui-
tive ontologies has converged from several different fields: from as-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
135
certaining what nonhuman animals, infants, and children can un-
derstand, from experiments on human adults, neuroimaging of 
brain activity in humans and other animals, and clinical studies of 
brain dysfunctions.11 Studies of infant cognition, for instance, adopt 
new procedures that habituate children to particular kinds of stim-
uli. Habituation upon repetition occurs in any organism with a ner-
vous system: any stimulus gradually ceases to arouse.12 But when 
something strikes an infant as new or anomalous, its interest revives: 
it looks ­longer at a scene or a screen or sucks harder on a teat as it 
listens to sounds. This revived interest indicates the infant’s wordless 
categories or expectations: only something it considers suf­fi­ciently 
different to belong to a new category will cause it to respond more 
intently. Such procedures allow developmental psychologists to dis-
cover how infants understand events.13
	
We share with other animals a rudimentary sense of space, of up 
and down versus across, built into our sense of balance and kinesthe-
sia (our monitoring of our own positions and movement). Our un-
derstanding be­comes finer-­grained as we encounter not just space 
but objects in space. Infants apprehend objects very early, although 
their understanding continues to develop in something akin to theo-
rylike stages.14
	
Experiments with infants indicate that they have more or less reli-
ably developing “theories” of objects, which begin, long before lan-
guage, with expectations about object trajectories, then object co­
herence and cohesion, then the causal force of object support and 
contact, then object persistence, concealment, containment, occlu-
sion, protuberance, and so on.15 This early intuitive understanding 
of physical objects depends not on manual skills, as the pioneering 
developmental psychologist Jean Piaget thought, but on more basic 
cognitive input, at a succession of pro­cessing levels: from, for in-
stance, lateral inhibition in the retina, to edge detection in visual 
pro­cessing, to the comprehension of objects as objects.16
	
Clearly, we share with many other creatures this much of folk 
physics, not vastly different, even if unformulated, from the intu-
itions that shaped Aristotelian physics: rules of thumb accurate 
enough to guide the actions of mid-­sized creatures in a world of 
mid-­sized and middle-­distance objects.17 Developmental psycholo-

On the Origin of Stories
136
gists estimate that infants achieve an adult level of understanding of 
all basic physics by eight months.18
	
Unless they already know its name, both children and language-­
trained chimpanzees will assign a new word like “apple” to an indi-
cated object rather than to its color or other features.19 By about eigh­
teen months children have become fascinated with naming objects.20 
But even before they can name them they can clas­sify them accord-
ing to their developing theory of kinds. Indeed all warmblooded ver-
tebrates apparently categorize objects at a va­ri­ety of levels.21
	
Localized neurological defi­cits in adults indicate that humans 
make major ontological distinctions among conspe­cifics (other hu-
mans), animals, plants, and artifacts.22 A certain kind of neurologi-
cal patient may, for instance, have severe dif­fi­culties in naming living 
things, but a relatively well-­preserved ability to name all other ob-
jects.23 Even children clas­sify living things as such on the basis that 
they derive from other living things,24 and artifacts on the basis that 
they are designed for a particular function. We distinguish animate 
objects from inanimate when we see that they move with nonrigid 
self-­propelled motion and can interact without contact.25 We auto-
matically draw different inferences from each category. Color mat-
ters first for a child or a monkey looking at food, but shape counts 
first in a tool.26 We will seek the purpose of an artifact, but we will 
expect a living thing to have the essence of its kind; we will look for 
the head or face of an animal but not of a plant; and we will pro­cess 
face-­recognition cues in humans but not in other animals.
	
We make the first crucial distinction between animate and inani-
mate far below the level of conscious awareness: neurons have been 
found that respond to biological but not to nonbiological motion.27 
And we understand the distinction consciously long before we can 
express it linguistically. Infants recognize it, through cues of self-­
propelled motion, by at least three months old. By at least twelve 
months, they have different expectations of, and make different 
causal inferences about, animate or inanimate things.28
	
Long before anything like narrative became possible, animals have 
had to be aware of other agents as volatile and potentially urgent 
threats or opportunities. Agency itself therefore catches attention.29 
Although most of us now see far more cars than we do animals, and 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
137
face more danger from them, and have been warned since childhood 
about the risks they pose, experiments show that we detect change of 
position far more quickly and accurately in animals than in cars.30 
Long before narrative, too, animals have needed to distinguish one 
organism from another at first sign: by smell, sound, or especially, in 
the human case, by sight. Hence human children have an innate fas-
cination with identifying animals of all kinds, out of all proportion 
to the likelihood of their encountering alligators or zebras.31
	
We humans overdetect agency,32 since it is safer to mistake a twig 
for a snake than vice versa. And we will interpret something as story 
if we can. Babies and adults alike cannot help seeing a sequence of 
moving dots in terms of animate causality.33 In a famous 1944 ex-
periment students were shown a short silent black-­and-­white film 
and asked to write down afterward what they saw. The film shows 
three shapes, two dark triangles and one dark circle, moving about a 
screen featureless except for a sta­tion­ary rect­an­gle with one side par-
tially opened out. Without being cued by the experimenters, all the 
students except one reported in terms not of a series of spatial shifts 
but of individuals in con­flict, usually two men competing for the at-
tentions of a woman, who found one of them too aggressive and fa-
vored the other. Only one student described the film in terms of the 
displacements of different shapes in a plane.34 More recent studies 
have produced similar results.35 Our minds naturally mature to in-
terpret events in the most powerful way we can, automatically send-
ing information that sat­is­fies the right patterns—in this case, the 
com­pli­cated patterns of motion, relative to one another, of shapes 
with nothing except their movement to suggest agency—to higher 
data-­pro­cessing levels and the richer inferences they allow.
	
Beyond rough-­and-­ready heuristics for agency and common pat-
terns of movement like flight, pursuit, fight, or mutual approach, 
animals make much subtler discriminations among their own spe-
cies.36 Our human distinctions are marvelously subtle—as are those 
of dogs, dolphins, or chimpanzees within their species, in ways we 
cannot easily detect, despite the various links between these species 
and ours. Many kinds of behavior become ritualized, standardized, 
exaggerated, and in in­ten­si­fied contrast to other kinds of behaviors. 
Children have an early interest in mastering human “rituals” as sim-

On the Origin of Stories
138
ple as greetings and farewells, comforting, or play. In the famously 
closely-­studied case of Emily, “the first and primary function of the 
narrative form” in her crib monologues when they began at twenty-­
one months “was to establish the canonical events of the child’s 
world from which other narrative types emerged . . . [and] search for 
stability in the dynamic of experience.”37 More elaborate standard-
ized behaviors by which we interpret recurrent situations have been 
studied in ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence in terms of scripts, standard expecta-
tions of standard situations, like going to a restaurant.38
	
Many animals understand others in terms of goals and desires, the 
beginnings of a theory of mind. David and Ann Premack’s chimpan-
zee Sarah shows that she can understand goals: she correctly selects 
photographs that provide the solutions to problems a videotaped ac-
tor tries to solve.39 Human infants at just under a year undergo a first 
cognitive revolution when they understand the goal-­directedness of 
others’ actions,40 though they cannot yet understand desire. By two, 
children have a “surprisingly sophisticated” grasp of others’ desires, 
though not yet of their beliefs.41
	
Empathy arises from recognizing others’ goals and desires, a ca-
pacity necessary in an individualized social species. Darwin noted 
that “many animals certainly sympathize with each other’s distress 
or danger,”42 as modern laboratory research con­firms. Even rats and 
monkeys have a default response to others of their kind, not just 
their kin, whom they see in distress.43 As species become more flexi-
bly social, such sympathy deepens: although monkeys appear never 
to offer consolation to victims of aggression, chimpanzees readily 
do.44 Human children “by one year of age . . . spontaneously comfort 
A frame from Fritz 
Heider and Marianne 
Simmel film, 1944, 
showing a geometric 
shape “trying to escape” 
from a space.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
139
people in distress.”45 Distress at the sight of another’s pain is “an 
­impulse over which we exert no control: it grabs us instantaneously, 
like a reflex.”46
Social animals readily categorize other conspe­cifics according to age, 
sex, and class or sta­tus, but in individualized so­ci­e­ties they must also 
be able to identify individuals. Biologists had assumed that inverte-
brates could not recognize individuals, but even mantis shrimps have 
now been discovered to do so.47
	
The more flexibly social a species, the more individuals need to 
discriminate, to know others’ position in relation to themselves or 
even to third parties. Species that cooperate through reciprocal al-
truism also need a good memory for who owes them and for those 
whom they owe favors. In a species as de­pen­dent on sight as ours, 
we recognize other individuals through a dedicated face-­recognition 
subsystem in visual pro­cessing. Not only can we recognize and re-
member faces for many years, but emotion saturates recognition. As 
an automatic part of sensory pro­cessing the amygdala, the brain’s 
emotional router, attaches an affective weighting to faces or voices 
important enough for us to recall later. We keep mental “files” on 
­individuals without confusing them,48 in ways that make it easy for 
us—and extremely hard for computers—to track individuals in life 
or in literature. Except in the most careless language, we have no 
problem following the antecedent of a pronoun; even in the most 
careful writing, computers programmed to analyze discourse easily 
lose track.
	
Animals not only recognize other individuals but discriminate 
among them. They evaluate personalities and prowess from past be-
havior and use their own past emotional response to individuals as 
a guide to ongoing associations and interactions. Those individuals 
who could more accurately assess others as associates or opponents 
would on average leave more descendants.49 Primates such as ba-
boons and chimpanzees discriminate among individuals on the ba-
sis of character and adjust their behavior accordingly—even to the 
point of female baboons’ accepting males as partners according to 
their demonstrated social sensitivity.50
	
Humans are tireless social evaluators.51 A markedly positive or 

On the Origin of Stories
140
negative weighting enhances our memory for others and can pro-
duce a palpable warmth or chill in our reactions, in life as in fiction.52 
Comparison clarifies judgments: even in animals as simple as gup-
pies the cognitive principle of the contrast effect aids discrimina-
tion.53 Fiction naturally makes the most of this capacity, deliberately 
pointing up character contrasts, often along thematically relevant 
axes of personality, like Penelope as the constant wife, Helen as the 
inconstant.
A final aspect of theory of kind we could call a theory of bonds or so-
cial relations, an intuitive sociology. Less studied in developmental 
psychology than more basic forms of cognition, except in the attach-
ment between infants and care­givers, it has been closely investigated 
in social animals.
	
One aspect is af­fili­a­tion and association (kinship, friendship, alli-
ance, group identity). Even barnacles and tadpoles distinguish kin 
from non-­kin.54 All humans can and want to understand not only 
kinship but all these relations from an early age, however variable the 
terms of wider kinship in different so­ci­e­ties.
	
A second aspect is hierarchy, sta­tus, or rank. Though undesirable 
from an egalitarian human point of view, hierarchy seems to some 
degree unavoidable in larger so­ci­e­ties to avoid incessant squabbling 
over resources. It persists in democratic so­ci­e­ties and soon estab-
lishes itself in new forms in so­ci­e­ties that try to impose revolutionary 
egalitarianism. All social animals effortlessly track the unique terms 
of hierarchy in their own species.
	
A third aspect of the theory of bonds is social exchange. In the hu-
man case this extends far further than in any other individualized 
society and has led to the evolution of a complex suite of moral emo-
tions to solve problems of trust and commitment.55 We can observe 
the basis for human moral emotions in other animals, especially pri-
mates: empathy, which as Darwin noted makes individuals much 
more able to live in groups;56 a sense of fairness and self-­righ­teous 
indignation, recently found experimentally even in capuchin mon-
keys,57 and demonstrated cross-­culturally in humans;58 forgiveness 
and reconciliation, needed to repair relations, observed over the last 
twenty years in many species;59 emotions like generosity and grati-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
141
tude;60 and a capacity for detecting cheating in social relations, which 
sharpens our attention to and understanding of social exchanges.61 
Children as young as a year and a half spontaneously give toys, prof-
fer help, and try to comfort the visibly distressed.62 The evidence for 
the social and moral emotions in other primates, not even our near-
est relatives, suggests that “human behavior has very old evolution-
ary roots.”63 Nature has endowed us with a moral capacity “much 
like a gyroscope at rest,” and culture’s role is “to spin it and establish 
its orientation.”64
Theory of Mind
Many animals understand other conspe­cifics’ behavior and relation-
ships. Many species of birds and mammals also have the rudiments 
of a so-­called theory of mind, an understanding of others in terms 
of goals, intentions, and perhaps desires. But humans appear to have 
a uniquely elaborate theory of mind that enables us to read one an-
other, and therefore social events, in a far finer-­grained way than any 
other species. Research on theory of mind in animals and humans 
has been intense, especially in children and those with autistic spec-
trum disorders. Since the term was introduced in 1978, thousands 
of papers have been published on the subject.65 Yet all this astute the-
oretical, observational, and experimental work on how we under-
stand other minds has until very recently been almost entirely ig-
nored in literary studies, despite the fact that trying to understand 
why others do what they do matters so much in both human life and 
literature.66
	
Over the last forty years many have proposed that the pressure 
to understand others has been a major driving force in the growth 
of higher, especially primate, intelligence.67 We need to infer others’ 
predispositions and their likely intentions and actions, which may in 
turn be based in part on their attempts to guess ours. If this hypoth-
esis is correct, higher intelligence emerged primarily as social intelli-
gence, through a cognitive arms race to understand conspe­cifics and 
to reveal to or conceal from others our own beliefs, desires, and in-
tentions. Because theory of mind was first opened as a field to ex-
plore within primatology, the social intelligence hypothesis was first 

On the Origin of Stories
142
called the Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis. Chimpanzees seek 
to understand one another especially in order to compete, sometimes 
by deception, for food, sex, or sta­tus. But researchers have begun to 
realize that we have probably reached our unique human level of 
theory of mind through pressures to cooperate more closely against 
other groups: we understand one another so much better because 
unlike chimpanzees we have crossed a cooperation divide and from 
infancy have a greater motivation to social engagement and shared 
attention than any other species.68
	
Moreover, since theory of mind was first explored, a lucky acci-
dent in the early 1990s led neuroscientists to discover the existence of 
mirror neurons, first in macaque monkeys and then in chimpanzees 
and humans. Mirror neurons in the brain’s premotor cortex fire not 
only when an animal performs an action but when it sees another 
(especially a conspe­cific) perform the same action, or even when it 
sees less than the whole action but can see enough to infer the other 
animal’s intention. Some mirror neurons need exact triggers, like a 
precision grip but not a whole-­hand grip; others may fire under less 
stringent conditions; and some can be cross-­modal. Certain mirror 
neurons in a monkey who merely hears a peanut being broken will 
fire in the parts of the motor cortex that would be activated to make 
the movement needed to break a peanut. Mirror neurons in mon-
keys, chimpanzees, and human preschoolers and adults allow an ef-
fortless, automatic understanding of the intentions of others through 
an almost reflex inner imitation. As one mirror-­neuron specialist re-
marks, in a phrase that could not be more relevant to storytelling, 
“when we (and apes) look at others, we find both them and our-
selves.”69
	
Nevertheless a fully human theory of mind requires a capacity for 
interpreting others not simply through outer actions and expres-
sions, and even through inner states like goals, intentions, and de-
sires, but uniquely also through beliefs. This last layer of the rich 
­human theory of mind may require spe­cific genetically designed 
mechanisms or be simply a robustly channeled consequence of nor-
mal human social development.70 Even in the latter case, human de-
velopment depends on a coordinated suite of biological adaptations 
for our ultrasociality: our primate legacy of mirror neurons; our 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
143
helplessness and underdevelopment at birth, yet our preparedness 
from the first to engage with human faces and voices, even while 
suckling; our eyes, whose color and shape have evolved to reveal 
rather than conceal direction and therefore intention; our long child-
hoods, and our motivation as children and parents to engage in-
tensely with one another, through stages like protoconversation, 
pointing, and sharing attention for the mere plea­sure of it, late in the 
first year, joint attention (my checking back and forth to see that oth-
ers know where I am directing their attention and to con­firm the tar-
get and the mutual engagement) at about twelve to fourteen months; 
and language.71 Perhaps our capacity to attend to and recognize the 
different perspectives of others that begins to appear in the second 
year of life and deepens with language provides a suf­fi­cient base for 
continued development toward a fully human theory of mind.72
	
The uniquely human level of theory of mind builds on a platform 
of simpler capacities, from the earliest evolving and most basic, de-
tecting animacy, to the more subtle, reading head and eye orienta-
tion and the changing expressions of faces and attitudes of bodies, to 
the still more complex, intuiting or inferring goals, intentions, and 
desires from these outer signs. Even at this level, it allows a much 
finer-­grained understanding of events, since “the exact same physi-
cal movement may be seen as giving an object, sharing it, loaning it, 
moving it, getting rid of it, returning it, trading it, selling it, and on 
and on—depending on the goals and intentions of the actor.”73 At 
the fully human level of theory of mind, we pass one crucial step fur-
ther: we also infer what others know in order to explain their desires 
and intentions with real precision.
Because we normally acquire theory of mind so effortlessly, we cease 
to notice anything to master. We assume that we simply see situa-
tions as they are. We need to appreciate the dif­fi­culties that those 
with autistic spectrum disorders have with theory of mind and the 
dif­fi­culties normal children have with what seem like “no-­brainers” 
to adults, to recognize how theory of mind transforms our compre-
hension of events.
	
Theory of mind is no mere byproduct of higher general intelli-
gence, but a psychological specialization that may be either relatively 

On the Origin of Stories
144
spared despite serious mental retardation, as in Williams syndrome, 
or relatively damaged, perhaps with no or mild retardation, in au­
tistic spectrum disorders. Children with full autism appear to lack 
theory of mind; unlike other children with mental handicaps at the 
same mental age, they have severe problems in inferring others’ at-
tention from reading the direction of their eyes, or their emotions 
from their expressions, or their knowledge from what they can per-
ceive. They therefore have great dif­fi­culty understanding social events 
and the sources of people’s knowledge—and in understanding or 
telling stories, or interpreting films in social ways.74 Temple Grandin, 
autistic but a high-­performing agricultural engineer, as a child felt 
that there seemed to be something “going on between other kids, 
swift, subtle, constantly changing, a swiftness of understanding so 
remarkable that sometimes she wondered if they were all tele-
pathic.”75
	
Simon Baron-­Cohen, a leading researcher into autism, shows how 
different our natural interpretation of events is from the way an au-
tistic child might construe a simple situation such as he happened to 
observe in his local park:
Joe and Tim watched the children in the playground. With-
out saying a word, Joe nudged Tim and looked across at the 
little girl playing in the sandpit. Then he looked back at Tim 
and smiled. Tim nodded, and the two of them started off to-
ward the girl in the sandpit.
He offers two possible readings of the situation, one sinister, one 
­innocent:
Maybe Joe and Tim had a plan to do something nasty to one 
of the children. Joe wanted Tim to know that their victim was 
to be the little girl in the sandpit, and he indicated this by the 
direction of his gaze. Tim recognized Joe’s intention and nod-
ded to tell Joe he had understood the plan. Then they went 
over to tell the little girl, who was unaware of what was about 
to happen.

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
145
Or:
Maybe Joe wanted to point out to Tim who it would be fun 
to play with. Tim agreed with Joe’s idea, so they went over to 
ask the little girl in the sandpit if she wanted to play.76
All the terms he highlights, he notes, would be mysterious to an au-
tistic child, and neither interpretation available.
	
Although it is more sophisticated than the other prototheories we 
have considered, theory of mind is not a “theory” in the sense of an 
explicit and culturally produced structure of propositions. It begins 
in the evolution of social species and emerges naturally over the first 
five years in normal human minds, not only in Western so­ci­e­ties but 
in children around the world.77 We can trace three stages of the early 
individual development of fully human theory of mind: (1) First, 
­infants up to about eigh­teen months have a single updating model 
of reality, of the world they can see now. (2) From about eigh­teen 
months to about four years, they can hold multiple models of real-
ity in their minds, but do not understand the pro­cess fully. They can 
call up memories of the past, anticipate the future, have some notion 
of the wishes and intentions of others, understand and respond to 
pictures or stories, enjoy pretend play, and distinguish these other 
representations—memories, wishes, anticipations, fancies, pictures, 
stories—from the world of the here and now. Other animals, espe-
cially chimpanzees and perhaps other great apes, dolphins, and other 
cetaceans seem to share some of these capacities. (3) During their 
fifth year, children grow into a distinctively human theory of mind, 
capable of metarepresentation—of understanding the pro­cess of 
representation—and involving beliefs as well as desires, goals, and 
intentions, a state that no other animal appears to reach. At this 
higher, exclusively human level, theory of mind be­comes not only an 
intuitive psychology but an intuitive epistemology. No wonder it is 
hard to attain, even though as adults we employ it effortlessly.
	
A key test for this spe­cifi­cally human level of theory of mind is the 
false-­belief test, often called the “Sally-­Anne” test. The experimenters 
enact a scenario before each child, perhaps with puppet dolls called 

On the Origin of Stories
146
Sally and Anne and a toy room as visual aids. Anne is in the room as 
Sally places a marble in a basket. Anne leaves, and the door closes 
behind her. Sally then takes the marble out and puts it in a box. Each 
child subject is asked: “Where do you think Anne will look for the 
marble when she ­comes back into the room?” Three-­year-­olds regu-
larly fail this test: they think that Anne will look in the box, where 
they know the marble now is. Beginning at some time between four 
and five, children regularly pass the test. They understand first-­order 
false belief, the capacity to realize that someone can have a different 
idea about something than what is ac­tually the case.78
	
Children have dif­fi­culty understanding their own knowledge. In 
another test they are asked what they think is in a Smarties tube, and 
naturally answer “Smarties” (a British candy like M & Ms). If they are 
then shown pencils rather than candy inside, and asked what they 
Diagram of the Sally-Anne test for false belief (theory of mind).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
147
now think is in the Smarties box, they answer “Pencils.” But when 
they are asked what they thought was in the box when they were first 
asked, three-­year-­olds will also say “Pencils,” since they now know 
what’s there; five-­year-­olds will say “Smarties”; four-­year-­olds show 
mixed results. They are not merely embarrassed to admit to having 
been wrong: though normally happy to point out other children’s 
mistakes, three-­year-­olds are just as sure that other children first said 
“Pencils” when in fact they had said “Smarties.” Children seem to 
come to understand their own understanding of things as they come 
to understand others’.79
	
Before the age of five, children cannot understand or remember 
clearly either their own or others’ mistaken beliefs. Nor do they ap-
preciate the bases for knowledge. One experiment involves a tun-
nel constructed so that children can either lift its lid to see an ob-
ject inside or put their hands inside to feel the object. The children 
are shown two piggy banks, one full and one empty. When one is 
placed in the tunnel, they are asked how they can tell which it is, the 
full or the empty. If they cannot answer, they are prompted: “Do you 
have to see the piggy bank or feel the piggy bank?” Most three-­ and 
four-­year-­olds fail, and, when challenged to prove their wrong an-
swer, “just gave a blank stare, seemingly unable to comprehend why 
they could not tell whether it was the full or empty piggy bank even 
though they were looking at it.”80
	
Because they cannot understand the bases of knowledge, children 
also perform poorly at games of hiding or deception. When three-­
year-­olds are asked to play a game in which the adult experimenter 
has to guess in which hand they have a marble, many either hold the 
marble in one open palm (with the other hand perhaps formed into 
a closed fist) or, as soon as the adult prepares to guess, show where 
the marble is.81
	
Young children cannot clearly anticipate what others know and 
therefore how they might behave on the basis of that knowledge. But 
in their fourth year they become curious about others’ knowledge. 
Heinz Wimmer, one of the first to study the child’s theory of mind, 
recorded his son’s first in­quiry, at three years and eight and a half 
months, about how people know something: “Heinz: ‘Today will be 

On the Origin of Stories
148
nice.’ Theo: ‘Where do you know that from?’ [German: Woher weißt 
Du?].” By the age of five, this concern “can become a veritable obses-
sion”:
Sybille at 5 years and 1 month was visited for the first time by 
Judith (a friend from kindergarten) and her mother, who live 
in a distant village. After the visit Sybille asked her father:
	 Sybille: “How did they know where I live?”
	 Father: “Maybe they asked in the kindergarten.”
	 Sybille: “But Sigrid [the kindergarten teacher] ­doesn’t 
know where I live.”
	 Father: “Maybe Judith’s mother looked up our address in 
the phone book.”
	 Sybille: “But how did they know the way?”
	 . . . .
	 Sybille: “From where did they know which door we live 
at?” (in a house with three families and three separate en-
trances)
	 Father: “They could have looked at the nameplate, where 
it says ‘Spangler.’”
	 Sybille: “Does it just say ‘Spangler’ there? Then how did 
they know that Sybille also lives there?”
	 and so on.82
	
Theory of mind be­comes uniquely human between ages three and 
five and continues to deepen over the next few years. Although from 
an early age children appreciate happiness in terms of what people 
want and what they get, they remain confused about another basic 
emotion, surprise, until five or six. Since surprise involves what peo-
ple believe and what is really the case, five-­year-­olds usually fail to 
anticipate when a character in a story will be surprised.83 At around 
this age children begin to master second-­order false belief, under-
standing one person’s thoughts about another’s. Imagine that af-
ter Anne leaves, she peeks back through the keyhole as Sally moves 
the marble. Each child is asked: “When Anne returns, where do you 
think Sally will think Anne will look?” Five-­year-­olds usually fail this 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
149
question; six-­year-­olds pass.84 Over the next few years children also 
re­fine their capacity to detect sarcasm, bluff, irony, double-­bluff, and 
to read emotional information from around the eyes.85 By early ado-
lescence they can cope with third-­ or fourth-­order false belief, close 
to the human limit. Even adult error rates suddenly rise to about 60 
percent on fifth-­order tasks.86
	
Theory of mind has many implications for human brains and be-
havior. The major computational cost of evolving language may have 
been not syntax but theory of mind, the capacity to handle multiple 
perspectives, multiple orders of belief or representation. Theory of 
mind and not language may have been the driving force behind the 
unprecedented expansion of the human brain. Indeed the parts of 
the brain especially associated with language, like Broca’s and Wer-
nicke’s areas, are sig­nifi­cantly smaller than those associated with the-
ory of mind abilities, in the prefrontal cortex, the brain region most 
disproportionately enlarged in humans.87
	
With our fully developed theory of mind, humans can engage in 
much more finely-­tuned social behavior than other species. We can 
predict the behavior of others far more accurately. We can inform 
others of what we can infer they do not know or cannot themselves 
infer, when we wish to cooperate, and we can conceal information 
if we wish them not to know, when we wish to compete. With ad-
vanced theory of mind, deliberate teaching also be­comes possible.
	
Theory of mind allows a much more precise and multiperspec-
tival understanding of social events. Because we understand beliefs 
as the basis for forming desires, goals, and intentions, and because 
we understand the sources of belief, we automatically and effortlessly 
track what others might know about a situation, and can therefore 
understand their behavior much more finely, even if it involves X’s 
reactions to Y’s reactions to Z’s thoughts about A. Almost automati-
cally we track what others can know, and that makes all the differ-
ence to our capacity to cooperate and compete.88 No wonder, then, 
that point of view and dramatic irony play such central roles in fic-
tion, or that the gap between appearance and reality is such a wide-
spread theme. But as we will see, the implications of theory of mind 
for fiction extend much further still.

On the Origin of Stories
150
Understanding Event Sequences
How we understand episodes and still ­longer sequences of events has 
been studied less than our understanding of objects or physical mi-
croevents. Much of the detailed information to date derives from 
human developmental studies.
	
So far we have focused on increasingly sophisticated abilities 
to  understand events, especially social events, in terms of under-
standing the entities involved: first as objects, then as inanimate 
or animate, then as allo-­ or conspe­cifics, and fi­nally as individual 
conspe­cifics apparently desiring p and believing q and therefore in-
tending r.
	
We can follow a partially similar cline of development in the ca-
pacity of children to understand events themselves. As they mature 
from infancy to adolescence, children advance from perception to 
deeper inference, from description to explanation, from iden­ti­fi­ca­
tion to temporality to causality to goals, from isolated events to 
whole episodes and then links between episodes.89
	
Infants first register objects that are sta­tion­ary or move along a 
continuous trajectory. Children’s first words mostly name objects. 
Reacting to stories, three-­year-­olds identify and describe objects, 
­announcing the presence of one item or another, or reporting ele-
ments in a listlike manner. Responding to a wordless picture story 
about a boy searching for his lost frog, used to test children cross-­
linguistically and cross-­culturally, a typical three-­year-­old indicates 
the stable features of the story world: “There’s a frog here . . . Here’s a 
moon. Those are boots.”90
	
Children can detect temporal connections, causes, and goals in 
events before they can follow them in narrative, and they can follow 
such connections in narrative before they can discuss them there or 
produce them in their own purely verbal narrative. But in enacting 
events, or in pretend play, young children perform better than they 
can explicitly articulate.91
	
Evidence now suggests that at less than a year infants can under-
stand some of the temporal and causal structure of events.92 One-­ 
and two-­year-­olds can imitate action sequences in the order in which 
they were presented.93 Reasoning about cause, even in novel circum-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
151
stances, not just through repeated associations, has been demon-
strated even in rhesus monkeys, who show no surprise when an ap-
ple and a hand with a knife disappear behind a screen and two apple 
halves emerge, but stare in apparent disbelief when an apple and a 
glass of water pass behind the screen and the apple reappears in two 
halves.94
	
As we mature, we pay pro­gres­sively more attention to cause, re-
calling proportionately more events attached to, rather than de-
tached from, causal chains at the age of four, still more at six, and 
more still as adults.95 In redescribing events, however, although four-
­year-­olds will have prog­ressed beyond three-­year-­olds’ naming of 
objects to a focus on the temporal, on action (“The boy and the dog 
slept while the frog quietly go out of his jar”),96 they do not yet refer 
spontaneously to causes, internal states, or goals, as five-­year-­olds do 
(“and after went out calling for the frog”).97
	
From early infancy children can appraise and revise their own be-
havior in terms of goals.98 From thirteen months, if not earlier, they 
can interpret the behavior of others in terms of goals, and by twenty 
months they recognize causes and goals connected with concrete 
physical actions.99 As we mature, we continue to interpret events pro­
gres­sively more in terms of goals.100 Again, explicit spontaneous ref-
erence to goals lags behind implicit skills: it does not develop until 
five years,101 when theory of mind has also begun to establish itself 
firmly.
	
As we mature, the right hemispheres of our brains seek explana-
tion at a deeper level and coherence on both a local and a larger 
scale.102 By age nine, children seek explanation in terms of cause and 
goal.103 By late adolescence, they look for coherence beyond the local 
episode. With that search for explanation and an increasing aware-
ness of the dangers of false belief ­comes the likelihood of realizing 
we may know too little, and the reassurance of reaching for the most 
readily available cultural understanding that seems to promise in-­
depth explanation. It is only at this point, past early childhood, that 
children begin to acquire the local, culturally inflected, religious, or 
sci­en­tific explanations for phenomena as different as dreams and 
disease.104 But such local and readily revisable cultural explanations 
could not grow except on the rich substratum of universal, natu-

On the Origin of Stories
152
rally  developing event comprehension. This event comprehension 
re­flects the regularities of the world—things, kinds, minds—and is 
already well established in many kinds of minds quite without hu-
man culture and in human minds largely in­de­pen­dent of any delib-
erate teaching.
Connecting and Recalling Events 
and Characters
To understand ­longer sequences of events, not just within but be-
tween episodes, we need considerable memory resources. Psycholo-
gists distinguish semantic from episodic memory.105 Semantic mem-
ory stores general knowledge, like my knowledge of trees or words 
like tree, root, oak, deciduous, memories often overlearned, automa-
tized, and rapidly accessible through parallel searches.106 Episodic 
memory records particular events that I remember as experienced, as 
mine, and can more or less locate to a spe­cific place and time in 
my past, like my memory of climbing a particular macrocarpa in 
childhood, or breaking off a poplar branch to use as a knight’s lance. 
Although such memories can be triggered, in Proustian fashion, by 
sensory similarities (a whiff of eucalyptus brings back memories of 
Stanford or Canberra), deliberate search for a particular earlier 
memory tends to be serial and time-­consuming in comparison with 
semantic memory.
	
Psychologists also distinguish in another way between two stages 
of memory: the constricted space of short-­term or working memory 
and the capaciousness of long-­term memory. To understand se-
quences of events ­longer than episodes, if a new episode has no ap-
parent connection to its predecessor, we need to search long-­term 
memory, first for another episode somehow connected with the 
event in focus, then, if that yields nothing, for general knowledge in 
semantic memory.107
	
Many have thought that infants cannot form memories and that 
animals have very limited memories and cannot form episodic mem-
ories. But testing for cognitive capacities in ways that do not depend 
on their verbal expression has revealed much that animals and in-
fants can do. Australian freshwater rainbowfish live for only two or 

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
153
three years in the wild but can form procedural (how-­to) memories 
that last for at least eleven months.108 Sheep have “semantic” memo-
ries that can recall individual faces of up to fifty other sheep and ten 
humans for at least two years.109 Scrub jays may have episodic mem-
ories.110
	
Human infants of thirteen months can store temporally ordered 
memories that last at least eight months.111 Toddlers form seman-
tic memories, expectations about a class of event, from only a single 
occurrence.112 Young children can “verbalize their memories, even if 
the events on which they are reporting occurred before the advent 
of  productive language capability” and occurred only once.113 In-
fants retain memories for several months without language, and can 
later superimpose language on previously encoded preverbal memo-
ries.114
	
From the first, storing and accessing episodic memories or envis-
aging immediately future options must have needed the capacity to 
distinguish memories from present perceptions or future imagin-
ings, or the consequences would have been immediately catastrophic. 
Since we now know that animals can plan strategic futures, whether 
in chimpanzee politics or in crow tool-­making, we have reason to 
think that these capacities developed before the human mind, that 
minds could already distinguish memory and future pro­jec­tion from 
perception—as of course our own fluid memories or fancies differ 
from the vivid and steady detail of our perception.
	
Frederic Bartlett first showed in 1932 that our memories are not 
eidetically exact but partially reconstructed, reshaped by the mind at 
ev­ery stage: in initial perception, in encoding, during storage, and in 
retrieval.115 We remember only selectively, according to what we at-
tend to and its recency, salience, and emotional impact. Neurologi-
cally, total recall would be prohibitively expensive: it would almost 
always be useless for us to remember trivial details years later, and 
the existence of such a vast data bank would catastrophically slow 
memory search for urgently needed information. Memory, it turns 
out, decays according to what mathematicians call a power-­law func-
tion, matching the fact that events also recur in a power-­law way: the 
more recent the event, the more likely it is to recur, and the more re-
cent the memory, the more likely it is to be relevant and therefore 

On the Origin of Stories
154
worth accessing.116 In optimal information-­retrieval systems, items 
should be recovered only when their relevance outweighs the cost of 
retrieving. And that is exactly how memory works: we remember 
common and recent events better than rare and long-­past ones.117
	
We tend to remember deep rather than surface factors, the “gist” 
rather than the detail, just as in stories we remember not words but 
our inferences about sequences, causes, and goals.118 We recall not 
surface impressions but implications for action. We remember in­
formation across rather than within sentence boundaries.119 We sort 
events so rapidly into sequence and causal sense that both children 
and adults recall events in chronological order even if they have been 
told them out of order and instructed to recall the information as 
presented.120 At three years, children cannot mentally reassemble an 
out-­of-­order sequence of pictures. At four, they can, but inflexibly. 
By six, they can construct the events forward and backward and sort 
them into hierarchical categories.121
	
We form general expectations of individuals (“traits”) or situa-
tions (“scripts”), and do not need to retain what conforms to those 
expectations, since we can simply access the general pattern in se-
mantic memory. But we retain episodic memories partly so that we 
can reevaluate past incidents if we encounter new information that 
challenges our evaluations, and perhaps revise our understanding of 
this part of the past.122 We search in memory for explanations be-
yond the immediate context according to the salience of the event we 
wish to understand, its causal connections with other events, and the 
time we have to search.
	
Because we need to remember particularly well the characters of 
those we encounter, we have evolved a sophisticated and ef­fi­cient 
system for assessing and recalling others. Experiment shows that we 
form a swift, detailed, nuanced sense of a new acquaintance, usu-
ally highly consistent with the impression that others take from the 
same evidence. We do not need to wait for multiple encounters be-
fore forming a response, and do not have to dredge past memories to 
compute another’s character at the moment we realize we need an 
assessment. We file a summary judgment effortlessly even on a first 
encounter, and we retain and recall this trait summary from seman-
tic memory remarkably accurately, much ­longer than episodic mem-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
155
ory seems to hold the details that led to the judgment. But our trait 
summary of another may prove wrong in the light of new evidence. 
Evidence that contradicts a trait summary primes us to recall from 
episodic memory details we would have otherwise found hard to re-
member, so that we can mentally revisit the grounds for the initial 
impression, reconstrue the situation if need be, and recompute our 
trait summary accordingly.123
	
Once we have developed full theory of mind, we will want to keep 
track of what others know, especially about strategic social informa-
tion, in order to predict how they might behave. We can take an al-
most automatic running tally of who could see what when,124 and we 
use this to interpret real and fictional events. Although this pro­cess is 
not infallible, its automaticity and ef­fi­ciency are telling signs of an 
advanced adaptation. When we combine our inferences about what 
others know with our sense of their character traits, we have at our 
disposal a powerful social calculus.
Remembering and Imagining Events
	
A “virtual explosion” of very recent work on memory, thought, 
and imagination has made it possible to see the close affinity between 
these three aspects of mind and our experience—including our ex-
perience of stories.125 The literary analysis of narrative has tended to 
stress words and conventions. Equipped with the results of recent 
cognitive psychology, a naturalistic account of narrative can now 
probe deeper into what happens in our minds, and why, as we en-
counter the world of fact and the worlds of fiction.
	
The emerging notion of grounded cognition shows that we think 
via our experience, which in turn depends on evolved mental pro­
cessing.126 We encounter the world multimodally, through our multi­
ple senses, our emotions, our actions, and our re­flections. Language, 
however, is amodal: the word “chair” retains its senses regardless of 
whether we meet it in spoken or written mode, printed on paper or 
screen or spelled out in neon lights or alphabet blocks, in Morse code 
or Braille. Cognition, recent neurocognitive research shows, begins 
not with the amodal symbols of language but with multimodal sim-
ulations of multimodal memories of multimodal experiences. In 

On the Origin of Stories
156
simulation, explains Lawrence Barsalou, we reactivate “perceptual, 
motor, and introspective states acquired during experience with the 
world, body, and mind . . . the brain captures states across the mo-
dalities and integrates them with a multimodal representation stored 
in memory (e.g., how a chair looks and feels, the action of sitting, 
introspection of comfort and relaxation). Later, when knowledge is 
needed to represent a category (e.g., chair), multimodal representa-
tions captured during experiences . . . are reactivated to simulate how 
the brain represented perception, action, and introspection associ-
ated with it.”127
	
In other words we think, remember, and imagine by mentally 
simulating or reactivating elements of what we have previously per-
ceived, understood, enacted, and experienced. To take some simple 
examples from fine-­grained neurocognitive research: my seeing a 
cup handle “activates a grasping simulation that inadvertently affects 
motor responses on an unrelated task”;128 my accurately judging the 
weight of what another person lifts requires simulating the lift in my 
own motor and sensory systems; my hearing a word activates motor 
areas associated with my saying it;129 my perception of space is not 
neutrally three-­dimensional but is shaped by my body, its relation to 
its environment, and its potential to act there.130 Brain damage to a 
particular region makes it more likely that I will lose mental catego-
ries that rely on it for pro­cessing. For instance, visual areas are espe-
cially active when we think about animals and motor areas when we 
think about artifacts (hammers, cups, chairs). Damage to visual ar-
eas of my brain will make it more likely that I will lose animals as a 
category, and damage to motor areas more likely that I will lose the 
category of tools.131 Mirror neurons, which fire in the appropriate 
part of our own motor areas when we see another perform an ac-
tion, form the basis for the simulations that underlie our rich social 
cognition so central to narrative.
Not only cognition but memory and imagination also depend on 
simulation. Since Frederic Bartlett, psychology has realized how 
much memory constructs rather than simply records and retrieves, 
but over the last few years new evidence arriving from neuroimag-
ing and from differences between normal and amnesiac individu-

	
Understanding and Recalling Events
	
157
als has proven highly pertinent to understanding narrative. Episodic 
memory’s failure to provide exact replicas of experience appears to 
be not a limitation of memory but an adaptive design that helps us 
to retrieve and recombine memories in order to run vivid simula-
tions of future experience. Where the exact memories of savants al-
low remarkable recall of the past, but at the expense of their coping 
with the future, our normal constructive episodic memory system 
“can draw on elements of the past and retain the general sense or gist 
of what has happened. Critically, it can flexibly extract, recombine 
and reassemble these elements in a way that allows us to simulate, 
imagine, or ‘pre-­experience’ . . . events that have never occurred pre-
viously in the exact form in which we imagine them.”132
	
Tellingly for this constructive episodic simulation hypothesis, imag-
ining the future recruits most of the same brain areas as recalling the 
past, especially the hippocampus and prefrontal, medial temporal, 
and parietal regions133 to provide a form of “life simulator”134 that 
allows us to test options without the risk of trying them in real life. 
The vividness allowed by reconfiguring multimodal memories al-
lows us to evaluate advance simulations rapidly and almost auto-
matically through the emotional weightings our bodies assigned at 
the time to the initial experiences.135
	
Stories employ words and conventions, but long before most nar-
rative conventions emerged, we evolved a capacity not only for reex-
periencing the past in memory but also for flexibly reconfiguring it 
to offer concrete simulations of future situations. And when we en-
gage with stories, our response does not restrict itself to the medium 
of presentation or to a kind of inner verbal retranscription. Rather 
we create on the fly a mental world that we keep track of by experi-
encing it through semisimulation: “As people comprehend a text, 
they construct simulations to represent its perceptual, motor, and af-
fective content. Simulations appear central to the representation of 
meaning.”136
	
Psychologists have used simple stories to understand how we fol-
low events in ordinary life—a cognitive pro­cess much more complex 
than psychology labs can usually probe, and much closer to fiction as 
well as to the facts of experience. Experiments show that in under-
standing stories our minds keep extraordinarily close track of agents, 

On the Origin of Stories
158
especially of a principal agent, and especially of his or her active 
goals. We simulate the focal agent’s situation, taking what psycholo-
gists call either an observer (outside) or field (inside) position, as we 
can in our own memories and dreams.137 As we track focal charac-
ters, simulation allows us to make swift inferences about their situa-
tion from goal-­relevant information that we amplify by keeping it 
active in working memory. Once a goal has been achieved, our acti-
vation of information related to it quickly decays in working mem-
ory; if a goal is postponed, we automatically inhibit any information 
relevant to it to enable better tracking of the new, currently active 
goal.138 Like simulation in general, this pro­cess is neither learned nor 
culture-­spe­cific and would seem to have mental roots—like mirror 
neurons, for instance, which respond even more strongly to goals 
than to actions139—much deeper than narrative. The capacity to 
track other agents effortlessly surely derives from the need of any 
flex­i­ble agent facing potential predators, prey, partners, rivals, or al-
lies to infer the maximum information about the likely next behav-
ior of those who could make a decisive difference to its fate.
	
Our capacities to comprehend events and to recall and recon­fig­
ure them in memory develop in us naturally, and to a considerable 
extent without language. But that we can handle events so well indi-
vidually does not prevent us from trying to find ever more interest-
ing ways to relate events, if we have good reason to—as we do.

	
159
11
NARRATIVE: REPRESENTING EVENTS
Aristotle, the first great analyst of narrative, called story­
telling the imitation of an action.1 He famously had a biological bent, 
but how can a post-­Darwinian biology deepen our understanding 
of narrative? How can we explain narrative from the ground up, by 
considering the interplay of cooperation and competition in social 
life? Why and how do creatures share information? Why and how 
would they share narrative information? What bene­fits make narra-
tive so compulsive for human narrators and narratees, and what are 
its costs?
	
Narrative need not involve language. It can operate through modes 
like mime, still pictures, shadow-­puppets, or silent movies. It need 
not be restricted to language, and often gains impact through enact-
ment or the emotional focusing that music offers in dance, theater, 
opera, or film, or the visual focus in stage lighting, comics, or film.2 
But language of course makes narrative more precise, ef­fi­cient, and 
flex­i­ble.
	
Narrative need not involve language, but it does need external 
representation, not merely internal representations such as our dif-
fuse, distractible mental “representations” of events as we witness, 
recall, anticipate, imagine, or dream them. Lately it has become al-
most a truism to speak of the self or of experience as fundamentally 
narrative. Despite the near-­consensus, we have little reason to think 
that this is true in either case.3 Event comprehension lies at the core 
of understanding experience, but we do not represent all of our ex-
perience—even all the day’s experience—in narrative form, even to 
ourselves, and we do not need to represent it in narrative form to 

On the Origin of Stories
160
construe it as experience or to be conscious of our selves. A neuro-
logical patient with a particularly severe form of memory loss, who 
has retained almost no detail of any event or person in his life, never-
theless seems to have a normal sense of self within the here and now.4
	
It would be burdensome to tell ourselves continuously the story of 
ourselves. But why should we tell any stories to others?
	
Sharing more information than we can glean from our own ef-
forts has been a major incentive for social life. Animals gain more 
from passive observation the more they incline to remain near oth-
ers, and that mere preference for company can then build more ac-
tive forms of cooperation.
	
Active communication, especially via voice, allows the rapid trans-
mission of detailed, complex, contingent information. Although 
such signals remain comparatively cheap, they cost senders in time, 
energy, and risk. If a vervet monkey utters an alarm call, it makes it-
self conspicuous to the leopard it senses, and therefore increases its 
own danger; but if each group member emits a call as soon as it de-
tects a threat, all improve their survival chances. While warning or 
food signals offer a group bene­fit, individuals would earn maximum 
short-­term gain by not sending signals themselves but heeding those 
of others. Yet if all ­adopted that strategy, all would become more vul-
nerable to predation or hunger. How, then, does cooperative com-
munication establish itself? And how can we explain the much more 
complex and costly communication of narrative?
	
Richard Dawkins and J. R. Krebs argued in an in­flu­en­tial 1978 pa-
per that communication should arise more for competitive than for 
cooperative reasons: we should expect the manipulation rather than 
the accurate transmission of information.5 But competition thrives 
best on concealing information: a predator silently stalking its prey, 
an ambush catching enemies unaware. Cooperation, by contrast, 
usually stands to gain from communication.
	
Manipulative and deceptive signaling does occur widely in nature, 
especially between species, but proves not to be the basis for ef­fi­cient 
communication. Signals that evolve through competition tend to be 
costly, as arms races develop between insistent senders and resistant 
receivers. Messages become louder, ­longer, more repetitive, massively 
redundant, like the roars of red deer stags or Superbowl advertisers. 

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
161
Signals used for cooperative purposes, by contrast—“conspiratorial 
whispers”—will be energetically cheap and informationally rich.6
	
This is what we find in highly social individualized species with 
elaborate communication systems. Dolphin social signals allow 
tightly coordinated behavior even in unpredictable circumstances. 
Primates emit food, alarm, and social calls to maintain, protect, and 
regulate their bands. Humans, the most cooperative of vertebrates, 
have the most ef­fi­cient and flexibly conditional forms of communi-
cation: pointing, gesture, and especially language. Computer model-
ing provides compelling evidence that low-­cost, ef­fi­cient communi-
cation like human language could have evolved only from exchanges 
in which “both parties stand to gain a high payoff from effective 
communication.”7
A predisposition to share information is not enough. How can ani-
mals share information about events?
	
The social pooling of information begins in present threats or op-
portunities. The waggle-­dance of honeybees and the alarm cries of 
vervet monkeys are unspe­cific and prenarrative. The bee’s dance ap-
pears indeterminate between iden­ti­fi­ca­tion, report, and instruction, 
between “there is . . . ,” “I have come from . . . ,” and “you should go to 
. . .” “a flower patch 100 meters away at 30° to the right of the sun.”8 
Like a child’s first responses to narrative (“There’s a frog here . . . 
Here’s a moon”), the vervet’s call indicates a particular kind (leop-
ard, eagle, snake), its presence now, and, in this case, like the bee’s 
dance, an immediate action hearers should take.9
	
Bee dances and vervet calls re­flect only stereotypical behaviors oc-
curring now. But other animals can partially represent events that 
are neither immediately present nor typical. Imitation occurs widely 
in social species, since individuals can gain by learning from the ex-
perience, perceptions, and behavior of others. Dolphins, for instance, 
derive competitive advantage—against prey, predators, or potential 
mates or rivals—from being able to coordinate and synchronize. 
This presumably explains why they can also readily imitate other 
species such as seals, turtles, skates, penguins, and humans. One dol-
phin has been observed spontaneously imitating the routine of the 
diver who would come to clean its pool, by taking up a feather in its 

On the Origin of Stories
162
beak to scrape algae off the observation window and emitting sounds 
to match the diver’s regulator and bubbles to mimic its exhaust air.10
	
If event representation begins in imitation, humans are “the con-
summate imitative generalist[s].”11 They can imitate, as we have seen, 
within an hour of birth, and do so more readily than any other spe-
cies.12 Two psychologists who hand-­reared a chimpanzee with their 
son to see if it might become enculturated by example found that 
instead their son began to emit chimpanzee grunts—at which point 
they abruptly called off the experiment.13
	
Unlike other species, humans rehearse and re­fine a broad range of 
actions in order to imitate others more exactly.14 Humans also begin 
to understand imitation as imitation or representation through play, 
like the exaggerations of mock chase and peek-­a-­boo. In the next two 
chapters we will consider the importance of advanced pretend play 
to the origins of fiction.
	
Humans not only imitate others more compulsively and more 
closely than animals of other species—and admire those who do it 
well—but have discovered other ways of representing events. Since 
imitation occurs in species as remote as cetaceans and primates, imi-
tatory enactment appears to have been the first move toward rep­
resenting actions. But with human language there emerged much 
more flex­i­ble and ef­fi­cient ways to represent events. As we saw in the 
last chapter, our species also has a richer understanding of actions 
within our kind than any other species within theirs. Our precise un-
derstanding of our actions makes possible our precise representation 
of human behaviors and our precise comprehension of those repre-
sentations. And we not only are more capable of representing events 
to one another, but we also have uniquely strong motives for doing 
so, with our unique predilection for social engagement.15
Brains evolved not to give humans rich mental lives—though we are 
delighted they do—but to permit creatures that have them to make 
better decisions. Our minds must mine the present for clues, re­fine 
these clues via information saved from the past, and turn them into 
intimations of the future on which we can act.16 But surely the best 
guide to what’s next is to know what’s happening now? That is evo­
lution’s own conclusion: we still pay attention primarily to the here 

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
163
and now, and our senses simply cannot see into the past, only at most 
into present traces of the past like a footprint, a photograph, or a fos-
sil. But how do we bene­fit, how do we know better what to do in the 
future, when our minds divert us from the present to images of the 
past? What is the function of narrative?
	
Narrative can offer us either particular social information to guide 
immediate decisions or general principles we can apply in future cir-
cumstances. It focuses overwhelmingly on “strategic information”: 
on whether Jack is sleeping with Jill, not merely how soundly Jack 
is  sleeping.17 In flexibly social species, such strategic information 
counts toward survival and reproductive success as much as non­
social information does. It also changes more unpredictably: that 
bunch of fruit might become ripe enough to eat tomorrow, but fights 
or reconciliations or other slips in the social landscape could happen 
even today.
	
Chimpanzees not only watch one another closely but can also 
draw the attention of others to the current actions of still others. 
Among the examples de Waal notes at the Arnhem chimpanzee col-
ony: Dandy sees Luit paying court to Spin while the current alpha 
male, Yeroen, sits a long way off. Barking excitedly, Dandy attracts 
Yeroen’s attention and leads him to the other two mating.18
	
In humans, behavior be­comes still more flex­i­ble and social, and 
social monitoring correspondingly more intense and more collab-
orative. We scrutinize one another from the crib to the deathbed. 
We observe one another not with cool detachment but with warm 
engagement: “Being affected by others is a design feature of human 
beings.”19 Through mirror neurons and other systems we are wired 
for emotional contagion. We half imitate what we see others doing, 
although an inhibiting mechanism stops us from ac­tually moving 
while we simulate. We automatically have empathy for others. We 
know how they feel because we literally feel what they are feeling.20
	
Color and motion have a popout effect within the visual system. 
So, too, for humans does any pattern that touches the tripwire “hu-
man”: a form, a face, an expression, an action, an interaction—even 
the relative motion of two triangles and a circle on a screen. In ex-
periments showing films of re­flective patches attached to people 
moving under low illumination, so that only moving dots are visible 

On the Origin of Stories
164
on screen, “you hardly see dots at all. What you see through the dots 
is a person. There is no doubt about it—you are watching a person 
doing things.” Within one-­fifth of a second “the displays home in on 
a brain mechanism that detects people.”21 Autistic children find it 
harder than others to match photographs of different people with 
the same mood, but they can match upside-­down photographs of 
the faces faster than other children. They can calmly match pat-
terns  with no emotional meaning to them, whereas normal chil-
dren feel confused by the emotional impact of the patterns we are 
programmed to feel, like the angle of lips or brows, yet cannot make 
sense of the patterns in faces upside-­down.22 Outside the autism or 
upside-­down experiment, we swiftly observe and interpret our world 
in terms of patterns of agency, humanity, individuality, personality, 
action, and interaction.
	
We attend to one another compulsively, with lightning-­fast emo-
tional radar, but since we live in groups that disperse and reassem-
ble fluidly, we also miss much of what goes on. Since we also have 
advanced theory of mind and understand false belief, we know that 
we often ­don’t know about particular items of strategic information; 
that others may know when we ­don’t know; and that we and they 
know what a difference it can make to know or not. We therefore 
­listen eagerly to those with strategic information they think we will 
value.
	
In our ancestral environment strategic social information would 
In an experiment by Gunnar Johannson, viewers see light sources attached to 
moving bodies not as isolated dots but as people.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
165
almost always have been about people we had already met and would 
often meet again.23 We therefore have an endless fascination with 
character information, since it helps us to predict the behavior of 
those we interact with and remains relatively stable over time.24 
Nowadays screen close-­ups make many care about the lives of media 
stars, however unlikely we are to meet them. Just as our continued 
craving for sweet and fat re­flects old circumstances, so our some-
times indiscriminate appetite for social information re­flects a time 
when we were likely to encounter repeatedly ev­ery­one we heard 
about. And we especially ingest information about the powerful, be-
cause their decisions and actions could in­flu­ence our lives, and about 
those who command attention, since those who could do so were 
usually social leaders.
	
Our thirst for news about others may not always serve a purpose 
in our supersaturated modern environment, but there is ev­ery rea-
son to believe that our craving for strategic social information is 
adaptive: it is universal, present from birth, can be selectively im-
paired in autism, and served and often still fulfills a clear function. 
Nature could not possibly arrange for each of us to be interested in 
precisely those who eventually matter to us, so it made our appetite 
intense and broad. Although nature could not foresee megacities, 
Upside-down faces used to test children with and without autism.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

On the Origin of Stories
166
globally mobile populations, or mass media, most of the time the 
fierce curiosity about others it developed in us still serves us well.
So far we have considered narrative as an extension of our compul-
sive, emotionally-­attuned social monitoring. But narrative may help 
us to make better decisions even without supplying immediate in-
formation. We talk about the past not only to disclose currently rel-
evant social particulars but also to provide tools for reasoning about 
action. Narratives may record practices previously successful or un-
successful. Among the Himba in Namibia, the indoctrination of obe-
dience and heroic virtues forms a normal part of ev­eryday life. When 
men visit, they sit together and start praise-­singing, hailing the he-
roic deeds of their ancestors.25 Narratives may offer explanations—
outcome O occurred because we performed action A—or analogues, 
parallels, or partial models for reasoning, as when indirect memories 
of Easter Island, the Holocaust, or Hiroshima guide our decisions 
today.26 Or they may merely introduce us to more of the range of hu-
man behavior, so that we have a richer context for understanding 
when we encounter something new.
	
Individual memory first evolved because suf­fi­cient regularities ex-
ist in the world for roughly similar situations to recur frequently. But 
since situations never repeat exactly, minds need to match similari-
ties loosely. Through something like massively parallel distributed 
computer programming, advanced brains became able to pattern-­
match memories and present predicaments, to allow them to bring 
to bear on present choices even distantly remembered events and the 
emotional weightings attached to them.27
	
As our brains expanded, we could apply the past to the present 
and future still more flexibly. But we were still trapped within what 
we had witnessed and remembered ourselves. With narrative we 
could, for the first time, share experience with others who could then 
pass on to still others what they had found most helpful for their 
own reasoning about future actions. We still have to act within our 
own time, but with narrative we can be partially freed from the lim-
its of the present and the self. And our ability to see connections be-
tween accounts of the past and present or future action prepared us 
for some of the core fascinations of fiction (see Chapter 24).

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
167
Narrative: Social and Individual Benefits
Narrative can provide listeners with clues to the present, hints from 
the past, examples or analogues for reasoning about future decisions. 
But how does narrative bene­fit tellers—without whom listeners learn 
nothing?
	
Should we see sharing social information as a form of reciprocal 
altruism? I give you strategic information that may bene­fit you, ei-
ther because it allows you to choose better courses of action or be-
cause you can pass it on to others for whom it will be directly rele-
vant. I do not extract an immediate payment, but when you know 
you have strategic information worth my attention or my passing on 
to others, I trust you will inform me in return.
	
In most forms of reciprocal altruism, the main temptation is not 
to repay the full value received. But in passing on gossip or news, we 
rarely feel tempted not to offer information for information. We do 
not view gossip as a chore or cost to avoid. Rather we compete to re-
port the latest news. Why?
	
Gossip can offer both individual and group bene­fits. Within-­
group cooperation gains from the punishment of noncooperators, 
and “gossip is overwhelmingly critical, and primarily about the 
moral and social violations of others. Only about 10% of gossip is 
about the good deeds of others.”28 Gossip can therefore serve as “a 
policeman and a teacher” by drawing the attention of others to 
breaches of cooperation and other social norms.29 While direct pun-
ishment can be costly, comparatively low-­cost gossip may suf­fice in 
small-­scale so­ci­e­ties to change the behavior of noncooperators or 
those who interact with them. In hunter-­gatherer so­ci­e­ties, gossip 
and ridicule serve to keep in check those who violate their strong 
egalitarian norms. Insofar as those who gossip are seen to offer a so-
cial ser­vice—and not to use gossip for manipulative personal gain—
they will be valued by other members of their groups.
	
Offering news in general bene­fits the giver as much as the re-
ceiver. I know I can earn a future credit on the social information 
exchange, often at little cost, for reporting something I happen to 
have witnessed or heard. I should “sell” this information while I still 
have something to sell, before another informant or a change in the 

On the Origin of Stories
168
situation makes my news worthless. And I want my news to be worth 
something to you, because then you will listen to me. I want your at-
tention.
	
Normally, and for good reason, we attend to the here and now. 
We  need to remain alert within the present, because danger may 
lurk even in the safety of our homes (what’s that burning smell? that 
creak on the stairs?). Nevertheless much ambient information is of 
low value. When we are not on the move, the world around us prob-
ably looks much as it did five seconds or five minutes ago. But if I 
report an event, you absorb it within the present but focus your at-
tention on the past. You know that I think it worth diverting your 
focus from the here and now, so you expect me to offer information 
of value, with the compression that narrative makes possible. Unless 
I have misjudged, or I muff the delivery, I have your attention and 
can direct it where I want as long as the story lasts.
	
As we have seen in Part 2, the capacity to command attention in 
social animals correlates highly with sta­tus—and the incapacity to 
gain attention marks low sta­tus, the inability to avert negative atten-
tion augurs danger (mockery, reproach, attack, or punishment), and 
the withdrawal of attention (ostracism, isolation) constitutes a se-
vere punishment in itself. Status in social animals also correlates with 
survival and reproductive success. We therefore seek attention as a 
good in itself and compete to tell stories. Studies show that we spend 
more than half our casual conversation time in gossip.30 If narrative 
were primarily altruistic, we would hold back and wait for others to 
produce their gossipy gift for us. Instead we normally compete not to 
hide social information but to divulge it.31 And when others recount 
a story, we often compete to offer additional details, alternative ex-
planations, equivalents (“You think you’ve had a bad day! . . .”) or 
parallels (“But when we were in Bolivia . . .”). We can support our 
friends, challenge enemies, or make our own claim on the attention 
of others.32
	
Apart from earning immediate credit on the information ex-
change, social narrative can earn a general sta­tus for those who con-
sistently provide information of high value and low cost: informa-
tion not already known, relevant to listeners’ situations, unexpected 
(not “Jill woke up this morning,” unless Jill has been in a coma), ac-

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
169
curate, and vividly, lucidly, and economically expressed. We will 
judge an individual with repeated access to valuable new social in-
formation as occupying a sig­nifi­cant node in the social network.
	
Those who offer information about the powerful can earn sta­tus 
from those with less information. (As with all these factors, we also 
adopt counterstrategies: we welcome insider knowledge, but we dis-
like name-­droppers trying to gain undeserved sta­tus.) Those who 
can offer information to the powerful can bene­fit directly from their 
patronage, as the chimpanzee Dandy did with the alpha male Yeroen 
by drawing his attention to a threat to his sexual rights, or as Polo-
nius tries to do by offering Claudius news of and reasons for Ham-
let’s seeming insanity.
	
Social information need not be news to earn sta­tus. Narrative may 
offer not just immediately relevant social information but also gen-
eral instances of human behavior to guide our re­flections and deci-
sions. Information not directly related to the short term must earn 
interest in other ways. In preliterate so­ci­e­ties elders accrue sta­tus for 
their depth of historical knowledge and the pertinence of the exam-
ples they can adduce for reasoning about the present and future. 
Even in modern institutions those with a rich store of apt precedents 
will be prized as repositories of institutional memory. Those who 
can recall and recount the past in ways that shape audience responses 
can have considerable in­flu­ence over decision-­making.33
Narrative and Strategy
Although humans are uniquely cooperative, we also compete within 
as well as between groups, even in narrative. As both tellers and lis-
teners, we use narrative strategically.
	
Much animal communication depends on environmental triggers, 
and for many species food and warning calls can be hard to suppress. 
Narrative, however, since it can refer to any other place or time, re-
mains highly in­de­pen­dent of the here and now. We can normally 
choose what stories to tell, and when, and to whom. And we can of-
ten predict what others know and might do with any additional in-
formation we could disclose. We have reason to pass on honest in-
formation if we want honest information in return, but we may 

On the Origin of Stories
170
disclose, withhold, or distort information strategically, even to the 
point of inventing purportedly true stories.
	
Narrative always bears at least a trace of strategy. We have to judge 
whose attention to catch, and when, and with what. We will seek to 
maximize audience interest and impact and to minimize audience 
effort or resistance. Take the case of a professional: the bard-­priest 
(dumsa) of the Kachin people in Burma traditionally adapts his sto-
ries to suit the audience that hires him.34 Or an amateur: an immi-
grant woman who arrived in Chicago late at night spontaneously 
recounted the evening’s events to a group of ­women as a near-­rape 
experience, appealing to female solidarity in the face of vulnerability, 
but reported the same events to a mixed-­sex audience as an encoun-
ter with a colorful group of weirdos, to avoid making part of her au-
dience defensive and to appeal to their appreciation of diversity and 
novelty.35 We may wish to maximize the time of telling (and thereby 
of holding the audience “in the palm of our hand”) insofar as doing 
so squares with not losing the audience’s attention: most of us sense 
how compelling we are as raconteurs, and how long we can hold the 
floor. We may wish to tell a story in order to move our listeners to a 
particular conclusion—and we might recall that the art of rhetoric 
was considered the core of formal education in the West for two mil-
lennia.
	
And we may wish to reshape or even invent a story to stir exactly 
the kind of response we seek.
	
Most of us do not lie habitually, but we may do so in response to 
circumstance. As children we discover the possibilities for primitive 
exculpation and inculpation: “I ­didn’t start it, Daddy! He did!” “No, 
he did! We were just . . .” The urgency of the situation and our knowl-
edge that no one else saw can embolden us. Even later, in tight situa-
tions or with little risk of detection, we may lie or “embellish” the 
truth. But as in other forms of cooperation, most of us come to take 
a ­longer view of things.
	
Advanced cooperation depends in part on the evolution of emo-
tions encouraging it. To prog­ress still further we need also the cul-
tural invention of values and practices that arise from and reinforce 
these social emotions: punishment for transgressions, for instance, 
and judicial systems to remove the need for personal revenge. The 

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
171
evolution of narrative depends in part on the evolution of our in­
clination to detect and reject abuses of communicative cooperative-
ness: our anger at dishonesty, our discomfort at flattery, our outrage 
at unfounded denigration, our indignation at the betrayal of con­
fidences, our annoyance at boasters and self-­promoters, our irrita-
tion at bores who claim our attention but offer little of interest in 
return. Each society forms its own cultural values to reinforce these 
responses. Homer has Odysseus strike Thersites for backbiting, to 
roars of approval; Dante assigns flatterers and slanderers to the lower 
depths of his Inferno; schoolchildren chant “Tell-­tale tit! Your tongue 
will split!” And each society creates its more or less successful institu-
tions for testing and punishing violations: corroboration or chal-
lenge; oaths and perjury laws; divination, confessions, judicial and 
forensic investigations; witnesses, seals, double-­entry bookkeeping; 
and the like.
	
We reach for a first lie in extremis. We experiment with lying: 
“I ­didn’t go near that chocolate cake!”—despite the incriminating 
smears. But most of us realize that while we wish to maximize the 
bene­fits for ourselves in what we tell, others also seek to maximize 
their interests. If we lie, manipulate, boast, flatter, or blab, they will 
resist and resent us. In the long run we serve our own interests best 
by earning reputations as tactful tellers of reliable, relevant, and, we 
hope, sometimes riveting reports.
	
If we seek to manipulate our audience, we will try to escape de­
tection so as to circumvent resistance. We can appeal to their pride 
without seeming to flatter openly. We can appeal to cooperative in-
stincts, to prosocial values we all wish to encourage in others, even 
though we might not be able to follow them perfectly ourselves. In-
deed since ev­ery­body loves an altruist,36 appealing to cooperative be-
havior has a good chance of appealing to all. Our good strategic rea-
sons to voice prosocial values in narrative make it all the likelier that 
we will air such values and then feel them to be shared. The publicity 
that prosociality can earn through narrative can in turn deepen the 
base of trust on which cooperation depends.
	
If we view narrative as a strategic social pro­cess—as we all do in-
tuitively—then one of the chief interests in studying narrative will be 
to study the strategies involved. And the most interesting strategists 

On the Origin of Stories
172
of all not only recount events but invent and shape them to appeal to 
an open-­ended audience in their own time and place—and perhaps 
all times and places.
As audiences, too, we actively strategize. We assess a story first of all 
for interest. When we observe the world for ourselves, we do not ex-
pect ev­ery sensory detail to be relevant, only to have the potential for 
relevance. We will suddenly focus attention on a looming danger or 
an emerging opportunity, but otherwise much of what we perceive 
will have no bearing on our current purposes. But if someone pro-
poses to tell us about another time and place, we want something 
worth the redirection from our here and now. Is it relevant enough? 
Does it involve people or events important, close, new, or unexpected 
enough to affect us? Does the story need to take so long or sound so 
convoluted? We resent, interrupt, walk away from, or avoid alto-
gether bores who relaunch common knowledge or old gossip or in-
formation never worth imparting. Boys, with their full testosterone 
tanks, deal particularly roughly with one another as listeners: “Story-
telling, joke telling and other narrative performance events are com-
mon features of the social interaction of boys . . . The storyteller is 
frequently faced with mockery, challenges and side comments on his 
story. A major sociolinguistic skill which a boy must apparently learn 
in interacting with his peers is to ride out this series of challenges, 
maintain his audience, and successfully get to the end of his story.”37
	
If we feel that stories continue to merit attention, we weigh them 
as they unfold. Do they seem reliable? Do the tellers have reputations 
for honesty? Are they telling the truth, boasting, slandering, flatter-
ing, tattling? If so, can we correct for bias or exaggeration? Can we 
sift direct observation from inference or hearsay? Some languages 
even build in evidentiary markers for past events so that audiences 
can know immediately whether the speaker claims to have directly 
witnessed, merely heard of, or only inferred this or that detail.
	
We will also seek to make stories count for ourselves as much as 
possible. We may apply their information to our own decision-­
making, seeking direct links to situations or people we know. If we 
see no immediate nexus, we might still check whether reports offer 
bases for reasoning about action: direct models for behavior or the 

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
173
oblique inferences of parable.38 We will face selection pressure to ex-
tract clearer or more pertinent information or implications.
	
We are not passive receptacles but highly active reconstructers. 
Our common understanding of events and language allows us to 
­follow stories from slight cues. As we make sense of stories, we also 
respond to what we understand of the events reported. The social 
emotions first evolved in direct encounters with others, as a guide 
to whom we should deal with and whom we should avoid, and in 
what circumstances. As animals increased in social intelligence, these 
emotions could also become activated through observing others in-
teracting between themselves, without the observer’s direct involve-
ment. The social emotions could also be reactivated, with little loss 
of force, by memories of others or their actions.
	
And in the human case, the social emotions could also be activated 
by default in response to accounts of the behavior of others that we 
have not witnessed directly. Because emotional responses to events 
evolved long before representations of events, and therefore before 
the representation of untrue or unreal events, our emotional systems 
did not evolve to be activated only on condition of belief. We have an 
“interested party” response to narrative.39 We need not identify with 
individuals we hear about (after all, a number of them may be of in-
terest to us, and we cannot see ourselves as several at once, especially 
if they are more or less in con­flict),40 but we respond to them almost 
as if we were witnessing the scene, and had a share in the outcome of 
their actions—especially since in the early human environment most 
reports would have been about people with whom we were likely to 
interact for the rest of our lives.
We re­fine much of our advanced social understanding through nar-
rative. As young children we naïvely seize on the opportunities that 
lies offer, only to discover how they can be found out and how oth-
ers regard them. As we mature, the con­flict between others’ narra-
tives and our own helps us understand in emotionally charged ways 
the differences among people’s perspectives on events. We learn such 
lessons partly through real-­world narrative, through being caught 
up in the con­flict of real-­world story and counterstory; through the 
negotiations of play, which like real-­world events involve active par­

On the Origin of Stories
174
tic­i­pa­tion rather than passive observation, but allow more leeway 
for harmless trial and error, and therefore learning; and in fiction, 
which does not involve active par­tic­i­pa­tion but can be powerfully 
and pointedly shaped to dramatize the force of narrative and coun-
ternarrative.
	
Indeed one account clashes with another in fiction from the Ra-
mayana to Rashomon or the latest soap opera. Competing narratives 
about events that seem real to the characters matter to fiction for 
good reason. Characters cannot be aware of ev­ery action and need 
to be informed of what has happened elsewhere. Who was in a posi-
tion to know, who informs whom, and how the information is inter-
preted can powerfully guide actions and reactions.
	
We are all highly sensitive to the roles that report and counterre-
port play in our lives and to the way we assess people through the 
stories they tell. But like many things we handle with ease and take 
for granted, these prominent features of human life have received 
comparatively little formal investigation. Fiction writers, however, 
have noticed and made the most of them, from boast and counter-
boast in Homer to con and countercon in David Mamet. Much sub-
tle evidence for human psychology has accumulated in the world’s 
literature,41 and perhaps nowhere more than in the way story and 
counterstory weave together in the web of human life.
Although it seems highly unlikely that language evolved in order to 
pass on gossip,42 the advantages of reporting events to others would 
have been manifest as soon as semantics and syntax became ad-
vanced enough to support it. And the flex­i­bil­ity of modern human 
language was surely enhanced by the pressure to communicate com­
pli­cated social information involving multiple points of view.
	
Human language, as the recent field of conceptual semantics 
shows, appears uniquely designed to represent what we understand 
of events. Language’s universal subject-­verb-­object combinations, 
however variable in sequence and detail, divide the world into stable 
entities and relatively transient actions.43 Even in nonhuman affairs, 
human actions shape the way we refer to matter (mass nouns like 
sand or clay as raw substance, versus countables like glasses or bowls, 
which have been molded from substance into objects), space (prepo-

	
Narrative: Representing Events
	
175
sitions across languages re­flect “an intuitive physics of fitting, sup-
porting, containing, covering, and other ways that humans put ob-
jects to use”), time (the future tense, for instance, across languages 
often incorporates the notion of volition or movement toward), and 
cause (prototypically an impetus transferred by a potent agent, espe-
cially a person, to a weaker entity that would rather stay put).44 Lan-
guage can report events so well because our overwhelming interest 
in human actions has itself shaped language.
	
To understand social events with the precision we need, our ob-
servations also need to incorporate theory of mind. We need to mas-
ter not just event representation, but also metarepresentation, the 
ways in which particular perspectives on events represent them as 
understood, anticipated, recollected, or imagined by someone, or 
portrayed by something, in a particular way in a particular situation. 
Many aspects of language seem especially well designed not merely 
to represent events, but to move an audience to all sorts of possible, 
rapidly shifting, vantage points on events or circumstances.
	
Even something as basic to language as verbal tense does this.45 We 
effortlessly compress multiple viewpoints in time into a single tense 
marker and then easily unzip these successive or overlapping per-
spectives:
(1) Trog is twenty summers. (2) He has lived with various 
­women. (3) In the year of the big dry, he lived with Grota. (4) 
In the year of the big wet, he would set up with Trunga. (5) He 
would then have lived a year with Grota.
In sentence 4, “he would” looks forward from the vantage point of 
“the year of the big dry,” which became our temporary base in sen-
tence 3, to an event then in the future but now in the past. In sentence 
5 we adopt this new event, setting up with Trunga, as a base from 
which to look back at the duration of Trog’s relationship with Grota.
	
Even in ordinary language, even in something as basic to syntax as 
tense or negation,46 we nimbly shift our own and our audience’s per-
spectives from our shared starting point to other provisional vantage 
points and foci with great ef­fi­ciency, speed, and accuracy. Language 
re­flects the shifts our minds use to make sense of events and their 

On the Origin of Stories
176
sequence, once we have theory of mind and a capacity for metarep-
resentation. And it can impart to others that sense, and those chang-
ing perspectives of time, place, and person, with minimal confusion.
Narrative arises from the advantages of communication in social 
species. It bene­fits audiences, who can choose better what course of 
action to take on the basis of strategic information, and it bene­fits 
tellers, who earn credit in the social information exchange and gain 
in terms of attention and sta­tus. That combination of bene­fits, for 
the teller and the told, and the intensity of social monitoring in our 
species, explain why narrative has become so central to human life.
	
The events that narrative reports may be directly related to pres-
ent or future choices of action, to situations or people that listeners 
may become involved with. Or they may offer ways of reasoning 
about action: analogues or “parables” to guide our social planning; 
models to emulate or spurn; or merely images of the range of human 
character, situations, and behavior, and, in ancestral environments, 
perhaps also of the behavior of predators and prey.47
	
Narrative is always strategic, for both teller and listener, in ways 
that can range from the callously selfish to the generously proso-
cial. Because natural selection occurs at multiple levels, it can assist 
individuals or groups at different levels in their competition with 
other individuals or groups. But narrative especially helps coordi-
nate groups, by informing their members of one another’s actions. It 
spreads prosocial values, the likeliest to appeal to both tellers and lis-
teners. It develops our capacity to see from different perspectives, 
and this capacity in turn both arises from and aids the evolution of 
cooperation and the growth of human mental flex­i­bil­ity.
	
But maximum flex­i­bil­ity, in humans as in others, depends on 
play.

	
177
12
FICTION: INVENTING EVENTS
Animals love to play, even with other species. Rats rarely 
tire of being tickled by humans, dogs of chasing and fetching. But 
only humans would play simultaneously with dinosaurs and ducks 
or dragons and skeletons. Only we immerse ourselves as children 
in pretend play and emerge through and beyond childhood into a 
world surrounded by fiction, a world of ac­tuality surrounded by 
possibility.
	
Young children do not often spontaneously produce stand-­alone 
stories, and cannot easily articulate in words alone what they under-
stand of stories they hear. But in pretend play they readily make up 
stories and often act out what they understand of a story better than 
they can frame it in words.
	
Children’s social pretend play lacks form as story or drama. It pro-
ceeds in fits and starts; it lacks consistency and direction. Children 
easily and naturally “break frame,” stepping outside the action—an 
utter no-­no in modern adult improvisatory theater—to narrate the 
story, or to act as codirectors or scriptwriters, as they negotiate the 
next development. (This phenomenon, incidentally, refutes the nar-
ratological tradition that insists that only narrated and not enacted 
stories count as narratives. For children, direction, narration, and 
­enactment flow readily and naturally into one another. So long as 
the play-­story continues, consistency of medium or mode does not 
matter.) Developmental psychologist Keith Sawyer has undertaken 
a longitudinal study of preschool children at play. Here he records 
Jennifer and Muhammed playing with toy animals at a sand table. 
Jennifer has a little duck, and Muhammed a dinosaur.

On the Origin of Stories
178
Jennifer
  1	 Oh big dinosaur
high-­pitched voicing, as duck
  2	 I cannot
  3	 (screams)
Muhammed
  4	 No, you can get on me
in deep, gruff voice
  5	 I just won’t care
  6	
J puts her duck on the dinosaur’s back
Jennifer
  7	 He said, he said
  8	 You bad dinosaur
in deep voice
  9	 Quickly, she hided in the sand
pushing the duck into the sand
10	 so the dinosaur
Muhammed
11	 No, pretend he killed her
12	 Ow!
13	 He’s already killed
Though inept as drama or story, this exchange makes perfect sense as 
play. The continuity of location, props, and pretend identities pro-
vides enough consistency for the “story” to lurch to its next point of 
interest or contrast. It engages attention. The children make the most 
of their theory of kind, their appreciation of the differences between 
species, as their story and the pitch of their play-­voices highlight the 
contrast between the two animals. Like children ev­erywhere, Jennifer 
and Muhammed are fascinated by the power and violence of the di-
nosaur. Like children and adults—not only in our own species—they 
have a special fondness for childlike features in humans and other 
animals.1 Ducks with their rounded beaks therefore particularly ap-
peal among birds, and toy ducks with their yellow plumage appeal as 
the youngest of ducklings. Even if the two toys are not too dissimilar 
in size, Jennifer and Muhammed make the most of the gap between 
the booming, imagination-­haunting dinosaur and the squeaking, 
vulnerable little duck. They cannot manage gradual development, 

	
Fiction: Inventing Events
	
179
but they can pick dramatic moments: challenge (You bad dinosaur), 
flight (she hided in the sand), and violent death.
	
In later childhood and beyond we can understand and represent 
both ac­tual and counterfac­tual events flexibly and almost effortlessly. 
Although language helps, our suppleness in social supposition does 
not derive from language. It begins to develop in us very early, before 
language, theory of mind, and metarepresentation are far advanced, 
in the form of pretend play. We cannot retrace far into our species 
past the origin of our capacity to comprehend and represent events, 
but we can, fortunately, follow the origin of stories in our individual 
past. And since our protracted childhood makes human life-­history 
unique, it is appropriate that childhood offers our clearest window—
through the one-­way glass of the developmental psychology labora-
tory—on the origins of our interest in story.
	
Animals play, and, despite dif­fi­culties in de­fin­ing it, human ex-
perts and nonexperts alike easily recognize play.2 Most biologists 
agree that it must be adaptive, since it is so widespread within and 
across species, since it consumes valuable energy, since it puts players 
at increased risk of predation or injury, yet remains eagerly antici-
pated, solicited, and maintained. But they do not often agree on its 
adaptive role.
	
Let me return by another route to the account of play I proposed 
in Chapter 6. Pleasure is nature’s way of motivating creatures to per-
form an activity now—and, in the case of play, to expend energy ea-
gerly in mastering skills and acquiring strengths they might need 
later in urgent or volatile situations, in attack, defense, and social 
competition and cooperation. Animals and humans not only look as 
though they enjoy play, but their brains release do­pa­mine—the main 
neurotransmitter for the anticipation of rewards—before and dur-
ing play.3
	
Juvenile play deprivation among both rats and humans correlates 
with serious social malfunction in later life. Young rats experimen-
tally deprived of play grow up unable to judge how and when to de-
fend themselves and veer between being far too aggressive and far 
too passive.4 In humans such experiments have yet to be tried, but 
in a large-­scale study of sociopathic murderers in Texas, researchers 
were surprised to find no common background factor other than an 

On the Origin of Stories
180
absence or an extremely reduced amount of play in childhood in 90 
percent of the perpetrators.5
	
Concerned to reject false romanticization, researchers com­pli­cate 
our notion of play as essentially inventive by stressing its frequent 
repetitiveness.6 But this feature not only should be expected; it lies at 
the heart of play. Play’s compulsiveness ensures the repetition that 
allows time to recon­fig­ure minds and bodies. If play incorporates 
routines not required in the ordinary course of events, but needed in 
escape, pursuit, or attack, like (in the human case) accurate throwing 
of pro­jec­tiles, then the skills it develops can become automatic and 
re­fined. Through overlearning actions, we can take them to a new 
level of control and flex­i­bil­ity, as now in playing tennis or the piano, 
or as once in wrestling and throwing at targets. (According to an 
eigh­teenth-­century explorer, the Hottentots of southwestern Africa 
“know how to throw very accurately with stones . . . It is also not rare 
for them to hit a target the size of a coin with a stone at 100 paces.”)7 
The plea­sure of mastery and the particularly strong male plea­sure in 
competition further hone skills learned in play.
	
All par­tic­i­pants must understand behaviors like chasing and 
rough-­and-­tumble as play and not real attack.8 To initiate play, canids 
have a ritualized play bow, particularly stereotyped in the young, like 
the “Once upon a time” that signals to a human child a partial sus-
pension of the rules of the real.9 All movements and postures be-
come loose in play.10 Baboons have a gamboling gait and a relaxed 
open-­mouthed play-­face—closely related to the human smile—to 
indicate “This is not in earnest.” Play constitutes a first decoupling of 
the real, detaching aggression or any other “serious” behavior from 
its painful consequences so as to explore and master the possibilities 
of attack and defense.11 In play we act as if within quotation marks, 
as if these were hooks to lift the behavior from its context to let 
us turn it around for inspection. Within the frame of play, animals 
make a first step toward the representation or re-­presentation of the 
real that thought and language provide and that allow us to rotate 
things freely in the mind, exploring them from new angles. Play per-
mits detachment, yet does so by engaging players intensely. Inviting, 
engrossing, energetic, this self-­rewarding concentrate of ordinary ac-
tion makes it possible to develop rapidly skills that it would be dan-

	
Fiction: Inventing Events
	
181
gerous to learn, and impossible to overlearn, within the urgencies 
of the real.
Play is widespread among animals, but pretend play appears to be 
an almost exclusively human activity. Infants engage compulsively 
in  pretend play, alone or with others. At twelve months they can 
­manipulate objects as if they were something else.12 Developmental 
psychologist Peter Hobson recalls his year-­and-­a-­half-­old son in his 
high chair, playing with a spoon, catching his father’s eye mischie-
vously, and “driving” and vocalizing the spoon as if it were a car: “He 
seemed aware that he and I were both looking at a spoon and not a 
car—yet, either separately or together, we could choose to relate to 
the spoon as a car for the purposes of pretend.”13
	
Children’s capacity to see a part of the world as if other than it is 
begins before they can use language or clearly at­tri­bute mental states 
to others. By the age of two, often after picking up cues from adults 
or older children, they find pretend play easy and fun, and they un-
derstand and enjoy the pretend play of others, like a mother talking 
into a banana as if it were a telephone.14 Although this marks an ad-
vance over the infant’s single updating model of reality, children at 
this age can entertain multiple models of reality, like past and pres-
ent, or the real world and a pretend part of it, but cannot yet under-
stand the nature of representation. A child laying its head down in 
play-­sleep on a cloth is not representing the cloth as a pillow: acting 
as-­if is not the same as using one thing to represent another.15
	
Play, like story, develops by stages as a child’s discriminations ex-
tend from objects to kinds to minds. At first infants see toys as mere 
objects to be pushed and pulled, to be tested for their fit and feel. 
Even dolls are just shapes in human form. But gradually they become 
persons, first the passive objects of the child’s care, then, with the 
child’s help, active agents, until eventually the child imagines the toys 
as seeing and feeling and at last at­tri­butes to them knowledge and 
belief.16
	
Developmental psychologist Janet Astington traces a similar tra-
jectory in her daughter’s interest in stories, from things and their 
qualities to individuals and their actions, intentions, and beliefs. At 
two, her daughter’s favorite “story” began: “Here is the farm. Here is 

On the Origin of Stories
182
the stable. The horse lives here with one little foal. Here is the cow-
shed. The cow lives here with two little calves . . .” One can almost 
imagine many an animal species having such “stories” as this, if they 
could have stories at all, but not what this girl liked by the age of 
four. By now her favorite book was a fairy-­tale trea­sury, with stories 
like “The Emperor’s New Clothes”:
The emperor thought he would like to see it while it was still 
on the loom. So, accompanied by a number of selected court-
iers, among whom were the two faithful of­fi­cials who had 
already seen the imaginary stuff, he went to visit the crafty 
impostors, who were working away as hard as ever they could 
at the empty loom . . .17
	
Two-­year-­olds tend to see stories as interactive exchanges, in which 
they can test and con­firm their knowledge with an older storyteller 
or enjoy the dramatization and the prompting and sharing of re-
sponse. A two-­year-­old will often balk at being placed in the role of 
storyteller, and may not want to go beyond simple naming: “Once 
upon a time there lived a horse and that’s the end.”18 Children’s spon-
taneous presleep monologues at this age also focus on the famil-
iar rather than the novel. Instead of inventing the marvelous, they 
recount the routines of the day, as if to fix in their minds standard 
situations or “scripts” they need to master, “the canonical events of 
[their] world from which other narrative types emerged.”19
	
Yet even in early pretense, children test the implications of their 
imagined contexts without confusing them with the real. They ap-
preciate counterfac­tuality—they do not eat their mud pies—but 
they can act out situations as if they were ac­tual.20 A cup that has 
been pretend-­filled by a pretend-­pour from an ac­tually empty teapot 
will spill its pretend contents if knocked over, and children will refill 
only the “spilled” cup, not the others, even if all are in fact empty.21 
They can run similar inferences with toys that represent animals 
or  people or with purely imaginary characters. Between the ages 
of three and ten, many children—perhaps 50 percent—develop sus-
tained and complex relationships with “imaginary companions.” 
They do not confuse their fantasy and reality, and from the age of 

	
Fiction: Inventing Events
	
183
three those who do have imaginary companions perform better than 
others on tests of the ability to differentiate the real and the imag-
ined. They often outperform others “at tasks that require a subtle use 
of intuitive psychology. They seem to have a firmer grasp of the dif-
ference between their own and other people’s perspectives on a given 
situation and are better at construing other people’s mental states 
and emotions.” Imaginary companions offer “training for the social 
mind,” as pretend play does in general for many kinds of behavior.22
	
But as children gain con­fi­dence in identifying and distinguishing 
objects and situations, they become interested in testing and over-
turning expectations, like so many toy blocks to be toppled in order 
to rouse a reaction. Even at twenty-­one months Emily had a different 
voice for play with her toys and for telling a story. For a story, she 
raised her vocal pitch and heightened her vocal contours, as if she 
realized the need to secure attention.23
	
Although young children tend not to invent stories to tell others, 
as opposed to engaging in pretend play alone or in company, or trad-
ing rhymes and riddles, their predisposition to pretend play makes 
them ready enough to tell stories when prompted.24 In their third 
year, before they have much command of story structure, they ap-
pear to grasp the crucial role of pattern and of holding the atten-
tion of listeners. At this age their stories are almost as much poems 
as narratives, focusing on striking characters and effects that violate 
expectations, but in a structure that resembles theme and variation 
rather than the event continuity that adults expect of stories:
The monkeys
They went up sky
They fall down
Choo choo train in the sky
The train fell down in the sky
I fell down in the sky in the water
I got on my boat and my legs hurt
Daddy fall down in the sky.25
The two-­and-­a-­half-­year-­old boy making up this “story” has no idea 
yet that stories incorporate not just characters, events, and locations 

On the Origin of Stories
184
but also aims, goals, actions, and out­comes. He cannot develop a 
story but seems to intuit the need to surprise, with his unusual char-
acters in unusual places defying the principles of gravity that he be-
gan to understand before he was three months old.26 Repetition is 
the simplest form of elaboration, but since pure repetition dimin-
ishes interest, repetition of a bold idea with variation offers him the 
best prospects of holding attention with the imaginative resources 
he has.
	
Even infants, like the rest of us, lose interest at mere repetition 
and suddenly look ­longer and harder at anything that strikes them 
as different: “Surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, is more informative 
than predictability.”27 Neurons in the substantia nigra and the ven-
tral tegmental areas of the brain secrete do­pa­mine in reaction to the 
surprising but not to the expected.28 Before they can understand or 
relate events in anything like an adult way, children seem to under-
stand the value of the rewards of surprise and how to produce them 
in their first attempts at story—as in the sudden shifts of Jennifer 
and Muhammed’s duck and dinosaur play.
	
In another game, Sawyer’s field notes record Jennifer, now with 
the dinosaur, playing with two unnamed boys who “have blocks, 
which are now ‘pepper shakers’ which shake ‘poison pepper.’ When 
Jennifer’s dinosaur be­comes a little too threatening, they chant ‘Pep-
per, Pepper,’ and shake at the dinosaur. Jennifer ­doesn’t want her di-
nosaur to die; she says ‘Pretend he just sneezes from the pepper, he 
­doesn’t die.’ The boys agree.”29 Against the attention-­catchingly ex-
travagant force of the dinosaur they invent the equally extravagant 
“poison pepper,” yet when the sheer power of their weapons threat-
ens to end the game, they easily move out of the pretense, for a mo-
ment, to negotiate a sudden new pretense to keep their play going.
	
By the time children reach three or four, their pretend play and 
their early stories aim not at realism but at catching the attention 
through fantastic characters and actions that violate expectations.30 
Since destruction is more arresting than more gradual change, they 
tend to focus on di­sas­ter, often without resolution.31 The evidence 
shows that they recall “breach stories,” stories that counter expecta-
tions, better than those that do not.32
	
As part of his challenge to romanticized notions of play, leading 

	
Fiction: Inventing Events
	
185
play scholar Brian Sutton-­Smith posits that “the delight the young 
have in destroying things and in general being bound to themes of 
violence and mayhem is, as [Mihai] Spariosu said, that they have 
perceived the generally chaotic nature of the universe and wish to 
par­tic­i­pate in it.”33 Surely not. A less far-­fetched explanation is that 
children have discovered they can make more of a difference to their 
world more quickly by destruction. It can take several minutes of 
painstaking concentration to build a tall pile of blocks, but less than 
a second, and one exuberant push, to make the whole thing clatter 
down. In story as in play, destruction is a way of causing maximum 
impact for minimum effort. A four-­year-­old boy made up this story:
Once there was a dragon who went poo poo on a house 
and the house broke
then when the house broke the people died
and when the people died their bones came out and 
broke and got together again and turned into a 
skeleton
and then the skeletons came along and scared the people 
out of the town
and then when all the people got scared out of the town 
then skeleton babies were born
and then ev­ery­one called it skeleton town
and when they called it skeleton town the people came 
back and then they got scared away again
and then when they all got scared away again the 
skeletons died
no one came to the town
so there was no people ever in that town ever again.34
This and other young children’s stories are not plotless, but un-
planned and episodic, a series of opportunistic riffs, each aimed at 
catching the attention, from the dragon as a conventional category-­
breaching monster, to the decorum-­breaching “poo poo” on the 
house, to the house’s collapse and killing its in­hab­i­tants, to their 
bones emerging from their bodies, breaking and coming together 
again, and somehow giving rise to skeleton babies.

On the Origin of Stories
186
	
As theory of mind continues to develop in middle and late child-
hood, children learn subtler ways of extending and linking events by 
incorporating aims and intentions, then feelings, then even beliefs, 
at first implicitly, then explicitly, into their play, their own stories, 
and their responses to questions about stories they read. Stories in-
creasingly have a large-­scale structure with distinct and well-­formed 
episodes and continuity between the episodes, especially in terms 
of characters’ goals. In pursuit of their goals, characters now resist 
the calamities that tend to befall them without comeback in youn­
ger children’s stories, and become more active, resourceful, and reso-
lute.35
	
Pretend play does not arise out of an increasingly sophisticated 
grasp of story structure; all it takes is the names of a few creatures 
and a few basic expectations of each of them, and an awareness of ac­
tions or of other creatures that would breach expectations. Although 
pretend play can help children deploy or test what they know of the 
real, it is more important for them to engage their own and their 
playmates’ attention through impact, surprise, the breach of normal 
expectations. Children need to be able to grasp the real, to work out 
what to expect of inanimate and animate, of different kinds of things 
and animals, of different behaviors and situations; but they quickly 
become interested not merely in recombining the normal but also 
in transgressing its boundaries. Holding their own attention or that 
of their playmates by surprise and intensity matters more than, and 
precedes, mastering the richness of the real. A choo-­choo train fall-
ing down in the sky, a dinosaur dying or only sneezing from poison 
pepper, a dragon poo-­pooing on a house until it collapses do little to 
instruct children about reality, but such stories keep them engaged 
and help the children explore alone and together the possible around 
the real.
	
Although many animal species can understand the actions of 
other members of their species in subtle ways that we have dif­fi­culty 
in deciphering, we understand the behavior of other humans in ways 
more sophisticated and precise than any other species can under-
stand its own kind. But as young children, before we understand 
events with any subtlety, before we understand what others can be-
lieve about a situation and therefore what they might feel, intend, 

	
Fiction: Inventing Events
	
187
and do, we are already compulsive creators of pretend events. And 
these pretend events not only recombine elements of the real but 
readily step over the ac­tual into the possible and the impossible. Why 
is so much of early human play pretend play? Why is the pretense so 
often so extravagant? And why, when we master language and theory 
of mind so that we can use all our special human understanding of 
social events to tell stories flu­ently, without needing to act them out, 
do we still find the “pretend” stories of fiction so engrossing?

188
13
FICTION AS ADAPTATION
In the 1989 TV movie The Naked Lie the unpleasant and self-­
centered Webster shows no sympathy for a prostitute who has been 
killed. When Victoria asks him, “What if it were your sister?” he 
sneers: “I ­don’t have a sister, but if I did, she ­wouldn’t be a hooker.” 
Later in the movie Victoria muses to another character: “You know 
that sister Webster ­doesn’t have? Well, she ­doesn’t know how lucky 
she is.”1 We easily follow Victoria’s initial counterfac­tual, Webster’s 
counterfac­tual refutation of her condition, and Victoria’s comically 
contradictory counterfac­tual consequence, the sister who, because 
she does not exist, cannot know how lucky she is not to do so if she 
has to suffer Webster as her brother. Stories help train us to explore 
possibility as well as ac­tuality, effortlessly and even playfully, and that 
capacity makes all the difference.
Fiction: Evidence for Adaptation
Since, as we have seen, much of our ability and inclination to un­
derstand, recall, represent, and invent events precedes language, our 
storytelling instinct needs a biocultural explanation. To explain how 
we understand and represent events poses no untoward biological 
challenge, since the advantages of both are so apparent, and since we 
can find such clear precursors in other animals. But fiction, inventing 
events, presents a more dif­fi­cult—but not insoluble—problem.
	
First, we need to see fiction as an art, and as emerging later than 
other arts, music, dance, and the first visual arts, like body decora-
tion and the fancy fin­ishing of stone hand-­axes. We already had other 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
189
arts as adaptations—and a strong predisposition to play with pat-
tern—before we began to make up stories.
	
Second, we need to see the novelty of fiction. We have good rea-
sons to think that it constitutes an adaptation in its own right. Tell-
ing fictional stories is a human universal. It develops spontaneously 
and without training in childhood in the form of pretend play. And 
even as adults we can and want to tell and listen to fiction.
	
One sign of a cognitive adaptation is that limited perceptual input 
yields rich conceptual output: the mind automatically pro­cesses in-
formation in elaborate ways. In fiction we repeatedly make infer-
ences that far outstrip evidence. Seeing the graffito “Ralph, come 
back, it was only a rash,” we naturally understand it first as one lov-
er’s appeal to the other to return, because what had seemed like a 
sexually transmitted disease was only an innocent rash; then as a joke 
pretending to be such an appeal. From minuscule data we leap to 
complex inferences. The dif­fi­culty of programming computers to 
understand natural-­language narratives has made plain how richly 
our minds pro­cess the world so that we can understand events and 
stories from the sparest information.
	
Another sign of a cognitive adaptation is the inability to suppress 
a response. If we see a plaster cast of a face lit from above or below, 
we will think it convex one way, concave another, because our visual 
system expects the main source of illumination to come from above 
and not below. We cannot suppress this tendency even when the light 
­comes from below, and we therefore read the highlights and shadows 
with precisely inverse values, as protruding where the cast recedes, 
and vice versa. In the same way we are unable not to imagine and re-
spond to the characters and events of a well-­told story, even if the 
storyteller invokes fantasy with a time-­honored “Once upon a time” 
or a new twist like Louise Erdrich’s “You ­don’t have to believe this, 
I’m not asking you to.”2 We may know that the story consists of mere 
words, words with no pretense to report real events, or of contrived 
images, pro­jected onto a flat screen in pixellated form, of ar­ti­fi­cially 
costumed, made-­up, and illuminated actors, whose real identities 
and lives may be quite familiar to us, and whom we may have seen 
playing very different parts—yet whether on page or screen we can-
not stop conjuring up and responding to the story’s invented people 

On the Origin of Stories
190
and predicaments, and even, if occasion prompts, weeping tears at 
characters’ fates.
	
Failure in a particular cognitive activity, as a result of genetic de-
fect, disease, or accident, also indicates the likelihood of specialized 
cognitive subroutines involved in a particular adaptation. Theory of 
mind is central to the human capacity to understand others as richly 
as we do and to our understanding of metarepresentation. Autistic 
individuals have very poorly developed theory of mind, often despite 
intelligence in other areas, and dif­fi­culties in story comprehension, 
and do not engage spontaneously in pretend play.3 Williams syn-
drome, with almost exactly the opposite symptoms—high sociality 
and playfulness, good theory of mind, linguistic and quasi-­narrative 
flu­ency, but severely impaired intelligence—con­firms that theory of 
mind is not simply a feature of general-­purpose intelligence.
Adaptations show design for some function. In the preceding three 
chapters I have explained the design for fiction, and its origins in 
other cognitive adaptations: evolved systems of event comprehen-
sion, our theories of things, kinds, and minds and of event storage, in 
episodic memory; evolved systems of event representation, whether 
in action, word, image, or object, and human joint attention both to 
events and to others representing events; and the reliable emergence 
of pretend play and story as a way of exercising our capacities for 
handling social information. A crucial question remains: What bio-
logical function(s) has fiction? What difference can it make in terms 
of human survival and reproduction?
Fiction’s Functions
I have suggested that we see art as cognitive play with information-­
rich pattern. Ordinary play allows animals to extend and re­fine their 
competence in standard species behaviors to the point where their 
skills offer a new freedom that may be crucial in situations like at-
tack, defense, or rearing offspring. The special cognitive play of art, I 
propose, allows humans to extend and re­fine key cognitive compe-
tences.
	
Only recently has research begun to con­firm the power of play 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
191
and art to recalibrate minds. Evidence has emerged from ethology 
and neurology that play of all kinds affects performance, as the in-
tense plea­sure it produces motivates repeat practice in secure situa-
tions and thereby strengthens synaptic connections. As Marc Bekoff 
notes, play “provides important nourishment for brain growth; it ac­
tually helps to rewire the brain, increasing the connections between 
neurons in the cerebral cortex. Play also hones cognitive skills.”4 Just 
as girls enjoy pretend play with dolls, female primates find babies, 
the youn­ger the better, fascinating; those who have not yet had in-
fants of their own are usually highly motivated to play at mothering 
the infants of others, while those who have not played the role of 
mother perform less well when they themselves become mothers.5 
Or, to jump to our own species and the present: computer games can 
improve the speed and accuracy of visual recognition and manual 
dexterity. Regular players have improved visual attention and can 
shift attention more quickly. The best predictor of surgeons’ skill at 
keyhole surgery turns out not to be years of training or number of 
procedures performed, but time spent at computer games.6
	
Similar bene­fits apply to art. “Learning requires the assimilation 
and consolidation of information in neural tissue. The more expe­
riences we have with something, the stron­ger the memory/learning 
trace for that experience be­comes.”7 Although many people say that 
their early music lessons ­didn’t “take,” cognitive neuroscientists have 
found otherwise: “Even just a small exposure to music lessons as a 
child creates neural circuits for music pro­cessing that are enhanced 
and more ef­fi­cient than for those who lack the training.”8 But be-
cause social information matters so much to us, we never need to 
sign up for story lessons, and we never complain that stories ­didn’t 
“take”: as children and adults we happily succumb to the training 
in social cognition that pretend play and fiction reliably yield. Chil-
dren have to hone their capacity to direct and shift attention.9 The 
high intensity of pretend play and fiction and their rapid switches 
of place, time, and perspective must make social cognition, like any 
other well-­learned and much-­practiced skill, faster, more ef­fi­cient, 
and more accurate, and speed up the capacity to guide and redirect 
social attention.10
	
Evidence has also begun to arrive that even vicarious and virtual 

On the Origin of Stories
192
experience activates the mind in ways that partly mimic direct ac-
tion. Witnessing or even hearing about activities can cause neurons 
involved in producing the action to fire. Social neuroscience has be-
gun to discover how our minds can be affected by emotional conta-
gion, by responding, even without registering consciously, to cues of 
spe­cific actions or emotions in others.11 As we have seen, mirror neu-
rons fire when we perceive someone performing an action, as they 
would if we were performing it ourselves. Electromyographic studies 
show that our faces automatically make invisibly small muscle con-
tractions in response to pictures of human facial expressions, even 
when we are unaware of what we have seen.12 Recent research also 
shows that merely encountering an action word like “grasp” can trig-
ger neurons to fire in the area of the motor cortex that would be acti-
vated when ac­tually grasping.13
	
Much of this research into neural plasticity, reinforcement, and 
indirect activation has only recently become possible. It seems likely 
that evidence will continue to arrive that art in general, through its 
capacity to compel our attention, improves spe­cific kinds of pattern 
detection: in the case of fiction, our ability to detect social and agen-
tial patterns.
	
Apart from immediate danger, nothing captures our attention like 
the actions of others around us, and most of us therefore find fiction 
even more compelling than music or visual art, and able to hold our 
interest for hours at a stretch. Fiction allows us to extend and re­fine 
our capacity to pro­cess social information, especially the key infor-
mation of character and event—individuals and associates, allies and 
enemies, goals, obstacles, actions, and out­comes—and to metarepre-
sent, to see social information from the perspective of other individ-
uals or other times, places, or conditions, as Jenny and Muhammed 
do with dinosaur and duck, or Victoria and Webster do with Web-
ster’s nonexistent sister.
	
Much more than other species, “we re­fine our resources by inces-
sant rehearsal and tinkering.”14 Fiction’s appeal to our appetite for 
rich patterns of social information engages our attention from infant 
pretend play to adulthood. Because it entices us again and again to 
immerse ourselves in story, it helps us over time to rehearse and re­
fine our apprehension of events. Fiction, I propose, does not estab-

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
193
lish but does improve our capacity to interpret events.15 It preselects 
information of relevance, prefocuses attention on what is strategi-
cally important, and thereby sim­pli­fies the cognitive task of compre-
hension. At the same time it keeps strategic information flowing at a 
much more rapid pace than normal in real life, and allows a com-
paratively disengaged attitude to the events unfolding. It trains us to 
make inferences quickly, to shift mentally to new characters, times, 
and perspectives. Fiction aids our rapid understanding of real-­life 
social situations, activating and maintaining this capacity at high in-
tensity and low cost.16
	
Fiction also increases the range of our vicarious experience and 
behavioral options. Like play, it allows us to learn possible opportu-
nities and risks, and the stratagems and emotional resources needed 
to cope with inevitable setbacks, without subjecting ourselves to ac­
tual risk. It does so ef­fi­ciently because it acts as a superstimulus by 
focusing on intense experience and concentrated change.17 These not 
only hook attention but rouse emotion, which in turn amplifies 
memory.
	
By inventing characters and events, by selecting them to shape 
emotions toward de­fined conclusions, fiction can stock memory 
with compact and compelling examples, not usually of scenarios we 
are likely to relive closely, but of situations with enough emotional 
and ethical similarities to those we do experience to provide a basis 
for our thinking. Fiction can design events and characters to provoke 
us to re­flect on, say, generosity, or threat, or deception and counter-
deception. And it ef­fi­ciently evokes our intense emotional engage-
ment without requiring our belief.18
	
Many have proposed that a major function of fiction is its ability 
to provide scenarios or models that we can draw on in planning our 
own actions and making our own decisions. Others object, arguing 
that obviously false situations can play no realistic role in planning.19 
The appeal of the surprising in fiction, from pretend play to Shake-
speare, does mean that much story, from a dragon poo-­pooing to 
a fairy queen falling in love with a workman transformed into an 
ass, seems designed to arrest attention rather than to offer scenarios 
likely to recur in the lives of audiences. If the prime function of fic-
tion were to provide literal models of situations we might encoun-

On the Origin of Stories
194
ter, then scenarios of an ev­eryday kind, such as we might find in 
language-­learning workbooks, would be the acme of fiction. But fic-
tional situations need be neither just the same as those we encounter 
in real life, nor realistic, in order to aid our thinking about action.
	
Thought experiments, Richard Dawkins observes, “are not sup-
posed to be realistic. They are supposed to clarify our thinking about 
reality.”20 The thought experiments of fiction may opt for realism, 
like Christ’s parable of the Good Samaritan, or against it, like Aesop’s 
animal fables. We do not need to be a Samaritan or to travel from 
Jerusalem to Jericho or to encounter a wayfarer robbed by the road-
side to learn from the example of the Samaritan’s charity. The very 
brevity of the parable (it takes only a minute to tell, in the version in 
Luke 10) and yet the clarity of its structure and sense, because it is fic-
tion (the threefold repetition, the pointed contrast of uncharitable 
priest and Levite and charitable Samaritan), are exactly what make 
this exemplary tale such a powerful basis for re­flect­ing on how we 
should help others.
	
This particular parable works though brevity, clarity, patterned 
structure, and realism: encountering someone in need, even a 
stranger in need, is a situation we are likely to face. Aesop’s fables 
succeed by defying our expectations of the real (animals that talk) 
and by simplifying character, appealing to our sense of different spe-
cies’ “personalities” (sly foxes, industrious ants). Other stories may 
entrance us not by concision and schematic concentration but by 
duration and elaborated verisimilitude. We may never be ship-
wrecked on a desert island like Robinson Crusoe, but we can learn 
from the example of his fortitude, resolution, and ingenuity.21 The 
very unusualness of the situation catches our attention and animates 
our imaginations, and our engagement with Crusoe in his predica-
ments makes the lesson “emotionally saturated.”22 We have the time 
to see and feel with Crusoe in his plight.23
	
In situations calling for charity, or alertness to flattery, or resource-
fulness and resolution, the very conspicuousness of the examples 
makes it probable that stories like the Good Samaritan, Aesop’s fable 
of the crow and the fox, or Robinson Crusoe might come to mind. 
Detailed similarity in the scenarios is not required.
	
Minds generate future: they guide action by trying to predict what 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
195
will follow. In the high volatility, variability, and flex­i­ble responsive-
ness of human social interaction, any improvement in interpreting 
situations and testing possible scenarios, actions, or reactions, using 
not only personal or reported experience but also the thought ex-
periments of pretend play and fiction, offers a telling advantage.
Like other arts, fiction establishes itself as a human compulsion be-
cause it improves one key mental mode: in this case, social cognition. 
But fiction has subsidiary functions arising from that fact.
	
Art depends on the unique human capacity to share attention. 
Other species, as they become more social, learn to attend to the at-
tention of others, and individuals can command attention according 
to their sta­tus—which correlates with survival and reproductive suc-
cess.24 “While telling a tale a person is, for the time being, dominant 
over his listeners,”25 and in the world of specialized storytellers, from 
a tribal storyteller or Homer to Shakespeare or Tolkien, sta­tus proves 
still more enduring.
	
Males have more reproductive variance than females: few females 
do not become mothers, and none can have very large numbers of 
offspring; unsuccessful males may father no children, and the most 
successful can father many. Males therefore have on average a stron­
ger drive than females to earn sta­tus, since it can gain them better 
access to females, and hence have more reason to engage in extreme 
behavior in order to secure sta­tus.26 Males therefore are overrepre-
sented at both ex­tremes, success or genius, and failure, crime, mental 
illness, or drug dependency. Despite Murasaki, Jane Austen, and J. K. 
Rowling, males outnumber females as classic and even popular sto-
rytellers (including today’s leading popular storytellers, filmmakers), 
while at the other end of the spectrum, males outnumber females by 
more than four to one in autism, which correlates highly with poor 
performance in social cognition and pretend play. But females, while 
on average they do not seek sta­tus as urgently as males, also on aver-
age invest more in childrearing, and are the principal tellers of fic-
tional stories, of folk tales and nursery rhymes, to their children.
	
Stories’ power to shape reactions can lead to manipulation, and 
often has.27 Mythic histories extol rulers from more or less “divine” 
chieftains or emperors to modern autocrats like Sta­lin or Kim Jong-

On the Origin of Stories
196
­il. Folk tales relayed by mothers tell children of the evils of stepmoth-
ers.28 But audiences listen strategically and learn to resist obvious 
manipulation. Storytellers’ appeals to values genuinely shared will 
meet with much easier acceptance and will help entrench what the 
community esteems and wel­comes: individual values that are also 
valuable for the group, like courage, resolution, resourcefulness, and 
cooperative values like sympathy, kindness, generosity, loyalty, and 
honesty.* Psychology has recently begun to study the emotion of 
­elevation, a feeling that we all know but that science has hitherto 
spurned: the admiration for moral beauty, and the desire to emulate 
it, that we experience when we witness a singular act of kindness, 
gratitude, fortitude, or the like—and that we feel no less intensely 
when we encounter it in fiction.29
	
Through appeals to the moral and social emotions, fiction can 
contribute to solving the problems of cooperation that become more 
acute the larger the population grows. As we have seen, cooperation 
can become more widespread with effective punishment for nonco-
operation, and even more robust with the punishment of those who 
fail to punish noncooperators.30 With such second-­order punish-
ment operating, the costs of maintaining systems of punishment, 
and therefore habits of cooperation, decrease rapidly. Stories can 
help motivate cooperation by arousing punitive or retributive emo-
tions like indignation and contempt, in tragedy and satire, or by 
stressing the need for vigilance against deception and manipulation. 
Experiments show that “we feel disgust (as evidenced by sig­nifi­cant 
activation of the anterior insula) when faced with the behavior of 
cheaters, and very real satisfaction (that is, activation of the caudate 
nucleus) when we punish those cheaters”31—feelings activated by 
fiction as well as by fact. And stories can help solve the problem of 
common knowledge:32 traditional stories ensure that all know and 
react to, and know that others know, the core values of the group.
	
The very nature of fiction makes it likely that storytellers earn least 
* Occasionally, of course, negative fictive models will also inspire imitators, even though 
negative behavior in fiction is usually emotionally marked, through the reactions of other 
characters and the tenor of the story, as behavior to avoid.

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
197
audience resistance and most admiration—the highest sta­tus—if 
they tell stories that appeal to values shared by the audience. Dick-
ens’ appeals to the generous hearts of his readers, whether overtly 
in A Christmas Carol or more obliquely in Our Mutual Friend, did 
not hurt either his massive sales fig­ures or his stature in his time 
and since, and may have helped alter the moral climate of En­glish 
society.
	
Another feature of fiction—but not of fact—also encourages the 
development of a moral sense. Story by its nature invites us to shift 
from our own perspective to that of another, and perhaps then 
­another and another. Stories come most alive when all the princi-
pal  characters have their own vivid life, especially when not only 
their actions but also their speech and thought are fully realized. 
Simply in order to animate the story, fiction lets us hear characters’ 
speech and even access their thoughts as we cannot do in life. Merely 
in ­following its own bent, fiction cultivates our sympathetic imagi-
nation by prompting us to see from the perspective of character after 
character.
	
In fac­tual narrative, history tends to be written by the winners, 
who feed reports of victorious campaigns to their chroniclers. In fic-
tion the story lives the more ev­ery­one ­comes to life, the more each 
character seems to exist in his or her own right. The twelfth-­century 
Persian poet NizÀmÂ reports his hero’s feelings: “While each warrior 
thought of nothing but to kill the enemy and to defend himself, the 
poet was sharing the sufferings of both sides”33—a remark that could 
equally characterize Homer in the Iliad or Tim O’Brien in his novels 
of the Vietnam War.
Fiction enormously enhances our creativity. It offers us incentives 
for and practice in thinking beyond the here and now, so that we can 
use the whole of possibility space to take new vantage points on ac­
tuality and on ways in which it might be transformed.
	
The ability to imagine the world as other than it is underpins pre-
tend play, and the ability to conceive of alternatives underpins all 
modeling.34 Free thought needs alternatives and counterfac­tuals. A 
mental architecture that pro­cesses only true information remains se-

On the Origin of Stories
198
verely constricted. Most discovery involves supposition.35 We cannot 
even think seriously about cause without counterfac­tuals: if this had 
not happened, would that still have occurred?36
	
Nature did not design us to think in the abstract. Minds evolved 
to respond to their immediate surroundings and could hardly do 
otherwise. Yet nature has prepared minds to attend to, and to act in 
response to, other agents and actions, and has shaped human minds 
to play, through their long childhood, with models and ideas of 
agents and actions and reactions. As we grow, we learn to dispense 
with physical props and to rely more and more readily on the cul-
tural props of our narrative heritage, always on call in memory, in 
order to think in sustained ways beyond the here and now.
	
Most of us can easily imagine concrete but com­pli­cated scenarios 
of action and interaction, but have much more dif­fi­culty mentally 
manipulating more than a few highly abstract terms in, say, logic or 
mathematics. A perfectly rational being, an emotionless Mr. Spock, 
might see this as a shortcoming—even if, most of the time, we rather 
like our predisposition to see things in agential terms. That we can 
think so effortlessly beyond the present in narrative but not, without 
special training, in abstract realms smacks of excellent but imperfect 
design for intelligence. Such a telltale combination of the ingenious 
and the inept itself shows evolutionary adaptation at work, like the 
brilliant engineering of our stereoscopic and trichromatic vision—
but with a blind spot near the middle of each eye—or the advantages 
of bipedal locomotion and forelimb freedom—but with the curses 
of bad backs and hard births.37 Nature cannot design from scratch, 
but it could let organisms move and act and care about other organ-
isms that also move and act. It was only from there, from beginnings 
already in place, that evolution could build the higher stages of hu-
man creative intelligence.
	
Because fiction extends our imaginative reach, we are not con­
fined to our here and now or dominated by automatic responses. 
We can think in terms of hidden causes, of inspiring or admonitory 
examples from the past, fictional or real, of utopian or dystopian 
models, of probable scenarios or consequences, or of counterfac­tuals 
whose very absurdity clarifies our thought. We know that there are 
always other spaces of the possible we can explore. And much of the 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
199
indefi­nite enormity of possibility space has been made concrete and 
particular through the examples of story.
	
This may be the most important function of pure fiction. By ap-
pealing to our fascination with agents and actions, fiction trains us 
to re­flect freely beyond the immediate and to revolve things in our 
minds within a vast and vividly populated world of the possible.
Fiction and Religion
To explain fully what difference storytelling has made to human sur-
vival and reproduction, we need to consider the impact not just of 
stories recognized as fictions, but also of invented stories that people 
take as true: of religion.
	
We can think beyond the ac­tual in narrative because of our sophis­
ticated social cognition and our predisposition to develop it through 
pretend play and story. This capacity has both an innovative, cre-
ative, protosci­en­tific side and a traditionalist and conservative side. 
Storytelling, like other arts, can open up new possibilities, but it can 
also be commandeered by religion’s power to enhance within-­group 
social cohesion.
	
First, the novel and exploratory. Explanation moves from the 
known to the unknown, from the seen to some unseen cause. With 
other intelligent animals, humans share an understanding of intui-
tive physics, biology, and psychology—of things, kinds, and minds—
that allows us to act flexibly within our world. But for us, uniquely, 
that seems in­suf­fi­cient.
	
Because we also develop, as part of our intuitive psychology, an 
advanced theory of mind, we acquire an intuitive awareness of the 
possibility and consequences of holding false beliefs: we see how we 
may misconstrue situations through not knowing what another may 
know. Other animals, especially omnivorous ones, exhibit curios-
ity, but unlike them, we also fret about what we may not know. Be-
cause we know we can know too little, we crave extra information 
and deeper explanation. But how do we get it? Explanation does not 
come easily.
	
Our intuitive understanding of things, kinds, and minds lets us 
leap to rich conclusions from slight evidence. Our theory of mind, 

On the Origin of Stories
200
our most powerful intuitive ontology, allows us to infer inner im-
pulses like beliefs, desires, and intentions driving outward actions. 
Reasoning from ourselves, we see agency as a prototype of causality: 
unless I intend to strike with this club, it will not swing down upon 
my enemy. But the powerful explanatory force of agency depends on 
invisible force: my hands and arms may ac­tually move the club, but 
something unseen within me determines how my limbs move. And 
whereas physical causation requires contact, psychological cause can 
work at a distance: I can make you move without touching you, 
merely by saying the right words, pointing to the right thing, or look-
ing at you or moving toward you in a certain way.
	
Not only do we see agency as a prototype of cause; we also overat­
tri­bute it, since erring in that direction is almost always safer than 
erring in the other. If we discount a rustle as no more than wind, we 
could find ourselves surprised by a snake or a spy. We know the po-
tentially dire consequences of not detecting unseen agents, and we 
assume that if we did know of agents affecting our lives in ways we 
cannot see, we could take answering action.
	
We also know other creatures with powers different from ours: 
animals that can see in the dark better than we can, or hear or smell 
what we cannot, or run faster, or exert more force with jaws or claws. 
Even in modern cities children remain fascinated by animals, and in 
their play learn to reason about different characters, perspectives, in-
tentions, and powers through the sharp distinctions that animals 
provide. The preoccupation with animal versus human powers has 
long been with us. Paintings of aurochs and mammoths adorn Pa-
leolithic cave walls. Totemism pervades preliterate cultures. And ani-
mals whose powers challenge or question those of humans feature in 
stories for children or in classics from The Epic of Gilgamesh and the 
Mahabharata to Ionesco, Cortázar, and Auster.
	
We desire deeper explanations. We see cause in terms of agency, 
and recognize the special characteristics of psychological or “spiri-
tual” rather than physical causation. We recognize other creatures’ 
different powers. We readily invent, recall, and retell stories involving 
agents that violate expectations. Across humankind we have there-
fore repeatedly offered (1) deep causal explanations in terms of (2) 
beings with powers different from ours, (3) understood in terms of 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
201
mind or spirit, moved like us by beliefs, desires, and intentions but 
(4) somehow violating our expectations of things or kinds, especially 
by transgressing normal physical limits—perhaps by being invisible, 
or existing in more than one place at a time, or being able to change 
shape or pass through solid obstacles or live forever.
	
Explanations in terms of spiritual cause do not dispense with ex-
planation by physical cause. Omitting that would be dangerous in 
the extreme. Instead, supernatural stories attempt to offer an addi-
tional level of explanation. A hut may collapse because termites have 
eaten it, but why this hut, at this time, with this woman inside? What 
spirit or witch has she offended?38 Such thinking always searches 
for a concealed agential cause to supplement the evident physical 
cause.39
	
As we should expect, young children naturally first understand 
the world in purely natural ways that re­flect human intuitive ontolo-
gies, but then begin to learn and subscribe to the “deeper” explana-
tions of local culture.40 In Manu society in Papua New Guinea, chil-
dren would first interpret events, such as a canoe’s going adrift, in 
terms of pure physical causality—the loosening of a rope, water cur-
rents—whereas their elders would add an additional layer of expla-
nation in terms of ghosts and evil intents. Explanations for dreams 
are similar in young American and Atayal (indigenous Taiwanese) 
children, but by the age of six or seven Atayal children, like their el-
ders, come to view dreams not as inner representations of the sleep-
ing mind but as real, visible external manifestations.41
	
Supernatural stories need not seek to explain the world in gen-
eral42—although some religions and philosophies eventually attempt 
such ambitious systematization, once intellectual specialization and 
speculation take firm root—but always aim to identify unseen forces 
that supposedly impact our lives. We can envisage possible futures 
and their dangers. We know we can often be at risk from not know-
ing the full truth of the present, let alone the future. We naturally 
welcome what seems a deeper explanation, an unseen cause in invis-
ible agents whom we can appease or supplicate so as to gain some 
mea­sure of control over the unknown.43
	
All storytellers can earn sta­tus. But those whose stories promised 
an apparently deeper explanation for what happened, and therefore 

On the Origin of Stories
202
a better chance of reducing future uncertainties, could earn a still 
higher sta­tus—as those who elaborated mythologies once did, as sci-
entists do today. To modern science, explanations in terms of unseen 
spiritual forces are mere fictions, invented stories without real ref­
erents. Yet despite being untrue, religious myths have provided the 
standard form of apparently deeper explanation for most humans 
since we emerged fully into culture. Such stories, arising readily from 
our quest for extra explanation, our overreading of agency, and our 
memory for the exceptional,44 prove hard to dislodge despite their 
detachment from fact.
	
Our intuitive psychology ef­fi­ciently explains a great deal in the 
human affairs that matter so much to us. Agential explanation has 
therefore seemed to us natural for so long that the idea of explaining 
things without agents can still seem hard to accept, even after sci-
ence’s successes. Newton’s account of planetary motion in terms of 
gravity delighted many but also repelled others who felt that it al-
lowed room for a godless universe or a remote and impersonal God, 
a cosmic clockmaker no ­longer actively intervening in our world. 
The Darwinian notion of design by natural selection—design oper-
ating retrospectively and mindlessly, merely by culling the weakest, 
cycle after cycle, rather than consciously and prospectively aiming 
for the stron­gest—remains still too contrary to ingrained human 
predispositions for many to comprehend.
	
Our capacity to think beyond the here and now has made our spe-
cies distinctively different. It has led to attempted explanations at a 
level deeper than the visible. Until the emergence of science, such 
superhuman explanations have been all too human and flawed. 
Even  sci­en­tific hypotheses are fictions of a kind, but science’s in-
vented stories offer explanation without what Daniel Dennett calls 
“skyhooks”—without top-­down forces, without mental or spiritual 
agents—and restrict themselves to what he calls “cranes,” explana-
tions building slowly from the ground up, from the simple to the 
complex, rather than hanging answers from the heavens.45
	
Science has improved immensely on the fictive agential explana-
tions of the past—although even scientists find they cannot help an-
thropomorphizing causal factors; but science could not have begun 
without our persistent inclination and ability to think beyond the 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
203
here and now, to invent agents and scenarios not limited to the ac­
tual or the probable but exploring also the merely possible or the ee-
rily improbable.
We forget that a fiction was invented once we start to rely on its ap-
parent explanatory power—as we do with sci­en­tific “fictions” once 
we think they work.
	
Science tests its stories hard, and some stand the test. But how can 
belief in stories that lack any foundation in fact ever have bene­fited 
humans? Why has fiction so often been assimilated to belief? If our 
senses fed us untrue data, if our minds continually made incorrect 
inferences, we would not last long. We need true information to sur-
vive. Why, then, did we not evolve a reluctance to believe the fictions 
of religion?
	
Operating in real time with limited resources, minds have to have 
stopping rules. We look for the first explanation that surfaces to con-
sciousness that seems to fit. The uncertainty that theory of mind 
arouses, that we do not know the complete situation, will often be 
appeased by the first ready-­made agential explanation that ­comes to 
mind.46
	
Since it pays to detect patterns and therefore to recognize recur-
rence, we also have a con­firmatory bias in our thinking: we welcome 
apparent con­firming instances and often shun falsifying evidence.47 
We have a conformist bias, which inclines us not to want to think in 
ways too unlike others.48 We do not readily seek disproof, and would 
not easily know where to start looking for it. It took millennia of 
civilization before we recognized the value of systematically and rig-
orously testing explanatory ideas, and even after four centuries of 
sci­en­tific method, the notion of searching for evidence that could 
count against our best theories still seems counterintuitive and dis-
concerting. Our forebears had neither the inclination to suspect nor 
the methods to test the existence of invisible beings who could per-
haps cause them harm. Even today the cost of testing a belief in un-
seen forces is extremely high—as we know from the modern quest 
for neutrinos or the Higgs boson.
	
Our supernatural ideas seem natural to us. We fixate on spirit be-
ings because of their difference from ordinary agents, through their 

On the Origin of Stories
204
invisibility, immateriality, immortality, and the like. But evolution-
ary anthropologists of religion show that we ac­tually think about 
­supernatural agents in ways that depend less on these attention-­
catching properties than on our intuitive ontologies, our folk be-
liefs about how ordinary minds work. Experiments on adults in the 
United States and India show what this means:
When asked to describe their deities, subjects in both cul-
tures produced abstract and consensual theological descrip-
tions of gods as being able to do anything, anticipate and re-
act to ev­ery­thing at once, always know the right thing to do, 
and be able to dispense entirely with perceptual information 
and calculation. When asked to respond to narratives about 
these same gods, the same subjects described the deities as 
being in only one place at a time, puzzling over alternative 
courses of action, and looking for evidence to decide what 
to do.49
	
Religious convictions derive less from doctrine than from story: 
“Public expressions of supernatural beliefs rarely, if ever, take the 
form of generalized or universally quantified statements, such as 
‘God reasons,’ ‘All spirits fly,’ and ‘Every frog turns into a prince.’ In-
stead, supernatural phenomena are usually embedded in explicitly 
contextualized episodes; for example, ‘The arux [an Itza’ Maya forest 
spirit] came as a child to steal my moccasins but disappeared as a 
gust of wind before I could catch it.’”50 Such episodes usually focus 
on supernatural spirits’ violations of the ordinary, like their being 
born of a virgin or walking on water or rising from the dead. Reli-
gion consists less of a coherent body of dogmas or explanatory sys-
tems than of these memorably surprising stories that we then flesh 
out through our common intuitive ontologies.
	
The spiritual beings that actively matter for believers all have un-
restricted access to strategic social information.51 We ourselves at-
tend closely to such information, and we know that because it con-
tinues to accrue wherever people act and interact, no mortal eye can 
see it all. We watch others assiduously when we can, as we know they 
watch us. Sometimes we may wish to act unobserved, but our fear 

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
205
that others might notice us undetected may make us wary of com-
mitting even apparently unseen actions that could earn others’ dis-
approval and reprimand. But belief in invisible spirits who in any 
situation can observe us undetected will incline all of us to behave 
more often in the ways generally approved of by all—in ways that aid 
cooperation within the group rather than short-­term individual ad-
vantage. Let me quote again Malidoma Patrice Somé’s echo of Dag-
ara elders: the “real police in the village is Spirit that sees ev­ery­body. 
To do wrong is to insult the spirit realm. Whoever does this is imme-
diately punished by Spirit.”52
	
Evolution, biologist D. S. Wilson observes, places no premium on 
truth. I may need to see where a rabbit is to hit it with a stick, but 
“there are many, many other situations in which it can be adaptive 
to distort reality . . . Even massively fictitious beliefs can be adap-
tive, as long as they motivate behaviors that are adaptive in the real 
world.”53
	
Fictions of course can motivate without belief: we can heed fables 
without thinking them literally true. But stories that start as inven-
tion but persist as explanation, as meriting belief, are considerably 
more powerful than mere illustrative examples. All the more so if 
they are designed to encourage cooperative behavior. Wilson writes:
Emotions are evolved mechanisms for motivating adaptive 
behavior that are far more ancient than the cognitive pro­
cesses typically associated with sci­en­tific thought. We might 
therefore . . . expect stories, music, and rituals to be at least 
as important as logical arguments in orchestrating the be-
havior of groups. Supernatural agents and events that never 
happened can provide blueprints for action that far surpass 
fac­tual accounts of the natural world in clarity and motivat-
ing power.54
	
Evolution will favor belief in a falsehood if it motivates adaptive 
behavior better than belief in a truth. (In any case, truths other than 
those supplied by the senses and intuitive inferences can be costly to 
discover.) It will favor beliefs in spirits that monitor human actions 
and that need to be appeased, if such beliefs reinforce group cohe-

On the Origin of Stories
206
sion. Of course they may do so at the cost of exacerbating external 
strife. But if our group gains in cohesion through a sense of divine 
support, it is likely, other things being equal, to be able to overcome 
enemies who lack such a compelling belief.
	
We have a desire for deeper knowledge and greater control; a 
strong inclination to read and overread the world in agential terms; a 
lively interest in, and a keen memory for, what violates expectations; 
a predisposition to learn from others; an instinct for conformity and 
fear of exclusion; and an inclination to seek con­fir­ma­tion of what 
we think we know. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that we prog­
ress from explanation in terms of intuitive ontologies to the appar-
ently more profound explanations of the supernatural stories that 
our cultures devise. And if we see belief as a mark of willingness to 
abide by the collective practices of the group, and a powerful prop 
for cooperation, we may even see reluctance to believe as a challenge 
to group unity and as tantamount to treason.
Varieties of Fictional Experience
To consider the functions of fiction, we have had to consider not only 
“pure” fiction, but all storytelling in any medium with invented ele-
ments, including stories that begin at least in part in imagination but 
are relayed at some stage as true.
	
In the evolution of biological adaptations, different functions may 
dominate at different times. Bird wings apparently evolved first as 
thermoregulatory flaps, and can still be used that way, but they much 
more centrally serve what is now their main function and what has 
shaped their recent evolution: flight. In the same way, our predispo-
sition to fiction has served different functions at different stages of 
cultural evolution. From the start, it has sharpened social cognition 
and extended our capacity to think beyond the here and now, to en-
tertain other possibilities and not simply accept the given. In most 
so­ci­e­ties and for much of human history, however, that storytelling 
power has often been commandeered by the apparent promise of ex-
planation, cohesion, conformity, and control offered by fiction that 
has hardened into mythological and religious belief.55

	
Fiction as Adaptation
	
207
	
Yet even in so­ci­e­ties saturated in religion or shored up by ideo-
logical fictions, other stories persist alongside of­fi­cial myths. The Ara­
bian Nights reached their fullest form in Islam’s most expansive years. 
Shakespeare conjured up the fairies of A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
and the enchanted isle of Prospero despite an of­fi­cial Anglicanism 
that often sent religious dissenters to their deaths. Anti-­Sta­lin jokes 
circulated in whispers in the stalls of Red Star cinemas screening 
party pro­pa­gan­da films. Or to take a more traditional example: 
among the Kalabari in Africa,
serious myths intended to throw light on the part played 
by the gods in founding social institutions shade into tales 
which, although their characters are also gods, are told for 
sheer entertainment. And although the Kalabari do make a 
distinction between serious myth and light tale, there are 
many pieces which they themselves hesitate to place on one 
side or other. Belief shades through half-­belief into sus-
pended belief. In ritual, dramatic representations of gods 
carried out in order to dispose them favourably and secure 
the bene­fits which, as cosmic forces, they control, are usually 
found highly enjoyable in themselves. And they shade off 
into representations carried out almost solely for their aes-
thetic appeal.56
	
Story emerges out of our focus on one another and other animal 
agents, and out of the play that helps us learn to imagine by way 
of actions and agents. Although story can be requisitioned to the se-
rious and even solemn purposes of religion, play remains, on the 
fringes or right back in the center.
	
We have, and have long had, stories of low cost but high long-­
term bene­fit, like proverbs, parables, or fables that still provide moral 
rules of thumb. We have stories of low cost and high immediate 
bene­fit for teller and audience, like jokes, which—being brief, porta-
ble, and steeped in the plea­sures of surprise—act as an ef­fi­cient so-
cial lubricant, like all social play.57 We have stories of high cost and 
high immediate bene­fit, as in the screen and print fiction produced 

On the Origin of Stories
208
especially to earn short-­lived attention. And we have stories of high 
cost and high long-­term bene­fit, like the serious stories that provoke 
us to reconsider what it is to be human.
	
In modern secular so­ci­e­ties, with an unprecedented degree of spe-
cialization of labor and mechanization of print and other media, 
­fictional storytelling again serves the purpose it has usually served, 
whenever not appropriated by faith or power. It helps us to under-
stand ourselves, to think—emotionally, imaginatively, re­flectively—
about human behavior, and to step outside the immediate pressures 
and the automatic reactions of the moment. From pretend play and 
jokes to Homer, Murasaki, or James Joyce, fiction taps into the swift 
ef­fi­ciency of our understanding of agents and actions. Old and new 
stories and characters open up and populate possibility space. All 
these fictions make us the one species not restricted to the here and 
now, even if that must be where we act and feel—and imagine.

	
209
book ii
F R O M  Z E U S  T O  S E U S S :  O R I G I N S  O F  S T O R I E S
The Boston flight had only just landed and I guessed I had a half-­
hour wait. If one ever wanted proof of Darwin’s contention that the 
many expressions of emotion in humans are universal, genetically 
inscribed, then a few minutes by the arrivals gate in Heathrow’s Ter-
minal Four should suf­fice. I saw the same joy, the same uncontrolla-
ble smile, in the faces of a Nigerian earth mama, a thin-­lipped Scot-
tish granny and a pale, correct Japanese businessman as they wheeled 
their trolleys in and recognised a fig­ure in the expectant crowd. Ob-
serving human va­ri­ety can give plea­sure, but so too can human 
sameness.
Ian McEwan, Enduring Love (1997)
In Book I I outlined a naturalistic account of art and fiction 
and argued that both are adaptations: we have evolved to engage in 
art and in storytelling because of the survival advantages they offer 
our species. Art prepares minds for open-­ended learning and cre-
ativity; fiction spe­cifi­cally improves our social cognition and our 
thinking beyond the here and now. Both invite and hold our atten-
tion strongly enough to engage and reengage our minds, altering 
synaptic strengths a little at a time, over many encounters, by expos-
ing us to the supernormally intense patterns of art.
	
These hypotheses need to be tested empirically against alterna-
tive explanations. But an evolutionary approach to literature does 
not depend on them or on any other hypotheses that claim art, lit­

On the Origin of Stories
210
erature, or fiction as adaptive. A biocultural approach to literature 
simply requires that we take seriously that evolution has powerfully 
shaped not just our bodies but also our minds and behavior. We can 
do that whether literature or fiction is an adaptation, byproduct, or 
some combination of the two.
	
Evolutionary literary criticism will be worth the detour into biol-
ogy and psychology only if it deepens our understanding and ap­
preciation of literature. Book II offers two contrasting case studies—
Homer’s Odyssey and Dr. Seuss’s Horton Hears a Who!, ancient and 
modern, adult and children’s, serious and comic, massive and mi-
nuscule—to show that it can.
	
Part 4 explores in depth the most vital classic of antiquity, the Od-
yssey. It tries to suggest what an evolutionary perspective allows us to 
see afresh even in a work astutely analyzed for two and a half millen-
nia. Of course readers have already seen much in the Odyssey or it 
would not have had such an audience for a hundred generations. An 
evolutionary approach will not reject all that others have seen but 
will also suggest new directions in which to look.
	
The six chapters fall into three pairs, focused in turn on attention, 
intelligence, and cooperation. The differences between each pair, and 
each of the six chapters, should suggest the va­ri­ety of possibilities 
that evolutionary approaches can open. They certainly do not limit 
the evolutionary approaches to a work as rich as the Odyssey.1
	
Part 4 has a second principal purpose. It introduces core elements 
of fiction: character, plot, structure, dramatic irony, and theme. It 
also attempts to explain these familiar narrative features from first 
principles by treating fiction as a human activity arising naturally 
out of other human and animal behavior, and to consider them in 
terms of a particular work’s unique problems and solutions.
	
Part 4 also has other aims: (1) to show the sophistication of hu-
man thought and art close to the origin of recorded stories, almost 
3,000 years ago, before many of the storytelling devices we take for 
granted had been discovered; (2) to offer an example of the way in 
which creativity in art precedes and prepares for creativity in the 
more resistant nonhuman world, in this case the achievements of 
Greek philosophy and science; (3) to show the necessary link between 
problems of historical knowledge and universal aspects of human 

	
From Zeus to Seuss
	
211
nature. An evolutionary approach to literature needs to be biocul-
tural: it needs to take into account historical, textual, and cultural 
scholarship; (4) to demonstrate the power of a problem-­solution 
model, emerging with the emergence of life and fruitfully applied to 
art by art historian Ernst Gombrich and film scholar David Bor-
dwell;2 (5) to show that although art as a behavior has been designed 
in part by evolution, its power also depends very much on traditions 
and individuals; (6) to demonstrate that while all fictions offer in-
tense doses of pattern, classics offer concentrations of pattern high 
enough to reward continually renewed attention.
	
Part 5 focuses on Dr. Seuss’s 1954 children’s picture story Horton 
Hears a Who! Whereas Part 4 explores near the historical origin of 
story, where story remains closely linked to tradition and religion, 
Part 5 selects a story near the individual origin of story, one designed 
for young children yet also in its different way aiming, as Homer 
does, at classic sta­tus, but composed in a world in which tradition 
and religion have ceded ground to innovation and creativity.
	
Just as Part 4 introduces the elements of fiction and the particular 
case of the Odyssey, so Part 5 introduces different levels of reading or 
literary explanation—universal, local, individual, and particular lev-
els, and the relationships between story and meanings—as it exam-
ines the special circumstances of a single story.
	
Standing near the origins of recorded story, the Odyssey offers 
us both a complete and highly reliable text and a case study in the 
problems caused by the lacunae of early historical knowledge. Hor-
ton Hears a Who! by contrast shows the opportunities provided by 
historical knowledge—Dr. Seuss’s prolific work in many media, his 
working pro­cesses, his sense of his own aims, and his immediate 
contexts—and the fertile interrelationship of the immediate and the 
wider evolutionary contexts. Mystery shrouds Homer’s mode of 
composition and his aims. Dr. Seuss’s methods and aims can be read-
ily retrieved, and show how creativity operates as a Darwin machine, 
through repeated cycles of variation and selection.

 

part 4
P H Y L O G E N Y :  T H E  O D Y S S E Y
poetry . . . in the noblest nations and languages that are known, hath 
been the first light-giver to ignorance, and first nurse, whose milk by 
little and little enabled them to feed afterwards of tougher knowledge 
. . . the poet . . . cometh unto you, with a tale which holdeth children 
from play, and old men from the chimney corner.
Sir Philip Sidney, A Defence of Poesy (1595)

 

	
215
14
EARNING ATTENTION (1): 
NATURAL PATTERNS: CHARACTER AND PLOT
For nearly 3,000 years, audiences and readers have enjoyed 
the Odyssey as “one of the best tales ever told.”1 It stands with its pre-
decessor and companion, the Iliad, as the oldest masterpiece of an-
cient story to survive, more accomplished than the earlier and in-
complete Epic of Gilgamesh, more concentrated than the later and 
over-­replete Mahabharata. Though not as mighty as the Iliad, the 
Odyssey has earned a larger audience through its hero, its story, and 
its narrative art.*
	
What can an evolutionary perspective offer on a story subjected to 
so much attention from audiences and critics for over two and a half 
millennia? For one thing, it can stress the importance of attention 
itself, so often taken for granted in literary criticism, or dismissed as 
the mere courting of popularity, but in fact a sine qua non of all art. 
Art can affect minds over time because it so compulsively engages 
attention.
	
An evolutionary account of the Odyssey will not ignore either the 
criticism or the critical skills that have developed over the centuries. 
After all, these skills start with our evolved capacities to understand 
events and minds and develop via the social learning that our species 
has also evolved to rely on. Indeed, I will take the opportunity pro-
vided by Homer’s mastery of character and plot to explain these core 
* Unless otherwise noted, I quote from Richmond Lattimore’s translations of The Odyssey 
and The Iliad, as offering the best combination of accuracy and poetry, and follow his spell-
ings of proper names.

On the Origin of Stories
216
elements of story in terms of an author’s shaping audiences’ atten-
tion by appealing to their evolved cognitive predisposition to fore-
ground and respond to—automatically, amid all the possible pat-
terns in a story—the patterns of character and plot. A biocultural 
analysis does not ignore the common ground, but as we will see in-
creasingly over the next six chapters, it can gradually deepen the per-
spective—and our sense of a storyteller’s art.
Homeric Problems
Despite millennia of criticism, much about the Odyssey remains un-
settled. Who composed the poem, and where, and when? Was it the 
work of a single author? If so, was it the “Homer” who composed the 
Iliad? Or did both epics emerge from a long tradition of oral story-
telling that slowly crystallized into the texts we now have? Was the 
Odyssey composed orally and written down or dictated by the poet, 
or handed down orally in roughly the form we now have, or con­
tinuously modi­fied before find­ing written form centuries later? Does 
it re­flect the society of its time, whatever that time was, or of the My-
cenaean age, in which something like the Trojan War may have oc-
curred or been imagined, or of the so-­called Dark Ages of Greece, 
between the collapse of Mycenaean culture and the time of composi-
tion, or some temporal blend? Did its first audiences regard it as his-
tory or as fiction?
	
Debate rages over all these issues and more, and just enough in-
formation survives to ensure that any answers remain problematic. 
Nevertheless, since the work of Milman Parry early last century, 
scholars accept that both the Iliad and the Odyssey derive from a long 
tradition of oral epic storytelling and that their outlines and many 
details can be explained by this tradition.
	
Although contention persists, consensus also exists: “it is now uni-
versally agreed that our epics present narratives of such coherence 
and sophistication that they cannot represent a mere accumulation 
of material over several centuries: a major creative effort must have 
gone into their final composition.”2 Many agree that each epic is so 
internally intricate as to suggest strongly the work of a single author, 
though not necessarily the same author, who is “not subordinated to 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
217
his tradition, but master of it,”3 able to use, ignore, violate, or tran-
scend “his inherited techniques . . . as he wishes.”4 Indeed many think 
that the composition and preservation of epics of such unprece-
dented scope and scale (15,000 lines in the Iliad, 12,000 in the Odys-
sey) required “the special ability, aims, imagination and reputation 
of a particular singer,” whose prestige enabled him “to outstrip nor-
mal performances, normal audiences and normal occasions . . . [and] 
impose his own will and his own vast conception”5 on both his own 
time and posterity. Many also think that although Homer grew up in 
the oral tradition, writing (using the newly invented alphabet) may 
have played a part in his composing the poems, probably in the late 
eighth century b.c.e. for the Iliad, and perhaps thirty years later for 
the Odyssey.
	
While all agree that the Iliad precedes the Odyssey, not just in story 
line but in composition, only some of those who accept solo author-
ship for the Iliad believe that the same author composed the Odys-
sey. The two epics differ not only in setting—war versus peace—but 
also in tone, trajectory, and the role of the gods. In the Iliad, the gods 
bicker; mortals on both sides gain and lose from divine interven-
tions; no side consistently has a moral advantage. In the Odyssey, all 
the gods except Poseidon back Odysseus; none backs Penelope’s suit-
ors; Odysseus, though not flawless or idealized, easily outstrips his 
opponents physically, intellectually, and morally. For that reason, and 
because Zeus and Athene support him, we anticipate and eventually 
witness victory for Odysseus. The Iliad, by contrast, has no clear-­cut 
moral lines, no winners, and many losers.
	
Yet if nothing of Shakespeare survived but anonymous texts of, 
say, A Midsummer Night’s Dream and King Lear, could we imagine 
these two plays as products of the same mind?6 For all their differ-
ences in tone and tenor, much links the Iliad to the Odyssey, and 
much distinguishes them from the surviving glimpses of the Epic 
Cycle tales composed over the next two centuries. There are no sig­
nifi­cant differences in diction between the two Homeric epics,7 and 
although in modern oral tales each singer has his own characteris-
tic standard forms for each type-­scene, the type-­scene templates in 
the Iliad and the Odyssey are indistinguishable.8 Both poems have a 
high proportion—almost two-­thirds—of dialogue, and “the little we 

On the Origin of Stories
218
know of other ancient Greek epics supports Aristotle’s statement that 
this ratio is unique.”9 Both Homeric epics focus intensely on a small 
part of their overall stories, unlike the Epic Cycle stories, and both 
downplay the fantastic and avoid the proliferation of intrigues char-
acteristic of the Cycle.10
	
Except for guesses based on Homer’s own, perhaps very stylized, 
depiction of the bards in the Odyssey, we know nothing of the cir-
cumstances of the poem’s composition or performance. But across 
cultures patrons often play a role in producing oral epic.11 It would 
be surprising if a work as extraordinary as the Iliad had not prompted 
patrons to request another, similar story. Such differences as exist be-
tween the two poems could easily be explained by the catalyst of a 
patron seeking a story with Odysseus rather than Achilleus as hero, a 
positive rather than a tragic end, and a more positive view of the 
gods. Of course such shifts could also easily have arisen from the po-
et’s own re­flections rather than a patron’s promptings, but in either 
case the differences between the Iliad and the Odyssey occur at this 
level, easily subject to conscious redirection by an author serving a 
slightly altered artistic purpose, and not at the level of unconscious 
lexical or scenic habits that authors cannot readily alter by choice 
and that usually differ markedly from author to author—but not 
from the Iliad to the Odyssey.
	
Whether Homer is one, two, or many, I will refer to “Homer” and 
assume a consistency of artistic purpose. This allows us to discern 
qualities in the Odyssey obscured for those who see the Homeric 
­epics as poorly cobbled together, “a miserable piece of patchwork” 
(Wilamowitz on the Iliad), “a crime against human intelligence” 
(Fick on the Odyssey).12
Strategies for Attention
An evolutionary approach to literature, as to life, sees organisms as 
seeking strategically to solve their particular problems, immediate 
and ­longer-­term. Both authors and audience members will be strate-
gists. Authors pay steeply in composition costs in return for engag-
ing the attention of audiences and directing their response as much 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
219
as they can without compromising their engagement. Audiences pay 
costs in time and effort and perhaps more (admission or book fees, 
for instance) and will seek to recoup as much bene­fit—as much cog-
nitive and emotional stimulus—as possible. They will be particularly 
wary of attempts to persuade them to attitudes contrary to their 
sense of their own interests. By stressing explicitly the costs and bene­
fits of earning and paying attention, an evolutionary approach to lit-
erature can focus rather than blur our appreciation of artistry.
	
As a singer of tales, Homer needs first to catch, hold, and move his 
listeners: if he bores them, he will not be invited to dinner again.13 
But how could he shape his story to appeal not only to his original 
audience, whoever they were, but also to an audience who cannot 
believe in Greek gods, the right of powerful males to whatever fe-
males they can obtain by force, or the justice of massive revenge? 
How can a classic remain alive over millennia of change?
	
One part of the evolutionary answer is that we all share a great 
deal as humans, however great our cultural differences. Another is 
that classics make multiple appeals to our attention, and that while 
some of these appeals fade over time, other attractions become more 
vivid as we uncover the insights and implications of genius. I start 
therefore with what almost all audiences agree on: the first reasons 
for enjoying the Odyssey, for thousands of years, some depending on 
the special place that Odysseus and the Trojan War have in Greek 
legend, but most involving features of character and plot at the heart 
of all story.
	
As we have seen in Part 3, storytelling can command the attention 
of others by delivering high-­intensity social information. Even ex-
pert storytellers have to compete against other demands on potential 
audiences, including their attention to the immediate environment, 
to ev­eryday needs, and to other artistic appeals for attention. Strate-
gizing bards should aim to reduce composition costs while earning 
the maximum rewards of attention.
	
Outstanding storytellers tend to choose the forms most valued in 
their culture. The Greeks canonized epic form and epic content, their 
tales of gods, heroes, and mortals, but only Homer survives of the 
storytellers of his time—and, Aristotle suggests, only his epics de-

On the Origin of Stories
220
served to survive. How did Homer appeal not just to his own time 
but beyond?
Studying storytelling in black inner-­city American neighborhoods, 
sociolinguist William Labov iden­ti­fied the importance of “evalua-
tion,” of making clear to a possibly restive audience the point of the 
particular story you wish to tell.14 In a tradition such as Greek epic, 
the most prestigious narrative form of Homer’s time, the epic mat-
ter and manner themselves provide a guarantee: if you are Greek,* 
this concerns you, this is your story. But Homer took it further. He 
begins his two epics with proems, poetic promos encapsulating the 
subject of the story to follow (the wrath of Achilleus, the return of 
Odysseus) and promising a concentration that to judge by Aristo-
tle was far from the norm for epic. Homer promises mighty mate-
rial, and minimal distraction—promises that in a world of compet-
ing demands appealed then and still appeal now.
Tradition and Innovation
Competition for attention has always been a feature of conscious life. 
The epic mode may have guaranteed at least initial attention from a 
Greek audience, but even the best-­disposed audience can drift. How 
does Homer hold his audience while telling a story already familiar?
	
Tradition gives his subject the stamp of authority, but how much 
did he depend on the prestige of the old stories and styles? How 
much did he fill in the existing outline of legend? No documents 
prior to the Iliad or the Odyssey survive to suggest how much he 
drew from tradition. But Aristotle, centuries later, expected no rigid 
adherence to the past.15 The Athenian tragedians allowed themselves 
considerable narrative freedom, although by then, three centuries 
­after Homer, tradition was much more open to challenge than in 
Homer’s own time. Nevertheless in the Odyssey itself Telemachos 
* An anachronism here. Homer thought in terms of local populations—Ionian, Achaian, 
Spartan, and so on. But he used the terms “Achaians,” “Argives,” and “Danaans” almost inter-
changeably to refer to the whole “Greek” force massed against Troy, and through both this 
sense of a common purpose and the prestige of his achievement his work played an impor-
tant part in the creation of a sense of a panhellenic culture.

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
221
observes, when the bard Phemius sings his tale: “People . . . always 
give more applause to that song which is the latest to circulate among 
the listeners” (1.351–352). Homer’s characters report the past freely, 
compressing, expanding, altering emphases, and we can infer that 
Homer likewise “felt free to expand, adapt, or complement his story 
(provided he did not change its core, which was quite small, pre­
sumably,” suggests Irene de Jong: “in the case of Odysseus, it may 
have comprised no more than the hero’s successful return home af-
ter twenty years).”16
	
This may overstate the case—slightly. But other than these ele-
ments—Odysseus as the last to return from Troy, reaching Ithaka af-
ter many delays and adventures, including the challenge posed by 
Polyphemos, and find­ing a wife still faithful despite the importu-
nate attentions of suitors—the story of Odysseus’ return may not 
have been much more elaborated within the larger story of the Tro-
jan War.
Character
How does Homer engross his audience in Odysseus’ return? One 
sure route to attention is to focus on highly memorable characters. 
We heed others, we distinguish one from another, and we take par-
ticular note of those of high sta­tus or exceptional powers or both. 
Epics from Gilgamesh to Beowulf focus on redoubtable heroes, espe-
cially those like Odysseus who have already acquired local cultural 
cap­ital. Odysseus finds that even among the remote Phaiakians his 
exploits at Troy are already a standard theme of their song.
	
Odysseus is the king of Ithaka; a warrior hero, second only to 
Achilleus among the Greek fighters at Troy; the man whose ruse of 
the Wooden Horse led to the sack of Troy and the recapture of Helen 
after the impasse of a ten-­year siege; the most intelligent of mortals, 
a favorite of Zeus, ruler of the gods, and of Athene, warrior goddess 
of wisdom.
	
Tradition already de­fines him: in the Iliad he is “like Zeus in coun-
sel” (2.636) and “his mind is best at devices” (10.241), although the 
most famous of his devices, the Wooden Horse, plays its part af-
ter the events recounted in the Iliad. But Homer makes him even 

On the Origin of Stories
222
more remarkable than legend recorded. Three times in the Odyssey 
he tells the story of the Wooden Horse, in circumstances more dra-
matic each time. Odysseus’ reputation at Troy has already spread 
across the Mediterranean, and he is on the minds of all, from Olym-
pos to Ithaka. Homer makes the most of Athene’s unique relation-
ship to Odysseus, not as a mortal lover, as other goddesses have, but 
uniquely as a kindred spirit, an intellectual comrade, a representative 
among mortals of the things she stands for among the gods.
	
Even with Athene’s support, Odysseus also arouses our interest 
and sympathy because he has suffered more than anyone else return-
ing from Troy, yet still endures. Although the victory at Troy owed 
more to him than to anyone else, he has had to face years of grief as 
he pines for home. We first see “great-­hearted Odysseus,” “wretched 
above all the other men,” weeping for a way home, with “the sweet 
lifetime . . . draining out of him” (5.150, 105, 152). His absence casts a 
pall over all who fondly recall him.
	
In each epic Homer focuses intently on a single hero, although 
Achilleus withdraws from the action for much of the Iliad and Odys-
seus remains absent or unrecognized through most of the Odyssey. 
In each, he builds up the hero as a nonpareil. The structure of each 
poem magnifies the hero, in a different way each time, yet shows him 
to be not only the greatest warrior but something else: the most com-
passionate, in Achilleus’ case, for all his fury on the battlefield; in Od-
ysseus’ case, the hero who can achieve his most glorious victory, 
against more than a hundred suitors, by playing the part of a lowly 
beggar abused by all.
	
We keep close track of the personality of others, because doing 
so  helps us to predict their behavior and to plan our own. Since 
­personality remains relatively stable, it pays us in life to monitor it, 
especially if a person is complex enough not to be entirely predict-
able. Story offers us intense concentrations of character information, 
and never more than in the case of Odysseus. He is not only the 
shrewdest strategist and the most dauntless warrior in the Odyssey, 
but the most multifarious character in ancient literature, and per-
haps even since. James Joyce asked a friend whom he considered the 
most many-­sided of all literary characters. He knew his own answer: 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
223
Odysseus—or Ulysses, in the Latin version of his name.17 His admi-
ration spurred him to the challenge of composing his own Ulysses 
with its own all-­encompassing hero.
	
Odysseus is “king and rogue, hero and trickster, gentleman and 
knave, family man and wanderer, faithful husband and roving lover; 
egotistic and considerate, ruthless and tender, prudent and fool-
hardy.”18 He is inexhaustible, and an unexampled hero, yet never 
merely idealized. The greatest triumph on his return voyage, as we 
will see, is also his greatest di­sas­ter, entirely preventable, entirely his 
own fault, earning him the wrath of the god Poseidon for his own 
folly (and his resourcefulness), and ultimately costing him the lives 
of his companions. He stands out from all men, and yet he also seems 
to undergo the whole range of human experience.
Plot
Episode
Character provides one of the surest means for a story to earn atten-
tion, but in his Poetics Aristotle places plot first. Surprising incident, 
especially if stakes are high, offers the simplest motive for story. The 
most famous parts of the Odyssey, even for those who have never 
read it, are Odysseus’ fabulous adventures beyond the fringes of the 
familiar, especially his ordeal in the cave of the one-­eyed Cyclops, 
his encounter with the sorceress Circe, his sailing between the cliff-­
dwelling monster Skylla and the deadly whirlpool Charybdis. The 
Cyclops and Circe stories, “more folk tales than epic episodes,”19 seem 
to have circulated widely before Homer composed his story.
	
But Homer allows only one-­sixth of the poem to the wanderings, 
and even then he has Odysseus himself tell the story to his Phaiakian 
hosts, as if both to provide eyewitness authentication and to mini-
mize his own narrative responsibility for these wild stories. Mere in-
cident can become repetitive, predictable, disjointed: one damned 
thing after another, with each adventure having to top the last. As a 
master storyteller, Homer recognizes this problem and solves it in 
multiple ways. Surprising fates can engage us even more than sur-
prising incidents. Homer makes Odysseus’ extraordinary destiny—

On the Origin of Stories
224
his regaining his wife and home after twenty years—the key to ev­ery 
door of his many-­chambered story.
Unity and Diversity: Goals
Aristotle critiqued the episodic as the worst kind of plot. The sum-
maries of other Epic Cycle stories show that although they concen-
trated on characters like Herakles or Theseus, still weightier in Greek 
mythology than Odysseus, they had no other focus, merely running 
their heroes through obstacle courses of traditional adventures and 
cheaply contrived new surprises. In contrast to these stories Aristotle 
singled out Homer’s epics and their unity of action. Homer tells the 
story not of Achilleus’ entire life, but only of his wrath and its conse-
quences in a forty-­day stretch in the Trojan War; he does not tell Od-
ysseus’ whole story, but only his return home.
	
Aristotle did not explain why or how “unity of action” matters 
in story. It matters because it focuses our attention and promises 
an overall pattern into which ev­ery event fits like a voussoir into an 
arch. In any situation, we look first for information relevant to our 
current concerns and resist the irrelevant. In story, the protagonists’ 
goals matter and become our criterion for relevance. From infancy 
we can identify others’ goals, and we have a default sympathy with 
their pursuing them—unless they are at odds with ours. In the case 
of Odysseus, we, the gods, Odysseus, and his family and friends all 
desire his return, so that anything relevant to that overarching goal 
instantly counts.
	
Intelligence evolved out of movement, to guide organisms away 
from threats and toward opportunities. All languages equate move-
ment toward with approaching or attaining a purpose.20 Goals have 
shaped stories since before the Epic of Gilgamesh, and quest narra-
tives like The Lord of the Rings still flour­ish. Few of these stories make 
the terms of the quest sharper than the Odyssey, where Homer estab-
lishes from the first Odysseus’ frustration with his con­finement to 
Kalypso’s island and his desire to return home. The Olympian gods 
support his goal; so do all those we admire in Ithaka and on the 
Greek mainland; and so do we.
	
Odysseus’ motivation has not just simplicity and clarity but emo-
tional amplitude. We notice an exceptional hero, but our sympathy 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
225
can be engaged when anyone pursues a goal central to life. Odysseus’ 
goals could not be more fundamental: survival and security, his own 
and his family’s; and reproduction, including mate selection and re-
tention, and the defense of offspring and the resources to maintain 
them.
	
Odysseus enters the poem in what might seem a male fantasy 
come true,21 sharing a bed with a goddess who can surround him 
with love and luxury and even the promise of immortality; yet we 
find him “unwilling beside the willing nymph” (5.153),22 weeping to 
return to home and to family. In Greek culture, philia sums up “that 
attachment to one’s normal and natural social environment which 
underlies so much of Greek happiness,”23 but under other terms 
philia is a human universal. As research inspired by the attachment 
theory of John Bowlby has shown, human and other infants need a 
secure base, especially a mother or other primary care­giver to return 
to, before they have the con­fi­dence to venture out into the world.24 
Odysseus is both the ultimate explorer, who in that sense represents 
all human curiosity—and we are the most curious species on Earth 
—and the personification of the desire to return home, which drives 
the whole narrative of the Odyssey.
	
The attachment of parents and children preceded in evolutionary 
terms the more or less monogamous attachment of male and female 
partners. The link between the two is revealed by the fact that in 
mammals attachment both between parents and children and be-
tween partners is expressed neurochemically through oxytocin. A 
central focus of story across the world is falling in love,25 or, in unro-
mantic biological terms, “mate selection.” The Odyssey tells us noth-
ing about how Odysseus and Penelope fell in love, although an Odys-
sey as linear and loose as the Herakliad or Theseid that Aristotle 
mocks could have told such a story. But although falling in love pro-
vides the climax of many a tale, it could never have been the climax 
of the Odyssey, whose story is the hero’s return after twenty years to 
a  faithful Penelope. Homer holds our attention by eschewing the 
­endorphin high of Odysseus and Penelope falling in love—which 
would have made his story sag in its long middle—and moving 
straight to the point where he can build steadily toward the climax of 
their re­union.

On the Origin of Stories
226
	
Nevertheless he evokes aspects of mate selection. He offers us an 
ideal opportunity for Odysseus: the virginal young princess, Nausi-
kaa, who realizes that she is ripe for marriage and demurely but 
­unmistakably signals that she would be happy to be wooed by Od­
ysseus. Though charmed, Odysseus wants nothing to deflect him 
from his return home. But Penelope at home shows another side of 
the pro­cess of mate selection. More than a hundred males compete 
against one another for her, Ithaka’s prize female, but she resists them 
all because she has already selected her prize male.
	
In monogamous relationships, in which both partners help to 
raise children, mate retention is a problem. Homer intensifies this 
problem to the extreme, not only making Odysseus the last to re-
turn from the Trojan War, but having him return after twenty years, 
double the length of the war itself, and making him face a wife be-
sieged by a swarm of suitors. While the need to defeat the reckless 
and murderous suitors determines Odysseus’ strategy over the last 
half of his tale, its climax ­comes not with the bloody defeat of the 
suitors but with Penelope’s at last recognizing Odysseus in a way that 
shows their unique compatibility. Odysseus enters the Odyssey in a 
situation that seems a male fantasy, as the paramour of a goddess; he 
ends the poem realizing a still greater fantasy, returning home after 
twenty years away to find Penelope still weeping for him ev­ery day, 
still enchanting enough to have 108 suitors in hot pursuit, only for 
him to be able to establish his absolute mental and physical superior-
ity to all his rivals and his unmatched, unbroken bond with his wife.
Unity and Diversity: Obstacles
Odysseus’ goals are decisively clear, central to life, emphatically in-
tense, and emotionally rousing for the gods, the mortal characters, 
and us. But goals by themselves rarely make a story. “Odysseus wants 
to return home, so he does” does not promise much of an epic. Story 
is not only the pursuit of goals, but the interaction of goals and ob-
stacles—often, obstacles arising from the competing goals of others. 
We know that the world does not depend on our desires and often 
frustrates them, so that to achieve them we need resolution and in-
ventiveness. Odysseus has both, and to an unprecedented degree.
	
He faces dire obstacles: raging elements, daunting distances, angry 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
227
gods, monsters and mortals galore, even amorous ­women, both hu-
man and divine. The giants and goddesses on his travels provide the 
spectacle in his story, but from the first Homer establishes the suitors 
as his ultimate obstacle, not monsters but mortals, an army of reck-
less insolence installed for years in his own home. None of Odysseus’ 
adventures in his wanderings take as much as a single book, but the 
challenge that faces him on his return dominates the first four and 
the last twelve of the poem’s twenty-­four books.
	
Revenge elicits intense emotions, from gnawing curiosity to mor-
alistic anger to acute apprehension as the rewards and risks of retri-
bution loom. Until it is sat­is­fied, moral anger can preoccupy us like 
little else. Since revenge can whet an appetite at the start of a story 
and be amply sat­is­fied at the end, it is no surprise that it has long 
been and still remains a staple of narrative, from the Oresteia to 
Hamlet and The Revenge of the Jedi.
	
Since we became human long before we invented legal institutions 
to break cycles of offense and retaliation, the urge to avenge affronts 
and injuries remains deep in our psyche. We may no ­longer share 
Odysseus’ or Athene’s sense that the suitors and the serving-­women 
who consorted with them all deserve death, but Homer summons 
all his craft to ensure that his audience—including those living un-
der conditions he could not readily imagine—feels a moral outrage 
against the suitors for their indifference to all responsibility, whether 
to the gods or their own social superiors or inferiors.
	
He establishes two interlinked problems from the start. The first—
how will Odysseus return to Ithaka?—we, the gods, and Odysseus 
share from the outset. The second—how will the suitors be dealt 
with?—Odysseus will be the last to ponder. Homer establishes the 
problem of the suitors’ behavior not as his hero’s narrowly personal 
motive but as something that outrages us, and the gods, and Odys-
seus’ family, his peers, and his trusty servants. Long before he returns 
to find the suitors wooing his wife, we all recognize the moral prob-
lem they pose and Odysseus’ return and revenge as the only solu-
tion.
	
In the Odyssey the unity of action that Aristotle extols in Homer 
is therefore a double unity, twining through the poem in two sturdy, 
mutually reinforcing strands. First, the return, a problem and a goal 

On the Origin of Stories
228
we share with Odysseus from the first. Then, the revenge against the 
suitors, a problem that we know lies ahead before Odysseus does, al-
though we look forward eagerly to him as the solution to the prob-
lem. Homer solves his own problem, as so often, in several ways. 
He finds a goal that can unify the poem’s action and encompass the 
traditional adventures of Odysseus, and more; he then invents a sub-
ordinate goal that he establishes for us but does not disclose to Odys-
seus until the final phase of his story, and that he treats very differ­
ently, in a much more detailed and psychologically strategic way. He 
creates both a complex unity of action through his hero’s nested hi-
erarchy of goals, and a complex diversity of action. He offers not just 
a higgledy-­piggledy succession of adventures but a series of changes 
in perspective, pace, and tactics. He keeps the principal obstacle be-
fore our eyes, but hidden from his hero’s, through the interim goals 
of the first half of the story, then transforms Odysseus from some-
one buffeted by fate, and apparently without support, to someone 
resolutely in command as he plans his revenge, con­fi­dent of Athene’s 
eager support.26 And he makes his hero, enduring, resourceful Odys-
seus, someone uniquely endowed to withstand and overcome all the 
obstacles he must face.
Outcome
Vividness of incident captures immediate attention but runs the risk 
of lapsing into a trite succession of spectacular moments. Unity of 
action, by integrating goals and obstacles, can hold an audience for 
far ­longer, by making ev­ery event relevant to an end we either dread 
or desire, part of a pattern that connects and sustains disparate de-
tails. And this leads to a third major factor in plot. The likelihood of 
change in the fortunes of characters we care for raises our expecta-
tions and rouses our emotions.
	
Feelings evolved as a guide to behavior: an appraisal of the posi-
tive or negative value of current conditions and of actions to be taken 
in response to them. In real life we naturally prefer a positive emo-
tional outcome, indicating that a course of action has been of bene­
fit. But the negative emotions, like fear and anger, are more powerful, 
because more critical: we need to avoid being eaten much more ur-
gently than we need to eat. Hence tragedy and thrillers can engage 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
229
emotions at their most intense. Yet most of us naturally prefer happy 
endings.27
	
Homer sim­pli­fies his story through the clarity of Odysseus’ goals, 
and our sympathy with them, while he amplifies it through the range 
of experience these goals involve, without the story’s ever losing its 
strong sense of direction. He makes the most of the intensity of neg-
ative emotions through the mortal dangers Odysseus confronts and 
the outrage the suitors’ behavior provokes. But he also holds out the 
promise of ultimate plea­sure. He maximizes the distance between 
Odysseus’ initial trials and his ultimate triumphs, and allows us to 
anticipate those triumphs even when no other mortal characters 
can.
	
More than anyone else, Odysseus made possible the Greek victory 
at Troy. Of all the returning warriors, he deserves most, yet his suf-
ferings in the wake of the war continue longest of all. He loses his 
companions, lives for seven years without mortal company, and we 
first see him weeping in despair of returning to home and human-
kind. But because we can see he has the support of all the gods but 
one, we can also foresee that his fortunes will change radically, trans-
forming him from the most unfortunate to the most fortunate of 
homecomers. Physically he has been the most direly threatened of 
all the heroes at Troy. Socially his trials are no less extreme: back in 
Ithaka at last, he will be reduced to a level more abject than any other 
Greek hero could endure, a beggar abused by another beggar, by ser-
vants, by the suitors despoiling his home and wooing his wife. But he 
reestablishes himself as the father of staunch Telemachos, the victor 
over the suitors, the husband of faithful Penelope, the lord of a newly 
pacified Ithaka, the upholder of the line of Laertes. Priam, king of 
Troy, had had fifty sons, but Zeus decrees he shall lose them all, and 
his kingdom, along with his life. Odysseus by contrast is his father’s 
only son, and Telemachos his only son, but together he and his son 
defeat the army of the suitors, and together with both his father and 
his son he stands resolute at the end of the poem against those who 
seek to avenge the suitors’ death.
	
As the contrast with Priam indicates, the scale of Odysseus’ tri-
umph is all the greater through the contrasts Homer repeatedly es-
tablishes between Odysseus and other heroes of the Trojan saga: Me-

On the Origin of Stories
230
nelaos, reunited with his fickle Helen, the cause of the whole war; 
Agamemnon, who returned home only to be killed by his faithless 
wife and her lover, the grimmest consequence of the war’s hollow vic-
tory;28 and Achilleus, dead and dejected in Hades, unconsoled by the 
glory he obtained at Troy, his despair relieved only by the news of his 
son’s bravery in battle. Odysseus has already earned glory at Troy as 
the architect of the city’s defeat, and now adds to it as the most he-
roic of the returnees, as the victor over the suitors, as the husband of 
the most faithful of wives. And he still lives to enjoy both his re-
nown—and the renown of his son—and life itself.
Storytellers need to balance audience bene­fits against audience costs 
in time and comprehension effort. Homer ensures the popular ap-
peal of the Odyssey not only through the features of character and 
plot already considered, but also by merely simplifying his plot, di-
viding the characters the easiest way of all, into “goodies” and “bad-
dies.”29 He focuses overwhelmingly on one hero, the foremost of the 
goodies, and contrasts the singularity of this hero with the often 
anonymous rabble of the suitors. In these respects, the strategies of 
the Odyssey stand in stark opposition to those of the Iliad. There, 
there is no division into goodies and baddies—indeed, Homer ap-
pears to have gone out of his way to allow much more of the Tro-
jan point of view than the traditional story granted30—and a score 
of highly individualized heroes take turns on center stage. These are 
major reasons for many critics’ preferring the Iliad, and for thinking 
that the author of the Iliad did not compose the Odyssey. They are 
also major reasons for the greater popular appeal of the Odyssey.
	
But as we shall see, Homer sim­pli­fies the story of the Odyssey into 
goodies and baddies—perhaps at a patron’s request, perhaps for his 
own reasons—without sacrificing moral complexity. Although the 
suitors are almost all irredeemably offensive, and Odysseus is unri-
valed in strength, shrewdness, and steadfastness of purpose, he also 
has his flaws, even in the midst of his successes. And although the 
story focuses resolutely on Odysseus, even in his absence, it makes 
him the most multifaceted of characters, in his roles, his personality, 
his experiences, his states of mind; it focuses on him in surprising 
ways, through sophisticated angles and ironies, as we shall see in the 

	
Earning Attention (1): Character and Plot
	
231
next chapter; and it does not ignore the point of view of others, even 
characters of humble station, like the nursemaid Eurykleia and the 
swineherd Eumaios.
	
Homer devises scores of ways to secure his audience’s attention as 
he draws on the strength of a local tradition, the Trojan saga, and the 
universal impact of character and plot as elements of story. Charac-
ter and plot are from one angle problems that all storytellers must 
solve to hold an audience, but Homer easily outdoes the usual solu-
tions. He generates multiple simultaneous solutions, even in these 
most ordinary and obvious aspects of story. The inventiveness and 
originality of his quest for his audience’s attention and response will 
take us still further into the art of story.

232
15
EARNING ATTENTION (2): OPEN-ENDED PATTERNS: 
IRONIES OF STRUCTURE
Nature has shaped our ultrasocial selves to attend to charac-
ter and event in life and story. Homer not only manages both su-
perbly, offering us an extraordinary hero and shaping events toward 
a supremely challenging goal, but he also makes them multifaceted 
enough to encompass wide swathes of life without losing focus or 
force. But all this is still not enough to explain why the Odyssey re-
mains such a classic after 3,000 years.
	
Authors can appeal to their immediate audience, or to future au-
diences they can only vaguely imagine, to first-­time audiences, or to 
repeat audiences. Homer appeals to all four. He sought and found 
ways to hold the attention of his time, of posterity, and of newcom-
ers and oldtimers.
	
Academic literary criticism tends to focus on meaning, on the 
themes of traditional critics or the ideologies of more recent ones. 
But works of art need to attract and arouse audiences before they 
“mean.”1 Every detail of a work will affect the moment-­by-­moment 
attention it receives, but not necessarily a meaning abstracted from 
the story. Our minds can focus on only a few things at once. To hold 
an audience, in a world of competing demands on attention, an au-
thor needs to be an inventive intuitive psychologist. Yet criticism has 
tended to underplay the “mere” ability to arouse and hold attention.
	
A biocultural approach to storytelling, by focusing on authors’ 
­appeal to audiences, can draw closer to the design and details of the 
text, to authors’ strategic decisions, large and small, and to the global 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
233
and local responses of readers. It will not ignore meaning—indeed, 
in the following four chapters I will suggest that it can add to the 
breadth and depth of literary meanings—but it also will not over-
look what first makes us interested enough and moved enough to 
linger, sometimes, over meanings.
	
Our minds automatically send information worth further pro­
cessing up to our highest evolved mental systems, the social cogni-
tive systems that track patterns of agents and actions. Fiction en-
gages these systems to play hard so that outside fiction they can work 
harder. But as we have seen in earlier chapters, we also have an open-
­ended appetite for patterns of new kinds that may yield new im­
plications we may have to work out on a case-­by-­case basis. Classic 
literary works amply engage our swift evolved systems of social cog-
nition, but they also abound in other, open-­ended patterns, internal 
structures that lack the popout effect of character and event but may 
nevertheless alter our expectations even without our conscious rec-
ognition. We catch and lose sight of such patterns, in a kind of hide-­
and-­seek surrounding the more immediate and insistent patterns of 
character and event. The structures the greatest storytellers set up 
around the more evolutionarily salient effects of character and event 
can shimmer with implications that invite us back again and again to 
their stories. Their shifting vistas help keep our attention alive.
	
I make no claim to have discovered all the patterns and ironies 
I marshal here, nor do I claim that they can be discovered only by 
adopting an evolutionary viewpoint. Neither the evolution of life nor 
the development of art requires organisms to be aware of evolution 
to do what evolution shapes them to do. But an evolutionary appre-
ciation of social behavior nevertheless helps us to highlight authors 
and audiences as strategists: authors trying to earn the attention of 
audiences, audiences always ready to redirect their minds to their 
own concerns should an author’s grip on their attention weaken. Au-
thors strategically assess the traditions they operate within or against, 
and their own relative skills and standing, and the expectations audi-
ences have both of traditions and of themselves as authors. An evo-
lutionary perspective helps us see the Odyssey’s subtler ironic pat-
terns as a concerted suite of solutions to problems of maximizing 
audience attention in the particular situation Homer faced, at his 

On the Origin of Stories
234
place in oral tradition, and with the Iliad already acclaimed, and 
given his own talents, inclinations, and ambitions.
Tradition and Attention
Greek bards reciting or singing tales about their gods and heroes al-
ready belonged to a system of competition for attention. But since 
traditional stories—a safe bet in a traditional world—were already 
familiar, how could a gifted storyteller stand out? How does a Homer 
appeal both to his immediate audience, who know the traditions, 
and to future audiences, who may or may not know them? How does 
he excite audiences by his version of the tale, the first time they en-
counter it, yet also invite repeat invitations to perform his particular 
version?2 Will his immediate audience not already have heard succes-
sively more elaborate versions from childhood, so that the usual nar-
rative elements of suspense, mystery, and surprise are absent?3
	
Ruth Scodel examines bardic traditions cross-­culturally, and notes 
that although audiences may know aspects of a traditional story, they 
are likely to do so not uniformly and comprehensively, but to vari-
ous degrees, in various versions, and almost always much less well 
than the bard. The bard cannot assume even his immediate audi-
ence’s prior knowledge, except of the story’s broadest outlines and 
most salient moments; but his awareness that their knowledge may 
be patchy allows him to omit, include, or elaborate old details or in-
vent new ones to create his own effects and emphases.
	
Scodel cogently explains why Homer’s epics are “notoriously odd 
as possible oral compositions,” why they seem designed for a special 
kind of attention:
They are very long, too long for most performance situa-
tions. But despite their length, the epics seem clearly, in their 
present form, designed for continuous reception or at least 
for reception within the context of a whole they themselves 
de­fine. Both epics are mere episodes in a much ­longer story, 
the Troy tale, which is itself incorporated into the overarch-
ing legendary history of the Greeks. The epics explicitly lo-
cate themselves within this larger frame. They belong to a 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
235
multi-­story tradition in which cycles of stories are well es-
tablished. However, they are relatively self-­contained. Most 
of their episodes do not work well if their implicit frame 
is  the Trojan cycle as a whole, instead of the epics them-
selves.  [Although one or two episodes are self-­contained, 
many] completely lose their point in a different context. The 
Telemachy [the story of Telemachos’ voyage in search of his 
father in the first four books of the Odyssey] works only in a 
richly expanded version of Odysseus’ return . . . The Iliad ob-
viously wants to be the Trojan epic, even though it tells a sec-
tion of the Troy story that could easily disappear completely 
without serious consequences for the tale of Troy as a whole; 
the Odyssey seeks to be the return story.4
	
Homer makes the most of the prestige of the tradition, yet he 
also appeals not only to his first audience, but to any later ones, by 
inserting his own self-­contained “tradition” within the tradition. He 
focuses on Troy and its aftermath, but chooses to omit the outlines 
of the story already known to all in his own world, like Aphrodite’s 
rewarding the Trojan prince Paris, for his judgment that she is the 
fairest of goddesses, with the love of Helen, the beautiful wife of the 
Greek Menelaos, and the lasting enmity against Troy that Paris’ judg-
ment arouses in Athene and Hera, the two goddesses he deems 
less fair.
The Iliad and the Tradition
To appreciate Homer’s originality and ambition in the Odyssey, we 
need first to see how he took tradition by surprise in the Iliad. As 
Aristotle noted, Homer recounts neither the beginning nor the end 
of the Trojan War,5 yet the Iliad’s scale and scope make it seem the 
epic of the war. Homer limits himself to a single episode, the wrath 
Achilleus feels for Agamemnon when the Greek leader takes Briseis 
from him, an episode that in all likelihood Homer invented himself. 
Yet although the Iliad recounts only this dispensable episode and its 
aftermath, it never feels remotely episodic or minor. The poem has a 
sustained sublimity of tone, a controlled but capacious architecture, 

On the Origin of Stories
236
and a high grandeur of subject: the opposition of the leader of the 
Greeks, Agamemnon, and the Greeks’ greatest fighter, Achilleus, and 
its consequences, especially Achilleus’ defeat of Hektor, the greatest 
fighter and indeed the mainstay of Troy. And although the Iliad fo-
cuses only on a brief and not particularly decisive phase of the ninth 
year of a ten-­year war, Homer works hard to create a sense that it 
encompasses the whole campaign.6
	
Homer chooses the story with the most cultural cachet, the major 
war of Greek legend, but to pique his audience’s interest recounts a 
phase of the war that is wholly new. Yet in a society that depends on 
the authority of tradition, his stance is not to challenge the tradition 
but to suggest that his story embodies and enshrines it in its most 
magisterial form. His massively circumstantial account of a previ-
ously unknown episode, he implies, testifies to his command of the 
whole Trojan saga.7 He offers his first audience both the authority of 
tradition and the surprise of the new.
	
By restricting the Iliad to a short phase of the war, he can achieve 
what Aristotle, Horace, and innumerable others have praised him 
for, the tight unity of action that keeps attention focused. But he also 
invents this episode to re­flect in complex and fascinating ways on the 
already familiar elements of the Troy saga, so as to invite us back 
again and again to reconsider the Iliad’s own shape and sense and its 
relation to the larger story.
	
Deep ironies saturate the Iliad and become both more troubling 
and more satisfying the more we return. Although the Trojan War is 
for the ancient Greeks the war story, Homer begins his story with a 
surprise and an enduring irony, setting not Greek against Trojan but 
Greek against Greek. He makes this ultimate war story, about the ul-
timate warrior, a fight about not fight­ing, a fight between the leader 
of the Greek fighters and the leading Greek fighter.
	
The reason for Achilleus’ refusal to fight contains another pointed 
ironic surprise and reversal. Agamemnon has had no choice but to 
return Chriseis, his latest battle prize, to her father, a Trojan priest 
of Apollo, in order to end the plague that irate Apollo has brought 
down on the Greeks. To compensate himself, Agamemnon comman-
deers Briseis, whom Achilleus has earlier won in battle and now loves 
as dearly as she loves him. As critics comment, “Not Helen but an-

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
237
other woman is the contended prize between two men as the Iliad 
opens.”8 Agamemnon has led a war to recover Helen, the wife Paris 
took from his brother, Menelaos, but he has no compunction about 
himself taking the woman Achilleus loves (Achilleus himself notes 
the irony, at 9.336–345). The Iliad begins with the Greek leader ut-
terly undercutting both the Greek grounds for the war—their claim 
to be redressing the injustice of a woman’s abduction—and their 
power to fight it, when Achilleus refuses to take to the field.
	
Although Homer surprises by making his war poem a fight about 
not fight­ing, that twist does not mean it is not a war story. Achilleus’ 
refusal to fight emboldens the Trojans, who come perilously close to 
defeating the Greeks and sacking their encampment. Suddenly the 
familiar outlines of the Troy story seem much less reassuring, as 
Homer makes us feel the anxiety and desperation as well as the grue-
some cost of war.
	
He ends the epic with another surprise, another complex and poi-
gnant irony. Almost throughout, Achilleus has been at odds with his 
own leader, but the Iliad closes, movingly, with his reconciliation not 
with Agamemnon but with the Trojan leader, Priam, as he offers him 
a guarantee of peace until Hektor has been laid to rest. The greatest 
Greek hero proves his greatest heroism not by fight­ing—although he 
has easily slain Troy’s greatest fighter—but by agreeing not to fight, 
by offering Priam a truce in recognition of their shared grief: his own 
for his best friend, Patroklos, Priam’s for his favorite son, Hektor, Pa-
troklos’ killer. This is the sad but high end of the poem. It began as a 
fight about not fight­ing, and now ends with two foes with bitterly 
personal reasons for enmity agreeing not to fight. But the somber 
stillness of reconciliation at the end of the poem incorporates a fur-
ther tragic irony, for, as we know, this is not the end of Troy’s sad 
story. When the truce is over, battle will resume, Achilleus will be 
killed, and Troy, along with Priam and all his remaining sons, will be 
destroyed.
	
All of which makes astonishing the judgment of the eminent critic 
Georg Lukács: “The way Homer’s epics begin in the middle and do 
not fin­ish at the end is a reflexion of the truly epic mentality’s total 
indifference to any form of architectural construction.”9
	
Homer depends on tradition, but transcends it. He takes over the 

On the Origin of Stories
238
epic form, and the Trojan saga, and the predilection for powerfully 
ironic parallels in Greek tradition—most famously, Agamemnon’s 
successful campaign against Troy to retrieve his brother’s straying 
wife, only to return to be killed by the lover his own wife has found in 
his absence. From such elements he invents his own telling irony—
Agamemnon’s taking Achilleus’ beloved Briseis, and Achilleus’ im-
placable wrath in response—to surprise and hold his first audience, 
but also to com­pli­cate and amplify the story’s internal tensions so as 
to appeal to repeat audiences or to later audiences drawn not so 
much by the Trojan tradition as by the Iliad’s self-­suf­fi­cient energies 
and ironies.
The Odyssey and the Tradition
Although the Iliad makes multiple claims to attention, the Odyssey 
outdoes it. Again Homer makes the most of the cachet of tradition, a 
tradition that by now also includes the Iliad. As before, he makes his 
new epic self-­contained, not a mere segment of a ­longer saga, but 
also continues and complements his earlier poem by making his new 
epic the story of the return to set alongside the story of the war.* In-
deed he seems to have sought to create two self-­suf­fi­cient but mutu-
ally reinforcing works of art, the exemplary stories of their subject, 
while keeping attention fresh by avoiding almost all familiar ground. 
In the Odyssey that strategy involves resisting the expectations cre-
ated both by the old story of Odysseus and by his own recent Iliad.
	
In neither poem does Homer dwell long on the expected core of 
the traditional story. Instead he chooses unexpected episodes, appar-
ently of his own invention—the wrath of Achilleus and all that fol-
lows, Telemachos’ voyage in search of his father, and Odysseus’ alli-
ance with Telemachos and the swineherd Eumaios—yet in each case 
offers a comprehensive and even definitive treatment of the tale of 
Troy. That he does not merely expand episodes already embedded 
within the traditional stories seems evident from the fact that these 
* Given that Homer repeats many lines and even blocks of text within the Odyssey, as within 
the Iliad, the avoidance in the Odyssey of any part of the Troy story covered in the Iliad—de-
spite the fact that Nestor, Menelaos, Helen, Demodokos, Odysseus, and Achilleus all report 
on the events of the war itself—must have been a highly conscious decision.

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
239
incidents would have no place except in the poems as he devised 
them.10
	
As in the Iliad, Homer again in the Odyssey prefers the intensity 
of compression to the slackness of mere sequence. Rather than re-
counting Odysseus’ whole life, or even the ten years of his return, 
from the sack of Troy to his final restoration to Penelope and to 
Ithaka, he trims Odysseus’ wanderings to fit his Trojan diptych. Con-
centrating the action into the four weeks or so between Athene’s ap-
peal to Zeus to release Odysseus from Kalypso and Odysseus’ return 
and defeat of the suitors,11 he devotes almost five-­sixths of the poem 
to the last ten days.
	
The traditional tale appears to have focused on Odysseus’ fabled 
ordeals on the fringes of the Mediterranean. Homer relegates this 
material to one-­sixth of the poem, recounted by his hero during a 
single night, the last before his return to Ithaka. Already the tradi-
tion seems to have contrasted Helen and Penelope, faithless wife and 
faithful, but Homer places this contrast at the center of his story 
when he shifts the emphasis from Odysseus’ wanderings to the vir-
tual siege of Penelope in Ithaka by an army of suitors. Against ex­
pectation, Odysseus finds Ithaka not a home and a refuge but the 
greatest danger of all, almost a war zone. It appears to have been a 
traditional irony of the stories of the return that many suffered worse 
losses after leaving Troy. Homer tightens the irony: once again Odys-
seus must do battle, this time almost single-­handed, over a woman, 
this time his own wife.12 His reception in Ithaka is at once a kind 
of miniature second Troy, and an escalation and refutation of the 
hostile welcome awaiting Agamemnon on his infamous return from 
Troy.
	
For all the shifting fortunes of war, the Iliad records a stalemate. 
Homer builds the Odyssey by pointing it always toward a single deci-
sive battle. The narrative moves swiftly from its own initial stale-
mate—Odysseus far from home, languishing for seven years on Ka-
lypso’s island—to an emphatic final reversal of his fortunes. In the 
Iliad the gods’ sympathies, like our own, are evenly balanced; no 
wonder no decisive outcome can be reached. In the Odyssey, the gods’ 
sympathies, like ours, are all but unanimously for “long-­suffering 
Odysseus.” Even before he knows it, we know he has the backing of 

On the Origin of Stories
240
the gods, and we expect his ultimate victory from the first. That ex-
pectation makes all the difference to the mood of the Odyssey and to 
its popularity.
	
Homer also contrasts his two heroes to the hilt. The entire story of 
the Iliad magnifies Achilleus, even in his absence: the Trojans surge 
forward only when they know that he has withdrawn from the field. 
In the Odyssey, too, the whole story magnifies Odysseus, even when 
he is absent: the suitors run riot because he is presumed dead. But 
Homer’s Achilleus is utterly single-­minded, focused intently first on 
his anger at Agamemnon for taking Briseis, the woman who means 
most to him, then on his rage against Hektor for killing Patroklos, 
the man who means most to him. In the later epic, by contrast, 
Homer makes Odysseus always and insistently multifaceted, circum-
spect, myriad-­minded.
	
And throughout the story Homer sustains audience attention by 
choosing unexpected angles and rhythms and ironies for each new 
phase.
The Telemachy
The Odyssey opens with a proem, a pre-­poem (1.1–9):
Tell me, Muse, of the man of many ways, who was driven
  far journeys, after he had sacked Troy’s sacred citadel.
Many were they whose cities he saw, whose minds he 
learned of,
many the pains he suffered in his spirit on the wide sea,
struggling for his own life and the homecoming of his 
companions.
Even so he could not save his companions, hard though
he strove to; they were destroyed by their own wild 
recklessness,
fools, who devoured the oxen of Helios, the Sun God,
and he took away the day of their homecoming. From 
some point
here, goddess, daughter of Zeus, speak, and begin 
our story.

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
241
From the start Odysseus is singled out as major—by tradition, by 
Homer’s appeal to the muse to tell the story of someone whose trav-
els have made him too famous to need naming, and then by the first 
scene of the poem, where Athene makes the question of Odysseus’ 
return the only item on the agenda in the council of the gods. Zeus’s 
reply to Athene refers to Odysseus’ fateful clash with Polyphemos 
and raises our expectation that we will hear more of his wanderings 
and his most famous adventure.
	
But instead Athene takes us with her, not to Odysseus, but to 
Telemachos in Ithaka. We see nothing of Odysseus for four books, 
one-­sixth of the story, and this ­comes, “or should come, as a con­
siderable surprise to anyone encountering the poem for the first 
time.”13
	
Homer would seem to risk disappointing us here, by not offering 
us the promised wanderings. But in fact these first four books con-
stantly whet our appetite for the story’s conclusion, by means of a 
series of images—prophecies, wishes, supposedly vain hopes, forlorn 
fantasies—of Odysseus returning to Ithaka and setting to rights the 
chaos caused by the suitors. In the first book alone, Odysseus is re-
ferred to on twenty-­nine separate occasions, or more than once ev­
ery fif­teen lines, and often for several lines at a stretch. He is absent, 
and felt to be absent, both by the characters, who are not expecting to 
see him, and by us, who were expecting him, and he is nevertheless 
very much present, on ev­ery­body’s minds, and of paramount im­
portance to all. Homer creates such a strong sense of anticipation 
throughout these four books that they become the oral equivalent of 
a page-­turner, not through the quiet onstage action but by rousing 
our keen con­fi­dence in Odysseus’ return to confront the suitors. And 
as many have noted, from Goethe onward, although we have a strong 
inkling of the outcome, we do not know how it will be achieved.14
	
Our plea­sure in anticipating Odysseus’ homecoming is magnified 
by our consciousness that the mortal characters in the story often 
view his return as no more than a hollow hope, forever excluded by 
the presumed “fact” of his death. We anticipate his return, we enjoy 
the privilege of knowing that the gods have already initiated the pro­
cess, and we look forward to the surprised plea­sure of those who 
currently conjure up his return as no more than an impossible 

On the Origin of Stories
242
dream. At the same time, since we do not know in detail what will 
happen, we remain curious (how can he possibly deal with all these 
suitors?), with a tinge of misgiving spicing our con­fi­dence. What if 
things do not turn out quite as Athene seems to expect? What if Po-
seidon finds out that Odysseus is on his way back to Ithaka, and vents 
his wrath on him while he is still at sea?
	
Homer’s strategy here also appeals upon our return to the story, 
knowing how it ends. We can relive the plea­sure of our first encoun-
ter, recalling that we already knew more than any of the mortal char-
acters, since we were already privy to Athene’s and Zeus’s acting in 
support of Odysseus. Yet now we can also enjoy the plea­sure of en-
joying more than our already privileged earlier selves, since we now 
know exactly how much each of the long series of predictions or dis-
missed dreams of Odysseus’ return is true or false.
	
Why else does Homer focus the first four books on Telemachos, 
rather than on his father? Among other reasons, Telemachos’ quest 
allows Homer to recount the major returns from Troy: Nestor, hap-
pily and rapidly reinstalled in his loving family; Agamemnon, mur-
dered by his wife and her lover, and avenged by his son; and Menel-
aos, back with Helen, the cause of the war, in a relationship that 
remains brittle, despite all the glitter, because of the long history of 
her infidelity. Homer can tell these stories not as mere authorial sum-
maries but in dramatic form, saturated with feeling for the tellers as 
they recount their own returns, and saturated with particular feeling 
for the young listener straining to learn more about his father and 
his comrades in war for so many years. Homer sets up each of these 
returns as a pointed contrast, both for Telemachos and for us, to Od-
ysseus and Penelope: Nestor, quickly recovering his old warm do-
mestic happiness; Agamemnon, grimly betrayed by his own wife af-
ter his long attempt to recover his brother’s faithless wife; Menelaos, 
reunited with his peerless Helen, but unable to ignore the old painful 
differences beneath the dazzling show.
	
Homer could have told the story without Telemachos’ quest for his 
father. But by starting this way he does more than establish Athene’s 
hands-­on help, Telemachos’ own stature, and the ironic light cast 
upon the returns of the other Greek heroes and Odysseus’ eventual 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
243
homecoming. Perhaps most important of all, he also introduces the 
ultimate goal of Odysseus’ own greater quest, Ithaka, yet not the old 
Ithaka he pines for, but the new one wasted by the “insolent,” “arro-
gant,” “reckless” suitors. The Telemachy ends with the suitors at an-
chor, lying in wait for Odysseus’ son, “in their hearts devising sudden 
death for Telemachos” (4.843). By showing us Telemachos in Ithaka, 
unable to persuade the suitors to disperse, unable to curb their out-
rages, Homer discloses not only the goal of Odysseus’s quest, but the 
painful cost of his absence, the scale of the threat awaiting him once 
he does return, and the son and heir who will help him regain their 
heritage. More than he could in any other way, Homer also makes us 
feel Odysseus’ absence and its cost, makes us long for his return and 
look forward with edgy excitement to the surprise it will cause for 
his family, friends, and foes.
Part and Whole
While the Odyssey as we have it is too long for a single performance, 
its parts are not self-­suf­fi­cient wholes. The Telemachy makes splen-
did if unexpected sense as the introduction to the story of Odysseus’ 
return, but it cannot stand on its own—and not only because of its 
cliffhanger ending.
	
As we now have it, the Odyssey divides into twenty-­four books. 
These divisions may well be post-­Homeric, yet many agree that the 
poem naturally falls into four-­book units.15 Here we can see an-
other aspect of Homer’s care to secure his audience’s attention. Each 
four-­book block would constitute something like a two-­ to three-­
hour performance, a dedicated afternoon’s or evening’s entertain-
ment. Each has its own focus: Telemachos and his quest for his fa-
ther (1–4); Odysseus’ escape from Kalypso’s island to the Phaiakians 
(5–8); his account to the Phaiakians of his great wanderings (9–12); 
his return to the island of Ithaka, to the hut of his loyal swineherd 
Eumaios, and his re­union there with Telemachos (13–16); his return 
to his palace in disguise as a beggar, subject to the abuse of the suit-
ors (17–20); his disclosure of himself as Odysseus to the suitors, to 
Penelope, to his father (21–24). Each block also marks a clear advance 

On the Origin of Stories
244
toward the return and restoration of Odysseus and thereby offers a 
reason to turn up for the next session.
	
Yet each block also marks a shift in scene or strategy or both. In 
the first, the Telemachy, we enjoy the irony that Odysseus is alive and 
about to return, so that we expect a pleasant surprise for those wish-
ing for his return but sure that he never will. In the second block, 
Odysseus’ escape to Phaiakia, the ironies prove quite different, as 
we shall see shortly. In the third block, the ironies disappear alto-
gether as Odysseus recounts his story directly to the Phaiakians. In 
the fourth block, irony returns more emphatically and immediately 
than ever as Odysseus stands before two who love him and do not 
recognize him, his loyal swineherd and his son. In the fifth block, the 
ironies multiply again, as the suitors heap abuse on a beggar they do 
not know as Odysseus and unwittingly stoke his revenge with ev­ery 
insult, while Odysseus also meets Penelope and his old nurse, Eu-
rykleia, in scenes where the insecurity of his disguise creates a new 
kind of suspense. In the final block, Odysseus springs his deadly, 
long-­prepared-­for surprise on the suitors, only for Penelope to spring 
on us and on Odysseus a surprise that takes us all unawares: her re-
luctance to recognize him as Odysseus.
	
Homer builds a strong narrative drive throughout the story, but 
breaks it into sessions that respect the limits of human attention. 
Each of his partially self-­contained sessions advances the story but 
also offers often a new scene, a new cast, and a new set of strategies. 
He devised this complex but lucid scheme for his original audience, 
but it has the same kind of appeal for modern readers as for old au-
ditors, for newcomers and for rereaders. Although on a repeat en-
counter we find ourselves back in the familiar world of Odyssean 
irony, we also find ourselves never settling into the same set of iro-
nies for long.
	
This scheme has little to do with the meanings of the Odyssey, but 
ev­ery­thing to do with our desire to attend to its story. Millennia later, 
Tolstoy introduced stream of consciousness into literature late in 
Anna Karenina, but he also divided the novel into eight books, and 
within each book into the interweaving strands of the story, and 
within each strand into short chapters easily assimilated in a reading 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
245
situation subject to interruptions. Like Tolstoy, Homer thinks about 
human psychology not only in terms of his characters but also in 
terms of his audience. One requires at least as much ingenuity and 
insight as the other.
From Kalypso to the Phaiakians
Each four-­book block of the Odyssey has its own taut relation to oth-
ers. After the Telemachy shows us the suitors who will not leave the 
home of the woman they would like to wed, the next block begins 
with Odysseus unable to leave the home of the goddess who would 
like to wed him. Like many of the ironies and symmetries of the Od-
yssey, this shapes our response immediately, although we may not 
enjoy it consciously until a repeat encounter. There is too much else 
happening.
	
In the proem to the Odyssey, Homer introduces Odysseus as the 
man who tried to save his companions, although, as Odysseus him-
self knows, his actions have often cost as well as sometimes saved the 
lives of his companions. From the first, and especially just before he 
at last brings Odysseus onstage, Homer stokes our admiration of his 
hero to ensure our sympathy and our eagerness for his ultimate tri-
umph.
	
In the first council of the gods, Zeus tells Athene that he has al-
ready been planning Odysseus’ homecoming. Athene suggests send-
ing Hermes, the messenger of the gods, to Kalypso to announce to 
her “our absolute purpose, the homecoming of enduring Odysseus, 
that he shall come back. But I shall make my way to Ithaka, so that 
I may stir up his son a little . . .” (1.86–89). Immediately she dons 
her sandals and streaks toward Ithaka and Telemachos. Directly af-
ter the Telemachy, book 5 opens with a second council of the gods 
and Athene again raising the case of Odysseus. Again Zeus says that 
Odysseus’ release is already his plan, their plan. He orders Athene to 
bring Telemachos safely home past the suitors waiting in ambush, 
then turns to Hermes, commanding him to announce to Kalypso 
“our absolute purpose, the homecoming of enduring Odysseus, that 
he shall come back” (5.30–31). Verbal repetitions are common in the 
Homeric epics, a sign of their oral heritage, yet critics have been puz-

On the Origin of Stories
246
zled by the overlap of these two councils of the gods. Why are they 
so similar? Why does Athene suggest dispatching Hermes immedi-
ately in the council in book 1, and Zeus order Hermes’ dispatch in 
the same words again in the council in book 5?
	
Throughout the Telemachy Homer highlights Athene’s role in re-
storing the fortunes of Odysseus and his family, to boost our an­
ticipation that he will be restored. She brings Odysseus’ case before 
Zeus, who announces that he already has Odysseus’ interests at heart, 
then promptly takes her own initiative in grooming Telemachos for 
heroism. Throughout the Telemachy, she appears before Telemachos 
in this or that mortal form. Not only does she supply spe­cific advice, 
but he usually recognizes that he has been instructed by a god, and 
his con­fi­dence grows accordingly.
	
Homer wishes to establish both Athene’s support and the long-­
term prospects for Ithaka’s ruling family, yet at the same time he 
wants us to experience the sufferings of “much-­enduring” Odysseus, 
at his lowest ebb, facing severe trials without any reassurance that he 
has the aid of the gods. He wants us to look forward keenly to Odys-
seus’ restoration, but also to sympathize with him now, amid all his 
ordeals.
	
Athene is a hands-­on goddess, and a passionate partisan of Odys-
seus. Were she to travel all the way to Ogygia to announce the gods’ 
decree to Kalypso, she would also visit her favorite mortal. Instead, 
Homer and Zeus assign her other pressing tasks, in the first coun-
cil, from which she rushes after Telemachos of her own accord, and 
in the second council, where Zeus orders her to guide Telemachos 
safely back to Ithaca. Hermes heads for Ogygia in her place, and talks 
only to Kalypso. Goddess though she is, Kalypso has no choice but to 
comply with the Olympian decree, but still hopes to deter Odysseus 
from leaving. She tells him nothing of the gods’ command, as if she 
should have the credit for his release,16 and seeks to deter him by re-
minding him of the possible malice of the gods.
	
Homer wants to stress Odysseus’ despair at being so far from his 
family for so long, without having us dwell on the fact that he has 
shared Kalypso’s bed for perhaps ­longer than he has ever shared 
­Penelope’s. After Hermes makes his announcement to her, Kalypso 
searches

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
247
after great-­hearted Odysseus,
and found him sitting on the seashore, and his eyes 
were never
wiped dry of tears, and the sweet lifetime was draining 
out of him,
as he wept for a way home, since the nymph was no 
­longer pleasing
to him. By nights he would lie beside her, of necessity,
in the hollow caverns, against his will, by one who 
was willing,
but all the days he would sit upon the rocks, at the 
seaside,
breaking his heart in tears and lamentation and sorrow
as weeping tears he looked out over the barren 
water.  (5.150–158)
This is how Homer has Odysseus at last enter the poem: the beloved 
of a goddess who can surround him with comfort, love, and even the 
promise of immortality, he nevertheless weeps inconsolably ev­ery 
day for home.
	
Not knowing of the gods’ decree, and wary of her motives, Od­
ysseus secures Kalypso’s oath that she will not thwart him. He con-
structs and launches a raft, still unaware of divine sanction, let alone 
support, for his homecoming. Poseidon, his one implacable foe 
among the gods, returns from his Aithiopian sojourn, spies Odysseus 
on his raft, and unleashes a storm that sweeps him into the bitter sea. 
Aware of Poseidon’s enmity, Odysseus fears imminent destruction, 
but finds some relief from a local goddess, Ino, who urges him to 
abandon the raft he has now regained and swim for shore. Dreading 
deceit, he clings to the raft, only for Poseidon to smash it asunder 
and leave Odysseus bobbing in the angry waves. As Poseidon resumes 
his homeward course, Athene secretly intervenes, calming the seas. 
When breakers threaten to dash Odysseus against the rocky strand, 
she prompts him, again in secret, to an escape. He scrambles ashore, 
naked, chilled, exhausted, fearing death from cold or whatever beasts 
prowl these parts. Within 150 lines, we have seen him buffeted by one 
life-­threatening challenge after another, in a miniature of his long 

On the Origin of Stories
248
ordeals on sea and land. Homer makes us feel Odysseus’ dread and 
despair, his sense that he is alone, without support in a hostile world, 
even as he also allows us to see that the gods will ensure his return to 
Penelope, however unlikely life, let alone happiness, has just seemed 
to him at sea and on this lonely shore.
Nausikaa
From the start, we expect Odysseus’ return. Not only does tradition 
decree it, but we have heard it freshly guaranteed by Zeus, not once, 
but twice. Yet Odysseus has no such reassurance. And suddenly we, 
too, face a surprise.
	
Odysseus has not seen another mortal for seven years.17 Now, 
sleeping exhausted under a blanket of leaves, still naked and caked 
with salt, he has reached his lowest ebb. But he wakes the next day to 
an idyll, a vision of purity: the cries of young maidens at play, amid 
their gleaming, freshly washed linen spread out to dry in the sun. 
The night before, Athene visited Nausikaa, the Phaiakian princess, in 
her sleep, and reminded her that she is nearing the age of marriage, 
and that part of a wife’s duties will be to keep the household linen 
clean. Early next morning, with the permission of her father, King 
Alkinoös, and his delicate recognition that she is readying herself for 
marriage, she rides with her young handmaidens to wash the palace 
linen in the river Odysseus staggered from the night before.
	
When Odysseus wakes with a start, her friends scatter in fear, but 
the princess remains. He hails her with “mortal or goddess?” If she is 
mortal, her parents and brothers must be blessed “with happiness at 
the thought of you, seeing such a slip of beauty . . .  but blessed at the 
heart, even beyond these others, is that one who, after loading you 
down with gifts, leads you as his bride home. I have never with these 
eyes seen anything like you.” He asks her for some rag to wrap him-
self in, “and then may the gods give you ev­ery­thing that your heart 
longs for; may they grant you a husband and a house, and sweet 
agreement in all things.” As he bathes and clothes himself, Athene 
­silently beautifies him. Nausikaa confides to her handmaids that al-
though the unkempt stranger had seemed unpromising, he now 
looks like a god: “If only the man to be called my husband could be 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
249
like this one, a man living here, if only this one were pleased to stay 
here.”
	
The hints become still stron­ger. Nausikaa asks him not to accom-
pany her into town lest people say “Who is this large and handsome 
stranger whom Nausikaa has with her, and where did she find him? 
Surely, he is to be her husband.” Her father, not yet aware of Odys-
seus’ identity, hears him recount his escape from Ogygia, his land-
ing on Scheria, his meeting with Nausikaa. Alkinoös exclaims: “how 
I wish that, being the man you are and thinking the way that I do, 
you could have my daughter and be called my son-­in-­law, staying 
here with me. I would dower you with a house and properties, if you 
stayed by your own good will. Against that, no Phaiakian shall detain 
you.”
	
The Odyssey opens with a proem announcing Odysseus as hero; 
the first four books surprise us by keeping him offstage. The next 
book seems to promise a more predictable course. True, it starts with 
a different kind of surprise as we find Odysseus loved by a goddess 
ready to offer him immortality, yet still weeping ev­ery day for home. 
But we expect him to be released, and he is. We expect him to face 
life-­threatening ordeals at sea, and one after another he does.
	
We also expect him to be reunited with Penelope and to face down 
the suitors. Yet now he meets the lovely Nausikaa, and suddenly we 
wonder, are all bets off? We both know what is coming in the story, 
which is a pleasant reassurance, and ­don’t quite know what’s coming, 
which is a pleasant surprise.
	
So far Athene has been the prime planner and instigator of the ac-
tion, and here she marshals both Odysseus and Nausikaa onto the 
beach, and there transforms and revitalizes her depleted champion 
for Nausikaa’s wonderment. Why?
	
Homer goes to some trouble to keep alive for as long as he can the 
possibility that Odysseus could become a husband for Nausikaa. In 
Greek etiquette, a stranger should be fed before being asked to iden-
tify himself, but then he should say who he is. Notoriously, Odysseus 
does not.18 If he announced himself as Odysseus, a fig­ure familiar 
even to these remote Phaiakians, he would be known at once as the 
husband of Penelope. He makes no secret of his anxiety to return, 

On the Origin of Stories
250
yet he not only avoids identifying himself but even avoids disclosing 
that he has a wife and son: “and let life leave me when I have once 
more seen my property, my serving people, and my great-­roofed 
house” (7.224–225).
	
The possibility that Odysseus might become a husband for Nausi-
kaa lingers. There is a fairy-­tale pattern in the air—the frog who 
turns into a handsome prince, or the forlorn stranger, the anony-
mous ragtag knight who unexpectedly wins the tournament and the 
hand of the princess.19 Odysseus, provoked into proving himself at 
the Phaiakian games, easily wins the one contest he enters.
	
But despite the admiration Odysseus and Nausikaa express for 
each other, despite Alkinoös’ encouragement to the stranger to ask 
for her hand, nothing ­comes of it. Much earlier in his travels Odys-
seus has faced temptations to linger and forget home. Some of his 
crew succumbed to the narcotic dreams of the Lotus-­Eaters, although 
he himself was never tempted. But he does enjoy a whole year with 
Circe, before his companions remind him they should all move on. 
Forewarned, he enjoys but protects himself against the fatal enchant-
ment of the Sirens’ song. Washed up alone on Ogygia, he finds a ref-
uge in Kalypso’s arms, but soon realizes she is no surrogate for home. 
And now among the Phaiakians he enters a wish-­fulfillment world, a 
kind of paradise, where the trees fruit all year round, yet a human 
paradise, where he would not be alone as on Kalypso’s island, but 
surrounded by a civilized, courteous, almost godlike people, among 
whom he could have a young princess for wife.
	
Whereas Kalypso held him fast until ordered to release him, 
Alkinoös both invites Odysseus to ask for his daughter if he chooses 
and in his next breath promises not to detain him. Odysseus never 
wavers from his resolve to return. For Odysseus and for Nausikaa, 
the new face each encounters on the beach is a sudden bright possi-
bility, but for Odysseus no mere possibility can compare with the 
ac­tuality of Penelope. As he says to Nausikaa at the end of his first 
speech to her, while still covering his nakedness: “may the gods . . . 
grant you a husband and a house and sweet agreement in all things, 
for nothing is better than this, more steadfast than when two peo-
ple, a man and his wife, keep a harmonious household” (6.180–184). 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
251
Nausikaa is no Circe, or Siren, or Kalypso, no deflector of Odysseus’ 
course, but a mea­sure of his focus and determination.
Throughout the Odyssey, Homer offers us the plea­sures of anticipa-
tion and foreknowledge, by making us privy to the decisions of the 
gods and the decrees of fate, the plea­sures of sympathizing with char­
acters coping with their plight without the luxury of foreknowledge, 
and the plea­sures of the unexpected. I can say “us,” because Homer’s 
appeal to his audience works both for his original listeners, steeped 
in the Greek narrative tradition, and for much later audiences who 
may have to rediscover the tradition as they read.
	
Homer sustains the narrative drive of his long story through the 
power and clarity of Odysseus’ goal of reaching home. He com­pli­
cates that goal, raising both our apprehension and eagerness, by 
showing from the first the threat the suitors pose to Ithaka and to 
Odysseus should he return.
	
Despite its unity of action, Homer cannot tell his story in one sit-
ting, and so divides it into four-­book blocks each of which can hold 
our attention over one sustained session. He not only changes the 
scene and cast from block to block but thereby also realigns the iro-
nies that saturate his story. Within each block he prepares marked 
changes of subject and mood. In the second block, our first encoun-
ter with Odysseus, we watch him isolated and weeping his life away 
on Kalypso’s island, fight­ing for dear life on the seas, or surrounded 
by admiration and ceremony on Scheria. Even in the Phaiakian 
world, the mood changes from the idyll with Nausikaa, to the pride 
and pathos of reliving his Trojan exploits in the songs of Demodokos, 
to challenge and victory at the Phaiakian games.
	
Not only does Homer invite, sustain, and refresh the attention of a 
first-­time audience, in his own time or later; he also prepares for a 
repeat audience. A second time around, we can enjoy the ironies of 
a first encounter in a new way, reliving the old plea­sures of con­fi­dent 
but still uncertain anticipation in light of the new satisfactions of 
exact foreknowledge. Something similar can happen in any reread-
ing or retelling, but Homer sharpens the tang of a repeat encounter 
by appealing to our ability to assess the precise proportion of truth 

On the Origin of Stories
252
in his endless partial anticipations, divine decisions, mortal guesses 
or wishes or hopes, portents or prophesies or omens heeded or ig-
nored.
	
Homer has also shaped his story so tightly that on each new read-
ing we can discover patterns, new ironies or symmetries or tensions, 
within the whole Trojan saga, or in the Odyssey’s relation to the Iliad, 
or purely within the Odyssey. To take just some that we can notice in 
the details already discussed in Odysseus’ three days with the Phaia-
kians:
	
1.	 The Iliad is at one level a story of wife capture: Helen, Briseis, 
Chriseis. We can recognize the Odyssey as a contrasting story of hus-
band capture. Circe, Kalypso, and Nausikaa all want Odysseus for their 
husband.20 The first two, being goddesses, hold him for a year and seven 
years, respectively, the third for no more than a momentary pang of 
mortal enchantment.
	
2.	 Or we can see that among the Phaiakians Odysseus has enjoyed 
peaceful human company and lavish hospitality for the first time in 
over twenty years, and for the only time in the Odyssey. His gracious re-
ception on Scheria echoes and expands on Telemachos’ entertainment 
at Pylos and Sparta, and will contrast in different ways with his warm, 
intimate, but humble welcome at the swineherd’s hut on Ithaka and the 
heartless abuse he receives from the suitors treating his home as theirs.
	
3.	 On Scheria, far from home, among a people he has never heard 
of, and still unknown to them, Odysseus triumphs, swiftly capturing the 
heart of Nausikaa, winning a lordly welcome and the option of a per-
manent place of honor from Alkinoös, hearing his deeds sung by the 
divine singer Demodokos, overmastering all at the discus, and enthrall-
ing his audience as he recounts the story of his wanderings. On Ithaka, 
his own home, by contrast, he will have to remain anonymous and in 
disguise as a beggar, to withstand abuse and hostility, to tell false ver-
sions of his recent past, and to overcome Penelope’s persistent doubts, 
even after his conquest of the suitors, that he really is her husband.
We may feel much in these contrasts on our first time through the 
story. But as we reread we can appreciate them anew when we return 

	
Earning Attention (2): Ironies of Structure
	
253
to Phaiakia and savor Odysseus’ reception there in contrast to what 
we now know in detail he faces in Ithaka.
A biocultural approach to literature does not invalidate the way we 
have customarily read literature. After all, it stresses both common 
evolved understandings and our human ability to re­fine understand-
ing through our evolved capacity to share so much via culture. But it 
will place new emphases on literature: new, at least, to modern criti-
cism, if not to the way people have ac­tually told or listened to tales. It 
will see authors as appealing to the attention and emotion of their 
audiences, or in biological cost-­and-­bene­fit terms, as individuals 
seeking strategically to maximize the bene­fits they can earn against 
the compositional costs they are prepared to pay. In the case of an 
author like Homer, aware of his rare storytelling skills, that challenge 
can involve a high cost in imaginative effort, but in return for an ex-
traordinary bene­fit: others’ attention to his story in his own day and 
far into the future, whether they are surprised newcomers or sat­is­
fied oldtimers.
	
If we take due note of the centrality of shared attention to all sto-
rytelling, we will also recognize the astonishing inventive accom-
plishment of classic authors, able to appeal to audiences of many 
kinds over many years, and the accomplishment of any storyteller 
who can secure an audience, wide or select, brief or enduring. There 
is nothing “mere” about audience appeal.
	
A story’s appeal begins in character and plot. Art, like anything 
else, catches our attention against a background of expectations: in 
the case of story, especially expectations of human nature (charac-
ter) and experience (plot). But we also bring to stories spe­cifi­cally 
artistic or narrative expectations: expectations about the story form, 
already developed or emerging as we proceed, if the form is unfa­
miliar, as hexameter epics will often be to modern readers; expecta-
tions about the storyteller, if we have encountered other work by the 
same person; and expectations generated by the work so far. These 
generic, author-­spe­cific, and work-­spe­cific expectations may drasti-
cally modify the way we attend.
	
I have suggested that we should see art as cognitive play, as play 

On the Origin of Stories
254
with pattern, and that great art offers high-­intensity pattern at mul-
tiple levels. In the case of fiction the most immediate patterns are 
those of character and event (goal, action, obstacle, outcome) and 
their combination in plot. Vivid patterns of character, such as we 
find in Odysseus and Penelope, Athene and Poseidon, the lead suitor 
Antinoös and the loyal swineherd Eumaios, allow for rich expecta-
tions, and their combination at the level of plot allows for still more 
compelling patterns, like the tension between Odysseus’ return and 
the suitors’ attempt to establish themselves in his place. But if, as our 
acquaintance with a story deepens, new patterns emerge into view 
—character contrasts, structural ironies, narrative designs—we will 
have all the more reason to attend with renewed interest. Such pat-
terns will be less prominent than those of character and event, which 
we have evolved to notice and pro­cess ef­fi­ciently, but will modulate 
our sense of relevance even without our conscious awareness and 
will deepen our sense of artistry when we do consciously recognize 
them. In most cases our recognition of structural patterns will swell 
and fade as the more humanly insistent patterns of character and 
event compete for our attention; but that constant complex inter-
play of the immediate and the remote, of shape and shimmer, of 
clear tone and half-­caught undertone, can make a familiar classic 
forever new.
	
An evolutionary perspective on storytelling will not make us ig-
nore meaning. But we will not rush to reduce complex strategies 
for  holding attention and evoking emotion, and the rich psycho­
logical intuition and invention they require, to portable, take-­home 
meanings. Meaning will deserve discussion, but as one effect among 
many.21 And many of the possible meanings of a work will mean still 
more when we consider them in the long perspective of human evo-
lution: the evolution, for instance, of intelligence or cooperation. To 
these we now turn.

	
255
16
THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENCE (1):  
IN THE HERE AND NOW
In Greek legend Odysseus is the most intelligent of mortals, 
“beyond all other men in mind” (Odyssey 1.66), in the words of Zeus 
himself. Intelligence matters far more in the Odyssey than in earlier 
or later epic. Whereas Achilleus embodies pure strength, Odysseus 
has not only physical strength but also strength of spirit and mind: 
resilience and resourcefulness. Athene, goddess of wisdom, plays a 
larger role in the Odyssey than all other gods combined, aiding and 
adoring Odysseus precisely because of his intelligence, “because you 
are flu­ent, and reason closely, and keep your head always” (13.332). 
Penelope, too, is “so dowered with the wisdom bestowed by Athene 
. . . to have . . . cle­verness, such as we are not told of, even of the an-
cient queens” (2.116–119).1
	
Despite the Odyssey’s promotion of intelligence, twentieth-­century 
scholars, notably Bruno Snell (1946) and Julian Jaynes (1976), have 
advanced bold claims about the lowly evolution of mind in Homer. 
Snell argued that the notion of “mind” was absent in Homer and dis­
covered only later, and that “Homeric man does not yet regard him-
self as the source of his own decisions.”2 Jaynes claimed that there is 
not even consciousness in the Iliad: its characters are “not at all like 
us” but “noble automatons who knew not what they did,” with no 
awareness of their “awareness of the world, no internal mind-­space 
to introspect upon.” Like schizophrenics they acted on dictates they 
heard from the other (right) side of their brain, which they at­tri­
buted to the gods but which we would call hallucinations. In the Od-

On the Origin of Stories
256
yssey, which he regards as at least a century later, he sees “a new and 
different world inhabited by new and different beings” and a marked 
growth toward subjective consciousness.3
	
Not only is it implausible that a writer gifted enough to last three 
millennia—and to inspire authors as major as Virgil, Shakespeare, 
Goethe, and Joyce—should have lacked a conscious mind or a no­
tion of mind; it is also wrong. Others have ably critiqued the ar­
guments of Snell, Jaynes, and others—Bernard Williams most wit­
tily, Jeffrey Barnouw most comprehensively.4 But to appreciate what 
Homer does see, show, and appeal to in the mind, we need an evolu­
tionary perspective, which can reveal that the Odyssey not only en­
capsulates but even advances the growth of intelligence.
	
There are three main reasons for claims such as those of Snell 
and Jaynes: (1) Homer does not have a precise or clear set of mental 
terms. But as philosophers love to show, our own nontechnical terms 
for mental phenomena are far from clear, even at the level of mind, 
brain, consciousness, soul, spirit, will, reason, let alone in ev­eryday 
terms like “heart” or “guts.” Adding terms like “Oedipal complex,” 
“anima,” or “mirror stage” only thickens the fog. (2) Homer has fewer 
ways of rendering mental states than Horace or Montaigne, let alone 
Tolstoy or Proust. He tends to express thought in external fashion, 
through actions like weeping, or through speech, to others or to one­
self, or through dreams involving a god’s visitation to the dreamer. 
(3) He shows many human actions as prompted by the gods.
	
Common sense can make us suspect the claims of Snell and 
Jaynes, but common sense can be a poor guide, mixing natural intu­
ition and cultural elaborations we mistakenly assume to be natural. 
Homer has no words or concepts equivalent to the faculties of emo­
tion, reason, and will, established in Western thought for so long that 
we think they demarcate defi­nite features of mind. In fact they re­
main mere folk terms, approximating aspects of mind but imprecise 
enough to need the thorough revision that only sci­en­tific psychology 
can make possible.* To assert that Homer’s not having these notions 
* Neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (1996) provides good arguments for distinguishing 
­emotions from feelings, and for not making a sharp distinction between reason and 
­emotion. Without emotions, he shows, we cannot reason, since we cannot decide among 
multiple options.

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
257
is proof he has no notion of mind is provincial, as if our own local 
habits contained the only valid ways of thinking about minds.
	
If we examine Homer in terms not of current Western folk no-
tions of mind, but of what he shows in his characters and expects in 
his audience, and of what science is currently disclosing about the 
mind, we will see not only that it is wrong to suppose he has no no-
tion of mind but that he has rich gifts as an intuitive psychologist 
and a considerable contribution to make to our understanding of 
the evolution of human intelligence.5
Bernard Williams rightly argued that a belief-­desire-­intention psy-
chology links Homer’s world and ours.6 An evolutionary perspec-
tive would have made his case swifter and stron­ger: animals other 
than humans understand desire and intention, human children un-
derstand intention in their first year and desire by age two, and this 
much (and more) is part of human intuitive psychology across cul-
tures.7 Understanding others in terms of desires and intentions, our 
evolved intuitive psychology, is very different from understanding 
minds as having distinct faculties such as reason and emotion, a 
much more culturally spe­cific theory—even if now widespread 
enough to be part of Western folk psychology—and, as it turns out, a 
much less tenable one.
	
An understanding of others in terms of desires and intentions has 
been a major force, perhaps the major force, in evolving intelligence 
in all social species. Without it stories would be impossible and the 
Odyssey incomprehensible. Odysseus desires to return to Ithaka and 
Penelope, and intends to attain these goals, and that aim drives the 
whole epic. But although we share with other animals an under-
standing of desire and intention, human intuitive psychology has 
moved a major step further. We understand one another in terms 
not only of desires and intentions but also of beliefs (see Chap-
ter 10).
	
The Odyssey depends on belief as much as on desire and intention. 
The suitors believe that Odysseus is dead and that even if he were 
alive he would be no match for them all, and therefore think they can 
carry on with impunity. Penelope believes her husband might well 
be dead, but is not sure; hence her dilemma. We, and Homer and his 

On the Origin of Stories
258
original audience, understand even the gods in terms of a belief-­
desire-­intention psychology. Zeus and Athene believe Odysseus to be 
of exceptional worth and deserts, and therefore want to act quickly, 
while the absent Poseidon still believes Odysseus to be safely stranded 
on Kalypso’s island.
	
The impact of the Odyssey’s story, like that of almost all stories, 
depends so much on belief-­desire psychology that we do not even 
register it. But belief-­desire psychology is a human minimum. What 
do we find at the maximum, in a storyteller as rare as Homer and a 
character as proverbially cle­ver as Odysseus?
	
Homer has a formulaic way of representing characters coming 
to major decisions that scholars call the deliberation type-­scene. A 
character wants to act on plan A, but then considers plan B, and usu-
ally, deciding that the latter is the better way, acts on B. Sometimes 
the character may act on neither, but simply perform C.
	
As we saw in Chapter 3, we can explain the initial emergence of 
mind in terms of more or less automatic, heuristic-­based responses 
to recurrent environmental conditions. Only much later did there 
evolve a flex­i­ble intelligence, especially in humans, that can with ef-
fort arrive at novel solutions to novel problems. Heuristic responses 
are fast, often parallel-­pro­cessed in the mind, through multichan-
neled, specialized, automatic subsystems that need little conscious 
attention. In order for novel solutions to be found, these rapid-­fire 
reactions have to be inhibited (in the orbitofrontal cortex) so that 
there is time to formulate and assess new options (in the dorsolateral 
cortex) before acting on them. Formulating these options is com-
paratively slow, because the ideas must be pro­cessed not in parallel, 
with many neural channels operating at once, but serially, with one 
input manipulated under the spotlight of attention until it activates 
the next.
	
Situations that cannot be coped with by routine responses activate 
working memory’s central executive, which allocates attention, in-
hibits information irrelevant to the problem, and amplifies relevant 
information into conscious, explicit representations within working 
memory’s slave systems, especially the most vivid, the phonological 
loop (our mind’s ear, our inner speech) and the visuospatial sketch-
pad (our mind’s eye).8 Moreover, “The ability to mentally generate, 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
259
maintain, and manipulate these abstract representations is limited 
by . . . attentional and working memory resources . . . and is thus ef-
fortful.”9 Our capacity to focus on information relevant to a problem 
and to inhibit irrelevant stimuli and responses expanded greatly with 
language, which allows the compression of information for compar-
atively ef­fi­cient manipulation within working memory.
	
Generating new responses to dif­fi­cult situations, then, involves 
stopping automatic responses and thinking with effort, in a highly 
conscious way, to solve problems. Homer may not have had ready-­
made terms for aspects of the mind, but he describes exactly this 
pro­cess. Formulaic yet flex­i­ble, he shows characters deliberating 
thoughtfully in the new or challenging situations for which flex­i­ble 
intelligence offers such an advantage: the inhibition of the initial re-
sponse, the conscious, explicit attention to the problem, and the gen-
eration and assessment of a new response before further action.10
	
The most memorable deliberation scene occurs in the cave of 
Polyphemos. After he has picked up and dashed out the brains of 
two of Odysseus’ companions, the Cyclops eats them, “entrails, flesh 
and the marrowy bones alike,” then, comfortably replete, lies down 
to sleep. Odysseus tells the story (9.298–306):
Then I
took counsel with myself in my great-­hearted spirit
to go up close, drawing from beside my thigh the sharp 
sword,
and stab him in the chest, where the midriff joins 
the liver,
feeling for the place with my hand; but the second 
thought stayed me;
for there too we would have perished away in sheer 
destruction,
seeing that our hands could never have pushed from 
the lofty
gate of the cave the ponderous boulder he had 
propped there.
So mourning we waited, just as we were, for the 
divine Dawn.

On the Origin of Stories
260
Notice how Odysseus rehearses the swordthrust in his mind, only to 
be stopped by a glimpse of unintended consequences. For the mo-
ment, he has no other plan; he merely knows that this one is fatal. He 
has to wait until Polyphemos takes his flocks out to pasture, leaving 
his “guests” trapped in the cave behind him, with Odysseus
mumbling my black thoughts
of how I might punish him, how Athene might give me 
that glory.
And as I thought, this was the plan that seemed best 
to me.
The Cyclops had lying there beside the pen a great 
bludgeon
of olive wood, still green . . .  (9.316–320)
Here plan B requires time to formulate, involves several stages of 
foreplanning, and, rather than being summarily described and then 
executed, unfurls suspensefully before our eyes as Odysseus prepares 
each new step.
	
His plan, to blind Polyphemos and then have his men steal out 
the next day beneath the Cyclops’ flock, has been recorded in 200 
folk variants.11 Whether or not these versions derive from or feed 
into the Odyssey, Homer has made the incident his own and pro-
moted it to pride of place, the first detailed adventure, after our and 
the Phaiakian audience’s long wait, in Odysseus’ account of his wan-
derings. He has made it pivotal, since the blinding of Poseidon’s son 
arouses the sea god’s wrath and leads to the smashing of the raft Od-
ysseus builds to flee from Kalypso. Twice later Odysseus will invoke 
the ordeal of the cave as a morale-­booster (12.209–212, 20.19–20), a 
reassuring example of his resourceful resolution in direst circum-
stances.
	
The blinding of a one-­eyed giant is memorable enough, but this 
incident especially haunts the mind because Homer makes it such 
a  paradigmatic example of flex­i­ble intelligence at work. Killing a 
deadly sleeping enemy who intends to eat you and your men, one 
by one or two by two: how could that be a wrong move? But in this 
case it is. Odysseus stops, thinks, and after hours of brooding devises 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
261
a multipart plan based on what lies at hand in the cave. If he only 
blinds Polyphemos, the Cyclops will still be able to move the boulder 
blocking the cave and to offer them all a chance of escape. But when 
a stake pokes his eye out, Polyphemos will naturally howl with pain, 
and the noise could bring other Cyclopes to his aid. To counter that 
danger, Odysseus tells Polyphemos that his name is “Nobody,” so that 
when the other giants do indeed rush to his cave and ask who is hurt-
ing him, Polyphemos answers, “Nobody”—and they promptly with-
draw. When he lets his flock out to pasture, the blinded Cyclops will 
monitor their passage by touch, to ensure that none but his sheep 
leave the cave. Odysseus solves that problem by tying each of his men 
under the middle of a trio of sheep, and by himself hanging under-
neath the fleece of the largest ram. The Wooden Horse is the classic 
instance of Odysseus’ invaluable ingenuity at Troy, not mentioned in 
the Iliad but retold three times from three angles in the Odyssey. The 
brilliant ruse of entering the enemy stronghold at Troy, inside an ar­
ti­fi­cial horse, seems to be restaged and reworked in the exit from the 
giant’s cave, hidden under live sheep.12
	
Odysseus will later present the encounter with Polyphemos as a 
triumph, but Homer makes the incident more problematic. As he 
takes his leave of Polyphemos after the escape from the cave, Od­
ysseus undoes much of his success. When he thinks himself out of 
range, he calls to Polyphemos from his ship, vaunting like the he-
roes of the Iliad. Polyphemos replies by snapping off the peak of a 
mountain and hurling it into the sea toward Odysseus’ voice, almost 
swamping his vessel. Sailing farther out, Odysseus calls again, al-
though his companions urge silence (9.502–505):
Cyclops, if any mortal man ever asks you who it was
that in­flicted upon your eye this shameful blinding,
tell him that you were blinded by Odysseus, sacker 
of cities.
Laertes is his father, and he makes his home in Ithaka.
Even after Polyphemos replies that he will invoke the aid of his ­father, 
Poseidon, Odysseus taunts him again, and elicits in reply Polyphe-
mos’ prayer to his father (9.530–535):

On the Origin of Stories
262
. . . grant that Odysseus, sacker of cities, son of Laertes,
who makes his home in Ithaka, may never reach 
that home,
but if it is decided that he shall see his own people,
and come to his strong-­founded house and to his 
own country,
let him come late, in bad case, with the loss of all his 
companions,
in someone else’s ship, and find troubles in his 
household.
At this point, almost ten years before Odysseus’ return to Ithaka, 
most of the companions and all the ships returning from Troy are 
still with him, and the suitors have yet to begin their assault on Pe-
nelope. Polyphemos’ curse establishes the terms of Odysseus’ fate 
over the next ten years. Its echo of Odysseus’ taunt and its accurate 
prefiguration of his future suggest how much Odysseus is to blame 
for the woes on his way home, and all because for once he does not 
restrain himself at this moment of intense anger and relief.
	
The Cyclops episode resonates because of its complex mix of Od-
yssean forethought and un-­Odyssean impulse. The inhibition theme 
stretches backward and forward from here throughout the story. The 
first mention of Odysseus’ great triumph at Troy, the Wooden Horse, 
­comes from Menelaos, who reports that Helen, standing with her 
second Trojan husband, Deiphobos, called to the heroes inside the 
horse in the voices of their wives, whom they had not seen or heard 
for ten years. Odysseus saved the day and the chance of a Greek vic-
tory at Troy, already created by his own ingenuity, by persuading Me-
nelaos and Diomedes not to respond, and even forcibly muffling An-
tiklos as he was about to answer. Odysseus’ failure to be silenced by 
his companions below the cave of Polyphemos pointedly reverses 
this earlier strategic success.
Odysseus’ failure of judgment in taunting Polyphemos is central, but 
strikingly exceptional. Critics have often wondered why the advance 
summary of the story in the Odyssey’s proem singles out only one 
much less celebrated adventure, the oxen of Helios (1.4–9):

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
263
many the pains he suffered in his spirit on the wide sea,
struggling for his own life and the homecoming of his 
companions.
Even so he could not save his companions, hard though
he strove to; they were destroyed by their own wild 
recklessness,
fools, who devoured the oxen of Helios, the Sun God,
and he took away the day of their homecoming.
At the start of the poem, to ensure sympathy for his hero, Homer 
contrasts Odysseus favorably with his companions. He did all he 
could for them, but their own lack of self-­control in eating the oxen 
sacred to the sun god, even after he had sternly warned them, led to 
their deaths.
	
Just as the Cyclops episode earns structural prominence in vari-
ous ways, so, too, does the Oxen of the Sun episode. Circe instructs 
Odysseus that he must travel to Hades, into the dread land of the 
dead, to learn from the shade of the seer Teiresias how to ensure his 
return. Teiresias tells him that Poseidon will not make his return easy, 
but that he might still come back, “if you can contain your own de-
sire, and contain your companions,” when they reach Thrinakia and 
the herds of Helios:
Then, if you keep your mind on homecoming, and leave 
these unharmed,
you might all make your way to Ithaka, after much suffering;
but if you do harm them, then I testify to the destruction
of your ship and your companions, but if you yourself 
get clear,
you will come home in bad case, with the loss of all your 
companions,
in someone else’s ship, and find troubles in your household,
insolent men . . .  (11.110–116)
Teiresias’ series of conditional out­comes (if .  .  . but if .  .  . but if) 
stresses the companions’ own responsibility for their final losses, 
then slides into the terms of Polyphemos’ curse before elaborating 

On the Origin of Stories
264
further. When Odysseus returns from Hades to Circe, she repeats the 
warning (including the first five lines above). As his ship approaches 
Thrinakia, Odysseus thinks of the warnings from Teiresias and Circe: 
“Both had told me many times over”—incompatible, in fact, with 
the evidence so far, since there has been only one, hurried, occasion 
for Odysseus in Hades to listen to Teiresias; but this recollection 
makes all the plainer Homer’s wish to weight these warnings. Then 
Odysseus repeats to his men the double repetition of the admoni-
tions. Nevertheless they rebel against his order to sail straight past 
Thrinakia. Although they at first heed his warnings not to touch the 
sacred cattle, contrary winds trap them on the island, and when they 
run out of the food they have brought and are forced to catch fish 
and birds, they slaughter the cattle while Odysseus sleeps. Hence-
forth they are doomed, and are struck by Zeus’s lightning as soon as 
they head to sea.
	
The inhibition of automatic responses is essential to higher intel-
ligence. It is also essential to morality, to overcoming instinctive but 
unwise responses to, for instance, anger (Odysseus’ challenge after 
escaping from the Cyclops who has eaten his companions) or hun-
ger (the companions who slaughter the sun god’s cattle). Odysseus 
is reckless that one time, and that lapse has grave consequences for 
him and his men. But the companions are reckless throughout the 
wanderings, even despite warnings from the gods. Homer repeatedly 
compares the recklessness of the companions with the recklessness 
(Zeus uses that very word, in the first speech in the poem) of Aigist-
hos in ignoring the gods’ warnings against killing Agamemnon, and 
with the recklessness of the suitors, repeatedly warned by gods, mor-
tals, omens, prophets, but unready to curtail their plea­sures.13
	
In his first reference to Odysseus, Zeus responds to Athene’s plea 
for her favorite (1.65–67):
How could I forget Odysseus the godlike, he who
is beyond all other men in mind, and who beyond others
has given sac­ri­fice to the gods, who hold wide heaven?
Odysseus is the darling of the gods, and the scourge of the suitors, 
almost the hand of divine justice, because—with that one costly ex-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
265
ception against Polyphemos—he takes the larger view: he overmas-
ters the impulses of the moment.14
	
In order to become the scourge of the suitors and the instrument 
of divine wrath, Odysseus on his return to Ithaka has to inhibit him-
self for ­longer, and under more trying circumstances, than ever be-
fore. Almost the entire second half of the Odyssey focuses on him 
back in Ithaka, hiding his identity in the guise of an aged beggar. He 
has to maintain the disguise despite two opposite provocations: the 
repeated insults to his heroic pride by the suitors and their acolytes, 
and the impulse to melt into tender tears on his re­union with his 
family and loyal followers.
	
Athene has warned him in advance: “you must endure much grief 
in silence, standing and facing men in their violence” (13.309–310). 
Odysseus alerts Eumaios at the start of book 16 to someone’s ap-
proach: “His whole word had not been spoken when his beloved son 
stood in the forecourt” (16.11–12). He has not seen Telemachos since 
he was an infant at Penelope’s breast, but he has yearned for him ever 
since and recognizes him instantly. Eumaios has become a kind of 
surrogate father during Odysseus’ long absence, and he and Telema-
chos greet each other as warmly as ac­tual father and son. Odysseus 
longs to tell his son who he is and clasp him to his breast, but he has 
to watch these two act out the re­union that he himself has craved all 
these years, allowing no sign of his identity or his emotions.15 Not 
that Homer says so explicitly, here, but he does expect us to infer 
his hero’s feelings.16 Those emotions are made manifest later, when 
Eumaios has left and Odysseus can disclose to Telemachos who he 
is: “So he spoke, and kissed his son, and the tears running down his 
cheeks splashed on the ground. Until now, he was always unyield-
ing” (16.190–191). Later Homer marks the irony immediately when 
Penelope confides in this beggar-­stranger, whom she does not recog-
nize as her husband and who claims to have entertained Odysseus 
(19.209–212):
her beautiful cheeks were streaming tears, as Penelope
wept for her man, who was sitting there by her side. But 
Odysseus
in his heart had pity for his wife as she mourned him,

On the Origin of Stories
266
but his eyes stayed, as if they were made of horn or iron,
steady under his lids. He hid his tears and deceived her.
	
Homeric heroes usually have a high consciousness of sta­tus and 
an aggressive reaction to any perceived slight. But Odysseus has to 
prepare his surprise assault on the suitors while enduring the lowly 
role of a beggar and the taunts of the suitors and their sycophants. 
Note the deliberation-­scene pattern when the goatherd Melanthios, 
an acolyte of the suitors, derides Odysseus-­as-­beggar and tries to 
kick him off a path. Odysseus withstands the blow
while he pondered within him
whether to go for him with his cudgel, and take the life 
from him,
or pick him up like a jug and break his head on the 
ground. Yet
still he stood it, and kept it all inside him.  (17.235–238)
In this case Odysseus entertains both a plan A and a plan B but re-
jects both, however immediately satisfying.
	
Inhibiting an instinctive response to seek a more adequate solu-
tion is central to Odysseus’ character and his special intelligence in 
the Odyssey. But one person matches him. Penelope’s most common 
epithet is “circumspect.” She, like Odysseus, sees the big picture.
	
Before her husband’s return Penelope fobs off the suitors with her 
famous web ruse, knowing she does not want to marry any of them 
yet unwilling to rule out the refuge of remarriage should Odysseus 
never come back. After the suitors discover her ploy, she still can-
not decide: “so my mind is divided and starts one way, then another. 
Shall I stay here by my son and keep all in order . . . or go away at last 
with the best of all those Achaians who court me here in the palace, 
with endless gifts to win me?” (19.524–529). Even after Odysseus re-
turns, kills the suitors, and stands before her undisguised, Penelope 
will not acknowledge him. She has heard false reports of Odysseus 
for years, and she knows that Zeus impersonated Amphitryon, while 
he was off at war, in order to possess Alcmena and sire Herakles. No 
­longer expecting Odysseus’ return, she fears that she, too, may be de-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (1): In the Here and Now
	
267
ceived by the gods—who have indeed flawlessly impersonated mor-
tals throughout the Odyssey. Much to her son’s vexation, Penelope 
restrains her desire to acknowledge this man who looks like her hus-
band until she has put him to a test that only Odysseus himself could 
pass. By instructing Eurykleia to move their bed out of her bedroom 
for him to sleep on, she tricks him into exploding into anger—at this 
he cannot inhibit his response—and only then does she give way to 
her feelings (23.205–208):
So he spoke, and her knees and heart within her 
went slack
as she recognized the clear proofs that Odysseus 
had given;
but then she burst into tears and ran straight to him, 
throwing
her arms around the neck of Odysseus, and kissed his 
head . . .
	
Both Athene and Homer are themselves exemplars, at different 
levels, of the role of inhibition within intelligence. Both stop, reject 
the obvious course, and search several moves ahead for a better so­
lution. Instead of rushing straight to Odysseus when she has been 
given Zeus’s permission to release him from Kalypso, Athene chooses 
to transport herself to Ithaka to develop Telemachos as the ally Od-
ysseus will need when he confronts the suitors. Instead of introduc-
ing Odysseus at the start, or following his fate since the end of the 
Trojan War in chronological order, or beginning with the thrills of 
his most famous adventures, Homer searches for a less obvious and 
far richer solution.
	
At ev­ery level, Homer shows the power of inhibition, the top-­
down control of thought. We can now understand this in neurologi-
cal terms, as the prefrontal cortex—the part of the human brain that 
has expanded most dramatically over the last three million years, 
and the part that makes abstract reasoning possible—suppressing 
immediate natural responses for the sake of long-­term strategic ad-
vantage. Homer had no notion of the mind as modern neuroscience 
can explain it, and the terms he had at his disposition were vague. 

On the Origin of Stories
268
But from his own intelligence and his experience in shaping stories 
he knew enough about how thought worked to portray the power of 
the mind at its best in Odysseus, Penelope, Telemachos, and Athene: 
intelligence resisting immediate impulse in order to seek more satis-
factory solutions.

	
269
17
THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENCE (2):  
BEYOND THE HERE AND NOW
The Metarepresentational Mind
Children between one and two start to entertain multiple 
models of reality, to recall the past and recognize it as no-­longer, to 
anticipate the future and recognize it as not-yet, and to enjoy pre-
tense as not-really. But although they can reason within these frames, 
they cannot yet clearly understand the relationships between one 
model and another. Only during their fourth year do they begin to 
develop fully human metarepresentational minds, which allow them 
to understand readily past, present, and future; real, pretend, sup-
posed, or counterfac­tual; and the perspectives of others and even 
their own in the past.1
	
In the most famous twentieth-century discussion of the Odyssey, 
and perhaps of any literary text, Erich Auerbach wrote that subjec-
tive or perspectival effects are “entirely foreign to the Homeric style; 
the Homeric style knows only a foreground, only a uniformly illumi-
nated, uniformly objective present . . . despite much going back and 
forth, it yet causes what is momentarily being narrated to give the 
impression that it is the only present, pure and without perspective.”2 
Like the readings of Snell and Jaynes in the previous chapter, Auer-
bach’s claim would seem prima facie highly unlikely: that a major 
masterpiece operates below the level that modern children reach be-
fore age five. And in fact the Odyssey not only multiplies perspectives 
but makes the most of their complex strategic interaction.
	
We learn at the start that Odysseus is alive, “detained by the 

On the Origin of Stories
270
queenly nymph Kalypso” (1.14) and that the gods have decided to re-
lease him. This knowledge makes all the difference to our sense of 
the first scenes in Ithaka, where Penelope and Telemachos pine for 
an Odysseus whom they imagine to be dead at sea or a pile of bare 
bones on land. Our knowledge also colors our first glimpse of Odys-
seus, who believes himself forever trapped on Ogygia, and yearns for 
an Ithaka that he has not seen for twenty years and that we have 
learned has changed in ways he cannot suspect. Not only are the 
characters’ notions and the audience’s emotions saturated with the 
knowledge of other perspectives, but characters easily take other 
characters’ perspectives into consideration. Athene as Mentes tries to 
reassure Telemachos, when she first meets him, that his father is not 
dead but “held captive on a sea-washed island, and savage men have 
him in their keeping” (1.197–198). She invents these “savage men” so 
as not to disturb him with the truth: that his father is held, however 
unhappily, in the amorous arms of a goddess.3 Much of the poem’s 
plea­sure derives from Homer’s allowing us to see things simultane-
ously from the perspective of one character, or of many, or in a larger 
view altogether.
Auerbach’s Exhibit A (he saw no need for a B) is the digression on 
Odysseus’ scar in book 19. Penelope has ordered her serving-­women 
to bathe the stranger’s feet: unlike the suitors, she will give him due 
hospitality despite his beggarly sta­tus. Odysseus, angry that he might 
be handled by the abusive young serving-­women who betray the 
household by sleeping with the suitors, asks for an old serving-maid 
instead. As Eurykleia steps forward, he realizes that she might recog-
nize the scar on his leg and turns away from the firelight to hide the 
telltale mark (19.392–395):
She came up close and washed her lord, and at once she 
recognized
that scar, which once the boar with his white tusk had in­
flicted
on him, when he went to Parnassos, to Autolykos and his 
children.
This was his mother’s noble father . . .

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
271
The digression explaining how he received his scar runs another sev-
enty lines. It ends by noting that on his return to Ithaka his parents
were glad in his homecoming, and asked about all that 
had happened,
and how he came by his wound, and he told well his 
story,
how in the hunt the boar with his white tusk had 
wounded him
as he went up to Parnassos with the sons of Autolykos.
  The old woman, holding him in the palms of her 
hands, recognized
this scar as she handled it. She let his foot go . . .  
(19.463–468)
Auerbach sees this passage as typical of Homer, and as proof that he 
“knows no background. What he narrates is for the time being the 
only present, and fills both the stage and the reader’s mind com-
pletely. So it is with the passage before us. When the young Euryclea 
(vv. 401 ff.) sets the infant Odysseus on his grandfather Autolykos’ 
lap after the banquet, the aged Euryclea, who a few lines earlier had 
touched the wanderer’s foot, has entirely vanished from the stage 
and from the reader’s mind.”4
	
Not from this reader’s mind, or the minds of many others.5 Auer-
bach adds that the scar digression could have been presented subjec-
tively, rather than authorially,
as a recollection which awakens in Odysseus’ mind at this 
particular moment. It would have been perfectly easy to 
do; the story of the scar had only to be inserted two verses 
earlier, at the first mention of the word scar, where the mo-
tifs “Odysseus” and “recollection” were already at hand. But 
any such subjectivistic-perspectivistic procedure, creating a 
foreground and a background, resulting in the present ly-
ing open to the depths of the past, is entirely foreign to the 
Homeric style; the Homeric style knows only a foreground 
. . . And so the excursus does not begin until two lines later, 

On the Origin of Stories
272
when Euryclea has discovered the scar—the possibility for a 
perspectivistic connection no ­longer exists, and the story of 
the wound be­comes an in­de­pen­dent and exclusive present.6
	
Auerbach could hardly be more wrong. The story of the scar is not 
presented as Odysseus’ memory, true, but it is presented as Eurykle-
ia’s, as Irene de Jong convincingly shows.7 “She recognized that scar” 
begins the digression, and “the old woman . . . recognized this scar” 
ends it. The digression begins with a description of Autolykos, his 
visit to his infant grandson, and Eurykleia’s laying the babe on Au-
tolykos’ knees and suggesting he should find a name for the child. 
There and then he names him Odysseus, and looks forward to seeing 
the boy grown up and visiting him. This account provides the transi-
tion to Odysseus’ visit as a youth, his being gored by a wild boar, and 
his vividly retelling the tale on his return to Ithaka. The vividness of 
that version remains fresh in Eurykleia’s mind.
	
Homer achieves through the scar digression effects far richer and 
subtler than Auerbach notices: (1) When she sees the scar, Eury­
kleia immediately recognizes her master. Her mind floods with the 
knowledge that she has cared for this “stranger” since infancy and 
has watched him grow into a hero. The long digression stresses how 
long she has known him, how vividly she recalls him, how happily 
she will greet his return. She recognized him at once; she caused him 
to be named as an infant; will she now name him again, and destroy 
his strategy of secrecy?8 (2) In name and in much else, Eurykleia is a 
doublet of Odysseus’ mother, Antikleia, whom Odysseus was trou-
bled to find already in Hades, dead of grief at his long absence.9 
Laertes had bought Eurykleia “when she was still in her first youth 
. . . and he favored her in his house as much as his own devoted wife, 
but never slept with her, for fear of his wife’s anger” (1.431–433). Eu-
rykleia has suckled Odysseus, has suggested that he be named, has 
watched him grow up. She has been another mother to him—and in 
her agitation at recognizing him, and wanting to announce his name 
to Penelope, she drops his leg back into the ba­sin, causing it to spill. 
(3) Within the digression, we see Odysseus traveling away, proving 
himself a brave young hero, and returning to a joyful welcome from 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
273
his parents. We have just seen Telemachos traveling away from home 
and proving himself his father’s son, a hero in readiness, welcomed 
back by a relieved mother—and also by the father he has consciously 
seen for the first time. Now a second mother wants to welcome 
­Odysseus back, after a much ­longer and more harrowing absence. 
(4) When Telemachos left on his secret journey, he confided in only 
one person, Eurykleia. He swore her to secrecy for at least twelve 
days. She kept the secret then—but can she do so now? (5) Odysseus 
sees the tears of delight in Eurykleia’s eyes, and hears her name him. 
Though not privy to her memories of him, he knows how far they 
reach and how vividly she will recall his earning the scar. He takes 
her by the throat and swears the astonished old nurse to silence on 
pain of death—just as once before, in the Wooden Horse at Troy, he 
had been able to stop Antiklos10* from responding to Helen’s imper­
sonation of his wife’s voice only by “brutally squeezing his mouth 
in the clutch of his powerful hands” (4.287–288). (6) The instanta­
neousness of Odysseus’ recognition by this second “mother” will 
stand in contrast to—and increase the sheer surprise of—the slow­
ness of his recognition by his wife.
	
Far from having no background or perspective, Homer creates 
multiple perspectives, present, past, future possible, future fore­
glimpsed or future preordained, mortal, divine, postmortal, divinely 
objective or humanly subjective, observed, dreamed, or remembered. 
He portrays sophisticated multilevel metarepresentational minds in 
his characters, and he expects such minds in his audience, easily 
able to imagine and distinguish memories, pro­jec­tions, perspectives, 
guesses, mistakes, and lies, and effortlessly understand their sta­tus. 
He assumes we will understand individual perspectives and strate­
gies, even when he does not comment on them, and compare them 
with the larger picture the poem lets us see. True, he does all this 
with a comparatively poor toolbox for fine mental detail, one lacking 
many terms and narrative tricks that others would invent over the 
coming millennia, and therefore he often represents thought via ex­
ternal action. But throughout the Odyssey he both creates and ap­
* His name, like Antikleia’s, pointedly echoes Eurykleia’s.

On the Origin of Stories
274
peals to metarepresentational minds that can and must negotiate 
multiple perspectives and multiple levels.
Deception
A metarepresentational mind allows us, among much else, to under-
stand what others might know or infer from what they see or hear, 
and how that knowledge may affect what they do. We can use this 
understanding for the purposes of cooperation—for example, in ex-
plicitly teaching others—or of competition.
	
In the world of the Odyssey, as we shall see in the next two chap-
ters, trust is scarce. Many habitual locutions suggest low expectations 
of honesty. One asks not who these strangers are, but who they “an-
nounce themselves as being” (4.139). When Hermes visits Kalypso to 
inform her of the decision of the gods’ council, he answers her in­
quiry: “You, a goddess, ask me, a god, why I came, and therefore I 
will tell you the whole truth of the tale” (5.97), as if, were either or 
both of them mortal, there would be little reason to expect a true 
answer. Alkinoös says to Odysseus, amid the long tale of his wander-
ings, “Odysseus, we as we look upon you do not imagine that you are 
a deceptive or thievish man, the sort that the black earth breeds in 
great numbers, people who wander widely, making up lying stories, 
from which no one could learn anything” (11.363–366)—a deeply 
ironic comment, given Odysseus’ own talent for deceit. Deceit is rife 
and Odysseus the master deceiver.
	
Nature itself employs deception in mimicry, cam­ou­flage, and 
bluff. Deceptive behavior is less widespread across species, and its 
frequency in a given species appears proportionate to the expansion 
of its neocortex or equivalent.11 Once thought to be uniquely hu-
man, deceit has been found in animals from scrub jays to wolves 
and all families of monkeys and apes.12 In most of these species it 
involves simply suppressing information, such as one’s knowledge of 
a food source, so that one can feed without having to share. In the 
Odyssey, too, Odysseus deceives most often by withholding informa-
tion, especially the one piece of information he knows better than 
anyone, his identity. He withholds his name from the Phaiakians un-
til he can stall no ­longer if he wants their aid in returning to Ithaka. 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
275
Much earlier in his travels, Polyphemos asks him where his ship is, 
and he pretends that it broke up on the shore, since he senses that the 
Cyclops might want to destroy it to cut off his escape.
	
Many researchers suggest that deception in other species does not 
usually involve intentions to create false beliefs.13 Such intentions 
are certainly a human specialty and Odysseus a supreme specialist. 
After he plies Polyphemos with strong drink, the Cyclops demands 
to know his name. Punning on his name, Odysseus answers ou tis, 
“nobody.” A little later, blinded by the stake, Polyphemos bellows out 
in pain and brings his fellow Cyclopes running. They call into his 
cave: “Surely none [mÁ tis] can be killing you by force or treachery?” 
He answers: “Good friends, Nobody is killing me by force or treach-
ery.” The other Cyclopes leave, assuming their help is not needed. 
Odysseus gleefully tells the tale: “the heart within me laughed over 
how my name and my perfect planning [metis] had fooled him” 
(9.406–414). Not for nothing is he polymetis Odysseus, Odysseus of 
many devices.
	
At last back on Ithaka, though he does not yet know it, Odysseus 
sees a youth—Athene in disguise—and asks her where he has been 
put ashore. She answers, playing the part of an untraveled Ithakan: 
“the name of Ithaka has gone even to Troy, though they say that is 
very far from Achaian country.” Odysseus responds,
but he did not tell her the truth, but checked that word 
from the outset,
forever using to ev­ery advantage the mind that was in 
him:*
“I heard the name of Ithaka when I was in wide 
Crete.”  (13.254–256)
He goes on to regale the “youth” with an elaborate lie about being in 
exile for killing a man who “tried to deprive me of all my share of the 
plunder from Troy” (13.262–263)—a warning to the youth not to try 
to steal the guest-gifts he has brought ashore from Phaiakia. Athene 
* Notice inhibition here explicitly linked to intelligence, and both to deception.

On the Origin of Stories
276
now appears before him in more or less her own shape, expressing 
her delight at his flu­ent falsehoods (13.291–299):
It would be a sharp one, and a stealthy one, who would 
ever get past you
in any contriving; even if it were a god against you.
You wretch, so devious, never weary of tricks, then you 
would not
even in your own country give over your ways of 
deceiving
and your thievish tales. They are near to you in your very 
nature.
But come, let us talk no more of this, for you and I 
both know
sharp practice, since you are far the best of all mortal
men for counsel and stories, and I among all the 
divinities
am famous for wit and sharpness.
Throughout the second half of the poem, indeed, Odysseus will not 
only remain almost always in disguise as a beggar, but will tell one 
slick lie after another, to Eumaios, to Penelope, to his father, invent-
ing elaborate versions of his past cunningly shaped to his immediate 
audience and purpose.
	
Most of us live in so­ci­e­ties with higher levels of trust than Od­
ysseus’ world, where raiding for cattle, ­women, and other movable 
goods was seen as normal and even enterprising behavior. The ma-
jority of those researching the evolution of intelligence consider that 
the prime impetus for the acceleration of intelligence has been so­
ciality, the need to understand and perhaps outwit others. At first 
dubbed the Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis, as we have seen, 
others rightly objected to this term, since social intelligence can 
strengthen cooperation as well as sharpen competition. In the hu-
man case our present ability to cooperate as well as we do in such 
large groups of unrelated individuals is unique, and a tribute to our 
intelligence, and to the cultural means, the values and institutions, 
we have elaborated to amplify trust.14 But the virtuosic deceptive-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
277
ness with which Odysseus deploys his intelligence and the delight it 
arouses in the goddess of wisdom suggest that in times and places of 
low trust, like the world of the Odyssey, a Machiavellian intelligence 
may have been a necessary defensive and offensive weapon.
	
Just as Odysseus is rated “beyond all other men in mind,” Pe­nelope 
knows herself to “surpass the rest of ­women, in mind and thoughtful 
good sense” (19.326). Despite being antiquity’s paragon of female fi-
delity, she, too, is an archdeceiver. Her ruse of the web misleads the 
suitors for years. She outdoes even Athene. While Athene’s disguise 
fools Odysseus on his first return to Ithaka, she cannot make him 
give himself away.15 That is precisely what Penelope accomplishes—
and indeed has to do, to be sure that this man really is her Odysseus, 
almost back from the dead—when she pretends that the bed he built 
for them, out of the base of a tree still rooted to the ground, has be-
come movable, as if her affections were themselves now mobile. His 
anger at the idea—his inability, for once, to inhibit his outrage—dis-
closes that he is no impostor, while her ruse testifies to the cunning 
they share.16
False Belief
Children under the age of four find it almost impossible to under-
stand false belief (see Chapter 10), but over the next year they de-
velop the capacity to comprehend that ideas can be wrong.17 Minds 
have evolved for many millions of years to take in information from 
the reality around them, but to pass the Sally-Anne test, to under-
stand that false beliefs can exist, children have to learn to inhibit 
what they know of the ac­tual state of things to grasp Sally’s or their 
own wrong idea. Inhibiting the immediate and known to reason out 
a false reading of the known is a highly unusual thing to ask of a 
brain, and there seems no firm evidence that any nonhuman animals 
manage the task.18 But for us it soon be­comes automatic and effort-
less to track what others might know or not know.
	
Understanding that belief underpins desire and intention, and 
that belief can be wrong, allows us much finer accuracy in predicting 
others’ desires, intentions, and behavior. It makes possible the com-
plexity and sophistication of human interaction. We effortlessly as-

On the Origin of Stories
278
sess others’ beliefs about social situations and the consequences 
of  any errors. That skill, central to social life, explains the force 
of dramatic irony, which pervades all storytelling and saturates the 
Odyssey.
	
Dramatic irony occurs in any story in which the audience or some 
characters realize they know more than others. From the start of the 
Odyssey, we know more than any of the mortal characters. We know 
that Odysseus still survives and the gods have decreed his return. We 
derive plea­sure from seeing the whole picture and from foreseeing 
the good fortune ahead for the woebegone Odysseus, Penelope, and 
Telemachos, and the come-uppance looming for the smug suitors.19 
We keep track of those who know more than others, although we 
enjoy knowing still more. In book 2, Telemachos, as the only person 
in Ithaka who knows he has been visited by a god, finds himself in a 
uniquely powerful position. But he does not know which god he en-
countered. We do, and we know it is the divinity with the most in-
tense devotion to Odysseus, and we know just why she has prompted 
Telemachos on his quest, and what answer he will find to his query.
	
Although dramatic ironies swarm through the poem, they keep 
on changing. In the first four books, many characters vividly imag-
ine Odysseus’ death or wish for his return, not thinking it at all 
likely, while we know him to be alive and about to return. In the next 
four-book block, Odysseus manages a dangerous escape but does 
not know as we do that Athene is keeping a close eye on him. In the 
next block, comprising Odysseus’ tale of his wanderings, he discloses 
much that is new to us, yet fresh dramatic ironies still arise. When he 
ventures into Hades, he is surprised to find Agamemnon there. He 
does not know of his old leader’s murder, on Zeus’s mind when the 
council of the gods opens in book 1, or of Phemios’ song later in that 
first book, and the subject of a long report by Nestor in book 3 and 
a shorter reminder from Menelaos in book 4. Everyone knows this 
story by now—ev­ery­body except Odysseus.
	
Upon Odysseus’ return to Ithaka, the ironies deepen. Athene dis-
guises him as a gray-haired old beggar or restores him to his glori-
ous prime according to strategic need. Disguise, like dramatic irony, 
pervades story, because our understanding of false belief shapes so 

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
279
much of what we think about behavior. For many de­cades critics and 
teachers have proposed “appearance and reality” as “the theme” of 
endless numbers of literary works. That it is ever the theme—or that 
any work of much interest can have only one theme—is unlikely, but 
that it is a theme is almost inevitable, since it is a central part of hu-
man intelligence to understand that we can make mistakes, whether 
about appearance and reality (like the Smarties tube, or Odysseus 
in disguise) or merely through not knowing some crucial piece of 
information (such as that Anne moved the marble, or that Odysseus 
is still alive).
	
Dramatic irony, though a narrative staple, is unusually ubiquitous 
in the Odyssey, and for good reason. Like Athene, Homer is fasci-
nated by Odysseus because of his intelligence (and by Athene be-
cause of hers). He builds into his story the audience’s plea­sure at 
knowing more than even the most intelligent of mortals, and then at 
siding with this mortal when he, too, has been apprised of some of 
the gods’ secrets.
	
Many animals, especially omnivores like crows, parrots, rats, and 
chimpanzees, are curious, but human curiosity extends far further. 
False belief makes all the difference. If we realize we can make mis-
takes through not knowing the whole situation, our realization adds 
a new spur to curiosity. We know we will often need to know more in 
order to choose what to do.
	
Athene pricks Telemachos’ natural curiosity about his father, 
rouses it to new urgency, and starts him on a voyage of discovery. But 
Odysseus himself, the archetypal voyager, has an even deeper curios-
ity, emphasized from the start. He explores the island and then the 
cave of Polyphemos out of sheer thirst for the unknown. He ventures 
into Hades, despite his dread of entering the land of the dead; even 
after he has heard what he needs to learn from Teiresias he lingers 
to ask questions of the familiar or the famous. He wants to hear the 
sound of the Sirens, despite the risk, so has himself tied to the mast 
with unstopped ears in order to enjoy the spellbinding new sensa-
tion. He always wants to take the long view, to see actions in their 
widest context, a quality in him that the Cynic and the Stoic philoso-
phers later singled out admiringly.20 Unlike them, Odysseus himself 

On the Origin of Stories
280
is no intellectual, for his world still has no such individuals; but it 
is no accident that Dante, Joyce, and Kazantzakis follow Homer in 
characterizing Odysseus or Ulysses as de­fined by curiosity.
	
But before and behind Odysseus there stands Homer. If Odysseus 
stops to consider the whole picture, Homer does so compulsively—
and did it in a different way in the Iliad. As we have seen, he focuses 
intently in each epic on a particular phase within the story of Troy or 
the return, but he does so in ways that are also magisterially sweep-
ing. Even within the phase of action on which he focuses, he encom-
passes the largest possible panorama and invites us to enjoy our 
privileged perspective. From the start, he shows us the decisions of 
the gods and con­firms the plea­sure of knowing the full story with 
each new irony, each wrong guess about the fate of Odysseus. With-
out spoiling the story’s surprises, which continue into the last two 
books, he allows us to see as much as or even more than Zeus.
	
Throughout the ironies that pervade the Odyssey, Homer plays 
constantly on our awareness of false belief, on our recognition that 
there may be hidden aspects of a situation that invalidate what we—
or the characters—know. Again and again he prepares for us the sat-
isfaction of knowing the whole story and anticipating the plea­sures 
awaiting the harried first household of Ithaka and the punishments 
awaiting the suitors.
	
Auerbach thought that Homer knew no background. Not so, as 
we have seen. But his famous discussion was right about the deep 
dissimilarity between Homer and Genesis. In the Hebrew text, God’s 
will is inscrutable, permanently unknowable except when he chooses 
to reveal it, and even then remains of an order fundamentally be-
yond human fathoming.21 In Homer, the comprehensive vision is in 
principle humanly obtainable, not unimaginably incomprehensible, 
even if we do not usually have access to all the relevant mortal facts, 
let alone to divine plans. But in the story of the Odyssey, we do have 
such access, and it places us in a position well beyond that of even 
the “wisest of mortals.”
	
The Odyssey derives much of its power from the gap between 
the characters’ limited perspectives and our all-encompassing vision. 
Homer reinforces our recognition that in life our grasp of situations 
may often be partial, and that full understanding involves seeing be-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
281
yond the immediate. He incorporates the broadest possible perspec-
tive, he exudes con­fi­dence that it is in principle accessible to human 
minds, he easily incorporates us into his comprehensive vision 
and the plea­sures and power it allows. These qualities in Homer may 
well have hothoused the flowering of Greek thought in the centuries 
that followed, when his work was the center of Greek education, 
thought, pride, and con­fi­dence. Homer has not only focused on a 
hero who embodies human intelligence, but he may have advanced 
intelligence itself, by increasing the con­fi­dence of his heirs within 
Greek culture that the whole world can in principle be understood 
by the human mind.22
Religion
Both Snell and Jaynes claim that Homer lacks a notion of mind—or 
that he and his characters altogether lack consciousness—especially 
on the basis of the gods’ role in motivating human action. To both 
scholars, the presence of the Olympian gods con­firms in Homer the 
absence of a modern mind or at least a modern notion of mind. I 
claim the converse. Religion plays such a prominent role for Homer 
and his characters precisely because they have a fully human sense of 
mind. They read others in terms of belief as well as desire and inten-
tion, and they understand—and find fascinating, to judge by all the 
dramatic irony in the Odyssey—the risks of false belief, of not know-
ing enough about a particular situation.
	
Our human awareness of false belief evolved out of a need to pre-
dict the behavior of others, but it has had much wider consequences 
for the growth of human knowledge. Once we realize that we often 
lack the information needed to explain a situation fully, we naturally 
wish, if the situation matters enough, to find a deeper explanation. 
Of course there may be none readily available, and the realization 
that there may be strategically essential information that we cannot 
access can disturb.
	
Because other agents—prey, predators, and especially human 
friends and foes—make the most dramatic difference to our chances 
and choices day by day, our understanding of other minds has 
evolved into our richest natural mental capacity. We explain the vis-

On the Origin of Stories
282
ible behavior of agents of all kinds, especially human agents, in terms 
of things we cannot see—beliefs, desires, and intentions—and we 
find these explanations powerful. We see psychological cause as a 
paradigm of all cause. So when we realize the implications of false 
belief, we naturally try to supplement what we do know and to coun-
ter our sense of the vulnerability of not knowing by resorting to the 
most powerful form of explanation at our disposal. If visible agents 
can be moved by invisible forces, perhaps there exist other invisible 
forces with still more explanatory value, unseen causes of movement 
and change? And though we often lack information, perhaps these 
others can always monitor what matters?
	
Agents with exceptional powers especially command our atten-
tion and haunt our memories. Agents who violate the intuitive on-
tologies by which we understand other living things—agents like the 
Greek gods, who are immortal, can know things at a distance, can 
­assume invisibility or whatever form they wish, or prompt humans 
in sleep or awake—seize on our imaginations precisely because they 
overstep natural boundaries. But although these supernatural beings 
transgress the natural order, we can still understand them in terms of 
a belief-desire-intention psychology. In the Greek case, if the gods 
know we have ignored their decrees or failed to offer due sac­ri­fice 
they will feel affronted and react accordingly.
	
Precisely because we understand false belief, because we realize we 
may err in action if we err in knowledge, we try to explain events 
more deeply. And in all human cultures, that has meant trying to 
explain events through supernatural agents. We do not set aside the 
natural, but we add the supernatural as another, apparently more 
powerful explanation. Storms at sea can sink a ship through waves, 
wind, or lightning, and knowing that, sailors can avoid setting sail in 
hazardous conditions. But to explain why this ship encounters a sud-
den storm, or lightning strikes that one, the Greeks invoke what they 
consider a more profound and pointed explanation, like the wrath of 
Poseidon or Zeus. Classicists call this “double determination”: expla-
nation in terms of the natural, including ordinary physical and psy-
chological causes, and in terms of the supernatural. The gods add to 
but do not eliminate human responsibility. Athene helps Odysseus 
and Telemachos in their slaughter of the suitors, but they fire the ar-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
283
rows and hurl the spears and in most cases deflect their opponents’ 
blows.
	
There are inconsistencies in Greek religious thinking, as in any 
other. “The gods know ev­ery­thing,” we hear repeatedly. Sometimes 
they know immediately and from afar (as when Zeus sends eagles 
to con­firm a mortal’s chance remark), and sometimes they do not 
know unless they happen to encounter an event directly (as when 
Poseidon, returning from Aithiopia, happens to espy Odysseus at 
sea) or learn indirectly (as when Polyphemos’ curse informs Posei-
don just who has blinded his son). Homer makes the most of these 
uncertainties for narrative impact, at times allowing Athene con­fi­
dent foreknowledge, at times making her seem genuinely apprehen-
sive that Odysseus’ case has been forgotten, at times having to act 
herself in the moment, uncertain quite what to do, at others having 
to incite her favorites to act in ways she has not anticipated.
	
To us Olympian gods explain nothing. But for Homer and his 
world, humanly aware of the possible incompleteness of their knowl-
edge, these gods offered the deeper explanation they sought and con­
firmed their con­fi­dence in the intelligibility of their world. Homer 
had a singular assurance in his power to explain the immediate 
through the remote, the seen through the unseen, the local through 
the all-encompassing. Within a couple of centuries his work was al-
ready at the center of Greek tradition. He evokes with incompara-
ble force the incompleteness of human knowledge in the here and 
now and yet the possibility of attaining comprehensive knowledge. 
Surely this combination helped to inspire the first philosophers to 
seek out still deeper explanations, even if they no ­longer depended 
on the gods, or even if, as for Xenophanes, human intelligence could 
recognize the gods themselves as parochial.
	
Religion offers not only the appearance and reassurance of deeper 
explanation, but also an apparent solution to problems of control.23 
Brains are “anticipation machines” whose task is to guess what will 
happen next in order to stay one step ahead.24 Most brains focus only 
on the here and now and try to anticipate only the immediate future. 
Human brains by contrast have a broader perspective, and can search 
for clues to the future in the past, or test sequences of imminent pos-
sible actions and out­comes, or imagine still ­longer-term futures. In 

On the Origin of Stories
284
the Odyssey, as in our world, people can vividly imagine elsewheres 
and elsewhens. But that capacity also puts us at risk of conjuring up 
futures filled with uncertainties and possible dangers—especially if 
our augmented ability to imagine the future fuses with our aware-
ness that we often lack key information.
	
Religion can allay this special human anxiety about the future. The 
gods and their signs in Homer offer predictions as well as explana-
tions. The terms of Zeus’s decision in favor of Odysseus’ return ex-
plain the hero’s ordeal, and can themselves be “explained” still more 
deeply in terms of Zeus’s need to heed the animosity toward Odys-
seus of a god as powerful as Poseidon. But we in the audience can see 
these explanations only because we are outside the story’s world and 
have untrammeled access to it through the might of Homer’s muse. 
Inside the story, much remains uncertain to the characters. Yet much 
can also be seen by those who care to look.
	
The signs Zeus sends—birds fly­ing or fight­ing on the right or left 
of the characters, a lightning flash, a sudden sound after someone 
has prayed for an omen—con­firm his control of events. Despite the 
portents’ ambiguities, they can be validly interpreted by the discern-
ing, like the seers Halitherses or Theoklymenos. Or the deserving can 
directly receive supernatural instruction about ways to cope with fu-
ture dangers. The less deserving receive divine admonitions but ig-
nore them, like Odysseus’ companions ignoring his firm instruc-
tions from Circe and Teiresias not to harm the oxen of Helios, or the 
suitors’ heedlessly laughing off the warnings of Athene, Halitherses, 
Theoklymenos, and Zeus himself. Homer rarely comments in his 
own voice about his characters, but he repeatedly calls “fools” those 
who ignore the signs of the gods’ wills, and he presents Odysseus as 
someone whose intelligence stands out as much as anything else by 
his always seeking to know and abide by the will of the gods.
	
Our conceptions have changed since Homer—although people all 
over the world still seek the reassurance of control through religion, 
superstition, and astrology. But at least in educated secular so­ci­e­ties 
we think we have found in science a better form of explanation, pre-
diction, and control. We still look for present signs and patterns as 
a way of predicting future risks—climate change, pandemics, earth-

	
The Evolution of Intelligence (2): Beyond the Here and Now
	
285
quakes, or asteroids—and of gaining a sense of control over a future 
whose anxieties still trouble us. Our methods have changed, but we 
still have a uniquely human drive to seek more comprehensive ex-
planations and more powerful predictions. In that sense Odysseus 
descending even into Hades to learn the will of the gods stands for 
us all.
Religion offers another reassurance to creatures with both the bless-
ings and the curse of imagination. Our metarepresentational minds 
allow us to entertain images of our own death or our absence from 
the world after death. That such imaginings have haunted our spe-
cies since long before the first civilizations is a matter of archeologi-
cal record.
	
Odysseus’ long absence from Ithaka amounts to a kind of death.25 
Many in Ithaka imagine him dead, and we first see his homeland suf-
fering under the effects of life without him. Early in his wanderings 
he almost reaches Ithaka with his men, only for them to untie the 
winds of Aiolos and drive their ship back where they came from, 
causing Odysseus to contemplate suicide. Later he steps into Hades 
and talks with the dead. He ­comes near to death before being washed 
up on Ogygia, where Kalypso offers him immortality. He declines, 
because he wants to return to Ithaka, preferring mortality’s real re-
wards even at the cost of its real risks. He almost dies again on his 
way to Scheria. As the Phaiakians take him from Scheria back to 
Ithaka, upon his eyes “there fell a sleep, gentle, the sweetest kind of 
sleep with no awakening, most like death” (13.79–81). He returns to a 
land where many envision him already dead, and where, unrecog-
nized by them, like a returning ghost, he can appraise others in terms 
of their attachment or hostility toward him and apportion reward or 
punishment accordingly.
	
Homer does not promise us immortality. As much as any poet, 
and more than most, he knows death close up. Death, in his depic-
tions of Hades, is not an end, but it is not life, nor even a half-life. 
It  does not inspire terror, like the Christian Hell, but it does de-
serve dread, for all the challenge and joy of life have drained away. 
Life is what matters, and the only immortality worth wanting is in 

On the Origin of Stories
286
the memory of the living. But he does suggest that through intelli-
gence, through thinking beyond the moment and taking thought for 
the gods, we may have our best chance for a long mortal life and a 
lasting memorial in the minds of others—as his hero and heroine 
and he himself have found.

	
287
18
THE EVOLUTION OF COOPERATION (1):  
EXPANDING THE CIRCLE
What could the Odyssey possibly tell us about human re­
lations? We first hear of Odysseus trapped on an island as the 
paramour-­cum-­prisoner of a goddess. At the end he arms to resist a 
revenge attack by the male relatives of the hundred-­plus suitors he 
has killed the previous day, only for Zeus to intervene and impose 
peace from above.
	
We may see the beginning, the bloody climax, and the ending of 
the Odyssey as highly unrealistic, although they were not to Homer 
and his audience. Does the gap between Homer’s beliefs and ours 
not make it unlikely that we can learn anything about our common 
humanity from the Odyssey?
	
The extreme situations certainly catch our attention. But they do 
much more. They allow Homer to explore solitude and society, com-
petition and cooperation in fundamental ways. We can see the whole 
story as a thought experiment. Unlike Ursula Le Guin, in the social-­
thought experiments of her science fiction, Homer has no idea of 
experiment or evolution. But an evolutionary approach to his story 
can suggest how searchingly he explores social life, even if there is in-
evitably much he does not question; how and why he uses the moral 
emotions to engage his original audience, in ways that still engage us, 
despite our very different social assumptions; and even how and why 
these emotions arose, and what part stories have played in shaping 
them.
	
Homer builds on the traditional outline: Odysseus returns, the 

On the Origin of Stories
288
last of the Greeks fight­ing at Troy, to find his wife still faithful after 
twenty years, despite being pursued by suitors whom she has man-
aged to keep at bay through her ruse at the loom.1 Most of the rest 
the poet seems to have added, like the major role Telemachos plays, 
and the key character and role of Eumaios. These characters, and 
also the unusual scale of the poem, the tight chronological focus, 
and the complex chronological rearrangement that throw so much 
weight onto the Ithaka scenes, suggest that the lengthy buildup to a 
decisive confrontation with an army of suitors was also new with 
Homer.
	
Homer says some profound and deeply moving things about hu-
man nature through balancing the Greek and Trojan forces in the Il-
iad, and through balancing the gods who back each side’s warriors. 
In the Odyssey he manages to say some very different, and some very 
similar, things, through the opposite strategy. He divides the charac-
ters sharply into good and bad, and places the ruler of the gods and 
the most active of goddesses on Odysseus’ side, and no gods at all 
behind the suitors.
	
Stories regularly engage the moral emotions, because these emo-
tions matter so much to social life. Before a year and a half, infants 
“look ­longer at visual displays depicting violations of arbitrary so-
cial rules” than at similar displays that do not.2 Children from the 
age of three, like adults, look out for and detect violations of social 
rules, especially for “permissions, obligations, prohibitions, prom-
ises, and warnings,” but they do not notice and detect violations in 
other types of reasoning.3 We attend to social violations, and they 
stir our emotions. And across cultures, whether Apache, Dogon, or 
Sami, stories and storytellers are valued for their ability to inculcate 
the values of the community by depicting social violations and their 
consequences.
	
An evolutionary approach to storytelling can consider morality in 
terms of the con­flicting demands of social life as they affect any spe-
cies. Far from being solely human, the social emotions are present in 
rudimentary form even in creatures like the worm C. elegans, with a 
brain containing only 302 neurons, compared with the billions in the 
human brain.4 Complex social emotions, like empathy and a sense of 
fairness, or behaviors like punishment and reconciliation, have been 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
289
observed and tested in many species, especially in social primates.5 
Many social features often explained only in terms of a particular 
human culture ac­tually re­flect factors common to all or many hu-
man so­ci­e­ties, and even to other species, so that attempts to explain 
them solely through local conditions are doomed to incompleteness. 
Not that the local should be ignored, but to explain it adequately we 
need to consider the problems that a particular cultural practice at-
tempts to solve, the evolved dispositions it deploys, and the problems 
it fails to solve or the new problems it generates. And to understand 
these problems in their local situation we first need to understand 
the problems of social life in general.
	
As we saw in Chapter 4, cooperation exists in many species yet 
is  extremely dif­fi­cult to evolve. It begins in mutualism, animals 
­bene­fiting one another merely as they go about their ordinary self-­
interested activities like feeding and keeping watch. It seems proba-
ble that sociality in multicellular animals began with defense, with 
safety in numbers. This first impulse to sociality depends for its ef-
fectiveness on emotions of comfort and plea­sure in the company of 
conspe­cifics, and anxiety in being too far away from them. Blind hu-
man babies smile at the sound of a human voice and focus their 
sightless eyes on the place where the sound issues from.6 Universally 
humans withdraw attention from others to punish them, and one of 
our severest forms of punishment is imprisonment in solitary con­
finement.
	
Odysseus begins the Odyssey deeply miserable. Although he is safe 
on an island with a comely goddess who supplies his ev­ery physical 
need, he has lost all his companions, he has not seen another of his 
kind for seven years, and he feels utterly bereft. He does not hesitate 
to risk death in crossing the sea for the chance of rejoining the hu-
man world. In opposition to him and his solitude, literally and struc-
turally, and indeed currently occupying the place in Ithaka to which 
he yearns to return, are the suitors, a whole “swarm” of them. Al-
though they nominally compete for Penelope’s favors, these are cur-
rently off-­limits, so meanwhile they enjoy Odysseus’ resources, his 
livestock, his wine, his servants. Their numbers give them con­fi­dence 
in their safety even should the lord of the estate return in righ­teous 
anger (2.246–251).

On the Origin of Stories
290
	
Except for identical twins, any two individuals of the same sexu-
ally reproducing species will be genetically different and will to that 
degree have competing interests wherever resources are limited. This 
competition of interests produces dominance disputes over access to 
resources. A stable hierarchy reduces the need for repeated squabbles 
over precedence and for that reason tends to establish itself in many 
animal so­ci­e­ties.
	
Whatever the precise political structure on Ithaka and the neigh-
boring islands, Odysseus is undisputedly at the top of the hierarchy 
among his companions when they leave for Troy and as they head 
back for Ithaka. He ends up alone, naked, on the island of the Phaia-
kians. At their athletic contests, the Phaiakian youths jeer at Odys-
seus as a mere merchant sailor, since he declines to par­tic­i­pate. An-
gered, he proves his noble sta­tus, even before disclosing his identity, 
through a displaced dominance contest, by throwing a discus far be-
yond any of theirs. Back in Ithaka, he must adopt the lowly position 
of a beggar before he can win back the dominance the suitors have 
challenged. The con­fir­ma­tion that he can do so ­comes in another 
ritualized physical contest, when he alone can string and draw the 
bow—at which point he unleashes his full power, and the bow’s, on 
those who have dared to challenge his position.
	
Hierarchy, so long as it is accepted, can reduce the competitive 
friction in sociality. But what establishes the bene­fits of cooperation? 
As William Hamilton’s theory of inclusive fitness notes, our genes 
exist not only in ourselves but also in our kin. We therefore recognize 
kin and are motivated to help them through feelings of attachment, 
usually mediated in mammals by the neurochemical oxytocin.
	
In the Odyssey Odysseus instantly recognizes Telemachos, though 
he last saw his son as an infant at Penelope’s breast. Despite his strat-
egy of secrecy, Odysseus discloses his identity to Telemachos as soon 
as they are alone, but keeps it still concealed from his swineherd Eu-
maios, although he has known and loved the “godlike swineherd” for 
de­cades, and although Eumaios has freshly and fully demonstrated 
his love and staunch loyalty. Later, just before the battle, Odysseus 
quizzes Eumaios about his preparedness to fight, but he does not 
need to ask for Telemachos’ help. From the first he assumes that his 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
291
son will aid him even in the potentially deadly showdown with the 
suitors.
	
At the moment when Telemachos realizes that the man before him 
is indeed his father, son and father embrace and weep for all their 
long years apart. Homer amplifies the poignancy via the universality 
of parent-­child love in an unexpected simile (16.213–219):
now Telemachos
folded his great father in his arms and lamented,
shedding tears, and desire for mourning rose in both 
of them;
and they cried shrill in a pulsing voice, even more than 
the outcry
of birds, ospreys or vultures with hooked claws, whose 
children
were stolen away by the men of the fields, before their 
wings grew
strong; such was their pitiful cry and the tears their 
eyes wept.
Since I won’t discuss Homer’s bold and brilliant similes again, let me 
linger over this. Here he resorts to an animal simile to express not so 
much the clamor of the cry issuing from Telemachos and “his great 
father”—although he does that, too—as the depth of their loss. In 
order to stress the father-­son bond, he chooses not warm and cud-
dly mammals but birds, since avian fathers and mothers usually both 
take close responsibility for their chicks, whereas mammalian fathers 
rarely help rear their offspring. The species Homer names are ra­
pacious and hard-­edged, yet they, too, suffer when their young are 
taken from them. In this characteristically complex Homeric reverse 
simile, human father and son have just been reunited but are com-
pared to parent birds just parted from their children for life. And 
that is the recognition that hits human father and son: they have 
been parted virtually all of Telemachos’ life.
	
Homer expects his audience to feel the force of the comparison. 
The universality of the emotion, the fact that it can rend the heart 

On the Origin of Stories
292
even of a vulture, does not make it seem in the least commonplace. 
On the contrary it signals that the love of parent and child is so cen-
tral to life that we can recognize it even in an almost alien species—
let alone in our two heroes. Homer is closer than chronology would 
suggest to the Darwin of The Expression of the Emotions in Man and 
Animals. Although these are not Homer’s or Darwin’s terms, this 
emotion has deep evolutionary roots and deep neural routes. It goes 
to the heart of the mind.
	
Cooperation spreads wider, beyond kin, through reciprocal al­
truism, the “you-­scratch-­my-­back-­and-­I’ll-­scratch-­yours” principle, 
helping now in return for similar help later. This trait requires the 
ability to remember individuals (the person to repay) and what they 
have done for us (the reason for repayment), the probability of re-
peat encounters (a reason not to fail to repay) in a nondispersing 
population (an occasion to repay), and a relatively long life (time to 
repay).
	
We take the ability to identify individuals for granted, and easily 
keep track of them. Yet noncooperators will have strong incentives to 
mislead others about their identity, a problem that manifests itself 
repeatedly in the far-­flung and low-­trust world of the Odyssey, where 
characters name themselves by declaring “I claim to be So-­and-­So, 
the son of So-­and-­So.” Odysseus himself hides his identity in the Od-
yssey more than he reveals it, and readily invents spurious identities 
that others believe, even though they have all had past experience of 
travelers as liars.
	
Besides an ability to track individuals, reciprocal altruism re-
quires an awareness of who does not repay, and a readiness to pun-
ish, or withhold cooperation from, noncooperators, through emo-
tions such as trust, gratitude, guilt, suspicion, and indignation.
	
From the moment Odysseus walks into the swineherd’s hut in 
the guise of an old beggar, Eumaios reveals his devotion and grati-
tude to the master he still believes is absent and will never return. 
No one in the Odyssey has suffered more than Odysseus, kept from 
his homeland for twenty years, but in one respect at least Eumaios 
suffers more. A king’s son, he was abducted as a boy from his home-
land and sold off to Odysseus’ father: in this story of homecoming, 
he will never see his homeland again. Yet though he has plummeted 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
293
in sta­tus from prince to slave, he happily serves Odysseus, who has 
appointed him chief swineherd, a lowly position but one that still al-
lows him the paradoxical dignity of being “the godlike swineherd,” 
“the swineherd, leader of men” (14.121):
never again now
will I find again a lord as kind as he, wherever
I go; even if I could come back to my father and mother’s
house, where first I was born, and they raised me when I 
was little.  (14.138–142)
Just before pulling the bow and slaughtering the suitors, and still 
­disguised as an old beggar, Odysseus tests Eumaios and the oxherd 
Philoitios, asking them whether they would fight for Odysseus 
against the suitors if he came home. Eumaios prays to all the divini-
ties that this might happen, Odysseus announces himself and, even 
before showing his scar in proof of his identity, pledges that in return 
for their aid “I shall get wives for you both, and grant you posses-
sions and houses built next to mine, and think of you in the future 
always as companions of Telemachos, and his brothers” (21.214–216).
	
Eumaios’ relationship with Odysseus includes elements of recip-
rocal altruism, but it runs much deeper. Odysseus’ kindness as a 
master has earned him enough credits that the swineherd does not 
hesitate at his request to join a potentially deadly mission, although 
the solicitous Odysseus offers him and Philoitios still ampler repay-
ment should they survive. But Eumaios and Odysseus feel much 
more than a sense that their debts to each other should be repaid in 
full. Tooby and Cosmides point to the banker’s paradox: when we 
seek to borrow money, we are in our least secure fi­nan­cial position 
and therefore offer the greatest risk to the bank. In reciprocal altru-
ism, too, I am likely to call on your aid when I am in my most des-
perate plight, and when aid may therefore often be dangerous to 
lend, and when you are least likely to want to venture your support. 
But friendship over­comes that problem, since it is based not on the 
expected exchange of ser­vices over time, but on the attachment of 
individuals, as something akin to, if less strong than, the emotional 
bonds in real kinship.7 Despite the master-­slave relationship between 

On the Origin of Stories
294
them, that is certainly the case for Odysseus and Eumaios. As Eu-
maios pointedly confesses to Odysseus, not knowing who this 
“stranger” is or how much it will mean to him (14.144–147):
the longing is on me for Odysseus, and he is gone 
from me;
and even when he is not here, my friend, I feel some 
modesty
about naming him, for in his heart he cared for 
me greatly
and loved me.
When much later Odysseus discloses who he is, they weep, embrace, 
and kiss before heading into battle.
Friendship can prove an even stron­ger cooperative cement than re-
ciprocal altruism, and reciprocal altruism can make cooperation 
possible in a group whose members regularly and repeatedly inter-
act. But what of those in larger populations or wider spaces, whom 
we might never encounter again? How can trust expand even there?
	
Groups larger than a few hundred individuals are “‘unnatural’ 
as far as genetic evolution is concerned because to the best of our 
knowledge they never existed prior to the invention of agriculture. 
This means that culturally evolved mechanisms are absolutely re-
quired for human society to hang together above the level of face-­to-
­face groups.”8 There has not been time in the 10,000 years or so since 
the agricultural revolution for the slow workings of evolution to 
recon­fig­ure human emotions to the point where we could automati-
cally trust even strangers. We often do now trust strangers, but usu-
ally we do so because we know that if things go wrong we have re-
course to a whole system of legal safeguards.
	
The society of the Greeks in the Odyssey is not large by modern 
standards, but travel around the eastern Mediterranean, though of-
ten fraught with danger, is common enough, if sporadic. Many in 
Odysseus’ world come into contact with others they may never see 
again, or cannot easily oblige to repay a debt. In this situation, coop-
eration is even less assured, since reciprocal altruism poses too great 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
295
a risk. Why put yourself out for someone whom you may never see 
again?
	
Here the solution has to be cultural, not purely evolutionary. The 
main solution in the world of the Odyssey is the institution of xe-
nia, hospitality.9 The word xenos, stranger-­guest-­host-­friend, tells a 
whole exemplary tale in a single word. When a stranger arrives at my 
doorstep, I am obligated to welcome and feed him (and it will be 
him: ­women did not travel alone), even before asking him who he is, 
and then perhaps to offer him a bath and a place to sleep. Anybody 
from outside my social unit should be received, simply because of his 
mere common humanity, as a person away from home, in need of 
food and shelter and company, in this world with no inns, restau-
rants, or even money. The stranger be­comes my guest, and to sig­nify 
that he has therefore also become my friend, I should bestow on him 
a valuable gift at his departure, and help him on his onward journey. 
He is then obliged, should I arrive on his threshold, to become my 
host: to repay the hospitality, a gift on parting, and onward assistance. 
But more than that: the bond of xenía created by the initial act of 
welcome and cemented by the gift should endure between us for life 
and between our descendants. A Greek and a Trojan who meet in 
battle in the Iliad put down their weapons when they discover they 
are “hereditary friends” because their forebears were xenoi.
	
In light of the problem of extending cooperation simply by evolved 
human impulses, especially at the fringes of one’s community, xenia 
offers an excellent solution, provided that people abide by it. And by 
and large Homer’s people do abide by a code so ingrained into their 
beliefs.
	
Xenía is a central value and a central issue in both the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. In the back story to the Iliad, Paris has been lavishly treated 
as a guest by Menelaos, but he breaks not only the rules of marriage 
but also the tenets of xenía by leaving with Menelaos’ wife and a good 
deal of his property: he is explicitly decried as “doing evil to a kindly 
host, who has given him friendship” (Iliad 3.354), and Menelaos de-
nounces the Trojans in general: “You who in vanity went away taking 
with you my wedded wife, and many possessions, when she had re-
ceived you in kindness” (13.626–627).
	
In the Odyssey, from the moment we first reach the mortal world, 

On the Origin of Stories
296
the suitors systematically and flagrantly violate xenia. Athene ar-
rives  in the form of Mentes as Telemachos broods on his father 
(1.118–124):
With such thoughts, sitting among the suitors, he saw 
Athene
and went straight to the forecourt, the heart within him 
scandalized
that a guest should still be standing at the doors. He 
stood beside her
and took her by the right hand, and relieved her of the 
bronze spear,
and spoke to her and addressed her in winged words: 
“Welcome, stranger.
You shall be entertained as a guest among us. Afterward,
when you have tasted dinner, you shall tell us what your 
need is.”
Although the suitors have all but taken over the palace, they ignore 
guests or, as we discover when Odysseus arrives as a beggar, actively 
abuse them. In contrast to the chaos of Ithaka, we see unstinting xe-
nia when Telemachos is welcomed to Pylos by Nestor and his close 
and open family and to Sparta by the brilliant but brittle Menelaos 
and Helen. Odysseus, arriving with nothing but his naked, salt-­caked, 
battered body, is entertained in even grander style by the Phaiakians, 
who show their ideal hospitality not only by not pressing him for his 
name for almost two days, but also by spiriting him onward—after 
first offering him to stay as long as he likes—all the way to Ithaka.
	
In partial repayment, and in the successful hope of winning more 
gifts, Odysseus tells the Phaiakians who he is and enthralls them with 
his account of his travels. The first episode that he describes in any 
detail is the encounter with Polyphemos, who violates xenia as grossly 
as can be imagined. On seeing Odysseus and his men, Polyphemos 
immediately asks, “Who are you?” Aware that this question has al-
ready breached decorum, Odysseus explains that they are Greeks, 
and tries to prime Polyphemos to his duties as host (9.267–271):

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
297
we come to you and are suppliants
at your knees, if you might give us a guest present or 
otherwise
some gift of grace, for such is the right of strangers. 
Therefore
respect the gods, O best of men. We are your suppliants,
and Zeus the guest god, who stands behind all strangers 
with honors
due them, avenges any wrong toward strangers and 
suppliants.
Ominously, Polyphemos laughs away Odysseus’ guidelines, gloating 
that the Cyclopes “do not concern themselves over Zeus of the aegis, 
nor any of the rest of the blessed gods, since we are far better than 
they.” Instead of feeding his guests, he begins to feed on them, after 
bashing their brains out.10 Later the Cyclops asks Odysseus his name, 
“so I can give you a guest present to make you happy,” and when 
he hears Odysseus’ (false) name, promises to eat him last, “and that 
shall be my guest present to you.” When Odysseus manages to blind 
Polyphemos and lead the rest of the survivors to freedom, he vaunts 
at the Cyclops, “you, hard one, who dared to eat your own guests in 
your own house, so Zeus and the rest of the gods have punished you” 
(9.478–479). Confident he is in the right, he announces who he really 
is, upon which the giant offers him another mocking “guest gift” 
(9.517), the curse of Poseidon’s wrath.
	
Odysseus and his men cannot escape Polyphemos’ “hospitality” 
soon enough. But another central facet of xenía is to aid guests to 
move on when ready. Just as Odysseus and his crew encounter hor-
rific violations of the principle of feeding guests in Polyphemos, the 
cannibalistic Lestrygonians, and the man-­devouring Scylla, so they 
face repeated risks of not being allowed to leave their hosts: the 
Lotus-­Eaters, whose narcotics can trap visitors forever; Circe, who 
­comes close to enthralling Odysseus’ crew permanently as pigs; and 
Kalypso, who keeps Odysseus as her lover until the gods decree she 
must release him.11
	
When Odysseus completes his tale to the Phaiakians, these exem-

On the Origin of Stories
298
plary hosts swiftly transport him to Ithaka, where the first mortal he 
sees, after Athene has transformed him outwardly into an aged beg-
gar, is his swineherd Eumaios. The swineherd’s love for the master he 
thinks absent wins us over instantly, and con­firms Odysseus in his 
old affection for him. Although his resources are modest, Eumaios 
wel­comes the beggar unreservedly and with unfeigned solicitude. 
When Odysseus thanks him, praying that Zeus and the other gods 
will reward him, “for you have received me heartily,” Eumaios an-
swers (14.56–58):
Stranger, I have no right to deny the stranger, not even
if one came to me who was meaner than you. All 
vagabonds
and strangers are under Zeus . . .
Eumaios’ respect for the principle of xenía matches his perfect prac-
tice, but his welcome is more than mere duty. It arises from a com-
passion so imbued as to have become utterly spontaneous—founded 
on innate human empathy, but reaching this level only through the 
salience of xenía as a local cultural value.
	
One line before Eumaios’ reply to Odysseus’ thanks, Homer the-
matizes xenía, I suggest, for immediately after Odysseus’ “you have 
received me heartily,” he introduces Eumaios’ response in these 
words: “Then, O swineherd Eumaios, you said to him in answer . . .” 
It as if Homer as narrator picks up on Odysseus’ direct thanks to Eu-
maios and, almost in his own rush of gratitude, himself addresses his 
character directly. From this point on—but not before—Homer re-
peatedly reports the swineherd’s actions in the second person: “Eu-
maios, you [did this or that].” No one else in the Odyssey is singled 
out in this striking way, but the precise location of Homer’s own first 
“you,” echoing Odysseus’ first “you” to Eumaios, as he thanks him for 
his hospitality, and preceding the swineherd’s straightforward decla-
ration that he simply has no right to deny hospitality, seems no acci-
dent.
	
The heartwarming reception that Eumaios gives Odysseus con-
trasts starkly with the abuse that Odysseus receives when he turns 
up, still disguised as a beggar, at his own palace—a move that Eu-

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
299
maios has cautioned him against. The suitors jeer at him, and An­
tinoös, the foremost and most brazen, hurls a footstool. Penelope, 
when she hears of this episode, reacts with outrage and compas-
sion (17.500–502). When she meets the stranger, she offers him food, 
a bath, bedding, and all her attention as he regales her with his—
false—accounts of his travels, his meeting with Odysseus, his assur-
ances of Odysseus’ imminent return.
	
As a value entrenched in Greek life, as a touchstone of decency, 
xenía extends reciprocal altruism beyond its natural limits. Another 
amplifier of reciprocal altruism is indirect reciprocity, our readiness 
to deal with people because we have seen or heard of their dealings 
with others: reputation, in other words—an inevitable feature of so-
cial life in a species whose members monitor and report on one 
­another. And the force of reputation can itself be culturally ampli-
fied, as it is by the high value set on kleos (report, reputation, glory) 
in Homer’s world. Not the least component of kleos is a reputation 
for xenia. As Penelope, ironically, tells Odysseus-­as-­stranger in re-
sponse to his assurance that her husband will very soon return, no 
one could match Odysseus in this respect (19.313–316):
Odysseus will never come home again, nor will you 
be given
conveyance, for there are none to give orders left in the 
household
such as Odysseus was among men—if he ever existed—
for receiving respected strangers and sending them off on 
their journeys.
	
Someone with a reputation for xenía, for dealing honorably even 
with strangers, should be trustworthy in dealing with familiars, and 
will therefore stand to bene­fit from the opportunities opened by the 
trust of others. But xenía is upheld by something regarded as even 
more powerful than social vigilance: the vigilance of the gods. As 
Odysseus tries to remind Polyphemos, as Eumaios states to Odysseus 
as a mere fact of life, the gods, and especially Zeus, monitor and pro-
tect vagabonds and strangers. In this role the most powerful of the 
gods is known as Zeus Xeinios, the protector of strangers. In the so-

On the Origin of Stories
300
cial world Homer depicts, strangers exist on or beyond the fringes of 
the familiar community that could protect them. They are at their 
most vulnerable, and for that reason Zeus protects them by punish-
ing those who refuse to help them. Zeus, the supporter of kings, also 
takes an interest in those in the positions of least power, beggars and 
suppliants, often mentioned in the same breath as strangers. Belief in 
Zeus’s protection of those without power in their own community, 
those who have ventured beyond the safety of home, and those who 
otherwise find themselves in dire need mitigates the potential harsh-
ness of hierarchy in Homeric society and helps solve the problem of 
extending the range of cooperation.
The suitors abuse Odysseus because he is a beggar and a stranger, 
because he has no backing or standing—and, as transformed by 
Athene, no apparent strength of his own. But we know that the house 
they lord it over is his, like the food they feast on and begrudge shar-
ing with him.
	
Even if we do not share the Greek code of xenia, we respond to 
the suitors’ treatment of Odysseus in multiple ways. Humans have 
a hierarchical streak, an urge to dominance, an awe for the domi-
nant, and a dislike of domination, that we share with many of our 
closest primate relatives. Chimpanzee politics are unstable because 
an ambitious male entering ma­tu­ri­ty can form alliances with one or 
two others to topple the current alpha male, in return for a share in 
the rewards of power (reciprocal altruism, in this case in pursuit of 
power). But humans can cooperate far more flexibly than chimpan-
zees, and can therefore more successfully resist domination. Domi-
nance is particularly hard to prevent in so­ci­e­ties in which resources 
can be stored, as they could after the invention of agriculture. But 
in all known hunter-­gatherer so­ci­e­ties, where no one can accumu-
late much in the way of resources, a tight egalitarianism operates: all 
cooperate to resist any attempts by individuals to dominate or even 
display special abilities.
	
We all share a desire to dominate, a resistance to being dominated, 
and an awe before dominance. We, like Homer’s original audience, 
cannot help feeling admiration at the might of an Odysseus. But we 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (1): Expanding the Circle
	
301
also empathize with those who are dominated, we respect those who 
use their dominance to help those lower in sta­tus, and we despise 
those who dominate without compassion. Odysseus is the natural 
and hereditary leader of his community, at the top of his local hi­
erarchy, and in his role as beggar and stranger he also experiences 
life at the bottom. Even without the Greek sense of xenía—although 
Homer has made the principle explicit enough for us to understand 
it—we admire someone who gives generously of what he has to 
someone in need, as Eumaios does to Odysseus as stranger. Odysseus 
himself as ruler in Ithaka has an impeccable record: “he did no act 
and spoke no word in his own country that was unfair . . . Odysseus 
was never outrageous at all to any man” (4.690–693). Both the wise 
Ithakan, Mentor, and Athene, wisdom itself, rate Odysseus as “scep-
tered king” as “gentle and kind .  .  . schooled in justice .  .  . kind, 
like a father” (2.230–234, 5.8–12). We feel a compounded outrage at 
the suitors for denying someone in need what they freely help them-
selves to, despite not being themselves needy, and for humiliating 
someone already apparently low in sta­tus, when the stranger not 
only needs a share of the food they happily waste, but is ac­tually the 
person whose food they are squandering and whose sta­tus they are 
aspiring to, without his strengths or his consideration for others’ 
weaknesses.
Xenía is axiomatic for the altruists in Odysseus’ world, but even for 
them cooperation can be deeply unstable. Although one must wel-
come a guest in the proper manner, one also has a perfect right when 
abroad, and in a position to do so, to raid another town or home-
stead.12 Odysseus observes xenía incomparably, yet one of his formu-
laic honorifics is “Odysseus, sacker of cities,” which he has earned 
especially but not only for his role in the sack of Troy. In his account 
to the Phaiakians, the first “adventure” he records is the raid he and 
his men undertook against the Kikonians, allies of Troy (9.40–43):
I sacked their city and killed their people,
and out of their city taking their wives and many 
possessions

On the Origin of Stories
302
we shared them out, so none might go cheated of 
his proper
portion.
Proper portion, indeed! And at the end of the Odyssey the returned 
hero announces that he will restock the flocks culled to feed the suit-
ors partly “by raiding” (23.357), as if this were merely a matter of pru-
dent management. This behavior appears intended to characterize 
him not as rapacious, but as capable and enterprising, like Achilleus 
in the Iliad, or Menelaos on his return from Troy, or Odysseus’ father, 
Laertes, before him. Even Odysseus’ protective deity, Athene, goddess 
of wisdom, is also known as “Athene, the giver of plunder” (16.207).
	
In a world of low trust such as this, where raids for ­women, slaves, 
livestock, and valuables were commonplace, it is no wonder that 
­xenia developed as a way of offering a guest what he immediately 
needed, and more, before he simply took whatever he could. The 
code of xenia was especially a means of appeasing the leaders of visit­
ing forces and forging alliances. Leaders could bene­fit not only from 
the interchange of goods (as Menelaos says, “there is both honor and 
brilliance in it, and there also is ­profit”; 15.78) but also from the in-
creased capacity of a broader alliance to resist the raids of others or 
to initiate raids against them. For this reason, democratic Athens 
would see xenia as a reactionary legacy of aristocratic privilege.13
	
Extending the boundaries within which cooperation works does 
not remove the temptation to use it for the short-­term advantages of 
competition at a still higher level: “We are motivated to preach and 
impose morality—to exhort and force others to do their duties—
and to punish transgressions, but we are also tempted to cheat when 
we believe we can get away with it.”14 Out on the fringes of the famil-
iar, we often believe that we can get away with it, and in the world of 
Odysseus, doing so is not even seen as cheating. You must look after 
strangers who arrive on your doorstep. But if you arrive on a strang-
er’s, let them take you in—or just take what you want. After all, they 
are outside the circle of cooperation.

	
303
19
THE EVOLUTION OF COOPERATION (2): 
PUNISHMENT
In Homer’s time xenía, hospitality to strangers, enlarged the 
circle of trust in a world where strangers were widely mistrusted. Yet 
xenía’s instability on the fringes of the familiar glaringly illustrates 
the problem of expanding cooperation. Even nearer home, though, 
cooperation can be abused.
	
Free-riding, taking advantage of the bene­fits of cooperation with-
out paying a fair share of the costs, is “the fundamental problem 
of social life.”1 It always offers a short-term advantage and hence a 
temptation, unless punishment reduces bene­fits and increases costs.
	
Penelope’s suitors are free-riders par excellence. As I suggested 
in the previous chapter, Homer largely invents the suitors, at least as 
a virtual army confronting Odysseus. They form an extraordinary 
group: a bunch of noncooperators in competition over a resource, 
Penelope, that only one of them can win, cooperating with each 
other just enough to last for years as noncooperators with the rest of 
their world.
	
At one level, they can be seen as an alliance of young upstarts 
threatening to replace the alpha male. In Chimpanzee Politics prima-
tologist Frans de Waal reports in depth on successive alliances and 
challenges to current leaders in the Arnhem chimpanzee colony. An-
thropologist Robin Fox notes that a youn­ger human generation’s 
challenge to the older generation’s power recurs in epic cross­
culturally, from the Mahabharata to Nordic saga.2 Throughout the 

On the Origin of Stories
304
Iliad and the Odyssey, Homer depicts young males—especially when 
they congregate, like the suitors or the competitors at the Phaiakian 
games—as heedless and reckless, a challenge to order.3
	
At another level, the suitors betray the hope that human social in-
telligence can compensate for the effects of hierarchy. We do share 
the widespread primate urge to dominate, and we feel awe before 
dominance: we are naturally hierarchical. But we also dislike being 
dominated and can form alliances to challenge existing power com-
binations and thereby mitigate hierarchy.
	
Yet the suitors, although they challenge or usurp the absent Odys-
seus’ position at the top of the Ithakan hierarchy, sharply raise the 
cost of anyone else’s lower sta­tus, abusing Eumaios as a slave or Od-
ysseus or Itos as beggars. To the unrecognized Odysseus, Eumaios 
laments that “never again now will I find again a lord as kind as he” 
(14.138–139). The suitors, by contrast, especially their leaders, bolster 
their sense of superiority by stressing the inferiority of those below 
them. When Antinoös refuses bread to Odysseus as beggar, impugn-
ing him as a free-rider, Odysseus rebukes him: “You would not give 
a bit of salt to a servant in your own house, since now, sitting at 
­another’s, you could not take a bit of bread and give it to me” 
(17.455–457). In reply Antinoös hurls a footstool at him, sparking a 
protest even from the other suitors and from Penelope herself.
	
From the moment we first see the suitors, as they ignore Athene 
waiting as the visitor Mentes, through their abuse of the stranger, to 
their final, fatal, feast, the suitors explicitly violate xenia. The essence 
of xenia is reciprocation, but the suitors think only of taking what 
they want—Odysseus’ livestock and wine, and ultimately his wife 
and position—and giving others only insult and injury.
	
Like Aigisthos before he murders Agamemnon, the suitors have 
been warned repeatedly—by Penelope and Telemachos, by their far-
sighted townsmen Mentor and Halitherses, by the prophet Theokly-
menes, and by the omens of the gods—but have heeded nothing. 
Odysseus therefore punishes them for himself, his family, his com-
munity, and the gods.
	
As we saw in Chapter 4, punishment proves essential in establish-
ing cooperation beyond immediate kin. To punish others involves 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
305
costs in time, energy, and the risk of resistance or retaliation, but 
some punishments are more costly to impose than others. Standing 
up firmly to 108 armed suitors, the prime of the local youth, would 
exact too great a price for Telemachos acting alone, even though at 
the bow-contest he proves mightier than any one of them and has 
powerful but distant sympathizers in Nestor and Menelaos. But Od-
ysseus never hesitates to pay the price.
	
Odysseus of course is fired by anger, an emotion that evolved to 
ensure that we resist others’ taking what we consider ours. His world 
does not yet have institutions that can depersonalize punishment by 
sharing across the whole community the burden of detecting in-
fringements and imposing penalties. It therefore operates, like many 
small-scale so­ci­e­ties even today, on the basis of personal revenge. 
If we do not look out for our own, if we do not signal that we will 
make others pay if they infringe our interests, then we can easily be 
exploited: “retaliation is absolutely essential to keep the wolves of 
selfish­ness at bay.”4
	
We can see the social emotions as solutions to the problems of 
commitment in social life.5 If we do not feel anger and sometimes 
act upon it, others may well encroach on our rights. Once an offense 
occurs, of course, full redress may be impossible, but if we lack a 
sense of outrage suf­fi­cient to make us retaliate, others may feel they 
can take piecemeal what is ours—as the suitors do to Odysseus be-
fore he reappears. Once Odysseus has killed Antinoös and told the 
rest he will deal with them the same way, Eurymachos, next among 
the suitors, offers Odysseus compensation from them all for what-
ever he has lost. Odysseus remains implacable: whatever the com-
pensation, “I would not stay my hands from the slaughter, until I had 
taken revenge for all the suitors’ transgressions” (22.63–64).
	
For Odysseus routing the suitors is partly personal retaliation for 
the losses he and his family have suffered through the suitors’ three 
years of feasting. It also reestablishes his honor: he should not 
be messed with—crucial to show in pastoral economies such as Itha-
ka’s, where low population densities make policing dif­fi­cult and the 
wealth concentrated in herd animals is easy to steal and dif­fi­cult to 
guard. In such ecological circumstances, across the world, the best 

On the Origin of Stories
306
form of defense has been a reputation for aggressively retaliating to 
any challenge.6
	
But Odysseus also punishes the suitors as a public duty, as part of 
a commitment to restore order—and his own position as its up-
holder. Even in primate so­ci­e­ties perceived violations of the social 
code are the single most common cause of aggression. Observers 
have noted that “animal so­ci­e­ties often resemble human feudal so­ci­
e­ties in that high-sta­tus individuals typically take on the role of 
­enforcing these implicit social norms, aggressing against those who 
violate them,”7 partly because they have most to gain or lose. In 
­Ithakan society, the norms are explicit rather than implicit, but oth-
erwise the pattern seems identical. Odysseus has more to gain than 
others from reestablishing the social order. By removing the threat of 
the suitors he recon­firms his sole access to his wife, his sole com-
mand of his estate, and his position as first among the Ithakan lords, 
and he scotches the suitors’ plan to murder his son. Homer, indeed, 
shapes his whole epic around Ithaka’s inability to police the suitors’ 
flagrant, protracted violations of the community’s norms until their 
leader returns.
But Homer stresses another side to Odysseus’ confrontation with the 
suitors. They are “sinners” (20.121) who “had first begun the wrong-
doing” (20.394). Odysseus punishes them on behalf of the gods, and 
by the gods’ design, almost at their prompting and certainly with 
their backing.
	
As soon as she hears Telemachos describe the suitors’ conduct, 
Athene declares: “How great your need is now of the absent Odys-
seus, who would lay his hands on these shameless suitors. I wish he 
could come now to stand in the outer doorway of his house, and 
wearing a helmet and carrying shield and two spears” (1.253–256). 
Penelope, Mentor, Halitherses, Nestor, and Menelaos all con­firm that 
mortals as well as gods feel outraged by the suitors, and Zeus in the 
second council of the gods impatiently con­firms Athene’s hope: of 
course “Odysseus shall make his way back, and punish those others” 
(5.23–24). In Hades the seer Teiresias prophesies, even before the 
suitors have begun besieging Penelope, that if Odysseus returns he 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
307
will find “insolent men .  .  . eating away your livelihood .  .  . You 
may  punish the violences of these men, when you come home,” 
­killing them “either by treachery, or openly with the sharp bronze” 
(11.116–120). When at last Odysseus reaches Ithaka, Athene for the 
first time since the start of the story discloses herself to him. Before 
he has even sighted them himself, she tells him to “consider how you 
can lay your hands on these shameless suitors” (13.376). When he de-
clares himself ready to fight with her help against even 300 men, she 
af­firms (13.393–395):
I will indeed be at your side, you will not be forgotten
at the time when we two go to this work, and I look 
for endless
ground to be spattered by the blood and brains of the 
suitors.
	
Throughout the poem, Homer does his utmost to show the ­suitors 
undermining cooperation, taking all for themselves without thought 
of repayment or fear of reprisal. For three years, despite openly of-
fending against reciprocity, xenia, and the gods, they have multiplied 
their misdeeds with impunity, thanks to the safety of numbers and 
the absence of opposing power. Their success amplifies their arro-
gance to the point where it almost calls into question the justice of 
the gods—just as, in the opposite sense, Odysseus’ suffering, despite 
his deserts and devotion to the gods, explicitly raises the question of 
divine justice, in the doubts Athene herself voices in the two Olym-
pian councils. Homer has worked at the problem from both ends: 
the misery of the good, the prosperity of the evil. By having the de-
serving Odysseus enforce the severest penalties against the undeserv-
ing suitors, Homer and Zeus af­firm cooperation and the power of 
punishment to uphold it, even when it seems to have been flouted as 
insolently as the suitors have done.
	
The gods or other supernatural agencies have been invoked to re-
inforce cooperative norms in almost all human so­ci­e­ties. Whatever 
the advantages of cooperation, we, like other social animals, “behave 
selfishly in some contexts,” as indeed we “must to survive any imme-

On the Origin of Stories
308
diate competition for resources.”8 Simple consent rarely sustains co-
operation among many for long,9 especially when we think no one 
will notice our selfish behavior. A community’s common belief in 
the tireless, ubiquitous, invisible vigilance of supernatural agents acts 
as a strong deterrent to uncooperative behavior.
	
From the start of the Odyssey Homer stresses the role of the gods 
in monitoring human behavior, in the prominence he gives in the 
proem to Helios’ punishment of Odysseus’ companions for devour-
ing his sacred cattle, in the central role this incident has in at last 
leaving Odysseus totally isolated on his homeward route, and in re-
peatedly noting and showing the power of the gods to know all.
	
Yet in the Odyssey the most egregious sinners do not hide their 
sin. Indeed the very brazenness of the suitors’ unchecked behavior 
makes them a key challenge to Greek norms and their divine enforc-
ers. Eumaios calls them “that swarm of suitors whose outrageous 
­violence goes up into the iron sky” (15.328–330). For three years, nev-
ertheless, the skies have left them unpunished. But when the suitors 
do fall to Odysseus, he insists that they have been “destroyed by the 
doom of the gods and their own hard actions” (22.413). And Homer 
structures his poem so that from the first we have no doubt of the 
gods’ vigilance, and their preparations for the punishment of the 
suitors, however remote either may seem to the troubled citizens of 
Ithaka.
	
Not only can the gods see all; they will severely punish mortals 
whose conduct offends. Since they are irascible, mortals need to be 
wary about what they do and whom they mix with. Many Greeks re-
turning from Troy pay for Athene’s wrath against them because of 
the rape of a woman in her temple during the sacking of Troy, 
whether or not they had anything to do with it. All Odysseus’ crew 
die for their part in killing and eating the oxen of the sun god despite 
stern warnings not to. Amphinomos proves himself the least selfish 
of the suitors, and Odysseus issues him a warning that Odysseus is 
about to return, and that he should leave before the “reckoning, not 
without blood, between that man and the suitors” (18.149–150). But 
Amphinomos walks back to his seat, not, like the rest of the suitors, 
dismissing the vengeance ahead, yet unable to ­escape. He

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
309
went back across the room, heart saddened within him,
shaking his head, for in his spirit he saw the evil,
but still could not escape his doom, for Athene had 
bound him
fast, to be strongly killed by the hands and spear of 
Telemachos.  (18.153–156)
	
Since the gods are mighty and irascible, they must be appeased. 
Appeasement involves both abiding by their precepts and offering 
sac­ri­fices in tribute. Yet Odysseus has suffered for ten years since the 
end of the Trojan War, despite always honoring the gods (19.363–367):
Surely Zeus hated you
beyond all other men, though you had a godly spirit;
for no man among mortals ever has burned so many
thigh pieces to Zeus who delights in the thunder, nor 
given so many
choice and grand sac­ri­fices.
What does ritual sac­ri­fice have to do with the evolution of coopera-
tion? A good deal, in fact. Evolutionary biology has discovered the 
importance of costly signaling. Senders will often exaggerate signals 
to others—for instance, of their formidableness as rivals or their 
­attractiveness as mates. Costly signals, however, cannot readily be 
faked, since the signals themselves cost senders and indicate that 
they have resources and the readiness to commit them. Rituals are a 
human form of costly signaling. Anthropological studies have con­
firmed that religious groups, such as Israeli kibbutzim, are consis-
tently more cohesive and ­profit­able than their secular equivalents, 
apparently thanks to ritual commitments that increase internal lev-
els of trust.10
	
Being prepared to expend time and valuable meat sacrificing to 
the gods indicates that you take their powers and purposes seri-
ously, and are therefore more likely to abide by the values they en-
dorse—like Zeus’s xenía—than are others who skimp on ritual 
­observance. Odysseus, Nestor, and Menelaos all signal by their elabo-

On the Origin of Stories
310
rate sac­ri­fice their respect for the gods, and therefore their trustwor-
thy place within the nexus of social cooperation. The suitors, by con-
trast, though they do not mock the gods as overtly as the brutish 
Polyphemos, repeatedly pay no heed to the warnings of those who 
do see the signs of the gods. That heedlessness emboldens them to 
ignore even the values that “Zeus who delights in thunder” sup-
ports.
	
If we wish to assess religion’s social bene­fits, its truth matters less 
than its power to motivate.11 So long as they are widely believed, false 
ideas can powerfully spur social cooperation: that the gods can watch 
ev­ery human move, that sooner or later they will punish infringe-
ments, that ritual can signal our respect for them and the precepts 
they safeguard. The contrary notion, that the gods can be ignored 
with impunity, would undermine cooperation among the Greeks. 
Homer structures his whole epic around the contrast between the 
view from Ithaka, where the suitors appear immune from punish-
ment, and our own view, which lets us see from the start the plans of 
the gods to unleash Odysseus on the suitors.
	
Odysseus himself has a larger view than any other mortal within 
the Odyssey, a fact that re­flects both his intelligence and his role as 
exemplar and upholder of his society’s values. Whenever about to 
make an important move, he almost invariably stops and re­flects: is 
this the right choice, practically and “morally,” in terms of the gods’ 
approval? High-level inhibition within the prefrontal cortex is essen-
tial to the human capacity to live by moral codes subtler than other 
animals’ social emotions allow, even though these emotions also un-
derpin human morality.12 But people vary in their impulsivity and 
self-control, and poor self-inhibitors often find themselves eventu-
ally inhibited by others, as the suitors are at last by Odysseus: “Weak 
motivational inhibition is thought to underlie the aggressive prob-
lems of conduct disorder . . . Conduct-disordered children and psy-
chopaths perform poorly on passive avoidance tasks (that require 
response inhibition) as a result of their diminished sensitivity to and 
re­flection on cues for adverse consequences.”13 The suitors pay no 
heed to likely adverse consequences, even when sent by Zeus, and 
therefore Odysseus, by executing his plan, by inhibiting his own out-

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
311
rage at their fresh insults, fi­nally inhibits them. They will be “reck-
less” no more.
Over the years audiences have responded differently to the slaughter 
of the suitors, but most of us agree with the moral pattern of the 
poem as I have summarized it. The suitors act with impunity, as if 
they can escape the usual social give-and-take. They take the goods 
they want and give bad in return. They cooperate against the very 
principle of cooperation and despite repeated warnings assume that 
their numbers place them above retribution. They have it coming.
	
Nevertheless we may also ask ourselves what exactly the often-
noted “violence” of the suitors ac­tually amounts to. Antinoös himself 
admits that they are violent men (21.289–290), but what evidence 
do we see? Antinoös’ throwing a footstool at Odysseus, Ktesippos’ 
throwing a cow’s hoof, the collective plan to kill Telemachos, and 
years of conspicuous freeloading. Should 120 die for this?
	
No, we are likely to agree—although, as the Oxford Classical Dic­
tio­nary notes, under “reciprocity,” the Greek idea of reciprocal justice 
was not an eye for an eye but a head for an eye. The gods themselves 
assume a norm of massive retaliation. Outraged at the affront to her-
self in the Greek forces’ desecration of her temple when they sack 
Troy, Athene ensures that all the Greeks encounter hardship on their 
return, and many ships are lost; on behalf of Helios, Zeus strikes a 
thunderbolt at Odysseus’ ship in return for his men’s killing one of 
the sun god’s sacred oxen, and kills the entire crew, sparing only Od-
ysseus himself. Like mortals, the gods, too, applaud mortal retribu-
tion, like Orestes’ revenge killing not only of Aigisthos but of his own 
mother.
	
Part of us accepts the killing of the suitors because we appreciate 
both the challenge to social cooperation that the shameless free-rid-
ing of the suitors poses, and the need for punishment to eradicate it. 
Part of us simply conforms to the unanimous judgment of Ithaka, its 
neighbors, and the gods against the suitors—and social conformity, 
the sharing of common norms, is itself a powerful contributor to the 
evolution of cooperation.14 Part of us actively thirsts for revenge on 
behalf of Odysseus, Penelope, Telemachos, and Eumaios—even if 

On the Origin of Stories
312
part of us also recognizes that the suitors are not as emphatically or 
uniformly violent as they are made out to be, and deserving of pun-
ishment but hardly eradication. Armed with an evolutionary under-
standing of human nature, we can see both why evolution has built 
into us an impulse for revenge and why nevertheless it is a crude, 
costly emotion that modern systems of impersonal justice have har-
nessed and tamed.15
	
But those systems were not yet invented in Homer’s world. There, 
justice still depended on individuals’ readiness to stand up for their 
own rights, despite the risks.
	
Game-theory models show how cooperation can evolve through 
the simple rule of Tit for Tat: cooperate on the first move, and if the 
other partner does not cooperate in reply, withhold cooperation (or 
actively punish) on the next move. Yet Tit-for-Tat has one serious 
weakness: when one side makes a noncooperative move, the other 
side will do the same in response, and both will find themselves 
locked into a vicious circle of retaliation. Computer simulations sug-
gest lifelike re­finements to the rules to avoid this impasse. “Generous 
tit-for-tat” allows two defections before it punishes, so that cycles 
of  retribution can be avoided—though, in this particular tweak, 
at  the cost of the other side’s realizing just how much it can get 
away with before cooperating again to avoid punishment. In a sense, 
even the harsh world of Odysseus offers a slightly generous tit-for-
tat system, since the gods often issue warnings before exacting penal-
ties. Penelope’s suitors receive repeated warnings, if they would 
only heed them, from the soundest citizens in Ithaka, from Telema-
chos, and via the omens of the gods, and Odysseus even person-
ally  warns Amphinomos, the most reasonable of the suitors. But 
when none acts on the admonitions, even the apprehensive Amphi-
nomos, no room remains for generosity, and retaliation is absolute 
and final.
	
For the suitors, at least. They are dead—but their relatives sur-
vive. And they want to exact revenge on Odysseus and Telemachos 
for slaughtering their sons and brothers. When justice operates at a 
personal level, retributive feuding presents an ever-present risk, as 
Homer shows himself very aware. The epic ends with Antinoös’ fa-

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
313
ther leading the male relatives of the slaughtered suitors in revenge 
against Odysseus and his father and son and their supporters. Eupi-
thes, Antinoös’ father, falls to Laertes, Odysseus’ father. Despite being 
again outnumbered, Odysseus’ side would have won the day, but 
Athene orders the fight­ing to cease, Zeus throws down a warning 
thunderbolt, and Athene instructs Odysseus to “stop this quarrel in 
closing combat, for fear Zeus of the wide brows . . . may be angry 
with you”:
So spoke Athene, and with happy heart he obeyed her.
And pledges for the days to come, sworn to by both sides,
were settled by Pallas Athene, daughter of Zeus of the 
­aegis,
who had likened herself in appearance and voice to 
­Mentor.
Thus ends the Odyssey, with Homer’s tacit admission that he can see 
no mortal solution to breaking the cycle of revenge. The gods inter-
vene because they choose that Odysseus deserves a peaceful old age 
as compensation for his trials and reward for his achievements. But 
only their uncharacteristic intervention has imposed an improbable 
calm.
	
Unlike the Iliad, the Odyssey has from the first signaled a “happy 
ending.” There is no doubt that the “good guy” will defeat the “bad 
guys,” and he does. But although Odysseus triumphs against the 
­suitors, in pitched battle against overwhelming odds, the tone never 
waxes triumphal. When Eurykleia sees the fallen suitors and begins 
“to raise the cry of triumph,” Odysseus silences her: “Keep your joy 
in your heart, old dame; stop, do not raise up the cry. It is not piety to 
glory so over slain men” (22.408–412). Even as he discloses his iden-
tity to Penelope and awaits her final recognition, Odysseus broods 
on the looming retaliation by the suitors’ families and next day braces 
himself reluctantly for another battle. Combat ceases after the first 
death, thanks to the gods’ intervention, but just as in the Iliad, Homer 
closes with a provisional peace: not as brief as the lull at Troy, which 
after all occurs in the middle of a war, but with no lasting con­fi­dence 

On the Origin of Stories
314
that calm can long prevail in human affairs. The Odyssey ends in re-
lief and resignation, and a long way from exultation.
The suitors have subverted cooperation and the Greek attempt to 
­extend it through xenía. They have also perverted hierarchy through 
their arrogance toward both inferiors and superiors. Although it 
seems they might get away with their outrageous conduct, they pay 
the ultimate price. The prudent heads in Ithaka had counseled the 
families of the suitors to curb their sons, as the aged Halitherses re-
minds them when he tries to dissuade them from marching against 
Odysseus (24.451–462).
	
We can see the earlier attempts of Halitherses and Mentor to shame 
the suitors’ families into restraining their unruly sons in the light of 
recent research into cooperation. Evolutionary biologists and econo-
mists have shown not only that monitoring and punishing noncoop-
erators are essential to maintaining reciprocal altruistic cooperation, 
but also that we may face temptation to leave punishment and its 
costs to others—in itself a selfish ploy, rendering punishment 
­perhaps too frail to ensure that cooperation survives. But coopera-
tion be­comes comparatively robust if nonpunishers are themselves 
punished, since there will remain fewer nonpunishers, and therefore 
fewer who ­profit from noncooperativeness, fewer who need to pun-
ish, and, ultimately, fewer who need to punish nonpunishers.
	
Halitherses and Mentor speak against the suitors in the assem-
bly convoked by Telemachos in book 2. Warning of “a great di­sas­ter 
. . . wheeling down” on the suitors, Halitherses urges: “let us think 
how we can make them stop, or better let them stop themselves” 
(2.163–169). Mentor declares to the Ithakans: “I hold it against you 
other people, how you all sit there in silence, and never with an 
­assault of words try to check the suitors, though they are so few, 
and you so many” (2.239–241). But Halitherses and Mentor cannot 
punish the nonpunishers in Ithaka who outnumber them, even if 
those nonpunishers themselves outnumber the offending suitors, 
any more than Telemachos himself can punish the suitors directly, 
though he does reprove them. Nestor and Menelaos also agree on the 
need to punish the suitors, but they live too far away to take respon-
sibility (or action), and can only look forward, like so many others, 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
315
to Odysseus’ return. Only his return and his resolve to take on all the 
suitors, despite the odds, will at last restore the principle of reciproc-
ity.
	
Homer ends the poem with three climaxes: the confrontation with 
the suitors, anticipated from the start; Penelope’s recognition of Od-
ysseus, also expected from the start, but taking us by surprise in its 
dif­fi­culty and details; and the aftermath of the slaughter. In this most 
unexpected ending of all, Homer shows that he is too aware of the 
cost of death—as of course he is throughout the Iliad—to make the 
killing of the suitors the triumph of right over wrong that we almost 
expect. At the close of the poem he stresses the dif­fi­culty of ensuring 
cooperation: the costliness of the failure to punish the suitors earlier, 
before their offenses warranted death; the costliness of the revenge 
the suitors’ families intend; and the necessity and the dif­fi­culty of 
reconciliation, when earlier corrective punishments have been lack-
ing and tensions have been allowed to run too high.
	
Odysseus has strongly personal reasons for anger at the suitors, 
but he also shoulders the burden of the community’s outrage when 
he leads his son and his two loyal herdsmen against them. But 
­because the punishment is personal, even if also on behalf of all, it 
precipitates personal revenge and a cycle of bloodletting that Homer 
can stanch only through the gods’ intervention.
	
In highlighting Odysseus’ central role in meting out punishment 
and restoring order in Ithaka, the Odyssey implicitly supports a firm 
hierarchy headed by one individual, although it softens the effects 
of his dominance by stressing his sympathy for beggars, strangers, 
and suppliants and others below him—or at least those who honor 
the values of sympathy and hierarchy. Hierarchies converging on 
single individuals have remained the norm in larger-scale so­ci­e­ties 
for most of history ever since, in monarchies and autocracies, and 
although we have invented new ways of distributing power in de-
mocracies, power still concentrates in the hands of leaders.
	
Although we may not agree with the arrangements entrenched 
by autocracy or with justice in the form of massive, bloody revenge, 
we can see the problems that cooperation entails, the attempted so-
lutions Greek society has invented, and the challenges the suitors 
pose. The social emotions evolved to help humans and other animals 

On the Origin of Stories
316
solve problems of cooperation. Building on such dispositions, local 
­cultural institutions allow us to extend cooperation still further, in 
Homer’s society through norms like xenía and a belief in the gods as 
monitors and admonishers of mortal doings. Since Homer we have 
invented new ways of distributing power and responsibility, of de-
tecting crime and administering punishment so as to break the cycle 
of transgression and personal retaliation. Yet we still accept the 
need for hierarchy, for concentrating power and responsibility, and 
we still feel a visceral desire to punish those who unfairly exploit the 
cooperation that makes social life possible and potentially ­profit­able 
to us all.
	
Our own solutions remain imperfect, and we still need to extend 
cooperation further, and to fine-tune the detection and punishment 
of noncooperation. But the underlying emotions are the same, even 
if inflected by local norms. Our awareness of the sheer dif­fi­culty of 
establishing cooperation, of the distance we have come and the dis-
tance we need to go, be­comes all the sharper when we look at the 
similarities and differences between Homer’s world and ours.
The Odyssey galvanizes our moral emotions, and thereby holds our 
attention through our desire, with Athene, to see Odysseus reap his 
just rewards, and our desire, with Athene and most of the mortals 
in the story, to see the suitors get their just deserts. The poem relies 
on and rouses our moral emotions, and it de­fines and vividly dem-
onstrates, chiefly by contrast, the principles of xenía and divine jus-
tice that build on these emotions: Polyphemos eating his guests and 
mocking the idea of guest-gifts; the suitors hurling abuse and injury 
at Odysseus and Eumaios; Eumaios offering the beggarly Odysseus 
ev­ery­thing at his disposal; Odysseus, Telemachos, and Eumaios, 
aided by Athene, punishing the suitors. For the original audience a 
public performance of the Odyssey would have helped to clarify and 
consolidate Greek social principles and, simply by reiterating the 
norms so memorably and publicly, to con­firm for the whole audi-
ence that all share these emotions and recognize these norms.
	
Homer reinforces xenía, the gods’ role as arbiters of justice, and, 
ultimately, the principle of cooperation. Through his characters he 
repudiates and exorcizes free-riders, exalts punishers, and rebukes 

	
The Evolution of Cooperation (2): Punishment
	
317
nonpunishers. Mentor and Halitherses reproach the people of Ithaka 
for not having punished the suitors earlier, and the leader of those 
whom they reproach, the father of the foremost and most offensive 
of the suitors, Antinoös, is killed, the last person to die in this tale 
of  the deaths of hundreds upon hundreds. Some have concluded 
that the last book-and-a bit of the Odyssey, after the re­union of Od-
ysseus and Penelope, could not have been composed by the author of 
the rest of the poem. But an awareness of the problems of the evolu-
tion of cooperation explains why the story ends where it does, and 
why the ending is both right and unsatisfying. Odysseus’ actions 
solve the problem of cooperation as well as possible, given the emo-
tions and the institutions prevailing in his world; yet Homer lets us 
sense that the problem is not really solved—as, of course, it is still 
not solved for us, even if we have found means to establish coopera-
tion on a much larger scale and a sometimes surer basis than in 
Homer’s world.


part 5
O N T O G E N Y :  H O R T O N  H E A R S  A  W H O !
“I know it is wet 
And the sun is not sunny. 
But we can have 
Lots of good fun that is funny!”
Dr. Seuss, The Cat in the Hat (1957)

 

	
321
20
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS: WORKING AT PLAY
If bright three-year-olds can understand and enjoy Dr. 
Seuss’s picture-­story book Horton Hears a Who! (1954), why does it 
need adult analysis? Theodor Geisel, the man behind the Seuss name, 
claimed he dropped out of Oxford and the Sorbonne—not that he 
had clambered far in—because “they were taking life too damn seri-
ously.”1 But a serious investigation of his funny little children’s book 
need not be too serious, and it can be serious enough only if it adds 
to the fun. And although even the very young can appreciate Dr. 
Seuss, we can understand literary works, like anything else, at differ-
ent levels. I want to show that a biocultural approach makes it possi-
ble to explain stories both more comprehensively and more precisely 
than through other current approaches.
	
Like Homer, Dr. Seuss appeals to his audience over multiple gen-
erations and multiple readings. In Homer’s case the lack of docu-
mentary evidence makes it dif­fi­cult to tell where his own contribu-
tions start and stop, and where the tradition or other individuals 
have shaped what we at­tri­bute to him. In Dr. Seuss’s case we have 
rich evidence for his work and its contexts. His classic children’s 
books allow us to explore another origin of stories: not their histori-
cal or phylogenic but their individual or ontogenic origin. As we saw 
in Chapter 12, the earliest stories that children “compose” are rudi-
mentary, evanescent, improvised, as much play as story, de­pen­dent 
on their situation, and not easily reproducible. Dr. Seuss’s stories by 
contrast prove ideal specimens—as “replicable” as sci­en­tific experi-
ments—for investigating the origin of stories.
	
The brevity and modernity of Dr. Seuss’s children’s stories allow 

On the Origin of Stories
322
us not only the maximum contrast with Homer but also a conve-
niently compact example that leaves us space to introduce some 
­general principles of an evolutionary approach to literature and crit-
icism. Apart from standard concerns—author, work, audience, con-
text; intention, effect, meaning; interpretation, evaluation, explana-
tion—we will follow three main lines: (1) a problem-­solution model 
that links the long term of evolution to the short term of an author 
making choices about this or that detail; (2) earning attention as 
prior to generating meaning in the problems an author faces; and (3) 
a multileveled system of explanation.
	
I propose four interconnected levels of explanation appropriate 
to Dr. Seuss’s story or any other work of literature: a universal level, 
which considers aspects of human nature in general; a local level, 
which focuses on particular cultural, historical, social, economic, 
technological, intellectual, or artistic contexts; an individual level, 
which assesses the dispositions and experience of an author (or, 
­alternatively, of a reader or critic); and a particular level, which ex-
amines the spe­cific problem situation of the author composing this 
story, or of a reader reading it in a certain situation (for the first time 
or the nth time) or for a given purpose.
The Origins of the Story
Bright young readers and their parents almost never realize what 
prompted Dr. Seuss to write Horton Hears a Who! Nor do they need 
to. While we normally understand what others do and say partly 
through inferring intentions from contexts, we often know nothing 
about works of art other than their appeal for attention. The more 
surely something rates as a work of art, the more it can appeal to us 
in­de­pen­dently of its origin. Horton Hears a Who! succeeds on its own 
terms: as the story of a kindly elephant who unhesitatingly offers to 
protect the tiny Whos who call for help from a dust speck. The other 
jungle animals, who cannot hear the Whos, not only deride him for 
his eccentricity but threaten to cage him and boil the clover on which 
the dust speck settled. Only when Horton exhorts the Whos to make 
themselves heard, and all shout together, even a last young boy who 

	
Problems and Solutions
	
323
had shirked the initial call to add his voice, do the other animals hear 
the Whos, realize Horton was right all along, and vow to help him 
protect his minuscule charges.
	
Nevertheless we do know the origin of Horton Hears a Who!—and 
it proves most unexpected. Dr. Seuss traveled to Japan in 1953, a year 
after the end of the Allied occupation. As he later recalled: “I con-
ceived the idea of Horton Hears a Who! from my experiences there 
. . . Japan was just emerging, the people were voting for the first time, 
running their own lives—and the theme was obvious: ‘A person’s a 
person, no matter how small,’ though I ­don’t know how I ended 
up using elephants. And of course when the little boy stands up and 
yells ‘Yopp!’ and saves the whole place, that’s my statement about 
voting—ev­ery­one counts.”2
	
Academics have acted on this knowledge. Ruth MacDonald writes 
that Horton “represents postwar United States in the international 
community of nations. The Whos of Who-­ville are Dr. Seuss’s char-
acterization of the Japanese after Hiroshima, a people whom he 
found optimistic, hardworking, and particularly eager to vote in 
their elections.”3 Historian Richard Minear concurs: “If Who-­ville is 
Japan, Horton must stand for the United States.”4 But there seem 
to be many steps missing between such an origin and such a mean-
ing. How did Dr. Seuss’s desire to foster democracy in Japan lead, as 
he wonders himself, to Horton the elephant and the microscopic 
Whos? And why should we read the story in terms of 1953 politics? 
The story’s text does not direct us there: Horton is an elephant, and 
about to be caged by a family of jungle monkeys, the Wickershams, 
and a mother-­child pair of kangaroos; if he is the United States, who 
would they be? A political allegory would be a strange key to a story 
aimed at children too young to follow current politics and at future 
readers.
	
I suggest two related problems here. First, the academic impulse 
to search for meaning results from not really understanding the key 
problem facing storytellers, the need to secure and maximize their 
audiences’ attention. Second, the origin of Dr. Seuss’s story lies much 
deeper than 1953, both in himself as an individual and in the human 
nature he shares and appeals to.

On the Origin of Stories
324
Problems and Solutions in Life and Art
Let me offer a model of artistic explanation that focuses on artists’ 
problems and solutions and can lead us to what we genuinely enjoy 
in Dr. Seuss. This model builds from the ground up, links science 
and art, and takes us from the long term of evolution to the moment 
of the individual artist trying to solve this problem in this work.
	
Biologically we can see all organisms as problem-­solvers, each ac-
tion or pro­cess as an attempt to solve a problem, however minor or 
routine. Evolution generates problems and solutions as it generates 
life. Rocks may crack and erode, but they do not have problems. They 
do not lose anything if they do not maintain or pass on their form. 
Amoebas and apes do. Natural selection creates complex new possi-
bilities, and therefore new problems, as it assembles self-­sustaining 
organisms piecemeal, cycle after cycle, by generating partial solu-
tions, testing them, and regenerating from the basis of the best solu-
tions available in the current cycle. In time, it can create richer solu-
tions to richer problems.
	
Species are integrated systems of spe­cific solutions—developmen-
tal patterns, organs, and behaviors—to recurrent problems in multi-
farious modes of life, especially to the persistent unpredictability of 
the environment. Sexual reproduction partially solves the problem of 
unpredictability by maximizing variations in form—new sets of pos-
sible genetic solutions—while still reproducing overall design. Flexi-
ble behavior solves the problem of unpredictability at the level of the 
organism by opening up new options for action. Minds solve the 
problem of directing agents to better choices for future actions, espe-
cially by predicting the near future from the present via patterns rel-
evant to a species in its past. Sociality solves the problem of gaining 
the most from pooling individual capacities. Culture solves the prob-
lem of making available to the whole group behavioral solutions 
more responsive to novel circumstances than genetic evolution can 
offer.
	
Any solution can create new problems. Play solves the new prob-
lem that if organisms need to learn flex­i­ble behaviors, they cannot 
come fully preloaded. It encourages animals especially while young 
to enjoy repeating actions in intense or extreme forms in situations 

	
Problems and Solutions
	
325
in which they will not face life-­or-­death risks, until responses be-
come both rapid and automatic yet finely sensitive to conditions. 
Art, I have suggested, solves a similar problem for humans. We derive 
most of our advantages from intelligence, and our minds solve the 
new problem of maximizing their capacity to pro­cess information 
patterns in flex­i­ble ways, in low-­risk situations, through the cogni-
tive play of art, our compulsive engagement in high-­intensity doses 
of the patterns that matter most to us.
	
A desire for sta­tus solves the new problem that the solution of 
­sociality causes: the need to compete for the resources that social liv-
ing makes available. Because of sexual reproduction, humans other 
than identical twins are genetically unique, and our differences are 
compounded by our natural and cultural behavioral flex­i­bil­ity. Our 
ultrasocial species gains still more from sociality than other species, 
partly through our capacity and desire to imitate others; but we solve 
the corresponding problem of maximizing our sta­tus and our access 
to the rich resources our ultrasociality earns by making the most 
of our considerable differences. We assess our individual capacities 
in comparison with those of others, and develop those abilities that 
offer us the greatest chance of success in competition with our peers. 
Through the rigorous techniques of behavioral genetics, Judith Rich 
Harris eliminates the usual explanations for the bulk of human per-
sonality difference (55 percent) unaccountable for by genetic varia-
tion. Comparing identical, nonidentical, and ­adopted and non­
adopted twins and nontwins, she shows that most nongenetic 
personality difference results not from environment (which accounts 
for about 9 percent) but from what she calls the “sta­tus system” 
within each of us: “the sta­tus system searches for self-­knowledge in 
the social cues provided by others. It then uses this information to 
plot a long-­term strategy that will involve direct competition only in 
those areas of endeavor in which the individual has a hope of suc-
ceeding and, if possible, avoid competition in other arenas. The re-
sult is that individuals seek unoccupied niches; they specialize in dif-
ferent things.”5
	
One way in which humans can specialize is through art, through 
providing occasions for cognitive play that engage the attention of 
others and thereby earn sta­tus and access to resources. As artistic 

On the Origin of Stories
326
modes and traditions develop, they accumulate extensive repertoires 
of problems and solutions for earning attention and so modify audi-
ence expectations. As individual artists specialize within an artistic 
tradition, they will also accumulate over years of creative effort per-
sonal repertoires of artistic problems and solutions that make the 
most of their individual difference and allow their work to earn at-
tention by their novel recombinations. In each new work they will 
seek to raise the bene­fit—the attention-­earning power—of their 
compositional efforts and lower their composition costs, through 
­recombining existing solutions in new ways, while also raising the 
bene­fits and lowering their audience’s costs in time and effort.
	
All this may sound abstract, but with Dr. Seuss as subject I prom-
ised fun. Ted Geisel singled out as his niche making the most of the 
spirit of play that underlies art. It earned him high sta­tus—acclaim 
as a classic and a genius—and it earned him rich resources as he sold, 
among much else, hundreds of millions of Dr. Seuss books.
Dr. Seuss: Working at Play
From his youth Geisel made the most of his singular ability and in-
clination to make others laugh. He turned these into his specialty: he 
worked and worked and worked at play. In high school he was voted 
class wit and artist. At Dartmouth College he channeled almost all 
his energies into the college humor magazine, Jack o’ Lantern, as its 
editor and most frequent contributor;6 a college contemporary later 
recalled: “That he is a rare and loopy genius has been common 
knowledge from an early epoch of his undergrad troubles.”7 When 
he was just twenty-­four his extravagantly Seussian cartoons for an in-
sect spray, Flit, caused such a sensation across America that an adver-
tising magazine could proclaim: “The most momentous theme of 
the summer of 1928 was not Prohibition, presidential election, avia-
tion, or world peace. It was mosquitoes.”8 From 1929 his work was fa-
mous enough to be published in collected form, year after year, and to 
earn the homage of parody. In the 1930s he became a one-­man indus-
try producing laugh lines like the unprecedented, idiosyncratically 
comic Seuss Navy advertising campaign he created for Essomarine.
	
Dr. Seuss’s individuality leaps out from almost ev­ery­thing he pro-

	
Problems and Solutions
	
327
duced after settling on his pseudonym at twenty-­four: from ev­ery il-
lustration, from ev­ery story in his children’s books, and if not from 
ev­ery phrase he wrote, then from all the verse of his mature chil-
dren’s stories. He confessed, mock-­apologetically: “I have a Seuss 
astigmatism in both eyes so that I see things as if they’ve been put 
through a Mixmaster or viewed through the wrong end of a tele-
scope. It’s not intentional. That’s just the way I see things.”9 In 1952, 
the year before he wrote Horton Hears a Who!, he lamented that most 
adults lose their capacity to laugh as freely as they did as children,10 
and he set out to remedy the situation.
Play and Thought
Dr. Seuss developed his intense sense of nonsense by rethinking play 
from the roots of thought up. In Chapter 10 we saw how our capac-
ity to understand events begins with our intuitive understanding of 
things, kinds, bond and minds, with our folk physics, biology, sociol-
ogy, and psychology. Dr. Seuss learned how to turn each systemati-
cally into play.
	
Developmental psychologists test infants’ first understandings of 
their world by noting which categories they see as the same (and 
therefore not worth fresh notice) or different (and therefore worth 
new attention, as they look ­longer at an image or suck harder on 
a teat in concentration). Similarity and difference, identity and rep-
etition, underlie logic and mathematics and all understanding, and 
Dr. Seuss plays on them with aplomb. Throughout his artistic life 
he loved to confuse same and different in images like deer whose 
horns—or men whose beards—grow together. In an enchanting 
cover of Judge magazine his humor derives almost entirely from the 
comical repetition of parents’ profiles and poses in their offspring. 
A Seussian mother has twenty-­three sons and names them all Dave. 
From the book The 500 Hats of Bar­thol­o­mew Cubbins Dr. Seuss 
leaped to the film The 5000 Fingers of Dr. T. On one page of Scram-
bled Eggs Super the Single-­File Zummzian Zuks advance in a soft 
Seussian curve from infinity, identical except as they dwindle sinu-
ously into the distance. On another page, fif­teen solo representatives 
of fif­teen preposterous species strut below two families of identical 
birds, one family all equal in size, the other all steadily diminishing.

On the Origin of Stories
328
	
Intuitive physics unfolds so early in young minds that by eight 
months infants have a basic understanding of folk physics, a “theory 
of things.” Dr. Seuss never lost a childlike fascination with the fun to 
be had with the rudiments of physics, with gravity, height, depth, 
size, in unstable piles or arrays (the Cat in the Hat’s fish in a bowl on 
a rake on a cat on a ball, or turtles precariously stacked below Yertle) 
or heavyweights hoisted aloft (a whale in a tree or on a volcano, a 
cow milked as she flies) or animals endlessly out of kilter.
	
After theory of things children develop a theory of kinds, a capac-
ity to distinguish between natural kinds and artifacts, and between 
kinds of natural things. Children and adults alike naturally notice 
difference in animal forms and readily recall animal names, but no 
one creates critters crazier than Dr. Seuss in nature, name, number, 
Dr. Seuss: 
cover of Judge 
magazine, 
June 1933.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Problems and Solutions
	
329
and form, in his If I Ran the Zoo and If I Ran the Circus, in his 
Schnopps and Sneetches and tizzle-­topped tufted Mazurkas galore.
	
Before age three, children understand the difference between nat-
ural kinds and artifacts, and know to look for the identity of natural 
kinds but for the function of artifacts. Dr. Seuss turns function to 
play in his Fix-­it-­Up Chappie’s Star-­On and Star-­Off Machines (The 
Sneetches) or the nameless but handy and many-­handed cleaner-­
upper machine that allows the Cat in the Hat to restore order after 
making mayhem while the sun is not sunny.
	
During the “terrible twos,” children begin to understand the rudi-
ments of social relationships. Dr. Seuss exploits these, too, in his play 
with attachment (Matilda the Elephant, who yearns to rear a chicka-
dee chick), with cooperation (Horton helping the Whos), competi-
tion (the North-­Going and the South-­Going Zax refusing to yield to 
or bypass one another), sta­tus (the Sneetches priding themselves on 
having or not having stars), domination (Yertle standing on his fel-
low turtles), exploitation (the parasites infesting Thidwick’s mighty 
antlers).
	
The last, most sophisticated, and computationally most challeng-
ing of these intuitive understandings to emerge is theory of mind. As 
we have noted, children do not attain an assuredly human theory of 
mind until age five. Accordingly Dr. Seuss plays with theory of mind 
sparingly but, as we shall see in Horton Hears a Who!, in a form he 
makes telling and accessible even for the young.
Play as Boundary-Crossing
Recent research into religion shows that we particularly notice and 
recall whatever crosses intuitive ontological boundaries.11 The same 
surprise factors work in play. Even before he became Dr. Seuss, Ted 
Geisel tirelessly undermined ontological barriers, between natural 
and ar­ti­fi­cial (an animal with an umbrella for a tail, a bird with a 
strawberry for a body and metal nuts for knees, a kangaroo whose 
pouch is a flower-­vase) or between one species and another (fish 
with antlers, deep-­sea chamois). Dr. Seuss subverts the human-­
animal boundary through an extravagantly overt anthropomorphiz-
ing that makes animal features both easy to read and distinctively 
and outrageously Seussian: “None of my animals have joints and 

On the Origin of Stories
330
none of them balance .  .  . none of them are animals. They’re all 
­people.”12
Play and Line
Even when he draws a single image of an ordinary animal or arti-
fact Dr. Seuss remains unmistakably Seussian, unmistakably playful 
in his uniquely recognizable way. In The Expression of the Emotions 
Darwin, describing what he called “the principle of antithesis,” 
showed how all aspects of a dog’s stance, expression, and movement 
are contrasted in moods of anger and moods of joy. It would be hard 
to better his characterization of the joyful or playful state as “flexu-
ous movements.”13 This looseness of position, movement, and ex-
pression has evolved in pointed contrast to serious behavior precisely 
in order to send an unambiguous signal of playfulness. Although we 
and other animals easily “read” playfulness in others, it took a Seuss 
to “write” it in images. By the time he was twenty-­five he had devel-
oped a graphic style marked by an exuberant lolloping loopiness that 
he never abandoned. His soft curves signal the relaxed and harm-
less.14 Even ugly, fearsome, smug, or tragic fig­ures seem almost be-
guiling in his world of supple sinuosity. And he made his animals not 
only playful but comically human, from the long flat floppy feet of 
his quadrupeds, to their wide-­mouthed smiles, with ancillary smiles 
even in the creases at the corners of their mouths, and their eyes wide 
open with whites showing or softly shut in serene beatitude, with 
each closed eyelid itself a smile, beneath sweet-­surprised humanoid 
eyebrows.
Playing with Expectation
Minds are bundles of expectations. The better we anticipate what 
happens next, the better moves we can make. The better we predict 
others’ ideas, intentions, and actions, the more we have over them—
although they will also try to predict our next moves. As we saw in 
Chapter 3, the capacity to anticipate others and how they will antici-
pate us has been a main driver of intelligence. And not only in com-
petition: we can also anticipate others for cooperative ends, like dol-
phins or humans hunting or playing together.

	
Problems and Solutions
	
331
	
Predators and enemies prefer to take their victims by surprise. But 
surprise, like expectation, can be used not just competitively but also 
cooperatively, not just for antagonism but also for friendship. Play 
and laughter test expectations, pushing them to or beyond usual lim-
its. In social play or humor we catch others off guard not to over-
come them but only to unbalance them just long enough to invite 
their gleeful rebound. Playful humor outruns others’ expectations 
not to defeat but to delight them.15
	
In humans and other animals that enjoy tickles, play-­fights, and 
peekaboo, the most unexpected movements cause the most intense 
squeals or pants of laughter—provided a friendly atmosphere has 
been established, especially through the relaxed expressions, pos-
tures, and movements of play. Play and humor work best not when 
we are caught completely unawares but when we are primed for sur-
prise yet still find our expectations outstripped, as when an infant 
expects a tickle or boo but cannot know just where, when, or how—
or when we turn a new page in Dr. Seuss.
	
When humor at its best transforms the outstripping of expecta-
tions from threat to treat, it af­firms how much our minds share even 
as we push into the unlikely or unknown. No one captures that af­fir­
ma­tion of what we share, even in wild surprise, better than Dr. 
Seuss.
From “Classic!” to Classic
In advertisements, cartoons, magazine covers, and stories, Dr. Seuss’s 
images and swoopy humor caught the eyes of readers across Amer-
ica. From the late 1920s his work brought him wealth and fame, but 
he wanted more. Books would allow him to hold an audience and 
invite them to return and reread. Books could pay more, they could 
highlight his name, they could keep his achievement in permanent 
rather than ephemeral form. His advertising contract with Standard 
Oil allowed him children’s books as his only sideline, but this acci-
dent coincided with his natural penchant for play.
	
Although little of Dr. Seuss’s early work had consisted of sus-
tained stories, much of it had a strong narrative streak. From the first 
he had turned character and event, the core of story, into play, from 

On the Origin of Stories
332
his invented creatures of ev­ery stripe and species to his fantastic situ-
ations—like the Flit advertisements, under the catchcry “Quick, 
Henry, the Flit,” featuring, say, a tightrope walker on the verge of a 
backward topple, or a bullfighter inches from a snorting bull, but 
each panicked instead by diving mosquitoes.16
	
Dr. Seuss’s visual language had become very much his own by 
1929, although he still had more to learn. His verbal playfulness had 
developed even earlier, and had been inventive from the start, but 
was still lax, prolix, and lame in much of his output of the 1920s and 
1930s. Just as he worked to turn logic, physics, biology, technology, 
and sociology into play, just as he turned line and color, expression, 
posture, gesture, movement, and form into an inviting game, so he 
gradually learned to make his verbal play match the punch of his vi-
sual game.
	
In traditional verse around the world the need to focus and refo-
cus attention has led to rhythm and to line-­lengths of about three 
seconds, perhaps in instinctive re­flection of the three-­second span of 
the human conscious present.17 But in most of his children’s books 
Dr. Seuss returns through this adult norm to the childhood play be-
hind it. He selects an anapestic rhythm that like nursery rhymes and 
unlike the iambic norm of En­glish poetry skips around natural En­
glish intonations: dit-­dit-­DA dit-­dit-­DA dit-­dit-­DA dit-­dit-­DA. 
(As if to con­firm Ellen Dissanayake’s claim for the importance of 
mother-­infant protoconversations as a start for art, Geisel recalled 
that it was his mother more than anyone else who was responsible 
“for the rhythms in which I write and the urgency with which I do 
it.”)18 He twists and plays with words in sense, sound, syntax, word 
formation, names, rhythm, and rhyme. He had always been meticu-
lous, but he became even more of a perfectionist, taking care with 
ev­ery word, “rewriting tediously, draft after draft,” so that his readers 
could read without a care except to read on: “He insisted on momen-
tum in his work and demanded excitement. Ted wanted to write a 
book whose young readers would ‘turn page after page’ until there 
were no more.”19
	
Even after his first picture books, Dr. Seuss tried other media: 
­political cartoons, films for the U.S. forces in World War II, sculp-
ture, painting, and more. Movies could earn the largest audience of 

	
Problems and Solutions
	
333
all, but despite a string of Oscar successes, he preferred the creative 
in­de­pen­dence and control of writing and illustrating his books. He 
succeeded so well as a children’s author that by 1959, at the end of his 
most creative de­cade, Rudolf Flesch could write: “A hundred years 
from now . . . children and their parents will still eagerly read the 
books of a fellow called Ted Geisel . . . I predict that Dr. Seuss will 
emerge as one of the great classics of this era.”20
	
Homer composed in the high art form of his time. Dr. Seuss knew 
that his world, unlike Homer’s, was saturated with multiple appeals 
to attention and that within that cacophony his children’s books 
were considered “a second-­class citizen of the arts,”21 but he pains-
takingly marshaled his stories through ev­ery stage of the production 
pro­cess. His care paid off, selling over 400 million Dr. Seuss books 
and earning the affection of generations of readers.
	
From as early as Dr. Seuss’s first children’s book, And to Think That 
I Saw It on Mulberry Street (1938), Clifton Fadiman praised him for 
writing for adults as well as for children, despite the simplicity of his 
stories and the breeziness of his draftsmanship.22 Seuss took pride 
in composing for both children and the adults who might read to 
them—or merely for their own plea­sure: adults learning to read in 
En­glish prisons spurned other children’s books but eagerly devoured 
Dr. Seuss.23 He wrote so that his stories would captivate imaginations 
young and old, impel them through to the end, and provide new 
plea­sures upon rereading. He wrote for immediate success, and 
achieved it, but also for future audiences. He could be topical, as in 
his Prohibition protests as a student cartoonist (his family had been 
brewers) or in his World War II political cartoons, but over the course 
of his career he aimed his highly individual sense of play more 
squarely at the universal, toward the plea­sure of toppling our shared 
expectations. He wrote for audiences young and old, first-­time and 
repeat, present and future, native and foreign. Like Homer, he made 
himself a classic.

334
21
LEVELS OF EXPLANATION: 
UNIVERSAL, LOCAL, AND INDIVIDUAL
Dr. Seuss recalled that he wrote Horton Hears a Who! because 
he wanted to encourage democracy in Japan after his visit there. No 
one else, not even another children’s writer of genius, would have 
started from that problem and reached anything remotely like his 
solution. Looking back, even he wondered how he “ended up using 
elephants.”1
	
I have begun to suggest, and will go on to show in more detail, 
how we can explain Dr. Seuss’s special stamp and Horton Hears a 
Who! in particular by seeing artists as individual problem-solvers 
aiming above all to earn the attention of their audiences. Especially 
enduring artists arrive at solutions that appeal richly to human cog-
nitive universals, even as the most con­fi­dent of them in­ten­sify their 
own idiosyncrasies in order to catch attention by their difference 
from others. Dr. Seuss made the most of his uniqueness by refining 
his individual ways of appealing to universals like our predilection 
for cognitive play, for story, for the plea­sures of amused surprise.
	
Explanations of art in terms of individual artists’ shaping their 
work to appeal to human nature may seem not only natural but even 
obvious. Yet they are out of line with much recent academic criti-
cism, which tends to underplay both the individual and the univer-
sal. Let me compare the current norm of academic criticism with an 
evolutionary model based on problems and solutions and on univer-
sal, individual, and particular as well as local levels of explanation.

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
335
Cultural Critique: The Local as Standard
Much criticism, especially recent academic criticism, has overstressed 
the local, the limited perspectives of an era, and understressed other 
levels of explanation, especially the commonalities of human nature 
as the subject and object of stories, and storytellers as individuals 
and as solvers of particular artistic problems in each work. Scholarly 
insistence on the differences between one time or place or culture 
and others makes it hard to account for the success of art across gen-
erations and frontiers. I concur with the Ghanaian-American phi-
losopher Kwame Anthony Appiah that we approach art “not through 
identity but despite difference. We can respond to art that is not ours; 
indeed, we can only fully respond to ‘our’ art if we move beyond 
thinking of it as ours and start to respond to it as art . . . My people—
human beings—made the Great Wall of China, the Sistine Chapel, 
the Chrysler Building: these things were made by creatures like me, 
through the exercise of skill and imagination.”2
	
Historian Richard Minear criticizes Dr. Seuss for his “willful am-
nesia” about the devastation of Japan that American bombing caused 
in World War II. Despite his disclaimers, he also reproves Dr. Seuss 
for not being “qualitatively different from his contemporaries . . . 
racism was an ingredient in much if not all American wartime think-
ing about Japan.” Minear’s attitude typifies the currently dominant 
critical mode, Cultural Critique, which critiques past perspectives 
from the standpoint of the present: “In visceral fashion, Dr. Seuss’s 
cartoons, films, and books from that era take us back into a mind-set 
that reminds us painfully of the pitfalls of racism, of the distance we 
have traveled.”3 There is indeed a whiff of hysteria in Dr. Seuss’s de-
piction of the Japanese in his political cartoons of 1941–42, although 
we can hardly call it racism, since the prime target of his exaspera-
tion was America’s false sense of security and refusal to join the ­Allies 
in resisting the aggressive imperialism of Germany, Italy, and Japan. 
And Minear’s historicist indictment of Dr. Seuss is both too narrow 
and too blunt, since it underplays his particular artistic problems 
and his individual way of deploying universals to solve them.
	
By the time he wrote Horton Hears a Who!, Geisel’s attitude to Ja-

On the Origin of Stories
336
pan had long been his own, unlike his unre­flect­ing acceptance of 
crude racial and ethnic stereotypes as a source for humor in the 
1920s, in his early twenties. In the political cartoons he began pro-
ducing in 1941 Dr. Seuss had stressed the dangers of American isola-
tionism in the face of both German and Japanese aggression, and 
­after Pearl Harbor, he had briefly warned about the dangers of Japa-
nese immigrants in the American West, even as he also began to sati-
rize racial prejudice, against blacks, Jews, or anyone else. General 
Douglas MacArthur considered his film for the American army 
headed for Japan, Your Job in Japan (1945), too sympathetic to the 
Japanese to be screened.4 Geisel and his wife Helen then cowrote 
the film Design for Death (1947), which “portrayed the Japanese peo-
ple as victims of seven centuries of class dictatorship.”5 Geisel de-
scribed it to a friend as “an attempt to show the means used on one 
particular nation to whip its people into war. But the point we try 
to make is that this particular nation is no different, ac­tually, than 
any other.”6
	
Geisel’s personal response to postwar Japan after his 1953 trip, his 
desire to promote democracy there, seems a concern remote from 
his usual audience, whether in the United States or in Japan. But in 
his desire to interest children and adults he transformed the initial 
impulse to advocate the value of even the smallest voice from a 
­message of contemporary political relevance into a timeless tale. In 
search of an appeal to all he over­comes the limitations of his time, 
as he had not transcended those limitations when he used racial and 
ethnic stereotyping as a source of humor in his youthful work. That 
work of the mid-1920s holds no interest now except as a sad testi-
mony to the pervasiveness of racial prejudice early in the twentieth 
century. His mature work by contrast appeals because it does not 
merely re­flect his time. Just as in his brilliant satire of racism, The 
Sneetches, also written in 1953, Dr. Seuss tries to engage the imagina-
tions of children in Horton Hears a Who! by appealing to human 
ethical universals, to values of individual and community, of in­de­
pen­dence and interde­pen­dence, of support for the weak and for the 
strong, common to Japan and the United States and to human be-
ings ev­erywhere.

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
337
Historicism: The Local as Cause
Minear inappropriately impugns Dr. Seuss for accepting the stereo-
types of his time, but at least he uses some personal detail—Dr. 
Seuss’s political cartoons of 1941–42 and his trip to Japan—to do so. 
But sometimes in the past, and often in recent Cultural Critique, 
criticism has allowed even less room for the individual as it elevates 
the supposed distinctiveness of an era into a causal trump card. Re-
cent literary theory has tended to treat cultures or so­ci­e­ties as almost 
autonomous agents, and literary works as impersonal texts, even “so-
cial texts,” and to underplay both the universal (“Man does not exist 
prior to language, either as a species or an individual”: Roland Bar-
thes)7 and the individual (“Since the 1960s, criticism . . . has denied, 
on theoretical grounds, the relevance of the single historically defin-
able author”: A. R. Braunmuller).8
	
Literary critic Louis Menand, for instance, claims that “The Cat in 
the Hat was a Cold War invention. His [Dr. Seuss’s] value as an ana-
lyst of the psychology of his time, the late nineteen-fifties, is readily 
appreciated: transgression and hypocrisy are the principal themes of 
his little story.”9 In one sense, the first claim is irrefutable: The Cat in 
the Hat was written during the Cold War. But Menand’s phrasing 
seems to imply that the book was invented as a consequence of, or 
even somehow by, the Cold War, with the surprise value that either 
of these claims would entail, but without committing himself to evi-
dence that he would need in order to substantiate either. This vague-
ness about causation, and the tendency to transfer agency from the 
individual to the local, pervades Cultural Critique.10
	
Menand links the concern to improve children’s reading to the 
Cold War (and to the spread of comics and television), although, as 
he acknowledges, The Cat in the Hat was published some months 
before Sputnik was launched and America suddenly feared it might 
be lagging behind Russia in education, science, and technology. But 
Dr. Seuss felt a personal urgency about education that long predated 
the Cold War. He began to compose a child’s first ABC in 1931–3211 
and wrote his first published children’s book in 1936–37. During 
World War II he was involved in army education films. Late in the 

On the Origin of Stories
338
war, stationed in Europe, he iden­ti­fied childhood education as one 
of four major problems facing postwar Germany.12 By 1949 he was 
articulating his dissatisfaction with the stolidity of Dick and Jane 
readers and realized by chance, when he heard a three-year-old recite 
the whole of Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose, that his own books 
could reach children much youn­ger than he had supposed, and as 
a result rethought his tactics.13 John Hersey, in a widely publicized 
1954 Life magazine lament about the readers used in public schools, 
had already singled out Dr. Seuss as one of the rare “imaginative ge-
niuses” who could offer an alternative to dull Dick and joyless Jane.14 
Thus in fact the Cold War seems to have had little to do with Dr. 
Seuss’s interest in awakening children’s capacity to enjoy reading.
	
Menand’s characterization of Dr. Seuss or his Cat as an analyst 
“of the psychology of his time, the late nineteen-fifties” seems to as-
sume a substantial shift in human psychology ev­ery few years, and to 
praise Dr. Seuss for having his finger on the mental pulse of the mo-
ment. But in most of his children’s books Dr. Seuss avoids topical al-
lusions and local appeals. He aims at the enduring rather than the 
ephemeral—a policy re­flected in the sales of his books generation 
after generation. Are the themes that Menand iden­ti­fies, transgres-
sion and hypocrisy, unique to the late 1950s, or were they just espe-
cially salient then?
	
Addressing the annual conference of the Modern Language Asso-
ciation, the bastion of North American academic literary criticism, 
in 2004, Menand voiced the widespread recognition that something 
has gone wrong with literary studies and that university literature 
departments “could use some youn­ger people who think that the 
grownups got it all wrong.”15 He could not suggest what they should 
say his generation had got wrong, but he deplored the absence of 
a challenge to the reigning ideas in the discipline. He lamented its 
“culture of conformity” in professors and graduate students alike, 
and noted with regret that the profession “is not reproducing itself 
so much as cloning itself.”16 Curiously, however, he then insisted that 
what humanities departments should defi­nitely not seek was “consil-
ience, which is a bargain with the devil.”17 Consilience, in biologist 
E. O. Wilson’s 1998 book of that name, is the idea that the sciences, 
the humanities, and the arts should connect with one another, so 

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
339
that science, especially the life sciences, can inform the humanities 
and the arts, and vice versa.18 Menand claims that he wants someone 
to say, “You got it all wrong,”19 but he rules out anyone’s challenging 
the position in which he and his generation have entrenched them-
selves.
	
In his address Menand stressed the importance of what he calls 
“difference,” which literary studies learned from “the greatest genera-
tion” of Barthes, Jacques Derrida, and Michel Foucault: that there 
are no universal truths and no universal human nature, but only lo-
cal cultural and historical differences. But this stance leads to multi-
ple problems. First is the simple logical one. The idea that all is dif-
ference, merely local and situated, must apply, if true, to itself; and if 
this disquali­fies its claim to truth, as the implication seems to be, 
then it contradicts itself. The only way out of the muddle of such 
paradoxes is to assume that the propositions are false: then no self-
contradictions arise.
	
A second problem arises from the attempt to de­fine difference 
as uniquely human. “Culture . . . is constitutive of species identity,” 
writes Menand, meaning human species identity.20 The implied 
­corollary is that culture is always local, always marked by difference. 
Actually, culture by itself is not uniquely constitutive of human iden-
tity, for, as we have seen, many other species have culture. But Me-
nand’s declaration also contradicts his claim of difference, since it 
presupposes a distinctive, species-typical trait, a common feature, as 
he thinks, uniting all humans and only humans. Yet this is exactly 
what the doctrine that all is difference purports to deny: that there 
are some features common to all human natures. In fact, not ev­ery­
thing in human lives is difference. Commonalities also exist, and 
without commonalities among people, human culture would be im-
possible, since it could not pass from one person to another or from 
one tradition to another. Cultural Critique wants to stress the “situ-
atedness” of all that is human, but wants to de­fine that situation only 
in terms of particular cultures. But why not also include the unique 
situation of being human, with the special powers evolution has 
made possible in us?
	
A third problem looms when Menand draws implications for crit-
icism: “A nineteenth-century novel is a report on the nineteenth cen-

On the Origin of Stories
340
tury; it is not an advice manual for life out here on the twenty-first-
century street.”21 Does this mean that all those who in our own times 
have read Pride and Prejudice and felt that it reveals something about 
the dangers of first impressions, and the error of equating social ease 
with merit and social stiffness with coldness or disdain, have been 
wrong? Or, to return to Dr. Seuss, and Menand’s claim that The Cat 
in the Hat analyzes “the psychology of his time, the late nineteen­
fifties,” by focusing on transgression and hypocrisy, an evolutionary 
approach to The Cat in the Hat will take seriously the particulars of 
the text, the individual who wrote it, and the universals he appeals to. 
It can therefore suggest other themes like the importance of play in 
human lives, and the tension between play and seriousness, play as 
a way of testing real-world risks without real-world consequences, 
the importance of imagination, the naturalness of parent-offspring 
con­flict, and the value and risks of deception, that link “Sally and 
me” of The Cat in the Hat not just to other American children of the 
late 1950s but to children and others anywhere. An evolutionary ap-
proach can highlight more of the book and its author without ob-
scuring its particulars.
Local versus Universal
Over the last two centuries many have proposed explanations of art 
in terms of the spirit or ideas or conditions of the times: the rise of 
Puritanism, the Enlightenment, late cap­italism, and so on. If one set 
of conditions applies to and explains the actions of many, then an 
individual-level explanation may indeed be in­suf­fi­cient or superflu-
ous. But common factors cannot explain uncommon choices. What 
allows a work to outlast its time when almost ev­ery­thing else of the 
time has been forgotten cannot by defi­ni­tion be common.
	
There are other fundamental problems with such explanations 
tied to the ethos of an era. They tend to posit a fundamental spiritual 
or intellectual difference between now and then. But our default evo-
lutionary, commonsense, and scholarly assumption should be that 
human nature remains ev­erywhere roughly the same. The similarity 
between ourselves and others is a precondition for our interpreting 

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
341
others at all, even for anthropologists or historians who wish to am-
plify their discoveries by stressing the exoticism of difference.22
	
Unless we find strong contrary evidence, we should expect ordi-
nary human concerns to persist. Art critic Ernst Gombrich reports 
how, during his years as a graduate student, concrete instances of hu-
man similarity across time called into question for him
the current interpretation of Mannerism as an expression of 
a great spiritual crisis of the Renaissance. If you sit down in 
an archive and read one letter after another by the family of 
the Gonzaga, the children and the hangers-on and so on, you 
become gradually much more aware that these were human 
beings and not “ages” or “periods” or anything of that kind. I 
wondered about these people undergoing such a tremendous 
spiritual crisis. Federigo Gonzaga, the patron of Giulio Ro-
mano, was in fact a very sensuous prince, particularly inter-
ested in his horses, his mistresses, and his falcons. He was 
certainly not a great spiritual leader. Yet, Mannerism was the 
style in which he had built his castle.23
	
A recent strategy has been to claim that notions we may take for 
granted were unthinkable in this or that past era. Some have argued, 
for instance, that there was “no concept of childhood in the past . . . 
parents were, at best, indifferent to their offspring and, at worst, cruel 
to them.”24 Such ideas are “still adhered to and used by many liter-
ary critics in spite of powerful criticism from other historians”25 and 
despite clear evidence of special care for the young demonstrated in 
many species of birds and mammals. Similar arguments have been 
advanced for romantic love, supposed by some to have been invented 
in “the twelfth century, first in southern and then in northern 
France,”26 although cross-cultural, neurological, and cross-species 
studies have demonstrated the workings of romantic love across so­
ci­e­ties and even species.27 Such cultural history has made “difference 
the absolute in human history,”28 but an evolutionary perspective, 
with its cross-cultural and cross-species comparisons, makes it hard 
to sustain the notion of only radical difference in human experiences 

On the Origin of Stories
342
as central as childhood and love, however variable the local circum-
stances.
	
Explanations in terms of cultural difference tend to lack many 
links in their proposed causal chains. “Reflectionist” explanations of 
art, which assume that art immediately re­flects its time or place, pre-
suppose either that ages have a unitary spirit or that different pur-
suits within a period are inevitably contesting representations of the 
age. Film critic David Bordwell notes that top-down explanations in 
terms of an era repeatedly begin from preconceived notions and are 
very selective in their presentation of supporting evidence, first in 
the historical data and then in the artistic works they choose and the 
details they choose from them.29 He also observes that scholars who 
commit themselves “to a search for a single overarching pattern tend 
not to treat historical actions as shaped by a multitude of factors.”30 
Such sweeping explanations turn people into passive conduits of 
the impulse of the age or par­tic­i­pants in an unavoidable common 
debate, rather than treating individuals as different in susceptibility 
to in­flu­ence, according to their capacities, positions, roles, aims, and 
interests.
Local Possibilities, Problems, and Solutions
Evolutionary criticism will have a special focus on the species, but 
it will not ignore local contexts. Neither artists’ activity nor the artis-
tic forms they employ would be possible without preexisting institu-
tions, technologies, norms, and examples.
	
An evolutionary approach to the human needs to acknowledge the 
special importance of culture in human life. In the world of prob-
lems and solutions that emerges with life, culture “can act as a potent 
problem-solving device.”31 But a culture or an era is not a consistent 
whole or a solution to a particular problem. The institutions, ideas, 
and practices of a given place and time will contain a patchwork of 
solutions to many different kinds of often unrelated problems. An 
explanation of a work of art will need to consider problems and so-
lutions offered at the local level, but it will need to demonstrate the 
relevance and salience of such local problems and solutions to the 
problems of individual artists creating particular works.

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
343
	
After Bordwell shows the weakness of top-down schemes seeking 
to explain stylistic difference via cultural or historical difference, he 
proposes his own far more subtle and sensitive model of stylistic his-
tory. He happens to be writing about film style, but his arguments 
apply to any medium. Explanations in terms of the spirit or con­
ditions of an era, he notes, impose a priori notions on the complex-
ity of events, presuppose biologically implausible whole-scale but 
short-term shifts of psychology, and deny an active role to individu-
als. He proposes instead seeing style not as a necessary re­flection of 
this or that aspect of a passing phase of wider history, but as a net-
work of problems and solutions, variously related to one another, 
in which individuals make choices within the institutions that pro-
vide the opportunities and the norms of the period. These institu-
tions therefore make certain kinds of options more likely and certain 
kinds of solutions more salient:
By granting a role to the artist’s grasp of the task and of her 
own talents, the problem/solution framework acknowledges 
various reasons for the agent to act . . . The artist’s choices are 
informed and constrained by the rules and roles of artmak-
ing. The artistic institution formulates tasks, puts problems 
on the agenda, and rewards effective solutions. Gombrich 
points out that even that precious resource individuality can 
be achieved only when the artist asks “What is there for me 
to do?” within the artistic institution and the larger culture.
Bordwell concludes by noting that “individual initiative matters” 
but that
group norms matter too . . . So the history of a technique is 
not likely to consist of one problem and one solution; often, 
a problem links to a solution and thence to a new problem. 
For the same reason, the problem/solution model does not 
commit itself to a neat outline of overarching change. There 
is no guarantee of a rise and fall, a birth or ma­tu­ri­ty or de-
cline . . . Similarly, the dynamic of problem and solution can 
lead to quite diverse, competing out­comes, all coexisting at 

On the Origin of Stories
344
the same moment, none of them emerging as the preferred 
solution.32
Dr. Seuss’s Problems and Solutions
How would a problem-solution model apply to Dr. Seuss? As Bor-
dwell’s model suggests, much of what any artist chooses to do is 
made possible by traditions, institutions, and norms. Dr. Seuss draws 
on the immemorial tradition of fictional storytelling; on local tradi-
tions of written and especially printed storytelling that have devel-
oped ways of compensating for the absence of the storyteller in per-
son, like narrative economy, scenic focus, clarity of character, and so 
on; and on the established ­genre of the illustrated children’s story.
	
He lives in an urbanized society in which the division of labor is 
normal, artistic specialization possible, and earning sta­tus and re-
sources through writing stories a professional option. He could 
not have had the career he had without the institution of book pub-
lishing, and its specialized branch of illustrated children’s fiction, 
and without traditions of authorship, royalties, attribution (unlike 
Dr. Seuss’s books, Shakespeare’s plays were often published with-
out his name), reviews, and a wide distribution system. Had these 
not been available, he would never have left advertising for chil-
dren’s books, or would have left it for film, and would not have been 
able to take many months to rework a single story into a master-
piece.  Local ­cultural conditions both offered opportunities and 
­imposed constraints. The cost of early color photolithography ex-
plains the limited color range and flat tones of Dr. Seuss’s early 
books. He had an acute eye for color and drafted his first children’s 
book with a whole range of subtle hues—until he learned it would 
cost buyers “about $150” at a time when a wool sweater cost one 
­dollar.33
	
Dr. Seuss makes the most of the traditions of En­glish, including 
the patterns of internal and end rhyme and anapestic rhythm that 
poets have developed over the centuries. He writes mostly in a mod-
ern standard En­glish, with the concreteness and directness gener-
ally favored in twentieth-century literary En­glish, but will eclectically 

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
345
adopt an archaism like “’Twas” for the sake of rhythm—in Bordwell’s 
terms, an old solution to a recurrent problem—or an Americanism 
or Briticism (“It sure was a . . .” “What rot!”) for rhythm or rhyme. 
He absorbs the norms of mid-twentieth-century verse in En­glish: he 
eschews the poetic inversions that he encountered in the comic chil-
dren’s verse of his childhood, like that of Hilaire Belloc, or which he 
parodied and added to in a schoolboy imitation of Walt Whitman,34 
but which were by now seen as poor taste, a clumsy twisting of En­
glish idiom into the straitjacket of rhythm and rhyme.
	
From the world of graphic art he took many ideas. From George 
Herriman’s long-running and groundbreaking comic Krazy Kat he 
borrowed its surreal role-reversals—the mouse attacking the cat, 
for instance, which he transposes into the bird or the bug or the jun-
From Palmer Cox’s Brownies, 1887.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

On the Origin of Stories
346
gle animals bullying an elephant. But instead of Herriman’s bris-
tling  verbal barbarisms, spare, dreamlike landscapes, and abrupt 
schematic story lines, Dr. Seuss made his own work alluringly acces-
sible, softly appealing, in word, image, and story. He learned from 
the comic mock-technology of Rube Goldberg in creating his own 
convoluted contraptions. He occasionally borrowed from the mani-
fold mayhem of Palmer Cox’s The Brownies: Their Book (1887), one 
of the delights of his youth,35 but he did so in a less wearying and 
more tantalizing fashion, inviting us into pages less dense and more 
absurd than Cox’s, pages that we can skip past in pursuit of the story 
and return to upon a rereading, alternating rapid visual assimilation 
and slow delighted exploration. He selectively but sparingly ­adopted 
some of the visual language of comics, its sim­pli­fied hands and 
­motion lines, but he avoided its speech-bubbles, its swift sequential 
framing, and its tough talk. He knew Lewis Carroll, Edward Lear, and 
Dr. Seuss, Horton Hears a Who!, 1954: Who-ville.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Levels of Explanation: Universal, Local, Individual
	
347
Hilaire Belloc, but his nonsense verse as the verbal obverse of a visual 
narrative was all his own.
	
Children’s tales have existed for many millennia, cheap color re-
productions of cartoons were possible from the 1890s, and comic 
masters like Winsor McCay and George Herriman were at work as 
early as the 1900s and 1910s. Without these universal and local condi-
tions, Dr. Seuss would not have created the works he has; but even in 
these conditions, no one else responded as he did, creating children’s 
books like his in manner or impact. The storytelling and comic tra-
ditions he encountered are enabling conditions, but in­suf­fi­cient to 
explain the special charge of his work. For that we need a finer-
grained explanation: we need to take into account Dr. Seuss’s own 
constitution, and the unique infectiousness his work has for other 
minds.

348
22
LEVELS OF EXPLANATION: INDIVIDUALITY AGAIN
Much of Theory, since Roland Barthes’s 1968 announcement 
of the “death of the author,” has sought—or professed—to downplay 
the individual, using the rhetorical strategy of referring not to au-
thors but to texts, as if they were self-­created or the product only of 
“systems of cultural production.”1 In fact even if they have nominally 
challenged the idea of the “single historically de­fined author,”2 most 
critics have continued to discuss single historically definable authors 
in articles and books that they would be indignant not to have at­tri­
buted to their own single historically de­fined selves.
	
We find individuality too important in ourselves, in others, and in 
authors to live without it; we are not slime molds or ants. The differ-
ences between individuals matter to us in life (people who fall in 
love with one identical twin will not fall in love with the other), in 
literature (we respect Hamlet for his singularity and dislike Rosen-
crantz and Guildenstern for their interchangeability), and in our ap-
preciation of art (we may happen to value almost anything by Ver-
meer and to resist almost anything by his contemporary Poussin). 
But in modern literary Theory, individuality has been critiqued as a 
Western bourgeois notion or as an illusion of “the subject” (the sub-
jective self) foisted on each of us by “the dominant ideology” (often 
conceived of in Theory, curiously, as unitary and self-­directed, un-
like individuals!) and as much less important in explaining literature 
than the local level, the historical or social or other context.
	
Biology has established more securely than ever the fact and the 
depth of individuality. The genetic recombination in sexual repro-
duction ensures so many dimensions for variation that the odds 

	
Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again
	
349
against two human parents’ producing genetically identical children 
from different conceptions are seventy trillion to one. Without in­
dividual variation, evolution would never have begun, since there 
would be no differences for natural selection to select from. And 
variation extends beyond genetic difference. Development magnifies 
difference, so that even identical twins, the result of the separation of 
a single cell at the first cell division, differ in such important details 
as the folds of the cerebral lobes.
	
Modern developmental neuroscience has deepened our knowl-
edge of neural plasticity, the mind’s capacity to modify itself accord-
ing to circumstance and experience. Shortly after birth, human minds 
have an oversupply of neural interconnections, more than they will 
need later in life. Connections not activated and strengthened by ex-
perience—necessarily unique for each individual—weaken and die 
off. Subsequent development strengthens initial biases. A higher or 
lower level of physical coordination, intellectual curiosity, or socia-
bility will lead to different choices and actions and therefore unique 
microenvironments and ranges of experience even for children 
raised within the same family. Social pressures toward conformity 
will be partially counteracted by the situational pressures to establish 
a niche of difference for oneself.3
	
Individuality is no late Western invention but a biological and 
psychological fact. For any social animal, and especially for ultraso-
cial humans, the capacity to distinguish other conspe­cifics in fine-­
grained ways evolved because those who could do so better could 
more reliably predict the bene­fits and costs of future interactions.4 
Chimpanzees show marked individual differences not only in phy-
sique but also in intelligence, sociability, and temperament, and 
modify their responses to other chimpanzees on the basis of per-
sonal characteristics. Jane Goodall once reported a respected fellow 
scientist telling her that even if she was discovering individuality in 
chimpanzees, it might be better to sweep such knowledge under the 
carpet.5 But why? She was certainly not imposing individuality on 
chimpanzees because of her own Western assumptions; in fact it 
was Japanese primatologists who first (apart from the chimpanzees 
themselves!) treated and heeded chimpanzees as individuals.6
	
The individuality of authors is no more a product of the West, the 

On the Origin of Stories
350
Enlightenment, or the bourgeoisie than is the individuality of apes, 
and has no more reason to be hushed up. As readers of others and 
readers of authors, we have always had an intuitive grasp of individ-
uality that we enjoy and rely on and need to articulate more clearly 
as part of literary theory, and that we can now trace to the capacity 
for discriminating individuals and intentions evident in many ani-
mal species.
What makes Theory’s frequent denial of the importance of authorial 
individuality so odd is that we engage so naturally, personally, and 
pleasurably with particular artistic personalities. We have a rich sense 
of artists’ individual “voices” and can easily savor them at a distance 
or recognize them close up, even if we cannot reproduce or describe 
or mimic them exactly. Audiences have always engaged with authors 
as individuals—even compulsive readers of Harlequin romances or 
other formulaic romance fiction have their favorite writers.
	
Since classical times, and in modern times since at least Erasmus 
in the sixteenth century, criticism has stressed the individual style of 
authors. In the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centuries this personal 
stamp was a major focus of criticism, even if the terms shifted from 
moral character in the age of Shaftesbury to personal imagination in 
the age of Shelley. In the twentieth century, even before recent The-
ory downgraded authors, critical theory had begun by the 1950s to 
understate the importance of authorial individuality. The New Criti-
cism of the mid-­twentieth century stressed authorial intention as 
crucial to interpretation, as indeed it is.7 But in life we respond to 
others not only because of their actions and the intentions that we 
read into them, but also because of them as individuals, with their 
distinct looks, smells, sounds; with their personal range of move-
ments, stances, gestures, glances, facial expressions; their vocal tone, 
timbre, pitch, and volume; their accents and register; their turns of 
word, phrase, and sentence; their social ease, responsiveness and 
awkwardness; their intelligence, curiosity, kindness, sense of humor; 
and much more. In the same way we respond individually to other 
artists as individuals, even before they consciously choose a certain 
artistic effect. In the words of Joan Didion: “The way I write is who I 
am, or have become.”8

	
Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again
	
351
	
Children and adults sense Dr. Seuss’s singularity from their first 
encounter with his books. He made himself even more singular while 
making the most of local conditions in the storytelling of his time, 
from Belloc to Herriman, or in the politics of his time, like Japan’s 
impending election. He took what he needed from his local context 
to amplify his own individuality while appealing to our universal 
predilection for play.
Dr. Seuss’s editor at Random House, Bennett Cerf, whose writers in-
cluded eventual Nobel laureates Eugene O’Neill and William Faulkner, 
liked to insist that Dr. Seuss was the only genius among his authors.9
	
As part of Theory’s dismissal of the individual, it has repudiated 
the notion of genius, both because it prefers to locate the source of 
outstanding works in the social energies of their time and because it 
rejects awe and reverence before genius. (With characteristic self-­
contradiction, Theory also spawned the star system in American ac-
ademe, bestowing unprecedented adulation on its heroes such as 
Derrida and Foucault: genius was ousted, in theory, from literature, 
to be reinstated, in practice, in Theory.) But genius exists. Statistics 
con­firm that a few people of exceptional creativity have an impact 
far beyond their time and place and a vastly disproportionate contri-
bution to make to their field10—and even Theorists who repudiate 
the notion of genius prefer to write about the work of authors of ge-
nius. To acknowledge some individuals as phenomenally creative is 
not to consider them superhuman, however. Indeed, an evolutionary 
viewpoint can explain how genius arises in a perfectly naturalistic, 
perfectly Darwinian way. Differential success, after all, lies at the core 
of evolution.
	
In the past artistic genius has often been explained in transcen-
dental terms like inspiration from the Muses. We can no ­longer ac-
cept supernatural explanations for exceptional creativity, but we do 
no better to deny genius and renounce attempts to explain it natu-
ralistically. Dean Keith Simonton has offered an evolutionary ac-
count of genius as a third-­order “Darwin machine.”11 Let me elabo-
rate on this concept, introduced in Chapter 8.
	
The first-­order Darwinian system is the evolution of life itself. Life, 
like other Darwinian systems, generates new genetic combinations, 

On the Origin of Stories
352
tests them in the environment, and allows those that do not fail the 
test (by dying before reproducing) to regenerate. This new genera-
tion produces new recombinations; some will fail, but others may 
fare better than any in the first generation. Gradually, success builds 
on success, by regenerating from the most successful available vari-
ants. Successive small improvements can accumulate and over time 
attain complex new functional design without planning or any pre-
conceived goal. Of course whatever successes emerge in this way 
must also cope with the success of other organisms in the same envi-
ronment, which also reproduce in the same Darwinian fashion, often 
to become better competitors, perhaps even predators or parasites. 
Their presence and developing capacities will therefore continually 
alter the conditions of the test phase of the cycle.
	
Second-­order Darwin machines are systems within living organ-
isms that themselves incorporate or deploy the same generate-­test-­
regenerate principle. One essential second-­order Darwin machine is 
the human immune system. Since it cannot predict exactly which 
pathogens individuals will happen to meet in their lifetimes, espe-
cially as bacteria and viruses evolve so fast, it generates a massive 
­array of possible antibodies. Only when the environment tests posi-
tive, when antibodies meet pathogens they can fit and therefore dis-
arm, are they selected for massive short-­term regeneration. Another 
second-­order Darwin machine is the human brain. Since evolution 
cannot predict in advance exactly what environments human brains 
will meet, brains begin by generating in infants more neural connec-
tions than they need, then testing them by experience, strengthening 
(regenerating) those interconnections that have been used, and kill-
ing off those that have not. New experience then tests these new con-
nection networks, and alters their strengths, and new experience 
again alters those strengths, in a repetition of the cycle that lasts as 
long as the brains function.
	
Among third-­order Darwin machines are our ideas and their con-
crete manifestations. The exceptionally creative rarely arrive at their 
best ideas easily. Responding to Cerf’s acclaim, Geisel remarked: “If 
I’m a genius, why do I have to work so hard? I know my stuff looks as 
if it was all rattled off in 28 seconds, but ev­ery word is a struggle and 
ev­ery sentence is like the pangs of birth.”12 But genius as effortless-

	
Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again
	
353
ness is a myth. Even the precocious and seemingly insouciant Mozart 
and Pushkin were both painstaking revisers.13 Exceptional creativity 
is possible only for those who apply themselves repeatedly and pro-
tractedly to particular kinds of problems, through cycles of generate-
­test-­regenerate. “To produce a 60-­page book,” Geisel explained, “I 
may easily write more than 1,000 pages before I’m sat­is­fied. The most 
important thing about me, I feel, is that I work like hell—write, re-
write, reject, re-­reject, and polish incessantly.”14 He kept in his studio 
what he called his “bone pile” of “the thoughts that got nowhere.”15
	
Any original idea lies some way beyond the known. Its novelty 
usually makes it likely that the problem emerges ill-­de­fined and 
therefore that the direction or range of possible solutions can hardly 
be anticipated in advance. Creative minds can only try to move 
blindly toward a still indefi­nite goal, and if some moves seem more 
promising than others, they then try new blind moves from these 
propitious positions. As experience at solving problems of a particu-
lar type accumulates, solutions can arrive a little more often, because 
previous efforts have produced so many partial successes, relatively 
complex moves or forms that have survived some tests that can then 
be recombined and regenerated to develop new, still ampler, degrees 
of success.
	
As a schoolboy, Geisel compared himself with others, recognized 
his special talent to make them laugh, and developed that as his 
­competitive niche. He worked obsessively at his humor, in cartoons 
and parodies, in school and college magazines, in newspaper col-
umns and advertisements. As he told his nephew: “You have to put in 
your hours, and fi­nally you make it work.”16 From all those trials, he 
found ideas that particularly appealed to himself and others, like the 
especially benign visual features of Seussian fauna, his comic combi-
nations of opposites or contrasts, his fantastic situations, his rhym-
ing verse, rambunctious rhythms, and nonsense words. Each of these 
partial successes became the basis for further recombinations, regen-
erations, and tests: wacky new widgets on which he could ring end-
less new comic changes.
	
Take for instance Horton Hears a Who! It hatched out of Horton 
Hatches the Egg, which in turn developed out of the Seussian visual 
style, the Seussian situation of preposterous contrast, and the devel-

On the Origin of Stories
354
oping Seussian capacity for concentrated verbal and verse play. The 
first Horton story developed in particular from Dr. Seuss’s personal 
predilection for heavyweight elephants and lightweight birds.
	
With his childlike attraction to the exceptional or the extreme, Dr. 
Seuss was fascinated by odd creatures, real or invented. Among real 
animals, he found elephants most fascinating of all. He liked play-
ing with expectations by mixing opposites (large/small, heavy/light), 
transgressing probabilities (mixing heaviness and flight or fragility), 
and crossing boundaries (animate and inanimate, species and spe-
cies or even biological order and order). Since at least his early twen-
ties he had made comic cap­ital of the contrast between elephants’ 
bulk and the airy lightness of birds, as in a 1925 painting of a Horton-
­like “Elephant Presenting Flower to a Bird,” which anticipates Hor-
ton and the Whos’ clover of 1954.17 He imagined many variations on 
elephants’ size, weight, and shape: elephants in improbable flight (in 
1930, with bird wings and bodies; in 1937, with bee wings and body) 
or sitting on elephant eggs that crack under their weight (1934) or, 
even less likely, on a bird egg that does not crack (1938), before Hor-
ton hatches his egg and sees an elephant-­bird fly forth (1940).18
	
Evolving his comic elephants offered Dr. Seuss ready solutions to 
new comic problems, but even his talent and training offered no 
guarantee of success. In 1938’s “Matilda, the Elephant with a Mother 
Complex” he combines two drawings with a short story exploiting 
the incongruous pairing of elephant and bird. He adds to the humor 
by mocking the whole mode of animal fables. But the audience is 
adult and the tone sourer than later Seuss. He portrays Matilda as 
absurd to feel maternal toward a chickadee egg. She deserves what 
she gets when the bird hatches from the egg, sights its elephantine 
incubator, cries out at her in terror, and flies away forever, leaving 
Matilda still roaming “the jungle, alone and friendless . . . a woebe-
gone creature, with nothing at all to show for her pains but a very 
bad case of lumbago.” There the story ends, except for a fingerposted 
“Moral: Do not go around hatching other folks’ eggs.” Seussian hu-
mor rarely limped so lamely, and the ungenerous tone was already 
uncharacteristic even of his 1930s work.19
	
Only two years later he turned around the elephant-­as-­incubator 
in Horton Hatches an Egg. Here for the first time he expands into a 

	
Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again
	
355
full-­length story his perennial fascinations with elephants and with 
upsetting scale and crossing kinds: a huge heavy thing sitting down 
on a light frail one and thereby saving rather than destroying it; an 
elephant hatching a bird. Knowing that this prem­ise will appeal to 
even the youngest, he then focuses their interest on heart and mind, 
on Horton’s engagingly extravagant kindness and constancy, coun-
tering the mother bird’s selfish­ness. Children understand the magi-
cal violation of biological kind at the end, when the egg yields a baby 
elephant-­bird, as a just reward for Horton’s patient parental care. 
Horton Hatches an Egg was his greatest success to date, but even after 
this, as we will see, Dr. Seuss had one more failure with Horton be-
fore the still richer success of Horton Hears a Who!
The Darwinian cycle-­and-­recycle of generate-­test-­regenerate can en-
able genius to emerge. All normal humans are born with two legs or 
two eyes, but in many other features determined by the interaction 
of multiple genes—and creativity seems more polygenic than any 
other biological feature discovered to date—there is a normal distri-
bution of capacities (a bell curve), with successively fewer toward the 
low end of a continuous range, many in the central bulge, and suc-
cessively fewer again toward the high end. Of those at the high end 
on some particular capacity, like the capacity to make others laugh, a 
smaller fraction will also be at the high end in terms of inclination, 
ambition, and determination, and may choose to work intensely at 
that particular capacity, since it allows them to excel and earn the 
admiration of others around them. Their ambition may cause them 
to make many trials of their own—and, often, motivate them to 
study the successes of others in their field—and to reject many of 
their own efforts as in­suf­fi­ciently successful, so that they generate 
further attempts from whatever has worked best in prior rounds.
	
Their exceptional capacity will become more singularly developed. 
Except in so­ci­e­ties that discourage acclaim, their skill will produce 
a  positive feedback loop that makes the value of distinction still 
greater, thereby amplifying ambition, multiplying effort, and raising 
the standards against which they test their own work. This pro­cess 
of repeated generation, testing, and regeneration of new efforts will 
provide the most talented with a highly personal set of partial solu-

On the Origin of Stories
356
tions for recombination in future trials. And the mathematics of 
combination ensure that even a small number of elements can allow 
an almost infinite power of recombination, as the twenty-­six letters 
of the En­glish alphabet allow endless rearrangements from epics or 
epigrams to Eminem.
	
This continually iterated pro­cess explains why even highly creative 
persons create in distinctively personal patterns. Shakespeare learned 
from the opportunities and examples of the drama of his day—blank 
verse, rhetorical exuberance, multiple plots, the ­genres of tragedy, 
comedy, and history—but from the first extended them in his own 
way, becoming, as his work matured, more idiosyncratic in vocabu-
lary, phrasing, imagery, meter, speech construction, characterization, 
scenic structure, plot development, plot parallelism, emotional 
change and range, and sheer artistic con­fi­dence. By working at their 
own kinds of problems intently, geniuses can build on their exper-
tise, their peculiar neural networks, their own mental materials and 
methods, rather than reinventing elements and methods each time 
from scratch. Even writers with a high inclination or a high determi-
nation to maximize novelty will reach positions and discover prac-
tices distinctly their own that they continue to recycle and recombine 
in their own way.
	
This account of genius also helps explain Simonton’s find­ing that 
the more exceptionally creative people are, the further they are likely 
to be from the norm of their milieu, the less likely they are to be 
­representative of their era, the less adequately local contextual rather 
than individual explanations can account for their singular cre­
ativity.
	
Genius can arise, in short, in a perfectly naturalistic manner, 
through a nested hierarchy of Darwinian pro­cesses that compounds 
the high creative ef­fi­ciency of such systems: the first-­order system 
of the evolution of life; the second-­order system of individual neu-
ral development; the third-­order system of individuals’ generating-­
testing-­regenerating within a field of endeavor to which they are 
strongly motivated by an initial bias of unusual talent and ambition, 
and the positive-­feedback effects of those efforts.
	
Most of our actions are simple and routine, small circumstantial 
variations on familiar patterns. We have many clearly de­fined and 

	
Levels of Explanation: Individuality Again
	
357
more or less automatically executed purposes: breathing, eating, 
walking, talking. When however we search for a novel solution to a 
novel problem, we may not know how to achieve it. When we do not 
know just what it is we want, we can only try blindly, and if some 
­trials seem more promising than others, we then attempt new blind 
trials from these most promising new advance bases.
	
This logic suggests one reason why genius matters so much to us. 
It follows patterns similar to those we all use, but it seeks persistently, 
and often successfully, for the substantially new. Even genius does 
not know quite where it is going until it arrives there, usually after a 
long cycle of generate-­test-­regenerate. But it gradually builds on its 
partial discoveries to arrive at substantial and often lasting solutions 
to problems it could not formulate before reaching them. It be­comes 
an ef­fi­cient system for generating sig­nifi­cant novelty.
	
A naturalistic account of genius explains rather than denies the 
existence of exceptional creativity, and does not encourage prostra-
tion before it. In stressing that it works by principles common 
through life at many stages, especially repeated cycles of blind varia-
tion and selective retention, it also registers the fact that genius, too, 
must often try out many ideas to find a single successful one, and 
will often have followed many wrong trails even in the course of 
reaching something wonderfully right.

358
23
LEVELS OF EXPLANATION: PARTICULAR
Success as Problem
Artists of genius will solve particular artistic problems in 
individual ways, using repertoires of materials and methods accu-
mulated over years of creative effort. But past success itself ensures 
that each new proj­ect creates new problems: How to build on previ-
ous accomplishments yet not merely repeat them? How to make the 
most of audiences’ high expectations and familiarity with one’s cre-
ative aims and angles, and yet surprise them?
	
Horton Hatches the Egg had achieved great success in 1940, but 
Geisel had been diverted to other work by the urgencies of World 
War II. When in 1949 he wondered what children’s book to try next, 
his Random House editor suggested he write a new Horton story. 
He did, but “Horton and the Kwuggerbug” added little to—almost 
subtracted from—Horton Hatches the Egg. Once again Horton “is 
suckered into helping a manipulative [and minuscule] animal dur-
ing the month of May: . . . ‘I know of a Beezlenut tree where some 
Beezlenuts grow!’ . . . Horton . . . climbs a 9,000-foot-high mountain 
‘while the Kwuggerbug perched on his trunk all the time / And kept 
yelling “Climb! You dumb elephant, Climb!”’”1 Dr. Seuss realized 
that this idea was not worth a whole new book, because the absurd 
prem­ise of a tiny creature exploiting a much larger one who could 
squash it without noticing was merely recycled, and because the ex-
ploitation theme, amusing when it merely framed Horton Hatches 
the Egg, turned sour when persistently repeated. “Horton and the 

	
Levels of Explanation: Particular
	
359
Kwuggerbug” became no more than a two-page magazine story soon 
forgotten.2
	
Often an unusual constraint or problem can engender fresh ideas, 
whereas the mere suggestion of “the same again” fails to pose enough 
of a problem to fire the imagination. To express this in Darwin­
machine terms, a mere sequel does not provide a severe and spe­
cific enough new test to motivate new recombinations of existing 
ideas—as a sudden climate change, by selecting from the existing 
flora and fauna according to new criteria, can prompt new life forms 
to develop.
	
But in 1953 a quite unexpected new problem fused for Geisel with 
the familiar challenge to think up the next Seuss book. During and 
after his trip to Japan, he felt a commitment to encourage par­tic­i­pa­
tion in the democratic pro­cess there and to counter the indoctrina-
tion that he felt Japanese, like German, youth had been subjected to 
during their nations’ expansionist years: in his words, “the worst ed-
ucational crime in the entire history of the world.”3
	
For many years he had been fascinated by the comic contrast be-
tween large and small. Often since his twenties that had taken the 
form of an elephant and a bird—an elephant falling in love with a 
bird or an egg, or an elephant exploited by a bird. That fascination 
had eventually led to Horton Hatches the Egg, and in “Horton and 
the  Kwuggerbug” he in­ten­si­fied the contrast still further. In 1953 
he saw a way to take the contrast of scale he had played with so often 
to a fantastic new extreme, by inventing creatures too small even 
to be seen, whose voices all needed to sound together if they were 
to be heard and saved: a whole community on a speck of dust, a 
wild  exaggeration of Japan’s population density and space short-
age. As a contrast to these microscopic “persons” he could again re-
sort to Horton, already established as an altruist in Horton Hatches 
the Egg. By making Horton the protector of a people whose exis-
tence only he could naturally hear, and by making others opposed to 
his protecting these invisible and inaudible people, until ev­ery last 
microperson spoke up as loudly and clearly as possible, Dr. Seuss had 
his story, his solution to the problem of encouraging democracy in 
Japan or elsewhere, and a series of visual and narrative opportunities 

On the Origin of Stories
360
to make the most of these creatures’ absurdly small size but full “per-
sonhood.”
	
He could satisfy the expectations built up by the endearing char-
acter of Horton in the earlier book, yet surprise his audience with 
something still more extreme. He could avoid the unpleasantness 
of  Mayzie’s or the Kwuggerbug’s manipulation of Horton, or the 
parasites’ exploitation in Thidwick, the Big-Hearted Moose. If his mi-
cropersons in some sense re­flect Japan, then they should not be seen 
as exploiters reluctant to pull even their own microweight. Horton 
wants to help them almost unasked:
Just a very faint yelp
As if some tiny person were calling for help.
“I’ll help you,” said Horton. “But who are you? Where?”
They then help themselves as much as they can, briskly rebuilding 
their city after the eagle drops it into the clover field—like the Japa-
nese in their postwar building boom—and shouting together to 
make their tiny voices heard.
Dr. Seuss faced a number of recurrent problems in each of his books. 
He wished to appeal to children and their parents, to first-time read-
ers and rereaders. He made his stories as much like play as possible, 
yet as artful as possible, saturating them with the cognitive toying 
with pattern that underlies all art. Especially after 1949, he writes 
his stories to invite their being read aloud4 and to be comprehensible 
even to very young children who cannot understand all the words.5 
In this particular story, he also wants to appeal both to those who 
have and those who have not already read Horton Hatches the Egg. 
He therefore establishes Horton’s agreeableness visually on the first 
page and his altruism verbally on he second.
	
And from the first he tries to maximize the bene­fits of attention 
and minimize the costs of comprehension. The narrative line of the 
story has a clarity that reduces comprehension costs while deliver-
ing  maximum urgency and impact: Horton’s goal of protecting 
a  whole people; the obstacle of the other animals, who object to 

	
Levels of Explanation: Particular
	
361
­Horton’s eccentricity; Horton’s and the Whos’ and our urgent 
need to convince the other animals that the Whos really exist. The 
differences among the animal species simplify character distinctions, 
while their humanized expressions allow maximum emotional legi-
bility.6
	
Each two-page spread moves the story along one narrative phase, 
with visual and verbal economy normally in crisp lockstep. Dr. Seuss 
times his story to fit a child’s short attention span, ensuring that 
each spread ushers in a new stage of the story to keep interest regu-
larly refreshed, with a single illustration, in simple outline, swiftly 
understood, with just one background color, a flat blue, and a red 
highlight, often reserved for the Whos’ clover or some narrative 
key, like the Who-ville mayor’s megaphone that allows Horton to 
hear him.
	
To vary the pace, and to plant deferred plea­sures for the rereader, 
Dr. Seuss occasionally disrupts the usual spareness of detail and im-
mediacy of effect, making the few pages with the Whos a protracted 
feast for the eye in their intricate comic profusion. Unlike his child-
hood favorite, Palmer Cox’s Brownies, but like Breughel’s Hunters in 
the Snow, even these crowded pages produce an immediate overall 
impression despite the centrifugal detail. These high-density Who-
pages do not slow down first-time readers but allow rereaders to dis-
cover at leisure the local comic complications, like a crowded Who 
bedroom with three double beds and five-decker bunks.
	
Dr. Seuss plays again his frequent game of contrasting singularity 
and similarity, individuality and multiplicity, repetition and varia-
tion, concisely compacted in his 1950 story of the identical twins 
Tadd and Todd, one who loves being a twin, the other who hates it.7 
This features in several ways in Horton Hears a Who!: in the contrast 
between Horton, so much on his own (unlike the eight Hortonish 
elephants carrying a Zinzibar-Zanzibar tree in Scrambled Eggs Su-
per!), and the other gregarious jungle animals, the kangaroo with her 
young mimic in her pouch, or the Wickersham Brothers with their 
seemingly endless repetitions; or the Whos, who in various different 
images seem to have an unceasing va­ri­ety of tufts and stripes, as if 
each individual or family were its own species, yet also display comic 

On the Origin of Stories
362
repetitions of identical young or adults in identical poses, in a pram, 
a chorus, or an unstable stack.
Intensifying the Story: 
The Confrontation Scene
Let us become still more particular and tighten our focus to the ar-
tistic problems, both typical and unique, facing Dr. Seuss on a single 
two-page spread within the story. We can dub this the confrontation 
scene: if the pages were numbered from the start of the story, these 
would be 38 and 39.
	
The first of the problems here faces storytellers anywhere: how 
to maintain and if possible heighten attention by moving the story 
along at speed. Dr. Seuss needs to make plausible and even alarming 
the situation of smaller animals threatening a much larger one, be-
cause by engaging readers’ fear for Horton, he can amplify their at-
tention: emotion, after all, directs attention.
	
The second is the problem of an already successful storyteller, and 
especially one as singularly successful as Dr. Seuss: how to redeploy 
the distinctive manner that has already won him such a following, 
how to give his readers more of the plea­sures they have returned to 
his work to seek, yet also to surprise them, how to refresh their atten-
tion rather than let it fade into habituation.
	
A third problem is to minimize the comprehension cost for the 
audience, so that they can—literally—see the situation at once. The 
less effort they have to make, the more they will value whatever re-
wards they find.
	
Normally each double spread in Horton Hears a Who! moves 
strongly from left to right, usually with Horton, as protagonist, head-
ing in that direction, from earlier to later, to the next page to be 
turned. In the confrontation scene the left-right movement contin-
ues but with a twist.
	
Horton has been searching for the clover with the Whos aboard, 
and several pages earlier (pages 30–31), exhausted, he has traced a 
comic Seussian serpentine down to where he faces the bottom right 
of the page, as if he will have to keep on meandering fruitlessly 

	
Levels of Explanation: Particular
	
363
­forever, on to the pages that follow. But on the next spread (pages 
32–33), perked up, he stares cross-eyed at the speck he has been look-
ing for on the one clover that he needs among these millions. 
Now his head faces us, so that we can see full-on his eyes staring 
in  relieved surprise at the speck, but his visible left flank shows 
he has only made a three-eighth turn to his left. The next time we 
see  him  (pages 36–37) the kangaroos and the three Wickersham 
Brothers have come up from behind him, so he turns around to re-
gard them from his position on page right, and faces almost com-
pletely left.
	
Now, in the confrontation scene, the rest of the animals advance 
further toward Horton, their target, while he faces decidedly left, as if 
backed into a corner with nowhere to go. Over the preceding scenes, 
Dr. Seuss has slowly turned Horton around, just over one half-turn, 
Dr. Seuss: Horton Hears a Who!, 1954: the confrontation scene.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

On the Origin of Stories
364
doing so perfectly naturally according to the needs of each page, but 
also so as to preserve the visual continuity for the reader and yet to 
offer change—like the surprise here of seeing Horton squeezed into 
the corner and almost cowering beneath all the other animals. Al-
though he is larger than his jungle companions, Dr. Seuss places 
him here below them on the page, as if subordinate to the domi-
nance their height allows them, thanks to the hillocks they stand on. 
Horton is on his own, and a fragment, not even a whole elephant. As 
if squashed flat, he looks up in wide-eyed and down-mouthed alarm 
at the cockily fierce kangaroos, mother and child comically redupli-
cating each other as they point to the threat of the cauldron where 
the Beezlenut oil boils.
	
This con­figu­ra­tion may alert us retrospectively to another prob-
lem Dr. Seuss has had to face all along. Much of the humor of the 
story arises from discrepancies of scale between Horton and the other 
animals and between all the jungle animals and the Whos. But at the 
same time Horton must not seem so much larger than the other 
­jungle creatures as to make it improbable that they can threaten and 
control him. Dr. Seuss quietly solves this problem by ensuring that 
on ev­ery other page in which Horton is present with another ani-
mal—until the last page, when all is resolved, when all are on the 
same side, and it makes sense to maximize Horton’s hugeness—there 
is at least one other animal whose eye level is above his. (The sole 
exception is the page where the kangaroos dive away from him mock-
ingly, almost aggressively, into the pool: here the position of the kan-
garoos, though lower than Horton, still exudes de­fi­ance as they hur-
tle into the water and splash him and his clover.) But no other page 
has the effect of the confrontation scene, with the kangaroo and her 
child glowering down at an abject Horton.
	
On the previous page we have seen the first three of the enfilade of 
jungle monkeys, the three Wickersham Brothers, who are all we have 
encountered earlier in the story. Now Dr. Seuss introduces a surprise 
as we turn the page to the confrontation scene and see the whole 
file, smilingly con­fi­dent in their numbers, encircling Horton, to his 
right, left, and straight ahead, with no space visible behind him. The 
monkeys, though not identical in pose like the kangaroos, have com-

	
Levels of Explanation: Particular
	
365
ically similar, comically con­fi­dent expressions, a vast proliferation 
against the lone Horton, matched in the repetition of their names in 
the verse:
With the help of the Wickersham Brothers and dozens
Of Wickersham Uncles and Wickersham Cousins
And Wickersham In-Laws . . .
Dr. Seuss makes his singularity-versus-similarity or singleness-­
versus-multiplicity joke here work, both visually and verbally, not 
just for humor but also for danger, to add to the narrative threat 
­suddenly posed by the overwhelming numbers facing the cornered 
­Horton.
	
The kangaroos point toward the Beezlenut-oil cauldron. It stands 
out in bright red at the top left, threatening the only other patch of 
red, the clover flower at bottom right, with the speck of dust perched 
on it, almost squeezed to the edge of the page, as if in the tightest of 
tight spots. Horton tries to shield it by put­ting himself and the great-
est visual distance the page allows between the clover and the threat-
ening army. Highlighted by the emphasis of their final position in 
the line, and by their rhyming, the words “caged,” “boil,” and “oil” 
add to the threat, even as Dr. Seuss adds a playful twist in the in-
vented Beezlenut (brazil nut and betel nut, with a bezel edge and a 
diesel flavor?).
	
The whole story has lurched forward, as often before, with the 
abrupt logic of nightmare. Horton’s speech highlights the key sur-
prise and threat, by starting with, and stressing, a repetition of the 
danger word: “Boil it?” The lines of his speech, visually separated 
from the kangaroo’s though ac­tually identical metrically, have been 
split in two, uniquely in this story, moved to the right so as to match 
the visual placement of kangaroo and elephant on the page and to 
reinforce the sense of the elephant’s being cornered and suddenly cut 
down in size.
	
His last line repeats the story’s key motif-word: “It’s all full of 
­persons! They’ll prove it to you!” By signaling here the next phase of 
the plot, Dr. Seuss both reduces our comprehension costs (we know 

On the Origin of Stories
366
roughly where the story is heading) and whets our curiosity. As we 
are about to turn the page, we wonder: how can the Whos prove to 
others that they are there?8
All Dr. Seuss’s decisions in the confrontation scene introduce and in-
stantly amplify the danger and urgency of the situation, and hence 
in­ten­sify our attention, impel us on through the story, and prepare 
for the triumph of the Whos’ proving their existence at the end—
without ignoring the comic or the fantastic.
	
Noël Carroll characterizes the devices by which filmmakers ensure 
that viewers respond similarly to a scene—including soundtrack mu-
sic, mise-en-scène, and editing—as “emotional prefocusing.”9 Like a 
master director, Dr. Seuss shapes his confrontation scene, in its place 
in the story, in its action, and in all its subsidiary choices, to prefocus 
our response, our attention, and our emotion. Each of his details, 
even if not consciously noticed, adds to the immediate impact of 
the story for first-time readers, and to the plea­sure of rereading, the 
sense that ev­ery­thing counts, that nothing is wasted, and that there is 
still more there than first met eye and ear.
	
Everything in the confrontation scene bears the mark of Dr. Seuss’s 
individual and invitingly playful style. The page builds on devices he 
has developed elsewhere, through many cycles of his Darwin ma-
chine: the two-page spread; the standardly Seussian verse; the nonce 
names and the rampant repetitions; the economical, unfussy, curv-
ing, loose-limbed Seuss line; the blithe, eyes-closed faces of the 
­kettle-carriers, the guiltless grins of all the other Wickershams; the 
comic parent-child duplication, dating back to at least 1933; the ele-
phant versus others, dating back to the 1920s; the elephant and flower 
(1925);10 the Beezlenut name (1951); the singularity-versus-multiplic-
ity jokes.
	
Yet despite the rich natural grain of his individuality, despite the 
personally tried and tested solutions, Dr. Seuss has also attended to 
the spe­cific problems of this phase of the story and this two-page 
spread, and has found many small solutions, some of them unique, 
like the singularly pop-eyed Horton, with less of the curve of his 
head showing between eye and object than in any other profile.
	
Dr. Seuss has had to “write, rewrite, reject, re-reject, and polish 

	
Levels of Explanation: Particular
	
367
incessantly,” to generate, test, and regenerate, in order to make the 
elements of the confrontation scene work as swiftly and effectively as 
they do. He has done so more to tighten attention and minimize the 
costs of comprehension, even for a very young child, than to express 
any abstract meaning. And he has done so not by using arbitrary 
conventions but by calling on many features with deep biological 
roots, like the expressions on Horton’s and the kangaroos’ faces, 
height as a sign of dominance, and the number of other animals 
ranked against the lone elephant.11
	
Dr. Seuss had been thinking of elephants and tiny others for 
­almost thirty years when he wrote Horton Hears a Who! He had 
­considered reprising Horton since at least 1949, but it took a wholly 
unexpected problem, arising from his sojourn in Japan, to generate a 
new set of variations on these familiar themes and spark a new imag-
inative surprise for his readers: a whole populace on a speck of dust. 
Dr. Seuss solves a problem posed—to his unique sensibility, at any 
rate—by his local context, but transforms it into his own particular 
problem, to make of it a story appealing to readers of all kinds, young 
and old, and at all times.
	
A truly evolutionary approach to literature, I have tried to sug-
gest through the simple example of Horton Hears a Who!, will apply 
a problem-solution model to multiple levels: the universal features 
of human nature that story in general and individual authors repre-
sent and appeal to; the local conditions available for earning an audi-
ence; the individual qualities that shape an author’s unique range of 
likely problems and solutions, and that he or she develops and deep-
ens over years of generating, testing, regenerating new artistic efforts; 
and the particular problems of a single story, especially of lowering 
the cost and raising the bene­fits of audience attention. An evolution-
ary analysis of any literary work can be sensitive to the moment and 
to the likelihood that past problems and solutions—within human 
nature, the local narrative tradition, the individual’s experience, and 
the work’s particular contours—will shape the new problems to be 
faced and the new solutions to be found.

368
24
MEANINGS
Events, Stories, Meanings
For all the modern academic interest in narrative, a compre-
hensive understanding of the way we extract information from real 
events we witness, events we learn about, or stories we encounter 
seems some way off. Mark Turner suggests in The Literary Mind 
that human minds are unique because they can draw meaning from 
stories of all kinds, real or invented, through a pro­cess he terms “par-
able.”1 We do have an extraordinary capacity to express ourselves 
via oblique vignettes, but the ways in which we understand events 
and stories go beyond both causal explanation and parabolic impli-
cation. How we understand the Vietnam War or War and Peace, 
our parents’ divorce or Anna Karenina, cannot be summed up as 
parable.
	
From an evolutionary standpoint, explaining how we understand 
events and stories necessitates also discovering how other animals 
learn from events. Although we still have much to discover about ad-
vanced animal cognition, creatures of many species appear to infer 
meanings from events. At the simplest this involves, say, the recogni-
tion that food can be obtained through a certain procedure, as a pi-
geon pecks at or a rat presses a le­ver in an experiment. Animals that 
observe others intently may acquire complex information about so-
cial opportunities and costs. Chimpanzees can find out not only the 
dangers of challenging a particular male or his coalition partners, 
but also, by observing over time how coalitions rise and fall, how to 
plan for their own strategic assault on the ruling alliance.

	
Meanings
	
369
	
By monitoring the actions of others, animals can learn not only 
from their own actions—often a costly way to learn a negative les-
son—and not only spe­cific strategic information but also general in-
formation: character information about spe­cific individuals or gen-
eral types, and plot information, spe­cific (A has xed B) or general, 
about the costs and bene­fits, the risks and opportunities, of various 
kinds of behavior. What an animal assimilates—conditions, proce-
dures, strategies, out­comes—will depend not just on what it encoun-
ters but also on its capacity to observe and infer. Events do not come 
with their implications labeled for bystanders, and animals that can 
extract more relevant information than their conspe­cifics will be in a 
position to make better decisions.
	
Events merely happen, and animals of all kinds may witness them 
or not. Stories on the other hand seem uniquely human, and whether 
fac­tual or fictional get told because they are presumed worth their 
audience’s attention either for the interest of the events themselves 
or for their implications.
	
Aristotle famously distinguished between the implications of his-
tory (ac­tual events) and those of poetry (or, as we would say, lit­
erature, especially invented events), calling the former “particular” 
and the latter “universal.”2 But this often-­repeated distinction seems 
wrong. We can derive “universal” or general implications from wit-
nessed events or reported narratives whether fac­tual or fictional. We 
cannot draw spe­cific strategic information from fiction as we can 
from fac­tual narratives: it is one thing to learn that Hannibal Lecter 
has behaved psychopathically, another to learn the same of your 
neighbor. But like other animals we can draw “universal” (general) 
implications from real events (in the human case, whether encoun-
tered directly or not), just as we can from fictional events. Plutarch’s 
Parallel Lives used historical fig­ures as moral exempla memorable 
enough to make him, in the Renaissance, the most popular of Greek 
classics.
	
Stories differ from events not only because they are indirect but 
also because they are told by storytellers. We interpret the actions of 
others all the time, and we often act (pull a face, roll our eyes . . .) 
only because we want others to interpret our actions in this or that 
way. Storytelling is a particular kind of action, and telling a particu-

On the Origin of Stories
370
lar story invites an audience to interpret not only the story’s events 
but also the storyteller’s action in telling it. Interpreting the teller’s 
motives can be easy in casual conversation, when we may often see a 
story as a reminiscence or an example or a parallel triggered by the 
preceding conversation.3 It may become more dif­fi­cult when some-
one tells a preexisting story, since the story was not made for the 
­occasion, though it may have been selected, and reshaped, to fit the 
situation of its retelling. It be­comes still more dif­fi­cult for a fictional 
rather than a fac­tual story, and a printed rather than a spoken story, 
for now the narrative intentions can be inferred not from the situa-
tion or the teller but only from the story’s events, manner, and im-
pact.
	
Our capacity to infer meanings from stories emerges naturally 
from our capacities both to infer general meanings from spe­cific 
events and to infer intentions from others’ actions. But just as the 
meanings we choose to draw from events are not wholly determined 
by the events, so our reactions to others’ actions may not be wholly 
determined by the actors’ intentions. Someone might say, “It’s hot in 
here” to prompt a window to be opened. The remark might indeed 
have its intended effect, but it could also elicit other reactions, spo-
ken or unspoken, from “Yes, why do they always overdo the central 
heating?” to “Why ­don’t you take your jacket off, then?” to “Is she 
having a hot flash? She looks that age” or “He always is one for stat-
ing the obvious.” In the case of fiction, a storyteller like Dr. Seuss will 
try to elicit the kinds of responses he most wants, but he will also 
expect that he cannot entirely control the responses of the large and 
diverse audience he seeks. In trying to rule out some unwelcome re-
actions, he might irritate or bore others resistant to being told what 
to think and feel. He will have to balance intuitively the costs and 
bene­fits of each choice, and monitor for possible counterreactions to 
each attempt to direct audience response.
Dr. Seuss and Meaning
Like many storytellers, Dr. Seuss had an ambivalent attitude to the 
meanings or morals of his stories. He was successfully Seussian in 
advertising campaigns like the Flit bug-­spray ads of the late 1920s or 

	
Meanings
	
371
the Essomarine gas ads of the 1930s long before he cared for serious 
meanings at all. The story that sowed the seed of the Horton books 
mocked the idea of the animal fable, with its humiliating and frus-
trating conclusion for Matilda the elephant and the jeering “Moral: 
­Don’t go around hatching other folks’ eggs.” Dr. Seuss’s first pub-
lished children’s book, And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street, 
seemed remarkable in its time for allowing its hero to concoct fan-
tastically tall tales and not be punished for doing so. It was rejected 
by publisher after publisher, on the grounds that they could find “‘no 
moral or message’ . . . nothing aimed at ‘transforming children into 
good citizens.’” Reading such replies, Geisel roared to his wife across 
his studio: “What’s wrong with kids having fun reading without be-
ing preached at?”4
	
Yet the rise of Hitler and the course of World War II made him 
a more serious and socially engaged writer.5 He would later declare, 
apparently forgetting Mulberry Street or The Cat in the Hat: “It’s 
­impossible to tell a story without a moral—either the good guys win 
or the bad guys win.”6 And in a further partial contradiction, as if 
a  moral was now not inevitable, but an infrequent and precious 
achievement, he remarked in his last year: “I think my stuff has 
­become useful, not just amusing. That’s important to me.”7 The anti-
tyrannical Yertle the Turtle (1958), the antiracist The Sneetches (1961), 
the antipollution The Lorax (1971), the antiwar The Butter Battle Book 
(1984) all have unmissable morals, despite their fantastic treatment.
	
In composing some stories, Dr. Seuss seems to have begun with a 
moral or message, and to have been guided by that throughout, al-
though the local problems of making the story as wackily Seussian as 
ever dominate the composition of even these books. But the greatest 
Seuss stories cannot be reduced to any single moral.
Horton Hears a Who! began with an impulse to promote democracy 
in Japan but emerged quite in­de­pen­dent of its origin. It has held au-
diences old and young, generation after generation, partly because it 
has too much life, like complex events in the real world, for us to ex-
tract only one neat meaning.
	
In “Matilda, the Elephant with a Mother Complex” Dr. Seuss 
mocked cozy moral meanings. In Horton Hears a Who!, however, he 

On the Origin of Stories
372
repeats four times “A person’s a person, no matter how small”: even 
the least have rights, and all have responsibilities even to the least of 
others. He notes: “In verse you can repeat. It be­comes part of the pat-
tern. To teach, you have to repeat and repeat and repeat.”8 The “moral 
of the story” recurs in variations on Horton’s line or simply in nu-
merous references to “small” and “persons.” Horton, the mightiest 
animal in the jungle, not only voices the line but acts on it from the 
first, and we admire him for it. The other animals, as soon as they 
believe in the Whos’ existence, instantly echo his sentiment and ac-
tions, playfully reprised at the end in the young kangaroo’s “no mat-
ter how small-­ish!” The story, its refrain, and its ending all suggest 
this as the natural and desirable attitude toward others.
	
Even a narrative “message” as explicit and reiterated as this never-
theless depends for its range of implication and application partly 
on audiences’ attitudes and interests.9 The problem-­solution model 
after all should apply not only to artists but also to audiences. Selfish 
gene theory shows that we cannot expect organisms to work rou-
tinely for the bene­fit of others:10 in this case they should seek to max-
imize the bene­fit for themselves of attending to a story. Audiences will 
therefore tend to seek what matters most to themselves, not neces-
sarily to the artist, and even to appropriate the work in ways the art-
ist did not intend.11 Vegetarians could read Horton Hears a Who! as 
supporting their cause. An antiabortionist group did use “A person’s 
a person, no matter how small” in its campaign until Geisel threat-
ened legal action.12
	
But if audiences engage with art to serve their own purposes, 
rather than those of the artists, then artists, intuiting this propensity, 
will often try to make their interests coincide—or at least seem to—
with those of their audiences, especially by promoting prosocial or 
group values, since we all bene­fit from associating with altruists or 
from living within thriving groups. In his two Horton books Dr. 
Seuss not only promotes sociality but does so with comic Seussian 
exuberance.
	
Yet most writers with literary rather than purely instructive ambi-
tions prefer to open up rather than close off implications. Just as a 
live metaphor in poetry creates an aura of suggestion rather than a 

	
Meanings
	
373
pinpoint illumination, meaning in story more open-­ended than fa-
ble tends to radiate out. We can read Horton Hears a Who! as about 
the rights of all, even the smallest, or the duties of all, even toward 
those who can least speak up for themselves. In that sense, and given 
Dr. Seuss’s primary audience and the diminutive size of the Whos, 
we may think spe­cifi­cally of the rights of children. The year before 
composing Horton Hears a Who!, Dr. Seuss had worked on his film, 
The 5000 Fingers of Dr. T. “The Kids’ Song” there includes the lines
Now just because we’re kids,
Because we’re sort of small,
Because we’re closer to the ground,
And you are bigger pound by pound,
You have no right, you have no right
To push and shove us little kids around . . .
I’d hate to grow like some I know
Who push and shove us little kids around.13
Horton Hears a Who!’s contrasts in size between Horton and the 
other jungle animals, and between the other animals and the Whos, 
can yield other implications: the weakness even of the strong if chal-
lenged by the rest (Horton for all his size cannot withstand the con-
certed opposition of the others); the strength of the comparatively 
weak if they are united (the other animals ranked against Horton; 
the Whos themselves in making themselves heard by the other ani-
mals).
	
Although it is a brilliant solution to Dr. Seuss’s self-­assigned prob-
lem of promoting democracy in Japan, Horton Hears a Who! is much 
more multivalent in its implications for the relationships among in-
dividual, group, and community. Every voice counts, even the small-
est, we learn from Jo-­jo’s “Yopp!” making the crucial difference, so 
that the Whos can at last be heard and their interests taken into 
­account. Yet this part of the story covers only the case of ev­ery­body 
speaking with one voice, when democracy allows people to speak 
freely with many con­flicting voices—or to remain silent. As a case 
for democracy, a message that all should shout with one voice would 

On the Origin of Stories
374
be misguided if narrowly taken. But the rest of the story tries to de-
bar such an inference. Horton acts on his own conscience, despite 
the concerted mockery and threats of the other animals. He resists 
their majoritarian pressure, and we commend him for doing so and 
resent the other animals for not tolerating dissent.14
	
Part of what makes the story so satisfying, indeed, is the delicate 
balance between our admiration for Horton’s having the courage to 
stand up for himself despite the pressure of his entire jungle com-
munity and young Jo-­jo’s having the decency to respond to the pres-
sure of his community. Both nonconformity and conformity have 
their claims. This kind of symmetry may not be consciously noticed 
even by most adult readers, yet it contributes naturally to our sense 
of the rightness of the story. In his case, Horton has good reason to 
resist the other animals; in his, Jo-­jo has good reason to join his fel-
low Whos.
	
Other aspects of the story carry other implications. Our distaste 
for the other animals’ initial intolerance of Horton’s belief in the 
Whos encourages a tolerance of difference, including racial differ-
ence—the more focused moral of the story “The Sneetches,” from 
the same year15—and differences in beliefs, and not just a tolerance 
for but an appreciation of the unusual, which Dr. Seuss seeks to 
stimulate throughout his work.
	
As in Horton Hatches the Egg, Horton’s character and conduct 
serve as an example. He shows not only an instinctive readiness to 
help, even more than in the earlier book, but once again persever-
ance, in following the eagle and sifting through the clover, and now 
courage, in not yielding before the opposition of all the other ani-
mals. That encouragement of resilience and determination proves 
central in other Seuss stories like “What Was I Scared Of?” and Oh, 
the Places You’ll Go.
We can reduce a story to any level of thematic abstraction, as Rich-
ard Levin forcefully pointed out when he debunked critical claims to 
have discovered supposedly ever deeper or wider “themes” in this or 
that Renaissance play, in what he called the “my theme can lick your 
theme” strategy.16 Although sermonizers may start and stick with a 
theme, storytellers need first of all to have audiences attend. A tacit 

	
Meanings
	
375
promise of eventual meaning, a take-­home fortune cookie message, 
offers too little incentive if the fare itself lacks flavor.
	
This is not to deny that even ­longer stories have implications, es-
pecially through their power to engage our moral emotions. And in-
deed their implications will have a major bearing on the attention 
they receive. Not only do stories tend to be prosocial in their impli-
cations, but they are regularly selected for that reason by parents and 
communities.
	
Horton Hears a Who! encourages openness and in­de­pen­dence of 
mind, resolution and courage in the face of obstacles, tolerance of 
others, compassion to those weaker than oneself, and efforts in sup-
port of the common good. Many a story with such laudable lessons 
nevertheless now languishes unread, and the success of Horton Hears 
a Who! depends less on its moral implications than on its appeal 
to attention in ev­ery line. Yet the fact that it can engage our moral 
emotions so simply and strongly, in such a rounded way, adds to 
its power to earn attention. Not only the artistry but also the moral 
tone of Dr. Seuss’s elephant stories became pro­gres­sively more en-
gaging, from Matilda, derided for her desire to hatch the egg and un-
rewarded when the bird flies in horror from her intimidating bulk, 
to Horton, exploited by lazy Mayzie but rewarded by his hatching an 
elephant-­bird, to Horton, eager to help the assiduous and resource-
ful Whos. Had the execution of Horton Hears a Who! remained as 
brilliant as it is but its story line been that of the mean and mocking 
“Matilda, the Elephant,” it would hardly have become the favorite it 
remains.
We are likely to be wary of the precepts of others, especially if they 
seem more to the advantage of the instructor than to the advantage 
of the instructed. Yet we all love an altruist. As game-­theory simula-
tions of cooperation show, any par­tic­i­pant in a social exchange bene­
fits when the other partner is an altruist. And Horton’s altruism is 
as colossal as his physique. He is ready to exhaust himself and risk 
his own freedom to save the lives of minuscule creatures who could 
never repay his kindness. There is an absurd Seussian extravagance 
here that appeals to us all, since we know that our concern for other 
creatures dwindles with size: we do not feel much solicitude for a fly, 

On the Origin of Stories
376
a mosquito, or an ant, let alone a bacterium, and we appreciate the 
extraordinariness of big Horton’s concern for creatures microscopi-
cally small.
	
Dr. Seuss’s comedy and his seriousness are the twin chambers of 
his story’s huge heart. The fantastic extravagance of Horton’s altru-
ism makes him all the more attractive and makes us all the more 
readily sympathize with him, ally ourselves with his goals, and re-
joice in the positive outcome for him and those he champions. We 
learn the moral lesson, in other words, in a memorable and pleasur-
able way, soaking up the admiration that Horton’s own behavior 
earns. Our guard is down, our moral emotions are engaged,17 our 
imaginations stirred. As novelist Philip Pullman writes: “‘Thou shalt 
not’ might reach the head, but it takes ‘Once upon a time’ to reach 
the heart.”18
So far I have stressed the moral and social meanings of Horton Hears 
a Who! But there are more. As I and others argue, all art serves cre-
ativity. Creativity and imagination are favorite themes in Dr. Seuss 
from And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street through The Cat 
in the Hat books and Oh, The Thinks You Can Think! to his unfin­
ished Hooray for Diffendoofer Day (1998), completed by Jack Pre-
lutsky and Lane Smith. A. O. Scott writes in the New York Times:
That I think about the health of my children’s imaginations 
at least as much as I worry about the strength of their char-
acters, and that I picture their powers of perception as both 
resilient and fragile, probably owes more to Theodor Geisel 
than to any parenting manuals I’ve read since. I suspect that 
it’s only a slight exaggeration—and exaggeration was one 
of his great gifts—to say that our current understanding of 
children, and of ourselves as former children, is the brain-
child of Dr. Seuss.
He calls Mulberry Street “a hymn to the generative power of fantasy, a 
celebration of the sheer inventive plea­sure of spinning an ordinary 
event into ‘a story that no one can beat.’”19
	
A fine work of art not only expresses creativity but also inspires it 

	
Meanings
	
377
in those who enjoy it. In children responding to Dr. Seuss, this ap-
preciation may not be sophisticated, but it will be there, even in 
­wonder at details: “Look! A whole city on a dust speck!” “See how 
he’s drawn them!” Through the zaniness of his choices Dr. Seuss 
makes a good deal of the creative appeal of the craftsman evident 
even to the youngest children, but although he designs his stories for 
accessible and immediate effects, the care in his design allows reread-
ers to notice more details or implications each time they read—in 
itself a pro­cess of continued creative discovery.
	
While creativity and imagination are strongly implicit in the man-
ner of Horton Hears a Who!, they are perhaps less central in its mat-
ter. Nevertheless, Horton’s capacity to conjure up in vivid imagina-
tion—on two two-­page spreads—one lone creature hanging on to 
the globelike sphere of the dust speck, and then a whole family and 
a token plant aboard the speck, is important in preparing for his 
­immediate readiness to protect whoever is on the speck, and in open-
ing our imaginations to this improbable scenario—soon to be out-
stripped, of course, by the direct glimpse of the happy Whos that the 
next, “objective” panorama of the speck offers us. And Horton’s gift 
of imagination, and our imagination in merely enjoying a story so 
fantastical, also align us against the other animals, who stick stolidly 
and almost fatally to the normal and the probable. The whole story 
insists that without the capacity to think beyond what we can see 
and to explore the worlds of the possible our lives would be sadly re-
stricted.
In discussing the Odyssey, I noted the role that the human under-
standing of false belief plays in its structure—in all the dramatic iro-
nies surrounding the fate of Odysseus—and in the metaphysics that 
informs the story: the sharp awareness that the truth of a human 
situation may not be visible to individuals within it, that the truth 
may often need a larger, more comprehensive vision, stretching even 
all the way to the Olympian gods. Dr. Seuss, too, constructs his story 
around a simple, central, readily graspable instance of false belief, the 
other animals’ assumption that there cannot be creatures living on a 
space as small as a dust speck. He sim­pli­fies the dramatic irony for 
his young readers, by including only one such irony, developing it 

On the Origin of Stories
378
gradually, and allowing the children to see first Horton’s good but 
imperfect guesses and then the reality he cannot see. He also moti-
vates his audience—by allowing us to see the happy Whos on Who-­
ville directly, and by put­ting them and Horton in danger because the 
other animals refuse to believe they exist—to want the jungle ani-
mals to recognize the existence of the Whos. We not only want Hor-
ton to achieve his goal, to save the Whos; we also want the other ani-
mals to discover that their belief was false, that it is they and not 
Horton who acted on false belief.
	
The human understanding of false belief, I suggested in previous 
chapters, has been crucial for the art of story and for religion and sci-
ence. Once we understand clearly that we may not know ev­ery­thing 
relevant to a situation, we will often wish to seek out a deeper expla-
nation. In the past such an effort often entailed supernatural expla-
nation, reading the seen in terms of unseen agency. In the modern 
world many of us seek to explain our world in strictly natural rather 
than in supernatural terms, without unseen agents. In Horton Hears 
a Who! the other jungle animals seem narrow-­minded for rejecting 
the notion that there might be creatures smaller than they have con-
ceived of on a mere dust speck. There are indeed unseen agents in 
this world—unseen by the jungle animals—but we can see them, 
and see that they are both fantastical, with their microcity, their mi-
crotennis, and microhockey, and real within the world of the story, 
perfectly natural, not in the least supernatural. They are also an em-
blem of the worlds within worlds that science has discovered—
and  an unwitting prediction of modern nanotechnology—and of 
the openness and imagination needed to discover the world through 
science.
In Parts 2 and 3 I suggested that the chief functions of art and story 
lie in improving human cognition, cooperation, and creativity. Even 
a story as playful and unassuming as Horton Hears a Who! explic-
itly  and implicitly develops social cognition, encourages coopera-
tion, and fosters the imagination, linking imagination with under-
standing our world more fully, with the creativity of human life as a 
whole, in religion and science as well as in art.
	
Mark Turner proposes the parable function of story. Story can be 

	
Meanings
	
379
used in that way, in Aesop or La Fontaine, in the parables of Christ or 
the fables of Tolstoy. But even a simple children’s story like Horton 
Hears a Who! can have myriad meanings radiating from its central 
core. These meanings are open, though not endlessly so, for they de-
rive ultimately from the open-­ended ways in which creatures can 
understand and emotionally assess not only spe­cific strategic infor-
mation but also the general implications of events. Dr. Seuss man-
ages both to offer a firm happy close to his story and a clear explicit 
moral and to allow for a wide range of other audience responses, in-
terests, and implications.
	
By focusing his efforts on securing our attention and activating 
our emotions, page by page, Dr. Seuss makes his simple story too 
rich to be compacted into a single moral, even the one he turns into 
a ringing refrain. Yet by focusing his efforts at the same time on Hor-
ton’s helping the Whos, and winning others over to help them, he 
stirs up an indefi­nite set of meanings that make the story matter still 
more to us. Attention and meaning remain distinct from and irre-
ducible to each other, but they feed off and into each other.

380
CONCLUSION: RETROSPECT AND PROSPECTS: 
EVOLUTION, LITERATURE, CRITICISM
Criticism seems to be badly in need of a coordinating principle, a 
central hypothesis which, like the theory of evolution in biology, will 
see the phenomena it deals with as parts of a whole.
Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism (1957)
Retrospect
Evolution allows us a clearer view of art and literature. Like a lens 
that can slide smoothly from macro to wide-­angle to telephoto, it of-
fers us more precision, breadth, and depth as we look at art in gen-
eral or literature in particular, or the elements of human nature rep-
resented or appealed to in either.
	
Throughout On the Origin of Stories, I have developed a number 
of key ideas:
Evolution
As I observed in Chapter 20, “Evolution generates problems and solu-
tions as it generates life. Rocks may crack and erode, but they do not 
have problems. Amoebas and apes do. Natural selection creates com-
plex new possibilities, and therefore new problems, as it assembles 
self-­sustaining organisms piecemeal, cycle after cycle, by generating 
partial solutions, testing them, and regenerating from the basis of 

	
Conclusion
	
381
the best solutions available in the current cycle. In time, it can create 
richer solutions to richer problems.”
	
Such Darwinian pro­cesses operate at multiple levels, not only at 
the level of genes or organisms, but also in secondary modes like the 
immune system. Particularly important for investigating art are the 
Darwinian pro­cesses within individual brains, where, as we grow, 
some of our neural connections atrophy through inactivity and oth-
ers multiply through use;1 within culture, where individuals together 
and over time engender and select new beliefs and practices;2 and 
within invention, as individuals or groups construct new artifacts or 
ideas and, from the most promising platforms, build still higher.3
	
Adaptations are complex biological systems, physiological or be-
havioral, which through the cumulative Darwinian pro­cess of blind 
variation and selective retention have developed a design that reliably 
serves some function, in other words provides a suf­fi­cient solution to 
some problem a species faces to improve chances of survival and re-
production.
Art as Adaptation
I have proposed that we see art as a form of cognitive play that ap-
peals to our intense human appetite for the rich inferences that pat-
tern allows. Art in this broad sense is a human adaptation, its chief 
functions being (1) to re­fine and retune our minds in modes central 
to human cognition—sight, sound, and sociality—which it can do 
piecemeal through its capacity to motivate us to par­tic­i­pate again 
and again in these high-­intensity workouts; (2) to raise the sta­tus of 
gifted artists; (3) to improve the coordination and cooperation of 
communities, in our very social species; and (4) to foster creativity 
on an individual and social level.
	
The plea­sures of play entice animals with flex­i­ble behaviors to en-
joy expending energy rather than resting, so that they learn and over-
learn key motor and social skills. We humans owe our competitive 
success, among ourselves and against other species, to intelligence. 
The appeal of the cognitive play in art makes art as compulsive for us 
as play, enticing us to forgo mental rest for mental stimulation that 
helps us to learn and overlearn key cognitive skills, especially our ca-
pacity to produce and pro­cess information patterns. Art entices us to 

On the Origin of Stories
382
engage our attention and activate our minds in ways that we find 
most pleasing, and allows the most gifted individuals to earn sta­tus 
by their power to command the attention of others.
	
Cooperation offers many bene­fits, although like all biological fea-
tures it also incurs costs. It has not been easy for a competitive pro­
cess to produce cooperation, but evolution has done so, especially 
through a series of social and moral emotions—like all emotions, na-
ture’s motivators for particular adaptive behaviors. Nevertheless the 
spread of cooperation through large communities of mostly unre-
lated individuals with inevitably competing interests needs the sup-
port of numerous evolved adaptations and cultural inventions that 
build on them. Among these are the community pride and coordina-
tion possible through shared design, music, dance, and story: tattoos, 
anthems, legends, and much more.
	
Creativity matters to us as humans, but may seem dif­fi­cult to 
­account for in terms of hard biological costs and bene­fits. Yet like 
sex, wasteful in that we lose half of our variable genes in each off-
spring (whereas asexual cloning transfers all genes to the next gen-
eration), creativity ultimately bene­fits us in producing a wider array 
of behavioral options, some of which will survive better than others 
under unpredictable selection pressures. Although many artistically 
creative choices do not lead directly to survival bene­fits, they 
strengthen dispositions that do so, through preparing human minds 
to think beyond the given and to feel con­fi­dent in controlling aspects 
of the world on their own terms, and can increase motives for trade 
and invention.
	
Storytelling appeals to our social intelligence. It arises out of our 
intense interest in monitoring one another and out of our evolved 
capacity to understand one another through theory of mind. Our 
­capacity to comprehend events, many facets of which we share with 
other animals, underlies our capacity for story but should not be 
confused with narrative, with telling events, an effortful pro­cess we 
undertake only to direct the attention of others to events real or 
imagined.
	
Stories, whether true or false, appeal to our interest in others, but 
fiction can especially appeal by inventing events with an intensity 

	
Conclusion
	
383
and surprise that fact rarely permits. Fictions foster cooperation by 
engaging and attuning our social and moral emotions and values, 
and creativity by enticing us to think beyond the immediate in 
the way our minds are most naturally disposed—in terms of social 
­actions.
Explanation
I have proposed four levels of explanation we can focus on for any 
story or literary work: the universal or specieswide, the features of 
human nature represented or appealed to in literature; the local, in 
time, place, or culture, which may modify human behavior and in-
terests in more or less substantial ways; the individual powers, inter-
ests, and experience of storytellers or their audiences; and the par-
ticular features of this or that story or audience situation.4
	
At the level of particular stories, the problem-­solution model allows 
us to analyze closely the choices we infer behind a work of art.5 Sto-
rytellers’ first problem is to capture attention. They may choose from 
among many different kinds of audience, but whichever audiences 
they seek, they will attempt to appeal through both common human 
predispositions and the fine-­tunings of local culture. Each attempted 
solution to the problem of holding audience interest will involve 
­different costs and bene­fits for both storytellers and their audiences. 
Storytellers will aim to reduce the costs and raise the bene­fits of their 
own composition efforts and their audiences’ responses.
	
Nature has shaped us to observe events and to infer information 
from them, both spe­cific (about this person, situation, or action) and 
general (about this type of person or the likely out­comes of that sort 
of situation or action). When we respond to fictions, we need not be-
lieve in the ac­tuality of particular individuals, situations, or actions 
in order to infer general implications.
	
We also interpret the actions of others in terms of their intentions. 
Telling a story is itself a complex action. So long as a storyteller holds 
our interest, we will infer sig­nifi­cance both from the story world—
from characters and events—and from the storyteller’s intentions in 
recounting these events in just this way. Both the fictional world’s 
implications for our world and the storyteller’s inferred intentions in 

On the Origin of Stories
384
telling us the story contribute to our sense of its import. But atten-
tion precedes meaning, although an emerging intuition of meaning 
may also feed back into our interest in the story.
Prospects
What are the consequences for literature of seeing storytelling as a 
human adaptation?
	
A first consequence should be that we realize that fiction is even 
more central to human life than we feel from the moment we first 
engage in pretend play to the moment we fin­ish our last story. Al-
though people continue to write and read literature with plea­sure 
and passion, academic literary study over the last few de­cades has 
often felt on the defensive, at least about literature, as if it were a 
­peripheral indulgence justifiable only by making it a stalking-­horse 
for political reform. But if storytelling sharpens our social cognition, 
prompts us to reconsider human experience, and spurs our creativ-
ity in the way that ­comes most naturally to us, then literary studies 
need not apologize.
Evocriticism versus Theory
The prevailing mode of literary theory in academe often calls itself 
simply “Theory,” as if theories like those of gravity, evolution, and 
relativity were nugatory compared with a single subset of literary 
theory. Capital-­T theory has become, as even some of its proponents 
admit, an initiation ritual, a graduate student boot camp for the in-
tellectual of­fi­cer corps. It has isolated literary criticism from the rest 
of modern thought and alienated literary studies even from litera-
ture itself.6
	
A biocultural or evolutionary approach to fiction can reverse these 
trends. Let me call it “evocriticism,” until a better term establishes 
­itself or, still better, until all literary criticism accepts that our evolu-
tionary past provides a natural framework for understanding our 
present and we can dispense with the distinguishing label. Evocriti-
cism lets us link literature with the whole of life, with other human 
activities and capacities, and their relation to those of other animals, 
as they compete, cooperate, and play, as they observe, understand, 

	
Conclusion
	
385
and empathize with others. It can reconnect literature with the whole 
range of human experience, and especially with what matters most 
in literature and life—and not just the features of life closest to ani-
mal existence.
	
Evocriticism can offer a literary theory both theoretical and em-
pirical, proposing hypotheses against the full range of what we know 
of human and other behavior, and testing them. Though compatible 
with much earlier literary theory and criticism, it will reject some 
possibilities, such as assumptions of radical disjunction between hu-
man minds of different eras or cultures based on a general cultural 
constructivism or particular “epistemic shifts.”
	
It can connect literature, for so long our best repository of infor-
mation about human experience, with ongoing research of various 
kinds that can re­fine and challenge our understanding of human na-
ture and thought.7 In this, it stands opposed to Theory, which cuts 
literature off from life by emphasizing human thought and ideas as 
the product of only language, convention, and ideology—although 
Theory then tries to compensate for severing literature from three-­
dimensional life by insisting that it is always political or ideological. 
Theory also cuts literature off from research by eschewing empiri-
cism, the testing of ideas against fac­tual evidence.
	
An evolutionary approach rejects taken-­for-­granted, locally un-
questioned assumptions about human nature. To understand stories 
at all requires at least an implicit theory of human nature. But most 
literary criticism has little more: either an intuitive theory of human 
nature as self-­evident, or recently an explicit and untenable theory of 
it as entirely socially constructed. By adopting a biocultural perspec-
tive, literature can both inform and be informed by science by en-
gaging with the in­quiry into human nature that a grasp of evolution 
makes possible.
	
The Western tradition has customarily linked humans to gods or 
God, and literature to the inspiration of the divine, to the Muses 
or God. Daniel Dennett refers to such supernatural explanations as 
“skyhooks,” hoisting the human above the earth by hanging us on to 
some celestial support.8 Postmodern thought has tended to de­fine 
the human in terms of culture or convention, no ­longer suspending 
us from the sky but keeping us somewhere above ground, as if cul-

On the Origin of Stories
386
ture allowed minds to hover like a head-­high fog. A biocultural ex-
planation builds from the ground up, from single-­celled organisms 
to humans. It interprets human society partly in light of the many 
forms of sociality that have evolved, under sometimes similar pres-
sures, throughout the animal world; human culture in light of cul-
ture in other animals; and human conventions in light of the conven-
tionalizing of behavior in animal ritual.
	
Postmodern thought has been a last bastion of human exception-
alism. Partly through sheer ignorance of culture and conventions 
in the animal world, Theory has decreed the world of human life to 
be entirely shaped by culture and convention and therefore distinct 
from the rest of reality. A biocultural account of the human, by con-
trast, sees us as having evolved under pressures often similar to those 
other animals face, but with a heightened capacity for sociality, social 
learning, and flex­i­ble thinking, which all helped, and were in turn 
helped by, the evolution of language, and which may have allowed us 
to pass through another major transition in evolution.
	
Evocriticism makes possible genuine and valid interdisciplinarity, 
through a connected, coherent, cumulative and relentlessly self-­
critical body of knowledge, and not the dilettantish smorgasbord 
(a dash of chaos theory here or Lacanian pseudopsychology there) 
exposed in the Sokal hoax.9 It can call on a model of human nature 
tested cross-­culturally from hunter-­gatherers to modern industrial-
ized so­ci­e­ties; tested comparatively, across species, within and beyond 
the primate and the mammalian lines; tested not shallowly but in 
real historical depth, over the millions of years that shaped the hu-
man mind and that account for the similarities among people of very 
different cultures, without neglecting immediate or midrange causal 
factors; and tested in the neurophysiological terms that are now be-
coming available through brain imaging technology.
	
An evolutionary approach to literature can encourage literary 
scholars to learn from the strengths of science without abandoning 
their own expertise. Science advances by subjecting its hypotheses 
to hard testing against possible counterevidence. Literary studies can 
work in the same way.
	
As we read fiction we generate ideas about the story, about why 

	
Conclusion
	
387
events so far have happened, about what we think will happen, and 
about why the author has told this story in this way. We revise our 
judgments as we read, and as we reread we may re-­revise them, no-
ticing new details incompatible with earlier impressions or new pat-
terns suggesting deeper explanations. This pro­cess closely resembles 
the sci­en­tific advancing and testing of hypotheses.10
	
Yet in literary criticism too many still share the naïve conviction 
that only positive evidence counts (that X had a motive, and access 
to the murder weapon; that work W can be explained as “about” 
theme T), when negative evidence counts for more (that X was else-
where at the time of the murder, or Y was seen plunging the knife 
into the victim; that in almost ev­ery line of work W we can find 
­details with no relation to theme T). We learn more when evidence 
against a reading surfaces, since it forces us to account for a richer 
stock of information. Literary critics can only gain from learning 
to test their own interpretations, their “readings,” against possible 
counterevidence, from within a text or beyond. They need to aban-
don the axiom that evidence amassed for a conclusion suf­fices as 
proof of good faith, never mind how much may count against.
In recent literary and film criticism scholars have often applied to 
fictional works some subset of Theory, ideas hallowed by their 
­provenance from, say, Derrida, Foucault, Lacan, or Althusser: “one 
thought-system is taken over as setting the standards by which [au-
thors] should be read. Critics derive their assumptions about lan-
guage and literature, their methodology (in some cases their re­
nunciation of method), their attitudes to life even, from a law-­giving 
individual or system.”11 Such critics assume that if they can “apply” 
the theory, if they can read a work in its light, they thereby somehow 
“prove” it, even if the criteria of application and evidence are loose.
	
Partly for that reason, I resist the term “literary Darwinism” 
­favored by some evolutionary critics. Darwin’s ideas have been far 
more fertile and valid than those of Marx or Freud, but precisely for 
that reason they belong to a widespread research program that has in 
many ways outstripped what Darwin proposed. Evolutionary critics, 
unlike those who have over the years labeled themselves as Marxist 

On the Origin of Stories
388
or Freudian, should appeal not to a founding father but to a live and 
empirically accountable research program. Marxism and Freudian-
ism by contrast remain popular in literary studies despite having 
been rejected by their home disciplines, and despite their reluctance 
or refusal to countenance negative evidence and their suspect, self-­
serving flex­i­bil­ity in their “search” for positive “evidence.”
	
Evolutionary anthropology, biology, economics, and psychology 
are research programs, not bodies of doctrine. Critic Frank Lentric-
chia dismissed Theory—which he had championed until he realized 
how thoroughly it quashed literary plea­sure—by saying: “Tell me 
your theory and I’ll tell you in advance what you’ll say about any 
work of literature, especially those you ­haven’t read.”12 Such predict-
ability will not be possible in evolutionary literary criticism. Evocrit-
icism will not replace one grand theory with another, although it will 
attempt to provide a basis for literary theory. It can investigate works 
at multiple levels, from the universal to the particular, or spe­cific 
problems or topics in human life as represented in literature—love, 
cooperation, sexual difference, life history, family con­flict, and much 
more—or spe­cific ways of engaging audience attention or rousing 
audience response, in spe­cific traditions or contexts, or within or 
across periods and ­genres.13
Evidence and “Proof”
Unlike current Theory, evocriticism prefers proposals concrete 
enough to be subjected to potential falsification by evidence, in both 
the theories used for literary analysis and the analyses themselves. 
Aspects of my own proposal for art as adaptation, for instance, would 
be falsified if repeated engagement in particular arts did not im-
prove the pro­cessing of information patterns in the relevant cogni-
tive modes, or if there were on average a negative correlation between 
individual artistic success and sta­tus or between the artistic richness 
of so­ci­e­ties and in­de­pen­dent mea­sures of social cohesiveness.
	
Claims within an evolutionary approach to literature can hardly 
be “proved” by application to literary works. Yet the fertility of such 
an approach should be tested both on particular works and on liter-
ary theory. If evocriticism cannot generate literary theory and criti-

	
Conclusion
	
389
cism richer than those possible through other methods, it does not 
warrant the considerable effort of learning enough about human 
evolution to apply it to literature.
	
In On the Origin of Stories I have discussed only two stories in con-
siderable detail. I chose the Odyssey and Horton Hears a Who! not 
because they bear out evolutionary themes in which I have a prior 
investment, but simply as supremely successful stories as near as I 
can get to narrative’s phylogenic and ontogenic origins. But it is not 
only narratives near the historical or individual origins of story that 
can be explained with help from evolution. I had intended to include 
other highly successful stories, a Shakespeare tragedy (Hamlet) and 
comedy (Twelfth Night), a classic novel (Pride and Prejudice), a mod-
ernist novel (Joyce’s Ulysses), and a postmodernist text (Spiegelman’s 
Maus), the last two by authors associated with the avant-­garde.14 
Space forced me to defer those additional examples.
	
I have wanted to show, among other things, that whatever else ev-
ocriticism may be, it need not be reductive and can be expansive. It 
can offer the widest possible explanatory perspective, on, say, the 
evolution of cooperation (the universal level) without neglecting the 
historical or regional circumstances (the local level: the institution 
of xenia in the Odyssey or the reintroduction of democracy in Japan 
in Horton Hears a Who!), or the individuality of the author (the in­
dividual level: problematic in Homer’s case, given our uncertainty 
about his identity, pervasive and intense in Dr. Seuss’s), or the par-
ticular problems and solutions the author faces in this work, to se-
cure an audience both by building on the appeal of other works in its 
tradition and by ensuring the many surprises this work offers within 
that tradition.
	
An evolutionary approach can be more sensitive than others to 
artistic detail and design. It can show the problem situations of sto-
rytellers aiming to engage the attention of wide audiences, their at-
tempts to minimize costs while maximizing bene­fits, and the Dar-
winian pro­cess of composition itself. It takes seriously the idea that 
the complex emerges out of the simple, mostly building slowly, by 
minute increments, in the design of species (the universal), in cul-
tural tradition (the local), in personal development (the individual), 

On the Origin of Stories
390
and in artistic composition and comprehension (the particular). It 
allows us to see art as part of an unbroken series of nested problems 
and solutions, from species to local to individual to particular im-
pacts and implications.
My discussions of Homer and Dr. Seuss have often drawn on schol-
arship of a nonevolutionary kind, historical, cultural, biographical, 
and bibliographical. Evocriticism should not exclude such detailed 
work, and in fact can offer a theoretical jus­tifi­ca­tion for employing it 
more secure than Theory’s recent rejections of the individual and 
particular.
	
An evolutionary approach should not seek to subvert common-
sensical readings. After all, works of art would fail if their meanings 
were integral to their overall effect yet had remained unrecognized 
until the latest critical find­ings. Occasionally, however, evocriticism 
will challenge common interpretations in the light of the best em-
pirical information; and it will consistently call into question read-
ings from biologically untenable positions, such as those that insist 
that reality is only culturally constructed, or that the human mind 
can be explained by psychology in the speculative Freudian tradi-
tion. (Naomi Goldenberg, for instance, reads The Cat in the Hat, in 
Philip Nel’s words, “as a masculine attempt to overcome womb envy: 
the Cat gives birth to little alphabetic cats (invents language) in or-
der to erase the role of the mother (removing a menstrual stain from 
mother’s dress and bed).”)15 Yet I would also stress (with David Bor-
dwell) that meaning is only part of the effect of works of art.16
Although it is informed by science, evocriticism does not limit it-
self to sci­en­tific reduction, since art by its nature invites a creative 
and original response, to some degree subjective and open-­ended, 
an aura of implication rather than an exact transfer of information. 
Evocriticism can account for the range of responses and appropria-
tions in terms of individual and local variation, a resultant diver-
sity of purposes and interests, and creativity as an adaptive function 
of art.
	
A biocultural approach should also be able to account for the exis-

	
Conclusion
	
391
tence of the critical tradition. Attention continually shifts in both in-
tensity and direction, and noticing in a new way a single detail or 
pattern in a work of art may begin to modify one’s response to the 
whole. Even artists who expertly appeal to audiences and monitor 
their own reactions as they compose cannot predict the fluc­tua­tions 
of attention and response in all possible audiences. Most of these 
fluc­tua­tions will make little difference to overall judgments, but a 
new recognition of any feature of a work of art may transform what 
we heed in the rest, whether we register it ourselves or see it high-
lighted by others. Since we are primed for social learning, we are pre-
disposed to learn from the responses of others—around the camp-
fire, in the next seat in the theater, in the review pages, in the library 
stacks—whenever we engage with stories.
Evocriticism should not be easy, should not impose a template, should 
not arrive at a priori conclusions. It is a research program, not a set 
of prefabricated conclusions or all-­purpose methods. It is open-­
ended at both ends, in terms of the evidence in literary works and 
the evidence about human nature or culture arriving from anthro-
pology, biology, economics, history, psychology, and sociology.
	
Evocriticism does not dispense with literary expertise, the sensi-
tive response of trained readers. It does not replace expert readers 
with a standard checklist of evolutionary questions and answers, but 
opens up to good readers a new range of problems and possibilities.
	
Critical expertise, too, should be explicable in evolutionary terms, 
and it is. Since we enjoy sharing attention and since we are pre­
disposed to learn from others, we like to discuss works of art—de-
signed, after all, to maximize sharable attention and response. Since 
stories, especially, often communicate values important in the com-
munity, parents or elders explain fables, stories, or mythologies to 
the young. But the flex­i­bil­ity of human minds and behaviors allows 
us to specialize. In a society in which not all need be generalists, those 
more inclined or able can devote suf­fi­cient time and energy to mas-
tering a particular skill so that it be­comes, as we say, second nature. 
Or in neurological terms: the expert pro­cesses relevant information 
rapidly and automatically in a more posterior region of the brain, 

On the Origin of Stories
392
leaving more room in the most advanced and explicit part of the 
mind, the neocortex, for higher-­level pro­cessing, deeper analysis, 
more novel and searching response.17
	
To become an expert reader, there is no substitute for reading 
­literature widely and intensely, but someone who does so and adopts 
an evolutionary and cognitive perspective can ask new questions 
about literature and the human nature seen in or stirred by fiction.
Attention
The evolutionary theory of art and fiction I have proposed stresses 
attention. Other evolutionary theories do not. I have several reasons 
for foregrounding attention.
	
1. Attention is important to all art, literature, and story, as artists 
and audiences—and Aristotle—have known for millennia. Alterna-
tive evolutionary explanations, like narrative as a source of informa-
tion (Michelle Scalise Sugiyama)18 or as a source of cognitive order 
(Joseph Carroll),19 do not cover all cases. Information can be impor-
tant in some stories, as even in the Odyssey, where the rituals of hos-
pitality or setting sail convey information directly (albeit informa-
tion likely to be already known to the original audience). So, too, can 
cognitive order, like Homer’s con­fi­dent overview of the cosmos, the 
worlds of the immortals, the mortals, and the dead. But the com-
monest stories, and the fastest to circulate, are jokes. Neither jokes 
nor children’s stories from a poo-­pooing dragon to Dr. Seuss’s kindly 
elephant constitute valid sources of information or cognitive order, 
but they are highly effective at earning attention for different audi-
ences and durations.
	
2. Art’s effects on human minds depend on its power to compel atten-
tion. Like play, art can reshape minds piecemeal because its high 
doses of pattern engage us compulsively and over time, over many 
experiences, alter our capacity to produce and pro­cess pattern.
	
3. Attention capture can explain the design features of stories, as 
other explanations cannot.
	
Information as a key to narrative can account for fac­tual narrative, 
but not for fiction. Why invent a form of story that makes it an error 

	
Conclusion
	
393
to infer spe­cific information (that a prince called Hamlet really ex-
isted, that Elsinore was the cap­ital of Denmark, that it perched on 
precipitous clifftops) and a puzzle to know what general informa-
tion to infer (that ghosts walk and talk, that daughters should re-
sist their fathers’ meddling in their love lives, that sons should not 
berate their mothers)? In a Tolstoy fable the story’s implications may 
be succinctly spelled out, but what information do we extract from 
Anna Karenina? Where do we start? Where do we stop?
	
Cognitive order, vague though it is as an explanation for fiction, 
fares no better.20 Even an implied story as brief as “Ralph, come back, 
it was only a rash” calls on our cognitive capacities to decode, which 
we can do in a flash. It catches our eye and provokes a sudden explo-
sion of amused emotion, but what cognitive order does it provide? 
Stories from childhood pretend play, like the chaotic dinosaur and 
duck examples in Chapter 12, to adult fiction like Donald Barthelme’s 
bewildering “The Indian Uprising”21 employ our capacity for rapid 
makeshift cognitive inference but do not supply cognitive order—
although some stories may.
	
But the aim of securing attention can explain the design features 
of stories from jokes or children’s pretend play to timeless master-
pieces or avant-­garde challenges. Because of our ultrasociality, we 
have a huge appetite for learning about social events. Fiction can 
compel our attention for hours on end. As I showed in discussing 
the  Odyssey and Horton Hears a Who!, the large-­ and small-­scale 
choices that successful stories continually make about ­genre, charac-
ter, plot, medium, structure, character contrast, irony, and much else 
can be explained in terms of attention, in terms of offering entice-
ments—especially emotional enticements—to keep audiences dis-
tracted from responding to their immediate surrounds as they half-­
immerse themselves in the far-­fetched world of story.
	
4. Attention can explain the social effects of art. Attention to one 
another ­comes so naturally to us all that we rarely think about its bi-
ological sig­nifi­cance. In social animals in general, and especially in 
primates, the ability to command attention is closely correlated with 
sta­tus, which indicates priority of access to resources and therefore 
normally correlates highly with survival and reproductive success.22 

On the Origin of Stories
394
And as all of us in our singularly social species know, there are few 
ways of holding others ­longer than by telling a vivid story. Humans, 
moreover, have a uniquely intense motivation and capacity to share 
attention—and this proclivity has recently been proposed as the 
key factor in the singular development of human intelligence and 
culture.23
	
The attention-­earning power of art can lead not only to a pri-
mary  market in sta­tus for artists but also to a secondary market 
in acceptance or sta­tus for audiences. We may wish to belong to or 
excel within some audience, whether large—those interested in the 
pop charts or best-­seller book lists or new movie releases—or small 
and select—those with cult or elite tastes, for 1930s blues music, or 
Julian Barnes’s “Dan Kavanagh” detective fiction, or avant-­garde 
film. We may earn the attention of others through our access, espe-
cially when restricted, to artists or their works: a first edition, a signed 
copy, a manuscript, an original painting, a commissioned perfor-
mance, an expensive seat at the opera, a night in a rock star’s hotel 
bedroom.
	
5. Attention explains artistic kinds. Artists can seek many differ-
ent audiences with their art, even within the art of fiction. “Whose 
attention does it invite?” may be the first question we ask about a 
story: does it de­fine its audience by age (child, adolescent, adult), by 
literary level (pulp, popular, literary, experimental), by ­genre (ro-
mance, mystery, thriller, Western, sci-­fi, fantasy)? Does it promise 
immediate, low-­effort attention-­worthiness, or ­longer-­term and 
higher-­effort engagement, to last over time and repeat rereadings? 
Is it the sort of book we would discard after reading or keep and re-
turn to?
	
6. Attention offers a guide to appreciation and evaluation. An ap-
proach to story that focuses on attention will respect the achieve-
ment of low-­culture fiction that appeals successfully to its chosen 
audience, although it will also rate differently fiction that can hold 
interest over many readings and many generations.
	
7. Attention can also explain the role of artistic reputation. In all 
­social species, individuals learn from others, especially from attend-
ing to what others attend to, even if it is no more than a threat like 

	
Conclusion
	
395
a predator or an opportunity like food. As a species, humans have 
evolved to be highly disposed to and able to learn from others.24 If 
others value something, it may be worthwhile for us, too, unless we 
know their values to be at odds with ours. If others clamor for The 
Da Vinci Code or the latest Harry Potter book, or have long held Cer-
vantes or Stendhal in high regard, perhaps we should try what they 
have enjoyed.
	
In cap­ital-­T Theory, critics rarely turn their critiques on them-
selves. A Theorist claims, in effect: “Meaning is endlessly irresolvable, 
but I expect you to understand precisely this point when I make 
it”; or “The author is an outmoded concept, but please quote me on 
that.” In this book I, too, am competing for attention (for a certain 
kind of audience: for you, dear intelligent educated reader), and I 
can do so partly by latching on to major works, as Homer himself 
chose the major story cycle of his time. If I thought I could com-
mand audiences for generations by doing so, I might concoct a new 
story and compete for still wider notice, but by riding on Homer’s 
classic sta­tus and Dr. Seuss’s perennial popularity, I hope to avoid the 
fate of novelists who find themselves altogether ignored.
Attention, Intention, and Problems
Evolutionary considerations strengthen and deepen the recognition, 
common among artists and audiences though not among academ-
ics, that works of art must first catch and hold the interest of audi-
ences. This need presents the first problem situation for artists, 
­although the problem will be further speci­fied according to their in-
tended audiences, their medium, the local expectations within that 
medium, and the ways in which they wish to direct audiences’ re-
sponses.
	
Most of our behavior is routine and quickly decided on. Art is 
not, to the extent that it is original. A Darwinian approach helps us 
realize that we rarely reach thoroughly novel out­comes in a single 
move. Novelty will most likely result from repeated cycles of varia-
tion and retention, including, in the case of artists, the accumulation 
of artistic experience over a tradition or a lifetime that can provide 

On the Origin of Stories
396
strategies or intuitions to be newly recombined. Within a particular 
work’s composition, another trial-­and-­error pro­cess occurs: an ap-
proximate intention modi­fied, expanded, abandoned, redirected, or 
elaborated as particular elements become concrete and suggest new 
solutions or new problems.
	
But intention does not explain all. In evolutionary analysis and in 
ev­eryday behavior, individual variation matters and can be analyzed 
apart from particular choices. We (and many other species) distin-
guish individuals in terms of not only their physical characteristics 
but also their personality, for the good reason that evidence of oth-
ers’ past behavior makes possible better predictions of their future 
behavior. While intentions help explain the particular actions people 
choose, the range of ideas to choose from will not be the same for 
one individual as for others, because of differences in capacity, expe-
rience, and inclination.
	
Evolutionary biology uses sophisticated cost-­bene­fit analysis 
to explain observed behavior. Despite specieswide traits, individu-
als differ considerably from one another, genetically, environmen-
tally, and developmentally. Part of their strategy will therefore be 
to recognize their own powers relative to the powers of others of 
their kind, and to act to suit their talents and interests: toward one or 
other of the arts, in certain cases, and toward certain directions 
within it.
	
We can see authors as problem-­solvers with individual capacities 
and preferences making strategic choices within particular situa-
tions, by shaping different kinds of appeals to the cognitive prefer-
ences and expectations of audiences—preferences and expectations 
shaped at both specieswide and local levels—and balancing the costs 
against the bene­fits of authorial effort in composition and audience 
effort in comprehension and response. Such an approach allows us 
to make tentative reconstructions of the problem situations authors 
face as they seek audiences now and in more or less un­imag­in­able 
futures. Clarifying the primacy (but not necessarily the ultimacy) of 
attention helps also to reconstruct a major part of an author’s prob-
lem situation and eliminates or makes less likely many alternative 
constructions of intent or implication.

	
Conclusion
	
397
Where From? Where To?
Evolutionary literary criticism offers no set questions, let alone set 
answers. It requires simply a readiness to accept that humans evolved 
and a commitment to empirical research to find out just what we are 
and why. Like evolutionary approaches to human life, evolutionary 
approaches to literature will suggest new questions and be more or 
less pertinent to old ones.
	
As children most of us will have occasionally written our address 
not as the bare minimum, “204 Ferguson Street, Palmerston North,” 
say, but as an expansive maximum, adding something like “North 
Island, New Zealand, Pacific Ocean, Southern Hemisphere, the World, 
the Solar System, the Milky Way, the Universe.” When we consider a 
famous textual crux in King Lear, a long evolutionary view of human 
nature will probably be as superfluous as the outer orbits of our 
childhood address. But when we discuss the play, we may find a larger 
context relevant even when we consider textual detail, like the differ-
ent kinds of attention Shakespeare aims for in the Quarto and Folio 
versions. When we examine aspects of the play’s impact and implica-
tions, we will very likely find that a view of human nature within 
a larger natural world can help explain King Lear’s power across cen-
turies and countries. We may compare Lear’s rage with the fury of 
an alpha male chimpanzee deposed from dominance, or note the 
sudden spike in levels of the stress hormone cortisol in animals that 
suffer loss in rank, or the strength of family attachment and inter-
generational and intragenerational con­flict across species, or the vul-
nerability that all social animals feel when they lose their place within 
the shelter of their group. These contexts may do as much to explain 
King Lear as studies of the notion of ser­vice or inheritance in 1605, 
and more to explain the play’s visceral universality.
	
Evocriticism may help to explain the force of a metaphor, the han-
dling of a theme, the depth of psychological representation. It may 
help to show that claims like the unthinkability of x before time t1 or 
the unfeelability of y before time t2, or other claims that we suppose 
differ radically from culture to culture or era to era, founder both on 
the evidence of texts and on cross-­cultural and cross-­species com-

On the Origin of Stories
398
parisons. But precisely what questions an evolutionary criticism will 
open up in what works or traditions depends as much on the imagi-
nation of good readers as on the researches of cognitive and evolu-
tionary anthropologists, economists, psychologists, and sociologists. 
And what answers they will suggest remain to be discovered.

	
399
AFTERWORD: EVOLUTION, ART, STORY, PURPOSE
[Darwinism] seems simple, because you do not at first realize all that 
it involves. But when its whole sig­nifi­cance dawns on you, your heart 
sinks into a heap of sand within you. There is a hideous fatalism 
about it, a ghastly and damnable reduction of beauty and intelli-
gence, of strength and purpose, of honor and aspiration . . .
George Bernard Shaw, Preface to Back to Methuselah (1921)
Does evolution by natural selection rob life of a sense 
of purpose, as many have feared? I suggest that, on the contrary, 
­Darwin has made it possible to understand how purpose, like life, 
builds from small beginnings, from the ground up. Art, including 
the art of storytelling, and science, including the theory of evolution, 
have played key roles in the recent expansion of life’s purpose.
	
A recurring element of On the Origin of Stories has been the theme 
of problems and solutions, and the power of a Darwinian system—a 
cycle of generating, testing, and regenerating—to attain highly com-
plex solutions to new problems that cannot be fully formulated, let 
alone planned for, in advance. This idea allows us to generalize and 
expand on the core concern of On the Origin of Species (1859).
	
There Darwin showed how new species could evolve through a 
pro­cess of blind variation and selective retention. He transformed at 
a stroke our understanding of natural design. Living things manifest 
complex design but can be produced by a mindless pro­cess that does 

On the Origin of Stories
400
no more than passively register, in terms of survival and reproduc-
tion, the advantages of particular variations. In The Blind Watch-
maker (1986) Richard Dawkins explains how nature is, indeed, like 
a  blind watchmaker, and thereby overturns the famous argument 
of theologian and naturalist William Paley. Paley opened his Natural 
Theology—or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity 
Collected from the Appearance of Nature (1802):
In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, 
and were asked how the stone came to be there; I might pos-
sibly answer, that, for anything I knew to the contrary, it had 
lain there for ever: nor would it perhaps be very easy to show 
the absurdity of this answer. But suppose I had found a watch 
upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the watch 
happened to be in that place; I should hardly think of the 
answer which I had given, that for anything I knew, the watch 
might always have been there . . . [The precision and intri-
cacy of its mechanism would have forced us to conclude] 
that the watch must have had a maker: that there must have 
existed, at some time, and at some place or other, an artificer 
or artificers, who formed it for the purpose which we find it 
ac­tually to answer; who comprehended its construction, and 
designed its use.
Nobody could reasonably disagree with this line of reasoning, Paley 
adds, yet this is tantamount to what an atheist does, for “ev­ery indi-
cation of contrivance, ev­ery manifestation of design, which existed 
in the watch, exists in the works of nature; with the difference, on the 
side of nature, of being greater or more, and that in a degree which 
exceeds all computation.”1 After reminding us that the complexity of 
natural organisms surpasses that of the most intricate watch by far 
more than science could guess in Paley’s time, Dawkins goes on to 
show how simple pro­cesses of variation and selective retention can, 
over many cycles, create products with even this degree of design.
	
As we have seen, other pro­cesses working within natural selection 
have been found to follow the same principle: the human immune 
system, the synapses in the young human brain, culture, and inven-

	
Afterword
	
401
tion. Such “Darwin machines”—Dawkins uses the term “universal 
Darwinism”2—allow genuine novelty to be achieved without ad-
vance knowledge of what will work best in an unpredictable and 
open world.3 The common principle of blind variation and selective 
retention allows for a deeply indeterministic pro­cess that explores 
patches of possibility space in multiple directions and pursues any 
direction that is provisionally more promising than others. It tracks 
through the vastness of the possible in ways that surprisingly often 
lead to rich solutions, as it compounds immediate advantages and 
retains achieved complexity into the next round of variations. Such 
Darwinian pro­cesses occur perhaps anywhere we find deeply origi-
nal novelty.
	
Darwin’s explanation of evolution by natural selection shocked, 
and still shocks, because it appears to deny purpose. We think of 
­purpose as prior to decision and action: I want to raise my arm, and 
unless I am paralyzed or restrained, I do. But in fact purpose emerges 
slowly, phylogenically and ontogenically. My capacity to move my 
arm in as many ways as I can depends on things like the evolution of 
forelegs into arms early in the primate line, the evolution millions 
of years later of a rotating socket in the shoulder of great apes to en-
able arboreal brachiation, and the further freeing up of arm move-
ments after early hominids became fully bipedal. Babies flail their 
arms uncontrolledly and purposelessly for months before they can 
direct them in a particular way for a particular purpose.
	
Paley’s example of the watch assumes a purpose we already un-
derstand: the intricate integration of material objects into an instru-
ment for telling the time. But humans did not become capable of 
constructing multipart mechanisms until within the last 50,000 years 
or so. Until their manual control reached a high level and their stone-
flaking attained the precision of the Levallois technique, they would 
have been unable to conceive of such mechanisms or, if confronted 
with them, to recognize anything of their construction or purposes. 
The idea of telling the time precisely would have been unknown 
and  meaningless to our human ancestors even at the end of the 
Stone Age.
	
Purposes can emerge only piecemeal; problems cannot even de­
fine themselves until many of the elements are already in place. The 

On the Origin of Stories
402
position of the sun in its daily sweep can indicate the phases of the 
day, but nothing more precise. Sundials and the sticks in the ground 
that preceded them afford more finely determined divisions of time 
during daylight. These in turn made it possible to imagine coordi-
nating common actions in advance. The first water- and sand-clocks 
enabled even tighter coordination. Mechanical clocks and bells to 
chime the hour or even the quarter-hour took social synchroniza-
tion still further. Not until European navigation and mapping flour­
ished in the fif­teenth century did anyone consider a portable clock 
to ascertain longitude, yet maritime clocks still remained highly in-
accurate for another three centuries. The first watches, in the early 
sixteenth century, could register only the hour, and to tell the time 
down to the minute on a portable mechanism took more than 
­another century. By Paley’s day, the recent invention of the duplex 
escapement made it possible to keep time accurately on a pocket 
watch, but only over the course of the nineteenth century did highly 
accurate timing allow new degrees of precision mea­surement and 
new research options in physics and psychology. Not until well into 
the twentieth century did cesium clocks attain the exactitude and re-
liability of timekeeping needed for quantum physics or space flight.
	
As instruments and standards for measuring finer time intervals 
developed, new purposes have been discovered, each largely incon-
ceivable a stage or two previously. Purposes arise not in advance, but 
as possibilities materialize. Of course, when the purpose be­comes es-
tablished, it can then be implemented ahead of time: I can choose to 
move my arm in such a way as to put on a sweater, or mea­sure men-
tal responses down to the millisecond in a psychology laboratory to 
assess the complexity of the neural pro­cessing involved. But each of 
these purposes, although it precedes a defi­nite action, has a long his-
tory that precedes it, in the species, the culture, and the individual, a 
history of prior trials and prior errors, before the purpose could be 
conceived and fully de­fined, let alone speci­fied in advance.
	
Life could become established only once matter or­ga­nized itself 
in a way complex enough to sustain and reliably reproduce itself. 
Maintaining such a highly improbable and functional arrangement 
of matter became life’s first purpose. As species continued to evolve, 
so did the purposes of their organs and behaviors. New behaviors, 

	
Afterword
	
403
like new organs, begin uncertainly, with slight mod­i­fi­ca­tions of ex-
isting structure, but become de­fined over time, and their function or 
purpose clearly specifiable in advance: a certain kind of spider, for 
instance, will spin a certain kind of web to catch a certain range of 
insect prey under certain conditions.
	
As creatures began to act in more complex and flex­i­ble ways, na-
ture evolved emotions to motivate better decisions. Satisfying these 
emotions—escaping fear, appeasing hunger, ful­fill­ing desire, sustain-
ing love, and so on—became important purposes in themselves for 
much of the animal kingdom. As behaviors standardize, as purposes 
de­fine themselves, social animals can learn to understand not only 
their conspe­cifics’ actions but even their desires and intentions be-
fore they act. We not only learn to infer others’ intentions, but in 
­social species that bene­fit from cooperation we also evolve to em­
pathize with or emotionally react against others’ purposes. And with­
out this capacity, stories would be impossible.
	
Yet we should not forget that despite our thinking of purposes as 
prior to actions, they have emerged over long stretches of evolution-
ary and experiential time. Intentions are ef­fi­cient routes to objectives 
clearly de­fined only after many preliminary stages of variation and 
selection within animals’ collective and individual pasts. Like design, 
purpose emerges rather than precedes.
Purposes evolve, and Darwinian pro­cesses extend them. Intelligence, 
cooperation, and creativity are all purposes that have emerged in the 
course of life on earth. Stephen Jay Gould famously argued that if 
we could rewind and replay the tape of evolution, humans and hu-
man intelligence would not reappear.4 Probably not; no one disputes 
that contingency strongly inflects evolution. But as Simon Conway 
Morris has stressed, certain capacities have evolved again and again, 
­because of the singular advantages they offer: senses, locomotion, 
minds, emotions, sociality, intelligence, cooperation, to name those 
that concern us most.5 Let us start late in this lineup.
	
Intelligence allows us to respond flexibly to circumstances, to solve 
problems not only according to successful old routines (prior pur-
poses, if you like) but also in novel and context-sensitive ways. Be-
cause it can sometimes find new solutions, intelligence is highly ad-

On the Origin of Stories
404
vantageous, yet hard to evolve. Although mind has been necessary 
for all motile creatures, more advanced intelligence has emerged in 
relatively few lineages, though quite diverse ones: invertebrates like 
octopi and cuttlefish, vertebrates like crows and parrots among birds, 
and cetaceans and primates among mammals.
	
Intelligence has large bene­fits but also incurs costs. Out of the 
pressure to develop social intelligence, humans have increased in 
self-awareness, so that we can model ourselves as others see us in 
competitive and cooperative scenarios. That greater self-awareness 
offers real advantages in anticipating others’ actions and reactions, 
but it also carries costs, including the ability to envisage our own 
death and absence from the ongoing world. For humans this aware-
ness has raised the question of our purpose in the face of our ulti-
mate lifelessness, one we have answered most frequently by imagin-
ing that we continue in some form after death. To judge from grave 
rituals dating back at least 70,000 years, and from evidence of the 
fear of death and the hope of immortality in the records of early civ-
ilizations, the preoccupation with death has loomed large ever since 
the appearance of a distinctly human culture.
	
Cooperation allows individuals to gain access to resources they 
could not obtain by themselves. It, too, has large bene­fits, and has 
evolved in many species. It, too, has been dif­fi­cult for natural selec-
tion to evolve, but nevertheless it has developed through a whole 
­series of partial solutions like mutualism, inclusive fitness, recipro-
cal altruism, and the emotions that motivate such behavior (trust, 
gratitude, shame, indignation, and the like) and the cultural comple-
ments that make it still more robust (social monitoring and punish-
ment, and even the punishment of nonpunishers).
	
Creativity is the capacity to produce sig­nifi­cant and valuable 
­novelty. This seems the most dif­fi­cult capacity of all for evolution 
to evolve, and for good reason. Significant and valuable by what cri-
teria?
	
Human creativity matters for human beings, but creativity hardly 
matters for evolution. Single-celled organisms reproduce themselves 
readily, and life would go on—did go on, for billions of years on 
Earth—with barely more complexity. Life persists through repro-
duction, through transmitting accumulated complexity to subse-

	
Afterword
	
405
quent generations. If inherited design were radically changed each 
time an organism reproduced, the hard-won gains of natural selec-
tion would rapidly be lost. Life can evolve new possibilities only 
slowly, through variations small enough not to threaten existing 
functions. But although evolution has thereby spawned many new 
species and even major new forms of life, it does not need or pursue 
creativity.
	
Yet organisms vary, even if only through imperfections in repro-
duction, and conditions change. Over enough time conditions will 
always alter, including competition with other organisms in the en-
vironment. Since any organism can become a source of energy 
for others, each has to find ways of exploiting others more ef­fi­ciently 
and to avoid being exploited by them, including predators, parasites, 
and pathogens. In species with a wide range of variations, some in­
dividuals will be able to exploit changing opportunities or avoid 
changing threats more effectively than others. Variation in itself—
enough to gain advantage, but not so large as to imperil existing 
­design—therefore offers a mea­sure of security against unpredictable 
circumstances. For this reason, sex has evolved many times: by re-
combining genes unpredictably but reliably, it generates a range of 
initially viable variations from which conditions will select.6 Some 
species even toggle between reproducing sexually or asexually ac-
cording to the degree of environmental instability.
Just as natural selection has evolved sex as a means for amplifying 
genetic variation, I suggest, it has evolved art in humans—first as a 
means of sharpening minds eager for pattern, but gradually also for 
creativity, for amplifying the va­ri­ety of our behavior. Gene-culture 
coevolution has recon­fig­ured art for creativity.
	
The immune system and the infant brain, as we have seen, natu-
rally overproduce options to cope with as many unpredictables as 
they can, then pare back whatever is not activated by experience, and 
regenerate from whatever has been stimulated by experience. These 
second-order Darwinian pro­cesses allow an extra level of flex­i­bil­ity 
beyond first-order genetic variation, a still more sensitive adjustment 
to even shorter-term unpredictability. Art in turn has become a sub-
sidiary Darwin machine that generates not natural but unnatural 

On the Origin of Stories
406
variations or options. By “unnatural” I mean only that art involves 
highly deliberate human choices, both individual and cultural, even 
if our choices derive ultimately from nature.
	
Creativity as a principle, as a Darwinian pro­cess, solves no par­
ticular prespecifiable problem, but offers another way of generating 
new possibilities that may prove to solve problems, even sig­nifi­cant 
ones, provided there is a consistent pressure toward a solution—
whether over generations, as in natural selection, over weeks or 
months or years, as a storyteller, say, posits and revises a story, or in 
only minutes or seconds in the spreading neural activation in a poet 
or a scientist seeking a new image or idea, in a mind prepared over 
many years, by many trials.
	
New evolutionary solutions often themselves spawn new prob-
lems. When our brains allowed us to become superpredators, to 
dominate our environments and earn the food we needed in much 
less time than our waking hours, we did not solve the “problem” of 
spare time, as did other top predators, lions, tigers, or bears, by sleep-
ing the extra hours away to conserve energy. Even at rest our large 
brains consume a high proportion of our energy, and since they offer 
us most of our advantages against other species and other individu-
als, we bene­fit not from resting them as much as possible but from 
developing them in times of security and leisure. The cognitive play 
of art could engage us in a self-rewarding way that entices us to im-
prove our mental pro­cessing power in the kinds of information that 
matter most to us.
	
But if art solves the problem of maximizing the advantages of the 
human brain in situations free of other pressures, it also sets up a 
Darwinian system for producing variation—and does so very ef­fi­
ciently. Because art appeals to our own cognitive preferences, we 
have built-in incentives to generate art: its effects should be pleasing 
in themselves. Since art’s criteria for success are human preferences, 
since the testing mechanisms come preinstalled in our minds as we 
sing, or tell a story, or dance, or daub, we can readily adjust our 
­actions to produce more satisfying effects: we can easily select from 
what we do, as we do it, and try out new variations, or stop when in-
terest flags.
	
In most so­ci­e­ties art has been collective and active, and even in 

	
Afterword
	
407
modern cities dance and song often still remain so. Where art tends 
to be more individual than communal, those with talent enough to 
spark the interest of others have a strong extra incentive to develop 
their skill for the attention, admiration, and sta­tus it can earn them. 
Although professional artists may not have appeared until agricul-
ture and permanent settlement allowed resources to accumulate and 
labor to specialize, the quality of some of the earliest art suggests that 
some individuals long before agriculture had the luxury of develop-
ing singular skills. Creative concentration and feedback during com-
position could work like a speeded-up version of natural selection 
as  these artists rapidly generated, discarded, and regenerated new 
variations.
	
Even in so­ci­e­ties in which art has become individualized and pro-
fessionalized, it remains highly social. Art not only activates our 
­private preferences but also adjusts and amplifies them through our 
sociality. From the first, mothers and others engage with infants in 
multimodal social play involving fine-grained attunement and inter-
action. We instinctively make learning enjoyable for children by 
making it social, by making it play, and by making it art, by appeal-
ing to the cognitive preferences that art animates. Throughout life, 
par­tic­i­pa­tion in artistic activities in group settings, whether actively, 
in performance, or more or less passively, as audiences, continues to 
amplify the emotional charge of art.
	
Art’s social nature can not only help motivate our par­tic­i­pa­tion 
but also provide ready-made models that reduce the costs of inven-
tion and increase the bene­fits of response. Nursery rhymes, for in-
stance, appeal to children’s interest in pattern, extend their capacity 
to play with rhythm and rhyme, and may prompt them to subvert 
or refresh an existing ditty with a new word, intonation, or elabora-
tion, or even to invent new chants or taunts of their own. Tribal 
arts like weaving, classic forms like the sonnet, and modern arts like 
filmmaking all depend on the existence of shared norms to provide 
prompts and challenges. As David Bordwell observes of film: “Norms 
help unambitious filmmakers attain competence, but they challenge 
gifted ones to excel. By understanding these norms we can better ap-
preciate skill, daring, and emotional power on those rare occasions 
when we meet them.”7

On the Origin of Stories
408
	
Art can engender variations through other factors present else-
where in nature—like randomness, “an intrinsic part of brain func-
tion” and “nature’s way of exploring unforeseen possibilities,”8 or 
copying errors—and through distinctively human factors. Art does 
not need to start from scratch but can recombine elements already 
developed in the same or a different art or tradition. Just as sex, by 
recombining genes, and hybridization, by recombining lineages that 
have had time to separate, can engender novel forms, art, too, can 
readily recombine, from the animal-human blends in cave art to the 
Minotaurs of the ancient Greeks or the modernist Picasso.
	
In any species attention diminishes with persistence or reiteration, 
but humans are especially curious. And as we have seen, attention, 
especially shared or commonly focused attention, has become un-
precedentedly important in our species. To attract attention art ex-
plores variation, even in traditional so­ci­e­ties, and all the more so in 
so­ci­e­ties in which professional art and a highly competitive market 
for attention act as incentives to discover new variations within ex-
isting forms or entirely novel combinations.
	
Art is uniquely well designed as a Darwinian system for producing 
new variations. It is not well designed to generate useful ideas. The 
markings on faces, costumes, or containers in tribal so­ci­e­ties, early 
empires, or modern cities serve no immediate practical function, 
only the function of appealing to human preferences—but they may 
make individuals to whom they belong more striking, or those who 
create them more admired.9 They may have consequences in terms 
of sexual or general social selection (an individual effect); they may 
be invested with social sig­nifi­cance, in terms of group identity or re-
ligious observance, and thereby promote cooperation (a group-level 
effect); and they may inspire new efforts in pro­cesses like ceramics 
or glassmaking or weaving, and thereby boost industries and trades, 
from silk manufacture to video games (a multileveled indirect ef-
fect).
	
Art offers a system of “unnatural” variation. It can produce sig­
nifi­cant and valuable novelty, often by the slow accumulation of 
small variations, like natural selection itself, though much faster, 
over generations or even lifetimes; sometimes, especially in so­ci­e­ties 
favoring novelty and complex enough to permit dedicated special-

	
Afterword
	
409
ization, by intense individual efforts (Joseph Haydn and the string 
quartet, Louis Armstrong and the jazz solo, Wu Man and the pipa). 
The selection occurs at two levels: artists judge their own new varia-
tions and combinations, selecting and recombining them until the 
result sat­is­fies; audiences then select them according to their own 
preferences, either awarding them attention or not, perhaps even 
preserving a favored few by remembering, retelling, repeating, or re-
working them.
	
Art may produce results not directly useful except in terms of mat-
tering to other humans, but in a species as highly social as ours this 
itself makes a difference. Our extremely large-scale sociality seems 
inconceivable without the stimulus and relaxation that art provides. 
And art bene­fits individuals both in the creative play of childhood 
and in raising adult creativity, in artistic traditions and models we 
can readily adopt or adapt, in encouraging us not just to accept our 
world but to remake it to suit our preferences.
	
Creativity has become increasingly a purpose of art. It seems not 
to have been so, at first, if we judge by the comparatively slow devel-
opment and proliferation of styles in traditional so­ci­e­ties. Never­
theless we can recognize awesome creativity already evident in work 
like the Mas d’Azil spearthrower from the Upper Paleolithic (14,000 
b.c.e.?) or Nok sculptures from almost two and a half millennia 
ago in what is now Nigeria. The deliberate pursuit of novelty and 
originality has further in­ten­si­fied in highly differentiated so­ci­e­ties 
around the world, and has become still more insistently the norm 
over the last two centuries. A work like the Odyssey, although it cele-
brates the inventiveness of an Odysseus or a Hephaestus, asserts the 
authority of tradition. Dr. Seuss represents his more modern age in 
embodying, celebrating, and promoting originality on ev­ery page.
	
Not that the conscious pursuit of novelty ensures successful cre-
ativity, even in solely artistic terms. Thousands of galleries open in 
hundreds of cities ev­ery week, but few will offer new works that pos-
terity “selects” as worthy of continued attention. Yet here art operates 
like any other Darwinian pro­cess. Many variations are generated—
in this case, thousands or millions of attempts to produce new varia-
tions on existing visual art models—but far fewer will survive selec-
tion. But the very strength of selection, even if only through human 

On the Origin of Stories
410
preferences, produces some remarkable results, just as consistent se-
lection pressures in nature lead to extraordinary new species and ad-
aptations. In art the pressure to earn attention as few other things 
can do produces some of the triumphs of the human spirit.
	
And the pro­cess of generation itself spawns new ideas. Although 
these may individually be small-scale, they may feed not only into 
major new artistic developments but also into new styles, tastes, and 
products. When settled existence and agricultural surpluses allowed 
the first accumulations of wealth, artisans or artists who could at-
tract the attention of the wealthy could raise their standards of in-
vention and execution, and thereby provide an impetus for new 
­pro­cesses that could produce earth, metal, or glass vessels in new 
forms, or with new durability, luster, or malleability. Highly crafted 
small-scale wares offered a first impetus to long-distance trade, and 
today new forms of computer graphics, music sharing, and narrative 
Nok sculpture 
(Nigeria), ca. 
400 b.c.e.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 

	
Afterword
	
411
or­ga­ni­za­tion help drive the development of computer software and 
hardware.
Evolution does not aim at creativity. It aims at nothing. But purpose 
emerges, and creativity as a purpose has emerged more and more 
distinctly in human life, through the arts’ appeal to our innate and 
acquired preferences, and through the essential part that generating 
and responding to art, including stories, plays in our development 
and interests as we mature. Of course there will be wide variations in 
individuals’ inclinations to art, and for all a trade-off between cost 
and bene­fit, effort and reward. For many, whether in a compound of 
Balinese carvers or a Canadian editor’s condominium, the trade-off 
may involve relaxing with a television soap opera. For others, it may 
require the intense creative struggle, the arduous pro­cess of trial and 
error, of bold variation and selective retention, of inventive art.
	
Not a well-de­fined problem for natural selection, creativity has 
not been easy to evolve. But it offers another solution to the open-
ended problem of unpredictability. Stories in particular foster our 
ability to multiply options and imagine possible actions in the face 
of any eventuality.
If art is “unnatural” variation, science is “unnatural” selection. Art 
appeals to our species preferences and our intuitions, often as they 
have been modi­fied by local culture. Science rejects our species 
­preferences and our intuitions, even as modi­fied by local culture. 
It tests ideas not against human preferences but against a resistant 
world, and its methods of testing, by logic, observation, and experi-
ment, encourage us to reject even ideas that seem self-evident and 
apparently repeatedly con­firmed by tradition.
	
Because science exposes itself to falsifying evidence, in the long 
run it retains and builds on only the most rigorously selected ideas. 
This winnowing strategy does not prove all science’s ideas correct, 
but it improves on the ratio of tested to untested ideas attainable by 
any other procedure.
	
Art could evolve as an adaptation because it appealed to our deep-
grained species preferences. Science could not. It appeals to one 
strong human inclination, our curiosity, but otherwise goes against 

On the Origin of Stories
412
the grain of our intuitions. All assumed, with Aristotle, and until 
Galileo, that a heavy object fell more rapidly than a lighter one. 
­Information gathering, invaluable for all kinds of animals and even 
for plants, has mattered especially for humans, but the knowledge 
gained has mostly been in the form of heuristics, partly right, but 
not necessarily so, like our hunches about falling objects or the sun’s 
motion around the Earth. And although accurate information is 
­invaluable, indecision is fatal, and no organism can always afford 
time to search for correct information. It was not possible to devote 
effort to a time-consuming, dif­fi­cult-to-imagine, and increasingly 
resource-expensive pro­cess of testing ideas until in Renaissance Italy 
the right conditions happened to converge: a considerable buffer 
of security and overproduction, opportunities for intense specializa-
tion, and the availability of information and con­flicting explanations 
that the printing press made possible.
	
Science still calls for qualities that are unnatural.10 Information 
sponges that they are, children soak up what they need in order to 
understand the basics of their world or their language. They need 
not be taught how to speak or pretend play. But they do need slow for­
mal instruction to read, write, or calculate, and they need even more 
training, and the help of externalized information (books, diagrams, 
models), to master the knowledge on which science builds. If they 
undergo the intensive training required to become scientists, they 
will still need imagination to find new ways of testing or reexplain-
ing received knowledge. Even for those with training, looking for po-
tential refutations of cherished ideas is both emotionally dif­fi­cult and 
imaginatively draining, especially since we have an inbuilt con­fir­ma­
tion bias. And whereas art appeals to human preferences, science has 
to account for a world not built to suit human tastes or talents.
	
Unnatural selection though it is, science allows for the accumula-
tion of advantageous variations and the rapid “evolution” of complex 
intellectual and technological design. Art works very differently. Many 
of its unnatural variations may not be intrinsically deeply valuable, 
even if they aim to appeal to human preferences. But some art is 
deeply valuable, and speaks profoundly to many, over long stretches 
of time or life, and across many cultures. Because art is primarily a 
pro­cess of variation—although artists and audiences also select—

	
Afterword
	
413
there is not the same ratcheted accumulation of better design that we 
meet in science. Hence art of thousands of years ago, like Homer’s or 
the Nok sculptors’, can be superior in many ways, as examples of cre-
ativity, to most works generated now, simply because Homer or the 
Nok craftsmen could appeal to preferences that they understood 
deeply and that have not changed radically since their day.
	
Art can produce major examples of creativity, as can science, but 
in a different and complementary way. It produces “unnatural” vari-
ation in us all, as we clap, dance, and sing, or as we engage in pretend 
play, with our dinosaurs and ducks, our monkeys falling down sky. 
It makes us realize that we can vary what we are given, that we need 
not accept things as they are, and that we can enter a new possibility 
space, including a counterfac­tual one, and populate it as we choose. 
True, our predilection for “unnatural” variation will make us much 
more likely to invent a melody or a metaphor than a cure for cancer, 
which depends on an external reality we cannot easily discover rather 
than on human predispositions we cannot help feeling. But precisely 
because art appeals to us, it offers something we can share and have 
evolved to create and consume.
Religion partakes of elements of both art and science. It could not 
have begun without the understanding of false belief—our aware-
ness that we may not have all we need to understand a situation—
that has amplified our curiosity and spurred us to science. Nor 
could it have begun without the capacity for story that grew out of 
our theory of mind and our first inclinations to art, like chant and 
bodily decoration. Storytelling launched a thousand tales. The tales 
most often told not only involved agents with memorably excep-
tional powers but also helped to solve problems of cooperation by 
suggesting that we are continually watched over by spirits who mon-
itor our deeds and punish or reward them.11
	
At the same time that religious stories helped to solve problems 
of securing attention and fostering cooperation, they could also al-
lay the unease that arose from our awareness of false belief. The so-
cial intelligence from which our grasp of false belief emerged also 
allowed us to imagine being dead and to foresee the world without 
us. It brought with it a new anxiety about the possible purposeless-

On the Origin of Stories
414
ness of our lives, although this could be allayed to some extent by 
stories of spirits guaranteeing purpose prior to human life or prom-
ising continued existence afterward.
	
Religion and power commandeered art, not entirely, but substan-
tially, for millennia. Not that art as play did not persist, between par-
ent and child, or among children, or among adults letting off steam. 
But where they could, religion and power appropriated to their own 
ends art’s ability to appeal to human imaginations.
	
Only when science began to offer alternative naturalistic explana-
tions of the world did religion and art start to split right apart. When 
science offered a detailed explanation of natural design without the 
need for a designer—the theory of evolution by natural selection—
that, more than any other single idea, stripped us of a world made 
comfortable by a sense of purpose apparently underwritten by be-
ings greater than us.
	
Nevertheless if we develop Darwin’s insight, we can see the emer-
gence of purpose, as of life itself, by small degrees, not from above, 
but by small increments, from below. The first purpose was the or­ga­
ni­za­tion of matter in ways complex enough to sustain and replicate 
itself—the establishment, in other words, of life, or, in still other terms, 
of problems and solutions. With life emerged the first purpose, the 
first problem, to preserve at least the improbable com­plexity already 
arrived at, and to find new ways of resisting damage and loss. As life 
proliferated, va­ri­ety offered new hedges against loss in the face of un­
predictable circumstances, and even new ways of evolving va­ri­ety, like 
sex. Still richer purposes emerged with emotions, intelligence, and 
cooperation, and most recently with creativity itself, pursued natu-
rally, and unnaturally, through human invention, in art, and pursued 
unnaturally, through challenging what we have inherited, in science.
	
Art at its best offers us the durability that became life’s first pur-
pose, the va­ri­ety that became its second, the appeal to the intelligence 
and the social emotions that took so much ­longer to evolve, and the 
creativity that keeps adding new possibilities, including religion and 
science. We do not know a purpose guaranteed from outside life, 
but we can add enormously to the creativity of life. We do not know 
what other purposes life may eventually generate, but creativity of-
fers us our best chance of reaching them.

NOTES
B I B L I O GR A P H Y 
I ND E X


	
417
NOTES
Epigraph: Nabokov 1962: 289 (Kinbote).
Introduction
	 1.	For general refutations of the charge of reductionism in evolutionary 
approaches to the human, see, for instance, A. Campbell 2002: 16; and, 
in evolutionary approaches to literature, J. Carroll 1995: 223 and 
Gottschall 2003: 262. Rather than arguing in general terms, I try here 
to demonstrate through particular cases the nonreductiveness of evo-
lutionary explanations of literature.
	 2.	See, for instance, in psychology: Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992; 
Pinker 1997, 2002; Buss 2005; in anthropology: D. Brown 1991; Sperber 
1996; Cronk 1999; in sociology: Sidanius and Pratto 1999; in econom-
ics: Frank 1988; Fehr and Henrich 2003; in history: Smail 2007; in lin-
guistics: Pinker 1995, 1999, 2007a; in law: Law 2004; O. Jones and 
Goldsmith 2005; in politics: Axelrod 1990, 1997; Thayer 2004; in reli-
gion: Boyer 2001; Atran 2002; D. S. Wilson 2002; J. Barrett 2004; Den-
nett 2006.
	 3.	Bonner 1980; Dehaene 1997; Hauser 2000; de Waal 2001a.
	 4.	Among recent writings on evolution and literature, see especially J. 
Carroll 1995, 2004; Storey 1996; B. Boyd 2001; Gottschall and Wilson 
2005; Nordlund 2007; Gottschall 2008a, 2008b; B. Boyd, Carroll, and 
Gottschall in press.
	 5.	See, for instance, Critical Inquiry 2004; Patai and Corral 2005; B. Boyd 
2006b.
	 6.	Gould and Lewontin 1979; see also Segerstråle 2000; A. Brown 1999.
	 7.	Fears misplaced: Radcliffe Richards 2000; Pinker 2002; basis of free-

418
Notes to Pages 4–22
dom: Cosmides and Tooby 2000; basis of culture: Tooby and Cos-
mides 1992; D. S. Wilson 2005.
	 8.	Marten et al. 1996; White 2001.
	 9.	Fossey 1983: 184–185.
	 10.	Jolly 1999: 290–291.
	 11.	Hansen 1999: 353.
	 12.	Chauvet, Deschamps, and Hillaire 1996.
	 13.	D. Morris 1962; Lenain 1997.
	 14.	See Schank and Childers 1984; Schank 1995; Duchan, Bruder, and He-
witt 1995.
Book I. Evolution, Art, and Fiction
	Epigraphs: Thompson 1942; Darwin [1859] 2003: 397.
	 1.	Tooby and DeVore 1987.
	 2.	D. Campbell 1983.
Part 1. Evolution and Nature
	Epigraph: Appiah 2006a: xi.
Chapter 1. Evolution and Human Nature?
	 1.	Headlam Wells 2005 ably and amply refutes recent critical claims that 
Shakespeare himself had no concept of or interest in human nature, 
that Shakespeare himself was antiessentialist.
	 2.	Midgley 1995: 166.
	 3.	McGrew 2003: 420.
	 4.	See the Introduction, note 2.
	 5.	Gould 1981.
	 6.	Lewontin 1972; Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994; Dawkins 
2004: 331–343; A. W. F. Edwards 2003.
	 7.	Cosmides and Tooby 1998, echoing the postulate originally proposed 
by the nineteenth-century German ethnographer Adolf Bastian.
	 8.	Ridley 2003: 20.
	 9.	Barthes 1972a: 9.

	
Notes to Pages 22–28
	
419
	 10.	For a recent example, see Menand 2005 and the reply in B. Boyd 
2006b.
	 11.	D. Brown 1991; Tooby and Cosmides 1992; Cronk 1999; Cronk, Cha-
gnon, and Irons 2002; Barkow 2006.
	 12.	Fanaai Le Tagaloa, quoted in Cronk 1999: 36.
	 13.	Appiah 1992: 42.
	 14.	Bordwell 2004: x.
	 15.	de Waal 2001a; Gaulin and McBurney 2001; Cronk 1999; Nordlund 
2007.
	 16.	Gaulin and McBurney 2001: 9.
	 17.	Ridley 2003.
	 18.	Sapolsky 2006.
	 19.	Iacoboni 2008: 175.
	20.	Dawkins 1985: 59.
	 21.	Ridley 2003: 247.
	 22.	Dawkins 1989b: 332, 331.
	 23.	Radcliffe Richards 2000: 129.
	 24.	M. Wilson, Daly, and Scheib 1997: 437.
	 25.	D. S. Wilson 2005, 2007a.
	 26.	D. Brown 1991: 147–149; J. Carroll 1995: 270–271.
	 27.	“. . . without a word of the book itself needing to be changed” (Dawk-
ins 2004: 158).
	 28.	Pinker 1995: 427; see also Dissanayake 1988: 28.
	 29.	D. S. Wilson 2007b: 16.
	 30.	Radcliffe Richards 2000: 121.
	 31.	Singer 1999; Radcliffe Richards 2000.
	 32.	O. Jones and Goldsmith 2005.
	 33.	Boehm 1993, 1999; Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wilson 2007a.
	 34.	D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007.
	 35.	Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995; Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wil-
son 2007a; D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007.
	 36.	This kind of critique often calls itself antifoundationalism (a rejec-
tion of claims to a firm foundation for knowledge): see, e.g., Menand 
2005. For a critique of the limitations of the kind of antifoundational-
ism common in modern literary studies, with a defense of a more 
valid antifoundationalism, common in modern science and almost a 

420
Notes to Pages 29–35
necessary consequence of accepting human evolution, see B. Boyd 
2006b.
	 37.	Keesing 1981, quoted in Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988: 62.
	 38.	See Bordwell 1985: 104–110 for a lucid critique of the notion that visual 
perspective re­flects the ideology of the uni­fied subject.
	 39.	Cf. Gombrich 1982: 282: “In fact the widespread view has recently 
been challenged that the conventional elements in photographs bar 
naïve subjects such as unsophisticated tribesmen from reading them.”
	40.	There are minor individual differences, such as color blindness in 8 
percent of the population and, recent research suggests, a fraction of 
­women who may have partially tetrachromatic vision: Hollingham 
2004.
Chapter 2. Evolution, Adaptation, and 
Adapted Minds
	 1.	Nordlund 2007: 32.
	 2.	Dawkins 1996: xiii.
	 3.	Fromm 2003: 317.
	 4.	Dawkins 1997: 66.
	 5.	Dawkins 1997: 2.
	 6.	Dawkins 1997: 148–154, reporting on Nilsson and Pelger 1994.
	 7.	Gould offered the stron­gest critique of what he called the “adapta-
tionist program,” but no one disputes the role of other factors than 
adaptation, and Gould never showed or even tried to show how com-
plex design could be the result of chance. See J. Carroll 2004: 227–244.
	 8.	Atran 2002: 22.
	 9.	Cain 1964: 51, quoted in Dawkins 1989a: 31.
	 10.	See the Introduction, note 2; and Sosis 2000, 2004; Irons 2001. For an 
evolutionary view that religion is not adaptive but a byproduct, see 
Kirkpatrick 2005.
	 11.	For other accounts of art as adapted, see Dissanayake 1988, 1995, 2000; 
G. Miller 2000b; Coe 2003. For literature as adaptive, see J. Carroll 
1995, 2004; Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b, 2004, 2005.
	 12.	Dawkins 1989a: 31.
	 13.	Dissanayake 2000: 153.

	
Notes to Pages 36–44
	
421
	 14.	G. Williams 1966: 16.
	 15.	Pinker 1997: 525 and 2007b.
	 16.	Daisies: A. Campbell 2002: 29; elephants: Dennett 1996a: 276.
	 17.	Atran 2002: 33.
	 18.	Radcliffe Richards 2000: 1; Richerson and Boyd 2005.
	 19.	G. Williams 1992: 77.
	20.	Hernadi 2001: 62; Špinka, Newberry, and Bekoff 2001: 163.
	 21.	Deacon 1997: 351.
	 22.	Baron-Cohen 1995; Kobayashi and Koshima 2001.
	 23.	Atran 2002: 21.
	 24.	Aiello and Wheeler 1995; G. Miller 2000b: 134: 15 percent of our oxy-
gen intake, 25 percent of our metabolic energy, 40 percent of our 
blood glucose.
	 25.	Plotkin 1997: 173.
	 26.	Plotkin 1997: 174–175.
	 27.	Meltzoff and Moore 1995; Meltzoff 1996.
	 28.	de Waal 2001b, 2002.
	 29.	Tinbergen 1963.
	 30.	de Waal 2002: 187, 190.
	 31.	Pinker 2005; de Waal 2002: 187; D. S. Wilson, Near, and Miller 1996: 
285.
Chapter 3. The Evolution of Intelligence
	 1.	For an accessible general overview, see Pinker 1997; for technical de-
tails, see Buss 2005.
	 2.	Lorenz 1978; Pinker 2002: 40–41.
	 3.	For summaries of the controversies, see A. Brown 1999; Segerstråle 
2000; Buller 2005; and the replies to Buller noted by Cosmides and 
Tooby at http://www.psych.ucsb.edu/research/cep/buller.htm.
	 4.	Gould and Lewontin 1979; Gould 1991.
	 5.	See especially Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992.
	 6.	Symons 1992: 142.
	 7.	Geary 2005.
	 8.	Fodor 1983.
	 9.	See also Bonner 1980 on flex­i­bil­ity.

422
Notes to Pages 44–54
	 10.	Geary 2005: 10. As Geary notes, he re­fines here the model proposed by 
Rochel Gelman.
	 11.	Geary 2005: 132.
	 12.	Humphrey 1976; Alexander 1989; Dunbar 1998a; de Waal and Tyack 
2003.
	 13.	Alexander 1989; Geary 2005: 60–66; Flinn, Geary, and Ward 2005.
	 14.	Geary 2005: 105.
	 15.	Geary 2005: 230–233.
	 16.	Geary 2005: 232.
	 17.	Baddeley and Hitch 1974; Baddeley and Logie 1999; Baddeley 2000.
	 18.	Geary 2005: 170.
	 19.	Cf. Bonner 1980: 147.
	20.	Geary 2005: 184, 216–217, 272.
	 21.	Similar conclusions have been reached by Tooby and Cosmides 2001.
Chapter 4. The Evolution of Cooperation
	 1.	W. D. Hamilton 1963, 1964; G. Williams 1966.
	 2.	Radcliffe Richards 2000: 174.
	 3.	D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007: 335 and passim.
	 4.	D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007: 338.
	 5.	Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995; D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 
2007: 339–344.
	 6.	Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007.
	 7.	Richerson and Boyd 2005; D. S. Wilson 2005.
	 8.	Pinker 1997: 428.
	 9.	See Dugatkin 2002 for an overview.
	 10.	Maynard Smith 1982a: 2 notes that this was often overlooked in early 
sociobiological accounts of cooperation.
	 11.	Butler 1954; E. O. Wilson 1975/2000: 7.
	 12.	Barash and Barash 2004; Leary and Downs 1995: 128: “human beings 
appear to possess a fundamental motive to avoid exclusion from im-
portant social groups.”
	 13.	Hamilton 1963; Dawkins 1989a: 80; Gaulin and McBurney 2001: 320. 
Nevertheless multilevel selection theory reinterprets Hamilton, as 
Hamilton himself came to accept: “When Hamilton reformulated his 

	
Notes to Pages 55–63
	
423
theory in terms of the Price equation, he realized that altruistic traits 
are selectively disadvantageous within kin-groups and evolve only be-
cause kin-groups with more altruists differentially contribute to the 
gene pool” (D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007: 335).
	 14.	Wright 1996: 190.
	 15.	Reeve 1998: 48: genetic “relatedness is not a mea­sure of the absolute 
genetic similarity between two individuals, but of the degree to which 
this similarity exceeds the background similarity between randomly 
chosen individuals from the population.”
	 16.	Trivers 1972, reprinted with discussion in Trivers 2002a: 123–153.
	 17.	See Wright 2000 for the implications of non-zero-sum games in hu-
man life.
	 18.	Singer 1999: 47–48.
	 19.	Trivers 1971, reprinted with discussion in Trivers 2002a: 3–55.
	20.	Trivers 1971; Axelrod and Hamilton 1981; Axelrod 1990.
	 21.	Trivers 1971, 1972, 2002a; Frank 1988; cf. Pinker 1997: 404–405.
	 22.	Pinker 2002: 53.
	 23.	Wilkinson 1984.
	 24.	de Waal 2001a: 366n17.
	 25.	Packer 1977.
	 26.	de Waal 1998: 203.
	 27.	Axelrod 1990.
	 28.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 193.
	 29.	Wason 1966; Cosmides 1989; Cosmides and Tooby 1992.
	 30.	Cosmides and Tooby 1995: 90.
	 31.	Cosmides and Tooby 1989: 91.
	 32.	Cosmides and Tooby 1995: 91.
	 33.	See Cosmides and Tooby 2005 for the most recent discussion.
	 34.	Cosmides and Tooby 2005; Buller 2005; see http://www.psych.ucsb.
edu/research/cep/buller.htm.
	 35.	Ermer et al. 2007.
	 36.	Fehr and Henrich 2003.
	 37.	Henrich et al. 2001.
	 38.	Brosnan and de Waal 2003.
	 39.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 8; D. S. Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007: 336 and 
­passim.

424
Notes to Pages 63–72
	40.	See also R. Boyd and Richerson 1992; Fehr and Gächter 2002; D. S. 
Wilson and E. O. Wilson 2007: 339.
	 41.	Flesch 2007 unwarrantedly makes this almost the sole biological rea-
son for storytelling.
	 42.	Boehm 1993, 2000.
	 43.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 64–65.
	44.	See Chwe 2001.
	 45.	J. Carroll et al. under submission.
	46.	No to our genes: Dawkins 1989b; Pinker 1997. Our genes say no: de 
Waal 1996, 2006.
Part 2. Evolution and Art
	Epigraph: Cain 1964, quoted in Dawkins 1989a: 31.
Chapter 5. Art as Adaptation?
	 1.	For fuzzy categories, see Rosch 1973 and 1975.
	 2.	D. Brown 1991; Dissanayake 1988, 1995, 2000.
	 3.	S. Davies 2000: 200, 201.
	 4.	Dutton 1993: 21 and 1995: 35.
	 5.	Dürer 1971: 24–25, quoted in Dutton 1977: 392; Goethe, conversation 
with Eckermann, 31 January 1827, quoted in Wright 2000: 155; Japa-
nese: Pinker 2002: 408.
	 6.	For animal culture, see Bonner 1980; de Waal 2001a. For the circularity 
of explaining culture by culture, see de Waal 2001a and Nordlund 2007.
	 7.	Dickie 1997: 19.
	 8.	Novitz 1996: 162: “We expect that works of art will make us feel more 
at home in our world.”
	 9.	Dissanayake 1988: 67, summarizing John Dewey, Herbert Read, and 
Suzanne Langer.
	 10.	Shklovsky 1990.
	 11.	For an appreciative survey, from someone interested in both the wide 
functions of art and an evolutionary perspective on the arts, see Dis-
sanayake 1988: 64–106 and 1995: 10, 84. For brief dismissive catalogues 
of proposed functions, see G. Miller 1999: 79 and 2000b: 262.

	
Notes to Pages 72–77
	
425
	 12.	Popper 1976: 61–62.
	 13.	S. Davies 1997: 19; N. Carroll 1999: 227 ff.; for the charge of circularity, 
N. Carroll 1999: 261.
	 14.	See D. Brown 1991; Dissanayake 1988, 1995.
	 15.	“The greater the number of generations in which a cultural behavior 
has been replicated, the greater the probability of evidence of design,” 
that is, of adaptation (Thornhill and Palmer 2000: 27).
	 16.	Dissanayake 1988, 1995.
	 17.	Griffiths 1997: 59.
	 18.	Darwin [1871/1874] 2003.
	 19.	G. Miller 2000b.
	20.	G. Miller 2000b; Cronin 1991.
	 21.	Trivers 1972; G. Miller 2000b: 85–88.
	 22.	G. Miller 2000b: 260–261.
	 23.	Pinker 1997: 536; Darwin [1871/1874] 2003: 572.
	 24.	Including Frisch 1974; Hamilton 1975; and Fox 1972.
	 25.	G. Miller 2000b. For a more detailed critique of Miller, see B. Boyd 
2005a.
	 26.	J. Carroll 2004: xx.
	 27.	Dissanayake 1995: 10–11.
	 28.	G. Miller 2000b: 35.
	 29.	Lane 1989: 272. Mothers singing: Sandra Trehub in Glausiusz 2001; in-
fant preferences: Trehub 2000: 440.
	 30.	G. Miller 2000a: 334.
	 31.	Bahn 1998: 283.
	 32.	Steven Brown 2000a: 245–246.
	 33.	See de Waal 2002, 2001a: 26: “one could de­fine language so narrowly 
that the babbling of a toddler does not fall under it, but does this 
mean that babbling has nothing to do with language? Narrow defi­ni­
tions neglect boundary phenomena and precursors, and they often 
mistake the tip of the iceberg for the whole.”
	 34.	Steven Brown 2000a, 2000b.
	 35.	Fukui in Glausiusz 2001. See also B. Boyd 2008b for a discussion of the 
different selection pressures on music and visual art.
	 36.	Dutton 2000: 513.
	 37.	Darwin [1871/1874] 2003.

426
Notes to Pages 77–90
	 38.	Lewis-Williams 2002: 98.
	 39.	Jolly 1999: 97–98 notes that human hair appears to have coevolved 
with preferences for hair styling.
	40.	Coe 2003.
	 41.	Kohn and Mithen 1999; see also G. Miller 2000b: 289–291; Bahn 1998: 
86. Kohn and Mithen were not the first to feel that flints were knapped 
to the level of a “virtuoso’s elegance” (Eiseley 1979: 270–271, cited in 
Dissanayake 2000: 132).
	 42.	G. Miller 2000b: 29.
	 43.	Thiessen and Umezawa 1998: 302.
	44.	See Sidanius and Pratto 1999.
Chapter 6. Art as Cognitive Play
	 1.	G. Williams 1966.
	 2.	Pinker 1997: 525; see also Pinker 2002, 2007b. For another account of 
Pinker’s byproduct hypothesis, see J. Carroll 1998.
	 3.	Pinker 1997: 525, 539, 526.
	 4.	Pinker 1997:528
	 5.	Pinker 1997: 523.
	 6.	Dennett 1996a: 339–340 wryly questions why we are ever awake, since 
action is costly.
	 7.	Dawkins 2004: 160.
	 8.	Rabkin 1999: 47.
	 9.	V. Johnson and Tjapaltjarri 1994; V. Johnson 2003; Petyarre 2001.
	 10.	Wright 2000: 5.
	 11.	OED, s.v. “pattern,” 8c.
	 12.	Gazzaniga 2008: 215–216.
	 13.	Weiss 1955: 286.
	 14.	Haidt 2006: 7.
	 15.	Quoted in Gould 1992: 268.
	 16.	Weiss 1955: 286, 290.
	 17.	Atkins 2003: 139.
	 18.	Gould 1985: 199.
	 19.	Solso 1994: 52.
	20.	Habituation is “the gradual loss of interest in repeated stimuli. Habit-

	
Notes to Pages 90–96
	
427
uation is a universal property of all nervous tissue. We find it in sea 
slugs. We find it in rats” (Martindale 1990: 11).
	 21.	Lehrer 2008: 130–131.
	 22.	Sloboda 2003: 38.
	 23.	Dissanayake 1988: 74–78 for a detailed and sound consideration of art 
as adult play; and Dissanayake 1995: 43–33, for Schiller, Spencer, Freud, 
and Huizinga on art and play. Friedrich Schiller linked art and play in 
[1794] 1967. For animal play, Bekoff and Allen 2002.
	 24.	Smith 1984: 67; Fagen 1995: 25; Mather and Anderson 1999.
	 25.	van Hooff and Preuschoft 2003: 266.
	 26.	Pinker 2007b: 170.
	 27.	Bekoff 2007: 100.
	 28.	Renner and Rosenzweig 1987; Doidge 2007: 43.
	 29.	Jenkins et al. 1990; Merzenich et al. 1999.
	 30.	Gordon et al. 2003; Goleman 2006: 178.
	 31.	Špinka, Newberry, and Bekoff 2001.
	 32.	E. O. Wilson 1975/2000: 164.
	 33.	Pinker 1995: 340.
	 34.	Siviy 1998.
	 35.	Stopping rules: Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC Research Group 1999. As 
a biological adaptation, curiosity has built-in stopping rules, when 
it exposes an animal to too much risk in novel environments, or 
when the rewards of new effort cease to justify continued search-
ing. Science manages to overcome those stopping rules by cultural 
means.
	 36.	Sutton-Smith 1997: 194 summarizes Gerstmyer 1991, who took video-
tapes of his/her daughter from twenty-one to thirty-two months, and 
concluded that play is typically a highly condensed representation of 
whatever it enacts, which means that much can be covered with great 
brevity.
	 37.	Quoted in Doidge 2007: 306.
	 38.	Merzenich et al. 1999; Doidge 2007: 68, 87, 111, 155.
	 39.	D. Morris 1962; Lenain 1997.
	40.	Nyreröd 2004.
	 41.	Martindale 1990: 11.
	 42.	Carey 2006.

428
Notes to Pages 96–101
	 43.	Kobayashi and Koshima 2001; Bekoff, Allen, and Burghardt 2002: 205; 
D. S. Wilson 2007a: 166.
	44.	Provine 2000: 94.
	 45.	Hauser 2000: 211; Provine 2000: 93.
	46.	Stern 1977: 35–37; Morgan and Morgan 1995: 104; Meltzoff and Moore 
1995; S. Johnson, Booth, and O’Hearn 2001: 639.
	 47.	Jolly 1999: 331.
	 48.	Corballis and Lea 1999: 340.
	49.	Trehub 2000: 437.
	 50.	Winkielman et al. 2006.
	 51.	Goleman 2006: 36.
	 52.	Dissanayake 2000: 29.
	 53.	Keller, Schölmerich, and Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988; Trevarthen 1993; Tre-
varthen, quoted in Goleman 2006: 36.
	 54.	Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wilson 2007a.
	 55.	Stern 1977: 39; J. Barrett, Richert, and Driesinga 2001: 51; Moore and 
Dunhman 1995; Tomasello and Call 1997: 405, citing Stern 1985 and 
Trevarthen 1979; Dissanayake 2000: 7, 29; Povinelli and Preuss 1995: 
422–423.
	 56.	Michael Tomasello, quoted in D. S. Wilson 2007a: 169.
	 57.	Deliège and Sloboda 1997: 121.
	 58.	Hrdy 1999: 157, 288.
	 59.	Stern 1977: 73.
	60.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 102 and passim.
Chapter 7. Art and Attention
	 1.	Jolly 1999: 291–292.
	 2.	Aristotle 1951; among those outside an evolutionary approach who 
have recently foregrounded attention are Bordwell 1997; N. Carroll 
1998; within such an approach: Aiken 1998; Bedaux and Cooke 1999; 
Cooke 1995; Coe 2003; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988; Nettle 2005.
	 3.	For a signal exception, see Dissanayake 2000.
	 4.	D. Campbell 1983.
	 5.	D. S. Wilson 2002, 2007a; Richerson and Boyd 2005; D. S. Wilson and 
E. O. Wilson 2007.

	
Notes to Pages 102–108
	
429
	 6.	Plotkin 1997: 204.
	 7.	Gaulin and McBurney 2001: 338.
	 8.	Amotz Zahavi, Bernd Heinrich, and John Marzluff call raven roosts 
“mobile information centers” (Ward and Zahavi 1973; Marzluff, 
­Heinrich, and Marzluff 1996; H. Bloom 2000); Whiten and Byrne 
1997: 162.
	 9.	de Waal 2006: 25.
	 10.	Bekoff 2002b: 36.
	 11.	H. Bloom 2000: 89; Matsuzawa 2003: 387; Buss 1999a: 15.
	 12.	Nettle 1999: 222.
	 13.	R. Wells 2003: 56.
	 14.	Kingdon 2003: 212–215.
	 15.	Sugiyama 1972; Goodall 1986; Marker 2000: 42; Geissman 2000: 116; 
Sebeok 1979.
	 16.	Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wilson 2007a.
	 17.	Iacoboni 2008.
	 18.	Goleman 2006: 25, 29–30.
	 19.	Pellis 2002.
	20.	Imitation: Meltzoff and Moore 1995, esp. 51; but see de Waal 2001a, 
esp. 216–238; de Waal and Tyack 2003: 371 for a strong but jus­ti­fied ref-
utation of the denial of the capacity to imitate in other animals than 
humans; rehearsal: Donald 1998 and 1999, esp. 141, 144.
	 21.	Hewlett and Cavalli-Sforza 1986; Scalise Sugiyama 2001b: 238.
	 22.	Goleman 2006: 30–34; Oakley 2007: 148.
	 23.	Goleman 2006; D. S. Wilson 2007a.
	 24.	B. Boyd 2008b.
	 25.	Alcorta and Sosis 2005.
	 26.	McNeill 1995: 2; Haidt 2006: 237.
	 27.	Dunbar 1996: 146.
	 28.	Appiah 2008.
	 29.	Chwe 2001.
	 30.	Jolly 1999: 390.
	 31.	Gould 1980: 267.
	 32.	Researchers distinguish between two forms of sta­tus: domination 
(deference enforced by the more powerful party), in any animal spe-
cies; and prestige (deference freely afforded by others), in humans 

430
Notes to Pages 108–115
alone. See Henrich and Gil-White 2001; and R. Johnson, Burk, and 
Kirkpatrick 2007.
	 33.	R. Hogan 1983, quoted in Buss 1999b: 31.
	 34.	Darwin [1859] 2003: 142.
	 35.	Richerson and Boyd 2005 discuss at length the reasons for the anoma-
lous “de­mo­graphic transition” over the last century, for high-sta­tus 
couples’ now tending to have smaller families than lower-sta­tus cou-
ples.
	 36.	Wright 2000: 26.
	 37.	Boehm 1993, 1997, 2000.
	 38.	For prestige, see Henrich and Gil-White 2001.
	 39.	de Waal 1996: 76.
	40.	G. Miller 2000b: 320.
	 41.	Chance and Larsen 1976, esp. 2, 13, 18, and 153.
	 42.	Chance and Larsen 1976: 194.
	 43.	Sloboda 2003: 38, 40.
	44.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 149.
	 45.	Knight 1998: 78; Dessalles 1998.
	46.	Hatfield 2002.
	 47.	H. G. Wells 2007: 397.
	 48.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 172.
	49.	Richerson and Boyd 2005.
Chapter 8. From Tradition to Innovation
	 1.	David Bordwell, private communication.
	 2.	D. S. Wilson 2002.
	 3.	Haidt 2006.
	 4.	Durkheim 1915: 381: “the principal forms of art seem to have been 
born out of religious ideas” (quoted in Dunbar, Knight, and Power 
1999: 165).
	 5.	Coe 2003: 27.
	 6.	Atran 2002.
	 7.	Pinker 2007a.
	 8.	Boyer 1994, 1996, 2001; J. Barrett 1996, 2004; Kinderman, Dunbar, and 
Bentall 1998; Atran 2002.

	
Notes to Pages 115–119
	
431
	 9.	For false belief, see Dennett 1978; Astington 1990; Perner 1991; Carru-
thers and Chamberlain 2000: 186.
	 10.	Cosmides and Tooby 1994; Spelke 1995; Caramazza and Shelton 1998; 
Wellman and Gelman 1998. For a review of the large literature on 
­theory of mind, see Baron-Cohen 2000.
	 11.	Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988: 54.
	 12.	For a discussion of the human capacity to “time-travel,” including en-
visaging the future, see Suddendorf 1999; Suddendorf and Corballis 
2007.
	 13.	Atran 2002: 12, 144–145.
	 14.	Quoted in D. S. Wilson 2002: 64.
	 15.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 17, citing Ostrom, Gardner, and Walker 1994; Rich-
erson and Boyd 2005.
	 16.	Atran 2002; Boyer 2002; D. S. Wilson 2002.
	 17.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 42.
	 18.	Zahavi and Zahavi 1997; G. Miller 2000b.
	 19.	Sosis and Bressler 2003; D. S. Wilson 2002; Alcorta and Sosis 2005: 
330–332.
	20.	Coe 2003.
	 21.	Atran 2002; Boyer 2002; D. S. Wilson 2002.
	 22.	Dissanayake 2000: 216.
	 23.	Jackson 1982.
	 24.	Coe 2003 offers an adaptive explanation of visual art in terms of the 
cooperative effects that ancestor-worship can create among the ances-
tors’ descendants, even arguing that art’s function is entirely one of 
social cohesion, and that art in traditional so­ci­e­ties is therefore rigidly 
traditional. But she does not account for either the origins or the fea-
tures of visual art, and her claims about the rigidity of traditional art 
do not square with the inventive diversity of forms across cultures or 
the diversity within cultures, both diachronically and synchronically. 
Many traditional cultures encourage innovation: in Sepik carving, for 
instance (Denis Dutton, private communication), or Ojibwe verbal 
play (Erdrich 2003). Maori art provides a good case study of a tradi-
tional culture with known parameters. In the mere five hundred years 
between Maori settlement in New Zealand and European occupation, 
Maori art diversified rapidly, regionally and locally.

432
Notes to Pages 119–125
	 25.	Dawkins 1997: 279; G. Williams 1966.
	 26.	Pinker 1997: 428.
	 27.	Boden 1991; Csikszentmihaly 1996; Simonton 1999.
	 28.	See Dawkins 1989b: 269 on the evolution of evolvability.
	 29.	D. Campbell 1987; Dennett 1996a; D. S. Wilson 2005.
	 30.	Edelman 1987; also Patricia Churchland, Terrence Deacon, Terrence 
Sejnovksi (see Sterelny 2003: 164).
	 31.	Plotkin 1994.
	 32.	Or, in evolutionary biological language, no local optima: see Bettinger, 
Boyd, and Richerson 1996.
	 33.	P. Davies 1988: 55–56; J. Hobson 1994: 214.
	 34.	Donald 1998.
	 35.	Dawkins 1999: x.
	 36.	See the discussion of prefocusing in N. Carroll 1998: 261.
	 37.	Martindale 1990.
	 38.	Stern 1977: 83–84.
	 39.	Plotkin 1994: 166: “Put crudely, in the case of instruction [the Lamar­
ckian pro­cess] the environment rules; in the case of selection [the 
Darwinian], internal or organismic states lead.”
	40.	As Plotkin notes, as long as intelligence “operates, even if in only 
small part, by Darwinian pro­cesses involving the unpredictable 
­generation of variants, then . . . intelligent behaviour . . . cannot be 
­reductively explained by genetics or genetics and development” 
(1994: 176).
	 41.	Haydon 1990; Wright 2000: 54, 192.
	 42.	See Root-Bernstein 1989 and 1996.
	 43.	Mumford wrote “dreams,” not “stories.” Dreams take their imagery 
from the waking world, including the world of story, which may be 
what Mumford ac­tually meant (quoted in Allmann 1989).
	44.	Root-Bernstein 2003: 267.
	 45.	Root-Bernstein 2000: 134.
	46.	Sharecroppers: Agee 1941.
	 47.	Gombrich 1979: 130.
	 48.	Bjorklund, Gaultney, and Green 1993: 97. The feeling of control has 
considerable survival value, neuroscientist Michael Gazzanigga ob-
serves, and must have been selected for (Gazzanigga 1994: 186).

	
Notes to Pages 129–134
	
433
Part 3. Evolution and Fiction
	Epigraph: L. Carroll [1893] 2006: chap. 23 (“The Pig-Tale”), 301–302.
Chapter 9. Art, Narrative, Fiction
	 1.	The term “metarepresentation” was introduced in Pylyshyn 1978.
	 2.	Tooby and Cosmides 2001: 12.
	 3.	Boyer 2001: 152.
	 4.	Schaller 1991.
	 5.	Meir Sternberg quotes Wendy Lehnert, a former student of Roger 
Schank, the leading researcher in ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence and story: 
“Thus far, ‘no natural language [computer] system can claim to tackle 
general language in an open-ended domain or task orientation,’ such 
as would qualify it to ‘read fiction’” (Sternberg 2003a: 359n; Lehnert 
1994: 170–171).
	 6.	The approach therefore accords with that of Joseph Carroll’s in, and 
since, his Evolution and Literary Theory (1995), and with David Bor-
dwell 1985, 1989, 1996. Where Carroll argues that understanding the 
world in general cannot be a matter of convention, I apply the same 
arguments to the spe­cific field of comprehending events, including 
the reported events of narrative.
Chapter 10. Understanding and Recalling Events
	 1.	P. Hobson 2004: 30, 31; Meltzoff and Moore 1995.
	 2.	Garcia and Koelling 1966; Garcia, Ervin, and Koelling 1966; Garcia and 
Ervin 1968.
	 3.	Frank 1988: 149.
	 4.	Boyer 2001; Sperber and Wilson 1988: vii.
	 5.	H. Damasio et al. 2004.
	 6.	See pp. 39–40 above for a discussion of the “frame problem” in ar­ti­fi­
cial intelligence.
	 7.	Dennett 1996b: 57.
	 8.	Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC Research Group 1999: 5, 128, 21; Boyer 
2001: 162; Sperber and Wilson 1988: 45.

434
Notes to Pages 134–138
	 9.	Wittgenstein, Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology 2:570, quoted in 
P. Hobson 2004: 243.
	 10.	Emmott 1997: 26.
	 11.	Boyer 2001: 100.
	 12.	For the implications for the development of art, see Martindale 1990.
	 13.	Arterberry 1997: 51. For a contrary view, see Sirois and Jackson 2007.
	 14.	Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997.
	 15.	Meltzoff and Moore 1995.
	 16.	Daly and Wilson 1998a: 433.
	 17.	Quine 1960: 6.
	 18.	Baillargeon 1986.
	 19.	Premack and Premack 2003: 117; Pinker 1995: 157.
	20.	Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997: 181.
	 21.	Lea 1999: 26–27.
	 22.	Caramazza and Mahon 2003.
	 23.	Caramazza 2000: 1038.
	 24.	Gelman 1990.
	 25.	Gergely et al. 1995: 167; Michotte 1963.
	 26.	Santos, Hauser, and Spelke 2002: 205–210.
	 27.	Brothers 1997: 40.
	 28.	Gergely et al. 1995; Caramazza and Shelton 1998.
	 29.	Baron-Cohen 1995.
	 30.	New, Cosmides, and Tooby 2007.
	 31.	Atran 1990; Astington 1990.
	 32.	J. Barrett 2004.
	 33.	Michotte 1963.
	 34.	Heider and Simmel 1944.
	 35.	Premack and Premack 1995; P. Bloom and Veres 1999.
	 36.	Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC Research Group 1999; Johansson et al. 
1994.
	 37.	Nelson 1996: 197.
	 38.	Schank and Abelson 1977; Schank 1995.
	 39.	Premack and Premack 2003: 146, 171–172.
	40.	Tomasello 1995; Gergely et al. 1995: 174; Premack and Premack 2003: 
145.
	 41.	Wellman quoted in Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997: 125; Wellman 1990; 
Perner 1991: 118.

	
Notes to Pages 138–143
	
435
	 42.	Darwin [1871/1874] 2003, chap. 4; de Waal 2001a: 352.
	 43.	de Waal 2001a: 352; Bekoff 2002a: 35.
	44.	de Waal 2001a: 326.
	 45.	de Waal 2001a: 352, 357.
	46.	de Waal 2001a: 355.
	 47.	D. Griffin 2001: 216.
	 48.	Boyer 2001: 122; J. Harris 2006.
	49.	Gaulin and McBurney 2001: 193; Buss 1999b: 51.
	 50.	Smuts 2000: 94; de Waal 1996: 73–74; Klein et al. in press.
	 51.	Goleman 2006.
	 52.	Baron, Keller, and Burnstein 2002.
	 53.	Kenrick, Sadalla, and Keele 1998: 504.
	 54.	Mock 2004: 22.
	 55.	See Frank 1988 and Katz 2000.
	 56.	Darwin [1871/1874] 2003, chap. 5.
	 57.	Brosnan and de Waal 2003.
	 58.	Douglas 2001; Fehr and Henrich 2003.
	 59.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 101, 191.
	60.	Wright 2000: 262; Pinker 2002: 256–257.
	 61.	Cosmides and Tooby 1992, 2005.
	 62.	Pinker 2002: 188.
	 63.	Brosnan and de Waal 2003; de Waal 2006.
	64.	Frank 1988: 65.
	 65.	Jung 2003; Nuñez 2001.
	66.	B. Boyd 1998; Zunshine 2006, the first book on theory of mind and 
fiction, demonstrates a shaky hold on the sci­en­tific literature and its 
application to fiction; see B. Boyd 2006a for a review and discussion, 
and Zunshine 2007 and B. Boyd 2007a for an exchange.
	 67.	Jolly 1966; Humphrey 1976; Byrne and Whiten 1988; Alexander 1989; 
Whiten and Byrne 1997; de Waal and Tyack 2003; Geary 2005; Zuber-
bühler and Byrne 2006.
	 68.	D. S. Wilson 2007a; Tomasello et al. 2005.
	69.	Iacoboni 2008: 139.
	 70.	See Baron-Cohen 1995 for the first, P. Hobson 2004 and to some ex-
tent Baron-Cohen 2005 for the second.
	 71.	Rakoczy, Tomasello, and Striano 2005; Tomasello et al. 2005.
	 72.	See Astington and Baird 2005.

436
Notes to Pages 143–150
	 73.	Tomasello et al. 2005: 675.
	 74.	Baron-Cohen 1995, 1998: 181; Klin, Schultz, and Cohen 2000: 363; 
Boyer 2001: 104.
	 75.	Sacks 1995: 272.
	 76.	Baron-Cohen 1995: 3. Baron-Cohen 2005 has revised his explanation 
of autism as theory of mind defi­cit by including empathy as a compo-
nent of theory of mind.
	 77.	Vinden and Astington 2000: 513; Cosmides and Tooby 1994: 102; Heyes 
2003: 721; Saxe 2004: 2.
	 78.	Astington 1990: 154–157; Perner 1991; Baron-Cohen 2000: 5–14; Saxe 
2004: 1.
	 79.	Perner 1991: 270; Gopnik and Astington 2000: 194.
	80.	Perner 1991: 161, 162.
	 81.	Perner 1991: 153.
	 82.	Perner 1991: 158–159. This natural human concern with the sources of 
knowledge even shapes the grammar of certain languages, such as 
Turkish, in which grammatical markings are needed to indicate the 
source of one’s knowledge about past events: if you witnessed them, 
heard about them, or had to infer them (Perner 1991: 149).
	 83.	Perner 1991: 136.
	 84.	Baron-Cohen et al. 1999: 410–411.
	 85.	Baron-Cohen et al. 1999: 407–408.
	 86.	Kinderman, Dunbar, and Bentall 1998.
	 87.	Dunbar 1998b: 103. Something as complex as theory of mind naturally 
engages many brain areas: current neuroimaging studies suggest me-
dial, orbitofrontal, and lateral areas of the prefrontal cortex, especially 
left medial frontal (Brodmann’s areas 8 and 9), Brodmann’s area 32, 
the medial temporal area, and the temporo-parietal junction: see L. 
Barrett, Henzi, and Dunbar 2003; Haan and Johnson 2003; Saxe 2004.
	 88.	See Emmott 1997.
	 89.	Baker-Ward, Ornstein, and Principe 1997: 91; Travis 1997: 119; Trabasso 
and Stein 1997: 243–244; Bourg, Bauer, and van den Broek 1997: 
393–396.
	90.	Berman and Slobin 1994; Travis 1997: 114; Trabasso and Stein 1997: 238, 
241.
	 91.	Nelson 1997: 2; Baker-Ward, Ornstein, and Principe 1997: 93; Bourg, 
Bauer, and van den Broek 1997: 395.

	
Notes to Pages 150–154
	
437
	 92.	Bauer and Mandler 1992; Travis 1997: 133, 136; Fivush and Haden 1997: 
172.
	 93.	Bauer 1996.
	94.	Hauser and Spaulding 2006, cited in Pinker 2007a: 217.
	 95.	Nelson 1997: 21; Travis 1997: 114; van den Broek 1997: 335; Bourg, Bauer, 
and van den Broek 1997: 397.
	96.	Trabasso and Stein 1997: 242.
	 97.	Berman and Slobin 1994: 67.
	 98.	Stein and Liwag 1997: 201.
	99.	Gergely et al. 1995; Bourg, Bauer, and van den Broek 1997: 388, 399.
	100.	Travis 1997: 113.
	101.	Travis 1997: 114.
	102.	Doidge 2007: 265–266, 278–279.
	103.	Trabasso and Stein 1997: 248.
	104.	See Chapter 13, notes 27 and 28 and text.
	105.	Tulving 1985.
	106.	Long, Oppy, and Seely 1997: 373.
	107.	Fletcher, Briggs, and Linzie 1997: 344–345.
	108.	C. Brown 2001: 109.
	109.	Kendrick 2004: 48.
	110.	Clayton and Dickinson 1998; L. Barrett, Henzi, and Dunbar 2003: 496.
	111.	Bauer and Wewerka 1997: 141–142.
	112.	Bauer 1996; Bauer and Wewerka 1997.
	113.	Bauer and Wewerka 1997: 146; Fivush and Haden 1997: 177; Bauer 1996.
	114.	Nelson and Ross 1980: 96.
	115.	Baker-Ward, Ornstein, and Principe 1997: 84, 89; Trabasso and Stein 
1997: 246.
	116.	Anderson and Schooler 1991.
	117.	Pinker 1997: 142–143.
	118.	Baker-Ward, Ornstein, and Principe 1997: 88. Goldinger 1998, how-
ever, suggests a multiple-trace memory model that stores aspects of 
surface detail as well as deeper structure.
	119.	Bartlett 1932.
	120.	Fivush and Haden 1997: 175.
	121.	Premack and Premack 2003: 238; Fivush and Haden 1997: 181; Trabasso 
and Stein 1997: 247.
	122.	Klein et al. 2002.

438
Notes to Pages 155–159
	123.	Klein et al. 2002, in press.
	124.	Emmott 1997.
	125.	Schacter and Addis 2007b: 331.
	126.	Barsalou 2008 offers a review. Evolved: Barsalou 2008: 620: “there are 
no a priori reasons why simulation cannot have a strong genetic basis. 
Genetic contributions almost certainly shape the modal systems and 
memory systems that capture and implement simulations”; 622, citing 
Barsalou 2005: “Barsalou . . . further proposed that nonhumans have 
roughly the same simulation system as humans but lack a linguistic 
system to control it.”
	127.	Barsalou 2008: 618–619.
	128.	Barsalou 2008: 624, citing Tucker and Ellis 1998.
	129.	Barsalou 2008: 624, citing Pulvermüller et al. 2006.
	130.	Barsalou 2008: 625, citing Franklin and Tversky 1990.
	131.	Barsalou 2008: 627 reviews the relevant studies.
	132.	Schacter and Addis 2007a: 778, quoting Atance and O’Neill 2001; also 
Buckner 2007; Suddendorf and Corballis 2007; Schacter, Addis, and 
Buckner 2008.
	133.	Schacter and Addis 2007a, 2007b: 332.
	134.	Buckner 2007: 318.
	135.	A. Damasio 1996.
	136.	Barsalou 2008: 633.
	137.	Schacter and Addis 2007a: 779.
	138.	Bower 2008 reviews this tradition of research.
	139.	Barsalou 2008: 623.
Chapter 11. Narrative
	 1.	Aristotle 1951: 1447a: “Epic poetry and Tragedy, Comedy also and 
Dithyrambic poetry . . . are all in their general conception modes of 
imitation”; 1448a: “the objects of imitation are men in action”; 1449b: 
“Tragedy, then, is an imitation of an action that is serious, complete, 
and of a certain magnitude.”
	 2.	See N. Carroll 1996b and 1998 on musical prefocusing, Bordwell 1997 
and 2005 on aspects of visual focusing in narrative film, McCloud 
1993 and Spiegelman 1999 on comics.

	
Notes to Pages 159–171
	
439
	 3.	See Strawson 2004 for a rare critique of these assumptions.
	 4.	The patient known as David, discussed in A. Damasio 2000: 119.
	 5.	Dawkins and Krebs 1978. See also J. Krebs and Dawkins 1984; Sperber 
2006.
	 6.	J. Krebs and Dawkins 1984.
	 7.	Noble 2000: 57. Paul Grice 1975 famously stressed the cooperative 
principle of conversation.
	 8.	Frisch 1950, 1967; D. Griffin 2001.
	 9.	Seyfarth, Cheney, and Marler 1980; Cheney and Seyfarth 1990.
	 10.	E. O. Wilson 1975/2000: 474; D. Griffin 2001: 229.
	 11.	Meltzoff 1988: 59.
	 12.	Meltzoff 1988; P. Hobson 2004.
	 13.	de Waal 2001b: 4.
	 14.	Donald 1998.
	 15.	Tomasello et al. 2005.
	 16.	Dennett 1993: 144; 1996b: 57.
	 17.	Boyer 2001; Barkow 1992: 629.
	 18.	de Waal 1998: 169.
	 19.	P. Hobson 2004: 75.
	20.	Marco Iacoboni, quoted in Oakley 2007: 104–105.
	 21.	P. Hobson 2004: 54.
	 22.	P. Hobson 2004: 247.
	 23.	Pinker 1997: 207.
	 24.	King, Rumbaugh, and Savage-Rumbaugh 1999: 112.
	 25.	Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1982: 194.
	 26.	Cf. Nettle 2005: 45.
	 27.	A. Damasio 1996, 2000.
	 28.	Haidt 2006: 54.
	 29.	Ibid.
	 30.	Dunbar, Marriott, and Duncan 1997.
	 31.	Dessalles 1998.
	 32.	Schank 1995.
	 33.	Sperber 2006.
	 34.	Leach 1954: 266.
	 35.	Langellier and Petersen 1992: 172.
	 36.	Jolly 1999: 110.

440
Notes to Pages 172–182
	 37.	Maltz and Borker 1982: 208, quoted in A. Campbell 2002: 107.
	 38.	For a general view of a wider sense of “parable” in narrative, see M. 
Turner 1996.
	 39.	Boyer 2001.
	40.	See N. Carroll 1998: 206.
	 41.	J. Carroll 1995, 2004; Sternberg 2003a, 2003b.
	 42.	As claimed in Dunbar 1996.
	 43.	Pinker 1995, 1997, 2007a.
	44.	Pinker 2007a: 149, 178, 187, 430, 208, 431.
	 45.	I adapt the example and simplify the more elaborate and rigorous ter-
minology of Fauconnier 1997: 73.
	46.	For negation, see Verhagen 2007, 2008b.
	 47.	Scalise Sugiyama 2001b and 2004 makes much—probably too 
much—of the importance of narrative warnings about predators in 
hunter-gatherer so­ci­e­ties.
Chapter 12. Fiction
	 1.	Lorenz 1971.
	 2.	Bekoff 2000; Bekoff and Allen 2002; Špinka, Newberry, and Bekoff 
2001: 142.
	 3.	Allen and Bekoff 1997; Bekoff 2002a, 2002b: 113.
	 4.	Fagen 1995: 35; see also Stuart Brown 1998.
	 5.	Stuart Brown 1998: 248; B. Sutton-Smith 1997: 40.
	 6.	Sutton-Smith 1997: 169–173.
	 7.	Corballis 2002: 79.
	 8.	Bekoff 2002a: 124–125.
	 9.	Allen and Bekoff 1997: 99–100.
	 10.	van Hooff and Preuschoft 2003: 267.
	 11.	Bateson 1955; Jolly 1999: 287.
	 12.	Allen and Bekoff 1997: 109.
	 13.	P. Hobson 2004: 76.
	 14.	Rakoczy, Tomasello, and Striano 2005: 78; Baron-Cohen 2000: 8; Well-
mann and Lagattuta 2000: 26.
	 15.	Perner 1991: 51.
	 16.	P. Harris 1991: 285; Dunbar 1996: 68.
	 17.	Astington 1990: 151–152.

	
Notes to Pages 182–193
	
441
	 18.	Sutton-Smith 1981: 15.
	 19.	Nelson 1996: 197. See also Sutton-Smith 1997: 163.
	20.	Suddendorf and Whiten 2001: 633.
	 21.	Leslie 1987, 1994; Boyer 2001: 130.
	 22.	Taylor 1999; Boyer 2001: 149.
	 23.	Nelson 1996: 193.
	 24.	Sutton-Smith 1986: 67.
	 25.	Sutton-Smith 1981: 53–54.
	 26.	Baillargeon 2002; P. Bloom 2004: 12–13.
	 27.	Ridley 2003: 179.
	 28.	Waelti, Dickinson, and Schultz 2001.
	 29.	Sawyer 1997: 118.
	 30.	Sutton-Smith 1997: 158–160; Göncü and Klein 2001: 4; Sutton-Smith 
2001: 162.
	 31.	Peterson and McCabe 1983.
	 32.	Pellegrini 1995: 154; Sutton-Smith 2001: 162.
	 33.	Stuart Brown and Sutton-Smith 1995: 40.
	 34.	Sutton-Smith 1981: 110–111.
	 35.	Sutton-Smith 1981.
Chapter 13. Fiction as Adaptation
	 1.	Fauconnier 1997: 121.
	 2.	Erdrich 1990: 76.
	 3.	Baron-Cohen 1995, 2000.
	 4.	Bekoff 2007: 100.
	 5.	Hrdy 1999: 157.
	 6.	Green and Bavelier 2007; Rosser et al. 2007.
	 7.	Levitin 2006: 193.
	 8.	Levitin 2006: 190.
	 9.	M. Johnson 1998: 428, 440.
	 10.	Fischler 1998: 394.
	 11.	Goleman 2006.
	 12.	Dimberg, Thunberg, and Elmehed 2000.
	 13.	Aziz-Zadeh et al. 2006.
	 14.	Dennett 1996b: 152.
	 15.	Cf. N. Carroll’s clar­i­fi­ca­tionism, 1998: 320–324.

442
Notes to Pages 193–202
	 16.	As dreams may also do?
	 17.	Nettle 2005: 44 discusses story as superstimulus.
	 18.	Gerrig 1993.
	 19.	Cosmides and Tooby 2000: 89.
	20.	Dawkins 1989a: 4.
	 21.	J. Carroll 2004: 116.
	 22.	J. Carroll 2004: 198.
	 23.	M. Turner 1996 discusses the parable function of stories, our ability to 
extract sense relevant to us; see also Schank 1995.
	 24.	L. Ellis 1995; de Waal and Tyack 2003 (hyenas); Pusey, Williams, and 
Goodall 1997; de Waal 1998: 163, 165 (chimpanzees); Wright 2000: 26, 
37 (humans).
	 25.	Allport and Postman 1946: 46.
	 26.	Sidanius and Pratto 1999; Baumeister 2007.
	 27.	Cf. P. Hogan 2003.
	 28.	Daly and Wilson 1998b.
	 29.	Haidt 2006: 193–200; Algoe and Haidt under submission.
	 30.	R. Boyd and Richerson 1992; Fehr and Gächter 2002.
	 31.	Oakley 2007: 259–260.
	 32.	See Chapter 7, note 30 and text.
	 33.	LaylÀ and MajnÄn, quoted in P. Hogan 2003: 147.
	 34.	Pretend play: Dunbar 2000: 239; modeling: Perner 1991: 87.
	 35.	Cosmides and Tooby 2000: 65.
	 36.	Lewis 1973; Collins, Hall, and Paul 2004.
	 37.	The tilting of the pelvis as we moved from quadrupedal to bipedal lo-
comotion is the major reason human births are so dif­fi­cult. Richerson 
and Boyd 2005 show that maladaptation offers even better evidence of 
evolution as opposed to “Intelligent Design” than does perfect adapta-
tion.
	 38.	Boyer 2001: 13.
	 39.	Atran 2002: viii–ix.
	40.	P. Harris 1990.
	 41.	Mead 1932; Kohlberg 1969; Wellmann and Gelman 1998: 562.
	 42.	Boyer 2001; Atran 2002.
	 43.	Horton 1993 stresses the importance of the sense of control that reli-
gion imparts, especially in preindustrial so­ci­e­ties.
	44.	J. Barrett 1996, 2000, 2004; Boyer 2001; Atran 2002.

	
Notes to Pages 202–217
	
443
	 45.	Dennett 1996a.
	46.	Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC Research Group 1999; Sperber and Wilson 
1988.
	 47.	Plotkin 1994: 191.
	 48.	Richerson and Boyd 2005.
	49.	Atran 2002: 94; J. Barrett and Keil 1996; J. Barrett 2004.
	 50.	Atran 2002: 88.
	 51.	Boyer 2001: 153.
	 52.	Quoted in D. S. Wilson 2002: 64.
	 53.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 41.
	 54.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 42.
	 55.	Horton 1993.
	 56.	Horton 1993: 231.
	 57.	For evolutionary discussions of humor, see B. Boyd 2004 and Gervais 
and Wilson 2005.
Book II. From Zeus to Seuss
	Epigraph: McEwan 2004: 4.
	 1.	For an excellent but very different evolutionary approach to Homer 
(especially the Iliad), see Gottschall 2008b.
	 2.	Popper 1999, 1976; Gombrich 1960, 1982, 1995; Bordwell 1985, 1989, 
1997, 2005; Bordwell and Carroll 1996.
Part 4. Phylogeny
	Epigraph: Sidney [1595] 1966: 40.
Chapter 14. Earning Attention (1)
	 1.	Tracy 1990: xi.
	 2.	van Wees 1999: 11.
	 3.	de Jong 1999a: 7.
	 4.	M. Edwards 1987: 1.
	 5.	Kirk 1993: 293.
	 6.	M. Edwards 1987: 20.
	 7.	M. Edwards 1987: 44.

444
Notes to Pages 217–234
	 8.	Gunn 1970.
	 9.	M. Edwards 1987: 88.
	 10.	J. Griffin 1977, 1980.
	 11.	Scodel 2002: 34–36.
	 12.	Frank Turner 1997: 137.
	 13.	W. H. D. Rouse, cited in Sternberg 1978: 56.
	 14.	Labov 1972.
	 15.	Aristotle 1951: 14.1453b.22–26, p. 51.
	 16.	de Jong 2001: 215.
	 17.	Budgen 1960.
	 18.	Sternberg 1978: 92.
	 19.	Barnouw 2004: 21.
	20.	Lakoff and Johnson 1999, 2003.
	 21.	Felson and Slatkin 2004: 106.
	 22.	From the Murray/Dimock translation, Homer 1995: 193.
	 23.	Stanford 1999: 201.
	 24.	Bowlby 1988; Hrdy 1999.
	 25.	See P. Hogan 2003.
	 26.	de Jong 2001: 313.
	 27.	On the preference for happy endings see Aristotle 1951: 13.1453a30–35, 
p. 47; and Lowe 2000: 129.
	 28.	Olson 1995: 24 notes that since at least 1895 this has become something 
of a critical commonplace.
	 29.	For an evolutionary analysis of this contrast in terms of “agonistic 
structure,” see J. Carroll et al. under submission.
	 30.	As Ruth Scodel aptly summarizes, Sale 1987 and 1989 convincingly ar-
gues “that the Iliad avoids the sharply hostile traditional epithets of 
the Trojans and that the epic language is weak in formulae for move-
ment from Troy or for being in Troy. In other words, the full, sympa-
thetic treatment of the Trojans in the Iliad is a relatively recent devel-
opment in the tradition” (Scodel 2002: 52–53).
Chapter 15. Earning Attention (2)
	 1.	Levin 1971, 1979, 2003; Bordwell 1989.
	 2.	Brann 2002: 109 notes that epic, “if ever there was a ­genre, is meant for 
the second and subsequent readings.”

	
Notes to Pages 234–248
	
445
	 3.	Sternberg 1978, 2003a, 2003b. Note Scodel 2004: 52: “Perhaps the most 
common misconception about traditional stories is that they do not 
allow for suspense. This is not true—a good story-teller can create 
suspense even when the audience knows the outcome . . . In Homeric 
epic, the situation is especially com­pli­cated, since many details of a 
traditional story could vary among different versions. So the audience 
could never know just how the end would be reached. The poet care-
fully keeps the audience aware of how the plot will turn out in gen-
eral, but uncertain about spe­cifics.”
	 4.	Scodel 2002: 48–49.
	 5.	Aristotle 1951: 23.1459a.30–34, p. 89.
	 6.	He reports the first Greek killed in the war, nine years earlier (2.701); 
he has the leading warriors on the battlefield iden­ti­fied to Priam by 
Helen as they stand together on the battlements of Troy, as if the war 
were just starting; he opens the fight­ing between named warriors with 
Menelaos and Paris, Helen’s Greek and Trojan husbands, in single 
combat, again as if hostilities had just begun; and he grimly foreshad-
ows, though he does not show, the death of Achilleus and the fall of 
Troy.
	 7.	Scodel 2002 offers a masterly account of these tactics.
	 8.	Felson and Slatkin 2004: 93.
	 9.	Lukács 1971: 67.
	 10.	Scodel 2002: 49.
	 11.	There are two distinct ways of dating the events in the Odyssey, de-
pending on whether the council of the gods in book 5 is seen as being 
a second version of the council in book 1 or as a new event. In the lat-
ter case, the duration of the action would change from about twenty-
seven to forty days.
	 12.	Cf. Knox 1996: 3.
	 13.	Tracy 1990: 3.
	 14.	Goethe in Cook’s translation, Homer 1993: 303; G. Finsler (1914) in de 
Jong 1999a: 4; Olson 1995: 140; Scodel 2004: 52.
	 15.	P. Jones 1991: 9; Walsh and Merrill 2002: 18.
	 16.	de Jong 2001: 34; J. Griffin 1980: 57.
	 17.	The evidence is inconsistent. Kalypso serves Hermes ambrosia and 
nectar on her own, and seems otherwise to have no one else with her. 
Nevertheless, when she serves Odysseus food, “her serving maids set 

446
Notes to Pages 249–259
nectar and ambrosia before her” (5.198–199). Yet there is no other ref-
erence to these serving maids or to anyone else on Ogygia. Odysseus, 
in an otherwise accurate report to Arete, describes Ogygia as an island 
where “subtle Kalypso lives, with ordered hair, a dread goddess, and 
there is no one, neither a god nor a mortal person, who keeps her 
company. It was unhappy I alone whom destiny brought there to her 
hearth” (7.245–249). Circe does have maidservants, who are nymphs 
and therefore immortal.
	 18.	See de Jong 2001: 171 for the critical reactions.
	 19.	Frog: Silk 2004: 35; knight: Woodhouse 1930: 54–65.
	20.	For both Circe and Kalypso, see 9.29–32.
	 21.	Bordwell 1989.
Chapter 16. The Evolution of Intelligence (1)
	 1.	Barnouw 2004: 54 and passim; Maehler 1999: 9–10, 17.
	 2.	Snell 1975: 31; Barnouw 2004: 163.
	 3.	Jaynes 1976: 75, 273, 276.
	 4.	B. Williams 1993; Barnouw 2004.
	 5.	For a superb demonstration of how modern artists and especially 
writers have anticipated the find­ings of psychology, see Lehrer 2008, 
which came to my attention too late to incorporate more fully.
	 6.	B. Williams 1993.
	 7.	Premack and Premack 2003: 145; Gergely et al. 1995: 174; Gopnik and 
Meltzoff 1997: 125; Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992: 89; Saxe 2004.
	 8.	Geary 2005: 14, 195, 215, 297; Pinker 2007a: 129.
	 9.	Geary 2005: 195, 13, 14, 211, 232.
	 10.	Bernard Williams discusses a version of the formula from the Iliad: 
“‘Yet still, why does the heart within me debate on these things?’ Her-
mann Fränkel had already noticed that remarks made to the thumos 
are then represented as made by it. But the word translated as ‘debate 
on,’ dielexato, refers, unsurprisingly, to a two-way discourse, and the 
formulae capture the idea that in talking to a thumos a man is talking 
to himself. What happens in both cases is that the character pulls back 
from a course of action he has been considering in favour of a course 
of action with which he is more iden­ti­fied” (B. Williams 1993: 350). 
Homer’s use of thumos seems to re­flect the idea of working memory 

	
Notes to Pages 260–278
	
447
as a mental workspace where one can talk to oneself more or less ex-
plicitly.
	 11.	P. Jones 2003: 18.
	 12.	Barnouw 2004: 12.
	 13.	de Jong 2001: 305.
	 14.	Barnouw 2004.
	 15.	For a fine discussion of these ironies, see de Jong 2001: 347–348, 388, 
396.
	 16.	This has been denied by some Homerists, but their denial is amply re-
futed by J. Griffin 1980: 51–65.
Chapter 17. The Evolution of Intelligence (2)
	 1.	See Perner 1991; Cosmides and Tooby 2000.
	 2.	Auerbach 1957: 5, 9. Barnouw 2004: 319 notes that Auerbach’s reading 
is both “much celebrated and much criticized.” See, e.g., Cook in 
Homer 1993: 332; M. Edwards 1987: 4.
	 3.	J. Griffin 1980: 64.
	 4.	Auerbach 1957: 2–3.
	 5.	See, e.g., Barnouw 2004: 321.
	 6.	Auerbach 1957: 5.
	 7.	de Jong 1985, 2001.
	 8.	Barnouw 2004: 322.
	 9.	Tracy 1990: 117.
	 10.	Sternberg 1978: 76.
	 11.	Whiten and Byrne 1997: 7.
	 12.	Bekoff 2002a: 56.
	 13.	Suddendorf and Whiten 2001: 640; Plotkin 1997: 217. But see Hare, 
Call, and Tomasello 2001; and de Waal 2004.
	 14.	See Tomasello et al. 2005; D. S. Wilson 2007a.
	 15.	Rutherford 1999: 286.
	 16.	Barnouw 2004: 343.
	 17.	Heyes 2003: 721.
	 18.	But see de Waal 2004.
	 19.	For a book suggesting that an evolutionary understanding of “come-
uppance” is the key to all fiction—surely an oversim­pli­fi­ca­tion—see 
Flesch 2007.

448
Notes to Pages 279–288
	20.	Stanford 1999: 201.
	 21.	Barnouw 2004: 327.
	 22.	Classicist Barry Powell (1991) has even advanced strong arguments 
that the alphabet, the most ef­fi­cient writing system yet known and 
the other cultural precondition for the great Greek tradition of 
critical thinking, was invented spe­cifi­cally in order to record Homer’s 
epics.
	 23.	Horton 1993.
	 24.	Dennett 1993: 144 and 1996b: 57.
	 25.	J. Griffin 1980.
Chapter 18. The Evolution of Cooperation (1)
	 1.	This seems to be woven into Penelope’s name: pene, thread or woof, 
and elopeaiai, from olopto, to pluck out, hence “weaver/unraveler” 
(Barnouw 2004: 338).
	 2.	Cummins 2005: 688.
	 3.	Cummins 2005: 689.
	 4.	A. Damasio 2003: 47.
	 5.	A. Damasio 2003: 46; see especially the work of Frans de Waal.
	 6.	Jolly 1999: 264.
	 7.	Tooby and Cosmides 1996.
	 8.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 119.
	 9.	The system of xenia has been ably described in, e.g., Finley 1979.
	 10.	Cf. de Jong 2001: 223.
	 11.	Most 1999: 489 ff.
	 12.	Knox 1996: 29–30.
	 13.	Walsh and Merrill 2002: 27.
	 14.	D. Krebs 2000: 143.
Chapter 19. The Evolution of Cooperation (2)
	 1.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 8.
	 2.	de Waal 1998; Fox 1995.
	 3.	de Jong 2001: 199, 417.
	 4.	D. S. Wilson 2002: 194.

	
Notes to Pages 289–333
	
449
	 5.	Frank 1988.
	 6.	Nisbett and Cohen 1996.
	 7.	Cummins 2005: 681; Clutton-Brock and Parker 1995.
	 8.	Atran 2002: 28.
	 9.	Atran 2002: 114.
	 10.	Sosis 2000, 2004; D. S. Wilson 2002; Alcorta and Sosis 2005.
	 11.	D. S. Wilson 2002.
	 12.	de Waal 1996, 2006.
	 13.	A. Campbell 2005: 641.
	 14.	Richerson and Boyd 2005.
	 15.	Cf. Radcliffe Richards 2000: 201.
Chapter 20. Problems and Solutions
	 1.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 248.
	 2.	Sheff 1987: 55, quoted in Minear 1999: 263, who notes that this was 
only Japan’s first postwar election.
	 3.	MacDonald 1988: 75.
	 4.	Minear 1999: 263.
	 5.	J. Harris 2006: 239.
	 6.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 233.
	 7.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 88.
	 8.	Cohen 2004: 110. The magazine was Printer’s Ink.
	 9.	Nel 2004: 97.
	 10.	Cohen 2004: 204.
	 11.	Boyer 2001; Atran 2002; J. Barrett 2004.
	 12.	Cohen 2004: 341.
	 13.	Darwin [1872] 1998: 56.
	 14.	Cf. Aiken 1998; Solso 1994.
	 15.	B. Boyd 2004; Gervais and Wilson 2005.
	 16.	Cohen 2004: 110, 117.
	 17.	Frederick Turner and Pöppel 1988.
	 18.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 7.
	 19.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 81.
	20.	Quoted in Nel 2004: 6.
	 21.	Nel 2004: 88.

450
Notes to Pages 333–342
	 22.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 82.
	 23.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 176.
Chapter 21. Levels of Explanation: 
Universal, Local, and Individual
	 1.	Sheff 1987: 55 in Minear 1999: 263.
	 2.	Appiah 2006b: 41.
	 3.	Minear 1999: 264.
	 4.	Nel 2004: 57.
	 5.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 119.
	 6.	Quoted in Nel 2004: 57.
	 7.	Barthes 1972b: 135.
	 8.	Braunmuller 1992: 78.
	 9.	Menand 2002: 148.
	 10.	See Levin 2003, chap. 2.
	 11.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 72; Cohen 2004: 105.
	 12.	Nel 2004: 60.
	 13.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 125.
	 14.	Quoted in Nel 2004: 29.
	 15.	Menand 2005: 14.
	 16.	Menand 2005: 13.
	 17.	Menand 2005: 14.
	 18.	E. O. Wilson 1999.
	 19.	Menand 2005: 12.
	20.	Menand 2005: 15.
	 21.	Ibid.
	 22.	D. Brown 1991.
	 23.	Gombrich 1991: 18.
	 24.	Pollock 1983: 23, critiquing this position.
	 25.	Nordlund 2007: 55.
	 26.	Howard Bloch, quoted in Nordlund 2007: 25.
	 27.	Nordlund 2007: 53–62; P. Hogan 2003; Diamond 2003; and Fisher 
2004.
	 28.	Kenan Malik, quoted in Nordlund 2007: 19.
	 29.	Bordwell 1997: 44.
	 30.	Bordwell 1997: 43.

	
Notes to Pages 342–360
	
451
	 31.	Richerson and Boyd 2005: 166.
	 32.	Bordwell 1997: 150–151, 156.
	 33.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 72.
	 34.	Cohen 2004: 26–27.
	 35.	Nel 2004: 77–79.
Chapter 22. Levels of Explanation: 
Individuality Again
	 1.	Critiqued in Levin 2003, chap. 2; and in Burke 1998.
	 2.	Braunmuller 1992: 78.
	 3.	J. Harris 2006.
	 4.	Klein et al. 2002.
	 5.	Goodall 1990.
	 6.	de Waal 2001a.
	 7.	Despite the so-called Intentional Fallacy of Wimsatt and Beardsley; 
see Livingston 2005.
	 8.	Didion 2005: 7.
	 9.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 170.
	 10.	Simonton 1999.
	 11.	Ibid.
	 12.	Nel 2004: 35.
	 13.	For Mozart, see Steptoe 1996: 33. Pushkin’s heavily revised manu-
scripts feature in many Russian editions of his work.
	 14.	Nel 2004: 32.
	 15.	Stofflet 1986: 65.
	 16.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 279.
	 17.	Seuss 1995: 18–19 (the dating may be incorrect).
	 18.	See Cohen 2004: 8–10.
	 19.	Judge, April 1938: 17; reproduced in Cohen 2004: 10.
Chapter 23. Levels of Explanation: Particular
	 1.	Cohen 2004: 306.
	 2.	Seuss 1951.
	 3.	Cohen 2004: 299.
	 4.	In June 1950 Redbook magazine carried Dr. Seuss’s “Gustav, the Gold-

452
Notes to Pages 360–372
fish,” which was “advertised as ‘An Amazing Adventure story for 
Youngsters and Other People of Imagination’” and introduced a new 
series of stories “‘presented with a technique that’s new. To get the best 
results . . . read it aloud to your youngsters.’ Up to this point, Ted had 
published eight books, half of which rhymed and half of which did 
not. Having had the experience with the boy who was too young to 
read but who had memorized the sounds of the words in Thidwick, 
Ted was now planning to use the sounds of his words to reach young-
sters at an early age” (Cohen 2004: 303).
	 5.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 82.
	 6.	For the last of these, cf. Nel 2004: 67.
	 7.	Cohen 2004: 305.
	 8.	N. Carroll 1988: 170–181 analyzes this question-and-answer narrative 
under the term “erotectic.”
	 9.	N. Carroll 1998: 261–275.
	 10.	See Cohen 2004: 8–10.
	 11.	See Dehaene 1997 for the biological roots of mathematics, including 
the evolved capacity for appraising quantity common to many animals.
Chapter 24. Meanings
	 1.	M. Turner 1996.
	 2.	Aristotle 1951: 1451b, pp. 34–35.
	 3.	Schank 1995.
	 4.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 81.
	 5.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 98.
	 6.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 211.
	 7.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 286.
	 8.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 155.
	 9.	Schank 1995.
	 10.	As noted in Chapter 4, this does not mean that cooperation cannot 
evolve, only that it requires special conditions.
	 11.	See Bordwell 2008 for a model of narrative reception that moves from 
perception (substantially the same for all) to comprehension (more 
variable) to appropriation, the value a given audience assigns to the 
story (relatively open). Bordwell does not invoke selfish gene theory 
but would accept its relevance.

	
Notes to Pages 372–386
	
453
	 12.	Morgan and Morgan 1995: 277.
	 13.	Cohen 2004: 289.
	 14.	In this story written in late 1953, we might suspect that another “local” 
context has played its part: Senator Joseph McCarthy’s campaign 
against supposed Communists in the federal government was ap-
proaching its peak.
	 15.	See Cohen 2004: 220.
	 16.	Levin 1979: 28–41.
	 17.	See Haidt 2006 and Algoe and Haidt under submission for discus-
sions of the emotion of elevation as an inspiration to emulate the 
prosocial dispositions and actions of others.
	 18.	Quoted in L. Miller 2005: 54; http://www.newyorker.com/
archive/2005/12/26/051226fa_fact.
	 19.	Scott 2000.
Conclusion
	Epigraph: Frye 1957.
	 1.	Edelman 1987.
	 2.	D. S. Wilson 2005.
	 3.	D. Campbell 1965, 1974; Hull 1988; Simonton 1999.
	 4.	Cf. J. Carroll 1995, which distinguishes the first three levels.
	 5.	Popper 1999, 1976; Gombrich 1995, 1960, 1982; Bordwell 1985, 1989, 
1997, 2005; Bordwell and Carroll 1996.
	 6.	Patai and Corral 2005; B. Boyd 2006b, 2006c.
	 7.	Among those who have recently argued for the role that literature can 
play as a source and a testing-ground for psychology are Livingston 
1988; Sternberg 2003a, 2003b; J. Carroll 2004; Gottschall 2008b; Sling-
erland 2008; J. Carroll et al. under submission.
	 8.	Dennett 1996a: 74.
	 9.	Sokal 1996, 2008; Sokal and Bricmont 1998; Editors of Lingua Franca 
2000. Frustrated by what he saw as the meaninglessness of postmod-
ern Theory’s language and the emptiness of its claims, physicist Alan 
Sokal wrote a parody of Theory-speak (1996), awash in sci­en­tific quo-
tations but ac­tually meaningless. After it was published by the editors 
of Social Text, whose ideological preconceptions it flattered, in its spe-
cial issue “Science Wars,” Sokal exposed and explained his hoax.

454
Notes to Pages 387–403
	 10.	Spitzer 1948; J. Ellis 2005: 100–101.
	 11.	Vickers 1993: 417.
	 12.	Quoted in Patai and Corral 2005: 6.
	 13.	Cf. Bordwell and Carroll 1996 for a discussion of the midrange inves-
tigations possible after the demise of Theory.
	 14.	While Maus is mainstream, I discuss another pointedly avant-garde 
Speigelman comic, The Narrative Corpse, in B. Boyd 2008a.
	 15.	Nel 2004: 254. Nel’s source is Steinfels 1995: 9: “The pink mess on the 
white dress reveals that menstrual taboos have also been violated 
[and] conjures up fears about the improper loss of virginity.” The 
stain also expresses “the children’s resentment over the loss of their 
mother and the playful protective environment she represents . . . the 
little cats . . . mark the advent of the alphabet,” the power of language 
to “transform the pink pollution into structures of culture.”
	 16.	Bordwell 1989.
	 17.	See Wolf 2007 for the neuroscience of reading, including the effects of 
reading on the plastic brain.
	 18.	Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b, 2005.
	 19.	J. Carroll 2004; J. Carroll et al. under submission. For a critique of 
Carroll’s position, see B. Boyd 2009b.
	20.	For a more detailed critique of Carroll’s proposal of the adaptive role 
of literature in terms of cognitive order, see B. Boyd 2008d.
	 21.	Barthelme 1968.
	 22.	Exceptionally, high sta­tus in humans in the last hundred years has be-
gun to correlate with smaller families. Richerson and Boyd 2005 dis-
cuss the reasons for the “de­mo­graphic transition,” which from a 
purely biological point of view would in normal circumstances be 
maladaptive.
	 23.	Tomasello et al. 2005.
	 24.	Richerson and Boyd 2005.
Afterword
	 1.	Dawkins 1991: 4, 5.
	 2.	Dawkins 1983, 1989b, 1991; Plotkin 1994.
	 3.	D. Campbell 1965; Hull 1988.
	 4.	Gould 1991: 48–52.

	
Notes to Pages 403–413
	
455
	 5.	S. Morris 2003.
	 6.	Michod, Wojciechowski, and Hoelzer 1988; H. Bloom 2000: 91–95.
	 7.	Bordwell 2006: 18.
	 8.	J. Hobson 1994: 214; P. Davies 1988: 55–56.
	 9.	See Bettinger, Boyd, and Richerson 1996 for an evolutionary discus-
sion of style and function.
	 10.	Wolpert 1993.
	 11.	Boyer 2001; J. Barrett 2004; D. S. Wilson 2002.

 

	
457
B I B L I O G R APH Y
Adolphs, R., L. Cahill, and R. Schul. 1997. Impaired declarative memory for 
emotional material following bilateral amygdala damage in humans. 
Learning & Memory 4:291–300.
Adolphs, R., H. Damasio, D. Tranel, G. Cooper, and Antonio Damasio. 
2000. A role for somatosensory cortices in visual recognition of emo-
tion as revealed by three-dimensional lesion mapping. Journal of 
Neuroscience 20:2683–90.
Agee, James. 1941. Let Us Now Praise Famous Men. Boston: Hough­ton 
­Mif­flin.
Aiello, Leslie C., and P. Wheeler. 1995. The expensive tissue hypothesis: The 
brain and the digestive system in human and primate evolution. 
Current Anthropology 36:199–121.
Aiken, Nancy. 1998. The Biological Origins of Art. Westport, Conn.: Praeger.
Alcorta, Candace, and Richard Sosis. 2005. Ritual, emotion, and sacred 
symbols: The evolution of religion as an adaptive complex. Human 
Nature 16:323–359.
Alexander, Richard D. 1989. Evolution of the human psyche. In The Hu-
man Revolution: Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Ori-
gins of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. Stringer. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 455–513.
Algoe, Sara B., and Jonathan Haidt. Under submission. Witnessing excel-
lence in action: The “other-praising” emotions of elevation, grati-
tude, and admiration.
Allen, Colin, and Marc Bekoff. 1997. Species of Mind: The Philosophy and 
Biology of Cognitive Ethology. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT 
Press.
Allman, William F. 1989. Apprentices of Wonder: Inside the Neural Network 
Revolution. New York: Bantam.

458
Bibliography
Allport, Gordon W., and Leo Postman. 1946. The Psychology of Rumor. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Anderson, John R., and Lael J. Schooler. 1991. Reflections of the environ-
ment in memory. Psychological Science 2:396–408.
Anderson, Joseph, and Barbara Anderson. 1996. The case for an ecological 
metatheory. In Bordwell and Carroll 1996, 347–367.
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. 1992. In My Father’s House: Africa in the Philoso-
phy of Culture. London: Methuen.
———. 2006a. Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers. New York: 
Norton.
———. 2006b. Whose culture is it? New York Review of Books, 9 February: 
38–41.
———. 2008. Experiments in Ethics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Aristotle. 1951. Poetics: Aristotle’s Theory of Poetry and Fine Art. Trans. S. H. 
Butcher. 1911. Reprint, New York: Dover.
Arterberry, Martha E. 1997. Development of sensitivity to spatial and tem-
poral information. In van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 51–78.
Astington, Janet Wilde. 1990. Narrative and the child’s theory of mind. In 
Britton and Pellegrini 1990, 151–171.
Astington, Janet Wilde, and Jodie A. Baird, eds. 2005. Why Language Mat-
ters for Theory of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Atance, C. M., and D. K. O’Neill. 2001. Episodic future thinking. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 5:533–539.
Atkins, Peter. 2003. Galileo’s Finger: The Ten Great Ideas of Science. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Atran, Scott. 1990. Cognitive Foundations of Natural History: Towards an 
Anthropology of Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2002. In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Auerbach, Erich. 1957. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western 
Literature. 1946. Trans. Willard R. Trask. Reprint, Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday.
Axelrod, Robert. 1990. The Evolution of Cooperation. 1984. Reprint, Lon-
don: Penguin.
———. 1997. The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of Com-
petition and Collaboration. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

	
Bibliography
	
459
Axelrod, Robert, and William D. Hamilton. 1981. The evolution of cooper-
ation. Science 211:1390–96.
Aziz-Zadeh, Lisa, Stephen M. Wilson, Giacomo Rizzolatti, and Marco 
Iacoboni. 2006. Congruent embodied representations for visually 
presented actions and linguistic phrases describing actions. Current 
Biology 16 (19):1818–23.
Baddeley, A. D. 2000. The episodic buffer: A new component of working 
memory? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4:417–423.
Baddeley, A. D., and J. G. Hitch. 1974. Working memory. Psychology of 
Learning and Motivation 8:47–90.
Baddeley, A. D., and R. H. Logie. 1999. Working memory: The multiple-
component model. In Models of Working Memory: Mechanisms of Ac-
tive Maintenance and Executive Control, ed. A. Miyake and P. Shah. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 28–61.
Bahn, Paul G. 1998. The Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bahn, Paul G., and Jean Vertut. 1997. Journey through the Ice Age. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Baillargeon, René. 1986. Representing the existence and the location of hid-
den objects: Object Permanence in 6- and 8-month-old infants. Cog-
nition 20:191–208.
———. 2002. The acquisition of physical knowledge in infancy: A sum-
mary in eight lessons. In Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive 
Development, ed. U. Goswami. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 47–83.
Baker-Ward, Lynne, Peter A. Ornstein, and Gabrielle F. Albert Principe. 
1997. Revealing the representation: Evidence from children’s reports 
of events. In van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 79–107.
Barash, David, and Nanelle Barash. 2005. Madame Bovary’s Ovaries: A 
Darwinian Look at Literature. New York: Delacorte.
Barash, Nanelle, and David Barash. 2004. Biology, culture, and persistent 
literary dystopias. Chronicle of Higher Education 51 (15):B10.
Barkow, Jerome H. 1992. Beneath new culture is old psychology: Gossip 
and social strati­fi­ca­tion. In Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992, 
627–637.
———, ed. 2006. Missing the Revolution: Darwinism for Social Scientists. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds. 1992. The 

460
Bibliography
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Cul-
ture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barnouw, Jeffrey. 2004. Odysseus, Hero of Practical Intelligence: Deliberation 
and Signs in Homer’s Odyssey. Lanham, Md.: University Press of 
America.
Baron, Andrew Scott, Matt Keller, and Eugene Burnstein. 2002. Character 
information enhances memory for faces. Paper presented at the an-
nual meeting of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society, Rutgers 
University.
Baron-Cohen, Simon. 1995. Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory 
of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
———. 1998. Does the study of autism justify minimalist innate modular-
ity? Learning and Individual Differences 10 (3):179–191.
———. 2000. Theory of mind and autism: A fif­teen-year-review. In 
Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, and Cohen 2000, 3–20.
———. 2003. The Essential Difference: Male and Female Brains and the 
Truth about Autism. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2005. The empathizing system: A revision of the 1994 model of the 
mindreading system. In Ellis and Bjorklund 2005, 468–492.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Michelle O’Riordan, Valerie Stone, Rosie Jones, and 
Kate Plaisted. 1999. Recognition of faux pas by normally developing 
children and children with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning 
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 29:407–418.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Helen Tager-Flusberg, and Donald Cohen, eds. 
2000. Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental 
Cognitive Neuroscience. 3d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, Justin L. 1996. Anthropomorphism, Intentional Agents, and Concep-
tualizing God. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
———. 2000. Exploring the natural foundations of religion. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 4:29–34.
———. 2004. Why Would Anyone Believe in God? Lanham, Md.: Altamira.
Barrett, Justin L., and Frank C. Keil. 1996. Conceptualizing a nonnatural 
entity: Anthropomorphism in God concepts. Cognitive Psychology 
31:219–247.
Barrett, Justin L., Rebekah Richert, and A. Driesinga. 2001. God’s beliefs 
versus mother’s: The development of nonhuman agent concepts. 
Child Development 72:50–65.

	
Bibliography
	
461
Barrett, Louise, Robin Dunbar, and John Lycett. 2002. Human Evolutionary 
Psychology. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Barrett, Louise, Peter Henzi, and Robin Dunbar. 2003. Primate cognition: 
From “what now?” to “what if?” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
7:494–497.
Barsalou, Lawrence W. 2005. Continuity of the conceptual system across 
species. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9:309–311.
———. 2008. Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology 
59:617–645.
Barthelme, Donald. 1968. Unspeakable Practices, Unnatural Acts. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Barthes, Roland. 1972a. Mythologies. 1957. 2d ed. 1970. Trans. A. Lavers. New 
York: Hill and Wang.
———. 1972b. To write: An intransitive verb? In The Languages of Criti-
cism and the Science of Man: The Structuralist Controversy, ed. R. 
Macksey and E. Donato. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 134–156.
Bartlett, Frederic C. 1932. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social 
Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bateson, Gregory. 1955. A new theory of play and fantasy. Psychiatric Re-
search Reports 2:39–51.
Bauer, Patricia J. 1996. What do infants recall of their lives? Memory for 
spe­cific events by one- to two-year-olds. American Psychologist 
51:29–41.
Bauer, Patricia J., and Jean Mandler. 1992. Putting the horse before the cart: 
The use of temporal order in recall of events by one-year-old chil-
dren. Developmental Psychology 28:441–452.
Bauer, Patricia J., and Sandi Saeger Wewerka. 1997. Saying is revealing: Ver-
bal expression of event memory in the transition from infancy to 
early childhood. In van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 139–168.
Baumeister, Roy F. 2007. Is there anything good about men? Address to 
American Psychological Association. August 24. Available at http://
www.psy.fsu.edu/∼baumeistertice/goodaboutmen.htm.
Bedaux, Jan Baptist, and Brett Cooke, eds. 1999. Sociobiology and the Arts. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Bekoff, Marc. 2002a. Minding Animals: Awareness, Emotions and Heart. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2002b. Virtuous nature. New Scientist, 13 July: 34–37.

462
Bibliography
———. 2007. The Emotional Lives of Animals. Novato, Calif.: New World 
Library.
Bekoff, Marc, ed. 2000. The Smile of a Dolphin: Remarkable Accounts of An-
imal Emotions. New York: Discovery Books.
Bekoff, Marc, and Colin Allen. 2002. The evolution of social play: Interdis-
ciplinary analyses of cognitive pro­cesses. In Bekoff, Allen, and 
Burghardt 2002, 429–435.
Bekoff, Marc, Colin Allen, and Gordon M. Burghardt, eds. 2002. The Cog-
nitive Animal: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cog-
nition. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Berman, Ruth A., and Dan Isaac Slobin. 1994. Relating Events in Narrative: 
A Crosslinguistic Developmental Study. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erl-
baum.
Bettinger, Robert L., Robert Boyd, and Peter J. Richerson. 1996. Style, func-
tion, and cultural evolutionary pro­cesses. In Darwinian Archaeolo-
gies, ed. S. Shennan. New York: Plenum, 133–166.
Bjorklund, David F., Jane F. Gaultney, and Bradni L. Green. 1993. “I watch, 
therefore I can do”: The development of meta-imitation during the 
preschool years and the advantage of optimism about one’s imitative 
skills. In Emerging Themes in Cognitive Development. Vol. 2: Compe-
tencies, ed. R. Pasnak and M. L. Howe. New York: Springer Verlag, 
79–102.
Bjorklund, David F., and B. L. Green. 1992. The adaptive nature of cogni-
tive imma­tu­ri­ty. American Psychologist 47:46–54.
Bloom, Howard. 2000. Global Brain: The Evolution of Mass Mind from the 
Big Bang to the 21st Century. New York: Wiley.
Bloom, Paul. 2004. Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development 
Explains What Makes Us Human. New York: Basic Books.
Bloom, Paul, and C. Veres. 1999. The perceived intentionality of groups. 
Cognition 71:B1–B9.
Blythe, Philip W., Peter M. Todd, and Geoffrey Miller. 1999. How motion 
reveals intention: Categorizing social interactions. In Gigerenzer, 
Todd, and ABC Research Group 1999, 257–285.
Boden, Margaret A. 1991. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. 1990. 
Reprint, New York: Basic Books.
Boehm, Christopher. 1993. Egalitarian society and reverse dominance hier-
archy. Current Anthropology 34:227–254.

	
Bibliography
	
463
———. 1997. Egalitarian behaviour and the evolution of political intelli-
gence. In Machiavellian Intelligence II, ed. R. W. Byrne and A. Whiten. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 341–364.
———. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
———. 2000. Conflict and the evolution of social control. In Evolutionary 
Origins of Morality: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives, ed. L. D. Katz. 
Bowling Green, Ohio: Imprint Academic, 79–101.
Bonner, John Tyler. 1980. The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Bordwell, David. 1985. Narration in the Fiction Film. Madison: University 
of Wisconsin Press.
———. 1989. Making Meaning: Inference and Rhetoric in the Interpretation 
of Cinema. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
———. 1996. Convention, construction, and cinematic vision. In Bordwell 
and Carroll 1996, 87–107.
———. 1997. On the History of Film Style. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
———. 2004. Foreword. In Moving Image Theory: Ecological Consider-
ations, ed. J. D. Anderson and B. F. Anderson. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press.
———. 2005. Figures Traced in Light: On Cinematic Staging. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
———. 2006. The Way Hollywood Tells It: Story and Style in Modern Mov-
ies. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 2008. Poetics of Cinema. New York: Routledge.
Bordwell, David, and Noël Carroll, eds. 1996. Post-Theory: Reconstructing 
Film Studies. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Bortolussi, Marisa, and Peter Dixon. 2003. Psychonarratology: Foundations 
for the Empirical Study of Literary Response. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bourg, Tammy, Patricia J. Bauer, and Paul van den Broek. 1997. Building 
the bridges: The development of event comprehension and represen-
tation. In van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 385–407.
Bower, Gordon H. 2008. The evolution of a cognitive psychologist: A jour-
ney from simple behaviors to complex mental acts. Annual Review of 
Psychology 59:1–27.

464
Bibliography
Bowlby, John. 1988. A Secure Base: Parent-Child Attachment and Healthy 
Human Development. New York: Basic Books.
Boyd, Brian. 1998. Jane, meet Charles: Literature, evolution and human na-
ture. Philosophy and Literature 22:1–30.
———. 1999. Literature and discovery. Philosophy and Literature 
23:313–333.
———. 2001. The origin of stories: Horton Hears a Who. Philosophy and 
Literature 25:197–214.
———. 2004. Laughter and literature: A play theory of humor. Philosophy 
and Literature 28:1–22.
———. 2005a. Evolutionary theories of art. In Gottschall and Wilson 
2005, 147–176.
———. 2005b. Literature and evolution: A biocultural approach. Philoso-
phy and Literature 29:1–23.
———. 2006a. Fiction and theory of mind. Philosophy and Literature 
30:571–581.
———. 2006b. Getting it all wrong: Bioculture critiques cultural critique. 
American Scholar 75 (4):18–30.
———. 2006c. Theory: Dead like a zombie. Review of Patai and Corral 
2005 and Levin 2003. Philosophy and Literature 30:289–298.
———. 2007a. Fiction and theory of mind: An exchange. Philosophy and 
Literature 31:196–198.
———. 2007b. Getting it all wrong. American Scholar 75:156–158.
———. 2008a. Art and evolution: The avant-garde as test case: Spiegelman 
in The Narrative Corpse. Philosophy and Literature 32:31–57.
———. 2008b. Artistic animals: Common and unique features of music 
and visual art. In The Visual Animal, ed. I. North. Adelaide: Centre 
for Contemporary Art, 15–26.
———. 2008c. The art of literature and the science of literature. American 
Scholar 77:118–127.
———. 2008d. Art as adaptation: A challenge. Comment on Joseph Car-
roll, “An Evolutionary Paradigm for Literary Study.” Style. 42:138–143.
———. 2009b. Evolution, art, purpose. American Scholar.
Boyd, Brian, Joseph Carroll, and Jonathan Gottschall, eds. In press. Evolu-
tionary Approaches to Literature and Film: A Reader in Art and Sci-
ence. New York: Columbia University Press.

	
Bibliography
	
465
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary 
Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1992. Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation (or any-
thing else) in sizable groups. Ethology and Sociobiology 13:171–195.
Boyer, Pascal. 1994. The Naturalness of Religious Ideas. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
———. 1996. What makes anthropomorphism natural: Intuitive ontology 
and cultural representations. Journal of the Royal Anthropological In-
stitute, n.s. 2:83–97.
———. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious 
Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Brann, Eva. 2002. Homeric Moments: Clues to Delight in Reading the Odys-
sey and the Iliad. Philadelphia: Paul Dry.
Braunmuller, A. R. 1992. Henry VIII. In Which Shakespeare? A User’s Guide 
to Editions, ed. A. Thompson, T. L. Berger, A. R. Braunmuller, P. Ed-
wards, and L. Potter. Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 78–81.
Britton, Bruce K., and A. D. Pellegrini, eds. 1990. Narrative Thought and 
Narrative Language. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brosnan, Sarah, and Frans B. M. de Waal. 2003. Monkeys reject unequal 
pay. Nature 425:297–299.
———. 2004. Fair refusal by capuchin monkeys. Nature 428:140.
Brothers, Leslie. 1997. Friday’s Footprint: How Society Shapes the Human 
Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Brown, Andrew. 1999. The Darwin Wars: The Scientific Battle for the Soul of 
Man. London: Simon and Schuster.
Brown, Culum. 2001. Familiarity with the test environment improves es-
cape responses in the crimson spotted rainbowfish, Melanotaenia 
duboulayi. Animal Cognition 4:109–113.
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human Universals. Philadelphia: Temple Univer-
sity Press.
Brown, Steven. 2000a. Evolutionary models of music: From sexual selec-
tion to group selection. Perspectives in Ethology 13:231–281.
———. 2000b. The “musilanguage” model of music evolution. In Wallin, 
Merker, and Brown 2000, 271–300.
Brown, Stuart. 1998. Play as an organizing principle: Clinical evidence and 
personal observations. In Animal Play: Evolutionary, Comparative, 

466
Bibliography
and Ecological Perspectives, ed. M. Bekoff and J. A. Byers. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 243–259.
Brown, Stuart L., and Brian Sutton-Smith. 1995. Concepts of childhood 
and play: An interview with Brian Sutton-Smith. ReVision 17 
(4):35–42.
Brownell, Hiram H., Dee Michel, John Powelson, and Howard Gardner. 
1983. Surprise but not coherence: Sensitivity to verbal humor in 
right-hemisphere patients. Brain and Language 18:20–27.
Buckner, Randy L. 2007. Prospection and the brain. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 30:318–319.
Budgen, Frank. 1960. James Joyce and the Making of “Ulysses.” Blooming-
ton: Indiana University Press.
Buller, David J. 2005. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Per-
sistent Quest for Human Nature. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT 
Press.
Burke, Séan. 1998. The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Sub-
jectivity in Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida. 1992. 2d ed. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Buss, David M. 1999a. Evolutionary psychology: A new paradigm for psy-
chological science. In Evolution of the Psyche, ed. David H. Rosen and 
Michael C. Luebbert. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 3–33.
———. 1999b. Human nature and individual difference: The evolution of 
human personality. In Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, 
ed. L. A. Pervin and O. P. John. New York: Guilford, 31–56.
———, ed. 2005. The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology. Hoboken, N.J.: 
Wiley.
Butler, R. A. 1954. Incentive conditions which in­flu­ence visual exploration. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology 48:17–23.
Byrne, Richard W. 1997. The technical intelligence hypothesis: An addi-
tional evolutionary stimulus to intelligence. In Whiten and Byrne 
1997, 289–311.
Byrne, Richard W., and Andrew Whiten, eds. 1988. Machiavellian Intelli-
gence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes 
and Humans. Oxford: Clarendon.
Cain, A. J. 1964. The perfection of animals. In Viewpoints in Biology, ed. 
J. D. Carthy and C. L. Duddington. London: Butterworths.

	
Bibliography
	
467
Campbell, Anne. 2002. A Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of 
Women. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2005. Aggression. In Buss 2005, 628–651.
Campbell, Donald. 1965. Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural 
evolution. In Social Change in Developing Areas: A Reinterpretation of 
Evolutionary Theory, ed. H. R. Barringer, G. I. Blanksten, and R. W. 
Mack. Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkma, 19–49.
———. 1974. Evolutionary epistemology. In The Philosophy of Karl R. Pop-
per, ed. P. A. Schilpp. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 413–463.
———. 1983. Two distinct routes beyond kin selection to ultrasociality: 
Implications for the humanities and social sciences. In Nature of 
Prosocial Development: Theories and Strategies, ed. D. L. Bridgeman. 
New York: Academic, 11–41.
———. 1987. Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as 
in other knowledge pro­cesses. 1960. In Evolutionary Epistemology, 
Rationality, and the Sociology of Knowledge, ed. G. Radnitzky and 
W. W. Bartley III. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 91–114.
Caramazza, Alfonso. 2000. The or­ga­ni­za­tion of conceptual knowledge in 
the brain. In Gazzaniga 2000, 1037–66.
Caramazza, Alfonso, and Bradford Z. Mahon. 2003. The or­ga­ni­za­tion of 
conceptual knowledge: The evidence from category-spe­cific seman-
tic defi­cits. Trends in Cognitive Science 7:354–361.
Caramazza, A., and J. R. Shelton. 1998. Domain-spe­cific knowledge systems 
in the brain: The animate-inanimate distinction. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience 10:1–34.
Carey, John. 2006. What Good Are the Arts? Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Carroll, Joseph. 1995. Evolution and Literary Theory. Columbia: University 
of Missouri Press.
———. 1998. Steven Pinker’s cheesecake for the mind. Philosophy and Lit-
erature 22:578–585.
———. 2004. Literary Darwinism: Evolution, Human Nature and Litera-
ture. New York: Routledge.
———. 2007. Evolutionary approaches to literature and drama. In R. I M. 
Dunbar and L. Barrett, 2007, 637–648.
Carroll, Joseph, Jonathan Gottschall, John Johnson, and Daniel Kruger. 

468
Bibliography
Under submission. Graphing Jane Austen: A Quantitative Analysis of 
Human Nature in British Novels of the Nineteenth Century.
Carroll, Lewis. [1893] 2006. Sylvia and Bruno Concluded. N.p.: Objective 
Systems.
Carroll, Noël. 1988. Mystifying Movies: Fads and Fallacies in Contemporary 
Film Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
———. 1996a. Prospects for film theory: A personal assessment. In Bor-
dwell and Carroll 1996, 37–68.
———. 1996b. Theorizing the Moving Image. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
vrsity Press.
———. 1998. A Philosophy of Mass Art. Oxford: Clarendon.
———. 1999. Philosophy of Art: A Contemporary Introduction. London: 
Routledge.
Carruthers, Peter, and Andrew Chamberlain, eds. 2000. Evolution and the 
Human Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca, Paolo Menozzi, and Alberto Piazza. 1994. The 
History and Geography of Human Genes. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Chafe, Wallace. 1990. Some things that narratives tell us about the mind. In 
Britton and Pellegrini 1990, 79–98.
Chagnon, Napoleon. 1997. Y™nomamö. 1968. 5th ed. N.p.: Wadsworth.
Chance, Michael, and C. J. Jolly. 1970. Social Groups of Monkeys, Apes, and 
Men. New York: Dutton.
Chance, Michael, and Ray Larsen. 1976. The Social Structure of Attention. 
London: Wiley.
Chauvet, Jean-Marie, Eliette Brunel Deschamps, and Christian Hillaire. 
1996. Chauvet Cave: The Discovery of the World’s Oldest Paintings. 
London: Thames and Hudson.
Cheney, D. L., and R. M. Seyfarth. 1990. How Monkeys See the World: Inside 
the Mind of Another Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 1959. A review of B. F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior. Lan-
guage 35 (1):26–58.
———. 1965. Cartesian Linguistics. New York: Harper and Row.
Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. 2001. Rational Ritual: Culture, Coordination, 
and Common Knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Clayton, N. S., and A. Dickinson. 1998. Episodic-like memory during cache 
recovery by scrub jays. Nature 395:272–274.

	
Bibliography
	
469
Clutton-Brock, T. H., and G. A. Parker. 1995. Punishment in animal so­ci­e­
ties. Nature 373:209–216.
Coe, Kathryn. 2003. The Ancestress Hypothesis: Visual Art as Adaptation. 
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
Cohen, Charles D. 2004. The Seuss, the Whole Seuss, and Nothing but the 
Seuss. New York: Random House.
Collins, John, Ned Hall, and L. A. Paul, eds. 2004. Causation and 
Counterfac­tuals. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Cooke, Brett. 1995. Microplots: The case of Swan Lake. Human Nature 
6:183–196.
Cooke, Brett, and Frederick Turner, eds. 1999. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Ex-
plorations in the Arts. Lexington, Ky.: International Conference on 
the Unity of the Sciences.
Corballis, Michael C. 2002. From Hand to Mouth: The Origins of Language. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Corballis, Michael C., and Stephen E. G. Lea, eds. 1999. The Descent of 
Mind: Psychological Perspectives on Hominid Evolution. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Cosmides, Leda. 1989. The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection 
shaped how humans reason? Studies with the Wason Selection Task. 
Cognition 31:187–276.
Cosmides, Leda, Stanley B. Klein, John Tooby, and S. Chance. 2001. Deci-
sions and the evolution of multiple memory systems: Using person-
ality judgments to test the scope hypothesis. Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society, Lon-
don.
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby. 1989. Evolutionary psychology and the 
generation of culture, part II. Case study: A computational theory of 
social exchange. Ethology and Sociobiology 10:51–97.
———. 1992. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In Barkow, Cos-
mides, and Tooby 1992, 163–228.
———. 1994. Origins of domain spe­cificity: The evolution of functional 
or­ga­ni­za­tion. In Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition 
and Culture, ed. L. A. Hirschfeld and S. A. Gelman. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 85–116.
———. 1995. Beyond intuition and instinct blindness: Toward an evolu-
tionarily rigorous cognitive science. In Cognition on Cognition, ed. J. 

470
Bibliography
Mehler and S. Franck. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press, 
69–105.
———. 1998. Evolutionary Psychology: A Primer. Available at http://www.
psych.ucsb.edu/research/cep/primer.html.
———. 2000. Consider the source: The evolution of adaptations for de-
coupling and metarepresentation. In Metarepresentations: A Multi-
disciplinary Perspective, ed. D. Sperber. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 53–115.
———. 2005. Neurocognitive adaptations designed for social exchange. In 
Buss 2005, 584–627.
Crawford, Charles, and Dennis L. Krebs, eds. 1998. Handbook of Evolution-
ary Psychology: Ideas, Issues, and Applications. Mahwah, N.J.: Law-
rence Erlbaum.
Critical Inquiry. 2004. Critical Inquiry Symposium special issue. Critical 
Inquiry 30.
Cronin, Helen. 1991. The Ant and the Peacock: Altruism and Sexual Selection 
from Darwin to Today. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cronk, Lee. 1999. That Complex Whole: Culture and the Evolution of Hu-
man Behavior. Boulder: Westview.
Cronk, Lee, Napoleon Chagnon, and William Irons, eds. 2002. Adaptation 
and Human Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective. New York: Al-
dine.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1996. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Dis-
covery and Invention. New York: Harper.
Cummins, Denise Dellarosa. 2005. Dominance, sta­tus, and social hierar-
chies. In Buss 2005, 676–697.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson. 1983. Sex, Evolution, and Behavior. Bel-
mont, Calif.: Wadsworth.
———. 1988. Homicide. Hawthorne, N.Y.: Aldine de Gruyter.
———. 1998a. The evolutionary social psychology of family violence. In 
Crawford and Krebs 1998, 431–456.
———. 1998b. The Truth about Cinderella: A Darwinian View of Parental 
Love. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Damasio, Antonio. 1996. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human 
Brain. 1994. Reprint, London: Papermac.
———. 2000. The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion, and the Mak-
ing of Consciousness. London: Vintage.

	
Bibliography
	
471
———. 2003. Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain. Or-
lando, Fla.: Harcourt.
Damasio, Hanna, D. Tranel, T. Grabowski, R. Adolphs, and A. Damasio. 
2004. Neural systems behind word and concept retrieval. Cognition 
92:179–229.
Darwin, Charles. [1859] 2003. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural 
Selection, ed. Joseph Carroll. Peterborough, Ont.: Broadview.
———. [1871/1874] 2003. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to 
Sex. 1874. 2d ed. Reprint, London: Gibson Square Books.
———. [1872] 1998. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. 
1872. 3d ed. Ed. Paul Ekman. London: Harper Collins.
Davies, Paul. 1988. The Cosmic Blueprint: New Discoveries in Nature’s Cre-
ative Ability to Order the Universe. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Davies, Stephen. 1997. First art and art’s defi­ni­tion. Southern Journal of Phi-
losophy 35:19–34.
———. 2000. Non-Western art and art’s defi­ni­tion. In Theories of Art 
­Today, ed. N. Carroll. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 
199–216.
Dawkins, Richard. 1983. Universal Darwinism. In Evolution from Molecules 
to Men, ed. D. S. Bendall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
403–425.
———. 1985. Sociobiology: The debate continues. Review of Richard 
Lewontin, Steven Rose, and Leon Kamin, Not in Our Genes (1984). 
New Scientist, 24 January: 59–60.
———. 1989a. The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene. 1982. 
2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1989b. The Selfish Gene. 1976. 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
———. 1991. The Blind Watchmaker. 1986. Reprint, London: Penguin.
———. 1996. River out of Eden. 1995. Reprint, London: Phoenix.
———. 1997. Climbing Mount Improbable. 1996. Reprint, London: Pen-
guin.
———. 1998. Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion, and the Appetite 
for Wonder. New York: Hough­ton Mif­flin.
———. 1999. Foreword. In The Meme Machine, ed. Susan Blackmore. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, vii–xvii.
———. 2003. Introduction. In Darwin [1871/1874] 2003, vii–xxx.

472
Bibliography
———. 2004. The Ancestor’s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life. Lon-
don: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Dawkins, R., and J. R. Krebs. 1978. Animal signals: Information or manipu-
lation? In Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach, ed. J. R. 
Krebs and N. B. Davies. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
282–309.
Deacon, Terrence. 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-evoluton of Language 
and the Human Brain. London: Allen Lane.
Dehaene, Stanislas. 1997. The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Math-
ematics. London: Penguin.
de Jong, Irene. 1985. Eurykleia and Odysseus’ scar: Odyssey 19.393–466. 
Classical Quarterly 35:517–518.
———. 1999a. Introduction: Homer and literary criticism. In de Jong 
1999b, 3:1–24.
———. 2001. A Narratological Commentary on the Odyssey. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
———, ed. 1999b. Homer: Critical Assessments. 4 vols. London: Routledge.
Deliège, Irène, and John Sloboda. 1997. Perception and Cognition of Music. 
Hove, Sussex: Psychology Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1978. Brainstorms. Montgomery, Vt.: Bradford.
———. 1993. Consciousness Explained. 1991. Reprint, London: Penguin.
———. 1996a. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of 
Life. 1995. Reprint, London: Penguin.
———. 1996b. Kinds of Minds: Towards an Understanding of Consciousness. 
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
———. 2006. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. New 
York: Viking.
de Quervain, Dominique J. F., Urs Fischbacher, Valerie Treyer, Melanie 
Schellhammer, Ulrich Schnyder, Alfred Buck, and Ernst Fehr. 2004. 
The neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science 305:1254–58.
Dessalles, Jean-Louis. 1998. Altruism, sta­tus and the origin of relevance. In 
Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy, and Knight 1998, 130–147.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1996. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong 
in Humans and Other Animals. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
———. 1998. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. 1982. Rev. 
ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

	
Bibliography
	
473
———. 2001a. The Ape and the Sushi Master: Cultural Reflections of a Pri-
matologist. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2001b. Man versus ape. Sunday Times, 5 August.
———. 2002. Evolutionary psychology: The wheat and the chaff. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science 11:187–191.
———. 2004. Brains and the beast: Can the behaviorists’ insistence on dis-
tinguishing animal from human cognition be reconciled with evolu-
tionary continuity? Natural History 114 (May): 53–57.
———. 2006. Morally evolved: Primate social instincts, human morality, 
and the rise and fall of “veneer theory.” In Frans B. M. de Waal, Rob-
ert Wright, Christine M. Korsgaard, Philip Kitcher, and Peter Singer. 
Primates and Philosophers: How Morality Evolved, ed. Stephen 
Macedo and Josiah Ober. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1–80.
de Waal, Frans B. M., and Peter L. Tyack, eds. 2003. Animal Social Complex-
ity: Intelligence, Culture, and Individualized Societies. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Diamond, Lisa. 2003. What does sexual orientation orient? A biobehavioral 
model distinguishing romantic love and sexual desire. Psychological 
Review 110:173–192.
Dickie, George. 1997. Art: Function or procedure—nature or culture? Jour-
nal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 55 (1):19–28.
Didion, Joan. 2005. The Year of Magical Thinking. London: Fourth Estate.
Dimberg, U., M. Thunberg, and K. Elmehed. 2000. Unconscious facial re-
actions to emotional facial expressions. Psychological Science 
11:86–89.
Dissanayake, Ellen. 1988. What Is Art For? Seattle: University of Washington 
Press.
———. 1995. Homo Aestheticus: Where Art Comes From and Why. 1992. Re-
print, Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 2000. Art and Intimacy: How the Arts Began. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius. 1973. Nothing in biology makes sense except in 
the light of evolution. American Biology Teacher 35:125–129.
Doidge, Norman. 2007. The Brain That Changes Itself: Stories of Personal 
Triumph from the Frontiers of Brain Science. New York: Penguin.
Donald, Merlin. 1998. Mimesis and the executive suite: Missing links in 

474
Bibliography
language evolution. In Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy, and Knight 1998, 
44–67.
———. 1999. Preconditions for the evolution of protolanguages. In Cor-
ballis and Lea 1999, 138–155.
Douglas, Kate. 2001. Playing fair. New Scientist, 10 March: 38–42.
Duchan, Judith F., Gail A. Bruder, and Lynne E. Hewitt. 1995. Deixis in Nar-
rative: A Cognitive Science Perspective. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erl-
baum.
Dugatkin, Lee A. 2002. Cooperation in animals: An evolutionary overview. 
Biology and Philosophy 17:459–476.
Dunbar, Robin. 1996. Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. 
London: Faber.
———. 1998a. The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology 
6:178–190.
———. 1998b. Theory of mind and the evolution of language. In Hurford, 
Studdert-Kennedy, and Knight 1998, 92–110.
———. 2000. On the origin of the human mind. In Carruthers and 
Chamberlain 2000, 238–253.
Dunbar, Robin, and Louise Barrett, eds. 2007. The Oxford Handbook of 
Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dunbar, Robin, Chris Knight, and Camilla Power, eds. 1999. The Evolution 
of Culture: An Interdisciplinary View. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers 
University Press.
Dunbar, Robin, Anna Marriott, and N. D. C. Duncan. 1997. Human con-
versational behavior. Human Nature 8 (3):31–46.
Dürer, Albrecht. 1971. Sketchbook of His Journey to the Netherlands, with Ex-
cerpts from His Diary. Trans. P. Troutman. New York: Praeger.
Durkheim, Emile. 1915. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. Trans. Jo-
seph Ward Swain. London: Allen and Unwin.
Dutton, Denis. 1977. Art, behavior, and the anthropologists. Current An-
thropology 18:387–407.
———. 1993. Tribal art and artifact. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 
51 (1):13–21.
———. 1995. Mythologies of tribal art. African Arts. Summer: 32–45.
———. 2000. But they ­don’t have our concept of art. In Theories of Art To-
day, ed. Noël Carroll. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 
217–238.

	
Bibliography
	
475
———. 2009. The Art Instinct. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Easterlin, Nancy. 2004. “Loving ourselves best of all”: Ecocriticism and the 
adapted mind. Mosaic 37 (3):1–18.
Edelman, Gerald M. 1987. Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal 
Group Selection. New York: Basic Books.
Editors of Lingua Franca. 2000. The Sokal Hoax: The Sham That Shook the 
Academy. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Edwards, A. W. F. 2003. Human genetic diversity: Lewontin’s fallacy. BioEs-
says 25:798–801.
Edwards, Mark W. 1987. Homer: Poet of the Iliad. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus. 1982. Warfare, man’s indoctrinability and group 
selection. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 60:177–198.
———. 1988. The biological foundations of aesthetics. In Beauty and the 
Brain: Biological Aspects of Aesthetics, ed. I. Rentschler, B. Herzberger, 
and D. Epstein. Basel: Birkhäuser, 29–68.
Eiseley, Loren. 1979. The Star Thrower. New York: Harcourt Brace Jo-
vanovich.
Ekman, Paul, ed. 1982. Emotion in the Human Face. 1971. Reprint, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ekman, Paul, and Wallace V. Friesen. 1975. Unmasking the Face: A Guide to 
Recognizing Emotions from Facial Clues. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Pren-
tice-Hall.
Ellis, Bruce J., and David F. Bjorklund, eds. 2005. Origins of the Social Mind: 
Evolutionary Psychology and Child Development. New York: Guilford.
Ellis, John M. 2005. Is theory to blame? 1997. In Patai and Corral 2005, 
92–109.
Ellis, L. 1995. Dominance and reproductive success among nonhuman ani-
mals: A cross-species comparison. Ethology and Sociobiology 
16:257–333.
Emmott, Catherine. 1997. Narrative Comprehension: A Discourse Perspec-
tive. Oxford: Clarendon.
Erdrich, Louise. 1990. Jacklight. 1984. Reprint, London: Abacus.
———. 2003. Books and Islands in Ojibwe Country. Washington, D.C.: Na-
tional Geographic.
Ermer, Elsa, Scott A. Guerin, Leda Cosmides, John Tooby, and Michael B. 
Miller. 2007. Theory of mind broad and narrow: Reasoning about 

476
Bibliography
social exchange engages ToM areas, precautionary reasoning does 
not. 2006. In Saxe and Baron-Cohen 2007, 196–219.
Fagen, Robert. 1995. Animal play, games of angels, biology, and the brain. 
In Pellegrini 1995, 23–44.
Fauconnier, Gilles. 1997. Mappings in Thought and Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 2002. The Way We Think: Conceptual 
Blending and the Mind’s Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic 
Books.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gächter. 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. 
Nature 415:137–140.
Fehr, Ernst, and Joseph Henrich. 2003. Is strong reciprocity a maladapta-
tion? On the evolutionary foundations of human altruism. In Ge-
netic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation, ed. P. Hammerstein. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 55–82.
Felson, Nancy, and Laura Slatkin. 2004. Gender and Homeric epic. In 
Fowler 2004, 91–114.
Finley, Moses. 1979. The World of Odysseus. 2d ed. Harmondsworth: Pen-
guin.
Fischler, Ira. 1998. Attention and language. In Parasuraman 1998, 381–399.
Fisher, Helen. 2004. Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of Romantic 
Love. New York: Henry Holt.
Fivush, Robyn. 2002. Scripts, schemas, and memory of trauma. In Repre-
sentation, Memory, and Development, ed. N. L. Stein, P. J. Bauer, and 
M. Rabinowitz. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 53–74.
Fivush, Robyn, and Catherine A. Haden. 1997. Narrating and representing 
experience: Preschoolers’ developing autobiographical accounts. In 
van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 169–198.
Flesch, William. 2007. Comeuppance: Costly Signaling, Altruistic Punish-
ment, and Other Biological Components of Fiction. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Fletcher, Charles R., Amy Briggs, and Brian Linzie. 1997. Understanding 
the causal structure of narrative events. In van den Broek, Bauer, and 
Bourg 1997, 343–360.
Flinn, Mark V., David C. Geary, and Carol V. Ward. 2005. Ecological domi-
nance, social competition, and coalitionary arms races: Why humans 

	
Bibliography
	
477
evolved extraordinary intelligence. Evolution and Human Behavior 
26:10–46.
Flinn, Mark V., and Carol V. Ward. 2005. Ontogeny and evolution of the 
social child. In Ellis and Bjorklund 2005, 19–44.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1983. The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychol-
ogy. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Foley, John Miles. 2004. Epic as ­genre. In Fowler 2004, 171–187.
Fossey, Dian. 1983. Gorillas in the Mist. Boston: Hough­ton Mif­flin.
Fowler, R. L., ed. 2004. The Cambridge Companion to Homer. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Fox, Robin. 1972. Alliance and constraint: Sexual selection in the evolution 
of human kinship systems. In Sexual Selection and the Evolution of 
Man, 1871–1971, ed. B. G. Campbell. London: Heinemann, 282–331.
———. 1995. Sexual con­flict in the epics. Human Nature 8:135–144.
Frank, Robert H. 1988. Passions within Reason: The Strategic Role of the 
Emotions. New York: Norton.
Franklin, N., and B. Tversky. 1990. Searching imagined environments. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 119:63–76.
Frisch, Karl von. 1950. Bees: Their Vision, Chemical Senses, and Language. 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
———. 1967. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
———. 1974. Animal Architecture. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Fromm, Harold. 2003. The new Darwinism in the humanities: Part II, back 
to nature, again. Hudson Review 56 (2):315–327.
Frye, Northrop. 1957. The Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Fukui, N. 2001. Is music the peacock’s tail? Paper presented at Human Be-
havior and Evolution Society conference, London.
Gallagher, Helen L., and Christopher D. Frith. 2003. Functional imaging of 
“theory of mind.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7 (2):77–83.
Gangestad, Steven W., and Jeffrey A. Simpson, eds. 2007. The Evolution of 
Mind: Fundamental Questions and Controversies. New York: Guilford.
Garcia, John, and F. Ervin. 1968. Gustatory-visceral and telereceptor-cuta-
neous conditioning: Adaptation in internal and external milieus. 
Communications in Behavioral Biology, Part A 1:389–415.

478
Bibliography
Garcia, John, F. R. Ervin, and R. A. Koelling. 1966. Learning with prolonged 
delay in reinforcement. Psychonomic Science 5:121–122.
Garcia, John, and R. A. Koelling. 1966. Relation of cue to consequence in 
avoidance learning. Psychonomic Science 5:123–124.
Gaulin, Steven J. C., and Donald H. McBurney. 2001. Psychology: An Evolu-
tionary Approach. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Gazzaniga, Michael S. 1994. Nature’s Mind: The Biological Roots of Think-
ing, Emotions, Sexuality, Language, and Intelligence. 1992. Reprint, 
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
———. 2008. Human: The Science behind What Makes Us Unique. New 
York: HarperCollins.
———, ed. 2000. The New Cognitive Neurosciences. 2d ed. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Geary, David C. 2005. The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition, 
and General Intelligence. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological 
Association.
Geissman, Thomas. 2000. Gibbon songs and human music from an evolu-
tionary perspective. In Wallin, Merker, and Brown 2000, 103–123.
Gelman, Rochel. 1990. First principles or­ga­nize attention to and learning 
about relevant data: Number and the animate-inanimate distinction 
as examples. Cognitive Science 14:79–106.
Gergely, György, Zoltán Nádasdy, Gergely Csibra, and Szilvia Biró. 1995. 
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age. Cognition 
56:165–193.
Gerrig, Richard J. 1993. Experiencing Narrative Worlds: On the Psychological 
Activities of Reading. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gerstmyer, J. S. 1991. Toward a theory of play as performance: An analysis 
of videotaped episodes of a toddler’s play performance. Ph.D. diss., 
University of Pennsylvania.
Gervais, Matt, and David Sloan Wilson. 2005. The evolution and functions 
of laughter and humor: A synthetic approach. Quarterly Review of 
Biology 80:395–430.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, and Reinhard Selten, eds. 2001. Bounded Rationality: The 
Adaptive Toolbox. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, and Peter M. Todd. 1999. Fast and frugal heuristics: The 
adaptive toolbox. In Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC Research Group 
1999, 3–34.

	
Bibliography
	
479
Gigerenzer, Gerd, Peter M. Todd, and ABC Research Group, eds. 1999. Sim-
ple Heuristics That Make Us Smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Glausiusz, Josie. 2001. The genetic mystery of music. Discover 22 (8): 
71–75.
Goldberg, Rick. 2002. Costly signaling in the Jewish context. Paper pre-
sented at Human Behavior and Evolution Society conference, Rut-
gers University.
Goldinger, S. D. 1996. Words and voices: Episodic traces in spoken word 
iden­ti­fi­ca­tion and recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 22 (5):1166–83.
———. 1998. Echoes of echoes? An episodic theory of lexical access. Psy-
chological Review 105:251–279.
Goleman, Daniel. 2006. Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human Re-
lationships. New York: Bantam.
Gombrich, Ernst. 1960. Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Picto-
rial Representation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———. 1979. Ideals and Idols: Essays on Values in History and Art. Oxford: 
Phaidon.
———. 1982. The Image and the Eye. Oxford: Phaidon.
———. 1991. Topics of Our Time: Twentieth-Century Issues in Learning and 
in Art. London: Phaidon.
———. 1995. The Story of Art. 1950. Reprint, London: Phaidon.
Göncü, Artin, and Elisa L. Klein. 2001. Children in play, story, and school: 
A tribute to Greta G. Fein. In Children in Play, Story, and School, ed. 
A. Göncü and E. L. Klein. New York: Guilford, 3–15.
Goodall, Jane. 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
———. 1990. Through a Window. Boston: Hough­ton Mif­flin.
Goodman, Nelson. 1972. Problems and Projects. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Gopnik, Alison, and Janet Wilde Astington. 2000. Children’s understand-
ing of representational change and its relation to the understanding 
of false belief and the appearance-reality distinction. 1988. In Child-
hood Cognitive Development: The Essential Readings, ed. K. Lee. Ox-
ford: Blackwell.
Gopnik, Alison, and Andrew N. Meltzoff. 1997. Words, Thoughts, and Theo-
ries. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Gordon, Nakia S., Sharon Burke, Huda Akil, Stanley J. Watson, and Jaak 

480
Bibliography
Panksepp. 2003. Socially induced brain “fertilization”: Play promotes 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor transcription in the amygdala and 
dorsolateral frontal cortex in juvenile rats. Neuroscience Letters 
(341):17–20.
Gottschall, Jonathan. 2003. The tree of knowledge and Darwinian literary 
study. Philosophy and Literature 27:255–268.
———. 2008a. Literature, Science, and a New Humanities. New York: Palgrave.
———. 2008b. The Rape of Troy: Evolution, Violence, and the World of 
Homer. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gottschall, Jonathan, and David Sloan Wilson, eds. 2005. The Literary Ani-
mal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative. Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay. 1980. Sociobiology and the theory of natural selection. 
In Sociobiology: Beyond Nature/Nurture? Reports, Definitions and De-
bate, ed. G. W. Barlow and J. Silverberg. Boulder: Westview, 257–269.
———. 1981. The Mismea­sure of Man. New York: Norton.
———. 1985. The Flamingo’s Smile: Reflections in Natural History. New 
York: Norton.
———. 1991. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History. 
1989. Reprint, London: Penguin.
———. 1992. Bully for Brontosaurus: Further Reflections in Natural History. 
1991. Reprint, London: Penguin.
Gould, Stephen Jay, and Richard Lewontin. 1979. The spandrels of San 
Marco and the Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist 
paradigm. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 205:581–598.
Gray, Russell D., Megan Heaney, and Scott Fairhall. 2003. Evolutionary 
psychology and the challenge of adaptive explanation. In From Mat-
ing to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, ed. K. Sterelny 
and J. Fitness. New York: Psychology Press, 247–268.
Green, C. S., and Daphne Bavelier. 2007. Action-video-game alters the spa-
tial resolution of vision. Psychological Science 18:88–94.
Greenblatt, Stephen. 1988. Shakespearean Negotiations: The Circulation of 
Social Energy in Renaissance En­gland. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.
Greenspan, S. I., and S. G. Shanker. 2004. The First Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Da Capo.

	
Bibliography
	
481
Grice, Paul. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Syntax and Semantics. Vol. 3: 
Speech Acts, ed. P. Cole and J. Morgan. New York: Academic.
Griffin, Donald R. 2001. Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness. 
1992. 2d ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Griffin, Jasper. 1977. The epic cycle and the uniqueness of Homer. Journal 
of Hellenic Studies 97:39–53.
———. 1980. Homer on Life and Death. Oxford: Clarendon.
Griffiths, Paul E. 1997. What Emotions Really Are: The Problem of Psycholog-
ical Categories. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Groos, K. 1898. The Play of Animals. New York: Appleton.
Gunn, D. M. 1970. Thematic composition and Homeric authorship. Har-
vard Studies in Classical Philology 75:1–31.
Haan, Michelle de, and Mark H. Johnson. 2003. Mechanisms and theories 
of development. In The Cognitive Neuroscience of Development. Hove, 
Sussex: Psychology Press, 1–18.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2006. The Happiness Hypothesis: Finding Modern Truth in 
Ancient Wisdom. New York: Basic Books.
Hamilton, W. D. 1963. The evolution of altruistic behavior. American Natu-
ralist 97:354–356.
———. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. Journal of Theo-
retical Biology 7:1–51.
———. 1975. Gamblers since life began: Barnacles, aphids, elms. Quarterly 
Review of Biology 50:175–180.
Hansen, Brian. 1999. A Prehistory of theatre: A path with six turnings. In 
Cooke and Turner 1999, 347–365.
Hare, B., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2001. Do chimpanzees know what 
conspe­cifics know? Animal Behaviour 61:1085–89.
Harlow, Harry F., and R. R. Zimmerman. 1958. The development of affec-
tional responses in infant monkeys. Proceedings of the American Phil-
osophical Society 102:501–509.
Harris, Judith Rich. 2006. No Two Alike: Human Nature and Human Indi-
viduality. New York: Norton.
Harris, Paul L. 1990. The child’s theory of mind and its cultural context. In 
The Causes of Development, ed. G. Butterworth and P. Bryant. Hemel 
Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 215–237.
———. 1991. The work of the imagination. In Natural Theories of Mind: 

482
Bibliography
Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading, ed. 
A. Whiten. Oxford: Blackwell, 238–304.
Hatfield, Rab. 2002. The Wealth of Michelangelo. Rome: Edizioni di storia e 
letteratura.
Hauser, Marc. 2000. Wild Minds: What Animals Really Think. London: Al-
len Lane/Penguin.
Hauser, Marc D., and B. Spaulding. 2006. Monkeys generate causal infer-
ences about possible and impossible physical transformations. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103:7181–85.
Haydon, Brian. 1990. Nimrods, piscators, pluckers and planters: The emer-
gence of food production. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 
9:31–69.
Headlam Wells, Robin. 2005. Shakespeare’s Humanism. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Heberlein, A. S., R. Adolphs, D. Tranel, D. Kemmerer, S. Anderson, and An-
tonio Damasio. 1998. Impaired attribution of social meanings to ab-
stract dynamic visual patterns following damage to the amygdala. 
Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 24:1176.
Heider, Fritz, and Marianne Simmel. 1944. An experimental study of ap-
parent behavior. American Journal of Psychology 57:243–259.
Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Sam Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and Ernst 
Fehr. 2001. In search of Homo economicus: Experiments in 15 small-
scale so­ci­e­ties. American Economic Review 91:73–78.
Henrich, Joseph, and Francisco J. Gil-White. 2001. The evolution of pres-
tige: Freely conferred deference as a mechanism for enhancing the 
bene­fits of cultural transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 
22:165–196.
Hernadi, Paul. 2001. Literature and evolution. Substance 30 (1–2):55–71.
Hewlett, Barry S., and Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza. 1986. Cultural transmis-
sion among Aka pygmies. American Anthropologist 88:922–934.
Heyes, Cecilia. 2003. Four routes of cognitive evolution. Psychological Re-
view 110:713–727.
Hilfer, Tony. 2003. The New Hegemony in Literary Studies: Contradictions in 
Theory. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Hintzman, D. H. 1986. “Schema abstraction” in a multiple-trace memory 
model. Psychological Review 93:411–428.

	
Bibliography
	
483
Hirstein, William. 2005. Brain Fiction: Self-Deception and the Riddle of 
Confabulation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hobson, J. Allan. 1994. The Chemistry of Conscious States. Boston: Little, 
Brown.
Hobson, Peter. 2004. The Cradle of Thought: Exploring the Origins of Think-
ing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hoffrage, Ulrich, and Ralph Hertwig. 1999. Hindsight bias: A price worth 
paying for fast and frugal memory. In Gigerenzer, Todd, and ABC 
Research Group 1999, 191–208.
Hogan, Patrick Colm. 2003. The Mind and Its Stories: Narrative Universals 
and Human Emotion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hogan, Robert. 1983. A socioanalytic theory of personality. In Nebraska 
Symposium in Motivation, ed. M. M. Page. Lincoln: University of Ne-
braska Press, 55–89.
Hollingham, Richard. 2004. In the realm of your senses. New Scientist, 31 
January: 40–43.
Homer. 1951. The Iliad. Trans. R. Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———. 1968. The Odyssey. Trans. R. Lattimore. 1965. Reprint, New York: 
Harper.
———. 1988. The Odyssey. Trans. R. Fitzgerald. 1961. Reprint, London: 
Collins Harvill.
———. 1993. The Odyssey. Trans. A. Cook. 1967. Reprint, New York: Nor-
ton.
———. 1995. The Odyssey. Trans. A. T. Murray and G. E. Dimock. 2 vols. 
1919. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press.
———. 1996. The Odyssey. Trans. R. Fagles. New York: Viking.
———. 2000. Odyssey. Trans. S. Lombardo. Indianapolis: Hackett.
———. 2003. The Odyssey. Trans. Rodney Merrill. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press.
Horton, Robin. 1993. Patterns of Thought in Africa and the West: Essays on 
Magic, Religion and Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer. 1999. Mother Nature: A History of Mothers, Infants, and 
Natural Selection. New York: Pantheon.
Hull, David L. 1988. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the So-

484
Bibliography
cial and Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Humphrey, Nicholas K. 1976. The social function of intellect. In Growing 
Points in Ethology, ed. P. P. G. Bateson and R. A. Hinde. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 303–317.
Hurford, James R., Michael Studdert-Kennedy, and Chris Knight, eds. 
1998. Approaches to the Evolution of Language. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Huxley, Julian. 1932. Problems of Relative Growth. London: Methuen.
Iacoboni, Marco. 2008. Mirroring People: The New Science of How We Con-
nect with Others. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Irons, William. 2001. Religion as a hard-to-fake sign of commitment. In 
Evolution and the Capacity for Commitment, ed. R. Nesse. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 292–309.
Jackson, Michael. 1982. Allegories of the Wilderness: Ethics and Ambiguity in 
Kuranko Narratives. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Jaynes, Julian. 1976. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bi-
cameral Mind. Boston: Hough­ton Mif­flin.
Jenkins, W. M., M. M. Merzenich, M. T. Ochs, T. Allard, and E. Guic-Rob-
les. 1990. Functional reor­ga­ni­za­tion of primary somatosensory cor-
tex in adult owl monkeys after behaviorally controlled tactile stimu-
lation. Journal of Neurophysiology 63 (1):82–104.
Johansson, Gunnar. 1973. Visual perception of biological motion and a 
model for its analysis. Perception and Psychophysics 14:201–211.
Johansson, Gunnar, Sten Sture Bergström, William Epstein, and Gunnar 
Jansson, eds. 1994. Perceiving Events and Objects. Hillsdale, N.J.: Law-
rence Erlbaum.
Johnson, Mark H. 1998. Developing an attentive brain. In Parasuraman 
1998, 428–443.
Johnson, Ryan T., Joshua A. Burk, and Lee A. Kirkpatrick. 2007. Domi-
nance and prestige as differential predictors of aggression and testos-
terone levels in men. Evolution and Human Behavior 28:345–351.
Johnson, Susan, Amy Booth, and Kirsten O’Hearn. 2001. Inferring the 
goals of a non-human agent. Cognitive Development 16:637–656.
Johnson, Vivien. 2003. Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri. Adelaide: Art Gallery 
of South Australia.
Johnson, Vivien, and Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri. 1994. The Art of Clifford 

	
Bibliography
	
485
Possum Tjapaltjarri. East Roseville, New South Wales: Gordon and 
Breach Arts International.
Jolly, Alison. 1966. Lemur social behavior and primate intelligence. Science 
153 (3735):501–506.
———. 1999. Lucy’s Legacy: Sex and Intelligence in Human Evolution. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Jones, Owen D., and Timothy H. Goldsmith. 2005. Law and behavioral bi-
ology. Columbia Law Review 105:405–502.
Jones, Peter. 1991. Homer: The Odyssey 1 & 2. Warminster, Eng.: Aris and 
Phillips.
———. 2003. Homer’s Iliad: A Commentary on Three Translations. Bristol, 
Eng.: Bristol Classical.
Jung, Wonil Edward. 2003. The inner eye theory of laughter: Mindreader 
signals cooperator value. Evolutionary Psychology 1:214–253.
Kaplan, Joan A., Hiram H. Brownell, Janet R. Jacobs, and Howard Gardner. 
1990. The effects of right hemisphere damage on the pragmatic inter-
pretation of conversational remarks. Brain and Language 38:315–333.
Katz, Leonard D., ed. 2000. Evolutionary Origins of Morality: Cross-Disci-
plinary Perspectives. Bowling Green, Ohio: Imprint Academic.
Keesing, R. M. 1981. Cultural Anthropology: A Contemporary Perspective. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Keller, Heidl, Axel Schölmerich, and Irenaus Eibl-Eibesfeldt. 1988. Com-
munication patterns in adult-human interactions in western and 
non-western cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 
19:427–445.
Kendrick, Keith. 2004. Here’s looking at ewe. New Scientist, 12 June: 48–49.
Kenrick, Douglas T., Edward K. Sadalla, and Richard C. Keele. 1998. Evolu-
tionary cognitive psychology: The missing heart of cognitive science. 
In Crawford and Krebs 1998, 485–514.
Kinderman, Peter, Robin Dunbar, and Richard P. Bentall. 1998. Theory of 
mind defi­cits and causal attributions. British Journal of Psychology 
89:191–204.
King, James E., Duane M. Rumbaugh, and E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh. 1999. 
Perception of personality traits and semantic learning in evolving 
hominids. In Corballis and Lea 1999, 98–116.
Kingdon, Jonathan. 2003. Lowly Origin: Where, When, and Why Our First 
Ancestors Stood Up. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

486
Bibliography
Kirk, G. S. 1993. Heroic Age and Heroic Poetry in Homer: The Odyssey, ed. A. 
Cook. 1962. Reprint, New York: Norton, 284–294.
Kirkpatrick, Lee A. 2005. Attachment, Evolution, and the Psychology of Reli-
gion. New York: Guilford.
Klein, Stanley B., Leda Cosmides, Cynthia E. Gangi, Betsy Jackson, and 
Kristi Costabile. In press. Evolution and episodic memory: An analy-
sis and demonstration of a social function of episodic recollection. 
Social Cognition.
Klein, Stanley B., Leda Cosmides, John Tooby, and Sarah Chance. 2002. 
Decisions and the evolution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple 
functions. Psychological Review 109:306–329.
Klin, Ami, David Schultz, and Donald Cohen. 2000. Theory of mind in ac-
tion: Developmental perspectives on social neuroscience. In Baron-
Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, and Cohen 2000, 357–488.
Kniffin, Kevin M., and David Sloan Wilson. 2005. Utilities of gossip across 
or­ga­ni­za­tional levels: Multilevel selection, free-riders, and teams. 
Human Nature 16 (3):278–292.
Knight, Chris. 1998. Ritual/speech coevolution: A solution to the problem 
of deception. In Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy, and Knight 1998, 68–91.
———. 1999. Sex and language as pretend-play. In Dunbar, Knight, and 
Power 1999, 228–247.
Knox, Bernard. 1996. Introduction. In Homer 1996, 3–64.
Kobayashi, H., and D. Koshima. 2001. Unique morphology of the human 
eye and its adaptive meaning: Comparative studies on external mor-
phology of the primate eye. Journal of Human Evolution 40:419–435.
Kohlberg, S. 1969. Stage and sequence: The cognitive-developmental ap-
proach to socialization. In Handbook of Socialization Theory and Re-
search, ed. D. A. Goslin. New York: Rand McNally, 347–380.
Kohn, Marek, and Steve Mithen. 1999. Handaxes: Products of sexual selec-
tion? Antiquity 73:518–526.
Krebs, Dennis. 2000. The evolution of moral dispositions in the human 
species. In Evolutionary Perspectives on Human Reproductive Behav-
ior, ed. D. LeCroy and P. Moller. New York: New York Academy of 
Sciences, 132–148.
Krebs, J. R., and Richard Dawkins. 1984. Animal signaling: Mind-reading 
and manipulation. In Behavioral Ecology, ed. J. R. Krebs and N. B. 
Davies. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates, 380–402.

	
Bibliography
	
487
Kugiumtzakis, G. 1988. Neonatal imitation in the intersubjective compan-
ion space. In Intersubjective Communication and Emotion in Early 
Ontogeny, ed. S. Braten. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
63–88.
Kurzban, Robert, and Martie Haselton. 2006. Making hay out of straw? 
Real and imagined controversies in evolutionary psychology. In 
Barkow 2006, 149–161.
Kurzban, Robert, John Tooby, and Leda Cosmides. 2001. Can race be 
erased? Coalitional computation and social categorization. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 98:15387–92.
Labov, William. 1972. Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black En­
glish Vernacular. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: 
Basic Books.
———. 2003. Metaphors We Live By. 1980. 2d ed. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lane, Richard. 1989. Hokusai: Life and Work. New York: Dutton.
Langellier, Kristin M., and Eric E. Peterson. 1992. Spinstorying: An analysis 
of ­women storytelling. In Performance, Culture, and Identity, ed. E. C. 
Fine and J. H. Speer. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 157–179.
Law. 2004. Law and the Brain special issue. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society: Biological Sciences 1697.
Lea, Stephen E. G. 1999. The background to hominid intelligence. In Cor-
ballis and Lea 1999, 16–39.
Leach, E. R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of Kachin 
Social Structure. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Leary, M. R., and D. L. Downs. 1995. Interpersonal functions of the self-es-
teem motive: The self-esteem system as a sociometer. In Efficacy, 
Agency, and Self-Esteem, ed. M. H. Kernis. New York: Plenum, 
123–144.
LeDoux, Joseph. 1998. The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings 
of Emotional Life. 1996. Reprint, New York: Touchstone.
Lehnert, Wendy. 1994. Cognition, computers, and car bombs: How Yale 
prepared me for the 1990s. In Beliefs, Reasoning, and Decision Mak-
ing: Psycho-Logic in Honor of Bob Abelson, ed. R. C. Schank and E. 
Langer. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 143–174.
Lehrer, Jonah. 2008. Proust Was a Neuroscientist. Boston: Hough­ton Mif­flin.

488
Bibliography
Lenain, Thierry. 1997. Monkey Painting. 1990. Trans. Caroline Beamish. 
London: Reaktion.
Leslie, Alan. 1987. Pretence and representation: The origins of “theory of 
mind.” Psychological Review 94:412–426.
———. 1994. Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of ToM. Cog-
nition 50:211–238.
Levin, Richard. 1971. The Multiple Plot in En­glish Renaissance Drama. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1979. New Readings vs. Old Plays: Recent Trends in the Reinterpre-
tation of En­glish Renaissance Drama. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———. 2003. Looking for an Argument: Critical Encounters with the New 
Approaches to the Criticism of Shakespeare and His Contemporaries. 
Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Levitin, Daniel J. 2006. This Is Your Brain on Music: The Science of a Human 
Obsession. New York: Dutton.
Lewis, David. 1973. Counterfac­tuals. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press.
Lewis-Williams, David. 2000. Stories That Float from Afar: Ancestral Folk-
lore of the San of South Africa. Cape Town: David Philip.
———. 2002. The Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the Origins of Art. 
London: Thames and Hudson.
Lewontin, Richard. 1972. The apportionment of human diversity. Evolu-
tionary Biology 6:391–398.
Livingston, Paisley. 1988. Literary Knowledge: Humanistic Inquiry and the 
Philosophy of Science. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
———. 2005. Art and Intention: A Philosophical Study. Oxford: Clarendon.
Long, Debra L., Brian J. Oppy, and Mark R. Seely. 1997. A “global-coher-
ence” view of event comprehension: Inferential pro­cessing as ques-
tion answering. In van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 361–384.
Lorenz, Konrad. 1971. Part and parcel in animal and human so­ci­e­ties. 1950. 
In Lorenz, Studies in Animal and Human Behavior. Trans. Robert 
Martin. Vol. 2. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 115–195.
———. 1978. Behind the Mirror: A Search for a Natural History of Human 
Knowledge. Trans. R. Taylor. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Lowe, N. J. 2000. The Classical Plot and the Invention of Western Narrative. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

	
Bibliography
	
489
Lukács, Georg. 1971. The Theory of the Novel. 1920. Reprint, Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press.
MacDonald, Ruth K. 1988. Dr. Seuss. Boston: Twayne.
Maehler, H. 1999. The singer in the Odyssey. 1963. In de Jong 1999b, 4:6–20.
Maltz, D., and R. Borker. 1982. A cultural approach to male-female mis-
communication. In Language and Social Identity, ed. J. Gumperz. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 195–216.
Marker, Peter. 2000. Origins of music and speech. In Wallin, Merker, and 
Brown 2000, 31–48.
Marr, David. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human 
Representation and Processing of Visual Information. San Francisco: 
Freeman.
Marten, Ken, Karim Shariff, Suchi Psarakos, and Don J. White. 1996. Ring 
bubbles of dolphins. Scientific American, August: 64–69.
Martindale, Colin. 1990. The Clockwork Muse: The Predictability of Artistic 
Change. New York: Basic Books.
Marzluff, John M., Bernd Heinrich, and Colleen S. Marzluff. 1996. Raven 
roosts are mobile information centres. Animal Behaviour 51:89–103.
Mather, J. A., and R. C. Anderson. 1999. Exploration, play and habituation 
in octopuses (Octopus dolfeini). Journal of Comparative Psychology 113 
(3):333–338.
Matsuzawa, Tetsuro. 2003. Koshima monkeys and Bossou chimpanzees: 
Long-term research on culture in nonhuman primates. In de Waal 
and Tyack 2003, 374–387.
Maynard Smith, John. 1982a. Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1982b. Introduction. In Current Problems in Sociobiology, ed. 
King’s College Sociobiology Group. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1–3.
Maynard Smith, John, and Eörs Szathmáry. 1995. The Major Transitions in 
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mayr, Ernst. 1961. Cause and effect in biology. Science 134:1501–6.
McCloud, Scott. 1993. Understanding Comics. Northampton, Mass.: 
Kitchen Sink.
McEwan, Ian. 2004. Enduring Love. 1997. Reprint, London: Vintage.
McGrew, W. C. 2003. Ten dispatches from the chimpanzee cultural wars. In 
de Waal and Tyack 2003, 419–439.

490
Bibliography
McNeill, William H. 1995. Keeping Together in Time: Dance and Drill in Hu-
man History. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Mead, Margaret. 1932. An investigation of the thought of primitive chil-
dren with special reference to animism. Royal Anthropological Insti-
tute 62:173–190.
Meltzoff, Andrew N. 1988. Imitation, objects, tools, and the rudiments of 
language in human ontogeny. Human Evolution 3:45–64.
———. 1996. The human infant as imitative generalist: A 20-year prog­ress 
report on infant imitation with implications for comparative psy-
chology. In Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture, ed. Ceci-
lia M. Heyes and Bennett G. Galef Jr. San Diego: Academic, 347–370.
Meltzoff, Andrew N., and M. Keith Moore. 1995. Infants’ understanding of 
people and things: From body imitation to folk psychology. In The 
Body and the Self, ed. J. L. Bermúdez, A. Marcel, and N. Eilan. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press, 43–70.
Menand, Louis. 2002. Cat people: What Dr. Seuss really taught us. New 
Yorker, 23–30 December, 148–154.
———. 2005. Dangers within and without. Profession, 10–17.
Merzenich, M. M., P. Tallal, B. Peterson, S. Miller, and W. M. Jenkins. 1999. 
Some neurological principles relevant to the origins of—and the 
cortical plasticity-based remediation of—developmental language 
impairments. In Neural Plasticity: Building a Bridge from the Labora-
tory to the Clinic, ed. J. Grafman and Y. Christen. Berlin: Springer 
Verlag, 168–187.
Michod, R. E., M. F. Wojciechowski, and M. A. Hoelzer. 1988. DNA repair 
and the evolution of transformation in the bacterium Bacillus subti-
lis. Genetics 118:31–39.
Michotte, Albert. 1963. The Perception of Causality. London: Methuen.
Midgley, Mary. 1995. Beast and Man: The Roots of Human Nature. 1979. 2d 
ed. London: Routledge.
Miller, Geoffrey. 1999. Sexual selection for cultural displays. In Dunbar, 
Knight, and Power 1999, 71–91.
———. 2000a. Evolution of human music through sexual selection. In 
Wallin, Merker, and Brown. 2000, 329–360.
———. 2000b. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution 
of Human Nature. New York: Doubleday.
Miller, Laura. 2005. Far from Narnia. New Yorker, 26 December, 54–75.

	
Bibliography
	
491
Minear, Richard H. 1999. Dr. Seuss Goes to War: The World War II Editorial 
Cartoons of Theodor Seuss Geisel. New York: New Press.
Mineka, Susan, M. Davidson, M. Cook, and R. Keir. 1984. Observational 
conditioning of snake fear in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology 93:355–372.
Mock, Douglas W. 2004. More than Kin and Less than Kind: The Evolution 
of Family Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press.
Morgan, Judith, and Neil Morgan. 1995. Dr. Seuss and Mr. Geisel. New 
York: Random House.
Morris, Desmond. 1962. The Biology of Art. London: Methuen.
Morris, Ian, and Barry Powell, eds. 1997. A New Companion to Homer. Le-
iden: Brill.
Morris, Simon Conway. 2003. Life’s Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely 
Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Most, G. W. 1999. The structure and function of Odysseus’ apologoi. In de 
Jong 1999b, 4:486–503.
Murphy, Dominic, and Stephen Stich. 2000. Darwin in the madhouse: evo-
lutionary psychology and the clas­si­fi­ca­tion of mental disorders. In 
Carruthers and Chamberlain 2000, 62–92.
Nabokov, Vladimir. 1962. Pale Fire. New York: Putnam.
Nel, Philip. 2004. Dr. Seuss: American Icon. New York: Continuum.
Nelson, Katherine. 1996. Language in Cognitive Development: The Emer-
gence of the Mediated Mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1997. Event representations then, now, and next. In van den Broek, 
Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 1–26.
Nelson, Katherine, and G. Ross. 1980. The generalities and spe­cifics of 
long-term memory in infants and young children. In New Directions 
for Child Development—Children’s Memory, ed. M. Perlmutter. New 
York: Plenum, 87–110.
Nettle, Daniel. 1999. Language variation and the evolution of so­ci­e­ties. In 
Dunbar, Knight, and Power 1999, 214–217.
———. 2005. The wheel of fire and the mating game: Explaining the ori-
gins of tragedy and comedy. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary 
Psychology 3:39–56.
New, Joshua, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. 2007. Category-spe­cific at-
tention for animals re­flects ancestral priorities, not expertise. Pro-

492
Bibliography
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 104: 16598–603.
Nilsson, D.-E., and S. Pelger. 1994. A pessimistic estimate of the time re-
quired for an eye to evolve. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
B 256:53–58.
Nisbett, Richard E., and Dov Cohen. 1996. Culture of Honor: The Psychol-
ogy of Violence in the South. New York: HarperCollins.
Noble, Jason. 2000. Cooperation, competition and the evolution of prelin-
guistic communication. In The Evolutionary Emergence of Language: 
Social Function and the Origins of Linguistic Form, ed. C. Knight. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 40–61.
Nordlund, Marcus. 2007. Shakespeare and the Nature of Love: Literature, 
Culture, and Evolution. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Novitz, David. 1996. Disputes about art. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criti-
cism 54:153–163.
Nuñez, M. 2001. “Cheating” as facilitating intentional context for the False 
Belief Task. Paper presented at Human Behavior and Evolution Soci-
ety conference, London.
Nyreröd, Marie. 2004. Ingmar Bergman—3 dokumentärer om film, teater, 
Färö och livet. SVT Nöje.
Oakley, Barbara. 2007. Evil Genes: Why Rome Fell, Hitler Rose, Enron Failed, 
and My Sister Stole My Mother’s Boyfriend. Amherst, N.Y.: Pro-
metheus Books.
Oatley, Keith. 1999. Why fiction may be twice as true as fact: Fiction as cog-
nitive and emotional simulation. Review of General Psychology 
3:101–117.
Ohman, A., and Susan Mineka. 2001. Fears, phobias and preparedness: To-
ward an evolved module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Re-
view 108:483–522.
Olson, S. Douglas. 1995. Blood and Iron: Stories and Storytelling in Homer’s 
Odyssey. Leiden: Brill.
Ostrom, E., R. Gardner, and J. M. Walker. 1994. Rules, Games, and Com-
mon-Pool Resources. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Packer, C. 1977. Reciprocal altruism in Papilio anubis. Nature 265:441–443.
Panksepp, Jaak. 1998. Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human 
and Animal Emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.

	
Bibliography
	
493
Parasuraman, Raja, ed. 1998. The Attentive Brain. Cambridge, Mass.: Brad-
ford/MIT Press.
Patai, Daphne, and Will H. Corral, eds. 2005. Theory’s Empire: An Anthol-
ogy of Dissent. New York: Columbia University Press.
Pellegrini, Anthony D., ed. 1995. The Future of Play Theory: A Multidisci-
plinary Inquiry into the Contributions of Brian Sutton-Smith. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Pellis, Sergio M. 2002. Keeping in touch: Play fight­ing and social knowl-
edge. In Bekoff, Allen, and Burghardt 2002, 421–427.
Perner, Josef. 1991. Understanding the Representational Mind. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press.
Peterson, Carole, and Alyssa McCabe. 1983. Developmental Psycholinguis-
tics: Three Ways of Looking at a Child’s Narrative. New York: Plenum.
Petyarre, Kathleen. 2001. Kathleen Petyarre: Genius of Place. Kent Town, 
South Africa: Wakefield.
Pinker, Steven. 1995. The Language Instinct: The New Science of Language 
and Mind. 1994. Reprint, London: Penguin.
———. 1997. How the Mind Works. New York: Norton.
———. 1999. Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language. New York: Ba-
sic Books.
———. 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New 
York: Viking.
———. 2005. Foreword. In Buss 2005, xi–xvi.
———. 2007a. The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window into Human 
Nature. London: Allen Lane.
———. 2007b. Toward a consilient study of literature. Philosophy and Lit-
erature 31:162–178.
Plotkin, Henry. 1994. Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993. Reprint, Harmonds-
worth: Penguin.
———. 1997. Evolution in Mind: An Introduction to Evolutionary Psychol-
ogy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Pollock, Lina A. 1983. Forgotten Children: Parent-Child Relations from 
1500–1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Popper, Karl R. 1976. Unended Quest: An Intellectual Autobiography. Glas-
gow: Fontana.

494
Bibliography
———. 1999. All Life Is Problem-Solving. Trans. P. Camiller. London: Rout-
ledge.
Povinelli, Daniel J., and T. M. Preuss. 1995. Theory of mind: Evolutionary 
history of a cognitive specialization. Trends in Neuroscience 
18:418–424.
Powell, Barry. 1991. Homer and the Origin of the Greek Alphabet. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Premack, David, and Ann James Premack. 1995. Afterword. In Sperber, 
Premack, and Premack 1995, 651–654.
———. 2003. Original Intelligence: Unlocking the Mystery of Who We Are. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Premack, David, and Guy Woodruff. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a 
theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:515–526.
Provine, Robert R. 2000. Laughter: A Scientific Investigation. London: Faber 
and Faber.
Pulvermüller, F., H. Huss, F. Kherif, F. M. P. Martin, O. Hauk, and Y. Shty-
rov. 2006. Motor cortex maps articulatory features of speech sounds. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 103:7865–70.
Pusey, Anne, Jennifer Williams, and Jane Goodall. 1997. The in­flu­ence of 
dominance rank on the reproductive success of female chimpanzees. 
Science 277:828–830.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. 1978. When is attribution of beliefs jus­ti­fied? Behavior and 
Brain Science 1:592–593.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Rabkin, Eric S. 1999. The descent of fantasy. In Cooke and Turner 1999, 
47–57.
Radcliffe Richards, Janet. 2000. Human Nature after Darwin: A Philosophi-
cal Introduction. London: Routledge.
Rakoczy, Hannes, Michael Tomasello, and Tricia Striano. 2005. How chil-
dren turn objects into symbols: A cultural learning account. In Sym-
bol Use and Symbolic Representation: Developmental and Comparative 
Perspectives, ed. L. L. Namy. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 69–97.
Ramachandran, V. S. 2001. Mirror neurons and imitation learning as the 
driving force behind “the great leap forward” in human evolution. 
Available at www.edge.org/documents/archive/edge69.html.

	
Bibliography
	
495
Ramachandran, V. S., and Sandra Blakeslee. 1998. Phantoms in the Brain: 
Human Nature and the Architecture of the Mind. London: Fourth Estate.
Reeve, Hudson Kern. 1998. Acting for the good of others: Kinship and reci-
procity with some new twists. In Crawford and Krebs 1998, 43–85.
Renner, M. J., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 1987. Enriched and Impoverished En-
vironments. New York: Springer Verlag.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture 
Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ridley, Matt. 2003. Nature via Nurture: Genes, Experience, and What Makes 
Us Human. New York: HarperCollins.
Root-Bernstein, Robert. 1989. Discovering. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
———. 1996. The sciences and arts share a common creative aesthetic. In 
The Elusive Synthesis: Aesthetics and Science, ed. A. I. Tauber. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer, 49–82.
———. 2000. Art advances science. Nature 407 (14 September): 134.
———. 2003. The art of innovation: Polymaths and universality of the 
creative pro­cess. In International Handbook on Innovation, ed. Larisa 
Shavinina. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 267–278.
Rosch, Eleanor. 1973. On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic 
categories. In Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language, 
ed. T. Moore. New York: Academic, 111–144.
———. 1975. Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology 104:192–233.
Rosch, Eleanor, and C. Mervis. 1975. Family resemblances: Studies in the 
internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology 7:573–605.
Rosser, James C., Paul J. Lynch, Laurie Cuddihy, Douglas A. Gentile, Jona-
than Klonsky, and Ronald Merrell. 2007. The impact of video games 
on training surgeons in the 21st century. Archives of Surgery (JAMA) 
142:181–186.
Rubin, K. H., G. G. Fein, and B. Vandenberg. 1983. Play. In Handbook of 
Child Psychology, ed. P. H. Mussen. New York: Wiley, 693–774.
Rutherford, R. B. 1999. The philosophy of the Odyssey. 1986. In Jong 1999b, 
4:271–298.
Sacks, Oliver. 1995. An Anthropologist on Mars. New York: Knopf.
Sale, W. M. 1987. The formularity of the place phrases in the Iliad. Transac-
tions of the American Philological Association 117:21–50.

496
Bibliography
———. 1989. The Trojans, statistics, and Milman Parry. Greek, Roman and 
Byzantine Studies 30:341–410.
Santos, Laurie R., Marc D. Hauser, and Elizabeth Spelke. 2002. Domain-
spe­cific knowledge in human children and nonhuman primates: Ar-
tifacts and foods. In Bekoff, Allen, and Burghardt 2002, 205–215.
Sapolsky, Robert. 2006. The 2% difference. Discover 27:42–45.
Sawyer, R. Keith. 1997. Pretend Play as Improvisation: Conversation in the 
Preschool Classroom. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Saxe, Rebecca. 2004. Reading your mind: How our brains help us under-
stand other people. Boston Review, February/March.
Saxe, Rebecca, and Simon Baron-Cohen. 2007. Theory of Mind. Special is-
sue of Social Neuroscience. 2006. Hove: Psychology Press.
Scalise Sugiyama, Michelle. 2001a. Food, foragers, and folklore: The role of 
narrative in human subsistence. Evolution and Human Behavior 
22:221–240.
———. 2001b. Narrative theory and function: Why evolution matters. 
Philosophy and Literature 25:233–250.
———. 2004. Predation, narration, and adaptation: “Little Red Riding 
Hood” revisited. Interdisciplinary Literary Studies 5:108–127.
———. 2005. Reverse engineering narrative: Evidence of special design. In 
Gottschall and Wilson 2005, 177–196.
Schacter, Daniel L., and Donna Rose Addis. 2007a. The cognitive neurosci-
ence of constructive memory: Remembering the past and imagining 
the future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 
362:773–786.
———. 2007b. On the constructive episodic simulation of past and future 
events. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:331–332.
Schacter, Daniel L., Donna Rose Addis, and Randy L. Buckner. 2008. Epi-
sodic simulation of future events: Concepts, data, and applications. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1124:39–60.
Schaller, Susan. 1991. A Man without Words. New York: Summit Books.
Schank, Roger C. 1995. Tell Me a Story: Narrative and Intelligence. 1990. Re-
print, Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Schank, Roger C., and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts, Plans, Goals, and 
Understanding: An Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures. Hills-
dale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schank, Roger C., and Peter G. Childers. 1984. The Cognitive Computer: On 

	
Bibliography
	
497
Language, Learning, and Artificial Intelligence. Reading, Mass.: Addi-
son-Wesley.
Schiller, Friedrich. [1795] 1967. Fourteenth letter. In Letters on the Aesthetic 
Education of Man, ed. E. H. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Schnider, Armin, Nathalie Valenza, Stephanie Morand, and Christoph M. 
Michel. 2002. Early cortical distinction between memories that per-
tain to ongoing reality and memories that ­don’t. Cerebral Cortex 12 
(1):54–61.
Scodel, Ruth. 2002. Listening to Homer: Tradition, Narrative, and Audience. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
———. 2004. The story-teller and his audience. In Fowler 2004, 45–55.
Scott, A. O. 2000. Sense and nonsense. New York Times Magazine, 26 No-
vember. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/library/magazine/
home/20001126mag-seuss.html.
Sebeok, Thomas A. 1979. Prefig­urements of art. Semiotica 27:3–73.
Segerstråle, Ullica. 2000. Defenders of the Truth: The Battle for Science in the 
Sociobiology Debate and Beyond. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sensu, Atsushi, Mark H. Johnson, and Gergely Csibra. 2007. The develop-
ment and neural basis of gaze perception. In Saxe and Baron-Cohen 
2007, 220–234.
Seuss, Dr. 1951. Horton and the Kwuggerbug. Redbook (January): 46–47.
———. 1957. The Cat in the Hat. New York: Random House.
———. 1989. And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street. 1938. Reprint, 
New York: Random House.
———. 1995. The Secret Art of Dr. Seuss. New York: Random House.
———. 1998. Horton Hears a Who! 1954. Reprint, New York: Collins.
Seyfarth, R. M., D. L. Cheney, and P. Marler. 1980. Vervet monkey alarm 
calls: Evidence for predator clas­si­fi­ca­tion and semantic communica-
tion. Animal Behavior 28:1070–94.
Shaw, George Bernard. 1921. Back to Methuselah. London: Constable.
Sheff, David. 1987. Seuss on wry. Parenting Magazine, February: 52–57.
Shklovsky, Viktor. 1990. Theory of Prose. 1925. Trans. Benjamin Sher. Elm-
wood Park, Ill.: Dalkey Archive.
Sidanius, Jim, and Felicia Pratto. 1999. Social Dominance: An Intergroup 
Theory of Social Hierarchy and Oppression. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

498
Bibliography
Sidney, Sir Philip. [1595] 1966. A Defence of Poetry, ed. J. A. Van Dorsten. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Silk, Michael. 2004. The Odyssey and its explorations. In Fowler 2004, 
31–44.
Simonton, Dean Keith. 1999. Origins of Genius: Darwinian Perspectives on 
Creativity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Singer, Peter. 1999. A Darwinian Left: Politics, Evolution and Cooperation. 
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Sirois, Sylvain, and Iain Jackson. 2007. Social cognition in infancy: A criti-
cal review of research on higher order abilities. European Journal of 
Developmental Psychology 4:46–64.
Siviy, Steven. 1998. Neurobiological substrates of play behavior: Glimpses 
into the structure of mammalian playfulness. In Animal Play: Evolu-
tionary, Comparative and Ecological Perspectives, ed. M. Bekoff and 
J. A. Byers. New York: Cambridge University Press, 221–242.
Slingerland, Edward. 2008. What Science Has to Offer the Humanities. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sloboda, John. 2003. Power of music. New Scientist, 29 November: 38–42.
Smail, David Lord. 2007. On Deep History and the Brain. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Smith, Peter K. 1982. Does play matter? Functional and evolutionary as-
pects of animal and human play. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
5:139–184.
———. 2005. Play: Types and functions in human development. In Ellis 
and Bjorklund 2005, 271–291.
———, ed. 1984. Play in Animals and Humans. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Smuts, Barbara. 2000. Battle of the sexes. In Bekoff 2000, 92–95.
Snell, Bruno. 1975. Die Entdeckung des Geistes: Studien zur Entstehung des 
europäischen Denkens bei den Griechen. 1946. Reprint, Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.
Sodian, Beate. 1986. Wissen durch Denken? Über den naiven Empirismus im 
Denken von Vorschulkindern. Münster: Aschendorf.
Sokal, Alan D. 1996. Transgressing the boundaries: Towards a transforma-
tive hermeneutics of quantum gravity. Social Text 46/47 (Spring/
Summer):217–252.

	
Bibliography
	
499
———. 2008. Beyond the Hoax: Science, Philosophy and Culture. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Sokal, Alan D., and Jean Bricmont. 1998. Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern 
Intellectuals’ Abuse of Modern Science. New York: Picador.
Solso, Robert L. 1994. Cognition and the Visual Arts. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Bradford/MIT Press.
———. 2003. The Psychology of Art and the Evolution of the Conscious 
Brain. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Sosis, Richard. 2000. Religion and intragroup cooperation: Preliminary re-
sults of a comparative analysis of utopian communities. Cross-Cul-
tural Research 34:70–87.
———. 2004. The adaptive value of religious ritual. American Scientist 
92:166–172.
Sosis, Richard, and E. Bressler. 2003. Cooperation and commune longevity: 
A test of the costly signaling theory of religion. Cross-Cultural Re-
search 37:211–239.
Spelke, Elizabeth. 1995. Initial knowledge: Six suggestions. In Cognition on 
Cognition, ed. J. Mehler and S. Franck. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/
MIT Press, 433–447.
Sperber, Dan. 1996. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
———. 2000. Metarepresentations in an evolutionary perspective. In 
Metarepresentations: A Multidisciplinary Perspective, ed. D. Sperber. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 117–138.
———. 2006. An evolutionary perspective on testimony and argumenta-
tion. In Biological and Cultural Bases of Human Inference, ed. R. Viale, 
D. Andler, and L. A. Hirschfeld. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
177–189.
Sperber, Dan, David Premack, and Ann James Premack, eds. 1995. Causal 
Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Debate. Oxford: Clarendon.
Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson. 1988. Relevance: Communication and 
Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Spiegelman, Art. 1986. Maus: A Survivor’s Tale. Vol. 1: My Father Bleeds His-
tory. New York: Pantheon.
———. 1991. Maus: A Survivor’s Tale. Vol. 2: And Here My Troubles Began. 
New York: Pantheon.

500
Bibliography
———. 1999. Comix, Essays, Graphics and Scraps: From Maus to Now to 
Maus to Now. New York: Raw.
Špinka, Marek, Ruth C. Newberry, and Marc Bekoff. 2001. Mammalian 
play: Training for the unexpected. Quarterly Journal of Biology 76 
(2):141–168.
Spitzer, Leo. 1948. Linguistics and Literary History. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Stanford, W. B. 1999. The untypical hero. 1963. In de Jong 1999b, 4:190–205.
Stein, Nancy L., and Maria D. Liwag. 1997. Children’s understanding, eval-
uation, and memory for emotional events. In van den Broek, Bauer, 
and Bourg 1997, 199–235.
Steinfels, Peter. 1995. Beliefs. New York Times, 19 August: 9.
Steptoe, Andrew. 1996. Mozart’s personality and creativity. In Wolfgang 
Amadè Mozart: Essays on His Life and Music, ed. S. Sadie. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 21–34.
Sterelny, Kim. 2003. Thought in a Hostile World: The Evolution of Cognition. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Stern, Daniel. 1977. The First Relationship: Mother and Infant. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
———. 1985. The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View from Psycho-
analysis and Developmental Psychology. New York: Basic Books.
Sternberg, Meir. 1978. Expositional Modes and Temporal Ordering in Fic-
tion. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
———. 2003a. Universals of narrative and their cognitivist fortunes (I). 
Poetics Today 24 (2):297–395.
———. 2003b. Universals of narrative and their cognitivist fortunes (II). 
Poetics Today 24 (3):517–638.
Stofflet, Mary. 1986. Introduction. In Dr. Seuss from Then till Now, ed. San 
Diego Museum of Art. New York: Random House, 8–69.
Storey, Robert. 1996. Mimesis and the Human Animal: On the Biogenetic 
Foundations of Literary Representation. Evanston: Northwestern Uni-
versity Press.
Strawson, Galen. 2004. Tales of the unexpected. The Guardian, 10 January.
Suddendorf, Thomas. 1999. The rise of the metamind. In Corballis and Lea 
1999, 218–260.
Suddendorf, Thomas, and Michael C. Corballis. 2007. The evolution of 

	
Bibliography
	
501
foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it unique to humans? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:299–351.
Suddendorf, Thomas, and Andrew Whiten. 2001. Mental evolution and de-
velopment: Evidence for secondary representation in children, great 
apes, and other animals. Psychological Bulletin 127:629–650.
Sugiyama, Y. 1972. Social characteristics and socialization of wild chimpan-
zees. In Primate Socialization, ed. F. E. Poirier. New York: Random 
House, 145–163.
Sutton-Smith, Brian. 1981. The Folk-Stories of Children. Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press.
———. 1986. Children’s fiction-making. In Narrative Psychology: The Storied 
Nature of Human Conduct, ed. T. R. Sarbin. New York: Praeger, 67–90.
———. 1997. The Ambiguity of Play. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
———. 2001. Emotional breaches in play and narrative. In Children in 
Play, Story, and School, ed. A. Göncü and E. L. Klein. New York: Guil-
ford, 161–176.
Symons, Donald. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
———. 1992. On the use and misuse of Darwinism in the study of human 
behavior. In Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992, 137–159.
Taylor, Marjorie. 1999. Imaginary Companions and the Children Who Cre-
ate Them. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thayer, Bradley A. 2004. Darwin and International Relations: On the Evolu-
tionary Origins of War and Ethnic Conflict. Lexington: University 
Press of Kentucky.
Thieme, H. 1997. Lower Paleolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature 
385:807–810.
Thiessen, Del, and Yoko Umezawa. 1998. The sociobiology of ev­eryday life: 
A new look at a very old novel. Human Nature 9:293–320.
Thompson, D’Arcy. 1942. On Growth and Form. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Thornhill, Randy, and Craig Palmer. 2000. A Natural History of Rape: Bio-
logical Bases of Sexual Coercion. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Tinbergen, Niko. 1963. On aims and methods in ethology. Zeitschrift für 
Tierpsychologie 20:410–433.

502
Bibliography
Tomasello, Michael. 1995. Joint attention as social cognition. In Joint Atten-
tion: Its Origins and Role in Development, ed. C. Moore and P. Dun-
ham. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 103–130.
———. 1998. Introduction: A cognitive-functional perspective on lan-
guage structure. In The New Psychology of Language: Cognitive and 
Functional Approaches to Language Structure, ed. M. Tomasello. Vol. 1. 
Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, vii–xxiii.
———. 2003. Introduction: Some surprises for psychologists. In The New 
Psychology of Language: Cognitive and Functional Approaches to Lan-
guage Structure, ed. M. Tomasello. Vol. 2. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Er-
lbaum, 1–14.
Tomasello, Michael, and Josep Call. 1997. Primate Cognition. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll. 2005. Under-
standing and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28:675–735.
Tooby, John, and Leda Cosmides. 1992. The psychological foundations of 
culture. In Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992, 19–36.
———. 1996. Friendship and the Banker’s Paradox: Other pathways to the 
evolution of adaptations for altruism. Proceedings of the British Acad-
emy 88:119–143.
———. 2001. Does beauty build adapted minds? Toward an evolutionary 
theory of aesthetics, fiction and the arts. Substance 30 (1–2):6–27.
Tooby, John, and Irwin DeVore. 1987. The reconstruction of hominid be-
havioral evolution through strategic modeling. In The Evolution of 
Human Behavior: Primate Models, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 183–237.
Trabasso, Tom, and Nancy L. Stein. 1997. Narrating, representing, and re-
membering event sequences. In van den Broek 1997, 237–270.
Tracy, Stephen V. 1990. The Story of the Odyssey. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Travis, Lisa L. 1997. Goal-based or­ga­ni­za­tion of event memory in toddlers. 
In van den Broek 1997, 111–138.
Trehub, Sandra. 2000. Human pro­cessing predispositions and musical uni-
versals. In Wallin, Merker, and Brown 2000, 427–448.
Trevarthen, Colwyn. 1979. Communication and cooperation in early in-
fancy: A description of primary intersubjectivity. In Before Speech: 

	
Bibliography
	
503
The Beginning of Human Communication, ed. M. Bullowa. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 321–347.
———. 1993. The function of emotions in early communication and de-
velopment. In New Perspectives in Early Communicative Develop-
ment, ed. Jacqueline Nadel and Luigi Camaioni. London: Routledge, 
48–81.
Trivers, Robert. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Re-
view of Biology 46:35–57.
———. 1972. Parental investment and sexual selection. In Sexual Selection 
and the Descent of Man: 1871–1971, ed. B. Campbell. Chicago: Aldine, 
163–179.
———. 1985. Social Evolution. Menlo Park, Calif.: Benjamin/Cummings.
———. 2000. The elements of a sci­en­tific theory of self-deception. In Evo-
lutionary Perspectives on Human Reproductive Behavior, ed. D. 
LeCroy and P. Moller. New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 
114–131.
———. 2002a. Natural Selection and Social Theory: Selected Papers of Rob-
ert Trivers. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2002b. Parent-offspring con­flict. 1974. In Trivers 2002a, 123–153.
Tucker, M., and R. Ellis. 1998. On the relations between seen objects and 
components of potential actions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance 24:830–846.
Tulving, Endel. 1985. Memory and consciousness. Canadian Journal of Psy-
chology 26:1–12.
Turner, Frank. 1997. The Homeric question. In A New Companion to 
Homer, ed. I. Morris and B. Powell. Leiden: Brill, 123–145.
Turner, Frederick, and Ernst Pöppel. 1988. Metered poetry, the brain, and 
time. In Beauty and the Brain: Biological Aspects of Aesthetics, ed. I. 
Rentschler, B. Hertzberger, and D. Epstein. Basel: Birkhäuser, 71–90.
Turner, Mark. 1996. The Literary Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van den Broek, Paul. 1997. Discovering the cement of the universe: The de-
velopment of event comprehension from childhood to adulthood. In 
van den Broek, Bauer, and Bourg 1997, 321–342.
van den Broek, Paul W., Patricia J. Bauer, and Tammy Bourg, eds. 1997. De-
velopmental Spans in Event Comprehension and Representation: 
Bridging Fictional and Actual Events. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erl-
baum.

504
Bibliography
van Hooff, Jan A. R. A. M., and Signe Preuschoft. 2003. Laughter and smil-
ing: The intertwining of nature and culture. In de Waal and Tyack 
2003, 260–287.
van Wees, H. J. 1999. Introduction: Homer and early Greece. In de Jong 
1999b, 2:1–32.
Verhagen, Arie. 2007. Construal and perspectivization. In Cognitive Lin-
guistics, ed. Dirk Geergerts and Hubert Cuyckens. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 48–81.
———. 2008a. Intersubjectivity and the architecture of the language sys-
tem. In The Shared Mind: Perspectives on Intersubjectivity, ed. J. 
Zlatev, T. P. Racine, C. Sinha, and E. Itkonen. Amsterdam: John Ben-
jamins, 307–331.
———. 2008b. Intersubjectivity and explanation in linguistics—a reply to 
Hinzen and Van Lambalgen. Cognitive Linguistics 19:125–143.
Vickers, Brian. 1993. Appropriating Shakespeare: Contemporary Critical 
Quarrels. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vinden, Penelope G., and Janet Wilde Astington. 2000. Culture and under-
standing other minds. In Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, and Cohen 
2000, 503–519.
Waelti, P., A. Dickinson, and Wolfram Schultz. 2001. Dopamine responses 
comply with basic assumptions of formal learning theory. Nature 
412:43–48.
Wallin, Nils L., Björn Merker, and Steven Brown, eds. 2000. The Origins of 
Music. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press.
Walsh, Thomas R., and Rodney Merrill. 2002. The Odyssey: The tradition, 
the singer, the performance. In Homer 2003, 1–53.
Ward, P., and Amotz Zahavi. 1973. The importance of certain assemblages 
of birds as “information centres” for food find­ing. Ibis 115 (4):517–534.
Wason, Peter. 1966. Reasoning. In New Horizons in Psychology, ed. B. M. 
Foss. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Weiss, Paul. 1955. Beauty and the beast: Life and the rule of order. Scientific 
Monthly 81 (December): 286–299.
Wellman, Henry W. 1990. The Child’s Theory of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press.
Wellman, Henry W., and Susan A. Gelman. 1998. Knowledge acquisition in 
foundational domains. In Handbook of Child Psychology. Vol. 2: Cog-

	
Bibliography
	
505
nition, Perception, and Language, ed. D. Kuhn and R. Siegler. New 
York: Wiley, 523–573.
Wellman, Henry W., and Kristin H. Lagattuta. 2000. Developing under-
standings of mind. In Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, and Cohen 
2000, 21–49.
Wells, H. G. 2007. The Country of the Blind and Other Selected Stories, ed. 
Patrick Parrinder. London: Penguin.
Wells, Randall S. 2003. Dolphin social complexity: Lessons from long-term 
study and life history. In de Waal and Tyack 2003, 32–56.
White, Don J. 2001. Mystery of the silver rings. Available at http://earth-
trust.org/delrings.html.
Whiten, Andrew. 1997. The Machiavellian mindreader. In Whiten and 
Byrne 1997, 144–173.
Whiten, Andrew, and Richard W. Byrne, eds. 1997. Machiavellian Intelli-
gence II: Extensions and Evaluations. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Wilkinson, G. C. 1984. Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat. Nature 
308:181–184.
Williams, Bernard. 1993. Shame and Necessity. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
Williams, George C. 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
———. 1992. Natural Selection: Domains, Levels, and Challenges. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, David Sloan. 1994. Adaptive genetic variation and human evolu-
tionary psychology. Ethology and Sociobiology 15:219–235.
———. 2002. Darwin’s Cathedral: Evolution, Religion, and the Nature of 
Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 2005. Evolutionary social constructivism. In Gottschall and Wil-
son 2005, 20–37.
———. 2007a. Evolution for Everyone: How Darwin’s Theory Can Change 
the Way We Think about Our Lives. New York: Delacorte.
———. 2007b. Foreword. In Oakley 2007.
Wilson, David Sloan, David C. Near, and Ralph R. Miller. 1996. Machiavel-
lianism: A synthesis of the evolutionary and psychological literature. 
Psychological Bulletin 119:285–299.

506
Bibliography
Wilson, David Sloan, and Edward O. Wilson. 2007. Rethinking the theoret-
ical foundation of sociobiology. Quarterly Review of Biology 82 
(4):328–348.
Wilson, Edward O. 1975/2000. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. 25th Anni-
versary Edition, 2000. Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Har-
vard University Press.
———. 1999. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. 1998. Reprint, New 
York: Vintage.
Wilson, Margo, Martin Daly, and J. E. Scheib. 1997. Femicide: An evolu-
tionary psychological perspective. In Feminism and Evolutionary Bi-
ology: Boundaries, Intersections, and Frontiers, ed. P. A. Gowaty. New 
York: Chapman and Hall.
Winkielman, Piotr, Jamin Halberstadt, Tedra Fazendeiro, and Steve Catty. 
2006. Prototypes are attractive because they are easy on the mind. 
Psychological Science 17:799–806.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1980. Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. 2 vols. 
Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Ed. G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von 
Wright. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wolf, Maryanne. 2007. Proust and the Squid: The Story and Science of the 
Reading Brain. New York: HarperCollins.
Wolpert, Lewis. 1993. The Unnatural Nature of Science. 1992. Reprint, Lon-
don: Faber.
Woodhouse, William. 1930. The Composition of Homer’s Odyssey. Oxford: 
Clarendon.
Worden, Robert. 1998. The evolution of language from social intelligence. 
In Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy, and Knight 1998, 148–166.
Wright, Robert. 1996. The Moral Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Ev-
eryday Life. London: Abacus.
———. 2000. Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny. Boston: Little, Brown.
Xu, Jiang, Stefan Kemeny, Grace Park, Carlo Frattali, and Allen Braun. 
2005. Language in context: Emergent features of word, sentence, and 
narrative comprehension. NeuroImage 25:1002–15.
Zahavi, Amotz, and Avishag Zahavi. 1997. The Handicap Principle: A Miss-
ing Piece of Darwin’s Puzzle. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zuberbühler, Klaus, and Richard W. Byrne. 2006. Social cognition. Current 
Biology 16:R786–790.

	
Bibliography
	
507
Zunshine, Lisa. 2006. Why We Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel. 
Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
———. 2007. Fiction and theory of mind: An exchange. Philosophy and 
Literature 31:189–195.

 

	
509
agriculture, invention of, 294, 300, 
407, 410
alarm calls, 160, 169
allegory, 323
alliances, 109, 300, 303, 304
Althusser, Louis, 387
altruism, 26, 52, 57–58, 59, 64, 171, 
375. See also cooperation
Ambassadors, The (Holbein), 124
amnesia, 156–157, 160
amygdala (brain), 30, 93, 139
analogy (in biology), 102, 106
anamorphosis, 124
Ananse, 107
Anatomy of Criticism (Frye), 380
And to Think That I Saw It on Mul-
berry Street (Seuss), 333, 371, 
376
animacy, 88, 115, 143, 186; as intui-
tive category, 136
animals: animal alertness to kinds, 
137; in art, 7, 8, 200; children’s 
fascination for, 6, 44–45, 137, 
178–179, 200, 328; Seussian fasci-
nation for, 328–329, 354; visual 
cortex and, 156
Aboriginals (Australia), 84
abstract art, 6
Acheulean hand-axes, 114, 121, 189; 
and sexual selection, 78
Achilleus (Odyssey), 236–237, 240, 
255
action, 91, 174–175
adaptation: cognitive, 189–190, 198, 
205; de­fined and explained, 
34–38, 41, 80–81, 92, 381; evolu-
tionary, 1, 13–14, 15–16, 31–32, 
40–41, 420n7; multifunctionality 
in, 113, 206; selection level of, 53
Aesop, 194, 379
af­fili­a­tion, 140
agency: arouses attention, 136–137, 
198, 207, 282; human, 163–164; 
versus nonagents, 115, 136–137; 
overattribution of, 115, 137, 200; 
as prototype of cause, 115, 137, 
200–201, 282, 378; tracking of, 
157–158
agent, 91, 115; ef­fi­ciently tracked, 
233; focal, 158
agential bias, 198, 200, 281–282
agonistic structure, 444n29
I N D E X
Page numbers in italic refer to illustrations.

Index
510
118–119, 123, 190, 325, 381; com-
municative theories of, 72; con-
cepts of, 69–70; creativity and, 
86, 114, 119–125, 381, 405–411; as 
Darwin machine, 121–123, 
405–406; defi­ni­tion of, 14; devel-
ops reliably in humans, 7, 8–9, 
11, 73; elevation and, 114, 118, 119; 
evolution of, 69–112; expressive 
theories of, 72; formal theories 
of, 72–73; functions of, 15, 71–73, 
80, 85–125, 378, 381, 406; histori-
cal theories of, 73; as human 
universal, 8–9, 11, 70, 73, 335; imi-
tation and, 112, 122; individual 
bene­fits of, 86, 91, 93, 99–100, 
408; individual sta­tus bene­fits 
of, 108–112, 123; institutional the-
ories of, 73; material conse-
quences of, 410–411; mimetic 
theories of, 19, 72; motivates co-
operation, 101–108; as niche op-
tion, 325–326, 396; as non-zero-
sum game, 86–87; as 
open-ended, 87; neural effects 
of, 86, 91, 93, 99–100, 119, 123, 190, 
209, 381, 392, 406; other evolu-
tionary explanations of, 392; 
pattern and, 85–87, 121; play and, 
4–7, 14–15, 85–98, 118, 119, 122, 
325, 381–382, 414, 427n23; power 
and, 414; precursors of in other 
species, 2, 3–7; problem-solution 
model and, 122; protoconversa-
tion and, 96–98; purpose and, 
414; religion and, 7, 8, 113–118, 
Anna Karenina (Tolstoy), 244–245, 
368, 393
ant, 51, 88, 348
anterior insula (brain), 196
anthem, 84, 382
anthropology, 2, 20, 21–22
antifoundationalism, 419n36
antithesis, principle of (Darwin), 
330
Apache, 288
apes, 5, 6, 8, 20, 54, 97–98, 102, 142, 
145, 274
“appearance and reality,” and false 
belief, 278–279
Appiah, Kwame Anthony, 17, 22, 
107, 335
appropriation, 452n11
Arabian Nights, The, 207
architecture, 84, 106
Aristotle, 19, 99, 135, 159, 218, 219, 
220, 223, 224, 225, 235, 236, 412; 
on attention, 392; on particular 
and universal in narrative, 369
arms races, evolutionary, 34, 46, 
141, 160–161
Armstrong, Louis, 409
art: as adaptation, 1, 3, 4, 14, 35, 36, 
38, 73, 80–98, 209, 381, 388; ap-
peal to human cognitive prefer-
ences in, 15, 85, 106, 121, 396, 
406–413; attention and, 99–112, 
116, 121–122, 407, 410; attune-
ment and, 104–105; boundaries 
of, 72–73; byproduct theory of, 
81–85; as cognitive play with pat-
tern, 15, 85–87, 100, 104, 107, 

	
Index
	
511
192, 195, 209, 215, 325, 326, 
381–382, 383, 391, 392–394, 397, 
408, 409; authorial shaping of, 
232–233, 254, 361, 362–366, 367, 
389, 392, 396; against back-
ground of expectations, 238, 
253–254; brain’s central executive 
and, 258; classics and, 211, 232, 
254; competition for, 110–111, 219, 
220, 232, 234, 254, 333, 408; con-
trol, in humans, 47; eye direc-
tion and, 37, 143; habituation, 90, 
122; human form and, 163–164; 
idiosyncrasy and, 334; impor-
tance to criticism, 392–394; joint, 
16, 98, 143, 190; learning and, 94; 
limits of, 244, 259; meaning 
earns, 375, 379; moral emotions 
and, 316–317, 375; Odyssey and, 
210, 215–254, 287; pattern and, 
90; to present, 162–163; pretend 
play and, 178; problem-solving 
and, 47, 258–259, 396; protocon-
versation and, 98; shared, and 
art, 101–108, 195; shared, and at-
tunement, 104; shared, and sto-
rytelling, 130, 253; shared, unique 
to humans, 7, 15, 79, 97, 98, 99, 
100, 142, 143, 391; sociality and, 
101–102, 191; sta­tus and, 110, 165, 
168–169, 195, 393, 394; storytell-
ing and, 168, 172, 176, 183, 185, 
186, 193, 194, 208, 209, 218–219, 
253, 323, 379, 394; surprise and, 
184, 186; underrated in criticism, 
232–233, 253
414; as self-rewarding, 94, 95, 105, 
119, 121; as sexually selected, 
73–79; social cohesion and, 
101–108, 113–118, 381, 388, 408; so-
cial exchange and, 123; social 
learning and, 105, 112; social na-
ture of, 407; “spiritual” appeal 
of, 115, 116, 118, 119; sta­tus and, 
108–112, 119, 121, 123, 381, 382, 388, 
407; storytelling and, 115, 130, 
388; technology and, 123; as 
training, 85–98; as “unnatural” 
variation (and selection), 
405–406, 408–410, 411, 413; as 
Western concept, 70, 114
artifact: in Dr. Seuss, 329, 346; as 
intuitive category, 136, 329; mo-
tor cortex and, 156
ar­ti­fi­cial intelligence, 10–11, 39, 40; 
narrative comprehension and, 
131
Asante (Ghana), 107
associationist psychology, 132–133, 
134
Astington, Janet, 181–182
Atayal (Taiwan), 201
Athene (Odyssey), 246, 270; decep-
tion and disguise theme, 
275–276; inhibition theme, 267; 
intelligence theme, 255, 279
Atkins, Peter, 89
attachment, 290–292, 397; in Dr. 
Seuss, 329
attachment theory (Bowlby), 225
attention, 48, 49, 395; art and, 7, 15, 
85, 94, 99–112, 118, 119, 121–122, 

Index
512
baboons, 139, 180
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 72
Back to Methuselah (Shaw), 399
Bacon, Francis, 10
Bali, 4
ballet, 4
Banksy (graffiti artist), 10
bardic tradition, 218, 234–235
Barnes, Julian, 394
Barnouw, Jeffrey, 256
Baron-Cohen, Simon, 144–145
Barsalou, Lawrence, 155–156
Barthelme, Donald, 393
Barthes, Roland, 22, 337, 339, 348
Bartlett, Frederic, 153, 156
bats, 58, 81, 88, 102
bear, 406
beaver, 83
bees. See honeybees
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 70
behavioral genetics, 325
behaviorism, 133
Bekoff, Marc, 191
belief, comprehension of, 142–149, 
257
Belloc, Hilaire, 347, 351
Beowulf, 221
Bergman, Ingmar, 94–95
Berlioz, Hector, 108
Bernard, Émile, 124
“biocultural,” 25
biological determinism. See genetic 
determinism
bird of paradise, 130
birds, 25, 29, 36–38, 44, 74, 88, 91, 
102; culture in song of, 71; Dr. 
attunement, 98, 101–108
Auckland, 9
audience, 105, 322, 383; adult (Dr. 
Seuss), 333, 360; appropriation 
of works by, 372, 452n11; children 
as, 333, 360; costs and bene­fits 
for, 219; diversity of response in, 
389, 390; engagement with au-
thor, 350; first-time, 232, 234, 
241–242, 333, 360, 366; future, 
232, 234, 238, 251, 323, 333, 338; 
group audience amplifies emo-
tional response, 407; immediate, 
233, 234, 244, 251, 333; kinds of 
author appeals to, 232, 234, 333, 
394; repeat, 232, 233, 234, 238, 
242, 244, 245, 251–253, 254, 321, 
346, 360, 361, 362, 377; sta­tus ef-
fects in, 394; as strategists, 196, 
218–219, 233, 372
Auerbach, Erich, 269–274, 280
Austen, Jane, 195
Auster, Paul, 200
author, 322; audience engagement 
with, 350; audience expectations 
of, 233; classic, appeals to mul-
tiple audiences, 232, 360; costs 
and bene­fits to, 218–219; death 
of, 348, 395; self-assessment of, 
233; as strategist, 218–219; under-
played in recent criticism, 337, 
348. See also individuals
autism, 141, 143–145, 164, 165, 195; 
and story, 190
avant-garde, 119, 389, 393, 394, 
454n14

	
Index
	
513
Butter Battle Book, The (Seuss), 371
byproduct, 32, 36; art as, 81–85, 210
C. elegans, 288
Cain, A. J., 35, 67
canids, 180
capuchin monkeys, 58, 62, 140
Carey, John, 95–96
Carroll, Joseph, 392, 417nn1,4, 
420n11, 433n6; contra Gould, 
420n7
Carroll, Lewis, 346
Carroll, Noël, 366
carving, 70, 75, 81–82, 83, 94, 95
Cat in the Hat, The (Seuss), 319, 
328, 329, 337–338, 340, 371, 376, 
390
categorization, infant 135, 327
category violation: attention and, 
115, 185, 186, 282, 329; memora-
bility and, 200–205, 282, 329
caudate nucleus (brain), 196
causation, 115; agential bias in un-
derstanding, 200, 282; compre-
hension of, 150–151; counterfac­
tuals and, 198; language and, 175; 
memory and, 154; search for, 198, 
199
cave painting, 7, 76
central executive (brain), 258
ceramics, 408
Cerf, Bennett, 351
Cervantes, Miguel de, 395
cetaceans, 76, 145, 162, 404
Chance, Michael, 110
chant, 80, 106, 114, 413
Seuss, 354, 359; Homeric imagery 
of, 291; in parental care in, 
95–96, 291; wings, evolution of, 
206
blind variation and selective reten-
tion, 120, 399, 401
Blind Watchmaker, The (Dawkins), 
400
body decoration, 72, 75, 77–78, 83, 
107, 123, 189, 413; sexual selection 
and, 78; social cohesion and, 78, 
106, 107
bonobos, 20, 21–22, 58
Bordwell, David, xi, 113, 211, 342, 
343, 345, 390, 407, 433n6, 452n11
boredom, 95
bowerbirds, 74, 78, 130
Bowlby, John, 225
brain, 24, 38, 43–44, 391–392; art 
and, 121; evolution of, 88, 
162–163; evolution of human, 
46–47, 75, 93, 98, 149; growth of, 
and play, 191; hemispheric spe-
cialization of, 151; in Homer, 
256–257; imagination and, 157; 
mind and, 115–116; neural Dar-
winism and, 120, 349, 381, 400, 
405; neuroscience and, 386; pre-
diction and, 283–284; random-
ness in, 408
Braunmuller, A. R., 337
Breughel, Peter, the Elder, 361
Broca’s area (brain), 149
Brown, Steven, 76–77
Brownies (Cox), 345, 346, 361
Buddha, 111

Index
514
ture, 19, 71; curiosity, 279; dance 
and chant, 103, 106, 108, 114; em-
pathy, 138; goal comprehension, 
138; imitation, 162; individuality, 
349; language, 136; mental time 
travel, 153; mirror neurons, 142; 
painting, 8, 94; parent-child in-
teraction, 96; play, 93, 99, 103, 
109–110; politics, 300; social 
monitoring, 163, 368; sociality, 
102, 103; sta­tus, 109–110; theory 
of mind, 145
Chimpanzee Politics (de Waal), 
303
China, art tradition in, 70
Christ, Jesus, 111, 194, 379
Christmas Carol, A (Dickens), 197
classic, literary, 326; attention, 211, 
219, 394; audience appeal, mul-
tiple, 232, 233–234, 254, 321, 333; 
Dr. Seuss as, 333; Homer as, 333; 
human nature and, 219, 333
cleaner fish, 61
Clinton, William, 110
Coe, Katherine, 431n24
cognition, 155–156
cognitive niche, 14, 89
cognitive order, art as source of, 
392, 393
cognitive preferences, art appeals 
to human, 15, 85, 106, 121, 396, 
406–413
Cold War, 337–338
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 72
combination (mathematics), 356
comics, 159, 345–346, 347
commitment, 140, 305
character: assessing, in animals, 
138; assessing, in life, 48, 139–140, 
154–155; attention and, 115, 216, 
221–223, 232; as automatically 
pro­cessed pattern, 88, 90–91, 
253–254; contrast, 140, 229–230, 
238, 239, 242; in Dr. Seuss, 331, 
361; empathy and, 222, 246; in 
fiction, 64, 140, 192, 221, 215–216; 
meaning and, 369; memory de-
sign and, 154–155; minds evolved 
to attend to, 232; in Odyssey, 210, 
221–223, 230–231, 253–254; pre-
diction and, 165, 222, 396; sim­
pli­fi­ca­tion of, in fiction, 194, 361; 
stability of, 222
Chauvet Cave, 7–9, 76
cheater detection, 59–61, 141
cheating, 59–61, 63, 64, 65, 196, 302. 
See also free-riding
chess, 11, 87
childhood: attention in, 110, 111; Dr. 
Seuss and, 376; event compre-
hension in, 150–152; evolution of 
human, 93, 98; human, 104, 143, 
179; metarepresentation in, 269; 
rights of, 373; storytelling and, 
145–187, 321; supposed a recent 
invention, 341; theory of mind 
in, 145–149
children’s reading, in America, 
337–338
chimpanzee, 5–6, 9, 20, 21–22, 24, 
45, 58, 113, 397; attention, 102, 111, 
163; character discrimination, 
139; competition, 142; compre-
hension of conspe­cifics, 137; cul-

	
Index
	
515
overstressed in recent criticism, 
337, 339, 340–341, 348, 351, 356. 
See also local level in literary ex-
planation
contrast effect, 140
control, 432n48; religion and, 
283–284, 442n43; science and, 
284–285
convention, 130, 131, 132, 157, 367, 
385; ritualization and, 386
convergence zones and regions, 134
conversation, 111
cooperation, 28, 389; in art, 78, 
101–108; attunement and, 103; 
communication and, 160; com-
petition and, 16, 26, 45, 101, 
108–109, 120, 149, 159, 302, 382; 
culture and, 63–64, 65, 118–119, 
294–302, 307–309, 315–316, 382; 
in Dr. Seuss, 329; evolution of, 
14, 42, 51–66, 101, 289–317, 404; 
human, 142; intelligence and, 
276–277; music and, 76–77; in 
Odyssey, 287–317; purpose and, 
403, 414; religion and, 112–118, 
204–208, 306–310, 413; social se-
lection for, 102–103; spiritual be-
liefs and, 117, 204–205; storytell-
ing and appeal of prosocial 
values, 171, 196, 375–376, 383
Cortázar, Julio, 200
cortisol, 397
corvids, 88, 102
Cosmides, Leda, 42, 59–61, 293
costly signaling, 117–118, 309–310
costs and bene­fits: of art, 10, 73, 80, 
83, 84, 122, 230, 253; in artistic
common knowledge, problem of, 
108, 196, 316–317
communication, 15; cooperation 
and, 171; evolution of, 160–162, 
176
communicative theories of art, 72
competition, 16, 26, 45, 53, 55–56; 
cooperation and, 108–109, 120, 
159, 302; in Dr. Seuss, 329; evolu-
tion and, 101, 120; genetic differ-
ences and, 290; in male, 180
comprehension costs, 122, 362, 
365–366, 367
computer games, 122, 191, 408
computer simulation, 58–59
conceptual art, 6
conceptual semantics, 174
conditioned response, 133
con­fi­dence, art and, 15, 106, 124–125
conformity, 112, 114, 203, 311, 349; 
dual attitude to, in Horton Hears 
a Who!, 374
consilience, 338–339
Consilience (Wilson), 338–339
constructive episodic simulation 
hypothesis, 156–157
constructivism (art movement), 
119
constructivism (cultural or social), 
19, 21, 23, 26–27, 28–30, 390
context, in literary theory, 322, 
335–336; artistic, 342–344; evolu-
tion as broadest, 397; example of 
Dr. Seuss, 344–347; human na-
ture and, 323, 336; local artistic 
context usually most relevant, 
342–344; local historical level 

Index
516
tion, 28; necessary to extend co-
operation, 63–64, 65, 118–119, 
294, 295, 315–316, 382; parent-in-
fant interaction and, 98; precur-
sors of, in other species, 2, 19, 25, 
71, 339; as problem-solver, 342; in 
Theory, 385–386
curiosity: amplified by awareness 
of false belief, 199, 279; animal, 
279; human, 89, 91, 93, 95; Odys-
seus and, 225
cuttlefish, 404
Cyclops (Odyssey), 259–262, 
296–297
Cynics, 279
Da Vinci Code, The (Brown), 395
Dagara (Burkino Fasso, Ghana), 
117, 205
Damasio, Antonio, 256
dance, 4, 8, 73, 77, 82, 84, 94, 95, 100, 
105, 114, 131, 159, 189, 407; chim-
panzees and, 103; drill and, 
106–107; of lekking birds, 74; 
opiates produced by, 107; social 
cohesion and, 106, 107; syn-
chrony and, 105–106
Dandy (chimpanzee), 109–110, 163, 
169
Dante Alighieri, 171, 280
Dartmouth College, 326
Darwin, Charles, 2, 27, 32, 33, 38–39, 
41, 51, 108–109, 122, 292, 330, 387, 
399, 414; empathy and, 13; on or-
igin of art, 75; on sexual selec-
tion, 74, 77
“Darwin machine,” 366, 381, 399, 
costs and bene­fits (continued) 
composition, 326, 370, 383, 389, 
396; in artistic reception, 326, 
360–361, 362, 365–366, 367, 372, 
396, 411; in evolution, 38; of in-
formation, 88; in punishment 
and social control, 63; of social-
ity, 84, 382; in storytelling, 
218–219, 326
counterfac­tuals, 49, 179, 182, 188, 
197–198, 269, 413
Cox, Palmer, 345, 346, 361
coyotes, 102
creativity: art and, 15, 86, 119–125, 
210, 376–377, 382, 383, 384, 390, 
405–414; de­fined, 120; Dr. Seuss 
promotes, 374, 376–377, 378; evo-
lution of, 403, 404–411; fiction 
and, 197; genius and, 351–357; in 
Greece, 210; as ill-de­fined prob-
lem, 411; in modernity, 211; poly-
genic, 355; problems and solu-
tions and, 359, 406; as purpose, 
414
crosswords, 86
crows, 153, 279, 404
Cubism, 119
Cultural Critique, 2, 335, 337, 384
culture: art and, 70–71, 342–344; as 
Darwin machine, 381, 400; de­
fined biologically, 25; effects of, 
on multilevel selection, 53; evo-
lution and, 22, 25; evolutionary 
advantages of, 25, 27, 324; human 
nature and, 19–20, 21–22, 70–71; 
inflects evolved dispositions, 62, 
141; as major transition in evolu-

	
Index
	
517
Design for Death (Geisel and Gei-
sel), 336
desire, comprehension of, 138, 142, 
143, 257
Destiny’s Child, 76
developmental psychology, 135–136, 
177–187, 327
Dick and Jane readers, 338
Dickens, Charles, 197
dictator game, 61–62
Didinga (Uganda), 108
Didion, Joan, 350
“difference,” 335, 339, 341–342, 374
dinosaur, 177–179, 184, 186, 383, 413
discovery, 377
disguise, false belief and, 278–279
Dissanayake, Ellen, 332, 420n11, 
424n11, 427n23
dog, 133, 137, 177, 330
Dogon (Mali), 118, 124, 288
dolphins: air art of, 3–4, 8, 9, 45, 
103; communication in, 161; 
comprehension of conspe­cifics 
in, 137, 145; cooperation in, 330; 
imitation in, 161–162; play in, 
102; sociality in, 102, 103; song of, 
76, 103
domain spe­cificity, 43, 59
dominance and counter-domi-
nance, 28, 109, 290, 300–301, 304, 
315, 397; in Dr. Seuss, 329
do­pa­mine, 93, 179, 184
dorsolateral cortex (brain), 258
double determination, 282
dragon, 185, 186, 392
drama, 5, 6–7, 9, 177, 178. See also 
theater
400–401; art as 120–123, 404–407; 
creativity as, 211, 359; de­fined, 
120, 351–352; genius and, 351–357, 
359; novelty and, 395–396
Dawkins, Richard, 24, 26, 31, 33, 35, 
52, 77, 83, 160, 194, 400
de Jong, Irene, 221, 272
de Waal, Frans, 41, 102, 109–110, 163, 
303
death: anxiety about, 285–286, 404, 
413–414; immortality, hopes of, 
404; in Odyssey, 285–286
death of the author, 2, 348, 395
deception, 48, 147, 160; in The Cat 
in the Hat, 340; in Odyssey, 
274–277
decorative art, 6
decoupling, 180, 182, 193
defection, 57, 64
defense, sociality and, 289
deliberation type-scene (Odyssey), 
258–261, 266
democracy, 140, 323, 334, 336, 359, 
371, 389; in Horton Hears a Who!, 
373–374
de­mo­graphic transition, 454n22
Dennett, Daniel, 202, 385
Derrida, Jacques, 339, 351, 387
Descent of Man, The (Darwin), 
39
design: in adaptation, 15–16, 34–38, 
80, 190, 381; apparent, in evolu-
tion, 33, 202, 352, 399–400; in art, 
392; art and human capacity for, 
82–83; human comprehension 
of, in agential terms, 202; imper-
fection of biological, 36, 198

Index
518
229; positive, 228; purpose and, 
403, 414; social and moral, 28, 30, 
44, 45, 57–58, 65, 140–141, 196, 
287, 288, 305, 316, 375, 376, 382, 
383, 404; storytelling and, 173, 
287, 288, 316, 355, 362, 366, 375, 
376, 379
emotional contagion, 163, 192. See 
also attunement; mirror 
neurons
emotional prefocusing, 366
empathy, 24, 54, 65, 104, 298, 403, 
436n76; in children, 138–139; in 
humans, 163; in primates, 
140–141, 288–289
endorphin, 225
engagement, social, 142
Enlightenment, 340, 350
Epic Cycle (Greece), 217, 218, 224
episodic memory, 48
epistemic shifts, 385, 397–398
epistemology, 28–30
Erasmus, 350
Erdrich, Louise, 189
essentialism, 19, 22
Essomarine Navy campaign 
(Seuss), 326, 371
Eumaios (Odyssey): loyalty of, 
290–291; re­union with, 292–293; 
xenía exemplified and thema-
tized in, 298–299
Eurykleia (Odyssey), digression of, 
270–274
eusociality, 51, 53
evaluation (Labov), 220
event comprehension, 15, 16, 130, 
131, 132–152, 159, 190, 368, 382; in 
dramatic irony, 149; in Horton 
Hears a Who!, 377–378; in Odys-
sey, 227–228, 229, 241–242, 
278–281; theory of mind and, 
277–278
dream, 121, 151, 158, 201
drumming, 114
Duchamp, Marcel, 72
duck, 177–179, 184, 393, 413
Dürer, Albrecht, 70
edge detection, 29, 43, 133, 135
egalitarianism, 64, 109, 300
elephant: in Dr. Seuss, 323, 329, 334, 
346, 354–355, 358, 359, 361, 366, 
367; painting by, 8; trunk as mul-
tifunctional, 81
“Elephant Presenting Flower to a 
Bird” (Seuss), 354
elephant seal, 74
elevation (emotion), 114, 118, 119, 
196
Elizabeth I, 110
Elizabeth II, 110, 111
Emily (longitudinal study of), 138, 
183
Eminem, 356
emotion, 48, 56; as adaptation, 81, 
205; art and, 73; attention and, 
111, 362; comprehension of, 141, 
144, 148, 149; decision and, 256; 
development of social and 
moral, 288; feeling and, 256; as 
index of evolved value, 30, 55, 73, 
228; inferred in others, 134, 149; 
memory and, 153, 193; as motiva-
tor, 205, 382, 403; negative, 228, 

	
Index
	
519
about, 20–30; non-randomness 
of, 33; truth not aim of, 205
evolutionary anthropology, 28, 39
evolutionary economics, 26, 39, 
65
evolutionary literary criticism, 
417nn1,4; expansive, not reduc-
tive, 389, 390, 417n1; local and 
universal in, 210–211, 384–398; 
method of, 386–387; open ques-
tions of, 397–398; readerly ex-
pertise and, 391–392; relation to 
traditional scholarship, 390
evolutionary psychology, 21, 24–25, 
26, 38–41, 42–43, 51, 52, 65; criti-
cisms of, 40–41; and Evolution-
ary Psychology, 39, 42
expectation, authorial manipula-
tion of, 233, 238, 241, 333, 354; 
mind and, 330–331; pattern and, 
253–254
explanation: agential bias in, 
199–204, 281–282; awareness of 
false belief motivates search for, 
115, 151–152, 199, 281, 282, 377; hy-
pothesis testing and, 386–387; in 
literary criticism and theory, as 
multileveled, 211, 322, 334–347, 
383, 387; narrative and, 166, 
199–201; religious, 199–204, 
281–285, 385; sci­en­tific, 284–285; 
skyhooks and cranes, 202, 385
exploitation, in Dr. Seuss, 329
Expression of Emotions in Man and 
Other Animals, The (Darwin), 
39, 292, 330
expressive theories of art, 72
animals, 135–136; comprehen-
sion of actions, 137–138; compre-
hension of cause, 150–151; com-
prehension of event sequences, 
150–152; comprehension of in-
tentions and beliefs, 141–149; 
comprehension of goals and de-
sires, 138; comprehension of in-
dividuals, 139–140, 157–158; com-
prehension of kinds, 136–137; 
comprehension of objects, 
135–136, 150; comprehension of 
social relations, 140–141; com-
prehension of space, 135; com-
prehension of time sequence, 
150–151, 154; in computers, 11, 
139, 189; development of, 
150–152; empathy and, 138–139; 
in fiction, 192; in infants, 135–136; 
language and, 174–175; matches 
stages of play, 181; memory of 
event gist, 154
event implication, and meaning, 
369
event storage, 190. See also memory
events: attention and, 115; as auto-
matically pro­cessed patterns, 
253–254; minds evolved to at-
tend to, 232
evolution, 1, 11, 19–41; change and, 
27; Darwinian versus Lamarck-
ian, 122; de­fined, 31; evolution of, 
27, 119, 120; explained, 32–34, 
351–352, 380–381; human nature 
and, 2–3, 13–16; imperfection of 
design in, 198; major transitions 
in, 28, 53, 130, 386; misgivings 

Index
520
biological origins of, 131–187; 
character in, 210, 221, 222, 254; as 
cognitive play with patterns of 
social information, 130; cooper-
ation and, 64, 196; dramatic 
irony in, 210, 278; elements of, 
210, 215–216; evolutionary puzzle 
of, 15, 69, 129–130, 188–189; ex-
planation involves, 199–203; 
functions of, 131, 188–208, 378; 
human centrality of, 384; imagi-
nation seeded by, 197–198, 206; 
manipulation in, 195–196; moti-
vation by, 205; narrative and, 69, 
129; plot in, 210, 254; pretend 
play and, 177–187; religion and, 
199–208; scenarios for re­flection 
in, 193–194; social cognition and, 
192–193, 195, 206; sta­tus and, 195; 
structure in, 210, 254; theme in, 
279; as thought experiment, 
194–195, 287; as vicarious experi-
ence, 193. See also narrative; sto-
rytelling
field position (psychology), 158
fig­ure skating, 4
film, 87, 95, 123, 159, 366, 407
Five Hundred Hats of Bar­thol­o­mew 
Cubbins, The (Seuss), 327
Five Thousand Fingers of Dr. T., 
The (Seuss), 327, 373
Flaubert, Gustave, 72
Flesch, Rudolf, 333
Flesch, William, 447n19
flex­i­bil­ity, behavioral and mental, 
42, 98, 103, 138, 163, 258, 259–261, 
eye, 33, 37; human, 96, 143
eye direction, 143, 144
fable, 194, 205, 207, 354, 371, 373, 
379, 391, 393
face decoration, 70, 72, 84, 95
face recognition, 45, 48, 88, 136; 
emotion associated with, 139, 
164, 192
fairness, 26, 58, 61–62, 65; in hu-
mans, 140; in primates, 140, 
288–289
fairy-tale, 182, 250
false belief: anxiety about the un-
known and, 413–414; deception 
and, 275; deeper explanation 
and, 115, 151–152, 199–203, 281, 
282, 377–378; de­fined, 115; devel-
opment of capacity to compre-
hend, 145–149; in Horton Hears a 
Who!, 377–378; narrative curios-
ity and, 115, 151; in Odyssey, 
275–282, 377; religion and, 115, 
199, 378, 413; Sally-Anne test, 
145–146, 148–149, 277; science 
and, 202–203, 378; Smarties test, 
146–147; social curiosity and, 164
falsification, 388
fantasy (­genre), 394
fashion, 112
Faulkner, William, 351
Fauvism, 119, 124
Fick, August, 218
fiction, 1–2, 3, 4, 15–16, 149; as adap-
tation, 188–208, 209; as art, 188; 
attention and, 130, 192, 215–216; 

	
Index
	
521
frogs, 89
Frye, Northrop, 380
function: adaptation and, 15–16, 
34–38, 80–81, 190, 381; art and, 
71–73, 80, 118; change of, over 
time, 113–114, 206; multifunc-
tionality, 81, 113, 118, 206
future, anxieties about, 116
Futurism, 119
Galilei, Galileo 412
game theory, 39; evolutionary, 52, 
56–57, 65, 375
Garcia, John, 133
Gates, William, 110
Gaudi, Antoni, 83
Gauguin, Paul, 70, 124
Geary, David, 43–49
Geisel, Helen, 336
Geisel, Theodor (Ted), 321, 326, 
329, 332. See also Seuss, Dr.
generate-test-regenerate, 120, 121, 
351–352, 355–356, 357, 367, 399
generosity, 26, 59, 141–142
genes, 19, 24, 25, 32
Genesis, 56, 280
genetic determinism, 11, 23–25, 
26
genetic drift, 34
genius, 326, 351–357, 358
genotype, 25
­genre, 122, 394
gesture, 161
Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 35
Gibbon, Edward, 123
gibbons, 76–77, 103, 105, 114
325, 396; play and, 91, 93, 104, 176, 
324, 381; second-order, 405; sto-
rytelling and, 50, 176
flight, 102
Flit insect spray advertising cam-
paign (Seuss), 326, 331, 370
focal agent, 158
folk biology, 49. See also theory of 
kinds
folk physics, 49, 116, 135–136, 328. 
See also theory of things
folk psychology, 49, 116. See also 
theory of mind
food calls, 160, 169
foreshadowing, in Odyssey, 
241–242, 251–252, 284
forgiveness, 59, 140
formal theories of art, 72–73
Fossey, Dian, 4
Foucault, Michel, 22, 66, 339, 351, 
387
Fountain (Duchamp), 72
“four questions” (Tinbergen), 41
Fox, Robin, 303
frame problem, 39–40
freedom, 3, 5, 26–27, 50, 69; art and, 
124; Darwinian evolution and, 
122–123; storytelling and, 
197–198, 208
free-riding, 63, 101, 292; suitors 
and, 303–304, 316. See also cheat-
ing
Freud, Sigmund, 387–388, 390
friendship, problems of coopera-
tion and, 293–294
Frisch, Karl von, 35

Index
522
gratitude, 57–58, 140–141, 404; in 
Odyssey, 292–293
grave ritual, 114, 404
grebes, 105
Greece, art tradition of, 70
grooming, 109
grounded cognition, 155–156
group selection, 52
guilt, 58, 292
guppies, 59, 61, 140
habituation, 90, 95, 122, 184, 362, 
408, 426n20; in tests of infant 
cognition, 135
hair, human, 77, 78, 106, 426n39
Hamilton, William, 51, 52, 54–55, 57, 
290
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 3, 19, 227, 
348, 389, 392
hand, human, 113
hand-axes, 78, 401. See also Acheu-
lean hand-axes; Oldowan hand-
axes
Haring, Keith, 10
Harlequin romances, 350
Harris, Judith Rich, 325
Haydn, Joseph, 409
Hayes, Cathy, 99
Heider, Fritz, 137–138
Helen (Odyssey), 140
Henry IV, Part 1 (Shakespeare), 
90–91
Herakles (Odyssey), 224
Herakliad, 225
Herriman, George, 345–346, 347, 
351
heuristics, mental, 134
gift, in xenía, 295, 296, 297
Gilgamesh, Epic of, 107, 200, 215, 
221, 225
gist, memory and, 154
glassmaking, 408
goal comprehension, 142, 143, 150; 
animal, 138; childhood, 151; in 
children’s story, 186; of focal 
agent, 157–158; infant, 138; mem-
ory and, 154; in Odyssey, 
224–226, 232, 243, 251; precedes 
desire comprehension, 138
gods: category violation and, 115, 
282; explanation and, 385; in Il-
iad, 217, 288; in Odyssey, 217, 
239–240, 281–286, 299–300; vigi-
lance and punishment in Odys-
sey, 306–317
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 70, 
241, 256
Goldberg, Naomi, 390
Goldberg, Rube, 346
Goleman, Daniel, 104
Gombrich, Ernst, 211, 341, 343
Gonzaga, Federigo, 341
Good Samaritan, Parable of the, 
194
Goodall, Jane, 349
gorillas, 4–5, 6, 22
gossip, 64, 129, 167, 174
Gottschall, Jonathan, 417n4, 443n1
Gould, Stephen Jay, 36, 38, 42, 90, 
108, 403
graffiti, 9–11
Grandin, Temple, 144
Graphing Jane Austen (Carroll et 
al.), 64–65

	
Index
	
523
hospitality, in Odyssey. See xenía
Hottentots (South Africa), 180
Housman, A. E., 124
human nature, 13, 19–30, 38–41, 
386; continuous with other life, 
425n33; human differences and, 
20–23; human predisposition to 
attend to human form, 163–164; 
literature and, 19, 41, 219, 323, 
385, 388, 396; understressed in 
recent criticism, 335, 339, 340–341
Hume, David, 132–133
hummingbird, 32
humor, 331
hunter-gatherers, 386; egalitarian-
ism of, 64, 109, 300; gossip in, 
167; learning in, 104
Hunters in the Snow (Breughel), 
361
Huxley, Julian, 124
hybridization, art and, 408
hypothesis testing, 386–387
iden­ti­fi­ca­tion, narrative, 173
identity: in categorization, 329; co-
operation and, 292; in Dr. Seuss, 
327; in Odyssey, 274–275, 290, 292
ideology, 232, 385
If I Ran the Circus (Seuss), 329
If I Ran the Zoo (Seuss), 329
Iliad, The (Homer), 107, 197, 215, 
221, 222, 230, 239, 240, 261, 280, 
295, 302, 303–304; ending of, 
313–314; gods’ role different from 
Odyssey, 217, 288; Jaynes on, 
255–257; relations to Trojan story 
traditions, 216–218, 235–238;
hierarchy: avoids dominance dis-
putes, 109, 140, 290; comprehen-
sion of, 140; in Odyssey, 290–291, 
300–304, 315–316
high and low art, 333
Himba (Namibia), 166
hippocampus (brain), 157
Hiroshima, 323
history, as narrative, 129, 197
Hitler, Adolf, 124, 371
Hobson, Peter, 181
Hokusai, 76
Holbein, Hans, the Younger, 124
Homer, 11, 42, 171, 174, 195, 197, 208, 
211, 215–317, 321, 322, 392, 413; ef-
fect on Greek thought, 281, 283; 
as intuitive psychologist, 232, 
243–245, 254, 257, 267–268
Homeric question, 216–218
homology (biology), 102, 106
honeybees, 4, 35, 102, 161
honor, 305–306
Hooray for Diffendoofer Day (Seuss 
and others), 376
Horace, 112, 236, 256
Horton (character), 64, 355, 359, 
372, 374, 375–376
“Horton and the Kwuggerbug” 
(Seuss), 358–359, 360
Horton Hatches the Egg (Seuss), 
353, 354–355, 358, 359, 360, 375
Horton Hears a Who! (Seuss), 11, 
211, 321–347, 353–379, 392; atten-
tion in, 393; meanings of, 336, 
371–379; origins of, 323, 335–336, 
353–355, 359–360; reasons for se-
lecting, 389

Index
524
tion, 322, 343, 348–350, 356, 367, 
383, 389; distinct from intention, 
350, 366, 396; in New Criticism, 
350; in style, 350; underplayed in 
recent criticism, 334–335, 337, 
342, 348
individuals: art and, 211, 325–326; in 
biology, 348–349; in chimpan-
zees, 349; discrimination among, 
139, 348, 396; Dr. Seuss as indi-
vidual, 326–327, 334, 351, 366; in-
dividuality as attention-getting, 
334; niche selection and, 325–326, 
349, 353, 396; recognition of, in 
animals, 139, 349; tracking of, 
139, 292; traits of, 154
Indonesia, art tradition in, 70
infants: art and, 84–85, 95–98; ha-
bituation experiments in, 135; 
respond at birth to human stim-
uli, 40, 96, 143
inference, 10, 39–40, 48, 49, 131, 133, 
134, 182, 205, 383; adaptation and, 
189; event comprehension and, 
150, 155, 158, 368; intuitive ontol-
ogies and, 136, 137, 199; memory 
and, 154; pattern and, 14–15, 88, 
89, 90, 133; reading and, 134, 322, 
370, 374; theory of mind and, 
143, 149, 199–200
information, art as source of, 
392–393
inhibition (psychology), 24, 47, 65, 
158, 163; false belief and, 277; in-
telligence and, 264; morality 
and, 264, 310; in Odyssey, 
Iliad, The (Homer) (continued) 
self-containedness of, 234–235; 
structural ironies of, 235–238
imaginary companions, 182–183
imagination: art and, 3, 121, 123, 125, 
382, 383; in Dr. Seuss, 340, 
376–377, 378; explanation and, 
199–203, 283–284; memory and, 
155–158; negative consequences 
of, 284, 285–286; pretend play 
and, 179, 181, 182–183, 207; reli-
gion and, 206; science and, 
202–203, 412; storytelling and, 
188, 197–198, 199, 202–203, 206, 
208, 209, 411
imitation, 4–7, 8, 16; animal, 
161–162, 429n20; art and, 112, 122; 
human, 104, 112, 162, 325; in hu-
man newborns, 96–97, 132, 162; 
mirror neurons and, 104, 142, 
163; protoconversation and, 97; 
storytelling and, 159
immune system, 120, 352, 381, 400, 
405
Impressionism, 119
inclusive fitness, 52, 54–55, 65, 290, 
404
India, art tradition in, 70
“Indian Uprising, The” (Bar-
thelme), 393
indignation, 58, 292, 305, 316, 
404
indirect reciprocity, 299
individual development, as clue to 
evolution of art, 7
individual level in literary explana-

	
Index
	
525
psychology; theory of kind; the-
ory of mind; theory of things
invariant-variant continuum, 44, 
47, 48–49
invention: art reduces cost and 
raises bene­fit of, 407; as Darwin 
machine, 381, 400–401; in origins 
of narrative, 170
Ionesco, Eugene, 200
Islamic calligraphy, 72
Itza’ Maya (Central America), 204
Japan: art tradition in, 70; origins 
of Horton Hears a Who!, 323, 334, 
335–336, 337, 351, 359, 360, 367, 
371, 373, 389; primatology, 349
Jaynes, Julian, 255–257, 269, 281
Johnson, Samuel, 72
jokes, 9–11, 207, 208, 392
Jones, Owen, 27
Joyce, James, 208, 222–223, 256, 280, 
389
Judge (magazine), 327
justice, 64, 119, 311–313
kabuki, 1, 93
Kachin (Burma), 170
Kakama (chimpanzee), 5–6
Kalabari (Nigeria), 207
Kalinga (Philippines), 95
Kasparov, Garry, 11
Kavanagh, Dan, (pseudonym), 394
Kazantzakis, Nikos, 280
Keats, John, 72
kibbutz, 309
Kim Jong-Il, 196
259–261, 264–268, 275, 277, 
310–311; prefrontal cortex and, 
267, 310; problem-solving and, 
258, 259, 266
innovation, 114, 122, 211. See also 
novelty
insects, 102
institutional theories of art, 73
institutions: artistic choice and, 
342–344; cooperation and, 
63–65, 305, 316
intelligence, 102; bias toward agen-
tial thought and, 198; childhood 
and, 98; cooperation and, 65; 
costs of, 404; as Darwin ma-
chine, 432n40; evolution of, 14, 
27, 42–50, 224, 257, 276–277, 
403–404; human, and coopera-
tion, 53; as human niche, 14, 325; 
in Odyssey, 255–286; play and, 93; 
as problem solver, 403–404; as 
purpose, 403, 414; sexual selec-
tion and, 75
Intelligent Design, 36, 442n37
intention: in autism, 144–145; com-
prehension of, 141–143, 257; in 
literary theory, 322, 350, 370, 
383–384; purpose and, 403; ver-
sus individuality, 327, 396
interdisciplinarity, 386
interested party response to narra-
tive, 173
interpretation, 369–370, 391
intuitive ontologies, 116, 134–152; 
human, 136, 204, 206. See also 
folk biology; folk physics; folk 

Index
526
Levin, Richard, 374
lies, 170, 171
Life (magazine), 338
lion, 406
literary criticism and theory: at-
tention as focus of, 210, 211, 215, 
219, 232–233, 238, 253, 322; cost-
bene­fit analysis in, 253; critical 
tradition and, 215, 391; evolu-
tionary, prospects of, 384–392; 
evolved and learned under-
standing in, 211, 215, 253–254; ex-
pectation and, 253; explanation 
in, 211; meaning in, 211, 233, 322; 
methods of, 386–387; multi-
leveled explanation in, 211, 322, 
367; pattern in, 211, 233, 253–254; 
problem-solution model in, 210, 
253, 322; theme in, 279; tradi-
tions as focus of, 211, 219, 
220–221, 233, 234, 235, 238. See 
also Cultural Critique; evolu-
tionary literary criticism; The-
ory
literary Darwinism, 387. See also 
evolutionary literary criticism
literary level, attention and, 394
Literary Mind, The (Turner), 368
literature, as evidence for psychol-
ogy, 174, 321, 453n7
living things, as intuitive category, 
136
local level in literary explanation, 
322, 342–344, 383, 389; example 
of Dr. Seuss, 344–347, 367; over-
stressed in recent criticism, 
kin recognition, 140, 290–292
kin selection, 54
kinaesthesia, 135
King Lear (Shakespeare), 217, 397
kleos, 299
Köhler, Wolfgang, 124–125
Krazy Kat (Herriman), 345–346
Krebs, J. R., 160
krumping, 106
Kuranko (Sierra Leone), 118
La Chapelle, David, 106
La Fontaine, Jean de, 379
Labov, William, 220
Lacan, Jacques, 386, 387
Lamarckian evolution, 122
language, 16, 385; as adaptation, 81; 
as amodal, 155; cooperation and, 
101, 103, 160–161; evolution of, 7, 
149, 161–162, 174, 386; memory 
not de­pen­dent on, 153, 157; nar-
rative not de­pen­dent on, 130–131, 
157, 158, 179; sociality and, 143; 
sta­tus and, 111; storytelling and, 
159, 162, 174–176, 187
lateral inhibition, 135
laughter, expectation and, 330–331
Le Guin, Ursula, 287
Lear, Edward, 346
learned helplessness, 125
learning, art and play and, 407
Lecter, Hannibal (Silence of the 
Lambs), 369
lekking birds, 74
Lentricchia, Frank, 388
Levallois technique, 401

	
Index
	
527
Mother Complex” (Seuss), 329, 
354, 371, 375
Maus (Spiegelman), xi, 389
Maynard Smith, John, 52
Mbuti (Congo), 6, 80
McCay, Winsor, 347
McEwan, Ian, 209
McNeill, William, 106–107
Mead, Margaret, 22
meaning: amplifies attention, 375, 
379, 384; attention precedes, 
232–233, 323, 367, 374–375, 379, 
384, 390; in Dr. Seuss, 370–379; as 
irresolvable, 395; in literary the-
ory, 322; open-ended, in art, 
372–373, 374–375, 379; open-
ended, in events, 369, 379; ori-
gins of, in events, 368–369; par-
ticular and universal, 369, 370, 
379, 383; in story, 211, 254, 340, 
369–370
medial temporal cortex (brain), 157
memory, 16, 47–48, 173; animal, 
152–153; childhood, 153; con-
structive nature of, 153–154, 
156–157; episodic, 152, 154–155, 
157; evolution of, 166; imagina-
tion and, 157; infant, 152–153; 
language and, 153; long-term, 
152; memory-matching, 166; 
procedural, 153; semantic, 152, 
153, 154; simulation and, 155–156, 
157; working, 152, 158
Menand, Louis, 337–340, 419n36
mental time travel, 153
Merzenich, Michael, 94
335–336, 337–338, 339, 340–341, 
348, 356. See also context, in lit-
erary theory
Locke, John, 132–133
Lorax, The (Seuss), 371
Lord of the Rings, The (Tolkien), 
224
love, evolution of, 69–70
“low” art, 394
Lukács, Georg, 237
lullabies, 76, 84–85, 98
Lyell, Charles, 32
macaque monkey, 142
MacArthur, General Douglas, 336
MacDonald, Ruth, 323
Machiavellian intelligence hypoth-
esis, 142, 276–277. See also coop-
eration; social intelligence hy-
pothesis
magic, and art, 7
Mahabharata, 99, 200, 215, 303
male-female differences, 195
Mamet, David, 174
manipulation, in story, 195–196
Mannerism, 341
Manton, Sidnie, 35, 67
Manu (Papua New Guinea), 201
Maori (New Zealand), 70, 431n24
Marx, Karl, 387–388
Mas d’Azil, 81–82, 409
mastery: art and, 118, 125; play and, 
180
mate selection and retention, 225, 
226
“Matilda, the Elephant with a 

Index
528
morality, 26, 141, 288–289. See also 
emotion, social and moral
Morris, Desmond, 8, 94
Morris, Simon Conway, 403
motherese, 97, 98
motor cortex (brain), 192
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 99, 
353
multilevel explanation in litera-
ture, 211, 334–347, 389–390
multilevel selection theory, 28, 
52–53, 63, 101, 422n13; religion 
and, 113–114
Mumford, Lewis, 124
Murasaki, 79, 195, 208
murder mystery, 122
music, 6, 72, 73, 82, 84, 105, 123, 130, 
192, 205; birdsong and, 74; as 
earliest art, 76, 77, 189; emotional 
focusing in film, 159; mental ef-
fects of, 191; opiates produced by, 
107; pattern and, 90, 100, 121; 
play and, 95; sexual selection 
and social cohesion in, 76–77; 
social cohesion and, 106; syn-
chrony and, 105–106; ­women 
and, 79
mutualism, 54, 65, 289, 404
mystery, in story, 234, 394
myth, 84, 107, 118–119, 195–196, 
199–202, 206, 391; shades into 
entertainment, 207
Nabokov, Vladimir, xiii
Naked Lie, The, 188
narrative, 130, 368, 382; con­flict be-
tween narratives, 173–174; emo-
metaphor, 372–373, 397
metarepresentation, 129, 145, 149, 
175, 176, 179, 189; development 
of, 269; imitation and, 162; in 
Odyssey, 269–286; play and, 181; 
story and, 192
meter, as pattern, 91
Mexico, 70
Michelangelo, 83, 111
Middle East, art tradition in, 70
Midsummer Night’s Dream, A 
(Shakespeare), 193, 207, 217
Miller, Geoffrey, 75–79, 80, 84, 110, 
420n11
mime, 5–6, 8, 80, 131, 159
mimetic theories of art, 72
mind: as adapted, 36, 38–41, 42–50; 
brain and, 115–116; expectation 
and, 133, 330; in Homer, 255–257; 
prediction and, 134, 324, 330
Minear, Richard, 323, 335–336, 337
mirror neurons, 24, 103–104, 142, 
156, 158, 163, 192
mismatch, evolutionary, 165
modelling, mental, 47, 107; art and, 
123; narrative and, 166, 176, 
193–194, 198
Modern Language Association, 
338
Modernism, 114
module, 43–44, 47
Mohammed, 111
monkeys, 92, 96, 136, 138, 142, 151, 
160, 161, 274
Montaigne, Michel de, 256
moral (of story), 370–371, 372, 375, 
379

	
Index
	
529
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 66
nightingale, 130
NizÀmÂ, 197
Nok (Nigeria), 409, 410, 413
Nonzero, 87
non-zero-sum, art as, 86–87
norms: in art, 342–344, 407; coop-
eration, and 63, 65, 112; in Odys-
sey, 294–302, 307; storytelling 
and, 64, 107–108, 316–317; visual 
art and, 106; xenía, 294–302, 316
novelty, 404; cultural attitudes to, 
408, 409; as product of Darwin 
machine, 395, 401, 408
nursery rhymes, 84–85, 100, 407
object comprehension, 133; in ani-
mals, 136; in infants, 135–136; 
language and, 174–175
O’Brien, Tim, 197
observer position (psychology), 158
obstacle, in Odyssey, 226–228, 254
ocher, 70, 77, 80, 83, 114, 123
octopus, 91, 404
Odysseus (Odyssey), 64; character 
of, and audience attention, 
221–223, 241–243; contrast with 
Achilleus, 240; curiosity of, 
279–280; deceptiveness, 274–277; 
intelligence 255–286; scar digres-
sion, 270–274
Odyssey, 11, 107, 210–211, 215–317, 
392; composition costs of, 217, 
218–219, 230, 234–235; coopera-
tion and competition in, 
287–317; designed in contrast to 
Iliad, 218, 230, 235–243, 288;
tions and, 173; enactment and 
narration, 177; experience as, 
159–160; functions of nonfic-
tional, 163–176; general implica-
tions of, 163, 166; immediate im-
plications of, 163–165; individual 
implications of, 173–174; narra-
tee bene­fits of and strategy in, 
171, 172–173, 176; narrator bene­
fits of and strategy in, 169–171, 
176; reasoning about action and, 
166; social comprehension and, 
173–174, 176; social emotions 
and, 173. See also fiction; story-
telling
narrative comprehension, 11
Narrative Corpse, The (Spiegelman 
et al.), 454n14
narratology, 130, 177
Natufian culture, 123
natural selection, 32, 34, 83; pur-
pose and, 202; sexual selection 
and, 74. See also evolution
Natural Theology (Paley), 400
nature-nurture, 19, 23–26
Nausikaa (Odyssey), 248–251
negation, 175
negative evidence, 387, 388
Nel, Philip, 390
neocortex (brain), 46–47, 274, 
391–392
neoteny, 178
neural Darwinism, 120, 349, 381, 
400, 405
Newton, Isaac, 202
niche selection, individual, 
325–326, 349, 353

Index
530
orbitofrontal cortex (brain), 258
Oresteia (Aeschylus), 227
osprey, 291
Our Mutual Friend (Dickens), 197
outcome, in Odyssey, 228–230, 254
Owerri Igbo (Nigeria), 35
oxytocin, 55, 225, 290
painting, 4, 6, 8. See also visual art
Paley, William, 400, 402
Papua New Guinea, 70
parable, 175, 176, 194, 207, 368, 
378–379
Parallel Lives (Plutarch), 369
parallel pro­cessing (brain), 152, 166, 
258
parental investment: de­fined, 
55–56; sexual selection and, 
74–75, 79
parent-child con­flict, 340, 397
parent-child interaction: art and, 7, 
76, 79, 96–98; in Odyssey, 
290–292
parietal cortex (brain), 157
parrots, 103, 279, 404
Parry, Milman, 216
particular level in literary explana-
tion, 322, 383, 389; distinguished 
from individual level, 366–367; 
example of Horton Hears a 
Who!, 358–367; understressed in 
recent criticism, 335
pattern, 16, 49, 73; action and, 
90–91, 233; agency and, 137–138, 
233; art and, 79, 85, 95, 100, 209, 
325, 381; character as salient, 89, 
90–91, 233; children’s storytelling 
Odyssey (continued) 
dramatic irony in, 241–242, 
278–281; ending of, 316–317; fore-
shadowing in, 241–242, 251–252; 
intelligence in, 255–286; irony in, 
239, 244, 245, 265, 278, 280; moral 
polarization in, 313–314; oral 
composition or transmission of, 
216–218; perspective in, 227–228; 
punishment in, 304–308; reasons 
for selecting, 389; relations to 
traditional story, 220–221, 
234–235, 238–243, 288, 303; reli-
gion in, 281–286; self-contained, 
234–235, 238; strategies for atten-
tion in, 218–231, 235, 238–254, 
287, 393; structures of, 223–225, 
227–228, 229–230, 239, 241–254, 
310, 315, 317; tradition and, 409; 
tragic recognition of revenge cy-
cle in, 312–314; xenía in, 294–302
Oh, The Places You’ll Go (Seuss), 
374
Oh, The Thinks You Can Think! 
(Seuss), 376
Ojibwe (Canada, USA), 431n24
O’Keeffe, Georgia, 70
Oldowan hand-axes, 78
On Growth and Form (Thomp-
son), 124
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 
13, 20, 38–39, 399
O’Neill, Eugene, 351
ontogeny, 7, 41, 321, 389
opera, 159
orality, in Homer, 216–217, 218, 
234–235, 245–246

	
Index
	
531
Petyarre, Kathleen, 84, 86
phenotype, 25
philia, 225
phonological loop (brain), 258
phylogeny, 41, 321, 389
physical and non-physical (psy-
chological, spiritual), 115–116
Piaget, Jean, 135
Picasso, Pablo, 70, 408
pigeon, 75–76, 368
Pinker, Steven, 75, 81–83, 92, 120
plasticity (brain), 44, 93–94, 192, 
349
Plato, 19
play: as adaptation, 91–93, 179, 324; 
in animals, 14, 92–93, 99, 177, 
179–181; as attunement, 104; Dr. 
Seuss and, 321–333, 340, 360; flex­
i­bil­ity and, 91, 92, 93, 104, 176; in 
humans, 92; imitation in, 162; 
laughter and, 331; mental effects 
of, 92, 180, 190–192, 392; as origin 
of art, 1, 4–7, 14–15, 79, 113, 
118–119, 381–382; parent-child re-
lations and, 98; play dep­ri­va­tion, 
effects of, 179; repetitiveness of, 
180, 191; ritualization of, 180; as 
self-rewarding, 92–93, 94, 180, 
191; social comprehension and, 
173–174; storytelling and, 
177–187, 321; as zero-sum or non-
zero-sum, 86–87
plot: Aristotle on, 223, 224; atten-
tion and, 216, 223, 224, 228, 232, 
236, 243, 287; contrast in, 
229–230, 238, 242, 252; in Dr. 
Seuss, 331–332; emotions and,
and, 183; de­fined, 87–91; emo-
tional reaction to, 91; events as 
salient form of, 233; expectation 
and, 253–254; in Dr. Seuss, 360; 
inference from, 14–15, 133, 
137–138, 387, 391; literary struc-
ture as open-ended form of, 233; 
in motherese, 97; in movement, 
137; in Odyssey, 252, 254; open-
ended appetite for in humans, 
14–15, 89, 112, 189, 233; patterns 
of patterns in art, 90–91, 211, 252, 
254, 360; prediction and, 
284–285, 324; protoconversation 
and, 97–98, 100; repetition and 
variation of, 122; science and, 89, 
284; storytelling and, 194; verbal, 
332, 344
pattern recognition, 87, 88, 192
Pavlov, Ivan, 133
peacock, 74
Penelope (Odyssey), 140; deception 
by, 277; delay in recognition of 
Odysseus, 266–267; intelligence 
of, 255, 266–267
period, in criticism, 340–342. See 
also context, in literary theory; 
local level in literary explanation
Perlutsky, Jack, 376
personality, 222, 325, 396. See also 
character
perspective and perspective-taking, 
53, 143, 149, 273; development 
and, 269; language and, 174, 175; 
in Odyssey, 227–228, 229, 231, 
241–242, 269–286; in story, 106, 
173–174, 176, 191, 192, 193, 197

Index
532
377, 401, 413; randomness and, 
408
Possum Tjapaltjarri, Clifford, 84, 
85
poststructuralism, 130
Potter, Harry, 395
pottery, 123
Poussin, Nicholas, 348
power, 28, 66, 109, 300, 315; art and, 
414
prediction, 88, 90, 194, 283–285, 324, 
330, 349
prefrontal cortex (brain), 149, 157, 
267
Premack, Ann, 138
Premack, David, 138
prestige, 108, 109, 111–112, 429n32
pretend play, 5–6, 16, 49, 106, 145, 
162, 177–187, 189, 190, 191, 195, 
199, 208, 393, 412
Pride and Prejudice (Austen), 340, 
389
primates, 1, 24, 76–77, 88, 96, 113, 
139, 401, 404; communication in, 
161; imitation in, 162; infants in, 
98; mirror neurons, 142; origins 
of morality in, 141; play in, 190; 
punishment in, 305; social emo-
tions in, 45, 58, 140–141; social 
intelligence in, 141; sta­tus in, 109, 
110, 393
prisoner’s dilemma, 56–57, 58–59
problems and solutions, 43, 
324–326; art and, 122, 321–333, 
335, 342–344, 345, 383, 389, 396; in 
art, 210, 211, 342; audiences and, 
plot (continued) 
224, 227, 228–229, 237, 246, 
291–292; episode in, 223–224, 
238–239; evolved concerns in, 
223–234; foreshadowing and, 
241–242; goals and, 224–226, 229, 
232, 242–243, 245, 254, 360; inci-
dent in, 223; meaning and, 369; 
obstacles in, 226–228, 254, 
360–361; in Odyssey, 210, 
223–230, 253–254; outcome in, 
223–224, 228, 229, 241–242, 254; 
as pattern of action, 90–91, 224, 
228, 253–254; protagonist-antag-
onists in, 230, 239–240, 288; situ-
ation in, 287; structure and, 223, 
236, 238–239; sympathy and, 224; 
unity and diversity of action, 
224, 227–228, 230, 232, 236, 239, 
244
Plotkin, Henry, 39–40
Plutarch, 369
Poetics (Aristotle), 223
point of view (fiction), theory of 
mind and, 149. See also perspec-
tive and perspective-taking
Pointillism, 124
pointing, uniquely human, 97, 143, 
161
police, 64, 119; absence of, in Odys-
sey, 306; spirit police, 117, 205
Polonius (Hamlet), 169
Polyxenus, 35, 67
Popper, Karl, 72
positive evidence, 387, 388
possibility, 188, 198–199, 203, 208, 

	
Index
	
533
288–289, 404; gossip and, 167; in 
Odyssey, 304–316; second-order, 
63, 314–315, 316–317, 404; story-
telling and, 196
Purcell, Edward, 89
purpose, 356–357; death and dread 
of purposelessness, 404, 413–414; 
divine guarantee of prior pur-
pose, 414; emergence of, 
401–403, 411, 414; evolution de-
nies, 399; evolution explains, 
399–417
Pushkin, Alexander, 72, 112, 353
race, 19–20, 77
racism, 335–336, 371, 374
rainbowfish, 152–153
“Ralph, come back, it was only a 
Rash,” 9–11, 189, 393
Ramayana, 175
Ramses I and II, 110
Random House, 351, 358
randomness, in brain function, 408
Rashomon (Kurosawa), 175
rat, 93, 133, 138, 177, 179, 279, 368
rationality model, 61, 65
reading: hypothesis and, 386–387; 
levels of, 211; neuroscience of, 
454n17
reciprocal altruism, 57, 58, 62, 65, 
300, 404; in Odyssey, 292–293, 
294, 299; storytelling and, 167
reconciliation, 140, 237, 288–289; in 
Odyssey, 315
reductionism, evolutionary, 417n1
re­flectionism, 342
233, 372; brain maximization in 
“spare” time, 406; cooperation 
and, 65, 101, 117, 289, 315, 317; cre-
ativity and, 359, 406; culture 
and, 289, 342; Darwin machines 
and, 395–396, 399–400; Dr. Seuss 
and, 321–333, 334, 358–367, 371; 
earning audience attention as 
artists’ prime problem, 233; evo-
lution and, 218; evolution of hu-
man mind, 47; evolved mecha-
nisms, 59–61, 324, 380–381; 
general intelligence, 48, 258, 
403–404; genius and, 355–356; 
Homer and, 228, 231, 235–237; 
indefi­nite in real novelty, 
401–402; inhibition and, 
258–259, 264–267; life, 324, 414; 
in mind, 258–259; multileveled, 
367; Odysseus and, 228, 259–261; 
originality and, 353, 357, 359; past 
success as problem, for Dr. 
Seuss, 358, 360, 362; past success 
as problem, for Homer, 233–234, 
238; in plot, 227–228; solutions 
produce new problems, 324, 406; 
style as changing network of 
problems and solutions, 343–344
Problems of Relative Growth 
(Huxley), 124
protoconversation, 96–98, 99, 100, 
104, 105, 143, 332
Proust, Marcel, 256
proverb, 84, 207
Pullman, Philip, 376
punishment, 57, 63–64, 117, 285, 

Index
534
rhesus monkey, 151
rhyme, 407; in Dr. Seuss, 344–345
rhythm, verse, 332, 344–345, 407
rhythmic gymnastics, 4
Richards, Janet Radcliffe, 24–25
ritual, 107, 205, 207; art and, 
117–118; costly signalling and, 
117–118, 309–310; in Odyssey, 
309–310
ritualization (biology), 137–138, 180
Rize (La Chapelle), 106n
Robinson Crusoe (Defoe), 194
romance (­genre), 394
Romano, Giulio, 341
romantic love, 341
Romanticism, 114
Root-Bernstein, Robert, 124
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 65–66
Rowling, J. K., 111, 195
sagas, 303
Sally-Anne test, 145–146, 148–149
Samburu (Kenya), 100
Sami (Lapland), 288
Samoa, 22
Sarah (chimpanzee), 138
Sawyer, Keith, 177, 184
Scalise Sugiyama, Michelle, 392, 
420n11, 440n47
scarification, 72, 78, 83, 84, 106
scenario, 6, 48, 49; as function of 
storytelling, 81, 95, 193–194, 198
scenic contrast, narrative pattern 
of, 91
Schiller, Friedrich, 427n23
science: art and, 124; consilience 
with art, 338–339; implied in 
rehearsal, as human practice, 121, 
162, 192, 429n20
relevance, 112
religion, 16, 35, 36; art and, 112, 
113–118, 413, 414; category viola-
tion and, 329; control and pre-
diction and, 283–284; death and, 
285–286; divine justice tested, in 
Odyssey, 307; explanation and, 
151–152; false belief and, 115, 199, 
378, 413; in Odyssey, 281–286; ori-
gins of, 114, 199–208; psychologi-
cal predispositions toward, 
199–208; ritual and, in Odyssey, 
309–310; social cohesion and, 
113–114, 309; social vigilance and 
punishment, in Odyssey, 
306–309; sta­tus and, 201–202; 
storytelling and, 64, 115, 199–208, 
211, 413; untruth of, as adaptive, 
310
repetition, 184
representation, 4–6, 8–9; in art, 72, 
95; of events, 16; in imitation, 
162; not con­fined to language, 
129; in play, 180; problem-solv-
ing and, 47–48; in story, 159–160; 
theory of mind and, 145, 149
reputation, 394–395
Requiem (Berlioz), 108
retaliation, 312–313
revenge, 59, 63–64; in Odyssey, 305, 
311–312; storytelling and, 227–228
Revenge of the Jedi, The (Lucas), 
227
reverse dominance, 109
reverse engineering, 37–38, 58

	
Index
	
535
378; individuality of, 323, 325, 
326, 333, 334, 351; later successes 
of, 333; opposites and contrasts 
in, 353, 354, 355, 359; originality 
as theme in, 409; other media of, 
332–333; perfectionism of, 332, 
352–353, 366–367; play and, 321, 
326–331, 375; repeated solutions 
deployed by, 366
sex, 382, 408; evolution of, 405, 414
sexual reproduction, 27
sexual selection, 73–79, 80, 408
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley-Coo-
per, third Earl of, 350
Shakespeare, William, 3, 9, 10, 70, 
72, 90–91, 111, 112, 193, 195, 207, 
217, 256, 344, 389, 397; as genius, 
356; not anti-essentialist, 418n1
shame, 58, 404
Shaw, George Bernard, 399
sheep, 153
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 350
Sidney, Sir Philip, 213
silk, 408
similarity and difference, 327
similes, Homeric, 291
Simmel, Marianne, 137–138
Simonton, Dean Keith, 351, 356
simulation, 155–158
Singer, Peter, 56–57
skyhook, 202
slime mold, 348
Smarties test, 146–147, 279
smile, 40, 46, 180
Smith, Lane, 376
Sneetches, The (Seuss), 329, 336, 371, 
374
Horton Hears a Who!, 378; meth-
ods of, 386–397, 411; non-agen-
tial explanation in, 202–203, 
284–285, 378, 414; as not adapta-
tion, 411–412; purpose and, 414; 
sci­en­tific validity indifferent to 
human preferences, 411; as “un-
natural” selection, 411
science fiction, 394
Scodel, Ruth 234–235
Scott, A. O., 376
Scrambled Eggs Super (Seuss), 327
scripts, 138, 154, 182
scrub jays, 153, 274
sculpture, 4, 8, 81–82, 106, 118, 123, 
409, 410, 413
self, as not narrative, 159–160
self-awareness, 404
Selfish Gene, The (Dawkins), 26
selfish gene theory, 26, 52, 54–55, 
372
selfish­ness, 52, 54
self-monitoring, human, 121
Sepik River carving (Papua New 
Guinea), 70, 431n24
serial pro­cessing (brain), 152, 258
Seurat, Georges, 124
Seuss, Dr., 11, 42, 64, 211, 319, 
321–379; books as preferred form 
for, 331, 333, 344; boundary-
crossing in, 328–329, 354; con-
cern for children’s reading, 
337–338; drawing style of, 330, 
353; early success of, 331; extrava-
gance of, 329, 355, 375–376; hailed 
as genius, 326, 338, 351; imagina-
tion as theme in, 340, 376, 377, 

Index
536
84, 98, 100, 101, 289; in Odyssey, 
287; protoconversation and hu-
man, 96–97
sociobiology, 51, 52, 53
sociopaths, play dep­ri­va­tion in, 
179–180
Sokal hoax, 386, 453n9
solitude, 289, 422n12
Somé, Malidoma Patrice, 117, 205
song, 94, 95, 114, 116, 130, 407; fash-
ion in animal, 71; as likely first 
art, 76; male display and, 74; so-
cial cohesion and, 76, 108. See 
also chant
songbirds, 74, 76–77, 78, 103
sonnet, 407
Sopranos, The, 56
spandrel, 38
Spariosu, Mihai, 185
spatial comprehension, 135
spearthrower, 81–82, 409
specialization, artistic, 344
Spice Girls, 76
Spiegelman, Art, xi, 389, 454n14
spiritual and physical, 115–116, 
200–201, 282
spirits: art and, 116, 118; category 
violation and, 115; as cause 
deeper than visible, 115, 199–206, 
282; as social monitors, 64, 
116–117, 204–205, 282, 299–300, 
307–309, 413
sport, 86
stag beetle, 74
stags, 74
Sta­lin, Josef, 196, 207
Snell, Bruno, 255–257, 269, 281
soap opera, 411
social cognition, 45; automatic fo-
cus on character and event 
through, 233; pretend play and, 
182–183; storytelling and, 176, 
192–193, 195, 199, 209, 233, 378, 
384
social cohesion: art and, 101–108, 
117–118, 119, 408; music and, 
76–77; religion and, 112–118, 
204–206; storytelling and; 288, 
visual art and, 106
Social Darwinism, 20–21
social emotions, 28, 30, 44, 45, 
57–58, 65, 140–141, 196, 305, 316, 
375, 376, 382, 383, 404; coopera-
tion and, 315–316; narrative and, 
173, 287–289
social engagement, 58, 104, 142, 143, 
162, 163
social exchange, 59–62, 140
social information, 64, 191, 192
social intelligence, 104
social intelligence hypothesis, 45, 
141, 257, 276–277, 330
social learning, 23, 27, 104, 105, 112; 
literary criticism and, 391
social monitoring, 163, 166, 176, 
204–205, 282, 382, 404
social selection, 408
sociality, 15, 23, 25, 51–66, 289, 324, 
325, 386, 397; art and, 106, 125; at-
tention and, 101–102; attune-
ment and, 103–104; communica-
tion and, 160, 403; human, 45, 

	
Index
	
537
spective-taking in, 106, 173–174, 
176, 197; play and, 118–119, 
177–187, 207–208, 321; prosocial 
values in, 106, 107, 176, 196–197, 
372, 375; punishment and, 196; 
scenario function of, 81, 95, 
193–194; simulation and, 157; so-
cial and moral emotions and, 
287, 288, 375; social monitoring 
and, 63, 204–205; sta­tus and, 201; 
­women and, 79. See also fiction; 
narrative
strategic information, 130, 155, 163, 
164–166, 167, 176, 193, 204–205; 
absent in fiction, 369
structuralism, 22, 130
structure: in Greek tradition, 238; 
in Horton Hears a Who!, 361; in 
Iliad, 235–238; in Odyssey, 210, 
225, 227–228, 233, 238–254; pat-
terns of, in story, 91, 233, 254
stylistic history, 342–344
substantia nigra (brain), 184
Sudoku, 87
suitors (Odyssey): con­fi­dence in 
numbers, 289, 307; as free-riders, 
64, 307, 311, 314; ignore xenía, 
295–296, 298–299; impiety, 308; 
punishment looming, 310; 
slaughter of, 311; sta­tus viola-
tions in, 301
supernatural, 199–208, 281–286, 
378, 385; coexists with natural 
explanation, 201, 282; reinforces 
cooperation, 307–309
Surma (Ethiopia), 107
star-nosed mole, 88
sta­tus, 102; art and, 108–112, 344; 
conversation and, 111; de­mo­
graphic transition and, 454n22; 
Dr. Seuss and, 326; in Dr. Seuss, 
329; in Homer, 266; humans 
and, 109–110, 301; narrative and, 
176; in Odyssey, 290, 293, 304; 
versus prestige, 429n32; primates 
and, 109–110; “sta­tus system,” 
325
Stendhal (Henri-Marie Beyle), 19, 
395
Stoics, 279
stopping rules, 427n35
storyteller: advantages of storytell-
ing for, 167–169; as intuitive psy-
chologist, 232, 244–245, 254, 257, 
267–268
storytelling, 1, 3, 5, 8, 105, 116; as ad-
aptation, 84, 94, 382; Aristotle 
on, 159; attention and, 115, 192, 
219; biological bases of, 132–208; 
children and, 177–187, 321; cre-
ativity and, 411; fictional and 
nonfictional, 129–130; human 
self-understanding and, 208; as 
human universal, 9–11, 73, 82; 
improves social cognition, 
49–50; male-female differences 
in, 195; motivates cooperation, 
64, 176, 204–206; myth and, 
118–119; negotiating norms 
through, 107–108; nonfictional 
narrative, 69, 129; not de­pen­dent 
on language, 131, 157, 159; per-

Index
538
theory of bonds, 140–141, 329
theory of kinds, 136–139, 152, 178, 
181, 186, 190, 199, 327; in Dr. 
Seuss, 328–331, 355. See also folk 
biology; intuitive ontologies
theory of mind, 16, 46, 49, 116, 152, 
164, 199; children’s storytelling 
and, 186, 187; development of, 
143, 15–49, 151; in Dr. Seuss, 329; 
dramatic irony and, 277–281; 
event comprehension and, 
141–149; evolution of, 149, 257, 
281; goal-desire comprehension, 
138; language and, 175, 176; pre-
tend play and, 179, 181; as psy-
chological specialization, 
143–144; religion and, 199–205; 
storytelling and, 190, 382, 413. See 
also folk psychology
theory of things, 116, 152, 181, 190, 
199; in Dr. Seuss, 327, 328. See 
also folk physics
Thersites, 171
Theseid, 225
Theseus, 224
Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose 
(Seuss), 338, 360
Thompson, D’Arcy, 13, 124
thrillers, 228–229, 394
throwing, 180
tiger, 406
time, 175, 402
Tit for Tat, 58–59, 312
tolerance, 374, 375
Tolkien, J. R. R., 195
Tolstoy, Leo, 244–245, 256, 379, 393
Tooby, John, 42, 60–61, 293
surprise: comprehension of, 148; in 
Dr. Seuss, 334; in laughter and 
play, 331; neural response to, 184; 
in Odyssey, 241, 244, 248, 249, 251; 
in story, 183–185, 186, 193, 234, 
236
suspense, in story, 234, 445n3
suspicion, 292
Sutton-Smith, Brian, 185
Symbolism, 114
sympathy, 57, 197, 315
symphony, 122
synchrony, attunement and, 104, 
105
Tale of Genji, The (Murasaki), 79, 
107
tattooing, 72, 78, 83, 84, 106, 382
teaching, 149
technology, art and 123
Telemachos (Odyssey), recognition 
of, 265, 290–291
Tempest, The (Shakespeare), 207
tense (language), 175–176
testing, 387
testosterone, 77
theater, 5, 159, 177. See also drama
theme (literary): meaning and, 232, 
374–375, 397; in Odyssey, 210; as 
reductive, 279, 374–375, 387
Theory, 2, 11, 27, 338–339, 350, 
384–386, 387, 388, 395, 453n9; de-
nies genius, 351; denies human 
nature, 19, 22–23; dismisses indi-
viduality, 334–335, 337, 342, 348. 
See also Cultural Critique; liter-
ary criticism and theory

	
Index
	
539
verse: in Dr. Seuss, 332, 372; as hu-
man universal, 73, 94, 332; pat-
tern and, 121; repetition and, 372
vervet monkey, 160, 161
video games, 408
Viki (chimpanzee), 99, 100
Virgil, 256
vision, 10–11, 29–30, 33, 37, 43–44, 
45, 48, 102, 133, 163; object com-
prehension in, 135, 156, 198
visual art, 72, 73, 77–78, 83, 84, 105, 
106, 116, 123, 130, 189, 192
visuospatial sketchpad (brain), 258
Vorticism, 119
vulture, 291–292
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 27, 33
War and Peace (Tolstoy), 368
Warhol, Andy, 72
Wason Selection Task, 59–61
weaving, 79, 82–83, 85, 94, 95, 106, 
123, 407, 408
Weiss, Paul, 89
Wells, H. G., 111–112
Wernicke’s area (brain), 149
Western (­genre), 394
whales, 71, 76, 130
What Good Are the Arts? (Carey), 
95–96
“What Was I Scared Of?” (Seuss), 
374
Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, Ulrich, 
218
Williams, Bernard, 256–257
Williams, George, 35, 37, 52
Williams syndrome, 144, 190
Wilson, David Sloan, 27, 205
tools, 2
trade, and art, 118, 123, 382, 410
tradition, 108, 112, 114; art and, 211, 
344, 431n24; Dr. Seuss and, 
344–345, 347; Homeric epic and, 
220–221, 234–240, 321; hybridiza-
tion of, 408; as repertoires of so-
lutions and problems, 220–221, 
326, 343–344; strategic authorial 
assessment of, 233, 389
tragedy, 196, 220, 228–29
trait, 154–155. See also character
Trobriand Islanders, 116
trust, 26, 57, 62, 140, 404; low in 
world of Odyssey, 274, 276–277, 
292, 294–295, 301–302
truth, 205–206, 339
Turner, Mark, 368, 378
Twelfth Night (Shakespeare), 389
ultrasociality, 15, 53, 101, 130, 142, 
325, 393, 409
Ulysses (Joyce) 222–223, 389
unity of action, 224, 236, 251
universal Darwinism, 401. See also 
Darwin machine
universal level in literary explana-
tion, 322, 333, 367, 389; under-
played in recent criticism and 
theory, 334–335, 337, 339
universals, human, 333, 334, 336, 
351, 383
vampire bats, 58
variation, biological, 349, 414
ventral tegmental (brain), 184
Vermeer, Jan, 348

Index
540
Wright, Robert, 87
Wu Man, 409
xenía, 294–302, 303, 309, 316–317, 
389; de­fined, 295; suitors and, 
295–296, 304; thematized, 298
Xenophanes, 283
Yertle the Turtle (Seuss), 328, 371
Your Job in Japan (Geisel), 336
Zunshine, Lisa, 435n66
Wilson, Edward O., 338–339
Wimmer, Heinz, 147–148
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 134
Wodaabe (Niger, Nigeria), 77
wolves, 274
work of art, 322
working memory, 47, 49, 152, 158, 
258; limits of, 259. See also mem-
ory
World War II, 323, 332, 333, 335–336, 
337, 358, 371
worm, 288
Wrangham, Richard, 5

