On Being The Only Ones	  
C.S.I. Jenkins and Jonathan Jenkins Ichikawa	  
	  
We were married earlier this year. That’s common knowledge; it’s the sort of thing we 
tell people pretty indiscriminately. The finer details of our relationship we tend not to 
advertise.  Nevertheless, people seem to take themselves to know quite a lot about 
them, too.	  
	  
We’re both academic philosophers from liberal democracies.  So relatively speaking, 
we exist in a very socially liberal pocket of a relatively socially liberal part of the 
world.  Our wedding guests were not exactly closed-minded reactionaries; neither 
are our other friends and intellectual peers.  None of them would bat an eyelid if they 
learned, for instance, that a friend or colleague was gay or bisexual.  And on the 
whole, these people tend to be pretty sensible about avoiding casually homophobic 
language, heteronormative assumptions, and suchlike.	  
	  
But even our very liberal pocket of our relatively liberal society is massively—and, to 
us, surprisingly—mononormative.  Acquaintances, friends, and colleagues are 
constantly assuming that our relationship, and indeed every relationship that they 
think of as ‘serious’, is a sexually monogamous one.	  
	  
Although the assumption is ubiquitous, we rarely make a point of correcting it—even 
when an individual makes it explicitly and repeatedly.  One reason we don’t is the 
simple fact that we don’t always feel like initiating conversations about the details of 
our personal lives with people to whom we’re not particularly close (even though 
they’re taking themselves to know quite a lot about it).  Or sometimes, although we’d 
be happy to have that sort of conversation with that person at some point, it’s come 
up at the wrong time and/or place.  (And then raising it later feels like announcing 
that it is now time to have a conversation about our personal lives, which we don’t 
often like to do.)	  
	  
But truth be told, there’s more to the story.  At least part of the reason we tend to be 
reluctant to correct mononormative assumptions is that, when push comes to shove, 
we’re a little bit afraid to.  We don’t want to deal with the kinds of negative attitudes 
that seem to hover around non-monogamy, and we often don’t feel that we have a 
good enough sense, in advance of disclosing our situation, of who’ll have those 
negative attitudes and who won’t.	  
	  
Sometimes, people (presumably, people who haven’t given the matter much thought) 
talk as if ‘non-monogamy’ were more or less synonymous with ‘infidelity’.  In 
mentioning that one’s in a non-monogamous relationship, one doesn’t, of course, 
want to be interpreted as having announced that one is a cheater.  (If you’re one of 
those struggling with the difference, consider that a necessary condition of cheating 
on a partner is doing something that your partner is not OK with; something you 
have, explicitly or otherwise, agreed not to do. To cheat is to break the rules of the 
relationship.)  And we hate rather a lot the prospect of people making insidious 
gender-stereotypical assumptions about us, for example that Jonathan must have 
coerced Carrie into a relationship style that she doesn’t actually want.  (The 
assumption that women could never want an open relationship is no less ridiculous 
than the assumption that women never want sex. But in neither case, unfortunately, 
does the ridiculousness of the assumption prevent it from being widely held.)	  
	  
We’re also afraid that people might take away the idea that our relationship isn’t 
serious. In our experience, many people will infer from non-monogamy to non-

seriousness without skipping a beat.  A very common piece of word processing 
software includes a thesaurus which, when asked for synonyms (synonyms) of 
‘monogamy’, will offer (among other things) ‘stability’, ‘fidelity’ and ‘commitment’.  In 
fact, some common ways of thinking and talking can implicate that a non-
monogamous relationship is considered to be no relationship at all; for instance, ‘I 
think we should see other people’ is widely used in effect to mean ‘I want to 
terminate this relationship’.  Most of all, we don’t want people attributing to us 
immorality, immaturity, fickleness, or other serious character failings.  And we 
certainly don’t want to have a long and detailed enough conversation to guard 
against all these possibilities, when all that’s happened is that someone has made 
some no-doubt-hilarious joke about our having forsaken all others or whatever.  (For 
the record, our wedding vows didn’t include this phrase, or anything else 
incompatible with what we’re doing now.)  So it’s pretty easy to find reasons not to 
bother to correct mistaken assumptions.	  
	  
Of course, those reasons extend further—for pretty much the same reasons, we 
don’t make deliberate decisions to tell many people about the workings of our 
relationship.  And although (at least most of the time) the people we have told 
reacted without negativity (at least as far as we could see), there are certain kinds of 
people we wish we hadn’t come out to.  After one of us shared some of these 
personal details with one acquaintance, that acquaintance proceeded to bring up the 
topic of our ‘unconventional’ personal life in almost every subsequent private 
conversation, regardless of topic.  (Just to be clear: that’s not cool.  Imagine if 
someone wanted almost every conversation with you to be about your race, or your 
clothing, or the fact that you are single.  You’d—rightly—pretty quickly start to worry 
about whether you were being treated as a human being in the round.)  Other people 
we’ve told and they thought it was no big deal; those are the people who get it.  It 
isn’t a big deal.	  
	  
But any nervousness about over-interest, while uncomfortable, is nothing like as 
much of an issue as our nervousness about negative judgment.  So where might this 
envisaged negativity come from?  We know of some pretty bad justifications for 
mononormativity, but frankly, they’re so bad that we find it difficult to take seriously 
the idea that they lie behind any (reasonably intelligent, reasonably compassionate) 
person’s having a genuinely negative attitude to non-monogamy.  Here are some of 
them:	  
	  
(1) It’s unhealthy to have a large number of sexual partners. 	  
This is silly for many reasons.  First, it’s false: one can maintain good sexual health 
by taking sensible precautions even if one does have several partners.  Second, non-
monogamy doesn’t entail having a large number of partners; that association is 
based on prejudice.  If you have only two partners in your whole life, but you have 
them at the same time, you’re being non-monogamous.  Conversely, having a large 
number of partners doesn’t entail non-monogamy, so this sort of health-based 
concern should be applied equally to promiscuous single people and the multiply 
serially monogamous.  Third, considered and ethical non-monogamy is likely to be a 
substantially better option health-wise than the frustrated drunken flings, clandestine 
affairs, or otherwise ill-considered hook-ups that are the fate of many of those who 
attempt monogamy despite not being well suited to it and eventually fail in the 
attempt.	  
	  
(2) Non-monogamy is inevitably psychologically damaging.  Sexual jealousy is 
unmanageable, always and for everyone, so all non-monogamous relationships 
eventually suffer and break down.	  

Different people are different.  It’s a silly mistake to assume that just because you (for 
example) find the idea of sharing a partner deeply uncomfortable, nobody else will 
ever be able to handle it.  Actually, it’s not even a particularly good sign that you will 
never be able to handle it; non-monogamous people who have trouble with jealousy 
often find they get better at dealing with it over time, by thinking and talking carefully 
and explicitly about what it is that they’re feeling.  (Certainly our own attitudes and 
dispositions have changed over time and with experience.)  And, of course, sexual 
jealousy is often a big problem in monogamous relationships; the connections 
between jealousy and sexual restriction/freedom are complex and highly 
interpersonally variable.  It might also be useful to stress here that non-monogamous 
relationships are generally not sexual free-for-alls, as some people assume.  (Again, 
it’s only prejudice that drives this assumption.)  The parties to a non-monogamous 
relationship get to decide what they are comfortable with and what they are not; it’s 
not about letting things happen that make you feel awful.  No ethical relationship, 
monogamous or otherwise, is about that.  What’s unusual is that non-monogamous 
people choose rules for their relationships based on the particular situations of the 
individuals involved, as opposed to adopting a standard set.  One particularly silly 
way to get to the silly view that non-monogamy is inevitably damaging is to premise it 
on some thought like: ‘One of my friends once tried a non-monogamous relationship 
in college, and it made him/her really unhappy’.  (To see how silly that is, just try 
replacing ‘non-monogamous relationship’ with e.g. ‘heterosexual relationship’ or 
‘relationship with another human being’.)  Most relationships, monogamous or 
otherwise, eventually suffer and break down for some reason or other.  Sometimes, 
for sure, it’s because they’re non-monogamous and that didn’t suit the people 
involved.  Other times, it’s because they’re monogamous and that didn’t suit the 
people involved.  Different people are different. You know: obviously.	  
	  
(3) Non-monogamy is unnatural.	  
This is just a weird claim.  We’re not even quite sure what it’s supposed to mean, but 
maybe it is the sort of claim that might make it relevant to point out that hardly any 
species is sexually monogamous.  (No, swans aren’t.  They do often pair bond for 
life, we understand, but there’s a difference between a life-long bond and a sexually 
exclusive one; assumptions to the contrary are yet more prejudice.)  And humans 
aren’t particularly monogamous either, if you look at their practice as opposed to their 
policy, and/or if you look at more of their history than the last little bit.  What it would 
take for humans nevertheless to count as ‘monogamous by nature’ escapes us.  But 
this whole discussion is silly in any case, because lots of very awesome things are 
totally unnatural, like MacBooks and ibuprofen.  So the (putative) unnaturalness of 
non-monogamy is just irrelevant to whether or not it’s a good idea.	  
	  
(4) Non-monogamy is forbidden by some religion or other.	  
If you think that settles it, there’s probably not much we can do to help.  For what it’s 
worth, we don’t think it’s OK to delegate moral decisions like this one to outside 
authorities, and we stand ready to modus tollens any conjunction of religious views 
which entails that ethical non-monogamy is unethical.	  
	  
(5) Non-monogamy is never ethical.	  
Non-monogamy requires explicit (and ongoing) reflection and decisions about what 
sorts of freedoms and restrictions are ethical given the particular individuals 
concerned.  It emphatically isn’t about ignoring or overruling ethical 
considerations.  So by itself, the claim that non-monogamy is never ethical has about 
as much plausibility as the claim that heterosexuality is never ethical, or that 
interracial relationships are never ethical, or that relationships that start on a Tuesday 
are never ethical.  If everyone involved is honest, happy and healthy, it’s hard to see 

what the problem is supposed to be.  It can’t be just wrong.  (Not even if it makes 
some people feel a bit uncomfortable; more on that in a moment.)	  
	  
So, reasons like (1)-(5) for being down on non-monogamy are bad.  (This isn’t an 
exhaustive list of bad reasons, obviously; just a representative selection.)  And yet so 
many people—otherwise open-minded people, including many of our past temporal 
slices—are going around making all these casually mononormative assumptions all 
the time.  How come? 	  
	  
A lot of it surely has to do with their simply not thinking about the matter.  We imagine 
that a lot of people may have never seriously considered the option of having an 
ethical non-monogamous relationship, or taken seriously the possibility that their 
friends or acquaintances might be having them.  In our experience, this just isn’t 
something a lot of people talk about.  It’s more or less universally assumed that when 
one commits seriously, it’ll be in a monogamous way.  The spectrum of non-
monogamous relationship styles (and just to emphasize, we’re talking about a wide 
range of options here; it’s not a one-size-fits-all situation) aren’t getting themselves 
onto people’s agendas.  The people who’ve made false assumptions about our 
relationship presumably had no idea they might have been making us feel a bit like 
freaks.  We’ve made similar assumptions about other people ourselves.  We try not 
to now, but it’s a lot easier to be careful now because we’ve been thinking about this 
stuff (a lot).	  
	  
The not thinking problem, while it is indeed a problem, is the most optimistic part of 
our explanation of the mononormative behavior that we’re used to.  Is there anything 
else going on?  Anything we should be more worried about?  Is some of the 
mononormativity around here due to a genuine and considered negative attitude to 
non-monogamy?  We’re not sure, but we fear that it might be.  But assuming that 
such negativity isn’t really motivated by bad reasons like (1)-(5), what could motivate 
it?  That’s to say, what could motivate it in the kind of reasonably intelligent, 
reasonably compassionate people whose judgment of us we actually care about?	  
	  
We worry that there’s an analogy to be drawn with a certain pernicious kind of 
homophobia.  It’s not news that some of the most vocal and hateful anti-gay protests 
come from closeted homosexuals.  They are the people made most uncomfortable 
by the existence of happy, comfortably out gay people: people, that is, who are living 
the lives that these vocal homophobes want for themselves but (for whatever reason) 
feel unable to claim.  Feelings of guilt and shame are likely to play an important role 
in this dynamic: people who are ashamed of their own homosexual feelings, and 
working very hard to suppress them, are more likely to be intensely aggravated by 
seeing other people openly embracing and enjoying theirs.  And they’re more likely to 
feel the need to ensure that such behaviour gets labelled as disgusting or 
immoral.  This unfortunate psychological state might not be consciously owned by its 
subjects, of course.  But people who are happy and secure with their own sexuality 
and relationship situation just don’t have that same kind of motivation to resent other 
people’s.	  
	  
It does seem to us somewhat likely that some people may harbour negative attitudes 
towards non-monogamy because, whether they are aware of it or not, they would like 
to have some sort of non-monogamous relationship themselves, and they resent 
people who are living the lives that they want but (for whatever reason) feel unable to 
claim.  We imagine that people who feel guilty or ashamed about their own feelings 
of attraction to people besides their partners, and are working very hard to suppress 
those feelings, are particularly likely to be intensely aggravated by seeing others 

openly embracing and enjoying their attraction to more than one person, and to feel 
the need to ensure that such behaviour gets labelled as disgusting or 
immoral.  (We’re also pretty confident that feelings of guilt and shame about being 
attracted to people besides one’s partner are pretty common.)  But if we suspected 
this sort of thing was behind someone’s negative attitude toward us and our 
relationship style, how on earth could we convey this to that person without causing 
offence and being dismissed?	  
	  
So much for nervousness about being judged.  There’s another factor that’s partly 
responsible for our non-disclosure: we don’t really want to look like the only ones in 
certain circles (particularly, the parts of academic philosophy that we frequent).  It’s 
not especially nice to feel different in that way.	  
	  
This point raises to salience another interesting question: if non-monogamy is not 
actually wrong, why aren’t more people doing it?  There are several relevant 
considerations here.  First, there’s the thing about different people being different; 
non-monogamy isn’t everyone’s cup of tea.  And then there’s the thing about how 
much people are just not thinking about this sort of possibility.  (In particular, people 
are not thinking about the various options they have when they go into relationships, 
and such things are a lot harder to negotiate if you get into a serious monogamous 
relationship and figure out years later that it might not be the best relationship style 
for you.)  And finally: you know, maybe they are.  That is to say, it might be that more 
people are doing it than you think.  Your friends or acquaintances who are doing it 
might just not be telling you.  (If you’re a friend or acquaintance of ours, then it’s very 
likely that that was the case.)  Maybe that’s partly because you’re making those 
mononormative assumptions and it doesn’t encourage disclosure.  Or maybe it’s just 
because they’re private people, and/or they don’t know you that well, and/or it hasn’t 
happened to come up yet.  Or maybe they don’t want to look like the only ones.	  
	  
Despite these various kinds of nervousness (justified or otherwise) about disclosure, 
being closetedly non-monogamous (effectively, mono-acting) has its disadvantages 
too.  We’re ready to be done with it.  Academic philosophy is a small world; certain 
areas of it are very small indeed.  What if someone happens to see one of us with 
somebody else, and assumes (not thinking about the alternatives) that we’re 
cheating?  We each hate the idea of being taken for a cheater, or of being pitied as 
the spouse of a cheater.  And we hate very much indeed the idea of some poor well-
meaning friend feeling awful about having witnessed some apparent cheating, and 
agonizing over whether they ought to say or do something.	  
	  
We’re not the type to like the idea of going round making a series of announcements 
to people—as we mentioned, our attitude is that our situation is something that 
should be no big deal.  And in many cases, we wouldn’t want to assume that people 
are interested enough in the inner workings of our personal lives to make it 
appropriate to make an announcement to them.  Hence the present strategy: we’ve 
written something about our situation.  This way, we’re not forcing the conversation 
on anyone who doesn’t want to have it, and at the same time, there’s some chance 
that we might help (a bit) with the not thinking problem.  And knowing the speed at 
which academic gossip travels, we can safely assume this will effectively dismantle 
our closet.  	  
	  
A final, but not at all trivial, consideration is that other people may be able to 
relate.  Certainly, it would’ve helped us feel less we were the only ones if someone 
else had written this article and we’d read it.  If there’s a chance we can do the same 

for someone else by writing this article, then so much the better for our writing this 
article. 
 
	  
	  
Jonathan Jenkins Ichikawa got his PhD from Rutgers University, is currently a 
postdoctoral research fellow at the Arche Philosophical Research Centre at the 
University of St Andrews, and will take up a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship and a 
Postdoctoral Teaching Fellowship at the University of British Columbia in September 
2011.  Carrie Ichikawa Jenkins got her PhD from Trinity College, Cambridge, is 
currently Head of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Nottingham, and 
will take up an Associate Professorship at the University of British Columbia in 
September 2011. 
	  

