APPENDIX
On Archimedes's proof of the subtangent-pvoperty of
a spiral.
THE section of the treatise On Spirals from Prop. 3 to
Prop. 20 is an elaborate series of propositions leading up
to the proof of the fundamental property of the subtangent
corresponding to the tangent at any point on any turn of the
spiral. Libri, doubtless with this serries of propositions in
mind, remarks (Histoire des sciences matMmatiques en Italie,
i, p. 31) that'Apres vingt sifecles de travaux et de d^cou-
verfces, les intelligences les plus puissantes viennent encore
^chouer contre la synthkse difficile du Traite des Spirales
d'Archimfede/ 
There is no foundation for this statement,
which seems to be a too hasty generalization from a dictum,
apparently of Fontenelle, in the Histoire de VAcademie des
Sciences pour Vannee 1704 (p. 42 of the edition of 1722),
who says of the proofs of Archimedes in the work On
Spirals: ' Elles sont si longues, et si difficiles a embrasser,
que, comme on l'a pu voir dans la Preface de 1* Analyse des
Infiniment petits, M. Bouillaud a avou^ qu'il ne les avoit
jamais bien entendues, et que Viete les a injustement soup-
^onn^es de paralogisme, parce qu'il n'avoit pu non plus
parvenir a les bien entendre. Mais toutes les preuves qu'on
peut donner de leur difficult^ et de leur obscurity tournent
a la gloire d'Archimede; car quelle vigueur d'esprit, quelle
quantity de vues diflKrentes, quelle opini&tret^ de travail n'a-
t-il pas fallu pour lier et pour disposer un raisonnement que
quelques-uns de nos plus grands g^omktres ne peuvent suivre,
tout li£ et tout dispose qu'il est ?'
P. Tannery has observed1 that, as a matter of fact, no
mathematicians of real authority who have applied or ex-
tended Archimedes's methods (such men as Huygens, Pascal,
Roberval and Fermat, who alone could have expressed an
opinion worth having), have ever complained of the
1 Bulletin des sciences mathtniatiques, 1895, Part i, pp. 265-71.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPENDIX 
557
< obscurity' of Archimedes; while, as regards Vieta, he has
shown that the statement quoted is based on an entire mis-
apprehension, and that, so far from suspecting a fallacy in
Archimedes's proofs, Vieta made & special study of the treatise
On Spirals and had the greatest admiration for that work.
But, as in many cases in Greek geometry where the analy-
sis is omitted or even (as Wallis was tempted to suppose) of
set purpose hidden, the reading of the completed synthetical
proof leaves a certain impression of mystery; for there is
nothing in it to show why Archimedes should have taken
precisely this line of argument, or how he evolved it. It is
a fact that, as Pappus said, the subtangent-property can be
established by purely 'plane' methods, without recourse to
a'solid' vevo-is (whether actually solved or merely assumed
capable of being solved). If, then, Archimedes chose the more
difficult method which we actually find him employing, it is
scarcely possible to assign any reason except his definite
predilection for the form of proof by reductio ad abswrdum
based ultimately on his famous ' LemmaJ or Axiom.
It seems worth while to re-examine the whole question of
the discovery and proof of the property, and to see how
Archimedes's argument compares with an easier ' plane' proof
suggested by the figures of some of the very propositions
proved by Archimedes in the treatise.
In the first place, we may be sure that the property was
not discovered by the steps leading to the proof as it stands.
I cannot but think that Archimedes divined the result by an
argument corresponding to our use of the differential calculus
for determining tangents. 
He must have considered the
instantaneous direction of the motion of the point P describ-
ing the spiral, using for this purpose the parallelogram of
velocities. The motion of P is compounded of two motions,
one along OP and the other at right angles to it. Comparing
the distances traversed in an instant of time in the two direc-
tions, we see that, corresponding to a small increase in the
radius vector r, we have a small distance traversed perpen-
dicularly to it, a tiny arc of a circle of radius r subtended by
the angle representing the simultaneous small increase of the
angle 0 (AOJP). Now r has a constant ratio to 0 which we call
a (when 6 is the circular measure of the angle 6). Consequently
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

558
APPENDIX
the small increases of r and 6 are in that same ratio. There-
fore what we call the tangent of the angle OPT is r/a,
i.e. OT/r — r/a\ and OT — r2/a, or r&, that is, the arc of a
circle of radius r subtended by the angle 6.
To prove this result Archimedes would doubtless begin by
an analysis of the following sort. Having drawn OT perpen-
dicular to OP and of length equal to the arc ASP, he had to
prove that the straight line joining P to T is the tangent
at P. He would evidently take the line of trying to show
that, if any radius vector to the spiral is drawn, as OQ', on
either side of OP, Q' is always on the side of TP towards 0,
or, if 0Q' meets TP in F, 0Q' is always less than OF. Suppose
that in the above figure OR' is any radius vector between OP
and OS on the ' backward' side of OP, and that OR' meets the
circle with radius OP in R, the tangent to it at P in G, the
spiral in R', and TP in F'. We have to prove that R, R' lie
on opposite sides of Ff, i.e. that RR' > RFf; and again, sup-
posing that any radius vector 0Q' on the 'forward' side of
OP meets the circle with radius OP in Q, the spiral in Q' and
TP produced in F, we have to prove that QQ' < QF.
Archimedes then had to prove that
(1) 
FfR: R0 < RR': R0, and
(2) 
FQ:QO>QQ':QO.
Now (1) is equivalent to
F'R: R0 < (arc RP): (arc ASP), since R0 = P0.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPENDIX 
559
But 
(arc ASP) = OT, by hypothesis;
therefore it was necessary to prove, alternando, that
(3) F'R: (arc RP) < RO : OT, or PO : OT,
i.e. 
< PM:MO, where OM is perpendicular to SP.
Similarly, in order to satisfy (2), it was necessary to
prove that
(4) 
FQ: (arc PQ) > PM: MO.
Now, as a matter of fact, (3) is a fortiori satisfied if
F'R: (chord RP) <PM:MO;
but in the case of (4) we cannot substitute the chord PQ for
the arc PQ, and we have to substitute PG\ where 0/ is the
point in which the tangent at P to
the circle meets OQ produced; for
of course PG' > (arc PQ), so that (4)
is a fortiori satisfied if
FQ:PG'>PM:MO.
It is remarkable that Archimedes
uses for his proof of the'two cases Prop.
FIG. 1. 
8 and Prop. 7 respectively, and makes
no use of Props 6 and 9, whereas
the above argument points precisely to the use of the figures
of the two latter propositions only.
For in the figure of Prop. 6 (Fig. 1), if OFP is any radius
cutting AB in F, and if PB produced cuts OT, the parallel to
AB through 0, in H, it is obvious, by parallels, that
PF: (chord PB) = OP : PH.
Also PH becomes greater the farther P moves from B
towards A, so that the ratio PF.PB 
diminishes continually,
while it is always less than OB: BT (where BT is the tangent
at B and meets OH in T), i.e. always less than BM: MO.
Hence the relation (3) is always satisfied for any point R' of
the spiral on the ' backward' side of P.
But (3) is equivalent to (1), from which it follows that F'R
is always less than RR', so that Rf always lies on the side
of TP towards 0.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

560 
APPENDIX
Next, for the point Q' on the ' forward' side of the spiral
from P, suppose that in the figure of Prop. 9 or Prop. 7 (Fig. 2)
any radius OP of the circle meets AB produced in Fy and
FIG. 2.
the tangent at B in G; and draw BPH, BGT meeting OT, the
parallel through 0 to AB, in H, T.
Then 
PF:BG>FG: 
BG, since PF > FG,
> 0G:GT, by parallels,
> OB.BT, a fortiori,
>BM:M0;
and obviously, as P moves away from B towards OT, i.e. as G
moves away from B along BT, the ratio 0G:GT increases
continually, while, as shown, PF.BG is always > BM:M0,
and, a fortiori,
>BM:M0.
That is, (4) is always satisfied for any point Q' of the spiral
' forward' of P, so that (2) is also satisfied, and QQ' is always
less than QF.
It will be observed that no V€V<TLS, and nothing beyond
' plane' methods, is required in the above proof, and Pappus's
criticism of Archimedes's proof is therefore justified.
Let us now consider for a moment what Archimedes actually
does. In Prop. 8, which he uses to prove our proposition in
the 'backward' case (E', R, F'), he shows that, if 
P0:0V
is any ratio whatever less than P0: OT or PM :M0, we can
find points F', G corresponding to any ratio P0 : 0 V where
OT < 0V < 0V, i.e. we can find a point F' corresponding to
a ratio still nearer to PO : OT than P0 : 0 V is. This proves
that the ratio RF': PG, while it is always less than PM:M0,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPENDIX 
561
approaches that ratio without limit as R approaches P. But
the proof does not enable us to say that RF': (chord PR),
which is > RF'.PG, is also always less than PM:MO. 
At
first sight, therefore, it would seem that the proof must fail.
Not so, however; Archimedes is nevertheless able to prove
that, if PFand not PT is the tangent at P to the spiral, an
absurdity follows. For his proof establishes that, if PFis the
tangent and OF' is drawn as in the proposition, then
F'O:RO < OR': OP,
or F'O < OR', ' which is impossible \ 
Why this is impossible
does not appear in Props. 18 and 20, but it follows from the
argument in Prop. 13, which proves that a tangent to the spiral
cannot meet the curve again, and in fact that the spiral is
everywhere concave towards the origin.
Similar remarks apply to the proof by Archimedes of the
impossibility of the other alternative supposition (that the tan-
gent at P meets OT at a point U nearer to 0 than T is).
Archimedes's proof is therefore in both parts perfectly valid,
in spite of any appearances to the contrary. The only draw-
back that can be urged seems to be that, if we assume the
tangent to cut OT at a point very near to T on either side,
Archimedes's construction brings us perilously near to infini-
tesimals, and the proof may appear to hang, as it were, on
a thread, albeit a thread strong enough to carry it. But it is
remarkable that he should have elaborated such a difficult
proof by means of Props. 7, 8 (including the * solidJ vev<ris of
Prop. 8), when the figures of Props. 6 and 7 (or 9) themselves
suggest the direct proof above given, which is independent of
any vtvais.
P. Tannery,1 in a paper on Pappus's criticism of the proof as
unnecessarily involving * solid' methods, has given another
proof of the subtangent-property based on ' plane' methods
only; but I prefer the method which I have given above
because it corresponds more closely to the preliminary proposi-
tions actually given by Archimedes.
1 Tannery, Memo I res scientijique$f i, 1912, pp. 800-16.
1523.2 
0 O
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

