!
On Populism, Liberalism and the Future of  the Left: 
An Interview with Raphael Liogier 
By Frédéric Baitinger 
 
Sociologist and philosopher, Raphael Liogier has published a series of books, delving into 
questions of the sacred and the religious within contemporary societies, and on more general 
questions about the future of human identities in a globalized and connected world. The first two 
volumes are entitled Le mythe de l’islamisation, Essai sur une obsession collective (2012) and Ce populisme qui 
vient: Conversations pour demain (2013). In these volumes, Liogier analyzes the current rise of populism, 
Islamophobia, and extremism in most developed countries, and proposes a new conceptual 
framework to understand it.  The third volume is called  La guerre des civilisations n’aura pas lieu: 
coexistence et violence au XXIeme siècle (2016.) Here, Liogier opposes the dominant idea, popularized by 
Samuel Huntington in his book Clash of  Civilizations, and the Remaking of  World Order (1996) that the 
contemporary rise of racism is not the consequence of a clash between incompatible religions and 
civilizations—as Fukuyama argued in his book The End of  History and the Last Man (1992), but the 
product of a global culture (with the multiplication of “deterritorialized spaces of desire”) that is 
working at undoing the traditional making of identity (by blurring the notion of frontiers, and the 
notion of the other). Liogier’s last and most recent book, which deals with the social and economic 
consequences of the changes implied by globalization and new technologies, is called Sans emploi. 
Condition de l’homme postindustriel (2016). In this volume, Liogier is imagining—very much like Herbert 
Marcuse or Georges Bataille in their respective times—what could be a world where the value 
attributed to labor would be replaced by a “basic universal income” that would enable each 
individual to become creative (and thus productive) in agreement with his or her “desire to be.” 
* 
Frédéric Baitinger: Before entering into the many refined and interesting concepts that you have developed in your 
books, could you explain to us what is the definition that you give to the notion of  populism, and how this definition 
could help us understand why the FN (the national Front) almost finished ahead during the first round of  the French 
presidential elections. What does populism mean for you? 
Raphaël Liogier: The question of populism is essential, even though the term is a bit confusing. To 
be a populist does not mean to be close to the people. It is not being  a demagogue, since demagogy 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
(understood as the art of seducing and convincing) is an essential part of any form of politics. To 
be a populist, according to me, is to speak in the name of people, to speak for them, which is to say, 
on their behalf. This is why the people, in order to vote for a populist, need to recognize 
“themselves” in him/her—which explains why most populists are never elected. Populists, if you 
look at history, are always eccentric characters that pretend to be beyond and above the political 
institutions that are normally supposed to represent the people. The case of Trump is obvious. 
While a character like Trump, in a “normal” time, would be taken for what he is—at best a low brow 
humorist—becomes, in times of crisis, the voice of the people who are feeling rejected or betrayed 
by the political system that was supposed to represent them. As such, what should be seen as 
shocking, or eccentric, becomes the best guarantee of the populist rejection of the corrupted 
highbrow institutions that have betrayed the people. And it is when the majority of a population 
starts to identify—below its conscious and immediate interest—with the eccentric position of the 
populist that such a thing as the election of someone like Donald Trump can happen.  
FB: Who is a populist in France, and why? 
RL: In France, the closest incarnation of the pure ideal type of a populist is Marine Le Pen. 
Contrary to her father, who was not a populist but an extreme-right elitist, Marine Le Pen is the one 
who brought to her father's party, the FN (the National Front), a left-wing twist that enabled her to 
start speaking in the name of the people. Such a twist, of course, is what makes of her an even more 
dangerous politician than her father. Indeed, while a lot of people are saying that the FN is less 
dangerous than before because of Marine Le Pen's move away from her father's radicalism, I would 
argue the exact opposite. I would say that it is precisely because Marine Le Pen has integrated into 
her program some left-wing measures, that she turned herself into a populist. And this turn is what 
makes of her someone way more dangerous than her father. Because when one is labeled “extreme-
right”, one can gain votes from the margins, and the margins, depending on the historical period, 
can be large, but those margins are never as large as what a populist is aiming at, namely, to represent 
all the “people”. We can actually see the difference  between the two postures in the difference 
between Le Pen, the  father during the 2002 elections, and Le Pen, the daughter, during the last 
election. While the father did not increase his score between the first and the second round (he 
remained at 20%°), thedaughter was able to gain 15% between the first and the second round (she 
went from 22% to 35%). Thus, Marine Le Pen  is no longer at the margins. She represents the 
center. She is neither left nor right. She wants to represent the interests of the French people beyond 
any political position. This is why Marine Le Pen can say, about François Hollande, that he has 
abandoned the poor, and betrayed the left. Such a statement, of course, is at the exact opposite of 
Jean Marie Le Pen's reaction to the election of François Mitterrand in 1980. While Marine Le Pen is 
claiming to represent the interest of the left, her father despised the left. We have thus, here, a 
complete reversal: from extreme-right, to populism.  
FB: What are the common features and the differences between the current populism, and the one that developed in 
Europe during the twenties and thirties? 
RL: Just like Hitler's movement in the twenties and thirties, Marine Le Pen's populism could be 
qualified as a “national socialism” (while her father's movement was a national liberalism), that is to 
say, as a movement that is neither left nor right. She belongs to the right when it comes to the 
question of identity, frontiers, etc. But she belongs to the left when it comes to social protectionism 
and health care. Of course, this left component is grounded itself in the idea that there is a “real 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
French population” that is beyond left and right, and that is threatened in its identity and that needs 
to be protected. Conversely, there is a “false French population” that is attacking from the inside the 
French identity, and that is putting at risk the future of France. And it is this idealized and 
completely constructed idea of a “the real people”, that enables populist to transcend political 
parties, and to claim to be neither right nor left.  
This is why the populist don't have a political program, but mostly a discourse on the lost or 
wounded identity of the people that they pretending to speak in the name of. This is why the 
populist is always a kind of tragic hero that comes to fight in the name of a lost identity that needs 
to be restored—even though everyone knows that it is a lost cause and that this identity will not be 
restored. And it is precisely because it is a lost cause that the populist, and the people they represent, 
can act beyond any norms, any form of rationality. It is to the extent that the “real people” feel 
betrayed and violated by the “false people”, that it gives them the “right” to act non-rationally, which 
is to say, to betray and violate the “false people” that have wounded in the first place their authentic 
identity.  
Populism, in this sense, is thus the product of a “narcissistic wound” that is being re-enforced by an 
economical crisis. In other words, populism is never, as some people argue, the sole product of an 
economical crisis. It is always, first and foremost, a problem related to the identity of a nation, and 
its growing incapacity to maintain the coherence of the narcissistic narrative of its own identity. 
Populism appears when a nation can no longer narrate its own identity the way it was used to (which 
is precisely what Trump's slogan “Make America Great Again!” shows). Populism indicates a fragility 
within the very discourse that is supposed to ground one's national identity. And beyond this 
fragility, it also indicates a form of frustration, resentment and humiliation on the side of the people 
that feel betrayed. And it is this specific frustration that triggers the need to find scapegoats, or at 
least some institutions or people that can be held responsible for this loss of power.   
Currently, we are witnessing, in most developed countries, a form of rejection of Islam—an 
Islamophobia—and, at the same time, a growing interest in Buddhism. I wrote my dissertation on 
Buddhism, and more so on the forms that Buddhism has taken since it has become popular in 
western countries. I showed, in this first work, how occidental people have created, through their 
specific appropriation of Buddhism, a new religion that  currently fits the agenda of a very western 
“desire to be” (a desire, by the way, that has nothing to do with  real Buddhism). At the extreme 
opposite of such a “good appropriation”, stands Islam. Islam, in our western culture, has slowly 
become the example of the “bad religion”, i.e. the example of a religion that is not in agreement 
with our specific western “desire to be”. While Islam was still seen as a “positive” and “exotic” 
religion in the 19th century, it has become, nowadays, and especially in Europe, the paradigm of what 
is a “bad” religion. Of course, the evolution of the image of Islam is related to the process of 
colonization, and de-colonization. While Europeans could still enjoy Islam as the Other during 
colonization, this “Other”, since the end of colonization, has become part of Europe itself, and has 
thus become a threat to the European identity. Islam is now the inner enemy. And this position of 
“extimacy” (of being the stranger inside) is what encourages many people who are feeling excluded 
from the western capitalist system, to identify with the excluded position of Islam in order to justify 
and legitimize their own terrorist activity. It thus forms a system, a vicious circle, where the bad 
image of Islam attracts violence and anger, and violence and anger are reinforcing the bad image of 
Islam. Terrorism, as we know it today, is not historically speaking, related to Islam. Quite on the 
contrary, it would be more accurate to say that contemporary terrorism was born at the end of the 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
seventies, out of many radical-left organizations such as Action Direct for example. It is thus, 
originally, a continuation of a radical-left fight.  
FB: If  the emergence of  populism, as well as extremism implies a form of  mythological problem at the level of  
identity, what is the identity problem that France is facing right now that has produced such a rise of  populism? And 
is this crisis related to the broader crisis of  the European identity? 
RL: While the populism from the twenties and thirties was able to ground its claims about “the real 
people” on a very “solid” racial ideology, itself grounded on some kind of “science”, our modern 
form of populism is “liquid”, which is to say, grounded on a very volatile hatred of certain cultures. 
It is the notion of culture that has replaced, nowadays, the notion of race. It is the culture of certain 
people that has come to represent what race represented in the twenties. But this hatred of certain 
cultures, far from being stable, is on the contrary very versatile. It keeps changing. When it comes to 
the “marriage pour tous”, for example, traditionalist Catholics can protest in the street alongside 
traditionalist Muslims. But the exact same Catholics could be protesting against those same Muslims 
on the question of the veil. This is why our contemporary populism is so versatile. The object of its 
hatred can vary according to places and time. It is a populism that hides its racism under the idea 
that certain cultures—like the one of Islam—is incompatible with the French culture. It is also a 
populism that goes with the idea that the vast majority of people are hold in hostage by minorities 
that political institutions are protecting at the expense of the “betrayed” majority. The Muslims, 
under such form of populism, becomes thus the perfect new scapegoat. Muslims, indeed, are the 
historical enemies of the Catholic Church (and thus of the traditional French right), and they are, 
since the process of decolonization, the enemies of the inside—the ones that are putting at risk the 
French universalist and enlightened identity. Muslims are supposed to be, from a left-wing 
perspective, the enemies of democracy, freedom of expression, feminism, same sex marriage, etc. – 
even though some people can demonstrate that it is not true at all.   
This is also why our contemporary populism is so wide spread across the political board, and can be 
located in every political party. It is even present, for example, within the PS (socialist party) when 
someone like Manuel Valls pretends to speak up in the name of the people in order to go against a 
decision from the Supreme Court. Likewise, someone like Melenchon can be accused of populism 
when it comes to his analysis of European institutions, or when it has to do with his very loose use 
of the notion of globalization when it comes to account for everything that is not going well in 
France now. Even during the first debate that preceded the elections, it was very clear that only two 
kinds of candidates were facing each other: populists against liberals.  And I am using here the term 
liberal in the way in which it was used during the French Revolution, that is to say, as someone who 
defends freedom in every possible sense. Benoit Hamon is a good example of this, since true 
liberalism implies providing to people the right conditions under which freedom would become 
possible for them.  
FB: In order to make this opposition between populism and liberalism clearer, could you connect it to a pair of  
concepts that you have developed in one of  your books: the opposition between differentialism, and relativism. What 
are the definitions of  those terms, and to which extent would you agree that the populist is differentialist when it comes 
to culture, while the liberal is relativist?  
RL: This pair of concepts comes from an anthropological school named “diffusionism” (Trans-
Cultural Diffusion”). The differentialist position is defined by the idea that there is an unbridgeable 
gap, a radical difference between cultures. The thesis defended by Huntington in The Clash of  
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
Civilizations is grounded on such an idea. Civilizations represent different cultures that are not 
comparable, since they did not go through the same stages of development, and that they don't 
share the same history. It is what I call, a form of zoology of culture that appreciates the other only 
if he/she remains in their own environment. This position is comparable to the one of an 
ethnologist who would be studying and admiring the culture of the Bonobo, and who would be 
horrified to simply imagine his daughter marrying one of them. This vision of culture is what have 
nourished the discourse of the classic right for the past thirty years, and it is of course what is 
supporting the position of a current populist like Marine Le Pen who can say: I am not a racist, I 
like Muslims, and the Muslim culture, but only when this culture stays in its own territory. To be a 
relativist, on the contrary, is to accept and welcome different cultures on your own territory as long 
as they don't directly affect the freedom of everyone. The relativist accepts differences in the name 
of what he or she shares with others. In other words, for a relativist, as long as one respects in 
others their humanity, which is to say their physical and moral integrity, then any cultural differences 
are acceptable.  
Now, if one wants to make the difference between the two positions clearer, one only need to take 
the example of the veil, and of excision. In the case of “excision” a differentialist would remain 
indifferent, and say that “excision” is fine, as long as it is not practiced outside its own culture. On 
the contrary, a relativist would oppose “excision”, in any culture, in the name of humanity, i.e. to 
oppose the attack on the integrity of the person that such a practice implies. So while the 
differentialist is a zoologist of culture who pretends not to be racist, the relativist is a universalist 
who tries to protect the freedom of every man in every culture. If one takes now the example of the 
veil, things are getting even clearer. For the differentialist, even if the veil is not directly a threat to its 
own freedom, the veil has nonetheless to be opposed since its very presence within the boundary of 
the territory of France is a threat to the integrity of the French culture and identity. For the 
relativist, on the contrary, the veil is not a problem as long as it is a practice that does not threat its 
own freedom, or the freedom of the one who is wearing it.  
FB: To remain on the theme of  the veil, could you explain to us how Marine Le Pen managed to make of  the notion 
of  laicity, which is a deeply “relativist” notion, one of  the main themes of  her “differentialist” campaign? 
RL: It is true that the notion of laicity is, at first, deeply “relativist”. It is the product of a liberal and 
universalist stand on culture. It has been made to protect the freedom of everyone. The first article 
of the 1905 law on laicity is the guarantee of the freedom of religion. As such, the state has the duty 
to guarantee the freedom of religion of everyone, and to pay for the construction of churches if 
necessary. In the case of recent immigration, the state has the duty to make sure that any minority 
can practice its own religion. It is a question of fraternity. And this fraternity is important because it 
is what guarantees the possibility of equality, and through equality the possibility of freedom. At the 
exact opposite of such an idea, Marine Le Pen made of laicity an instrument at the service of a 
hygienist politics, a politics that targets unwelcome identities, which is to say, identities that are 
threatening the integrity of the French one. In a way, one could say that Marine Le Pen emptied out 
the notion of laicity of all of its content in order to make of it a part of the French heritage. A kind 
of relic.  
But this appropriation of laicity by Marine Le Pen was made possible by François Barouin, that is to 
say, by the right-wing politician who is currently leading the legislative campaign for UMP. François 
Barouin is the author of the 2003 law called the “new laicity”. This law argues that laicity is not the 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
pure product of the universal declaration of human rights, but can be opposed to it sometimes. In 
other words, the law on the “new laicity” was the law that opened up a differentialist interpretation 
of what was supposed to guarantee a relativist position. Laicity became, since then in France, an 
instrument to fight against communitarianism, that is to say, an instrument to fight any form of 
cultures or minorities that could be a threat to the integrity of the French identity. There is no need, 
any longer, to prove that a culture is actually threatening the physical or moral integrity of a person 
to oppose it in the name of laicity. It is only enough to underline the fact that a culture is different 
from the French one in order to make of it a real threat that deserves to be opposed. And it is 
Barouin's law that is responsible, at an institutional level, for this complete reversal of what laicity 
was supposed to be. It is what I call a laicity of exception. A laicity for a time of crisis. A laicity that 
fits the agenda of the populist who thinks that its national identity is under so much pressure that 
there is no more time to hear the defense, to pay attention to human rights. In other words, since 
2003, and all the more today with Marine Le Pen, laicity has become an instrument that is being 
used against the notion of human rights, while it was originally created to protect them and 
guarantee their enforcement.  
FB: This new interpretation of  laicity, as a laicity of  exception, is also very much aligned with another important 
feature of  populism that you have isolated: the hatred of  political institutions. Indeed, the populist, since he or she is 
pretending to speak in the name of  the people, does not need to respect the institutions that are normally made to 
represent the complexity of  a nation. Quite on the contrary, just like with the “new laicity”, the populist thinks that 
political institutions, just like the declaration of  human rights in the case of  the “new laicity”, is not what is supposed 
to be defended, but what needs to be bypassed.  
RL: Absolutely. The populist has the belief that he or she is emotionally connected with the people 
that he or she is speaking in the name of. The populist pretends to feel the people, while institutions 
are supposed to represent people, that is to say, to be removed from any emotional ties. This is why 
the populist can say that institutions are betraying the people, that they are the “system” that is 
responsible for what has happened to them. When Manuel Valls was Secretary of Defense, for 
example, and that he opposed the decision of the Supreme Court in the name of his community of 
feeling with the rest of the French people, he acted as a populist who thought that one of the most 
important French institutions could be bypassed in the name of a supposedly shared emotion. He 
even said that a new law should be made to oppose the decision of the Supreme Court. This is a 
typical populist move. To be in a position of power granted by the institutions, while pretending not 
to be a part of it in order to be able to voice directly the opinion of the people. It is ironic. The 
populist, just like Trump, is always at the heart of the system and benefiting from it, and pretending, 
in order to be able to denounce it, not to be a part of it. The populist attacks the very heart of our 
institutions—the constitution, that is to say, what has been created to defend society against the 
arbitrary actions of collective emotions. For example, let's imagine that a majority of French people, 
for whatever emotional reason, would have agreed on the position that one has to measure at least 
five feet eight inches in order to be a French diplomate, the constitution would be here to remind us 
that such a law is actually against the values contained in the Universal Declaration of the Human 
Right, and thus, un-constitutional. This is why also the only kind of institution that a populist can 
tolerate is the referendum, since the referendum has the function of validating a collective emotion. 
The referendum is the ultimate weapon to bypass all the other institutions, and to do it in the name 
of the people.  
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
FB: This populist attack on institutions, which goes hand in hand with an emphasis placed on emotion, is also what 
can explain the populist hatred of  the figure of  the intellectual. For the populist, reason and complex analysis has to 
be seen as what is being used by intellectuals to betray the real people. But if  it is so, how do you understand the 
victory of  Emmanuel Macron during the last presidential elections in France? What pushed French people to choose 
an intellectual and a liberal for their president, and not a populist such as Marine Le Pen?  
RL: Before answering the second part of the question, I think it is important to keep in mind the 
basic structure of what I call the populist scene. This scene is composed of four protagonists. The 
first one is “the real people”, that is to say, the people that think that they have been betrayed by the 
system. The second one is the “false people”, that is to say all the minorities that are threatening 
from the inside the integrity of the “real people”. The third one is the ally of the “false people”. 
This third protagonist has the character of the traitor, the one who is fighting for the rights of 
minorities within the system. It is, for example, the character of the intellectual. And opposed to it is 
the fourth protagonist that I call the tragic hero. The tragic hero is the ally of the “real people.” In 
this sense, it can be a journalist, like Eric Zemmour, or a politician, like Marine Le Pen or Donald 
Trump. It is a character who pretends to represent the interests of the “real people.” It is thus a 
scene where two opposite visions of existence are opposed. On the one hand, we have the side of 
the “real people” and their tragic hero. It is a side where something has been lost—the real French 
identity—and where life has become a desperate fight for a lost cause. And on the other, we have 
the side of the “false people” and the traitors of the system—the side of those who have chosen 
the corruption of neo-culture, that have chosen to abandon the authentic French culture, to allow it 
to be lost. 
This is why one can judge populist political platform inconsistent. But it would be a mistake to judge 
populism that way. The only consistence that a populist has is the defense of what has been lost. It 
is at the specific level, I think, that one can understand why Emmanuel has been elected in France. 
The populist line is a protectionist line. Populism protects people against globalization, against 
Islam, against terrorism, against everything that seems like a threat to the “real people”. And 
populists are heard when a country is traversing an existential crisis, when a country can no longer 
hold up the narcissistic image it had of itself. In the face of this emotion, and its populist response, 
Emmanuel Macron and his movement En marche!, has been the only truly liberal answer. Of course, 
prior to En marche!, there were people in the Socialist party, or in the Republican party, that were 
opposed to the populist trend, but they were divided and thus inoperative. Before the constitution 
of En marche!, most of those people were still opposed to one another in the name of older partisan 
divisions, while they were sharing an essential part—their opposition to populism. Emmanuel 
Macron has been the one who enabled them to start working together. Before him, liberals from the 
right were afraid to be called progressive, because it would have associate them with the left, and the 
liberals from the left were afraid to be called liberal, because it would have associate them with the 
right. And it is thanks to Emmanuel Macron and his movement en En Marche! that it has become 
possible to be fully a liberal in France, that is to say, to be progressive and liberal. This is the real 
genius of Macron. To have made possible this alliance between the progressive force of the left, and 
the liberal force of the right. And it is thanks to this alliance that Macron has been able to impose 
his positive reading on the current situation. Reversing every source of anxiety of the populists, 
Macron and his movement has been able to substitute for the tragic emotion that was dominating 
the beginning of the election, a sense of hope. He managed to refocus the debate on what was really 
at stake—our freedom of speech, our freedom of expression, in other words, all the values of 
liberalism.  
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
I could perhaps now mention three other reasons that have helped the election of Macron. The first 
one is, of course, the scandal that happened to François Fillon, who otherwise would have been 
elected on the program that was half populist, half liberal. And there are also two external reasons, 
Trump's election, and the Brixit. Contrary to what one might be tempted to think, the Brixit did not 
reinforce populism in France but played against it. The Brixit was the actual realization of all the 
populist dreams in the rest of Europe. But the actualization of the dream through the Brixit actually 
showed to the rest of Europe how bad and ineffective this dream was. Europe, which was taken as 
one of the scapegoats of the populist movement turned out to be not so evil. Even more so, the 
very idea of Europe—which has been a completely negative idea since the past ten or twenty years
—became positive again thanks to the Brixit (since England is facing economic difficulties, and 
impulses of independence from Ireland and Scotland). Melenchon, for example, or Marine Le Pen, 
who were both against Europe at the beginning of their campaign, sensed that they had to change 
their position on Europe if they wanted to win. Europe became, once again, the source of a positive 
narrative for the French people. Likewise, Trump’s election had a negative impact on French 
populism. His election was felt as a traumatic event that has destabilized the very idea that a French 
populist had of America. Instead of seeing in America the symbol of capitalism, it became a 
potential model without truly being one. The French populist could no longer be anti-American the 
way they used to be. It also showed to people how terrible and disastrous it is to have a populist 
elected at the head of a powerful country like the United States. It scared them. It showed them how 
inefficient and dangerous it is.  
FB: How do you imagine the effect that the victory of  Macron and his movement En Marche! will have on the 
French political scene? 
RL: I hope that Macron will not be overwhelmed by his victory, and that he will not fall back onto 
older partisan logic. I hope he will be able to maintain his highly specific position that has enabled 
him to win. What might happen is that once Macron is  in place, all the differences that his election 
were permitted to transcend will reappear. Each decision that will have to be taken might become 
the occasion to rediscover differences between progressives from the left and liberals from the right, 
and thus generate future divisions.  
FB: Talking about divisions, we have not yet talked about what happened to the Socialist Party, and the extreme left 
during these past elections. While Macron generated a form of  implosion of  the socialist party, by provoking a 
division between the people who decided to support Benoit Hamon, and those who decided to join En marche!, and 
those who, calling for an even more radical change, decided to join Melenchon. As a result, the left ended up divided in 
at least three strong candidates.  
RL: The case of Melenchon is interesting. If Melenchon has been capable of gathering so many 
people, it is because he is not afraid to be a populist sometimes. This is why he is not so radical and 
can speak to a part of the population that does not belong to the radical left, but which does feel 
protected by Melenchon when it comes to protectionism, equality, and health care. Of course, those 
electors are looking for the same things in Melenchon's program as the electors of Marine Le Pen, 
except that they are not as racist as them. This is why, also, I believe that Melenchon mostly gained 
electors from the left, i.e. electors who would have voted for a populist like Manuel Valls, and who 
did not recognize themselves in a liberal candidate like Hamon. Consequently, one could say that 
Hamon has been the victim of Melenchon, as well as the victim of Macron. Melenchon stole from 
Hamon the socialist vote, and Macron the liberal vote. Hamon became, thus, a kind secondary 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
choice. Not left enough for those who recognized themselves in Melenchon, and not liberal enough 
for those who recognized themselves in Macron. The idea of a “guaranteed income” which I defend 
also in my own way, is a good example of that. It is an idea that transcends the classical division 
between left and right, and that can be hard to hear for certain voters who are still reasoning with 
economic categories of the past. In addition, one could also argue that Hamon became the perfect 
symbol of the system and its failure.   
FB: To end this interview, could you summarize, for us, the solutions that you have been developing in your last book 
Sans emploi to all the political and economical problems that we have been discussing so far?  
RL: Throughout this interview, we have been talking, mostly, about Europe and the United States. 
But we should have talked about industrially advanced societies, since it is in those countries, that is 
to say the richest countries, that populism is on the rise. Those countries, although they are the 
richest, have the feeling that something is going wrong at a symbolic level, and thus at the level of 
their identity. There is something happening in those countries that is even more radical that what 
was happening during the thirties in Europe. It is not only an economic or a social change, but it is a 
deep transformation of our relationship to the world, and to ourselves, and which related to the 
appearance of a new system that has not yet been fully taken into account. There is a new way to 
live in the world that is emerging, and that has not yet been fully understood and acknowledged. 
This new way of living is visible on the internet, and is being broadcast all over the planet through 
many apps and websites. And this new way of living, which is only accessible to a few, is producing a 
lot of effects all over the planet. And these effects, most of the time, are negative. Most of them are 
feeding the “populist equation” inasmuch as this new way of living is exhibiting in the obscenest 
way the absolute wealth  which a tiny part of the population enjoys, while the rest arecondemned to 
watch it from afar.    
There exist three kinds of goods and services. There are the goods and services of the first level, 
that are required to survive. Those goods and services were the basis of what was valued during the 
Paleolithic. Beyond those, there are the goods and services of the second level, which are related to 
what I call a “desire to live”. It is, in a sense, what could be called objective luxury, which is to say, a 
form a luxury that one can do without, but that do increase objectively the amount of pleasure or 
happiness that one can achieve in a life time. This second level is related to the creation of large 
civilization. And then there is the “desire to be”, which was there from the start, but that was almost 
never allowed to be expressed. The “desire to be” is the desire to tell something positive about one's 
own existence, the desire to be able to narrate one's own life beyond the common narrative that are 
usually imposed on one's life. Unfortunately, this “desire to be” could not be lived by most of the 
population up to now. Work, thus, became the ultimate ideology that was supposed to bring meaning 
to one's life – while the true liberation from work was not yet possible. This is why the notion of 
work, during the past two centuries, has been slowly separated from slavery through a series of laws 
that could guarantee the independence of the worker, and perhaps even more, the independence of 
the “citoyen” (citizen)—that is to say, the independence of a worker who would not be owned by 
their employer. In the course of this change, work became a value in itself, and laziness the source 
of all evils (while it was certainly not the case in paganism, and neither in Judaism where it is work 
that is seen as the curse). The ideas of idleness, which was a positive idea related to one’s 
contemplation or intellectual work got reduced to the one of laziness, and the one of laziness with 
the one of the devil. Consequently, the idea of work in the sense of a work of art got confused with 
the notion of work as labor. And thus, when people say that they need to work, what they say is that 
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

!
they need to give meaning to their life through the production of a “work”, and not that they need 
to labor as slaves. While the notion of work as labor is what enslave people and deprive their life of 
any meaning, the notion of work as a creation is what can express people's “desire to be”.   
But today, we have entered a new phase within our economic development. And this new phase, 
which is clearly a phase of “abundance” (a phase where things get produced in large number with 
almost no labor force), could enable every worker to reclaim its “desire to be”. Unfortunately, our 
society is still functioning within the coordinates of the former stage of economy, that is to say, a 
stage of scarcity. Consequently, we are witnessing the paradoxical situation where our modern 
economies have never produced so many goods, while the system of redistribution of these goods 
is still mapped onto a former stage of scarcity. This is why work is still being protected as a value in 
itself. But it is a mistake. And the mistake comes from the fact that we still don't know how to 
redistribute the wealth that is being produced. To me, the problem is to find the proper way to 
redistribute the wealth while maintaining the motivation of each individual, i.e. while maintaining his 
or her “desire to be” as high as possible.   The idea is to maintain a form of competition, but only at 
the level of the “desire to be”, and not at the two prior levels (at the level “survival”, and the level 
of the “desire to live”). What is important is to create the right conditions of this “ultimate” 
competition at the level of the “desire to be”. Against the neo-liberals, who pretend to be for the 
competition at the level of work, while maintaining all sorts of inherited privilege that make such 
competition a fraud, I want, as a liberal, to create a real condition of equality at the two prior levels 
in order to have a real and fair competition at the level of “desire”. This is why I am advocating for 
the creation of a “guaranteed income” that would create the proper condition for such a 
competition. What is at stake, for me, is the liberation of the creative potential of everyone. While 
today, most young people are ashamed because they don't have a job, and in the worst case scenario, 
humiliated to the point of sometimes becoming terrorists, the installation of a “guaranteed income” 
could not only free them from such a shame, but also liberate their creative potential . Likewise, all 
the people who suffer from “burnout”, are actually suffering from the fact that they cannot create 
out of the job they have a narrative that can fit their own “desire to be”. In my mind, it is the whole 
ideology around work that needs to evolve, and with it, the whole legislation around work too. We 
have to start imagining a world where everyone could be creative, where everyone could develop 
their “desire to be”. Such a society would not be a society of laziness (for laziness is the expression 
of depression), but a society of creative idleness where what is being taxed is mostly the capital, that 
is to say, the machines, as well as the consumption. But not work per se. Likewise, it is the whole 
idea of private property and accumulation of wealth that needs to change. Instead of this outdated 
vision of private property, we should start to think about new forms of collective property where 
each one could integrate in his or her narrative the objects that they need to have and use at a certain 
moment. What needs to be changed is thus not the idea of property, but the fiction of an exclusive 
property. It is at that level that we could reverse the populist equation.  
New York, May 23rd 2017.
https://www.europenowjournal.org/2017/11/06/on-populism-liberalism-and-the-future-of-the-
left-an-interview-with-raphael-liogier/

