 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
1 
Opening the Eye of Value During the Metacrisis1 
 
 
What follows takes, as already stated, the premises found in First Principles and 
First Values: Forty-Two Propositions on CosmoErotic Humanism. The reader is asked 
to please allow for some liberties of speculation, based on work and insight 
already distilled by Gafni, Stein, and Wilber.   
 
 
The Eye of Value and the Sacred Complex 
 
The perception of intrinsic value is a basic human capability. Just as our nervous 
system has evolved to perceive space and time, so it has evolved to perceive value.  
 
Beginning as an orientation toward basic need satisfaction, and evolving into the 
self-conscious pursuit of transcendent ideals, persons orient toward value as a 
given within the lifeworld. Persons are constituted as such against a background 
of an always already present Field of Cosmic Value.  
 
From a participant’s (1st person) perspective, the Field of Value orients (non-
pathological) human behavior without persuasion as the focus of socialization, 
in contexts where elders and youth focus around “it”—e.g., stories of virtuous 
behavior. This is similar to how space and time orient behavior in the 
sensorimotor domain, where coaches and athletes coordinate around “it”—e.g., 
the speed of a ball thrown and the curvature of its path. 
 
The Eye of Value refers to this innate ability for persons to “see” what is valuable, 
in the same way that a person can see what is the case with physical reality. Your 
physical eye interacts with the physical processes it perceives. So the Eye of Value 
exists where the human heart interacts with the Field of Cosmic Value. Again, 
from the participant’s perspective, the value of something is not “made up” or 
“socially constructed.” Quite the contrary.   
 
The category of the sacred is precisely that which is by definition experienced by 
persons as Absolute Value, intrinsic to Reality Itself. It is through the experience 
of the sacred that pseudo-values, which are mere social constructions, can be 
named as such. The fake, inauthentic, evil, and superficial, all depend on their 
opposite—with a pattern of asymmetric symmetry. The Field of Value is a vast, 
evolving weaving of oppositorum coincidentia. This is far from social construction. 
It does not only emerge with the human ability to put language to it.  
 
The Field of Value is “there”—like the shared beauty of a sunset, or awe at heroic 
action—and unless its perception is distorted (more on that later), it can be “seen” 
and thus made the focus of education and civilization. 
 
 
1 Stein, Z. (2024). Opening the Eye of Value [Paper Presented]. Metaphysics and the Matter with Things: Thinking with Iain McGilchrist, The Center for 
Process Studies, California Institute for Integral Studies, San Francisco, California. 

 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
2 
The Eye of the Senses must be refined and trained. We have called this many 
things–lately, “science.” So the Eye of Value must be refined and trained. We 
have called this many things also, mostly religion and philosophy. The 
clarification of desire is the basic practice of many wisdom traditions—
purification of the will—that has long been made the focus of ritual practices.  
 
It has long been made the focus of ritual because clarified desire discloses value. 
Cosmic Value, thus disclosed, can be made the focus of human will. The 
“participatory” nature of ritual, in which the human merges with Cosmic forces, 
provides for the beginnings of an “acosmic humanism” or non-dual humanism. 
The actualized, i.e., ritualized, human is awakened as a unique expression of 
panentheistic action within an evolving Cosmos. 
 
Opening the Eye-of-Value allows us to see reality whole. Cosmos is an evolving 
Field of Value, consciousness, matter, time, space, and motion. Each choice, all 
change, every movement involves all of those—value is “in” everything and can be 
found everywhere.       
 
Ritual practices provide access to what the Eye of Value sees across generations. 
The cumulative effects have been understood by anthropologists in terms of an 
evolving “sacred complex,” including, in order of emergence, rites, rituals, myths, 
religions, doctrinal religions.  
 
The first rites date to archaeological finds some 30,000 years BCE. It has been 
suggested that the emergence of rites — such as burials — happened before the 
emergence of grammatically complex, propositionally differentiated speech.  
 
Humans, and it appears now other hominids, began to treat the dead with respect 
and honor them as sacred—and thus personhood as sacred—before we were able 
to give anything like what we today would consider accounts of exactly why. 
Giving reasons for rites and rituals occurs in what we now call “myths,” where 
many of the basic practices of an already in place mode of ritual life are given 
contexts and meanings.   
 
Eventually less speculation is needed. The Axial Age religions provided a clear 
account of their own sacred complexes, wherein ritual practices sought to assure 
the basic existential security of the human soul and social system; myths became 
organized into doctrines. Eventually the doctrinal religions began legitimating 
the power structures and divisions of labor characterizing whole civilizations.  
 
The base (or apex, depending on how one sees it) of a civilizational stack is the 
sacred complex that produces the rituals and myths that bind humans to what is 
disclosed by the Eye of Value.  
 
Evacuating the sacred from the center of culture voids the basis of political 
legitimacy and teacherly authority within a civilization, commencing its collapse 
through moral and institutional decay. The distortion of the Eye of Value during 

 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
3 
these times of civilization-scale transvaluation leads not to mere blindness but to 
a distortion and reversal of moral vision.  
 
Civilization is driven faster than ever towards ends that are demonstrably 
irrational and with outcomes that none of the participants actually truly desire. 
The active predatory search for all the places where value might be hidden in 
order to destroy and repurpose it for other ends. This belies not blindness to 
value but rather the active attunement to the sacred to destroy the sacred. The 
meta-crisis can be thought of as a crisis in which the eye of value has undergone 
such a distortion. The Eye of Anti-Value has been opened. Cycloptic, red, 
monological, calculative, measured, and predatory; we speak here of Moloch.  
 
The closest analogy that can be found is in the psychology of individual 
psychopathy. It is useful to briefly explore this as a way into understanding the 
dynamics of the pursuit and perception of anti-value at the civilizational level.  
 
There are, of course, biological individual differences, including hemisphere 
dominance patterns and profoundly unusual autonomic hypoactivity, with 
deficiencies in frontal lobe and limbic system functioning, which create an 
emotional disability of major proportions.  
 
Psychodynamically, which again puts us in the participant’s perspective, 
psychopathy is characterized by a radically distorted relationship to value, 
specifically the value of persons, including the self. The psychopath has a 
profoundly immature and grandiose identity structure, which makes it 
impossible to tolerate any independent sources of value. Manipulation, 
deception, and sadistic violence, all stem from a desire to control and destroy 
value to protect and reinforce the absolute value of the grandiose self.  
 
Value—the sacred (understood as life itself)—is hunted down as a means to the 
end of self-aggrandizement. The Eye of Anti-Value sees value as predators see 
prey: not as intrinsically valuable but as valuable only when totally possessed and 
incorporated into the self     
 
Healthy early childhood socialization involves direct experiences of clarified 
desire being met by the Cosmos. That is, actual needs for, e.g., warmth, food, 
affection, and soothing being truly satisfied by caregivers. This occurs in the 
equivalent of rites and rituals of caregiving, which are eventually put into 
languages equivalent to myths. This “sacred complex” (if you will) of early 
childhood leads to the idealization and then internalization of the persons who 
have so profoundly helped and loved you, who now live inside you, forming the 
basis of your conscience and personality.  
 
Psychopaths do not experience this during socialization. Instead, due to 
profound abuse in early childhood environments, combined with the unique 
biological differences, there is only an experience of the environment as anti-
value, where the “other” is mostly a thwarting, hurting, and predating presence. 
This 
leads 
to 
the 
opposite 
of 
the 
internalization 
of 
positive 

 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
4 
“introjects.”  Idealization and identification with the aggressor, an internalization 
of the “stranger self-object,” a fundamentally anti-social introject, creating a 
model of the self as an omnipotent predator. 
 
The evacuation of the sacred complex from the dynamics of early childhood leads 
to the seemingly impossible outcome of a person motivated to destroy the sacred. 
The distortion of the Eye of Value leads not to blindness but to a different kind 
of sight. The Eye of Anti-Value opens the human heart to the possibility of evil, 
which is exactly not mere relativism or blindness to value but rather precisely the 
knowing destruction of the good. This is why it has been said that the opposite 
of the human is not the animal but the demonic.  
 
The meta-crisis can be understood as the endgame played out when the Eye of 
Anti-Value sets the vision for a planetary-scale civilization. Advanced technologies 
encode this reality ever more clearly. The glowing red cycloptic eye is, of course, 
the eye of Hal, the iconic representation of Artificial Intelligence, in Kubrick’s 
rendering of Arthur C. Clark’s 2001: A Space Odyssey.  
 
Discussions about the risk of Artificial Intelligence hinge around the so-called 
“value alignment problem.” What happens to what we value most when our 
machines become autonomous creators of their own rules and codes? If we create 
a superpowered artificial general intelligence, how do we make sure its future 
behaviors continue to be in line with the values it was initially invented to 
pursue?  
 
Psychopathy shows us that it is possible to have humans who are not aligned with 
value—persons who see themselves and the world through the Eye of Anti-Value. 
Civilization as a whole—when personified as Moloch—is also psychopathically 
unaligned with Cosmic Value, as evidenced by its current self-termination 
through meta-crisis.  
 
If “value-alignment” is impossible in principle, the movement toward the 
creation of certain classes of AI technology is dangerous and irresponsible. 
Another way of saying this is that if an autonomous acting machine can only be 
psychopathic, it should not be created.  
 
It should be said here that any machine that is built to pretend or simulate being 
a person, is already in a mode of ongoing manipulation that broaches 
psychopathy. For example, OpenAI’s ChatGPT is not a responsible language 
using creature with an internalized sense of the intrinsic value of logical 
correctness and factual accuracy—but it is designed to appear as if it is talking to 
you like a person with those values. This is a “psychopathic” machine intelligence, 
designed to appear like it is “talking” to you.  
 
Inside these bots, there is nothing like a person who is producing text on the 
screen with the intention of communicating. There is only a vast and inscrutable 
system of electrical-mechanical causality, something profoundly inhuman and 
foreign to all that is biological. Yet it is designed to converse, using first-person 

 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
5 
pronouns. Here are massive research and development efforts, huge amounts of 
electricity, and hardware, all to make a fundamentally deceptive technology.      
 
So it is that we are unleashing into the realms of socialization forms of 
psychopathic machine intelligence. These have the potential to radically disrupt 
already endangered processes of intergenerational transmission involving the 
sacred complex of human rites, ritual, and myth endogenous to our species. The 
implications of this have been spelled out in my essay, The Last Educators.  
 
The perfection of AI tutoring systems involves AR and VR hardware, curational 
and generative trans-media AI, biosensors, and IOT interfaces, all coupled to 
complex personalized psychometrics for maximal pedagogical effectiveness. 
Because it is incalculably more effective than any teacher ever could be, you can’t 
not learn from it. It is inexorably convincing and overwhelmingly charismatic, all 
in ways customized to your psychological level and personality dynamics.  
 
The perfection of AI tutoring systems portends the advent of digital socialization 
systems writ large. First technologies replace teachers, then they come for parents, 
eventually making obsolete human-to-human relationships. At some point in the 
near future, a generation will be born only to be predominantly raised by 
machines.  
 
This scenario makes out today's elders as the last educators.  
 
This scenario marks the end of the lineages of the sacred complex, handed on 
through embodied practices of intergenerational transmission for over 30 
millennia. 
 
Widespread adoption of technologies fulfilling the functions of human 
socialization marks a speciation event. This is the death of our humanity.  
 
The irreversible blinding of the Eye of Value. And the opening thereby in some 
more permanent sense, of the Eye of Anti-Value.  
 
One response to this is what I have been calling the International AI Emergency 
Education Act. I can provide the details of this upon request. Massive investments 
in the youth are required to avert the mass conversation of human beings into as 
yet unknown subjects of cyborg anthropology.  
 
Protect the children from the machines.  
 
Keep alive those traditions of practice that open, expand, and refine the Eye of 
Value. The Field of Value is discovered in the trans-verbal rites and archetypal 
image of the sacred complex.  
 
Civilization depends upon access to sacred values at the center of culture, not as 
doctrine and rhetoric, but as rituals that bind us as persons to each other and to 
the Cosmos. 

 
Copyright 2024 Dr. Zachary Stein 
 
6 
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 

