Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical 
Science Trends and Challenges for Future Research
National Materials and Manufacturing Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Optics and Photonics
Essential Technologies for Our Nation

THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
500 Fifth Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy 
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of 
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard 
for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract No. ECCS-1041156 between the National Academy of Sciences 
and the National Science Foundation, and by the following awards: #N66001-10-1-4052 from DARPA-
DSO; #N66001-11-1-4091 from DARPA-MTO; #60NANB10D266 from NIST; #W911NF-10-1-0488 
from ARO; #DE-DT0002194,TO#16 from DOE-EERE; and #DE-SC0005899 from DOE-BES, as well 
as support from SPIE, OSA, and the NRC. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-26377-1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-26377-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012954592
This report is available in limited quantities from:
National Materials and Manufacturing Board
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
nmmb@nas.edu
http://www.nationalacademies.edu/nmmb
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, 
Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America

The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished 
scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 
the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on 
scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National 
Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its 
administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences 
the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure 
the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters 
pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National 
Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg 
is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to as-
sociate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy’s purposes of furthering 
knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies 
determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. 
Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org


v
COMMITTEE ON HARNESSING LIGHT: CAPITALIZING ON OPTICAL 
SCIENCE TRENDS AND CHALLENGES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
PAUL McMANAMON, Exciting Technology, LLC, Co-Chair
ALAN E. WILLNER, University of Southern California, Co-Chair
ROD C. ALFERNESS, NAE,1 Alcatel-Lucent (retired), University of California, 
Santa Barbara
THOMAS M. BAER, Stanford University
JOSEPH BUCK, Boulder Nonlinear Systems, Inc.
MILTON M.T. CHANG, Incubic Management, LLC
CONSTANCE CHANG-HASNAIN, University of California, Berkeley
CHARLES M. FALCO, University of Arizona
ERICA R.H. FUCHS, Carnegie Mellon University
WAGUIH S. ISHAK, Corning Incorporated
PREM KUMAR, Northwestern University
DAVID A.B. MILLER, NAS,2 NAE, Stanford University
DUNCAN T. MOORE, NAE, University of Rochester
DAVID C. MOWERY, University of California, Berkeley
N. DARIUS SANKEY, Intellectual Ventures
EDWARD WHITE, Edward White Consulting
Staff
DENNIS CHAMOT, Acting Director, National Materials and Manufacturing 
Board
ERIK B. SVEDBERG, Study Director
HEATHER LOZOWSKI, Financial Associate
RICKY D. WASHINGTON, Administrative Coordinator (until August 2012)
MARIA L. DAHLBERG, Program Associate (until August 2012)
ANN F. LARROW, Program Associate (effective August 2012)
LAURA TOTH, Senior Program Assistant (until February 2012)
PAUL BEATON, Program Officer, STEP3 (October through December 2011)
CAREY CHEN, Christine Mirzayan Science and Technology Policy Fellow, STEP 
(October through December 2011)
1  NAE, National Academy of Engineering.
2  NAS, National Academy of Sciences.
3  STEP, Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy.

vi
NATIONAL MATERIALS AND MANUFACTURING BOARD
ROBERT H. LATIFF, R. Latiff Associates, Alexandria, Virginia, Chair
DENISE F. SWINK, Independent Consultant, Germantown, Maryland, 
Vice Chair
PETER R. BRIDENBAUGH, NAE,1 ALCOA (retired), Boca Raton, Florida
VALERIE M. BROWNING, ValTech Solutions, LLC, Port Tobacco, Maryland
YET-MING CHIANG, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
PAUL CITRON, NAE, Medtronic, Inc. (retired), Minnetonka, Minnestota
GEORGE T. (RUSTY) GRAY II, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
New Mexico
CAROL A. HANDWERKER, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
THOMAS S. HARTWICK, Independent Consultant, Snohomish, Washington
SUNDARESAN JAYARAMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
DAVID W. JOHNSON, JR., NAE, Stevens Institute of Technology, Bedminster, 
New Jersey
THOMAS KING, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee
MICHAEL F. McGRATH, Analytic Services, Inc., Arlington, Virginia
NABIL NASR, Golisano Institute for Sustainability, Rochester, New York
PAUL S. PEERCY, NAE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
ROBERT C. PFAHL, JR., International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative, 
Herndon, Virginia
VINCENT J. RUSSO, Aerospace Technologies Associates, LLC, Dayton, Ohio
KENNETH H. SANDHAGE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
ROBERT E. SCHAFRIK, GE Aviation, Cincinnati, Ohio
HAYDN WADLEY, University of Virginia, Charlottesville
STEVEN WAX, Independent Consultant, Reston, Virginia
Staff
DENNIS CHAMOT, Acting Director
ERIK B. SVEDBERG, Senior Program Officer
RICKY D. WASHINGTON, Administrative Coordinator (until August 2012)
HEATHER LOZOWSKI, Financial Associate
MARIA L. DAHLBERG, Program Associate (until August 2012)
ANN F. LARROW, Program Associate (effective August 2012)
LAURA TOTH, Senior Program Assistant (until February 2012)
1  NAE, National Academy of Engineering.

vii
Preface
The National Research Council (NRC) undertook the writing of a study on op-
tics and photonics in 1988 (Photonics: Maintaining Competitiveness in the Informa-
tion Era)1 and then again in 1998 (Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering 
for the 21st Century).2 Now, after 14 years of dramatic technical advances and eco-
nomic impact, another study is needed to help guide the nation’s strategic thinking 
in this area. Since 1998 many other countries have developed their own strategic 
documents and organizations in the area of optics and photonics, and many have 
cited the U.S. NRC’s 1998 Harnessing Light study as instrumental in influencing 
their thinking. The present study, Optics and Photonics: Essential Technologies for 
Our Nation, discusses impacts of the broad field of optics and photonics and makes 
recommendations for actions and research of strategic benefit to the United States.
To conduct the study, the NRC established the Committee on Harnessing Light: 
Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Challenges for Future Research, a di-
verse group of academic and corporate experts from across many disciplines critical 
to optical science and engineering, including materials science, communications, 
quantum optics, linear and nonlinear optical elements, semiconductor physics, 
device fabrication, biology, manufacturing, economic policy, and venture capital. 
The statement of task for this study (given in full in Appendix A) is as follows:
1  National Research Council. 1988. Photonics: Maintaining Competitiveness in the Information Era. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

viii
P r e f a c e
1.	 Review updates in the state of the science that have taken place since pub-
lication of the National Research Council report Harnessing Light;
2.	 Identify the technological opportunities that have arisen from recent ad-
vances in and potential applications of optical science and engineering;
3.	 Assess the current state of optical science and engineering in the United 
States and abroad, including trends in private and public research, market 
needs, examples of translating progress in photonics innovation into com-
petitiveness advantage (including activities by small businesses), workforce 
needs, manufacturing infrastructure, and the impact of photonics on the 
national economy;
4.	 Prioritize a set of research grand-challenge questions to fill identified tech-
nological gaps in pursuit of national needs and national competitiveness;
5.	 Recommend actions for the development and maintenance of global lead-
ership in the photonics-driven industry—including both near-term and 
long-range goals, likely participants, and responsible agents of change.
It became apparent from the outset that various funding agencies and profes-
sional societies that deal with optics and photonics felt a keen need for the NRC 
to provide an authoritative vision of the field’s future. If the field is indeed a key 
enabling technology that will help drive significant economic growth, then such a 
study should attempt to make recommendations that can be used to help policy 
makers and decision makers capitalize on optics and photonics. It was in this spirit 
that the committee conducted this study.
Several factors, including the following, made the committee’s task a challeng-
ing one:
1.	 The field of optics and photonics is extremely broad in terms of the technical 
science and engineering topics that it encompasses.
2.	 The field impacts many different market segments, such as energy, medicine, 
defense, and communications, but as an enabling technology it is not always 
highlighted in available data about these areas.
3.	 The field has expanded greatly beyond the United States, such that many 
other countries have invested heavily in research and development and 
manufacturing.
Additionally, the area of optics and photonics is typically subsumed as an 
enabling technology under the heading of other disciplines (e.g., electrical engi-
neering, physics). Therefore, it was challenging to gather data specific to optics 
and photonics in terms of workforce and economic impact. For example, optics 
enables common DVD players, but is the economic impact to be gauged by the 

ix
P r e f a c e
value of the whole DVD player or just the inexpensive yet high-performance laser 
that makes the whole system work properly? Similarly, how do we place a value on 
the fact that the society-transforming Internet could not have grown at such a fast 
pace, or achieved even close to its current level of performance, without low-loss 
optical fiber, which by itself is not particularly expensive? The committee grappled 
with many such questions.
In the course of the study, the committee observed that exciting progress has 
been made in the field and believes that the future holds much promise. A small 
anecdotal indication in the popular press of the breadth and depth of the field is 
that roughly 12 of the 50 best inventions of 2011 listed by Time magazine had optics 
as a key technological part of the invention.3
Our entire community owes its sincerest gratitude to the generous sponsors of 
the study, which include the Army Research Office, the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, the Department of Energy, the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, the National Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the 
Optical Society of America, and the International Society for Optics and Photon-
ics (SPIE). Each sponsor was critical to enabling the study to proceed with the 
necessary resources, and key champion(s) in each of these organizations stepped 
forward at a crucial time to help out. We also wish to thank the many individuals 
who helped the committee accomplish its task, including the workshop speakers 
and study reviewers, and we are extremely grateful to have worked with outstand-
ing committee members.
It was with a deep sense of appreciation that the committee was able to rely on 
the dedication, professionalism, insight, and good cheer of the NRC staff, primar-
ily Dennis Chamot, Maria Dahlberg, Erik Svedberg, Laura Toth, and Ricky Wash-
ington. As the manager of the study, Erik has been a superb and tireless partner, 
whose keen perspective was invaluable. The committee also extends its thanks to 
Stephen Merrill, executive director of the National Academies’ Board on Science, 
Technology, and Economic Policy, for engaging his staff during the latter part of 
this study, especially Paul Beaton, program officer, and Carey Chen, Christine 
Mirzayan Science and Technology Policy Fellow. In addition, the committee would 
like to thank Kathie Bailey-Mathae, director of the Board on International Scientific 
Organizations, for critically helping with the preliminary groundwork leading up 
to the start of the study.
We sincerely hope that readers of this study find some perspectives that will 
3  Grossman, L., M. Thompson, J. Kluger, A. Park, B. Walsh, C. Suddath, E. Dodds, K. Webley, N. 
Rawlings, F. Sun, C. Brock-Abraham, and N. Carbone. 2011. Top 50 Inventions. Time. Available at 
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2099708,00.html. Accessed October 16, 2012.

x
P r e f a c e
help guide future actions, whether such readers are congressional staffers, funding 
agencies, corporate chief technology officers, or high school students.
Paul McManamon and Alan E. Willner, Co-Chairs
Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on
Optical Science Trends and Challenges for Future Research

xi
Acknowledgments
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) Report Review Committee. The 
purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that 
will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to 
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
William B. Bridges (NAS/NAE), California Institute of Technology,
Elsa Garmire (NAE), California Institute of Technology,
James S. Harris (NAE), Stanford University,
Thomas S. Hartwick, Hughes Aircraft Company,
Eric G. Johnson, Clemson University,
Stephen M. Lane, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
E. Phillip Muntz (NAE), University of Southern California, and
Thomas E. Romesser (NAE), Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com-
ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or rec-
ommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. 
The review of this report was overseen by Peter Banks (NAE), Red Planet Capital 

xii
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
Partners. Appointed by the NRC, he was responsible for making certain that an 
independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with in-
stitutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. 
Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring 
committee and the institution.
The committee also thanks those who were guest speakers at its meetings and 
who added to the committee members’ understanding of optics and photonics 
and related issues:
John Ambroseo, Coherent Inc.,
Eugene Arthurs, SPIE,
John Dexheimer, LightWave Advisors, Inc.,
Ed Dowski, Ascentia Imaging,
Julie Eng, Finisar,
Michael Gerhold, U.S. Army Research Office,
Larry Goldberg, National Science Foundation,
Matthew Goodman, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
Linda Horton, Department of Energy,
Kristina Johnson, Consultant,
Christian Jörgens, German Embassy,
Bikash Koley, Google,
Prem Kumar, CLEO,
Minh Le, Department of Energy,
Donn Lee, Facebook,
Robert Leheny, Institute for Defense Analyses,
Frederick J. Leonberger, Eovation Advisors, LLC,
Tingye Li, AT&T Consultant,
Aydogan Ozcan, University of California, Los Angeles,
Mario Paniccia, INTEL,
Kent Rochford, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Joseph Schmitt, Cardiovascular Division, St. Jude Medical,
Jag Shah, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
Bruce J. Tromberg, University of California, Irvine,
Usha Varshney, National Science Foundation, and
Paul Wehrenberg, Consultant.

xiii
Contents
SUMMARY		
1
1	
INTRODUCTION	
13
	
Motivation for This Study, 15
	
Enabling Technology, 16
	
Economic Issues, 17
	
Global Perspective, 18
	
Importance of Education, 18
	
Progress for the Future, 19
2	
IMPACT OF PHOTONICS ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY	
20
	
Introduction, 20
	
The Economics of Photonics: A Case Study of Lasers, 21
	
	
The Economic Impact of the Laser, 22
	
	
Funding of Early Laser Development, 23
	
	
The Early Laser Market, 24
	
	
International Comparison, 25
	
	
Conclusions from the Laser Case Study, 27
	
Estimating the Economic Impact of Photonics—Industry Revenues, 
	
	
	
Employment, and R&D Investment in the United States, 28
	
Government and Industrial Sources of R&D Funding in Photonics and 
	
	
	
Federal Funding of Optics, 32

xiv
C o n t e n t s
	
Changes in Photonics-based Innovations in the United States  
	
	
	
Since 1980, 37
	
Venture Capital in Optics, 43
	
Markets for Technology, Intellectual Property, and U.S. University 
	
	
	
Technology Licensing, 50
	
Models of Collaborative R&D and Implications for Photonics  
	
	
	
Innovation, 52
	
	
Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology (SEMATECH), 54
	
	
Optoelectronics Industry Development Association (OIDA), 56
	
	
National Nanotechnology Initiative, 59
	
Summary Comments, 60
	
	
Proposed National Photonics Initiative, 61
	
Findings, 62
	
Recommendations, 63
3	
COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND  
DATA STORAGE	
64
	
Introduction, 64
	
	
Communications, 65
	
	
Information Processing, 69
	
	
Data Storage, 72
	
Impact Example: The Internet, 73
	
Technical Advances, 75
	
	
Communications, 75
	
	
Networking, 85
	
	
R&D Example Areas, 87
	
	
Information Processing, 88
	
	
Data Storage, 91
	
Manufacturing, 92
	
	
Communications, 92
	
	
Information Processing, 93
	
	
Data Storage, 94
	
Economic Impact, 94
	
	
Comparison Between the United States and the Rest of  
	
	
	
the World, 96
	
Findings and Conclusions, 97
	
Recommendations and Grand Challenge Questions, 99
4	
DEFENSE AND NATIONAL SECURITY	
102
	
Introduction, 102
	
Optics and Photonics: Impact on Defense Systems, 104

xv
C o n t e n t s
	
Technology Overview, 104
	
	
Changes Since the Harnessing Light Study, 105
	
	
Identification of Technological Opportunities from Recent  
	
	
	
Advances, 108
	
Manufacturing, 121
	
U.S. Global Position, 122
	
Findings and Conclusions, 124
	
Recommendation and Grand Challenge Questions, 126
5	
ENERGY	
127
	
Introduction, 127
	
Solar Power, 130
	
	
Photovoltaic Systems, 133
	
	
Concentrated Solar Power Systems, 142
	
	
Hybrid Systems, 147
	
	
LCOE Outlook for Solar Power Compared to Other Current and 
	
	
	
Possible Future Fuel Sources, 148
	
Solid-State Lighting, 150
	
Findings, 159
	
Recommendations and Grand Challenge Question, 160
6	
HEALTH AND MEDICINE	
163
	
Introduction, 163
	
Historical Overview of the Impact of Technology on Medicine, 164
	
Optics and Photonics in Medical Practice Today, 166
	
Advances in Technology Providing the Opportunity for New 
	
	
	
Applications of Photonics, 168
	
Advances in Technology Providing the Opportunity for Future 
	
	
	
Applications of Photonics, 169
	
	
Nucleic Acid Sequence Detection and Mutation Detection, 169
	
	
Proteomic Analysis Through Protein and Tissue Arrays, 171
	
	
High-Throughput Screening, 171
	
	
Flow Cytometry Mass Spectrometry, 174
	
	
Ophthalmology, 174
	
	
Image-Guided Surgery, 176
	
	
Dual Energy CT and Quantitative Image Analysis, 178
	
	
Biomedical Optics in Regenerative Medicine, 180
	
	
Biomedical Optics in Research, 180
	
Findings, 181
	
Recommendations, 183

xvi
C o n t e n t s
7	
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING	
185
	
Introduction, 185
	
Production and Innovation in Photonics Technologies: 
	
	
	
Three Case Studies, 186
	
	
Displays, 186
	
	
Solar Cells, 189
	
	
Optoelectronic Components for Communications Systems, 194
	
	
Similarities and Differences Among the Three Cases, 200
	
Advanced Manufacturing in Optics, 202
	
	
Optical Surfaces, 203
	
	
Aspherical Lenses, 204
	
	
Fabrication Processes and Equipment, 204
	
Applications of Photonics in Manufacturing, 205
	
	
Photolithography, 206
	
	
Lasers in Manufacturing, 211
	
Additive Manufacturing, 212
	
	
Stereolithography, 214
	
	
Selective Laser Sintering, 215
	
	
Laser Engineered Net Shaping, 217
	
Photonics and the Future of U.S. Manufacturing, 219
	
	
High-Volume Products, 220
	
	
Low-Volume Products, 221
	
The U.S. Manufacturing Workforce, 221
	
Findings, 223
	
Recommendations and Grand Challenge Question, 224
8	
ADVANCED PHOTONIC MEASUREMENTS AND APPLICATIONS	
226
	
Introduction, 226
	
Impact of Optics and Photonics on Sensing, Imaging, and Metrology, 227
	
Technology Overview, 230
	
Changes Since Harnessing Light, 232
	
	
Changes in SI Definitions, 232
	
	
Development of Attosecond Pulse Trains by Means of the 
	
	
	
Generation of High Harmonics, 233
	
	
Table-top Availability of Extreme Intensities by Means of 
	
	
	
Chirped-Pulse Amplification, 234
	
	
Nano-optics and Plasmonics, Negative-Index Materials, and 
	
	
	
Transformation Optics, 235
	
	
Advances in Controlled Generation of Quantum Light States 
	
	
	
and Their Manipulation and Detection, 236

xvii
C o n t e n t s
	
	
High-Resolution Remote Sensing with Optical Synthetic 
	
	
	
Aperture Radar, 239
	
	
Advances in Adaptive Optical Techniques, 239
	
	
Identification of Technological Opportunities from  
	
	
	
Recent Advances, 239
	
	
Manufacturing, 244
	
U.S. Global Position, 244
	
Findings, 245
	
Recommendations and Grand Challenge Question, 246
9	
STRATEGIC MATERIALS FOR OPTICS	
248
	
Introduction, 248
	
Energy Applications, 249
	
Novel Structures: Sub-Wavelength Optics, Metamaterials, and 
	
	
	
Photonic Crystals, 250
	
Technology Challenges of Nanostructured Materials, 254
	
Optical Materials in the Life Sciences and Synthetic Biology, 257
	
Findings, 258
	
Recommendations, 259
10	 DISPLAYS	
260
	
Introduction, 260
	
The Near Future, 262
	
Overview of Displays, 263
	
	
Liquid-Crystal Displays, 263
	
	
Touch Displays, 264
	
	
OLED Displays, 267
	
	
Flexible Displays, 268
	
	
Projection Displays, 269
	
	
Three-Dimensional Holographic Displays, 269
	
Display Product Manufacturing, 272
	
Findings, 272
	
Recommendations, 272
APPENDIXES
A	 Statement of Task, with Introductory Information	
277
B	
Acronyms and Abbreviations	
280
C	 Additional Technology Examples	
288
D	 Biographies of Committee Members	
331


1
Summary
Optics and photonics technologies are central to modern life; indeed, UNESCO 
has recently adopted a resolution declaring 2015 to be the International Year of 
Light.1 These technologies enable the manufacture and inspection of all the inte-
grated circuits in every electronic device in use.2 They give us displays on our smart-
phones and computing devices, optical fiber that carries the information in the 
Internet, advanced precision fabrication, and medical diagnostics tools. ­Optics and 
photonics technology offers the potential for even greater societal ­impact over the 
next few decades. Solar power generation and new efficient lighting, for example, 
could transform the energy landscape, and new optical capabilities will be essential 
to supporting the continued exponential growth of the Internet. ­Optics and pho-
tonics technology development and applications have substantially increased across 
the globe over the past several years. This is an encouraging trend for the world’s 
economy and its people, while at the same time posing a challenge to U.S. leader-
ship in these areas. As described in this study conducted by the ­National Research 
Council’s (NRC’s) Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science 
Trends and Challenges for Future Research, it is critical that the United States take 
advantage of these emerging optical technologies for creating new industries and 
generating job growth.
1   For more information, see http://www.eps.org/news/106324/.
2   For example, photolithography is used to create most of the layers in integrated circuits, and 
cameras inspect the quality afterward.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
2
Each chapter of the present report addresses the developments that have taken 
place over the 15 years since the publication of the NRC report Harnessing Light: 
Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century,3 technological opportunities 
that have arisen since then, and the state of the art in the United States and abroad, 
and recommendations are offered for how to maintain U.S. global leadership.
It is the committee’s hope that this study will help policy makers and leaders 
decide on courses of action that can advance the economy of the United States, 
provide visionary guidance and support for the future development of optics and 
photonics technology and applications, and ensure a leadership role for the United 
States in these areas. Although many unknowns exist in the course of pursuing 
basic optical science and its transition to engineering and ultimately to products, 
the rewards can be great. Researchers have achieved some dramatic advances. For 
example, work in optics and photonics has now provided clocks so stable that they 
will slip less than 1 second in more than 100 million years. Much more primitive 
clocks enabled the incredibly useful Global Positioning System (GPS), and it re-
mains to be discovered how these new clock advances can be fully harnessed for 
the benefit of society. In many ways, the current period might be analogous to the 
dawn of the laser in 1960, when many of the transforming applications of that 
extraordinary invention had not yet been contemplated. This is only one example 
of technology innovation in optics and photonics that can lead to future major 
applications.
GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTIONS TO FILL TECHNOLOGICAL GAPS
To fill identified technological gaps in pursuit of national needs and na-
tional competitiveness, the committee developed five overarching grand challenge 
questions:
1.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community invent technologies for 
the next factor-of-100 cost-effective capacity increases in optical networks?
As mentioned in Chapter 3, it is not currently known how to achieve this goal, 
but the world has experienced a factor-of-100 cost-effective capacity increase every 
decade thus far, and user demand for this growth is anticipated to continue. Un-
fortunately, the mechanisms that have enabled the previous gains cannot sustain 
further increases at that high rate, and so the world will either see increases in 
capability stagnate or will have to invent new technologies.
3  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

3
S u m m a r y
2.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community develop a seamless inte-
gration of photonics and electronics components as a mainstream platform 
for low-cost fabrication and packaging of systems on a chip for communica-
tions, sensing, medical, energy, and defense applications?
In concert with meeting the fifth grand challenge, achieving this grand chal-
lenge would make it possible to stay on a Moore’s law-like path of exponential 
performance growth. The seamless integration of optics and photonics at the 
chip level has the potential to significantly increase speed and capacity for many 
applications that currently use only electronics, or that integrate electronics and 
photonics at a larger component level. Chip-level integration will reduce weight 
and increase speed while reducing cost, thus opening up a large set of future pos-
sibilities as devices become further miniaturized.
3.	 How can the U.S. military develop the required optical technologies to sup-
port platforms capable of wide-area surveillance, object identification and 
improved image resolution, high-bandwidth free-space communication, 
laser strike, and defense against missiles?
Optics and photonics technologies used synergistically for a laser strike fighter 
or a high-altitude platform can provide comprehensive knowledge over an area, the 
communications links to download that information, an ability to strike targets at 
the speed of light, and the ability to robustly defend against missile attack. Clearly 
this technological opportunity could act as a focal point for several of the areas in 
optics and photonics (such as camera development, high-powered lasers, free-space 
communication, and many more) in which the United States must be a leader in 
order to maintain national security.
4.	 How can U.S. energy stakeholders achieve cost parity across the nation’s 
electric grid for solar power versus new fossil-fuel-powered electric plants 
by the year 2020?
The impact on U.S. and world economies from being able to answer this 
question would be substantial. Imagine what could be done with a renewable 
energy source, with minimal environmental impact, that is more cost-effective 
than nonrenewable alternatives. Although this is an ambitious goal, the commit-
tee poses it as a grand challenge question, something requiring an extra effort to 
achieve. Today, it is not known how to achieve this cost parity with current solar 
cell technologies.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
4
5.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community develop optical sources 
and imaging tools to support an order of magnitude or more of increased 
resolution in manufacturing?
Meeting this grand challenge could facilitate a decrease in design rules for 
lithography, as well as providing the ability to do closed-loop, automated manufac-
turing of optical elements in three dimensions. Extreme ultraviolet (EUV) is a chal-
lenging technology to develop, but it is needed in order to meet future lithography 
needs. The next step beyond EUV is to move to soft x rays. Also, the limitations 
in three-dimensional resolution on laser sintering for three-dimensional manu-
facturing are based on the wavelength of the lasers used. Shorter wavelengths will 
move the state of the art to allow more precise additive manufacturing that could 
eventually lead to three-dimensional printing of optical elements.
The committee believes that these five grand challenges are the top priorities in 
their respective application areas, and that because of their diverse nature, further 
prioritization among them is not advisable. These grand challenge questions are 
discussed in the main text immediately after the first key recommendation that 
supports the challenge and are drawn from the findings and recommendations 
throughout the report. They are discussed in the chapter in which they first appear, 
and occasionally in succeeding chapters.
REPORT CONTENT AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
This report is divided into chapters based on application areas, with crosscut-
ting chapters addressing the impact of photonics on the national economy, ad-
vanced manufacturing, and strategic materials. Following an introductory Chapter 
1, Chapter 2 discusses the impacts of photonics technologies on the U.S. economy.
Chapters 3 through 10 each cover a particular area of technological applica-
tion. As mentioned, the discussion of each application area typically begins with 
a review of updates in the state of the science since the publication of the NRC’s 
report Harnessing Light, as well as the technological opportunities that have arisen 
from recent advances in and potential applications of optical science and engineer-
ing. Included are recommended actions for the development and maintenance of 
global leadership in the photonics-driven industry, including both near-term and 
long-range goals, likely participants, and responsible agents of change. As relevant 
to their respective topics, the chapters assess the current state of optical science 
and engineering in the United States and abroad, including trends in private and 
public research, market needs, examples of translating progress in photonics inno-
vation into global competitive advantage (including activities by small businesses), 
workforce needs, manufacturing infrastructure, and the impact of photonics on 
the national economy.

5
S u m m a r y
Following is a chapter-by-chapter overview of the content of Chapters 2 
through 10, including the key recommendations from each.
Chapter 2: Impact of Photonics on the National Economy
Chapter 2 considers the economic impact of optics and photonics on the na-
tion and the world. This chapter uses a case study of lasers to discuss the conceptual 
challenges of developing estimates of the economic impact of photonics innova-
tion. It also addresses the problems associated with using company-level data to 
provide indicators of the economic significance of the “photonics sector” within 
the U.S. economy. Additionally, this chapter discusses the ways in which the chang-
ing structure of the innovation process within photonics reflects broader shifts in 
the sources of innovation within the U.S. economy. The chapter also considers the 
results of recent experiments in public-private and inter-firm research and devel-
opment (R&D) collaboration in other high-technology areas for the photonics 
sector. Possibly the most important finding of the committee in this area is related 
to the pervasive nature of optics and photonics as an enabling technology.
Key Recommendation: The committee recommends that the federal govern-
ment develop an integrated initiative in photonics (similar in many respects 
to the National Nanotechnology Initiative) that seeks to bring together aca-
demic, industrial, and government researchers, managers, and policy makers to 
develop a more integrated approach to managing industrial and government 
photonics R&D spending and related investments.
This recommendation is based on the committee’s judgment that the photonics 
field is experiencing rapid technical progress and rapidly expanding applications 
that span a growing range of technologies, markets, and industries. Indeed, in spite 
of the maturity of some of the constituent elements of photonics (e.g., optics), 
the committee believes that the field as a whole is likely to experience a period of 
growth in opportunities and applications that more nearly resembles what might 
be expected of a vibrantly young technology. But the sheer breadth of these ap-
plications and technologies has impeded the formulation by both government 
and industry of coherent strategies for technology development and deployment.
A national photonics initiative would identify critical technical priorities for 
long-term federal R&D funding. In addition to offering a basis for coordinating 
federal spending across agencies, such an initiative could provide matching funds 
for industry-led research consortia (of users, producers, and material and equip-
ment suppliers) focused on specific applications, such as those described in Chap-
ter 3 of this report. In light of near-term pressures to limit the growth of or even 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
6
reduce federal R&D spending, the committee believes that a coordinated initiative 
in photonics is especially important.
The committee assesses as deplorable the state of data collection and analysis of 
photonics R&D spending, photonics employment, and sales. The development of 
better historical and current data collection and analysis is another task for which 
a national photonics initiative is well suited.
Key Recommendation: The committee recommends that the proposed na-
tional photonics initiative spearhead a collaborative effort to improve the 
collection and reporting of R&D and economic data on the optics and pho-
tonics sector, including the development of a set of North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS) codes that cover photonics; the collection of 
data on employment, output, and privately funded R&D in photonics; and the 
reporting of federal photonics-related R&D investment for all federal agencies 
and programs.
It is essential that an initiative such as the proposed national photonics initia-
tive be supported by coordinated measurement of the inputs and outputs in the 
sector such that national policy in the area can be informed by the technical and 
economic realities on the ground in the nation.
Chapter 3: Communications, Information Processing, and Data Storage
Chapter 3 considers communications, information processing, and data stor-
age. The Internet’s growth has fundamentally changed how business is done and 
how people interact. Photonics has been a key enabler allowing this communica-
tion revolution to occur. The committee anticipates that this revolution will con-
tinue, with additional demands driving significant increases in bandwidth and an 
even heavier reliance on the Internet. So far there has been a factor-of-100 increase 
in capacity each decade. However, there exists a technology wall inhibiting achieve-
ment of the next factor-of-100 growth.
Key Recommendation: The U.S. government and private industry, in combi-
nation with academia, need to invent technologies for the next factor-of-100 
cost-effective capacity increase in long-haul, metropolitan, and local-area opti-
cal networks.
The optics and photonics community needs to inform funding agencies, and 
information and entertainment providers, about the looming roadblock that will 
interfere with meeting the growing needs for network capacity and flexibility. There 

7
S u m m a r y
is a need to champion collaborative efforts, including consortia of companies, to 
find new technology—transmission, amplification, and switching—to carry and 
route at least another factor-of-100 capacity in information over the next 10 years.
Key Recommendation: The U.S. government, and specifically the Department 
of Defense (DOD), should strive toward harmonizing optics with silicon-based 
electronics to provide a new, readily accessible and usable, integrated electronics 
and optics platform.
They should also support and sustain U.S. technology transition toward low-
cost, high-volume circuits and systems that utilize the best of optics and electronics 
in order to enable integrated systems to seamlessly provide solutions in commu-
nications, information processing, biomedical, sensing, defense, and security ap-
plications. Government funding agencies, the Department of Defense, and possibly 
a consortium of companies requiring these technologies should work together to 
implement this recommendation. This technology is one approach to assist in 
accomplishing the first key recommendation in Chapter 3 concerning the factor-
of-100 increase in Internet capability.
Key Recommendation: The U.S. government and private industry should 
position the United States as a leader in the optical technology for the global 
data center business.
Optical connections within and between data centers will be increasingly 
important in allowing data centers to scale in capacity. The committee believes 
that strong partnering between users, content providers, and network providers, 
as well as between businesses, government, and university researchers, is needed 
for ensuring that the necessary optical technology is generated, which will support 
continued U.S. leadership in the data center business.
Chapter 4: Defense and National Security
In Chapter 4, the committee discusses defense and national security. It is be-
coming increasingly clear that sensor systems are the next “battleground” for domi-
nance in intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. Comprehensive knowledge 
across an area will be a great defense advantage, along with the ability to commu-
nicate information at high bandwidths and from mobile platforms. Laser weapon 
attack can provide a significant advantage to U.S. forces. Defense against missile 
attacks, especially ballistic missiles, is another significant security need. Optical 
systems can provide synergistic capability in all these areas.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
8
Key Recommendation: The U.S. defense and intelligence agencies should fund 
the development of optical technologies to support future optical systems 
capable of wide-area surveillance, exquisite long-range object identification, 
high-bandwidth free-space laser communication, “speed-of-light” laser strike, 
and defense against both missile seekers and ballistic missiles. Practical applica-
tion for these purposes would require the deployment of low-cost platforms 
supporting long dwell times.
These combined functions will leverage the advances that have been made in 
high-powered lasers, multi-function sensors, optical aperture scaling, and algo-
rithms that exploit new sensor capabilities, by bringing the developments together 
synergistically. These areas have been pursued primarily as separate technical fields, 
but it is recommended that they be pursued together to gain synergy. One method 
of maintaining this coordination could include reviewing the coordination efforts 
among agencies on a regular basis.
Chapter 5: Energy
Chapter 5 deals with optics and photonics in the energy area. Both the gen-
eration of energy and the efficient use of energy are discussed in terms of critical 
national needs. Photonics can provide renewable solar energy, while solid-state 
lighting can help reduce the overall need for energy used for lighting.
Key Recommendation: The Department of Energy (DOE) should develop a 
plan for grid parity across the United States by 2020.
“Grid parity” is defined here as the situation in which any power source is no 
more expensive to use than power from the electric grid. Solar power electric plants 
should be as cheap, without subsidies, as alternatives. It is understood that this will 
be more difficult in New England than in the southwestern United States, but the 
DOE should strive for grid parity in both locations.
Even though significant progress is being made toward reducing the cost of 
solar energy, it is important that the United States bring the cost of solar energy 
down to the price of other current alternatives without subsidy and maintains a 
significant U.S. role in developing and manufacturing solar energy alternatives. 
There is a need not only for affordable renewable energy but also for creating jobs 
in the United States. A focus in this area can contribute to both. Lowering the cost 
of solar cell technology will involve both technology and manufacturing advances.
Solid-state lighting can also contribute to energy security in the United States.

9
S u m m a r y
Key Recommendation: The DOE should strongly encourage the development 
of highly efficient light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for general-purpose lighting 
and other applications.
For example, the DOE could move aggressively toward its 21st-century light-
bulb, with greater than 150 lm/W, a color rendering index greater than 90, and a 
color temperature of approximately 2800 K. Since one major company has already 
published results meeting the technical requirements for the 21st-century lightbulb, 
the DOE should consider releasing this competition in 2012. Major progress is be-
ing made in solid-state lighting, which has such advantages over current lighting 
alternatives as less wasted heat generation and fast turn-on time. The United States 
needs to exploit the current expertise in solid-state lighting to bring this technology 
to maturity and to market.
Chapter 6: Health and Medicine
Chapter 6 discusses the application of optics and photonics to health and 
medicine. Photonics plays a major role in many health-related areas. Medical im-
aging, which is widely used and is still a rapidly developing area, is key to many 
health-related needs, both for gaining understanding of the status of a patient and 
for guiding and implementing corrective procedures. Lasers are used in various 
corrective procedures in addition to those for the eye. There is still great potential 
for further application of optics and photonics in medicine.
Key Recommendation: The U.S. optics and photonics community should 
develop new instrumentation to allow simultaneous measurement of all 
­immune-system cell types in a blood sample. Many health issues could be ad-
dressed by an improved knowledge of the immune system, which represents 
one of the major areas requiring better understanding.
Key Recommendation: New approaches, or dramatic improvements in exist-
ing methods and instruments, should be developed by industry and academia 
to increase the rate at which new pharmaceuticals can be safely developed 
and proved effective. Developing these approaches will require investment 
by the government and the private sector in optical methods integrated with 
high-speed sample-handling robotics, methods for evaluating the molecular 
makeup of microscopic samples, and increased sensitivity and specificity for 
detecting antibodies, enzymes, and important cell phenotypes.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
10
Chapter 7: Advanced Manufacturing
Chapter 7 addresses the field of advanced manufacturing and the way in which 
it relates to optics and photonics. Advanced manufacturing is critical for the eco-
nomic well-being of the United States. While there are issues concerning the ability 
of the United States to compete successfully in high-volume, low-cost manufac-
turing, it is likely that the United States can continue to be a strong competitor in 
lower-volume, high-end manufacturing. Additive manufacturing has the potential 
to allow the production of parts near the end user no matter where the design is 
done. Thus, if the end user is in the United States, it is there that the printing or 
manufacturing would occur. Optical approaches, such as laser sintering, are very 
important approaches to three-dimensional printing.
Key Recommendation: The United States should aggressively develop additive 
manufacturing technology and implementation.
Current developments in the area of lower-volume, high-end manufacturing 
include, for example, three-dimensional printing, also called additive manufactur-
ing. With continued improvements in the tolerance and surface finish, additive 
manufacturing has the potential for substantial growth. The technology also has 
the potential to allow three-dimensional printing near the end user no matter 
where the design is done.
Key Recommendation: The U.S. government, in concert with industry and 
academia, should develop soft x-ray light sources and imaging for lithography 
and three-dimensional manufacturing.
Advances in table-top sources for soft x rays will have a profound impact on 
lithography and optically based manufacturing. Therefore, investment in these 
fields should increase to capture intellectual property and maintain a leadership 
role for these applications.
Chapter 8: Advanced Photonic Measurements and Applications
Chapter 8 discusses sensing, imaging, and metrology in relation to optics and 
photonics. Sensing, imaging, and metrology have made significant progress since 
the publication of the NRC’s Harnessing Light in 1998.4 Notable developments in-
clude having at least one Nobel Prize awarded for developing dramatic increases in 
4  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

11
S u m m a r y
the precision of time measurement.5 Single-photon detectors have been developed, 
but at this time they are only available with a dead time after detection, not allowing 
single-photon sensitivity for detecting all incoming photons. Extreme nonlinear 
optics has made significant progress, providing the potential for soft x-ray sources 
and imaging. Entangled photons and squeezed states are new areas for R&D in the 
optics and photonics field, allowing sensing options never previously considered.
Key Recommendation: The United States should develop the technology for 
generating light beams whose photonic structure has been prearranged to yield 
better performance in applications than is possible with ordinary laser light.
Prearranged photonic structures in this context include generation of light with 
specified quantum states in a given spatiotemporal region, such as squeezed states 
with greater than 20-dB measured squeezing in one field quadrature, Fock states 
of more than 10 photons, and states of one and only one photon or two and only 
two entangled photons with greater than 99 percent probability. These capabilities 
should be developed with the capacity to detect light with over 99 percent efficiency 
and with photon-number resolution in various bands of the optical spectrum. 
The developed devices should operate at room temperature and be compatible 
with speeds prevalent in state-of-the-art sensing, imaging, and metrology systems. 
U.S. funding agencies should give high priority to funding research and develop-
ment—at universities and in national laboratories where such research is carried 
out—in this fundamental field to position the U.S. science and technology base at 
the forefront of applications development in sensing, imaging, and metrology. It is 
believed that this field, if successfully developed, can transfer significant technology 
to products for decades to come.
Key Recommendation: Small U.S. companies should be encouraged and sup-
ported by the government to address market opportunities for applying re-
search advances to niche markets while exploiting high-volume consumer 
components. These markets can lead to significant expansion of U.S.-based 
jobs while capitalizing on U.S.-based research.
Chapter 9: Strategic Materials for Optics
Chapter 9 deals with strategic materials for optics. The main developments 
in materials for optics and photonics are the emergence of metamaterials and the 
5  For example, the 2005 Nobel Prize in physics. More information can be found at http://www.
nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2005/. Accessed August 2, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
12
realization of how vulnerable the United States is to the need for certain critical 
materials. At this time, some of those materials are available only from China.
Recommendation: The U.S. R&D community should increase its leadership 
role in the development of nanostructured materials with designable and 
­tailorable optical material properties, as well as process control for uniformity 
of production of these materials.
Chapter 10: Displays
Chapter 10 addresses display technology. The major current display industry is 
based on technologies invented primarily in the United States, but this industry’s 
manufacturing operations are located mostly overseas. Labor costs were a con-
sideration, but other factors such as the availability of capital were significant in 
creating this situation. However, the United States is still dominant in many of the 
newer display technologies, and it still has an opportunity to maintain a presence 
in those newer markets as they develop.
Recommendation: U.S. private companies and the Department of Defense 
should ensure a leadership role by funding R&D related to new materials for 
flexible, low-power, holographic and three-dimensional display technologies.
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
In reviewing the technologies considered here, a number of potential future 
opportunities have come to light that allow one to imagine changes to daily life: 
for example, electronic imaging devices implantable in the eye which can restore 
sight to the blind; cost-effective, laser-based, three-dimensional desktop printing 
of many different types of objects; the generation, detection, and manipulation of 
single photons in the same way as is done with single electrons, and doing it all on 
a photonic integrated circuit; the use of optics as interconnects between integrated 
circuit chips, with dramatic increases in power efficiency and speed; the unfurl-
ing of a flexible display on a smartphone or the watching of holographic images 
at home; and the ability of mobile lasers to neutralize threats from afar with high 
accuracy and speed. These are just a few interesting examples of potential changes 
that can occur as a result of the enabling technologies considered in this study.

13
1
Introduction
Optics and photonics are technical enablers for many areas of the economy, and 
dramatic technical advances have had a major impact on daily life. For example, 
in the last decade, advances in optical fiber communications have permitted a 
nearly 100-fold increase in the amount of information that can be transmitted 
from place to place, enabling a society-transforming Internet to thrive. As noted in 
the introduction to Charles Kao’s 2009 Nobel Prize lecture on his work in optical 
fiber communications, “the work has fundamentally transformed the way we live 
our daily lives.”1 Indeed, optical fiber communications have enabled what Thomas 
Friedman has called a “flat world.”2 Without optics, the Internet as we know it 
would not exist.
The phrase “optics and photonics” is used throughout this study to capture 
light’s dual nature (1) as a propagating wave, like a radio wave, but with a fre-
quency that is now a million times higher than that of a radio wave; and (2) as a 
collection of traveling particles called photons, with potential as a transformative 
field similar in impact to electronics. Further proof that optics and photonics are 
technical enablers can be seen in the laser. A laser provides a source of light that 
can be (1) coherent, meaning that a group of photons can act as a single unit; and 
1  Kao, C.K. “Sand from Centuries Past: Send Future Voices Fast.” Nobel Lecture. 2009. Available at 
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2009/kao_lecture.pdf. Accessed July 30, 
2012.
2  Friedman, T.L. 2005. The World Is Flat. New York, N.Y.: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
14
(2) monochromatic, meaning that the photons can have a well-defined single color. 
Today we can see how these effects are used in many areas. With light:
·	 High amounts of energy can be precisely directed with low loss.
·	 Many different properties of waves (i.e., degrees of freedom such as am-
plitude, frequency, phase, polarization, and direction) can be accurately 
manipulated.
·	 Waves can be coherently processed to have high directionality, speed, and 
dynamic range.
BOX 1.1 
Optics, Electro-optics, Optoelectronics, and Photonics: 
Definitions and the Emergence of a Field
Optics—the science that deals with the generation and propagation of light—can be 
traced to 17th-century ideas of Descartes concerning transmission of light through the aether, 
Snell’s law of refraction, and Fermat’s principle of least time. These ideas were subsequently 
built upon through the 19th century by Hooke (interference of light and wave theory of light), 
Boyle (interference of light), Grimaldi (diffraction), Huygens (light polarization), Newton (cor-
puscular theory), Young (interference), Fresnel (diffraction), Rayleigh, Kirchhoff, and, of course, 
Maxwell (electromagnetic fields). The end of the 19th century marked the close of the era of 
classical optics and the start of quantum optics. In 1900, Max Planck’s introduction of energy 
quanta marked the first steps toward quantum theory and an early understanding of atoms and 
molecules. With the demonstration in 1960 of the first laser, many of the fundamental and 
seemingly disconnected principles of optics established by Einstein, Bose, Wood, and many 
others were focused and drawn together.
“Electro-optics” and “optoelectronics” are both terms describing subfields of optics in-
volving the interaction between light and electrical fields. Although John Kerr, who discovered 
in 1875 that the refractive index of materials changes in response to an electrical field, could 
arguably be regarded as the inaugurator of the field of electro-optics, the term “electro-optics” 
first gained popularity in the literature in the early 1960s. By 1964 authors from RAND could 
be found publishing from a group called the Electro-Optical Group. In 1965 the Quantum 
Electronics Council of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) was formed 
from IEEE’s Electronic Devices Group and Microwave Theory and Techniques Group; in 1977 
became an IEEE society; and in 1985 took the name Lasers and Electro-Optics Society, thus 
legitimizing the use of the name in the professional field.
The exact origins and limits of the term “optoelectronics” are difficult to pin down. Some 
claim that optoelectronics is a subfield of electro-optics involving the study and application of 
electronic devices that source, detect, and control light. Colloquially, the term “optoelectronics” 
is most commonly used to refer to the quantum mechanical effects of light on semiconductor 
materials, sometimes in the presence of an electrical field. Semiconductors started to assume 
serious importance in optics in 1953, when McKay and McAfee demonstrated electron mul-

15
I n t r o d u c t i o n
MOTIVATION FOR THIS STUDY
Although the fields of optics and photonics have developed gradually (Box 1.1), 
important changes have occurred over the past several years that merit study and 
related action:
1.	 The science and engineering of light have enabled dramatic technical 
advances.
2.	 Globalization of manufacturing and innovation has accelerated.
tiplication in silicon and germanium p-n junctions, and Neumann indicated separately in a 
letter to a colleague that that one could obtain radiation amplification by stimulated emission 
in semiconductors. Japan’s Optoelectronics Industry and Technology Development Association 
was established in 1980, and the U.S. counterpart is the Optoelectronics Industry Development 
Association.
As used in its present sense, the term “photonics” appeared as “la photonique” in a 1973 
article by French physicist Pierre Aigrain. The term began to be seen in print in English around 
1981 in press releases, annual reports of Bell Laboratories, and internal publications of Hughes 
Aircraft Corporation and in the more general press. In 1982, the trade magazine Optical Spectra 
changed its name to Photonics Spectra, and in 1995 the International Society for Optics and 
Photonics (SPIE) debuted Photonics West, arguably one of the largest conferences in optics 
and photonics. Sternberg defines “photonics” as the “engineering applications of light,” involv-
ing the use of light to detect, transmit, store, and process information; to capture and display 
images; and to generate energy. However, in the professional literature, “photonics” is used 
almost synonymously with the term “optics,” referring equally to both science and applications. 
The term “photonics” continues to gain popularity today. In 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
established the journal Nature Photonics, and in 2008 the Lasers and Electro-Optics Society 
became the IEEE Photonics Society.
SOURCES:
Brown, R.G.W., and E.R. Pike. 1995. A history of optical and optoelectronic physics in the 
twentieth century. In Twentieth Century Physics, Vol. III, L.M. Brown, A. Pais, and B. Pip-
pard, eds. Bristol, U.K., and Philadelphia, Pa.: Institute of Physics Publishing; New York, 
N.Y.: American Institute of Physics Press.
IEEE Global History Network. 2012. “IEEE Photonics Society History.” Available at http://www.
ieeeghn.org/wiki/index.php/IEEE_Photonics_Society_History. Accessed August 1, 2012.
Nature Publishing Group. 2006. “Nature Publishing Group Announces the Launch of Nature 
Photonics.” Available at http://www.nature.com/press_releases/Nature_Photonics_launch 
es.pdf. Accessed August 1, 2012. 
SPIE. 2011. “History of the Society.” Available at http://spie.org/x1160.xml. Accessed August 
3, 2012.
Sternberg, E. 1992. Photonic Technology and Industrial Policy: U.S. Responses to Technologi-
cal Change. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
16
3.	 Optics and photonics have become established as enabling technologies for 
a multitude of industries that are vital to our nation’s future.
Accordingly, the National Research Council’s Committee on Harnessing Light: 
Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Challenges for Future Research under-
took a new study to examine the current state of the art and economic impact of 
optics and photonics technologies, with an eye toward ensuring that optics and 
photonics continue to enable a vibrant and secure future for U.S. society.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY
Optics and photonics, an enabling technology with widespread impact, ex-
hibits the characteristics of a general-purpose technology, that is, a technology in 
which advances foster innovations across a broad spectrum of applications in a 
diverse array of economic sectors. Improvements in those sectors in turn increase 
the demand for the technology itself, which makes it worthwhile to invest further 
in improving the technology, thus sustaining growth for the economy as a whole. 
The transistor and integrated circuit are good examples of general-purpose tech-
nologies. The importance of photonics as an enabling technology since 1998 can 
be highlighted by a few examples:
·	 A cell phone can enable video chats and perform an Internet search, with 
optics and photonics playing a key part. The most obvious contribution of 
optics is the high-resolution display and the camera. In addition, the cell 
phone uses a wireless radio connection to a local cell tower, and the signal 
is converted to an optical data stream for transmission along a fiber-optic 
network. An Internet search conducted on the phone will be directed over 
these fibers to a data center, and in a given data center clusters of co-located 
computers talk to each other through high-capacity optical cables. There 
can be more than 1 million lasers involved in the signaling.
·	 People are surrounded by objects whose manufacture was enabled by highly 
accurate directed-energy light. For example, nearly every microprocessor 
has been fabricated using optical lithographic techniques, and in nearly 
all advanced manufacturing, high-power lasers are used for cutting and 
welding.
·	 Optics is rapidly changing medical imaging, making it possible not only to 
see with higher resolution inside the body but also to distinguish between 
subtle differences in biological material. Swallowed capsules can travel 
through the body and send images back to a doctor for diagnosis. Today, 
the relatively young field of optical coherence tomography has the poten-

17
I n t r o d u c t i o n
tial to save thousands of lives annually3 by providing dramatically better 
images for early detection of disease. Optical spectroscopic techniques can 
provide valuable information from blood and tissue samples that is critical 
in early detection and prevention of health problems, and eye, dental, and 
brain surgery now uses focused lasers for ablating, cutting, vaporizing, and 
suturing.
·	 In World War II, only a small fraction of the bombs dropped from airplanes 
hit their target. “Smart” bombs debuted in Vietnam. Although the Thanh 
Hoa Bridge withstood 871 sorties by conventional bombs and 11 U.S. planes 
were lost, the bridge was destroyed with four sorties and no losses the first 
time smart bombs were used. In Iraq and Afghanistan, smart bombs are the 
norm.4 The critical advance is accurate targeting using laser designators and 
laser-guided munitions. Moreover, situational awareness of the battlefield 
and of enemy terrain provides information for targeting. Imaging systems 
using LIDAR (light detection and ranging), such as HALOE, can provide 
wide-area three-dimensional imaging. Even wider-area passive sensors such 
as ARGUS-IS can provide highly detailed mapping of a country in days as 
opposed to months.
Additional examples of optics and photonics as enabling technologies are 
discussed in subsequent chapters and also in Appendix C.
ECONOMIC ISSUES
From an economic standpoint, an enabling technology like optics and photon-
ics tends to be commercialized outside the industry, and profits can be generated 
by companies that do not consider themselves a part of the photonics industry. 
These companies are more inclined to invest in previously validated applications 
for which photonics can but does not necessarily provide the sole technology so-
lution, rather than to invest in photonics in particular. Since 2000, the photonics 
industry has tended to receive little interest from the investment community and 
little financial analyst coverage, and start-up companies in photonics can have dif-
ficulty acquiring seed capital.5
However, a large fraction of the major companies in the United States rely on 
3  Center for Integration of Medicine and Innovative Technology. Capabilities brochure. Available 
at http://www.cimit.org/images/media_center/CapabilitiesBrochure.pdf. Accessed July 30, 2012.
4  Air University Review. 1987. “The Decisive Use of Air Power?” Available at http://www.airpower.
maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/aureview/1987/werrell.html. Accessed July 30, 2012.
5  This subject is addressed further in Chapter 2.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
18
photonics-enabled technologies to be competitive in the marketplace.6 To move 
forward in general, having an optics and photonics technology roadmap that 
focuses on meeting needs in specific market applications and that is synergistic 
with business and marketing trends could help to improve business development, 
profitability, and growth.
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE
In considering actions for global leadership in the photonics industry, the 
committee took note of several important points. For example, although many 
key optics and photonics innovations occurred in the United States, including in 
display and communications technologies, the multibillion-dollar display industry 
has moved mostly to Southeast Asia, with a negligible fraction of display produc-
tion remaining in the United States. Furthermore, whereas the United States for 
decades led the manufacture of telecommunications equipment, China went from 
having no company in 1998 in the top 10 largest telecommunications companies 
in the world to having three such companies in 2011. A similar scenario exists for 
Chinese companies that specialize in selling optical components and subsystems. 
By contrast, data centers continue to be located overwhelmingly in the United 
States, possibly because the United States has the most effective communications 
infrastructure at the moment.
A theme evident in several of the presentations made to the committee was that 
innovation will remain critical to ensuring a U.S. leadership position in optics and 
photonics. The United States has acclaimed educational institutions and a creative, 
entrepreneurial corporate spirit. According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of-
fice, the number of patents granted to the United States in 2010 in the field of optics 
was more than 50 percent greater than that granted to the next-nearest country. 
Yet, according to the records of the Optical Society of America, the number of 
research papers submitted to its journals in 2010 by scholars from the Pacific Rim 
countries exceeded the number of papers submitted by North American authors.7
IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION
Education plays a critically important role in ensuring a vibrant future for the 
United States in the fields of optics and photonics. Today, the United States has 
6  See, for example, the National Center for Optics and Photonics Education’s (OPTEC’s) Photon-
ics: An Enabling Technology, for fields that are important. Available at http://www.op-tec.org/pdf/
Enabling_Technology_9NOV2011.pdf. Accessed July 30, 2012.
7  Cao, J. 2012. A new journal in optics and photonics—Light: Science and Applications. Editorial. 
Light: Science and Applications 1:Online. Available at http://65.199.186.23/lsa/journal/v1/n3/full/
lsa20123a.html. Accessed July 26, 2012.

19
I n t r o d u c t i o n
many outstanding universities that educate students from around the world in the 
classroom and in research laboratories. Over the past several years, many institu-
tions outside the United States have also invested heavily in excellent educational 
facilities. Because education is inextricably linked to innovation in optics and 
photonics, the committee underscores the importance to the nation of maintain-
ing a strong U.S. educational infrastructure in optics and photonics. Although the 
present study does not focus on education, it does mention specific examples that 
might benefit from action, including the training of skilled technicians as well as 
ensuring that an adequate numbers of citizens can be hired by the defense industry. 
The committee concluded that improvements in technical education are needed to 
increase the quality of skilled blue-collar workers in optics and photonics.
PROGRESS FOR THE FUTURE
Although many of the innovations in optics and photonics (i.e., the science 
and engineering of optical waves and photons) have occurred in the United States, 
U.S. leadership is far from secure. The committee has heard compelling arguments 
that, if the United States does not act with strategic vision, future scientific advances 
and economic benefits might be led by others.
It is the committee’s hope that this study will help policy makers and leaders 
decide on courses of action that can advance the future of optics and photonics; 
promote a greener, healthier, and more productive society; and ensure a leadership 
position for the United States in the face of increasing foreign competition.
In general, the committee’s recommendations call for improved management 
of U.S. public and private research and development resources, emphasizing the 
need for public policy that encourages adoption of a portfolio approach to invest-
ing in the wide and diverse opportunities now presented by optics and photonics.

20
2
Impact of Photonics on 
the National Economy
INTRODUCTION
The vast diversity of applications enabled by photonics poses both economic 
promise and policy challenges. On the one hand, technical advances in funda-
mental principles of photonics may have broad impacts in many applications 
and economic sectors. On the other hand, this diversity means that monitoring 
public and private investment, employment, output, and other economic aspects 
of photonics is difficult. Photonics is a broad technology rather than an industry, 
and the economic data assembled by U.S. government agencies do not support a 
straightforward assessment of the “economic impact” of photonics. For example, 
there are no North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes that 
enable the tracking of revenue, employment, and industrial research and develop-
ment (R&D) spending in photonics-related fields, and we lack data on government 
R&D spending in photonics. The absence of such information reduces the visibility 
of photonics within the industrial community and impedes the development of 
more coherent public policies to support the development of this constellation of 
technologies and applications.
This chapter takes the following form: First, a case study of lasers is used to 
introduce the field of photonics, and the conceptual challenges of developing 
estimates of the economic impact of photonics innovations are discussed. Next, 
company-level data are presented, and the challenges associated with using such 
data to provide indicators of the economic significance of the “photonics sector” 
within the U.S. economy are addressed. Next is a discussion of sources of R&D 

21
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
investment within photonics, including government and company funding of 
R&D, followed by an examination of the ways in which the changing structure 
of the innovation process within photonics (including sources of R&D funding) 
reflects broader shifts in the sources of innovation within the U.S. economy. That 
section motivates the subsequent discussions of the role of venture-capital finance 
in photonics innovation, the role of university licensing, and the implications of 
offshore growth in the production of optics and photonics products for innova-
tion in the field. This discussion of the changing structure of innovation finance 
and performance in the United States leads to the next section, which considers 
the implications of recent experiments in public-private and inter-firm R&D 
collaboration in other high-technology sectors for the photonics sector. Finally, 
conclusions and recommendations are presented.
THE ECONOMICS OF PHOTONICS: A CASE STUDY OF LASERS
The laser is a central technology within photonics, and a brief history of its 
development and expanding applications provides some insights into the eco-
nomic effects of the much broader field of photonics, as well as underscoring 
the difficulties of measuring the economic impact of such a diverse field. First 
demonstrated in 1960 by Theodore Maiman of Hughes Aircraft, the laser built on 
fundamental research on microwave technology by Charles Townes and Arthur 
Schawlow at Columbia University and Bell Labs, respectively. The laser exhibits 
many of the characteristics of a “general-purpose technology”1 (other examples 
include information technology [IT], steam power, and electrical power), in that 
laser technology itself has been transformed by a series of important innovations, 
with numerous new types of lasers developed over the past 50 years. Innovations 
in lasers have broadened the applications of this technology, many of which have 
produced dramatic improvements in the performance of technologies incorporat-
1  Rosenberg, N., and M. Trajtenberg. 2004. A general-purpose technology at work: The Corliss 
steam engine in the late-nineteenth-century United States. Journal of Economic History 64:61-99. In 
this paper, Rosenberg and Trajtenberg highlight four characteristics of a “general-purpose technol-
ogy” (GPT): “first, it is a technology characterized by general applicability, that is, by the fact that it 
performs some generic function that is vital to the functioning of a large number of using products 
or production systems. Second, GPTs exhibit a great deal of technological dynamism: continuous 
innovational efforts increase over time the efficiency with which the generic function is performed, 
benefiting existing users, and prompting further sectors to adopt the improved GPT. Third, GPTs 
exhibit ‘innovational complementarities’ with the application sectors, in the sense that technical ad-
vances in the GPT make it more profitable for its users to innovate and improve their own technolo-
gies. Thus, technical advance in the GPT fosters or makes possible advances across a broad spectrum 
of application sectors. Improvements in those sectors increase in turn the demand for the GPT itself, 
which makes it worthwhile to further invest in improving it, thus closing up a positive loop that may 
result in faster, sustained growth for the economy as a whole” (p. 65).

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
22
ing lasers (e.g., fiber-optic communications). Over the course of the 50 years since 
its invention, the laser has been used in applications ranging from communications 
to welding to surgery.
The Economic Impact of the Laser
One measure of the economic impact of the laser is provided by Baer and 
Schlachter’s 2010 study for the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),2 
which compiled data on the size of three economic sectors in which lasers have 
found important applications. Baer and Schlachter listed these as follows:
•	 Transportation (production of transport equipment, etc.), estimated to 
account for $1 trillion in output during 2009-2010;
•	 The biomedical sector ($2.5 trillion); and
•	 Telecommunications, e-commerce, information technology ($4 trillion).
The value of lasers deployed in each of these three sectors was respectively 
estimated at $1.3 billion (CO2 and fiber), $400 million (solid-state and excimer 
lasers), and $3.2 billion (diode and fiber lasers).
It is important to distinguish between the role of lasers as “enabling” the growth 
of these three sectors and the role of this technology as “indispensable” to these 
sectors, because the distinction is central to analyses of the economic impact of 
any new technology. The fundamental question that arises in this context is, What 
would have happened in the absence of the laser? That is, what if substitutes had 
been employed to realize some if not all of the benefits associated with the laser’s 
applications in these sectors? What would have been the cost (both in terms of 
higher prices and reduced functionality) associated with using non-laser substi-
tutes? In some areas (e.g., surgery, some fields of optical communication), substi-
tutes might well have been unavailable or would have performed so poorly as to 
render them useless. In other fields such as welding, however, substitutes for lasers 
that presented fewer cost and performance penalties might well have appeared. In 
some cases, substitutes for lasers might well have improved their performance and 
reliability over time.
In the case of the laser as with most major innovations, the data and the meth-
odology necessary to conduct counterfactual thought experiments of this sort are 
lacking, which makes it difficult to develop credible estimates of economic impact. 
These analytic challenges are no less significant in assessing the impacts of other 
2  Baer, T., and F. Schlachter. 2010. Lasers in Science and Industry: A Report to OSTP on the Contribu-
tion of Lasers to American Jobs and the American Economy. Available at http://www.laserfest.org/lasers/
baer-schlachter.pdf. Accessed June 25, 2012.

23
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
photonics technologies currently in use, and they are truly forbidding where one 
seeks to predict the economic impact of future applications that have only begun 
to emerge.
Nonetheless, it seems clear that the laser has been adopted in a diverse ar-
ray of applications, some of which have underpinned the growth of entirely new 
methods for the transmission of information.3 Equally important is the way in 
which continued innovation in laser technology has enabled and complemented 
innovation in technologies using lasers. This mutual enhancement further extends 
the adoption of these applications as performance improves and costs decline. 
Moreover, the appearance of new applications and markets for lasers has created 
strong incentives for further investment in innovation in lasers. All of this feedback 
and self-reinforcing dynamics are classic features of general-purpose technologies. 
Lasers are one example of such a technology within the field of photonics.
Funding of Early Laser Development
The development of laser technology shares a number of characteristics with 
other postwar U.S. innovations, in fields ranging from information technology to 
biotechnology. Like these other technologies, much of the research (especially the 
fundamental research) that underpinned the laser and its predecessor, the maser, 
relied on federal funding. Similar to the experience with IT, much of this federal 
R&D funding was motivated by the national security applications of lasers during 
a period of high geopolitical tension.4 Industry funded a considerable amount of 
laser-related R&D, much of which focused on development and applications, but 
3  Interestingly, optical communication was the only foreseen application of the laser in 1958. See, 
for example, Sette, D. 1965. Laser applications to communication. Zeitschrift für angewandte Math-
ematik und Physik ZAMP 16(1):156-169.
4  Bromberg, J.L. 1991. The Laser in America, 1950-1970. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. In this study, 
Bromberg emphasizes another characteristic of federally and industrially financed R&D in the field 
of lasers: the extent of linkage among research and researchers in U.S. industry, federal laboratories, 
and academia during the 1945-1980 period: “Academic scientists were linked to industrial scientists 
through the consultancies that universities held in large and small firms, through the industrial spon-
sorship of university fellowships, and through the placement of university graduates and postdoctoral 
fellows in industry. They were linked by joint projects, of which a major example here is the Townes-
Schawlow paper of [sic] optical masers, and through sabbaticals that academics took in industry and 
industrial scientists took in universities. Academic scientists were linked with the Department of 
Defense R&D groups, and with other government agencies through tours of duty in research orga-
nizations such as the Institute for Defense Analyses, through work at DoD-funded laboratories such 
as the Columbia Radiation Laboratory or the MIT Research Laboratory for Electronics, and through 
government study groups and consultancies. They were also linked by the fact that so much of their 
research was supported by the Department of Defense and NASA” (p. 224). Similar linkages among 
industry, government, and military research characterized the early years of development of the U.S. 
computer and semiconductor industries, in contrast to their European and Japanese counterparts.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
24
much of this R&D investment (particularly in the early years of the laser’s develop-
ment) was motivated by the prospect of significant federal procurement contracts 
for military applications of lasers.
The early work in the 1950s of Townes at Columbia University on masers, for 
example, was financed in large part by the Joint Services Electronics Program, a 
multi-service military R&D program that sought to sustain after 1945 the wartime 
research activities of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Colum-
bia Radiation Laboratories, both established during World War II. Military fund-
ing supported early work on masers and lasers at RCA, Stanford University, and 
Hughes Aircraft. R&D related to lasers at the National Bureau of Standards also was 
closely overseen by military representatives. By 1960, according to Bromberg,5 the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was investing roughly $1.5 million (1960 dollars) 
in extramural R&D on lasers, an amount that rose rapidly after Maiman’s demon-
stration of the ruby laser at Hughes; by 1962, according to Bromberg’s estimates, 
the DOD was spending roughly $12 million on laser-related R&D, one-half of the 
total U.S. R&D investment in the technology. In 1963, total DOD R&D investment, 
including intramural projects, approached $24 million, which increased to just over 
$30 million in the late 1970s.6 Another tabulation of military R&D investment es-
timates total military laser-related R&D spending through 1978 at more than $1.6 
billion (all amounts in nominal dollars).7
The Early Laser Market
The military also was a major source of demand in the early laser industry, 
although its share of the market declined over time as civilian applications and 
markets grew rapidly. According to Bromberg, the DOD share of the laser market 
fell from 63 percent in 1969 to 55 percent in 1971.8 Although the DOD dominated 
the government market for lasers, other federal agencies also were important pur-
chasers, and Seidel estimates that total government purchases of lasers amounted 
to nearly 56 percent of the total market in 1975, increasing to slightly more than 
60 percent by 1978.9 Commercial laser sales grew from $1.985 billion in 1983 to 
5  Bromberg, J.L. 1991. The Laser in America, 1950-1970. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
6  Koizumi, K. 2008. AAAS Report XXXIII: Research & Development FY 2009, Chapter 5. Available 
at http://www.aaas.org/spp/rd/09pch5.htm. Accessed July 30, 2012.
7  Seidel, R. 1987. From glow to flow: A history of military laser research and development. Histori-
cal Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 18:111-147.
8  Bromberg, J.L. 1991. The Laser in America, 1950-1970.
9  Seidel, R. 1987. From glow to flow: A history of military laser research and development. Histori-
cal Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 18:111-147.

25
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
$2.285 billion in 1984, according to DeMaria;10 government sales in these same 
2 years amounted to $1.23 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively. The government 
share of laser sales almost certainly has continued to decline in more recent years.
The dominance of the early laser market by the military services had important 
implications for the development of the embryonic laser industry. In contrast to 
the military services of other NATO member nations, U.S. military procurement 
officials rarely excluded new firms from procurement competitions, although in 
many cases these firms had to arrange for a “second source” of their products to 
avoid supply interruptions. The prospect of military procurement contracts there-
fore attracted new firms to enter the laser industry and underlaid a growth in the 
total number of firms working with laser development. The number of new firms 
in the industry also grew rapidly because of the growth of new laser applications 
in diverse civilian markets, as well as the growth of new types of laser technologies. 
Clearly, the military contracts sped up the laser development. The appearance of 
the diode-pumped solid-state laser in 1988, however, may have triggered the exit 
from the industry of a large number of firms, and the number of active firms fell to 
87 by 2007, during a period of rapidly increasing sales for the industry as a whole.
International Comparison
Although data allowing for a comparison of the structure of the laser industries 
of the United States and other nations are not readily available, it is likely that the 
number of independent producers of lasers in other nations exhibited less dramatic 
growth and decline. Assuming that this characterization of the laser industries 
of the United States and other nations is accurate, the differences reflected the 
prominent role of government demand for lasers in the United States, as well as 
the important role of U.S. venture capital in financing new-firm entrants into the 
laser industry.
The origin of U.S. and Japanese scientific publications appearing in Applied 
Physics Letters from 1960 through 2009 on the topic of semiconductor lasers was 
analyzed by Shimzu (2011);11 data in the study by Shimzu suggest a contrast in the 
sources of leading-edge laser R&D during this period. Established U.S. firms in the 
areas of electronics, IT, and communications dominated semiconductor-laser pub-
lications during 1960-1964, accounting for more than 80 percent of publications of 
U.S. origin. These firms’ share of publications dropped sharply after 1964, to 30 to 
10  DeMaria, A.J. 1987. “Lasers in Modern Industries.” In Lasers: Invention to Application, J.H. Au-
subel and H.D. Langford, eds. Report of the National Academy of Engineering. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press.
11  Shimuzu, H. 2011. Scientific breakthroughs and networks in the case of semiconductor laser 
technology in the U.S. and Japan, 1960s-2000s. Australian Economic History Review 51:71-96.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
26
35 percent during 1965-1974, before increasing again to 61 percent during 1975-
1979 and 46 percent during 1980-1984. By 2005-2009, however, the established-
firm share of U.S. scientific publications in semiconductor lasers had dropped to 
less than 5 percent. Start-up firms, which contributed no semiconductor-laser 
publications during 1960-1980, accounted for more than 10 percent of publica-
tions during 1985-1989 and 9.25 percent during 2005-2009. U.S. university-based 
researchers accounted for the majority of U.S. semiconductor-laser publications 
throughout the 1965-2009 period, as their share grew from slightly more than 57 
percent in 1965-1969 to almost 85 percent during 2005-2009. (See Figure 2.1.)
The data in the Shimuzu study on publications of Japanese origin in 
semiconductor-laser research in Applied Physics Letters12 indicate a minimal role 
for start-up firms as sources of research. Although all papers published in this 
prestigious journal are reviewed by scientific peers, the burden of translation into 
English may well introduce some bias into this comparison—papers of Japanese 
origin effectively have to clear a higher “quality threshold” to appear in this ­journal. 
This potential source of bias should be kept in mind in comparing Japanese and 
U.S. publications. Established Japanese corporations, which accounted for no sci-
entific papers during 1960-1969 (see Figure 2.1), contribute a declining share of 
scientific papers of Japanese origin in semiconductor lasers, although their share 
declined somewhat less significantly, from 75 percent during 1970-1974 to nearly 
40 percent during 2005-2009. Japanese start-up firms, however, played almost no 
role as a source of scientific publications, appearing only after 2000 in Shimuzu’s 
data, with a share of 0.74 percent during 2000-2004 and 2.94 percent during 2005-
2009. Japanese universities, which accounted for less than 30 percent of papers of 
Japanese origin in this journal and field before 1990, by 2005-2009 contributed 
more than 55 percent. (See Figure 2.1.)
Although covering only one area of laser technology and limited to one scien-
tific journal, the data analyzed by Shimuzu clearly indicate that new-entrant firms 
in the United States accounted for a much larger share of scientific activity (as rep-
resented by publications) in semiconductor lasers than was true of Japanese start-
ups, whereas established Japanese firms have maintained a more prominent role as 
sources of scientific publications into the 21st century than have U.S. established 
firms in electronics, communications, or IT. The role of university researchers as 
sources of published scientific research, however, appears to have grown signifi-
cantly in both nations, albeit more dramatically in the United States than in Japan.
12  Ibid.

27
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
Conclusions from the Laser Case Study
This brief overview of the development of laser technology and the U.S. laser 
industry highlights several issues that are relevant to overall photonics technology. 
The difficulty of measuring the “economic impact” of lasers reflects the need for 
any such assessment to rely on assumptions about the availability or timing of 
the appearance of substitute technologies. These difficulties are more serious for 
predictions of the economic impact of technologies currently under development. 
Such predictions rely on guesses about the nature of substitutes and markets, as well 
as predictions concerning the pace and timing of the adoption of new technologies. 
The laser’s development also highlights several of the features of general-purpose 
technologies, namely, their widespread adoption, driven in many cases by contin-
ued innovation and improvement in the focal technology, as well as the ways in 
which users of the technology in adopting sectors contribute to new applications 
that rely in part on incremental improvements in the technology. In the view of 
the committee, many other technologies in the field of photonics share these char-
acteristics with lasers.
FIGURE 2.1  Comparison between the United States and Japan with respect to different sectors’ contributions to 
scientific publications that appeared in Applied Physics Letters from 1960 through 2009 on the topic of semi-
conductor lasers. (In the set of two bars for each time period, U.S. data are on the left, and Japanese data are 
on the right.) SOURCE: Based on data in Shimuzu, H. 2011. Scientific breakthroughs and networks in the case 
of semiconductor laser technology in the U.S. and Japan, 1960s-2000s. Australian Economic History Review 
51:71-96.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
University
Startups
Other
Companies
University
Startups
Other
Companies
USA
Japan
2005-
2009
2000-
2004
1995-
1999
1990-
1994
1985-
1989
1980-
1984
1975-
1979
1970-
1974
1965-
1969
1960-
1964

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
28
The development of laser technology and the laser industry in the United States 
also displays some contrasts with the experiences of other nations, particularly in 
the important direct and indirect role played by the federal government in the early 
stages of the technology’s development. Federal R&D and procurement spending, 
much of which was derived from military sources, influenced both the pace of 
development of laser technology and the structure of the laser industry, revealed 
most plainly in the contrasts between U.S. and Japanese scientific publications in 
laser technology. Moreover, the high levels of mobility of researchers, funding, and 
ideas among industry, government, and academia were important to the dynamism 
of the U.S. laser industry in its early years, with few formal policies geared toward 
“technology transfer” between government or university laboratories and industry 
such as those in place today. Although military R&D spending continues to account 
for roughly 50 percent of total federal R&D spending (which now accounts for 
roughly one-third of total national R&D investment, down significantly from its 
share during the period of laser-technology development),13 the share of long-term 
research within the military R&D budget has been under severe pressure in recent 
years, and congressional restorations of executive branch cuts in this spending have 
often taken the form of earmarks. Moreover, as the laser industry matures and 
nonmilitary markets exert much greater influence over the evolution of applica-
tions for this technology, the ability of military R&D to guide broad technological 
advances in this field has declined.
ESTIMATING THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF PHOTONICS—
INDUSTRY REVENUES, EMPLOYMENT, AND R&D 
INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES
This section employs estimates of revenues, employment, and R&D investment 
for a sample of firms that are active in the field of photonics to illustrate the breadth 
of photonics-based industrial activity in the U.S. economy.
The data were provided by the International Society for Optics and Photonics 
(SPIE) and the Optical Society of America (OSA) and include 336 unique (avoiding 
double counting of corporations that appear on more than one membership list) 
corporate members in 2011; 1,009 unique companies that had exhibited at one of 
the two trade shows in 2011; and 1,785 unique companies listed as employers of 
13  National Science Foundation. 2012. Chapter 4, “R&D: National Trends and International 
­Comparison—Highlights.” In Science and Engineering Indicators 2012. Available at http://www.nsf.
gov/statistics/seind12/c4/c4h.htm#s6. Accessed July 30, 2012.

29
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
professional societies’ individual members in 2011.14 Table 2.1 lists the number of 
publicly traded and privately held companies in each of these three groups. Note 
that although the companies listed within each of the three groups described above 
appear only once, there is overlap among companies appearing on each of the three 
lists (i.e., a single firm may be listed as a member of one or the other society, as 
well as an exhibitor and an employer of society members). Aggregating all unique 
companies across the three groups produces a list of 2,442 unique U.S. companies 
active in some way within photonics, 285 of which are public and 2,157 of which 
are privately held, as shown in Figure 2.2. As a point of comparison, there were 
approximately 5.9 million “employer” firms (firms with payroll) in the United 
States in 2008, and approximately 17,000 publicly traded companies.15 Thus the 
present study’s count of companies across the three lists comprises approximately 
0.04 percent of all U.S. employer firms and 1.7 percent of all U.S. publicly traded 
companies.
Data on revenues, employment, and R&D spending in 2009 and 2010 for 282 
of the 285 publicly traded companies that are listed as members, employers, or 
exhibitors can be seen in Table 2.2.16 The total revenues associated with these 282 
public companies in 2010 amounted to $3.085 trillion, they invested $166 bil-
lion on R&D (amounting to 5.4 percent of revenues), and employed 7.4 million 
individuals. As a comparison point, “employer” firms in the United States in 2008 
created an aggregate of $29.7 trillion in revenues and employed an aggregate of 120 
14  NAICS or other industry-specific public databases on economic activity in photonics do not 
currently exist. In an attempt to create a rough estimate of economic activity in photonics, the com-
mittee collected three types of information with help from the two largest professional societies in 
photonics: SPIE and the Optical Society of America (OSA). This information included (1) a list of all 
U.S.-headquartered member companies for each society, (2) a list of U.S.-headquartered exhibiting 
companies at the largest trade conference for each society, and (3) a list of all U.S.-headquartered 
companies associated with individual members of the professional society. The information provided 
by these societies covers only 2011. In the analysis of this information, the list of member companies 
was considered to be a rough estimate of companies with strong participation in optics and pho-
tonics in 2011, the list of exhibiting companies as a rough estimate of companies selling products 
involving photonics in 2011, and the list of companies associated with individual members of the 
professional society a rough estimate of companies with some activities in photonics in 2011. This 
list of firms also served as the basis for compiling estimates of economic activity during 2010 for the 
subset of firms for which data were available (see text). It is important to emphasize that each of these 
estimates is very rough, and it is plausible that some photonics-specialist firms are not captured by 
these estimates, while other firms for which photonics represents a small share of overall revenues, 
employment, or R&D investment may be included.
15  According to the U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. “Statistics about Business Size.” Available at http://
www.census.gov/econ/susb/introduction.html. Accessed June 25, 2012.
16  Data from Standard & Poor’s Compustat. Available at http://www.compustat.com/. Accessed 
June 25, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
30
million individuals.17 Thus, the public firms listed as active in photonics accounted 
for approximately 10 percent of U.S.-based employer firms’ revenues and 6 percent 
of U.S.-based employer firms’ aggregate employment in 2010.
Data were also used from Dun and Bradstreet to estimate revenue and R&D 
expenditures for the publicly traded and privately held firms listed as corporate 
17  Public company listings contributed by SPIE and the Optical Society of America. Revenue, 
employee, and research and development (R&D) expenditure data subsequently collected from 
Compustat.
TABLE 2.1  Number of Unique Companies in 2011 That Were Corporate Members, Partici-
pated in One of the Two Largest Trade Shows, or Were Associated with Individual Members 
Across the Two Largest Professional Societies in Photonics
By Type
Public
Private
Total
No.
%
No.
%
No.
Corporate members
45
13
291
87
336
Exhibited at trade shows
107
11
902
89
1,009
Employed professional society members
243
14
1,542
86
1,785
SOURCE: Data contributed by SPIE and the Optical Society of America, compiled by Carey Chen, Board on Sci-
ence, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.
FIGURE 2.2  Percentage in 2011 of public versus private companies across the 2,442 unique com-
panies recorded within the SPIE and OSA databases. SOURCE: Data contributed by SPIE and OSA, 
and subsequently collated by Carey Chen, Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the 
National Academies.

31
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
members of SPIE or OSA, on the assumption that photonics sales and innovation-
related activities are likely to be much more significant within these firms than 
within those listed as exhibitors or employers of professional society members. 
This group of public and private corporate member companies was responsible 
for $503 billion in revenues in 2010 (roughly one-sixth of the aggregate revenues 
for the more comprehensive list of firms summarized in Table 2.1) and employed 
1.5 million individuals (slightly more than one-tenth of the employment associ-
ated with the more comprehensive list of firms). Table 2.3 reports total revenues 
and R&D investment for the publicly traded and privately held firms within this 
population of “photonics specialists.”18 Clearly, the firms that can be defined as 
“photonics specialists” account for a much smaller share of overall U.S. employ-
ment and industrial revenues.
18  R&D expenditures were not available from Dun and Bradstreet for privately held companies.
TABLE 2.2  Revenues, Number of Employees, and R&D Expenditures from 282 Unique Public 
Companies in 2009 and 2010
2009
2010
Revenue ($ millions)
2,741,289
3,085,292
No. of employees (000s)
7,159
7,415
R&D expenditures ($ millions)
151,104
166,603
R&D: % of revenue
5.5%
5.4%
SOURCE: Public company listings contributed by SPIE and the Optical Society of America. ­Revenue, employee, 
and research and development (R&D) expenditure data subsequently collected from ­Compustat. Compiled by Carey 
Chen, Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.
TABLE 2.3  Revenue and Number of Employees for the 336 Unique Companies (in 2010) 
That Had Corporate Members with at Least One of the Two Professional Societies
Company 
Type
No.
Revenue 
($ millions)
No. of Employees 
(000s)
R&D Expenditures 
($ millions)
Public
45
501,551
1,495
27,455
Private
291
1,394
10
Not available
TOTAL
336
502,945
1,506
SOURCE: Company listings contributed by SPIE and the Optical Society of America. Revenue, employee, and 
research and development (R&D) expenditure data subsequently collected for public companies from Compustat 
and for private companies from Dunn and Bradstreet. Compiled by Carey Chen, Board on Science, Technology, 
and Economic Policy of the National Academies.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
32
These data suggest that a small (although non-negligible) proportion of ­total 
U.S. firms is accounted for by those U.S.-headquartered firms with sufficient 
activity in photonics to be active as a member, an exhibitor, or an employer of 
a ­professional-society member in the database of one of the two largest U.S. 
­photonics-related professional societies. The aggregate revenues associated with 
these firms, however, represent a relatively large proportion of aggregate U.S. 
employer firm revenues (10 percent) and employment (6 percent). This study 
interprets these data as indicative of the pervasiveness of photonics innovation 
and technology within this economy. Data for firms identified here as specialists 
in photonics suggest that these firms account for a much smaller share of total U.S. 
industrial revenues and employment, although they are still a significant source of 
economic activity.
Like the data from the Baer and Schlachter study for OSTP on lasers cited 
above,19 these data convey some sense of the breadth of photonics-based industrial 
activity within this economy. While not directly measuring the economic impact 
of photonics within the U.S. economy in 2011, they do reflect the general-purpose 
­nature of photonics. This field of technology influences innovation and employ-
ment across a broad swath of the economy. Once again, the estimates used in 
this analysis underscore gaps in existing public databases and the need for better 
measurement and tracking of photonics-related R&D, employment, and industrial 
activity to enable better understanding of the full economic impact of so pervasive 
a technology.
GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRIAL SOURCES OF R&D FUNDING 
IN PHOTONICS AND FEDERAL FUNDING OF OPTICS20
One of the only previous attempts to estimate overall U.S. R&D investment in 
the field of photonics and to compare R&D investment in optoelectronics among 
Western Europe, Japan, and the United States is the 1992 study by Sternberg,21 
which covers only 1981-1986. Sternberg in turn relies on an unpublished study 
for the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) by Tassey,22 which 
19  Baer and Schlachter. 2010. Lasers in Science and Industry.
20  This section uses rough estimates of agency-level R&D spending in areas related to optics and 
photonics to discuss overall trends in U.S. R&D investment in the field of photonics. To address the 
lack of regularly tracked data or recent published studies on U.S. R&D investment in photonics, the 
committee requested data on all optics- and photonics-related programs from all government agen-
cies identified as potentially supporting R&D in these areas. The results of this data-collection effort 
are discussed in the text. 
21  Sternberg, E. 1992. Photonic Technology and Industrial Policy. Albany, N.Y.: State University of 
New York Press.
22  Tassey, G. 1985. Technology and Economic Assessment of Optoelectronics. Planning report. 
­Gaithersburg, Md.: National Bureau of Standards.

33
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
Sternberg claims includes only nondefense R&D spending for the United States. 
(Sternberg does not discuss whether or not Tassey’s study omits defense-related 
R&D spending in Japan or Western Europe.) Sternberg’s data indicate that U.S. 
R&D investment from industry and government sources grew from $69 million in 
1981 to $339 million in 1986, while Japanese investment grew from $112 million 
to $344 million, and European investment grew from $30 million to $165 mil-
lion. As noted above, Sternberg claims that Tassey’s data, which form the basis for 
these comparative estimates, omit U.S. defense-related government R&D spending, 
which he estimates to be as much as $230 million in 1986. If Sternberg’s revision 
of Tassey’s estimates is credible, U.S. R&D investment in optoelectronics as of the 
middle of the 1980s greatly exceeded the combined investments of Europe and 
Japan. In a separate calculation for fiscal year (FY) 1990, Sternberg estimates that 
“Science and Technology Funding” from DOD sources23 for photonics amounted 
to $655 million, which exceeds his estimate of U.S. photonics R&D funding from 
all sources for 1986.
A 1996 study on R&D spending in optoelectronics alone found that Japanese 
firms spent much more than U.S. firms on optoelectronics R&D during 1989-
1993.24 But the study also showed that the U.S. government spent significantly more 
on optoelectronics R&D during this period than the Japanese government spent, 
investing more in R&D in 1990 alone than the Japanese government had spent in 
15 years of government support. (See Tables 2.4 and 2.5.)
Since the publication of Sternberg’s monograph in 1992, studies in Canada 
and Europe have attempted to estimate public funding of photonics. The ­Canadian 
Photonics Consortium estimated Canadian funding of photonics from public 
sources in 2008 to have been approximately $136 million,25,26 roughly two-thirds 
of the estimated $219.7 million that the U.S. government invested in R&D in opto­
electronics alone in 1993 (see Table 2.4). The European Union (EU) Framework 7 
Programme invested €165 million (U.S. $210 million at average international ex-
23  It remains unclear whether or not this funding includes development work.
24  Japanese Technology Evaluation Center (JTEC). 1996. Optoelectronics in Japan and the United 
States. Report of the Loyola University Maryland’s International Technology Research Institute, 
­Baltimore, Md.
25  Photonics21. 2010. “Lighting the Way Ahead, Photonics21 Strategic Research Agenda.” 
­Dusseldorf, Germany: European Technology Platform. Available at http://www.photonics21.org/
download/SRA_2010.pdf. Accessed June 25, 2012. 
26  Canadian Photonics Consortium. 2008. “Photonics: Making Light Work for Canada, A Survey 
by the Canadian Photonics Consortium.” Available at http://www.photonics.ca/Making%20Light 
%20Work%20for%20Canada_2008.pdf. Accessed June 25, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
34
change rates for the year 2010) in photonics in 2010 as part of its information and 
communications technology work program (EU Framework 7,27 IRS28).29
27  European Commission. 2010. “Information and Communication Technologies Work Pro-
gramme 2011-12.” Seventh Framework Programme (FP7). Available at http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/
ict/. Accessed June 25, 2012.
28  Internal Revenue Service. 2010. “Internal Revenue Service Yearly Average Currency Exchange 
Rates.” Available at http://www.irs.gov/businesses/small/international/article/0,,id=206089,00.html. 
Accessed June 25, 2012.
29  Photonics is also funded through other EU mechanisms and work programs, and so this is not 
a complete representation (e.g., medical imaging would be in the “Health” work program). In addi-
tion, individual countries, including both France and Germany, have individual programs focused 
on photonics. Nonetheless, the EU 2010 investment in R&D in information and communications 
TABLE 2.4  Optoelectronics R&D Spending by U.S. Firms, 1989-1993 
($ millions)
Source of Funding
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
In-house
533.5
598.9
651.3
615.7
619.8
Federal government
189.7
200.1
204.8
178.6
219.7
Customer
8.7
11.6
15.3
17.1
20.4
Joint venture
0.5
2.5
7.8
0.4
5.2
Other
3.2
2.2
3.5
3
2.6
TOTAL
735.6
815.3
882.7
814.8
867.7
SOURCE: Japanese Technology Evaluation Center (JTEC). 1996. Optoelectronics in Japan and 
the United States. Report of the Loyola University Maryland’s International Technology Research 
Institute. Baltimore, Md.: International Technology Research Institute. Available at http://www.
wtec.org/loyola/opto/toc.htm. Accessed June 25, 2012.
TABLE 2.5  U.S. Government-Funded Optoelectronics R&D, by Funding Organization, 
1989-1993 ($ million)
Source of Funding
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
DOD
122
120
116.6
107.8
145.6
ARPA
4.5
6.7
9
22.5
21.7
Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force)
48.1
55.3
57.5
33.3
38.1
NASA
10.7
12.7
15
8
5.9
DOE/National Lab
2.4
1.6
1.5
0.7
0.3
NIH
0.6
0.6
1.1
1.2
1
NSF
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
NIST
—
—
—
0.9
3.1
Other
1.4
2
2.2
2.4
3.6
TOTAL
190
199.3
203.3
177.1
219.6
NOTE: Acronyms are defined in Appendix B of this report. SOURCE: Japanese Technology Evaluation Center 
(JTEC). 1996. Optoelectronics in Japan and the United States. Report of the Loyola University Maryland’s Inter-
national Technology Research Institute. Baltimore, Md.: International Technology Research Institute. Available at 
http://www.wtec.org/loyola/opto/toc.htm. Accessed June 25, 2012.

35
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
No recent studies have attempted to estimate the scale or agency sources of 
U.S. government R&D support for photonics. As part of the committee’s data-­
collection efforts, each agency was given a one-page description of this study, 
including a brief description of what the committee included in its definition of 
­optics and photonics, along with examples of optics and photonics technologies 
and applications. The responding agencies were as follows: within the Department 
of Defense, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR), Army Research 
­Office (ARO), Office of Naval Research (ONR), High Energy Laser-Joint Technol-
ogy ­Office (HEL JTO), and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA); 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS); Department of Energy (DOE); ­National 
Institutes of Health (NIH); NIST; and the National Science Foundation (NSF). 
Although all of the agencies and programs contacted made a good-faith effort to 
respond, serious gaps nonetheless remained in the committee’s estimates of total 
federal R&D support for photonics during FY 2006-FY 2010. The committee ob-
tained a total estimate of more than $53 billion for federal photonics-related R&D 
during this period. Nearly $45 billion of this total is based on DOD R&D invest-
ments that appear to involve photonics in some fashion but cannot be verified as 
limited solely or even primarily to photonics. Similarly, the estimated $4.4 billion 
in photonics R&D attributed to NIH includes investments in other technological 
fields. However, much of the NIST R&D investment in photonics is omitted from 
the estimates. Because of these complications, the committee recommends that an 
estimate of $53 billion for federal R&D investments in photonics during FY 2006-
FY 2010 be interpreted more realistically as an upper bound on a “true” total that 
may well be anywhere from $25 billion to $55 billion.
Within individual federal programs, more reliable and precisely defined esti-
mates of photonics-related R&D investment were obtained. Many of these agency- 
or program-specific investments in photonics R&D have grown during FY 2006-
2010. Within the DOD, for example, DARPA R&D funding in optics and photonics 
has almost doubled during this period, rising to $486 million by FY 2010 (see 
Figure 2.3).
The second-largest funder of optics and photonics R&D, and the largest civilian 
funder, is NIH, which accounts for 80 percent of the reported nondefense photon-
ics R&D in Table 2.5. Here again, the funding of optics and photonics technologies 
appears to have grown during the last decade. Figure 2.4 shows aggregate annual 
funding of optics and photonics by NIH based on a search for all proposals granted 
between 2000 and 2011 that included the words “optics,” “photonics,” “opto,” or 
“laser” in their abstract, project title, or project terms. While the data for 2011 ex-
technology-related photonics still amounts to little more than the estimated U.S. government invest-
ment in R&D in optoelectronics alone in 1993 (Table 2.4).

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
36
FIGURE 2.3  DARPA funding in optics and photonics. SOURCE: Based on data collected from the De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Research and Development, Test and Evaluation, 
and Defense-Wide Budgets Database (http://www.darpa.mil/NewsEvents/Budget.aspx), compiled by 
Carey Chen, Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.
FIGURE 2.4  Funding by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) between 2000 and 2011 in optics and 
photonics based on a keyword search in the NIH RePORTer Database. SOURCE: Data collected from 
the National Institutes of Health RePORTer Database on October 10, 2011, compiled by Carey Chen, 
Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.

37
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
tend only through October 10, NIH personnel reported that the full-year funding 
level for 2011 is likely to be lower than that for 2010.30
According to the data provided by NIH RePORTer search, the National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) has provided the most funding, at 15.8 percent of the NIH total, 
followed by the National Eye Institute (NEI) at 11.8 percent and the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) at 9.9 percent.
Other data from the federal agencies also suggest that federal photonics R&D 
spending has grown in recent years. For example, Figure 2.5 compiles the total 
funding during 1977-2011 associated with grants either fully or partially funded 
by the NSF Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Division.
Finally, data on DOE funding of solar energy and photovoltaics R&D (Fig-
ure 2.6) suggest similar upward trends in the last decade, although a longer time 
series suggests that federal funding in solar energy may well have been equally 
substantial in the late 1970s. Although federal R&D funding in this field during the 
1980s and 1990s was lower than that of the Japanese and German governments, 
federal R&D funding has grown substantially in recent years, such that it once again 
exceeds these other governments’ investments (see Figure 2.7).
In summary, the data made available by federal agencies for this committee’s 
attempt at a complete estimate of federal photonics-related R&D investment sug-
gest that the DOD dominates funding of optics and photonics, with NIH being 
the second-largest contributor.31 Federal R&D spending in optics and photonics 
also appears to have grown during the last decade.
CHANGES IN PHOTONICS-BASED INNOVATION 
IN THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1980
This section discusses several aspects of the changing structure of the public 
and private R&D institutions and investments that have underpinned innovation in 
photonics and other technologies in the United States since 1980. These structural 
changes have reduced the role of large industrial firms as performers of R&D and 
have increased the importance of smaller firms, many of which are funded through 
venture capital, and at least some of which rely on university-licensed intellectual 
30  It is important to note that the search tool uses two different coding methods, one pre-2008 
(each institute’s judgment of how a grant should be coded) and one post-2008 (an automated trans-
NIH coding system called RCDC). It does not appear that this difference in coding should affect the 
rising trend observed from 2000 to 2006, as this is before the change in 2008.
31  It should be noted that, although every effort was made to be comprehensive in this estimate, 
the data provided were incomplete. The extraordinary dearth of data on the scale and sources of 
federal R&D funding in optics and photonics (as is the case in assessing the economic significance of 
photonics) leaves one “flying blind.” In the committee’s judgment, the creation of more reliable and 
comprehensive data on federal R&D spending in this field is essential to the formulation of a more 
effective and coherent public policy.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
38
FIGURE 2.5  National Science Foundation (NSF) Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) 
Division funding in optics and photonics. NOTE: To show the trend in underlying sources, two out­liers 
(a 4-year grant of $4.8 million in total awarded in 2002 and a 9-year grant of $6.3 million in total 
awarded in 1994) were removed from the analysis. In addition, three cooperative agreements (totaling 
$12.9 million, $13.8 million, and $17.4 million, respectively, the first awarded in 1999 and the last 
two both awarded in 2003) were excluded from the above plot. The first and last were agreements for 
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Centers (NSECs), and the middle one was a renewal proposal 
for the National Nanofabrication Users Network. SOURCE: Data collected from the NSF Electronics, 
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Division database on October 31, 2011, compiled by Carey 
Chen, Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.
property. The role of venture capital in photonics innovation is discussed in the 
next section, and potential approaches to inter-firm and public-private collabora-
tion in technology development are examined in a subsequent section. Chapter 7, 
“Advanced Manufacturing,” discusses another important structural change in U.S. 
R&D and innovation during this period—the movement of much of the produc-
tion activity in photonics and other high-technology industries to foreign locations.
Since 1980, the mix of private and public R&D investment in United States 
has shifted from roughly 50/50 federal/private to roughly 30/70 (Figure 2.8). More-
over, within the defense-related R&D budget, the share of “research” (6.1-6.3) has 
declined somewhat (see Figure 2.9). To the extent that U.S. photonics technol-
ogy development benefited heavily from defense-related R&D and procurement 
spending, the decline in the share of total R&D accounted for by defense may have 
reduced federal support for photonics.32 As the case study of lasers discussed above 
32  As noted above, the committee lacked sufficient data to reach strong conclusions about federal 
agency-level R&D spending in photonics since 1980.

39
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
FIGURE 2.7  Federal research, development and demonstration (RD&D) budget in photovoltaics (at 
2010 prices and exchange rates). SOURCE: International Energy Agency (IEA) Online Statistics © 
OECD/IEA 2012. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 2.6  Department of Energy (DOE) funding in solar energy and photovoltaics R&D. SOURCE: 
Data provided by the Department of Energy on October 18, 2011, compiled by Carey Chen, Board on 
Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
40
FIGURE 2.8  Federally and non-federally funded research and development (R&D) between 1953 and 
2002. SOURCE: National Science Foundation (NSF), Science and Engineering Indicators, various years.
FIGURE 2.9  Trends in defense R&D, FY 1976-2008 (House) in billions of constant FY 2007 dollars. 
NOTE: Contribution from Department of Homeland Security (DHS) defense R&D (shown at the top of 
years 2003-2008) can be difficult to discern in lower-resolution formats. SOURCE: American Association 
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) analyses of R&D in AAAS Reports VIII-XXXII. FY 2008 figures 
are the latest AAAS estimates of FY 2008 appropriations; 2007 figures include enacted supplementals; 
R&D includes conduct of R&D and R&D facilities. DOD S&T figures are not strictly comparable for all 
years because of changing definitions. JULY ’07 REVISED © 2007 AAAS. Reprinted with permission.

41
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
suggests, defense procurement demand was an especially powerful impetus to the 
advance of technologies in photonics-related fields in the early years of their de-
velopment. Among other things, defense procurement provided an initial market 
for the production of many new entrant firms. It is plausible that the U.S. market 
for photonics technologies now is dominated (in terms of total revenues) by non-
defense demand to a much greater extent than in previous decades.33 Certainly, 
this general trend of a declining role in the scope and influence of defense-related 
procurement within the evolution of a technology-intensive sector is broadly 
consistent with earlier trends in information technology and semiconductors.34
During 1984-2001, the structure of U.S. industrial R&D performance also 
has changed significantly (see Figure 2.10). The share of overall industrial R&D 
performance accounted for by the largest U.S. firms has declined significantly, 
from 60 percent in 1984 to less than 40 percent by 2001. The share of the smallest 
firms (fewer than 500 employees) has more than doubled during this period, and 
the share of industrial R&D performance accounted for by firms with 500-9,999 
employees also has grown significantly. Some of this growth in the share of smaller 
firms may reflect alliances with larger firms and other types of outsourcing. None-
theless, the role of the largest U.S. firms in industrial R&D has declined significantly 
during this period. The committee’s studies in this chapter and in Chapter 7 sug-
gest that trends in the structure of photonics-specific industrial R&D are likely 
to resemble these overall trends. These trends also may reflect growth in the role 
of inter-firm “markets for technology,” as smaller, specialized firms develop new 
technologies for sale or license to larger firms that seek to commercialize or incor-
porate these technologies into their products. Another factor in the growth of U.S. 
technology licensing activity has been the increased presence of U.S. universities 
in patenting and licensing faculty research discoveries, a trend that was encour-
aged and legitimized by the passage of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980.35 Such “markets 
for technology” also have benefited from another significant development during 
1984-2001 in the United States—the shift in policy to stronger patent-holder rights.
Finally, non-U.S. markets have increased their share of overall global demand 
for many high-technology products, and offshore sites for the production and 
R&D activities of many U.S. high-technology firms also have assumed greater 
importance, as noted in Chapter 7. In most high-technology industries, U.S. firms’ 
offshore R&D facilities tend to focus on product development more than on basic 
33  The committee lacked data on the precise role of defense procurement in the development of the 
overall field of photonics or on the trends in defense procurement spending over time.
34  Mowery, D.C. 2011. “Federal Policy and the Development of Semiconductors, Computer Hard-
ware, and Computer Software: A Policy Model for Climate Change R&D?” In Accelerating Energy 
Innovation, R.M. Henderson and R.G. Newell, eds. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
35  Mowery, D.C., R.R. Nelson, B.N. Sampat, and A.A. Ziedonis. 2004. Ivory Tower and Industrial 
Innovation: University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the Bayh-Dole Act. Stanford, 
Calif.: Stanford University Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
42
research. Their growth (and especially the growth of U.S. firms’ R&D activities in 
industrializing economies) reflects the increased sophistication of non-U.S. ap-
plication environments (reflecting, among many other factors, greater broadband 
deployment in many non-U.S. economies). The United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD) World Investment Report 2005 noted that 
multi-national firms from the United States, Europe, and Japan all had increased 
the share of their offshore R&D activities located in the People’s Republic of 
China, Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea. According to the UNCTAD report, 
the developing-economy share of U.S. multi-national firms’ foreign R&D invest-
ment grew from 7.6 percent in 1994 to 13.5 percent by 2002.36 The case studies in 
36  Similarly, German firms increased the share of their foreign R&D investment in developing 
and transitional (including new Eastern European EU member) economies from 2.7 percent to 7.2 
percent between 1995 and 2003. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 
2005. World Investment Report 2005: Transnational Corporations and Internationalization of R&D. 
New York, N.Y.: UNCTAD.
FIGURE 2.10  Firm-size class shares of industry-performed research and development (non-federally 
funded) between 1984 and 2001. SOURCE: NSF, Science and Engineering Indicators, various years.

43
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
Chapter 7, as well as the experiences of the committee, suggest that both offshore 
production and at least some offshore R&D investment by both U.S. and non-U.S. 
firms in photonics have grown considerably since 1990.
VENTURE CAPITAL IN OPTICS
The growing importance of smaller firms as R&D performers in the U.S. 
economy since 1980 partly reflects expanded venture-capital funding for new-firm 
formation and R&D in high-technology sectors. Venture capital has played a sig-
nificant role in the development of the optics and photonics industry. While total 
venture-capital investment in the United States may be lower today than during the 
dot-com bubble, investments continue to be significantly higher than in the early 
1990s. As shown in Figure 2.11, in 1995 the total capital invested in venture-backed 
companies in the United States was $3.7 billion. This investment grew dramatically, 
peaking at $99 billion in 2000. It then fell to a low in 2003, increasing to a minor 
peak around $30 billion in 2007.
The committee was able to use data on venture-capital investments in com-
munications, equipment and services, and telecommunications, to provide insights 
FIGURE 2.11  Total U.S. venture-capital investments, 1995-2010. SOURCE: PricewaterhouseCoopers/National 
Venture Capital Association MoneyTree™ Report, Data: Thomson Reuters. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
44
into the investments made in optics and photonics companies.37 The communi-
cations, equipment and services, and telecommunications sectors were among 
the leading market applications for optics and photonics technologies between 
1993 and 2000. Nonetheless, venture-capital investment data for these sectors 
omit photonics-based applications in solar, biotechnology, and many defense 
applications.
Figures 2.12 and 2.13 report the estimated total venture-capital investment in 
network and telecommunications services during 1995-2011, as well as the share 
of total venture-capital investment in the United States directed toward these sec-
tors. At the peak in 2000, optical investments in network and telecommunications 
services were estimated to be close to $8 billion, which represented roughly 28 
percent of the total venture-capital dollars invested in network and telecommuni-
cations services. Between 1998 and 2000, the percent of dollars invested in optics 
and photonics companies in network and telecommunications services grew from 
15 percent to 20 percent of total venture dollars invested in network and telecom-
munications services to a peak of 28 percent. In 2010, optical and photonics invest-
ments in communications, equipment and services, and telecommunications fell 
from a total of $8 billion to less than $2 billion.
Categorizing optical and photonics investments is much more difficult to do 
today than in 2000. Between 1993 and 2000, most of the optics investments were 
in the areas of communications, reflecting growth in fiber-optic networks for long-
haul communications. In 1995 the primary technologies that represented optics 
investments included lasers, fiber optics, optical electronics, imaging instruments, 
and optical components. The incredible growth of the World Wide Web, the pas-
sage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and the new ability of individuals to 
invest in public stocks through online services that allow the trading of stocks at 
an unprecedented rate expanded demand for optical technologies that were at the 
center of the infrastructure needed to build the new information highway.
By 1998 an optical communications-centered view of public companies had 
devel­oped within the U.S. investment community. Investment banking analysts 
began to follow level-three services/infrastructure systems companies (e.g., ­Ciena, 
ADC, and Nortel), components/subsystems companies (e.g., Uniphase, JDS, SDL, 
Inc., and LightPath), and supporting technologies companies (e.g., Newport, 
­Aeroflex, and VerTel). By 2000, 200 to 300 optical components companies received 
nearly $10 billion in venture financing, 8 new firms had initial public offerings 
(IPOs), and 10 more filed for IPOs.38 However, the financing of so many new 
entrants led to intense competition for market share in a market that soon faced 
slower growth. In 2001, more than 100 optical companies sought financing and 
37  Analysts have never collected data for photonics-specific venture-capital funding. 
38  Chang, M. 2010. What is the state of investment in photonics? Laser Focus World 46(5):33.

45
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
FIGURE 2.12  Network and telecommunications percent of total annual venture-capital investments, 
1995-2011. SOURCE: PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association MoneyTree™ 
Report, Data: Thomson Reuters. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 2.13  Trends (in U.S.$ billions) in U.S. venture series A rounds venture investments with proxy-relation 
to optics and photonics, 1995-2011. SOURCE: PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association 
MoneyTree™ Report, Data: Thomson Reuters; courtesy of John Dexheimer, LightWave Advisors, Inc. Reprinted 
with permission.
more than 30 companies planned to file for IPOs. The optimistic growth forecasts 
for overall telecommunications were not realized, resulting in a crash in the market 
that led venture capitalists to direct their investments away from optical network-
ing companies.
During the past decade, the investment community’s expected returns from 
the traditional optics and photonics sectors declined sharply. Figure 2.14 shows 
the change in internal rate of return (IRR) expectations from communications 
companies compared with IRRs in the 1990s that were greater than 100 percent. 
From Figure 2.14, one can see that communications companies, defined here to 
include significant optics and photonics, had a mean IRR of greater than 100 per-
cent for those funded in 1993 through 1998, with the highest return occurring for 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
46
those companies funded in 1998 (a mean IRR of 272 percent). The mean IRR for 
communications companies with exits funded in 1999 dropped to 31 percent and 
was negative for those companies funded between 2000 and 2001. It can also be 
seen that the mean IRRs for all venture-backed companies with a successful exit 
performed worse than the communications sector during the late 1990s, which 
drove the demand for venture capital-investments during the 1999-2001 period. 
For companies funded in those years, the mean IRR was negative.
The expectations of the venture industry for specific sectors also are affected 
by trends in the overall stock market. Figure 2.15 shows the performance of the 
OEM [original equipment manufacturers] Capital Photonics Index relative to the 
S&P 500, revealing that the S&P 500 outperformed the photonics sector during 
the early part of 2011. If the traditional photonics industry fails to outperform 
the S&P 500, it is unlikely that the venture industry will shift its investment focus 
away from social networking and software companies, which currently account for 
a large share of venture-capital investments, back to photonics. Accordingly, the 
U.S. venture-capital industry may play a smaller role as a source of investment in 
photonics innovation in the telecommunications sector, for the near future at least.
Further support for this forecast of the modest near-term effects of venture-
FIGURE 2.14  U.S. venture internal rate of return (IRR) on vintage year companies, 1993-2005. (Shown is the 
calculated mean return on investments in terms of IRRs for companies in a given year known as the vintage 
year.) SOURCE: Data collected by Cambridge Associates. Reprinted with permission.

47
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
capital funding on photonics innovation in telecommunications applications is 
provided by Figure 2.16, which shows the results of a venture-capital survey con-
ducted by Deloitte and the National Venture Capital Association (NVCA) to de-
termine the anticipated investments of venture capital over the next 5 years in the 
telecommunications and new media/social networking markets.
The optics and photonics companies that survived the downturn in the tele-
communications equipment market have diversified into the biotechnology, en-
ergy, imaging, and defense applications. Since the venture-capital industry as-
sociations do not track the photonics industry as a separate sector, the challenge 
again becomes one of determining a correct metric to ascertain the role of venture 
financing in the contemporary optics and photonics industry. The bursting of the 
telecommunications bubble in March 2000 also means that investment analysts 
now do not track firms in these fields closely. Today only 3 investment analysts 
track the company JDSU (a company that produces optoelectronic components 
for telecommunications and data communications), compared to more than 40 
in 2000. By contrast, First Solar has 30 analysts and Cree has 50, which may be 
interpreted as an indicator that more private investment has been directed to solar, 
lighting, and display technologies. Other markets in which optical technologies 
are used as a key enabler that have received attention from the venture-capital 
community include biopharmaceutical tools, environmental sensing devices, and 
medical devices.
With communications no longer a driving factor for many venture capitalists 
FIGURE 2.15  Relative performance of OEM Capital Photonics Index (lower red line) versus S&P 500 (upper blue 
line), May 2010 through April 2011. SOURCE: Courtesy of OEM Capital, Inc., as presented by John ­Dexheimer 
to the National Research Council, August 24, 2011. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
48
FIGURE 2.16  Anticipated investment levels in terms of total capital over the next 5 years—new media/social 
networking (top) and telecommunications (bottom). SOURCE: 2011 Global Venture Capital Survey, June, by 
Deloitte; National Venture Capital Association—Next 5 Year Venture Capital Forecast of Allocations. Reprinted 
with permission.

49
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
and optics now spread across many applications, the optics and photonics com-
munity may benefit significantly from an initiative to regain the attention of the 
venture-capital community and to reduce reliance on government funding. (See 
Box 2.1.) In addition, for policy makers to have the ability to track and measure the 
impact of optics and photonics, the optics industry needs to encourage organiza-
tions like the NVCA to refine its economic and financial data collection to track 
venture-capital investments in optics and photonics across the diversity of markets 
in which optics and photonics can be enabling technologies. If returns from optics 
investments can be better quantified, venture capitalists may be more likely to track 
and invest in optics and photonics as they did for the brief period in the mid-1990s.
BOX 2.1 
A Note on Government Funding of Small 
and Medium-Sized Businesses
As suggested in this chapter in the earlier section entitled “Government and Industrial 
Sources of R&D Funding in Photonics and Federal Funding of Optics,” in addition to venture 
capital and angel funding, government funding can contribute to the financing of small firms 
that are research and development performers. Major government programs funding small 
and medium-sized enterprises include the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program 
(which channels funds through multiple federal agencies, including the Department of Defense 
[DOD], Department of Energy [DOE], National Institutes of Health [NIH], and National Science 
Foundation [NSF]; the related Small Business Technology Transfer [STTR] Program; and varying 
programs at the National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST], including the earlier Ad-
vanced Technology Program [ATP] and the more recent Technology Innovation Program [TIP]).
In 2010, 11 federal agencies together provided more than $2 billion in SBIR funding. 
Individual programs in the DOD (including the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
[DARPA]), DOE, NIH, and NSF also can target early technology development and commer-
cialization by small firms outside of the SBIR initiatives. An estimated 20 to 25 percent of 
funding for early-stage technology development comes from the federal government. Never-
theless, small technology-based firms (500 or fewer employees) received only 4.3 percent of 
extramural government R&D dollars in 2005 (in contrast to medium and large firms, which 
received 50.3 percent). Of this 4.3 percent, 2.5 percent (or 58 percent of the total) came from 
SBIR and STTR funds.
  NOTE: The committee was unable to collect per-agency numbers on SBIR (and other small 
business-oriented) funding of optics and photonics. Nevertheless, it is likely that SBIR funding 
and other programs (including NIST’s ATP and TIP, as well as some DARPA initiatives) have 
played an important role in funding early-stage technology development in photonics.
  SOURCES: Branscomb, L.M., and P.E. Auerwwald. 2002. Between Invention and ­Innovation: 
An Analysis of Funding for Early-Stage Technology Development. Washington, D.C.: National 
Institute of Standards and Technology; National Research Council. 2008. An Assessment of 
the SBIR Program. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
50
MARKETS FOR TECHNOLOGY, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, 
AND U.S. UNIVERSITY TECHNOLOGY LICENSING
As is discussed above in this chapter, structural change in the U.S. R&D system 
has expanded the importance of licensing transactions involving intellectual prop-
erty, and the committee believes that these transactions play an important role in 
photonics innovation in particular. Further evidence of the increased importance 
of licensing transactions and patented intellectual property in general is provided 
by the America Invents Act (Public Law No. 112-29), which was signed into law on 
September 16, 2011. This act, which represented the first comprehensive overhaul 
of U.S. patent policy in decades, was intended in part to improve the quality of 
patents granted by the U.S. Patent Office and included steps to further harmonize 
U.S. patent policy with that of other nations.
As the discussion of lasers pointed out, U.S. universities have long been an 
important source of ideas and discoveries in the broad field of photonics. In many 
ways the role of U.S. universities in the U.S. photonics industry appears to be more 
significant than is true of university research in the photonics industries of other 
nations. The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 (Public Law No. 96-517) was passed with broad 
bipartisan support in order to catalyze the commercialization by U.S. firms of U.S. 
universities’ research advances, and in the wake of the act’s passage, U.S. university 
patenting has grown. Many if not all U.S. research universities have established 
campus offices of technology licensing to oversee the patenting and licensing to 
industry of research advances.39 In the case of the photonics industry, universities 
have clearly over the last four decades been playing an expanding role in early-stage 
R&D. For example, there has been an increase in the percent of overall publica-
tions in optoelectronics with at least one academic author over the four decades 
between 1967 and 2007.40
The expanded licensing activities of U.S. universities have also attracted con-
siderable criticism from at least some sectors of U.S. industry, notably firms in 
information technology. R. Stanley Williams of Hewlett Packard, a firm with a long 
history of close research collaboration with U.S. universities (and a firm active in 
photonics research and innovation), stated in testimony before the U.S. Senate 
Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space:
Largely as a result of the lack of federal funding for research, American Universi-
ties have become extremely aggressive in their attempts to raise funding from large 
corporations. . . . Large U.S. based corporations have become so disheartened and 
39  Although lacking precise data, the committee believes that university-licensed intellectual prop-
erty has been an important source of innovation in the U.S. photonics industry.
40  Doutriaux, T. 2009. “The Resiliency of the Innovation Ecosystem: The Impact of Offshoring on 
Firms versus Individual Technology Trajectories.” Work toward a Master’s Thesis. Advisor: E. Fuchs. 
Pittsburgh, Pa.: Carnegie Mellon University.

51
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
disgusted with the situation they are now working with foreign universities, espe-
cially the elite institutions in France, Russia and China, which are more than willing 
to offer extremely favorable intellectual property terms. (September 17, 2002)41
These remarks from a leading industrial research manager suggest that for at 
least some U.S. firms, U.S. universities’ patent and licensing policies have become an 
impediment to collaboration rather than a facilitator of such collaboration, which 
remains essential to innovation in a U.S. economy that faces challenges from foreign 
nations with increased technological capabilities. In some cases, frictions between 
university licensing professionals and U.S firms reflect an unrealistic assessment 
by university personnel of the financial returns associated with “driving a hard 
bargain” in licensing terms for a single patent. In December 2005, in response to 
this criticism and other industry statements of dissatisfaction, four large IT firms 
(Cisco, Hewlett Packard, IBM, and Intel) and six universities (Carnegie Mellon 
University; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; University of California, Berkeley; 
Stanford University; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; and University 
of Texas at Austin) agreed on a “statement of principles” for collaborative research 
on open-source software that emphasizes the liberal dissemination of the results 
of collaborative work funded by industrial firms.42
In 2007, a group of technology-licensing managers that included representa-
tives from Stanford University; the California Institute of Technology (Caltech); 
the University of California, Berkeley; and other leading U.S. research universities 
as well as the Association of American Medical Colleges, issued a list titled “In the 
Public Interest: Nine Points to Consider in Licensing University Technology” that 
emphasized the importance of ensuring access to universities’ intellectual property 
in the public interest.43 Finally, the National Research Council (NRC) convened 
a committee of experts and practitioners from industry and academia to con-
sider best practices in university technology licensing, and issued a report titled 
41  American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 2002. Statement available at http://www.
memagazine.org/contents/current/webonly/webex319.html. Accessed April 2, 2005.
42  The “Open Collaboration Principles” cover “just one type of formal collaboration that can be 
used when appropriate and will co-exist with other models, such as sponsored research, consortia 
and other types of university/industry collaborations, where the results are intended to be proprietary 
or publicly disseminated.” According to the principles, “The intellectual property created in the col-
laboration [between industry and academic researchers] must be made available for commercial and 
academic use by every member of the public free of charge for use in open source software, software 
related industry standards, software interoperability and other publicly available programs as may 
be agreed to by the collaborating parties.” Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. 2006. Available at 
http://www.kauffman.org/pdf/open_collaboration_principles_12_05.pdf. Accessed October 17, 2012. 
43  Association of University Technology Managers. 2007. “In the Public Interest: Nine Points 
to Consider in Licensing University Technology.” White paper. Available at http://www.autm.net/
Nine_Points_to_Consider.htm. Accessed July 25, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
52
Managing University Intellectual Property in the Public Interest, in 2011.44 Notable 
among the conclusions of the report was that “[university] patenting and licensing 
practices should not be predicated on the goal of raising significant revenue for 
the institution. The likelihood of success is small, the probability of disappointed 
expectations high, and the risk of distorting and narrowing dissemination efforts 
is great” (p. 5).
The committee believes that the “Nine Points” document cited above, and 
the conclusions of the NRC’s 2011 report on U.S. university technology licensing, 
provide valuable guidelines for U.S. universities’ management of their photonics-
related intellectual property. The committee supports the conclusions of these 
expert groups.
MODELS OF COLLABORATIVE R&D AND IMPLICATIONS 
FOR PHOTONICS INNOVATION
As is noted above, the structure of the U.S R&D system has changed since 1980. 
As the share of federal R&D funding has declined, so also the role of large-firm 
R&D laboratories has decreased in significance, the influence of defense-related 
procurement within maturing high-technology sectors such as lasers (and, the 
committee believes, other photonics technologies) has declined, and offshore R&D 
has grown in importance. What do these trends imply for the structure of federal 
R&D in photonics and the ability of such R&D investments to produce significant 
economic payoffs for U.S. taxpayers? In other high-technology sectors, ranging 
from nanotechnology to semiconductors, one policy that has proven useful is 
public-private collaboration in R&D.45
It is widely accepted in economics that “in the absence of policy intervention, 
the social rate of return to R&D expenditure exceeds the private rate, leading to 
a socially suboptimal rate of investment in R&D” (p. 22).46 This market failure 
raises important questions for how public policy should seek to foster increased 
investment in R&D. In addition to public funding of R&D, one useful policy tool 
to internalize the externalities (e.g., that the social benefits exceed the private-firm 
44  National Research Council. 2011. Managing University Intellectual Property in the Public Interest. 
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
45  An essential first step in developing such a policy is a better accounting of the current federal 
investment in photonics R&D.
46  Jaffe, A. 2002. Building programme evaluation into the design of public research-support pro-
grammes. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18(1):22-34.

53
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
benefits) of R&D is public-private partnerships or research.47,48 Past research has 
found a positive impact of Japanese consortia and of ATP-funded U.S. government-
industry joint ventures on the research productivity of participants in the tech-
nological areas targeted by the consortia.49,50,51 Indeed, in addition to the support 
provided by the government’s funding, research consortia can play an important 
role in supporting network formation, thus increasing knowledge flows among 
participants,52,53,54,55 and supporting skills56,57 and the creation of new industries.58
In addition to considering research consortia, this section looks at several 
less widely researched models of coordinated technology development. As Bergh 
discusses in his paper “Manufacturing Infrastructure for Optoelectronics,”59 it 
considers three models for the coordination of technology development for a 
shorter or longer term and with more or less government funding. The first model, 
SEMATECH, is a not-for-profit research consortium established in 1987 to provide 
a research facility in which member companies could improve their semiconductor 
manufacturing process technology. The second, the Optoelectronics Industry De-
velopment Association (OIDA), is a not-for-profit partnership of North American 
suppliers and users of optoelectronic components, established in 1991 to improve 
the competitiveness of the North American optoelectronics industry with public 
47  Spence, A.M. 1984. Cost reduction, competition, and industry performance. Econometrica 52(1): 
101-121.
48  Katz, M.L. 1986. An analysis of cooperative research and development. RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics 17(4):527-543.
49  Branstetter, L., and M. Sakakibara. 1998. Japanese research consortia: A microeconometric 
analysis of industrial policy. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2):207-233. 
50  Branstetter, L., and M. Sakakibara. 2002. When do research consortia work well and why? Evi-
dence from Japanese panel data. American Economic Review 92(1):143-159.
51  Sakakibara, M. 2003. Knowledge sharing in cooperative research and development. Managerial 
and Decision Economics 24:117-132.
52  Tripsas, M., S. Schrader, and M. Sobrero. 1995. Discouraging opportunistic behavior in collab-
orative R&D: A new role for government. Research Policy 24:367-389. 
53  McEvily, B., and A. Zaheer. 1999. Bridging ties: A source of firm heterogeneity in competitive 
capabilities. Strategic Management Journal 20:1133-1156.
54  Whitford, J. 2005. The New Old Economy: Networks, Institutions, and the Organizational Trans-
formation of American Manufacturing. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
55  Fuchs, E. 2010. Rethinking the role of the state in technology development: DARPA and the case 
for embedded network governance. Research Policy 39:1133-1147.
56  McEvily, B., and A. Zaheer. 1999. Bridging ties: A source of firm heterogeneity in competitive 
capabilities. Strategic Management Journal 20:1133-1156.
57  Whitford, J. 2005. The New Old Economy.
58  Fuchs, E. 2010. Rethinking the role of the state in technology development: DARPA and the case 
for embedded network governance. Research Policy 39:1133-1147.
59  Bergh, A. 1996. Manufacturing infrastructure for optoelectronics. Lasers and Electro-Optics 
Society Annual Meeting Conference Proceedings. IEEE. Lasers and Electro-Optics Society LEOS-96. 
November 18-21, 1996.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
54
funding from various agencies as well as private membership funding. The third, 
the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI), is one of the largest federal inter-
agency R&D programs; established in 2000, today it coordinates funding from 25 
federal departments and agencies for nanotechnology research and development. 
An effective industry coalition would take time and resources to develop and 
therefore would need staunch commitment by stakeholders. One goal would be 
to create a collective voice that is knowledgeable and credible to center activities in 
photonics, to provide a positive influence to the industry, and to keep government 
agencies and the public informed. The examples below provide insights into how 
these goals have been achieved through institutions in the United States historically. 
The model provided by the German Fraunhofer Institutes is discussed in Box 2.2.
Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology (SEMATECH)
As noted above, SEMATECH was established in 1987 to provide a research 
facility in which member companies could develop next-generation manufac-
BOX 2.2 
Fraunhofer Institutes
The committee heard reports about the unique and successful photonics activities of the 
German Fraunhofer Institutes. These institutes represent a novel approach to fostering leading-
edge research by a combination of universities, companies, and government. In this approach 
(1) the government provides an overarching forum and core funding, (2) the industry provides 
a healthy percentage of the funding but is focused on key areas in which the industry has 
interest, and (3) the universities provide the intellectual workforce to achieve technological 
advances. Although it is debated whether this model would be effective in the U.S. institutional 
structure, this combination has been successful in providing leadership, maintaining interest, 
and producing impressive technical advances within the German context.
Even if the full model is not transferable, aspects of these highly respected Fraunhofer 
Institutes might be valuable models for the United States, given that these institutes have been 
playing a pivotal role in technology commercialization and enabling Germany to have a leader-
ship position in photonics. For example, this model was instrumental in the recent formation 
of the €360 million High-Tech Foundation Fund. This fund includes industry and government 
participation to provide seed capital for start-up companies to commercialize technologies 
that are spun out of the Fraunhofer Institutes. This fund also enables industry leaders to steer 
critically needed seed capital to worthy photonics start-up companies without requiring govern-
ment agencies to make the selections.
  SOURCES: Fraunhofer. 2012. Available at http://www.fraunhofer.de/en/html. Accessed June 
26, 2012. See also German Center for Research and Innovation. 2012. Available at http://www.
germaninnovation.org/about-us. Accessed June 26, 2012.

55
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
turing technology.60,61 SEMATECH sought to support horizontal collaboration 
among U.S. semiconductor producers on the development of process technology. 
This initial focus, however, proved to be infeasible because of the importance of 
firm-specific process expertise for the competitive advantage of individual semi-
conductor manufacturers.62,63 As a consequence, SEMATECH altered its research 
agenda to a vertical collaboration model that sought to improve the technological 
capabilities of U.S. suppliers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment.64 This 
shift in its research agenda was associated with a shift in SEMATECH’s intellectual 
property policies—from licensing research results to member firms on an exclusive 
basis for 2 years, to member firms’ receiving priority in ordering and receiving new 
models of equipment resulting from SEMATECH-funded research.65 By the mid-
1990s, SEMATECH’s interactions with equipment and material suppliers fell into 
four main categories: joint development projects, equipment improvement proj-
ects, provision of technology “roadmaps,” and expanded communication between 
suppliers and member firms.66
Although SEMATECH’s role in the improvement of the U.S. industry’s com-
petitiveness may be difficult to prove, SEMATECH met most of its revised objec-
tives in the development of process technology, the supply of manufacturing equip-
ment, and collaboration between manufacturers, suppliers, and research centers.67 
Some research suggests that SEMATECH reduced the duplication of member R&D 
spending 68,69 and that economic returns to member companies outweighed their 
membership costs.70 Several lessons for the design and structure of public-private 
consortia can be drawn from the experience of SEMATECH. First, SEMATECH 
focused primarily on short-term research, with 80 percent of all R&D efforts 
60  Grindley, P., D. Mowery, and B. Silverman. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research: Lessons 
in the design of high-technology consortia. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 13(4):723-758.
61  Link, A., D. Teece, and W. Finan. 1996. Estimating the benefits from collaboration: The case of 
SEMATECH. Review of Industrial Organization 11:737-751.
62  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
63  Carayannis, E., and J. Alexander. 2004. Strategy, structure, and performance issues of precom-
petitive R&D consortia: Insights and lessons learned from SEMATECH. IEEE Transactions on Engi-
neering Management 51(2):226-232.
64  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
65  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
66  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
67  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
68  Irwin, D., and P. Klenow. 1996. High-tech R&D subsidies: Estimating the effects of SEMATECH. 
Journal of International Economics 40:323-344.
69  Irwin, D., and P. Klenow. 1996. SEMATECH: Purpose and performance. Proceedings of the 
­National Academy of Sciences 93:12739-12742.
70  Link, A., D. Teece, and W. Finan. 1996. Estimating the benefits from collaboration: The case of 
SEMATECH. Review of Industrial Organization 11:737-751.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
56
focused on outcomes within 1 to 3 years.71 Second, SEMATECH was organized 
originally by industry, its operations were led and its decisions directed by industry, 
and it retained substantial support in the form of funding from industry.72 Third, 
SEMATECH operated with a fairly centralized organizational structure rather than 
as an umbrella consortium of independent projects (although this characterization 
is less true for the equipment projects), which facilitated adjustment of its research 
agenda and operations in response to the changing needs of the industry.73,74 
Fourth, SEMATECH drew top executives from member firms into organizational 
decisions and management.75,76 Fifth, SEMATECH was a consortium of established 
companies with underlying strengths in product and process technology.77
Optoelectronics Industry Development Association (OIDA)
Similar to the situation in the semiconductor industry, the value of a photonics 
community coalition is apparent in providing leadership to help interface with in-
dustry and government on policy matters, as well as in informing the general public 
and the investment community on current matters. However, previous attempts 
to form photonics industry trade associations have had limited success, possibly 
because these organizations did not receive sufficiently broad industry participa-
tion. For example, the Laser Electro-Optics Manufacturers Association and OIDA 
were composed largely of photonics technology manufacturers and tended not to 
have support from the applications for those outcomes from industry. The case of 
OIDA is further discussed here.
In 1988, a National Research Council study entitled Photonics: Maintaining 
Competitiveness in the Information Era recommended the formation of “an indus-
try association that could help organize consortia to conduct cooperative research 
and address technical problems and policy issues beyond the scope of any one 
71  It is important to point out that the R&D activities of SEMATECH were complemented by 
two other initiatives. SEMI/SEMATECH represented the U.S. semiconductor equipment producers 
within SEMATECH, and operated with a modest funding base contributed by the members of the 
Semiconductor Equipment Manufacturing Industry Association (SEMI); and the Semiconductor 
Research Corporation (SRC), which enlisted the members of SEMATECH and other U.S. semicon-
ductor firms, supported long-term R&D at U.S. universities.
72  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
73  Browning, L., J. Beyer, and J. Shelter. 1995. Building cooperation in a competitive industry: 
­SEMATECH and the semiconductor industry. Academy of Management Journal 38(1):113-151.
74  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
75  Browning et al. 1995. Building cooperation in a competitive industry.
76  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.
77  Grindley et al. 1994. SEMATECH and collaborative research.

57
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
organization.”78 In 1991, OIDA was founded as a North American partnership of 
suppliers and users of optoelectronics components to improve the competitiveness 
of the North American optoelectronics industry.79 Early on, OIDA undertook an 
Optoelectronic Technology Roadmap Program, intended to identify the critical 
paths for the development of enabling optoelectronic technologies. This roadmap 
exercise concluded in 1996 that mastering volume manufacturing was essential to 
its members’ ability to reduce costs and improve competitiveness.80
The U.S. optoelectronics industry and OIDA have a long-standing association 
with NIST as well as with the Department of Defense. In October 1997, at the 
request of OIDA leaders, NIST organized a photonics manufacturing competition 
within the Advanced Technology Program (ATP) that led to the funding by ATP of 
10 proposals from industry.81 In 1992, DARPA began a series of programs, which 
continued through 2009, to promote the development of new optoelectronics tech-
nologies, including direct funding for OIDA workshops and operating expenses. In 
1994, NIST’s Optoelectronics Division was founded “to provide the optoelectronics 
industry and its suppliers and customers with comprehensive and technically ad-
vanced measurement capabilities, standards, and traceability to those standards.”82 
As indicated by NIST,83 the division’s mission was to maintain close contact with 
the optoelectronics industry through major industry associations, including the 
Optoelectronics Industry Development Association, and to represent NIST at 
the major domestic and international standards organizations in optoelectronics 
such as the Telecommunications Industry Association and the American National 
Standards Institute. This division is now part of the new Quantum Electronics and 
Photonics Division.84
OIDA remains active in technology roadmapping and in the improvement of 
member-firm capabilities in high-volume manufacturing, including support for 
such “R&D infrastructure” as an optoelectronics foundry.85 Although the found-
78  National Research Council. 1988. Photonics: Maintaining Competitiveness in the Information Era. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
79  Bergh, A. 1996. Manufacturing Infrastructure for Optoelectronics.
80  Bergh, A. 1996. Manufacturing Infrastructure for Optoelectronics.
81  Kammer, R., Director, National Institute of Standards and Technology. 1998. Prepared Remarks. 
Optoelectronics Industry Development Association. Washington, D.C., October 2.
82  National Research Council. 1999. An Assessment of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology Measurement and Standards Laboratories: Fiscal Year 1999. Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy Press. 
83  More information is available from the NIST Physical Measurement Laboratory at http://www.
nist.gov/pml/. Accessed August 6, 2012. 
84  Quantum Electronics and Photonics Division. Physical Measurement Laboratory, National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology (NIST), website. Available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/div686/. 
Accessed July 25, 2012.
85  These efforts have produced few measureable outcomes.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
58
ing membership of OIDA included larger companies, such as AT&T, Bellcore, 
Corning, IBM, 3M, Hewlett-Packard Company, and Motorola, the number of 
member companies has declined over the course of OIDA’s history. Further, in 
contrast to SEMATECH membership, many OIDA member firms are smaller, 
with less developed technologies, and membership fees for all are low compared 
to SEMATECH—in the low thousands to tens of thousands. Along with its modest 
industry funding, a key challenge for OIDA is that of enlisting the participation of 
senior industry executives in managerial positions. Perhaps most importantly, in 
contrast to SEMATECH, OIDA has lacked a clear R&D agenda. This consortium’s 
inability to develop such a focus reflects the diversity of applications characteristic 
of photonic semiconductors, which complicates agreement among member firms 
on technological goals. Inasmuch as photonics manufacturing technology is less 
mature than semiconductor process technologies, the optoelectronics industry 
might be better served by a university-government-private partnership that focuses 
more intensively on early-stage R&D. The Semiconductor Research Corporation 
(SRC) is an interesting contrast to SEMATECH in this respect. (See Box 2.3.)
BOX 2.3 
Semiconductor Research Corporation
The Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) is another semiconductor research and 
development consortium whose structure contrasts with that of SEMATECH. In 1982, the 
Semiconductor Industry Association launched the Semiconductor Research Association as 
a cooperative research organization to “enhance basic research in semiconductor related 
disciplines” by funding “long-term, pre-competitive research in semiconductor technology at 
U.S. universities.” In contrast to SEMATECH—which was created in 1987 out of an SRC initia-
tive—SRC uses horizontal collaborations between member firms and academic researchers to 
define and fund long-term technology developments central to the survival and success of the 
semiconductor industry.
In addition to SRC’s receiving funding from member firms, SRC program directors also 
seek matching funds from federal, state, and local governments. Federal-level collaborators 
have included the U.S. Army Research Office, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agen-
cy, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the National Science Foundation.
In 2000, the SRC board committed to globalizing the SRC membership and research 
base. To date, however, little empirical research exists on the history, processes, or successes 
of SRC. SRC is viewed by several of its member companies as an ongoing success and war-
rants further study as an interesting model for research consortia focused on long-term pre-
competitive research.
  SOURCE: Semiconductor Research Corporation. 2012. “About Semiconductor Research 
Corporation.” Available at http://www.src.org/about/. Accessed August 3, 2012.

59
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
National Nanotechnology Initiative
In September 1998, the Interagency Working Group on Nanotechnology (IWGN) 
was formed within the National Science and Technology Council of the Office of Sci-
ence and Technology Policy.86 As described in the National Research Council’s 2002 
report Small Wonders, Endless Frontiers: A Review of the National Nano­technology 
Initiative (from which material in this paragraph is drawn substantially and, in some 
cases, extracted), this group formalized the operations of a set of staff members 
from several agencies that in November 1996 had begun to meet regularly to dis-
cuss their plans and programs in nanoscale science and technology. In August 1999, 
IWGN’s plan for an initiative in nanoscale science and technology was approved by 
the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) and OSTP, 
and in its 2001 budget submission to Congress, the Clinton administration raised 
nanoscale science and technology to a federal initiative, referring to it as the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI). The National Science and Technology Council (a 
cabinet-level committee with membership drawn from federal agencies across the 
government) formed the Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology (NSET) 
Subcommittee to focus on NNI activities. The National Nanotechnology Coordi-
nation Office, established in 2001, provides technical guidance and administrative 
support to the NSET Subcommittee, facilitates multiagency planning, conducts 
activities and workshops, and prepares information and reports. The NRC also 
provides feedback to NNI through its triennial review of NNI;87 such a review is 
currently ongoing.88
Today NNI is one of the largest federal interagency R&D programs, coordinat-
ing funding for nanotechnology research and development among 25 participating 
federal departments and agencies. Its federal funding grew from $225 million in 
FY 1999 to $464 million in 200189 and an estimated $1.639 billion in 2010.90,91 As 
86  National Research Council. 2002. Small Wonders, Endless Frontiers: A Review of the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
87  National Research Council. 2006. A Matter of Size: Triennial Review of the National Nanotechnol-
ogy Initiative. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 
88  See National Research Council. 2012. “Interim Report for the Triennial Review of the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative, Phase II.” Prepublication copy. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press. Available at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13517. Accessed October 23, 2012. 
89  National Research Council. 2002. Small Wonders, Endless Frontiers.
90  National Research Council. 2002. Small Wonders, Endless Frontiers.
91  Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP): A Decade of Investments in Innovation Co-
ordinated Through the National Nanotechnology Initiative. National Nanotechnology Initiative 
Investments by Agency from FY 2001 through FY 2010. OSTP’s “High Value Data Sets.” The White 
House. Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ostp/library/highvalue. Accessed 
December 26, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
60
stated on the NNI webpage,92 NNI has four goals: (1) maintain a world-class re-
search and development program aimed at realizing the full potential of nanotech-
nology; (2) facilitate the transfer of new technologies into products for economic 
growth, jobs, and other public benefit; (3) develop educational resources, a skilled 
workforce, and the supporting infrastructure and tools to advance nanotechnol-
ogy; and (4) support responsible development of nanotechnology.
NNI has facilitated several developments to enhance dialogue and coordination 
among nanoscale R&D programs at federal agencies; these include working groups, 
an infrastructure network involving an integrated partnership of user facilities at 
13 campuses across the United States, centers to support the development of tools 
for fabrication and analysis at the nanoscale, and NNI-industry consultative boards 
to facilitate networking among industry, government, and academic researchers, 
analyze policy impacts at the state level, and support programmatic and budget 
redirection within agencies. In contrast to either OIDA or SEMATECH, NNI is 
focused more intensively on priority setting and support for more fundamental, 
long-term research in this emerging technology.
Given the diversity of applications characteristic of photonics and the relative 
immaturity both of much of the science and much of the industry, the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative may provide an interesting model for the increased 
coordination and tracking of long-term funding of research in photonics. Since 
the writing of the 1998 NRC report Harnessing Light: Optical Sciences and Engi-
neering for the 21st Century,93 there has been an explosion of new applications for 
photonics. Indeed, in spite of the maturity of some of the constituent elements of 
photonics (e.g., optics), the committee believes that photonics as a whole is likely to 
experience a period of growth in opportunities and applications that more nearly 
resembles what might be expected of a vibrantly young technology.
SUMMARY COMMENTS
The preceding overview of some recent experiments in collaborative R&D 
makes apparent several implications for similar efforts in photonics. First, industry 
participation and leadership, both intellectual and financial, are essential. Second, 
such an industry commitment to collaborative R&D may be more difficult in a sec-
tor that spans a diverse array of applications and is populated mainly by new, rela-
tively small firms. Finally, consortia (such as SEMATECH) in which industry plays 
a major role in establishing and funding the R&D agenda may not be well suited 
for supporting long-term research. An interesting exception may be the model 
92  National Nanotechnology Initiative. Available at http://www.nano.gov/. Accessed August 6, 2012.
93  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

61
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
presented by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (see Box 2.3), which has 
supported work by academic researchers in the United States. Nonetheless, given 
that SRC programs tend to focus on developing technologies to achieve specific end 
goals that involve stakeholders from a single industry, the long-term precompetitive 
research agenda supported by the SRC may be insufficient by itself to deal with the 
diversity of applications that are the focus of R&D within the field of photonics.
Rather than endorsing any single structure for the support of R&D that in-
volves collaboration among industry, government, and academic researchers, the 
committee believes that a higher-level venue for discussion and assessment of R&D 
priorities is needed. Any such structure could include among its activities R&D 
consortia of the type represented by SRC, or SEMATECH, or still other models for 
collaborative R&D. A research consortium is more likely to succeed in a focused 
application of the optics and photonics landscape. In the absence of some coordi-
nating initiative, it will prove difficult to develop an effective strategy for public and 
private R&D investment that seeks to support longer-term R&D and to translate 
innovation into economic opportunities for U.S. firms and employees across the 
diversity of emerging photonics applications. Accordingly, the committee’s judg-
ment is that the time is overdue for a federal initiative in photonics that seeks to 
engage industry, academic, and government researchers and policy makers in the 
design and oversight of R&D and related programs that include federal as well as 
industry funding.
Proposed National Photonics Initiative
A national photonics initiative would coordinate agency-level investment in 
photonics-related R&D and could provide partial support for other technology-
development initiatives, including R&D consortia funded by federal and industry 
sources. The committee believes that a number of experiments in coordinating 
across industry-government-academia in different fields of R&D and technology 
development are warranted. As pointed out in the next chapter, “Communications, 
Information Processing, and Data Storage,” one application area that may be par-
ticularly ripe for such a public-private consortium is large-scale data communica-
tions and storage, now the focus of an initiative overseen by OSTP.94 Finally, as with 
NNI, a national photonics initiative would assume responsibility for developing, 
coordinating, and measuring federal funding and national outputs (such as eco-
nomic indicators) in photonics, to help inform national policy.
94  Office of Science and Technology Policy. 2012. “Big Data Press Release.” Available at http://www.
whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/big_data_press_release_final_2.pdf. Accessed July 
30, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
62
FINDINGS
Key Finding:  Photonics is a key enabling technology with broad applications in 
numerous sectors of the U.S. economy. The diversity of applications associated 
with photonics technologies makes it difficult to quantify accurately the economic 
impacts of photonics in the past and even more difficult to predict the future eco-
nomic and employment impacts of photonics.
Key Finding:  Given the diversity of its applications and the enabling character of 
photonics technology, data on photonics industry output, employment, and firm-
financed R&D investment are not currently reported by U.S. government statistical 
agencies, further complicating analysis of this technology’s economic impact and 
prospects. Although the 1998 National Research Council study Harnessing Light: 
Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century reached a similar conclusion 
and recommended that members of the photonics community be involved in the 
next round of Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) or North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS) development, no such action was taken by federal 
statistical agencies.
Finding:  Another significant gap in the economic data on photonics is a lack 
of systematic collection or reporting by the federal government of its significant 
investment in photonics R&D. As a result, the most basic data are lacking for esti-
mating the overall federal R&D investment in this technology field or the allocation 
of federal photonics R&D investments among different fields and applications.
Finding:  The private organizations that monitor U.S. venture-capital investment 
trends also do not collect information on the full spectrum of photonics-related 
venture-capital investments. Changes in the structure of the U.S. R&D and in-
novation systems mean that the importance of venture-capital funding for the 
formation of new firms in photonics, as well as for these firms’ investments in 
R&D and technology commercialization, has grown; thus these gaps in data on 
venture-capital investment hamper the ability to monitor innovation in photonics.
Finding:  Many of the important early U.S. innovations in photonics relied on 
R&D performed in large industrial laboratories and benefited as well from defense-
related R&D and procurement spending. The structure of the R&D and innovation 
processes in photonics, similar to other U.S. high-technology industries, appears 
to have changed somewhat, with universities, smaller firms, and venture-capital 
finance playing more prominent roles. These changes in the structure of R&D 
funding and performance within photonics increase the potential importance of 
inter-firm collaboration and public-private collaboration in photonics innovation.

63
I m p a c t  o f  P h o t o n i c s  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  E c o n o m y
RECOMMENDATIONS
Key Recommendation:  The committee recommends that the federal govern-
ment develop an integrated initiative in photonics (similar in many respects to 
the National Nanotechnology Initiative) that seeks to bring together academic, 
industrial, and government researchers, managers, and policy makers to develop a 
more integrated approach to managing industrial and government photonics R&D 
spending and related investments.
This recommendation is based on the committee’s judgment that the photonics 
field is experiencing rapid technical progress and rapidly expanding applications 
that span a growing range of technologies, markets, and industries. Indeed, in spite 
of the maturity of some of the constituent elements of photonics (e.g., optics), 
the committee believes that the field as a whole is likely to experience a period of 
growth in opportunities and applications that more nearly resembles what might 
be expected of a vibrantly young technology. But the sheer breadth of these ap-
plications and technologies has impeded the formulation by both government 
and industry of coherent strategies for technology development and deployment.
A national photonics initiative would identify critical technical priorities for 
long-term federal R&D funding. In addition to offering a basis for coordinating 
federal spending across agencies, such an initiative could provide matching funds 
for industry-led research consortia (of users, producers, and material and equip-
ment suppliers) focused on specific applications, such as those described in Chap-
ter 3 of this report. In light of near-term pressures to limit the growth of or even 
reduce federal R&D spending, the committee believes that a coordinated initiative 
in photonics is especially important.
The committee assesses as deplorable the state of data collection and analysis of 
photonics R&D spending, photonics employment, and sales. The development of 
better historical and current data collection and analysis is another task for which 
a national photonics initiative is well suited.
Key Recommendation:  The committee recommends that the proposed national 
photonics initiative spearhead a collaborative effort to improve the collection and 
reporting of R&D and economic data on the optics and photonics sector, includ-
ing the development of a set of North American Industry Classification System 
(­NAICS) codes that cover photonics; the collection of data on employment, output, 
and privately funded R&D in photonics; and the reporting of federal photonics-
related R&D investment for all federal agencies and programs.
It is essential that an initiative such as the proposed national photonics initia-
tive be supported by coordinated measurement of the inputs and outputs in the 
sector such that national policy in the area can be informed by the technical and 
economic realities on the ground in the nation.

64
3
Communications, Information 
Processing, and Data Storage
INTRODUCTION
Optics has become the way by which most information is sent over nearly all 
the distance that it travels. The remarkable growth of networks and the Internet 
over the past decade has been enabled by previous generations of optical technol-
ogy. Optics is, furthermore, the only technology with the physical headroom to 
keep up with this exponentially growing demand for communicating information. 
The exceptionally high carrier frequency allows transmission of high bandwidths. 
Satisfying that future demand will, however, require the continued research and 
development (R&D) of new technology for optics and continued innovation in its 
interface with electronics. The use of optics will not be restricted to the traditional 
market of long-distance telecommunication. Increasingly optics will be used for 
ever-shorter distances, possibly providing few-millimeter or shorter links between 
the silicon chips themselves. One key driver for such shorter distances will be to 
attain sufficient density of communications. A second key driver will be to control 
the growing power dissipation that is due to switching/transmission elements and 
the environmental impact of information processing. This chapter summarizes 
the developments in optics over the last 15 years (i.e., since the publication of the 
National Research Council’s [NRC’s] Harnessing Light1) in information commu-
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

65
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
nications, processing, and storage and indicates key directions for the future for 
optics in these fields.
Communications
Optical communications networks provide the underlying high-capacity, ubiq-
uitous connectivity that underpins the global Internet. Figure 3.1 characterizes 
the growth of communication and computing between 1986 and 2007, based on 
a broad collection of data.2 Approximately around the year 2000, Internet traffic 
took over from voice telephone as the single largest communication format for 
information. Now Internet traffic dominates completely. All of the long-distance 
communications on the Internet are over optical fiber.
Major advances in transmission techniques and technologies have allowed 
network providers to provide extremely cost-effective network upgrades that have 
kept pace with the extraordinary appetite for broadband Internet services. That 
growth, as exemplified in Figure 3.1, has driven network bandwidth demands by 
a factor of 100 over the last 10 years. That increase has been enabled by realizing 
the full potential of wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) that has resulted in 
fibers carrying as many as 100 separate wavelengths. In addition, the capacity per 
wavelength in commercially deployed terrestrial networks has increased from a 
maximum of 10 gigabits per second (Gb/s) per wavelength when the first edition 
of Harnessing Light was published in 1998, to 100 Gb/s today. As a result, per fiber 
transmission capacities in terrestrial systems today as high as 5-10 terabits per 
second (Tb/s) are possible.3 Transoceanic capacities have lagged somewhat behind 
terrestrial values because the long amplifier-only distances and the desire to extend 
the amplifier spacing have made upgrading to per wavelength capacities above 10 
Gb/s problematic. Nevertheless, transoceanic per fiber capacities of approximately 
1 Tb/s are typical. For the future there are expectations that this growth will con-
tinue as more video content calls for bandwidth and that there is a need for another 
factor-of-100 growth in the coming 10 years as well.
Major advances have also been achieved in both cost-effectively managing the 
large capacity in today’s WDM optical networks and in leveraging the value propo-
sition of optical amplifiers to provide multi-wavelength amplification over network 
mesh and ring architectures. Reconfigurable, wavelength-routed networks—in 
which wavelength-defined units of capacity can be added, dropped, or switched 
2  Hilbert, M., and P. Lopez. 2011. The world’s technological capacity to store, communicate, and 
compute information. Science 332(6025):60-65.
3  Alferness, R.C. 2008. “Optical Communications—A View to the Future.” 24th European Confer-
ence on Optical Communications, Brussels, Belgium, September 22. Available at http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4729111&tag=1. Accessed June 26, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
66
from one fiber route to another fiber route directly in the optical domain without 
the need for conversion to electronics—are now heavily deployed in long-haul ter-
restrial networks as well as metropolitan networks. Wavelength-routed networks 
provide cost-effective solutions because they allow data on wavelengths passing 
through a node at a multi-route network node to remain in the optical domain and 
benefit from the cost-effective multi-wavelength amplification enabled by optical 
amplifiers, rather than needing to be individually electronically regenerated. The 
large increase in capacity demand has ensured that a prerequisite for the economic 
viability of such networks—namely, that the capacity demand between any two 
node pairs on the network be at least as large as that which can be carried by a 
single wavelength—is met.
WDM optical networks require reconfigurable optical add/drop multiplexers 
(ROADMs) to, under network electrical control, drop or add wavelength chan-
nels at a node and to switch wavelength channels from one fiber route to another. 
ROADMs are key enablers that have evolved significantly in their functionality, 
providing increasing levels of flexibility, and in their capacity, or number of fiber 
ports and wavelengths per fiber, over the last decade. Further progress in these 
network elements and their enabling technologies will be essential to addressing 
the growing demand for capacity.
FIGURE 3.1  Traffic In bytes per second (B/s) (1 byte = 8 bits) on the Internet, on voice telephone, and 
overall, 1986-2007. Also shown is the capacity to compute in general-purpose machines, expressed 
in millions of instructions per second (MIPS). SOURCE: MIPS graph based on data extracted from 
Hilbert, M., and P. Lopez. 2011. The world’s technological capacity to store, communicate, and com-
pute information. Science 332(6025):60-65.

67
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
Ultimately, networks are no better than the access capacity that they provide to 
the end user, whether that customer is a business or a residence. Increasingly that 
access is through an optical link. The last decade has seen significant increase in 
the deployment of fiber in the access network, initially to the curb, but increasingly 
also directly to the business or home.
The United States is not a world leader in fiber to the home or business. It 
ranks roughly at number 11 among the countries in the world, with approximately 
7 percent penetration. The penetration of fiber to the home in the United States 
is roughly 5 percent.4
Passive optical networks (PONs) are the primary broadband optical delivery 
architecture, providing the shared bandwidth of a fiber to multiple users (16 to 
64 users). Initially, systems provided shared bandwidth of 2.5 Gb/s. New systems 
operating at a total bandwidth of 10 Gb/s are becoming available. Just as wavelength 
multiplexing has provided cost-effective bandwidth enhancement in long-haul 
and metropolitan networks, as capacity demand in the access network increases 
to enable new broadband services, it is expected that WDM will be employed for 
capacity expansion. A critical requirement will be robust, low-cost WDM optical 
components to operate in the outside plant. Research in this area at a somewhat 
modest level is ongoing; an example of U.S.-funded research in this area is the 
National Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering Research Center for Integrated 
Access Networks.5
In spite of the dramatic achievements that optics has brought to communica-
tion networks over the last decade (or, perhaps, because of them), the demand for 
higher bandwidth, both in the fixed and the mobile domains, continues to grow 
rapidly. Comparing projections from a number of sources, it seems conservative 
to suggest that network capacity demand will grow at the rate of at least a factor 
of 100 over the next 10 years, approximately following the recent historical trend 
shown in Figure 3.1.6 Ubiquitous video is the key driver. Increasingly that video is 
two-way as more end users upload video to sharing websites. Mobile video is also 
growing at an extremely rapid rate—92 percent compound annual growth rate 
according to a Cisco report7—that puts large bandwidth demand on the backhaul 
4  Montagne, R. 2010. “Understanding the Digital World.” Presented at the FTTH Council Eu-
rope Conference. Available at http://www.ftthcouncil.eu/documents/Reports/Market_Data_Decem 
ber_2010.pdf. Accessed June 26, 2012.
5  More information is available at the website of the Center for Integrated Access Networks at www.
cian-erc.org. Accessed June 26, 2012.
6  Korotky, S.K., R.-J., Essiambre, and R.W. Tkach. 2010. Expectations of optical network traffic gain 
afforded by bit rate adaptive transmission. Bell Labs Technical Journal 1(4):285-296.
7  CISCO. 2012. “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2010-2015.” White pa-
per. Available at http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/
white_paper_c11-481360.pdf. Accessed June 26, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
68
network, which is increasingly requiring optical links. One can expect also that 
increasingly mobile backhaul will not be done by point-to-point links as is done 
today, but rather will be part of an extended-access network which serves end 
points that include wireless base stations, small enterprises, curb drops, and homes.
Broadband mobility will require ubiquitous, cost-effective backhaul, resulting 
in the convergence of wire-line and wireless networks that are currently often sepa-
rate. The nature of traffic in an Internet- and video-driven network could suggest 
different overall network architecture, with merging between the metropolitan and 
access networks. Integration of data centers into the network is key today and will 
be even more so in the future, especially as cloud services become more pervasive. 
Already in 2003, the NRC’s Committee on Coping with Increasing Demands on 
Government Data Centers stated:
Recommendation: Data centers should aggressively adopt newer, more “bleeding 
edge” technical approaches where there might be significant return on investment. 
This should be done carefully to minimize the inevitable failures that will occur 
along the way. Even with the failures, the committee believes the cost savings and 
improvements for end users will be substantial when compared to the methods 
practiced today.8
Just as capacity demand has required the advantages of optics to be pushed further 
to the edges of the network, data centers will increasingly depend on optics for 
interconnection, and eventually for reconfigurability and switching. A future of 
“cloud services” in which most if not all digital services are performed by shared 
resources in the network is looking increasingly attractive. This new paradigm, 
which would depend on ubiquitous, instant, and highly reliable access to the net-
work, could place demands on the network equivalent to those of the transition 
from voice to data in the late 1990s. The advent of WDM, made cost-effective with 
the optical amplifier, has enabled the cost-effective scaling of optical point-to-point 
transmission systems to meet the exponential demand growth. ROADMs and opti-
cal cross-connects have made it possible to leverage that advantage to multi-node 
ring and mesh networks. As a result, optical networks that underpin the Internet 
have been able to keep pace with exploding demand over the last 10 years. How-
ever, realistically, the several-orders-of-magnitude capacity increase resulting from 
many wavelengths will not be duplicated by simply adding even more wavelengths, 
because of limited optical amplifier bandwidth and fiber power limits in the fiber 
to mitigate transmission impairment.9
8  National Research Council. 2003. Government Data Centers: Meeting Increasing Demands. Wash-
ington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
9  Chraplyvy, A. 2009. “The Coming Capacity Crunch.” Plenary paper. 35th European Conference 
on Optical Communications, Vienna, Austria, September 21. Available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5287305&tag=1. Accessed June 26, 2012.

69
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
The optical communication industry is highly challenged to find the key new 
technologies, architectures, and techniques that will enable cost-effective growth in 
capacity to keep up with the capacity demand that video, including mobile video, 
will make on the network. Achieving that goal by simply increasing the number 
of wavelengths, or by increasing the bit rate per wavelength, appears unlikely with 
known or incrementally improved technology. Therefore, some fundamentally 
new optical solutions that build on top of today’s WDM optical networks will be 
urgently required in order to ensure that the global Internet is able to continue to 
serve as the engine for economic growth. It is estimated that without new tech-
nology developments, Internet growth will be constrained starting between 2013 
and 2014.
Information Processing
The main, and growing, use of optics in information processing is to connect 
information within and between information switching and processing machines. 
There are substantial physical reasons—specifically, reducing power dissipation and 
increasing the density of information communications—why optics is preferable 
and ultimately possibly essential for such connections.10 The idea of using optics 
for performing the logical switching in information processing—as in some kind 
of optical transistor—is one that has continuing research interest, although the 
criteria for success there are challenging,11 and no such use appears imminent. 
The last decade has seen sustained research interest in very advanced ideas such as 
quantum computing,12 although such ideas remain very much in fundamental re-
search. Optics, however, is likely to have very important roles in any such quantum 
computing or quantum communications—for example, as the best means of com-
municating quantum states over any meaningful distance—and optics might also 
be important in future quantum gates. Quantum encryption, a means of sending 
key information with immunity to any eavesdropping, has seen first commercial 
optical systems. In the meantime, efforts are needed to create systems that utilize 
the best combination of optics and electronics to enable integrated systems for 
efficient information processing.
In the practical connection of information, optics has increasingly taken over 
the role of data communications within local networks for information process-
ing systems such as data centers, supercomputers, and storage area networks, for 
10  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips. Proceedings 
of the IEEE 97:1166-1185.
11  Miller, D.A.B. 2010. Are optical transistors the next logical step? Nature Photonics 4:3-5.
12  Nielsen, M.A., and I.L. Chuang. 2000. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information. Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
70
distances from approximately 100 meters to 10s of kilometers. Commercial ap-
proaches include optics in networking architectures such as Ethernet, Fiber Chan-
nel, and Infiniband, especially as data rates and data densities rise, and in active 
optical cables that are internally optical but externally have electrical inputs and 
outputs. Low cost is particularly critical for shorter distances. Consequently, such 
data communications have often used technologies different from the long-haul 
telecommunications approaches, such as vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers 
and laser arrays, and multi-mode (rather than single-mode) optical fibers for the 
shorter distances. The use of optics in such networks is likely to steadily increase 
because of continuing increases in network traffic and information processing.
As can be seen in Figure 3.1, the ability to compute information, as indicated 
by the growth of the computational power (expressed in millions of instructions 
per second [MIPS] that can be executed by the general-purpose silicon chips that 
are sold),13 has approximately the same growth rate as that of Internet traffic. The 
ability to connect information within information processing systems is, however, 
hitting increasingly severe limits. The ability of wires to interconnect does not scale 
well to higher densities, especially for information communications outside the sili-
con chips themselves (“off-chip” communications). This point is well understood 
by the semiconductor industry, as shown, for example, in its projections of an 
off-chip interconnect bottleneck.14 The interconnect capability of electrical wires 
between chips, or processor cores, is not going to scale to keep up with the ability 
to compute—sometimes called the bytes per flops (floating point operations per 
second) gap.15 Thus, although Internet bandwidth and raw computational power 
in MIPS or flops might continue to scale, the systems performance in between will 
not, unless a new interconnect technology is introduced that can scale in capacity.
High-performance silicon chips today, as characterized, for example, by the 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) numbers,16 already 
have interconnect capabilities well into the range of multiple terabits per second 
per chip. To scale to keep up with processing power, future chips in the 2020 time 
frame would need 100s of terabits per second of interconnect capability, an amount 
of interconnect for one chip that is comparable to the entire Internet traffic today. It 
is worth noting that generally there is likely much more information sent inside in-
formation processing systems than is sent between them. One order-of-magnitude 
13  Hilbert M., and P. Lopez. 2011. The world’s technological capacity to store, communicate, and 
compute information. Science 332(6025):60-65.
14  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
15  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
16  More information is available through the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconduc-
tors at http://www.itrs.net/Links/2010ITRS/Home2010.htm. Accessed June 26, 2012.

71
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
estimate17 is that each byte traversing the Internet causes approximately 1 million 
bytes of data communications within data centers.
The large and increasing interconnected bandwidth inside information pro-
cessing systems creates problems both for density of interconnects and for power 
sourcing and dissipation. Interconnecting one bit of information off a chip cur-
rently involves several to 10s of picojoules (pJ) of energy. A substantial portion (e.g., 
50 to 80 percent) of all power dissipation on silicon chips is used to interconnect 
the information rather than to perform logic.18 Power dissipation in general is a 
severe limitation on information processing; for example, the clock rate on main-
stream silicon chips has not changed substantially in recent years because higher 
clock rates would lead to too much power dissipation. A recent NRC study19 on 
supercomputing also emphasizes this problem with power dissipation and the 
need, in particular, to reduce interconnection power while maintaining or even 
increasing the byte-per-flops ratio.
Power dissipation in information processing is already environmentally sig-
nificant. Electricity used in data centers in 2010 likely accounted for between 1.1 
and 1.5 percent of total electricity use globally, and between 1.7 and 2.2 percent of 
electricity use in the United States.20 The power dissipation in interconnects in serv-
ers alone has been estimated to exceed solar power generation capacity.21 Of course, 
information processing and communication can have substantial environmental 
benefits in improving the efficiency of many activities and in reducing travel.22 
But, if current growth trends in Internet traffic and in information processing 
continue, reducing the energy per bit processed and/or communicated will be 
crucial. Even though sending a bit over the Internet might take approximately 
10 nanojoules (nJ)/bit23 compared to 10s of pJ/bit for off-chip interconnects, the 
vastly greater number of bits being sent inside the machine (approximately 106 
17  G. Astfalk. 2009. Why optical data communications and why now? Applied Physics A: Materials 
Science and Processing 95(4): 933-940.
18  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
19  National Research Council. 2010. The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next 
Level? Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
20  Koomey, Jonathan. 2011. Growth in Data Center Electricity Use 2005 to 2010. Oakland, Calif.: 
Analytics Press. Available at http://www.analyticspress.com/datacenters.html. Accessed October 27, 
2011.
21  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
22  The Climate Group. 2008. SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the Information 
Age. A report by the Climate Group on behalf of the Global eSustainability Initiative. Available at 
http://www.smart2020.org/_assets/files/02_Smart2020Report.pdf. Accessed June 26, 2012.
23  Tucker, R.S., R. Parthiban, J. Baliga, K. Hinton, R.W.A. Ayre, and W.V. Sorin. 2009. Evolu-
tion of WDM optical IP networks: A cost and energy perspective. Journal of Lightwave Technology 
27:243-252.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
72
times24) means that the power dissipation inside information processing machines 
may substantially dominate over telecommunications power. Hence reducing in-
terconnect power inside machines is crucial for controlling power dissipation in 
information processing.
The research understanding of the reasons for, and the requirements on, op-
tics and optoelectronics for such shorter connections is now relatively complete 
and consistent.25,26 Optics helps in two ways. First, optics can carry information 
at much higher density than is possible in electrical wires, as is essential for future 
scaling of interconnect capacity. Second, optics can fundamentally save energy 
in interconnects because it completely avoids the need for charging wires (the 
charging of electrical wires to the signal voltage is the dominant source of energy 
dissipation in electrical interconnects).
The key challenges in short-distance, high-density, low-energy optical inter-
connect are technological: optoelectronic devices must operate with very low ener-
gies—for example, 10 femtojoules (fJ)/bit—much lower than have been required 
for telecommunications and data communications until now. For cost and perfor-
mance reasons, the optical and optoelectronic technologies have to be integrated 
with electronics in a mass-manufacturable process.
New technologies have been advancing in research and early product intro-
ductions over the last decade, especially in terms of devising ways of combining 
optics, optoelectronics, and electronics in silicon chips and platforms (silicon 
photonics).27,28 These technological opportunities are discussed below.
Data Storage
The past decade has seen the maturation of technologies such as the DVD 
(digital versatile disk) for the distribution of consumer video, and the emergence 
of third-generation disk technologies such as Blu-ray for higher density. Research 
continues on possible fourth-generation optical disks, including multi-layer and 
possible holographic recording. Optics may also have crucial roles to play in 
other potential emerging technologies such as HAMR (heat-assisted magnetic 
24  Astfalk, G. 2009. Why optical data communications and why now? Applied Physics A: Materials 
Science and Processing 95:933-940.
25  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
26  Astfalk, G. 2009. Why optical data communications and why now? Applied Physics A: Materials 
Science and Processing 95:933-940.
27  Lipson, M. 2005. Guiding, modulating, and emitting light on silicon—Challenges and opportu-
nities. Journal of Lightwave Technolology 23(12):4222-4238.
28  Jalali, B., and S. Fathpour. 2006. Silicon photonics. Journal of Lightwave Technolology 24(12): 
4600-4615.

73
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
recording)29 for next-generation magnetic hard drives, for which near-field optics 
using nanophotonic technologies may provide the precise heating required.
The picture for the future of optical disks like DVDs is less clear because of the 
competition from other forms of storage, such as flash memory (memory sticks), 
and from networks. Whether optical disks will have the role in the distribution of 
data and entertainment, such as movies and games, which they have had in the 
past is debatable because of the growth of broadband networks as an alternative 
distribution channel—as, for example, in the growing use of video on demand 
over the Internet.
IMPACT EXAMPLE: THE INTERNET
As is now readily self-evident, the Internet has transformed the way in which 
society operates. Previous conceptualizations of distance and geography have dis-
appeared in a maze of ubiquitous cellular telephones, e-mail, web browsing, and 
social networking. Indeed, the productivity of people coming of age after the mid-
1990s is intertwined with the easily available communication and information 
found through the Internet.
Initially the Internet was not reliant on optical communications. However, data 
transfer rates during those formative times were painfully slow. Without optical 
technologies, conventional methods were utilized: users depended on slow, dial-up 
modems, e-mails occasionally took hours before arriving at their destination, and 
making intercontinental phone calls involved an annoying delay between speaking 
and listening.
Optics changed the Internet and data transfer by increasing the capacity of the 
system by nearly 10,000-fold over the past two decades. The nearly instantaneous 
nature of current optical-based communication allows for real-time video chats. 
Telepresence, telemedicine, and tele-education would not be possible without op-
tics. In short, without optics, the Internet as we know it would not exist. As it was 
stated in 2006 by the NRC Committee on Telecommunications Research and De-
velopment: “Telecommunications has expanded greatly over the past few decades 
from primarily landline telephone service to the use of fiber optic, cable, and wire-
less connections offering a wide range of voice, image, video, and data services.”30
The same report continues:
Yet it is not a mature industry, and major innovation and change—driven by re-
search—can be expected for many years to come.
29  Kryder, M.H., E.C. Gage, T.W. McDaniel, W.A. Challener, R.E. Rottmayer, G. Ju, Y.-T. Hsia, and 
M.R. Erden. 2008. Heat assisted magnetic recording. Proceedings of the IEEE 96:1810-1835.
30  National Research Council. 2006. Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research. Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press, pp. 1-20.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
74
Without an expanded investment in research, however, the nation’s position as a 
leader is at risk. Strong competition is emerging from Asian and European countries 
that are making substantial investments in telecommunications R&D.
For many telecommunications products and services that are now commodities, 
the United States is at a competitive disadvantage compared with countries where 
the cost of doing business is lower. Continued U.S. strength in telecommunications, 
therefore, will require a focus on high-value innovation that is made possible only 
by a greater emphasis on research. Expansion of telecommunications research is also 
necessary to attract, train, and retain research talent.
Telecommunications research has yielded major benefits such as the Internet, 
radio frequency wireless communications, optical networks, and voice over Inter-
net Protocol. Promising opportunities for future research include enhanced Internet 
architectures, more trustworthy networks, and adaptive and cognitive wireless net-
works.31
The 2002 NRC study Atoms, Molecules, and Light: AMO Science Enabling the 
Future stated:
Internet optical backbone link capacity increased a hundredfold between 1995 
and 1998, to 20,000 trillion bits per second. While the communications industry 
has recently suffered a downturn, the potential for increasing demand for capacity 
in the 21st century remains, with features and services such as HDTV, broadband 
communications, and advanced home security systems becoming more available 
through the use of optical fiber, wireless, satellite, and cable connections.32
The use of optics, however, is not always obvious to the casual observer. Often 
someone can be seen using a cell phone to perform an Internet search. Where is 
the optics? The cell phone uses a wireless radio connection to a local cell tower, 
but that radio signal is converted to an optical data stream and sent along the fiber 
optic network across the planet. The data search itself, such as through Google, 
relies on data centers in which clusters of co-located computers talk to each other 
through high-capacity optical cables. In fact, there can be as many as a million 
lasers in a given data center.
During the introduction to the 2009 Nobel Prize Lecture by Dr. Charles Kao 
on the innovation of optical fiber communications, the Physics Committee Chair 
said: “The work has fundamentally transformed the way we live our daily lives.”33
31  National Research Council. 2006. Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research. pp. 1-20.
32  National Research Council. 2002. Atoms, Molecules, and Light: AMO Science Enabling the Future. 
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, pp. 7-8.
33  More information on the Nobel Prize is available at http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
physics/laureates/2009/. Accessed June 26, 2012.

75
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
TECHNICAL ADVANCES
Communications
The past 20 years have seen an explosion in technical achievements in the field 
of optical communications. Whereas an undersea optical cable was deployed in 
1988 and could accommodate 280 Mb/s,34 there exist today commercial systems 
that can carry 5 Tb/s per fiber strand. This represents an astonishing increase 
of four orders of magnitude in performance in commercial systems, and R&D 
laboratories can transmit more than an order of magnitude higher than that.35 
This technological improvement was driven primarily by the exponential growth 
in capacity demand, primarily due to Internet usage. Looking to the future, it is 
expected, as stated above, that the network traffic demand will grow by a factor of 
100 over the next decade,36 necessitating technology advances that can keep pace. 
However, the research community is struggling to envision technical paths for 
achieving this vision.
In the mid-1990s, leading laboratories achieved the transmission of 1 Tb/s and 
0.1 Tb/s respectively over hundreds and thousands of kilometers of single-mode 
optical fiber.37 The key advances that enabled these results and that were captured 
by the NRC’s 1998 Harnessing Light38 study include those described below.
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
By simultaneously transmitting different channels of data on different wave-
lengths by means of WDM, the system capacity can be dramatically increased. 
Moreover, wavelength-selective components enable highly efficient network rout-
ing, such that specific wavelength channels can be added or dropped at intermedi-
ate nodes without disrupting the other optical channels.39
34  Runge, P.K. 1990. Undersea lightwave systems. Optics and Photonics News 1(11):9-12.
35  Zhu, B., T.F. Taunay, M. Fishteyn, X. Liu, S. Chandrasekhar, M.F. Yan, J.M. Fini, E.M. Monberg, 
and F.V. Dimarcello. 2011. 112-Tb/s space-division multiplexed DWDM transmission with 14-b/s/
hz aggregate spectral efficiency over a 76.8-km seven-core fiber. Optics Express 19(17):16665-16671.
36  Winzer, P.J. 2010. Beyond 100G Ethernet. IEEE Communications Magazine 48(7):26-29.
37  Kerfoot, F.W., and W.C. Marra. 1998. Undersea fiber optic networks: Past, present, and future. 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 16:1220-1225.
38  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
39  Kaminow, I.P., C.R. Doerr, C. Dragone, T. Koch, U. Koren, A.A.M. Saleh, A.J. Kirby, C.M. 
­Ozveren, B. Schofield, R.E. Thomas, R.A. Barry, D.M. Castagnozzi, V.W.S. Chan, B.R. Hemenway, D. 
Marquis, S.A. Parikh, M.L. Stevens, E.A. Swanson, S.G. Finn, and R.G. Gallager. 1996. A wideband 
all-optical WDM network. Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 14:780-799.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
76
Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers
Broadband (>3 THz), low-noise optical amplifiers—erbium-doped fiber am-
plifiers (EDFAs)—enabled the amplifying of many channels simultaneously and 
the cascading of numerous stages, thereby making long-distance WDM transmis-
sion practical.40
Dispersion Management
Chromatic dispersion and nonlinearities are fiber-based effects that signifi-
cantly degrade transmitted data. However, by judiciously alternating between 
positive and negative dispersion element, the accumulated dispersion can be com-
pensated, and the phase-matching needed for generating inter-channel nonlinear 
effects can be minimized.41
New Engineering Approaches Needed
Similar to the experience in other areas of technology, new engineering ap-
proaches are required in order to achieve new eras of technical advancement in data 
transmission. Some of the key directions over the past decade42 that have enabled 
the continued achievement include approaches borrowed from the radio commu-
nity, although these approaches were not possible until recent device performance 
increases. They are described below.
Higher-Order Modulation Formats. Until recently, deployed systems employed 
simple, amplitude on/off-keyed digital data encoding. However, phase-shift ­keying 
(PSK) of the optical carrier wave produces a better receiver sensitivity and is rela-
tively tolerant to degrading effects such as nonlinearities.43 The fiber bandwidth 
is precious because the available spectrum is rapidly filling up, and so spectral ef-
ficiency, measured in bits per second per hertz, becomes more critical; as another 
benefit, spectrally narrow channels are more robust to dispersion effects. A typi-
cal example is quadrature-phase-shift-keying (QPSK), which encodes two bits of 
information on each symbol, thereby doubling the spectral efficiency. This can be 
40  Li, T.Y. 1993. The impact of optical amplifiers on long-distance lightwave telecommunications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 81:1568-1579.
41  Kurtzke, C. 1993. Suppression of fiber nonlinearities by appropriate dispersion management. 
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 5:1250-1253.
42  Kaminow, I.P., Tingye Li, and A.E. Willner. 2008. Optical Fiber Telecommunications V B: Systems 
and Networks. New York, N.Y.: Academic Press.
43  Winzer, P. J., and R.-J. Essiambre. 2007. Advanced modulation formats for high-capacity optical 
transport networks. Journal of Lightwave Technology 24(12):4711-4720.

77
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
further extended to even higher I/Q (in-phase/quadrature) data constellations—for 
example, quadrature-amplitude modulation (QAM) of 16 to 512,44,45,46 as seen in 
Figure 3.2, in which data are encoded on both phase and amplitude of the optical 
carrier. Additionally, independent data can be transmitted along the two orthogo-
nal polarization axes of the optical fiber, that is, polarization-division-multiplexing, 
doubling again the capacity and spectral efficiency.47
Coherent Systems Utilizing Digital Signal Processing. In heterodyne receivers, 
ubiquitous in the radio world, a weak data signal is mixed with a local oscillator 
that has much higher power. Following the same approach, an optical coherent 
system utilizes a narrow line-width laser as the local oscillator to mix with a weak 
incoming optical data signal. The balanced detectors can be used to recover both 
amplitude and the phase information, that is, the time history of the data channel’s 
wave. Coherent systems (1) exhibit better receiver sensitivity than direct detection 
and (2) can utilize sophisticated electronic digital-signal-processing (DSP) tech-
niques to equalize and compensate for many impairments, such as chromatic- and 
polarization-based degradations.48,49,50
Concepts That Might Improve Capacity
Recently, due to technology advances, two other concepts have emerged that 
might further improve capacity for the next several years, as discussed below.
44  Zhou, X., and J. Yu. 2009. Multi-level, multi-dimensional coding for high-speed and high-
spectral-efficiency optical transmission. Journal of Lightwave Technology 27(16):3641-3653.
45  Schmogrow, R., D. Hillerkuss, S. Wolf, B. Bäuerle, M. Winter, P. Kleinow, B. Nebendahl, T. 
­Dippon, P.C. Schindler, C. Koos, W. Freude, and J. Leuthold. 2012. 512QAM Nyquist sinc-pulse 
transmission at 54 Gbit/s in an optical bandwidth of 3 GHz. Optics Express 20:6439-6447.
46  Okamoto, S., K. Toyoda, T. Omiya, K. Kasai, M. Yoshida, and M. Nakazawa. 2010. “512 QAM (54 
Gbit/s) Coherent Optical Transmission over 150 km with an Optical Bandwidth of 4.1 GHz.” Con-
ference paper. 36th European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communication, Turin, Italy.
47  Gnauck, A.H., P.J. Winzer, A. Konczykowska, F. Jorge, J.Y. Dupuy, M. Riet, G. Charlet, B. Zhu, 
and D.W. Peckham. 2012. Generation and transmission of 21.4-Gbaud PDM 64-QAM using a novel 
high-power DAC driving a single I/Q modulator. Journal of Lightwave Technology 30:532-536.
48  Taylor, M.G. 2004. Coherent detection method using DSP for demodulation of signal and sub-
sequent equalization of propagation impairments. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 16(2):674-676.
49  Savory, S.J. 2010. Digital coherent optical receiver: Algorithms and subsystems. Journal of Selected 
Topics in Quantum Electronics 16(5):1164-1179.
50  Salsi, M., O. Bertran Pardo, J. Renaudier, W. Idler, H. Mardoyan, P. Tran, G. Charlet, and S. Bigo. 
2011. “WDM 200 Gb/s Single-Carrier PDM-QPSK Transmission Over 12,000 km.” Conference pa-
per. 37th European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communication, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6065939. Accessed June 26, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
78
Space Division Multiplexing (SDM). After time, wavelength, and polarization 
multiplexing, space multiplexing is now being investigated to further increase the 
transmission capacity. In a space-division-multiplexing system, each independent 
data channel is carried by an orthogonal spatial dimension. Two emerging ap-
proaches include using the following: (1) a special multi-core fiber, each individual 
core of which transmits an independent data stream;51 and (2) a few-mode fiber, 
with each independent data channel on one of the orthogonal spatial modes (see 
Figure 3.3). In both approaches, the key challenge is the crosstalk. Unique chal-
lenges for multi-core fiber systems include the following: (1) further increasing the 
number of cores, (2) decreasing the inter-core nonlinear effects, and (3) developing 
multi-mode/multi-core network elements, such as an erbium-doped fiber that has 
matched multi-cores, so that all cores can be amplified simultaneously in a single 
fiber element. For multi-mode systems, unwanted mode conversions among differ-
ent spatial modes are a natural occurrence which leads to several-channel crosstalk. 
51  The Climate Group. 2008. SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the Information 
Age. A report by the Climate Group on behalf of the Global eSustainability Initiative. Available at 
http://www.smart2020.org/_assets/files/02_Smart2020Report.pdf. Accessed June 26, 2012.
FIGURE 3.2  Recorded experimental data constellation of optical 1024-quadrature-amplitude-
modulation (QAM) signal (60 Gb/s) using coherent optical transmission over 150 km. The two axes are 
for in-phase and quadrature directions, with the total constellation representing data points encoded 
in amplitude and phase without (a) and with (b) digital nonlinear compensation. SOURCE: Reprinted, 
with permission, from Koizumi Y., K. Toyoda, M. Yoshida, and M. Nakazawa. 2012. 1024 QAM (60 
Gb/s) single-carrier coherent optical transmission over 150 km. Optics Express 20(11):12508-12514.

79
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
FIGURE 3.3  (a) Space division multiplexing (SDM) using multi-core fiber. SOURCE: Reprinted, with 
permission, from Matsuo, S., K. Takenaga, Y. Arakawa, Y. Sasaki, S. Tanigawa, K. Saitoh, and M. 
Koshiba. 2011. Crosstalk behavior of cores in multi-core fiber under bent condition. IEICE Electron-
ics Express 8(6):385-390. (b) Multi-mode fiber. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Ryf, R., 
S. Randel, A. Gnauck, C. Bolle, A. Sierra, S. Mumtaz, M. Esmaeelpour, E. Burrows, R. Essiambre, 
P. Winzer, D. Peckham, A. McCurdy, and R. Lingle. 2012. Mode-division multiplexing over 96 km 
of few-mode fiber using coherent 6×6 MIMO processing. IEEE Journal of Lightweight Technology 
30:521-531. (c) Bit error rate performance and recovered data constellations of the quadrature-phase-
shift-keying (QPSK) signal tributaries after SDM transmission using four spatial modes in a single 
few-mode fiber. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Al Amin, Abdullah, An Li, Simin Chen, Xi 
Chen, Guanjun Gao, and William Shieh. 2011. Dual-LP11 mode 4x4 MIMO-OFDM transmission over 
a two-mode fiber. Optics Express 19:16672-16679.
(a)
(b)
(c)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
80
This problem can be partially solved by utilizing a multiple-input, multiple-output 
(MIMO) approach. MIMO is a popular technique in radio-frequency (RF) sys-
tems and can untangle some of the crosstalk between modes using digital signal 
processing.52,53 However, it is unclear as to the upper limit of performance and 
number of modes that can be supported.
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM). OFDM uses a single 
carrier wave and multiple orthogonal subcarrier waves; it has produced some of 
the most exciting results in the RF world. Each subcarrier that carries independent 
data can be densely packed in the spectrum, since orthogonality is maintained by 
advanced electronic processing in the transmitter/receiver.54 OFDM is spectrally 
efficient and is tolerant to many fiber-based impairments, but it does require a 
fair amount of high-speed electronic data signal processing, such as fast Fourier 
transforms and analog-digital converters.55
Device and Subsystem Achievements
These recent systems-level advances have been enabled by device and subsys-
tem achievements, which include those described below.
High-Speed Local and Access Area Networks. The advances of local area networks 
(LANs) made it possible to deliver the high bandwidth from long-haul optical 
networks to desktops. Started with light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and Fabry-Perot 
lasers as transmitters, multi-mode optical fibers and fiber ribbon cables became 
major LAN standards in the mid-1990s. In the late 1990s, direct modulated gigabits 
52  Kaminow et al. 1996. A wideband all-optical WDM network.
53  Ryf, R., A. Sierra, R. Essiambre, A. Gnauck, S. Randel, M. Esmaeelpour, S. Mumtaz, P.J. Winzer, 
R. Delbue, P. Pupalaikis, A. Sureka, T. Hayashi, T. Taru, and T. Sasaki. 2011. “Coherent 1200-km 6 
x 6 MIMO Mode-Multiplexed Transmission over 3-CoreMicrostructured Fiber.” Conference paper. 
European Conference and Exposition on Optical Communications. Available at http://www.optics 
infobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=ECOC-2011-Th.13.C.1. Accessed June 26, 2012.
54  Shieh, W., and I. Djordjevic. 2009. Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing for Optical Com-
munications. New York, N.Y.: Elsevier/Academic Press.
55  Liu, X., S. Chandrasekhar, B. Zhu, P.J. Winzer, A.H. Gnauck, and D.W. Peckham. 2011. 448-Gb/s 
reduced-guard-interval CO-OFDM transmission over 2000 km of ultra-large-area fiber and five 
80-GHz-Grid ROADMs. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology 29:483-490.

81
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
per second vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL)56,57,58,59,60 transmitters 
became the dominant transmitters due to the low-drive voltage and low manufac-
turing cost. At present, 10 Gb/s VCSELs are being deployed and 40 Gb/s have been 
demonstrated in laboratories.61,62 Research efforts toward wavelength-tunable and 
100 Gb/s direct modulated lasers will be important for next-generation broadband 
communications.63,64
High-Speed Electronic Circuits. Electronic circuits are an “optical system’s best 
friend.” High-speed, high-output-power and linear electronics are clearly needed 
to drive the optical modulators, and high-speed logic circuits are crucial to achiev-
ing the signal processing in coherent, MIMO, and OFDM systems.65,66 Good elec-
tronics can help mitigate many of the problems produced in the optical domain, 
thereby enabling better system performance.
Photonic Integration. In general, a system with better performance requires more 
components, which might make the system even more complex. For example, the 
transceiver in a system using higher-order modulation formats is much more com-
56  Soda, H., K. Iga, C. Kitahara, and Y. Suematsu. 1979. GaInAsP/InP surface emitting injection 
lasers. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 18:2329-2330.
57  Watanabe, I., F. Koyama, and K. Iga. 1986. Low temperature CW operation of GaInAsP/InP 
surface emitting laser with circular buried heterostructure. Electronics Letters 22:1325-1327.
58  Jewell, J.L., S.L. McCall, Y.H. Lee, A. Scherer, A.C. Gossard, and J.H. English. 1989. Lasing char-
acteristics of GaAs microresonators. Applied Physics Letters 54:1400-1402.
59  Chang-Hasnain, C.J., J.P. Harbison, G. Hasnain, A. Von Lehmen, L.T. Florez, and N.G. Stoffel. 
1991. Dynamic, polarization, and transverse mode characteristics of vertical cavity surface emitting 
lasers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 27:1402-1409.
60  Maeda, M.W., C.J. Chang-Hasnain, J.S. Patel, C. Lin, H.A. Johnson, and J.A. Walker. 1991. Use 
of a multi-wavelength surface-emitting laser array in a 4-channel wavelength-division-multiplexed 
system experiment. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 3:268-269.
61  Müller, M., W. Hofmann, A. Nadtochiy, A. Mutig, G. Böhm, M. Ortsiefer, D. Bimberg, and M.-C. 
Amann. 2010. B1.55 m high-speed VCSELs enabling error-free fiber-transmission up to 25 Gbit/s. 
Proceedings of International Semiconductor Laser Conference (ISLC), September 26-30, Kyoto, 
Japan, pp. 156-157.
62  Westbergh, P., J.S. Gustavsson, B. Kögel, A. Haglund, and A. Larsson. 2011. Impact of photon 
lifetime on high-speed VCSEL performance. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 
17(6):1603-1613.
63  Chang-Hasnain, C.J. 2000. Tunable VCSEL. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electron-
ics 6(6):978-987.
64  Taubenblatt, M.A. 2012. Optical interconnects for high-performance computing. Journal of 
Lightwave Technology 30(4):448-457.
65  Li, T.Y. 1993. The impact of optical amplifiers on long-distance lightwave telecommunications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 81:1568-1579.
66  Kurtzke, C. 1993. Suppression of fiber nonlinearities by appropriate dispersion management. 
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 5:1250-1253.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
82
plicated than an on-off keying (OOK) system,67 because it requires multiple lasers, 
modulators, couplers, and balanced detectors, as seen in Figure 3.4. This scenario 
has benefited greatly from advances in photonic integrated circuits on both III-V68 
and silicon materials.69
Optical Fiber Modifications. Although the attenuation of optical fiber reached its 
near-optimum point of 0.2 decibels per kilometer (dB/km) decades ago, modifica-
tions to the fiber itself have produced critical changes to the optical wave propaga-
tion properties that enabled systems advances. By varying the core and cladding 
size and composition, key changes in the amount and spectral slope of chromatic 
dispersion have managed the accumulation of dispersion and nonlinear effects.70 
Moreover, large-effective-area fiber has reduced the power density, thereby reduc-
ing the build-up of nonlinear effects.71 Furthermore, creating nanostructures in 
the cladding of the fiber has enabled the fiber to be very tightly wound without 
incurring bending losses, thus enabling ubiquitous deployment of fiber without 
the need for highly skilled technicians.
Potential Innovation. Device and subsystem innovations that herald the next wave 
of communication systems could include those described below.
·	 Silicon photonics. At the time of the publication of Harnessing Light in 
1998,72 the community did not pay much attention to silicon as a photon-
ics material. In terms of performance and the ability to interact with light, 
III-V materials were far superior in performance. However, significant 
advances in the past few years in creating silicon-based photonic elements 
have excited the industry. Modulators, waveguides, couplers, detectors, 
multiplexers and filters have all been demonstrated.73 (See Figure 3.5.) 
67  OOK is the simplest form of amplitude-shift keying (ASK) modulation, in which digital data 
are represented by the presence or absence of a carrier wave.
68  Welch, D.F., F.A. Kish, R. Nagarajan, C.H. Joyner, R.P. Schneider, V.G. Dominic, M.L. Mitchell, 
S.G. Grubb, T.-K. Chiang, D. Perkins, and A.C. Nilsson. 2006. The realization of large-scale photonic 
integrated circuits and the associated impact on fiber-optic communication systems. Journal of Light-
wave Technology 24:4674-4683.
69  Asghari, M., and A.V. Krishnamoorthy. 2011. Silicon photonics: Energy-efficient communica-
tion. Nature Photonics 5:268-270.
70  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips. Proceedings 
of the IEEE 97:1166-1185.
71  Lewotsky K. 1996. Large-effective-area fiber minimizes nonlinearities. Laser Focus World 32:16.
72  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
73  Xu, Q., B. Schmidt, S. Pradhan, and M. Lipson. 2005. Micrometre-scale silicon electro-optic 
modulator. Nature 435:325-327.

83
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
Even active elements such as lasers have been reported by wafer bonding74 
or direct growth.75,76 This makes it possible to mass-produce cost-effective, 
chip-scale integrated photonic circuits by using the massive silicon manu-
facturing infrastructure. An important application is in the mass produc-
tion of active cables, in which silicon photonics and fiber take the place of 
coaxial cable to provide tens of gigahertz of bandwidth with extremely low 
loss over 10s of meters.
·	 Low power consumption. As data communications increase at an exponen-
tial rate, the power consumption by the communication infrastructure is 
growing rapidly. Moreover, it has been well known that although electronic 
power consumption scales with increased data rate, the power consump-
tion of photonics does not. In view of both of these facts, the optical 
communications community is taking very seriously the mantle of using 
optics in novel ways to dramatically reduce the power consumption. This 
will require new integrated device technologies, such as photonic-crystal 
74  Liang, D., and J.E. Bowers. 2010. Recent progress in lasers on silicon. Nature Photonics 4:511-517.
75  Kunert, B., S. Zinnkann, K. Volz, and W. Stolz. 2008. Monolithic integration of Ga(NAsP)/(BGa)
P multi-quantum well structures on (0 0 1) silicon substrate by MOVPE. Journal of Crystal Growth 
310(23):4776-4779.
76  Chen et al. 2011. Nanolasers grown on silicon.
FIGURE 3.4  (a) 28-Gbaud InP square or hexagonal 16-QAM modulator. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, 
from Doerr, C.R., L. Zhang, P. Winzer, and A.H. Gnauck. 2011. “28-Gbaud InP Square or Hexagonal 16-QAM 
Modulator.” Conference paper. Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC), Los Angeles, Calif., March 6, 
2011. Available at http://www.opticsinfobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OFC-2011-OMU2. (b) Monolithically inte-
grated InP dual-port coherent receiver for 100-Gb/s PDM-QPSK signal. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, 
from Houtsma, V.E., N. Weimann, T. Hu, R. Kopf, A. Tate, J. Frackoviak, R. Reyes, Y. Chen, C.R. Doerr, L. Zhang, 
and D. Neilson. 2011. “Manufacturable Monolithically Integrated InP Dual-Port Coherent Receiver for 100G 
PDM-QPSK Applications.” Conference paper. Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC), Los Angeles, Calif., 
March 6, 2011. Available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5875296.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
84
FIGURE 3.5  (a) Intel creates the world’s first end-to-end silicon photonics connection with integrated 
lasers. SOURCE: Image available at http://www.demonstech.com/2010/07/intel-creates-worlds-first-
end-to-end.html. (b) Kotura’s chip-scale 10×10 Gb/s integrated silicon transmitter. SOURCE: Image 
available at http://www.gazettabyte.com/home/2009/10/26/photonic-integration-bent-on-disruption.
html. Reprinted with permission.
(a)
(b)

85
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
structures, as well as novel system and switching architectures to create a 
“green” network.77,78
·	 Reconfigurable network elements.  Electronic systems are not static, and yet 
optical systems tend to be deployed in a fairly static fashion. Tunable and 
reconfigurable network elements will provide needed flexibility to optical 
systems, such that the network can optimize its bandwidth allocation and 
quality of service in a robust fashion.79,80 Filters, (de)multiplexers, routers, 
switches, dispersion compensators, and lasers all fall into this category.81
Networking
The topics discussed above deal primarily with the core issues of increasing 
the capacity and distance performance of optical communications systems—the 
solutions to this need has fueled the dramatic momentum of worldwide com-
munications. However, the power of optics has also been unleashed to enable 
dramatic advances in multi-user networking. Not only do parallel wavelengths 
readily provide capacity enhancement, they also enable wavelength-dependent 
routing.82 In a WDM network, the wavelength can define the network routing 
such that a specific wavelength channel can appear at its destination by travers-
ing wavelength-dependent network elements. A network node can detect only the 
specific wavelength and traffic meant for that node and pass the other wavelengths 
not meant for that destination without disturbance. Key benefits include these: (1) 
lower network delay and latency for non-dropped traffic, and (2) lower “cost” to 
detect only the dropped traffic rather than all the traffic entering the node.
A key element in this network revolution is the wavelength-selective optical 
add/drop multiplexer (OADM). Moreover, the OADM has evolved to become dy-
77  Nishimura, S., K. Shinoda, Y. Lee. G. Ono, K. Fukuda, F. Yuki, T. Takemoto, H. Toyoda, M. 
­Yamada, S. Tsuji, and N. Ikeda. 2011. Components and interconnection technologies for photonic-
assisted routers toward green networks. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology 17:347-356.
78  Kilper, D. 2011. “Tutorial: Energy Efficient Networks.” Conference paper. Optical Fiber Com-
munication Conference (OFC), Los Angeles, Calif., March 6. Available at http://www.opticsinfobase.
org/abstract.cfm?uri=OFC-2011-OWI5. Accessed June 26, 2012.
79  Gringeri, S., B. Basch, V. Shukla, R. Egorov, and T.J. Xia. 2010. Flexible architectures for optical 
transport nodes and networks. IEEE Communications Magazine 48(7):40-50.
80  Saleh, A.A.M., and J.M. Simmons. 2011. Technology and architecture to enable the explosive 
growth of the internet. IEEE Communications Magazine 49(1):126-132.
81  Poole, S., S. Frisken, M. Roelens, and C. Cameron. 2011. “Bandwidth-Flexible ROADMs as 
Network Elements.” Conference paper. Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC), Los Ange-
les, Calif., March 6, 2011. Available at http://www.opticsinfobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OFC-2011-
OTuE1. Accessed June 26, 2012.
82  Feuer, M.D., S.L. Woodward, P. Palacharla, X. Wang, I. Kim, and D. Bihon. 2011. Intro-node 
contention in dynamic photonic networks. Journal of Lightwave Technology 29(4):529-535.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
86
namic, such that a reconfigurable OADM (ROADM) can accommodate changing 
traffic patterns.83 A myriad of wavelength-selective and -tunable components have 
enabled such advances.84,85 The speed of reconfiguration might be as long as once 
a day or as short as nanoseconds, depending on the application.
These applications include circuit and packet switching. Circuit switching 
has limited speed requirements and is considered fairly easy to implement but is 
somewhat inefficient in terms of capacity utilization. As bandwidth becomes more 
precious in the network, packet switching, which is common in today’s Internet, 
has fast switching requirements and is much harder to implement optically but is 
quite capacity-efficient. In the 5- to 10-year horizon, it is likely to become clearer 
as to the specific technologies that might be used for optical packet switching as 
well as the perceived benefits of implementing it in the optical domain.
As time has passed, optical fiber has moved ever closer to the end user. Even 
30 years ago, it was clear that optical fiber would dominate long-distance com-
munications. At present, optical fiber is being deployed around the world to en-
able individual users to access the broadband Internet. Fiber to the x, in which x 
can represent many things, including curb, home, or office, will only accelerate as 
costs decrease.86 In fact, access networks are quite sensitive to cost, given that only 
a few users will share the cost of the optical components, which are generally as-
sumed to be more expensive at present than electronic ones. An exciting area of 
R&D is in passive optical networks, such that gigabits per second data rates can be 
deployed at low cost to many simultaneous users in a neighborhood.87 Advances 
in low-cost integrated optical components and efficient optical access architec-
tures will be crucial to achieving this vision; note that RF-over-fiber, in which a 
radio-frequency subcarrier is encoded and is transmitted on an optical carrier 
wave, represents an interesting and potentially exciting approach to bridge the gap 
between wireless signals and WDM networks.88 It should be emphasized that the 
exponential growth in wireless traffic only accelerates the need for optics in access 
networks, since wireless hubs will typically connect in the ground to the larger 
network through optical fiber. Clearly, the optics and photonics community needs 
83  Lewotsky, K. 1996. Large-effective-area fiber minimizes nonlinearities. Laser Focus World 32:16.
84  Asghari, M., and A.V. Krishnamoorthy. 2011. Silicon photonics: Energy-efficient communica-
tion. Nature Photonics 5:268-270.
85  Lewotsky, K. 1996. Large-effective-area fiber minimizes nonlinearities. Laser Focus World 32:16.
86  Lee, C., W.V. Sorin, and B. Kim. 2006. Fiber to the home using a PON infrastructure. IEEE Jour-
nal of Lightwave Technology 24:4568-4583.
87  Skubic, A., J. Chen, J. Ahmed, L. Wosinska, and B. Mukherjee. 2009. A comparison of dynamic 
bandwidth allocation for EPON, GPON, and next-generation TDM PON. IEEE Communications 
Magazine 47(3):S40-S48.
88  Chen, L., K. Preston, S. Manipatruni, and M. Lipson. 2009. Integrated GHz silicon photonic 
interconnect with micrometer-scale modulators and detectors. Optics Express 17(17):15248-15256.

87
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
to bring forward technologies for the next-order-of-magnitude capacity increases 
in optical networks very soon.
R&D Example Areas
In general, the field of optical communications is quite rich in terms of in-
novations and applications. Brief descriptions of example areas of R&D that have 
the potential for large impact include the following:
·	 Quantum communications. Quantum optical communications typically 
use the quantum state of a single photon or a pair of entangled photons—
which can be widely separated while maintaining their inherent quantum 
­connection—in order to achieve ultimately secure and highly efficient com-
munications.89 For example, if information is encoded on the photon’s state 
of polarization (SOP), then any eavesdropper would necessarily disturb the 
photon’s SOP and be detected. Quantum key distribution (QKD) might 
be extremely important for links requiring ultimate security. Moreover, 
for systems in which single photons are carrying information, the bits per 
photon can be quite efficient. Practical single-photon transmitters and 
detectors are being actively pursued, and the quantum amplifier/repeater 
remains an elusive research goal.90,91
·	 Free-space communications. Free-space communications have existed for 
decades as radio. However, there has been the desire, also for decades, to 
make use of optics in free-space communications due to its much higher 
frequency range and data transmission capacity.92 Lasers are also highly 
directional, such that they are power-efficient in terms of divergence and are 
relatively secure since they are difficult to intercept. Especially for satellite 
communications at higher bandwidths, there is the potential for dramatic 
decreases in the crucial parameters of size, weight, and power (SWaP). Satel-
lite or high-altitude free-space laser communications are attractive because 
of the lack of weather attenuation issues, even at optical wavelengths. The 
Department of Defense is especially interested in free-space laser commu-
89  Treiber, A., A. Poppe, M. Hentschel, D. Ferrini, T. Lorünser, E. Querasser, T. Matyus, H. Hübel, 
and A. Zeilinger. 2009. A fully automated entanglement-based quantum cryptography system for 
telecom fiber networks. New Journal of Physics 11:045013. Available at http://iopscience.iop.org/1367-
2630/11/4/045013. Accessed June 26, 2012.
90  Kimble, H.J. 2008. The quantum Internet. Nature 453:1023-1030.
91  Gisin, N., and R.T. Thew. 2010. Quantum communication technology. Electronics Letters 14: 
965-967.
92  Killinger, D. 2002. Free space optics for laser communication through the air. Optics and Photon-
ics News 13(10):36-42.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
88
nications, as discussed in Chapter 4 of this report, because of the need for 
high-bandwidth communication with moving platforms.
Information Processing
In the technology for optics for interconnection, the past decade has seen sig-
nificant progress in three main areas:
·	 Evolutionary advances in optoelectronics made from III-V semiconductors,
·	 The emergence of silicon photonics as a potential new technology base, and
·	 Nanophotonics for very-high-performance optics and optoelectronics, 
some with quite novel capabilities and opportunities.
Evolutionary Progress in III-V Device Technology
Technology for optical data links continued to evolve in the last decade, with 
continued improvements in speed and reduced power dissipation for device tech-
nologies such as VCSELs. Integration of devices in larger functional units has con-
tinued in III-V technology.93 Such predominantly III-V approaches can integrate 
multiple active optoelectronic devices, such as lasers, optical amplifiers, modula-
tors, switches, and detectors for highly functional units for optical networking.
Silicon Photonics
The potential for the use of silicon-based optical technologies (so-called silicon 
photonics, as mentioned above) has advanced substantially.94 Such silicon photon-
ics can be manufactured in silicon complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) fabrication facilities, thereby potentially reducing manufacturing costs 
and allowing direct integration with low-cost silicon electronics. Such an approach 
offers serious possibilities for an integrated electronics/optoelectronics/optics plat-
form that could address problems of manufacturability and cost for future high-
volume applications such as local optical networks or interconnects.
Silicon itself and/or related CMOS materials such as silicon nitride or silicon 
dioxide can all be used as very effective optical waveguides on the surface of a 
93  Blumenthal, D.J., J. Barton, N. Beheshti, J.E. Bowers, E. Burmeister, L.A. Coldren, M. Dummer, 
G. Epps, A. Fang, Y. Ganjali, J. Garcia, B. Koch, V. Lal, E. Lively, J. Mack, M. Masanovic, N. McKeown, 
K. Nguyen, S.C. Nicholes, H. Park, B. Stamenic, A. Tauke-Pedretti, H. Poulsen, and M. Sysak. 2011. 
Integrated photonics for low-power packet networking. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum 
Electronics 17:458-471.
94  Soref, R. 2006. The past, present, and future of silicon photonics. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics 
in Quantum Electronics 12:1678-1687.

89
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
silicon chip. Additionally, very close integration of devices such as photodetectors 
and output devices has the potential to improve system performance, especially 
when power dissipation is particularly important, as it is in optical interconnect 
applications.
Optical modulators using silicon as the active material can be made in linear 
(e.g., Mach-Zehnder) forms that have been integrated into products or in more 
aggressive high-quality-factor ring-resonator forms that also can allow the selection 
and switching of different wavelength channels. Ring resonators are still largely 
in research, in part because of the requirements for precise tuning and thermal 
stabilization. Most silicon photonics work is targeted at the telecommunications 
wavelengths (e.g., in the so-called C band near 1550 nanometers [nm]) where 
silicon itself is transparent. Incorporating photodetectors requires the addition of 
germanium, which absorbs light efficiently in some of the C band. Germanium is 
already known to be compatible with silicon CMOS technology, as it is already in 
use for other purposes in modern CMOS systems.
Other silicon-compatible modulator concepts based on optical absorption 
changes in germanium structures are starting to emerge from research. These 
devices might offer very low operating energies without the tuning of resonators. 
Approaches include Franz-Keldysh bulk germanium modulators95 and, more ag-
gressively, so-called Quantum-Confined Stark Effect (QCSE) modulators96 based 
on the use of thin germanium “quantum well” layers.
At the time of this writing, there is still no room-temperature-operated 
electrically-driven laser that can be grown directly on silicon, although research 
is continuing on various approaches, including attempts to make germanium or 
related materials (such as germanium-tin alloys) into the so-called direct bandgap 
materials that are generally required for efficient lasers. Lasers have been success-
fully demonstrated based on the hybridization of III-V materials onto silicon 
after growth.97 Viable III-V light sources on silicon by direct growth onto the 
95  Liu, J., M. Beals, A. Pomerene, S. Bernardis, R. Sun, J. Cheng, L.C. Kimerling, and J. Michel. 
2008. Waveguide-integrated, ultralow-energy GeSi electro-absorption modulators. Nature Photonics 
2:433-437.
96  Roth, J.E., O. Fidaner, E.H. Edwards, R.K. Schaevitz, Y.-H. Kuo, N.C. Helman, T.I. Kamins, J.S. 
Harris, and D.A.B. Miller. 2008. C-band side-entry Ge quantum-well electroabsorption modulator 
on SOI operating at 1 V swing. Electronics Letters 44:49-50.
97  Fang, A.W., H. Park, O. Cohen, R. Jones, M.J. Paniccia, and J.E. Bowers. 2006. Electrically pumped 
hybrid AlGaInAs-silicon evanescent laser. Optical Express 14:9203-9210.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
90
silicon are still a subject of research, although some nanophotonic structures offer 
promise.98,99
It is an open question whether the laser light sources need to be integrated on 
the silicon. Use of off-chip lasers removes some power dissipation from the chip 
and allows centralized stabilization of wavelengths and/or pulse timing, at the ex-
pense of having to align the laser light to the chip with some additional optics. Ap-
proaches exist for hybridizing III-V materials onto silicon substrates and/or optical 
structures, and such approaches offer one intermediate approach for integrating 
light sources on the chip. However, amplifiers on the chip may be very desirable 
in order to increase functionalities, given that the Si-based optical components are 
still fairly lossy, which limits the number of components that can be integrated. 
This argues for monolithic integration of active components with optical gain.
Although the various output device options (modulators and lasers) for direct 
modulation are still emerging from research, they do offer serious possibilities 
for devices that could meet the energy per bit requirements100 to allow optics to 
replace wires even at relatively short distances such as chip-to-chip interconnects. 
It is conceivable that one technology platform could emerge here that would allow 
the manufacture of systems for applications ranging from chip-to-chip all the way 
to long-distance optical networks, but much research and technology development 
remain to be done.
Nanophotonics
The ability to controllably fabricate structures on a deeply sub-wavelength 
scale—for example, using the same lithographic techniques employed for silicon 
CMOS electronics—has opened up a broad range of possibilities in optics and op-
toelectronics. Areas include photonic crystal structures, metamaterials, nanometal-
lics/plasmonics, nanoresonators, nanolasers, and new classes of optical components 
based on sub-wavelength nonperiodic design.
The basic physics of various novel nanophotonic structures has advanced 
substantially. Dielectric nanoresonators of various kinds achieved very high qual-
ity factors. Nanometallic structures have allowed the concentration of light to 
very small, sub-wavelength volumes and the guiding of light in sub-wavelength 
circuits.101 Metamaterials, based on sub-wavelength patterning, allow the engi-
neering of effective materials with optical properties unlike those of conventional 
98  Kunert, B., S. Zinnkann, K. Volz, and W. Stolz. 2008. Monolithic integration of Ga(NAsP)/(BGa)
P multi-quantum well structures on (0 0 1) silicon substrate by MOVPE. Journal of Crystal Growth 
310(23):4776-4779.
99  Chen et al. 2011. Nanolasers grown on silicon.
100  Miller, D.A.B. 2009. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips.
101  Brongersma, M.L., and V.M. Shalaev. 2010. The case for plasmonics. Science 328:440-441.

91
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
materials.102 Novel nanophotonics approaches to optical components such as very 
compact wavelength splitters have emerged, including the concept of nonperiodic 
design for function.103 Extremely sensitive optical and optoelectronic device struc-
tures have been demonstrated, including lasers, photodetectors, modulators, and 
switches, with some down to single-photon sensitivity.104 With such nanophoton-
ics approaches, there is demonstrated potential for very low threshold lasers,105 
very low energy modulators, and very low capacitance photodetectors. Novel ap-
proaches to optoelectronic devices exploiting nanoscale growth techniques may 
circumvent some of the difficulties (such as crystal lattice constant matching) that 
often limit more conventional approaches to device fabrication.106 As the size of 
many of these new optics and photonics elements shrinks, it certainly opens up for 
the possibility to produce systems that utilize the best of optics and electronics to 
enable integrated systems to seamlessly provide solutions in many of today’s fields.
Data Storage
The advent of nanometallic structures to concentrate light to deeply sub-
wavelength volumes has opened up new opportunities for optics in data storage, 
both for sub-wavelength optical reading and writing and for the use of optics 
to concentrate light for other storage approaches, as in heat-assisted magnetic 
recording, whereby the light provides the very localized heating above the Curie 
temperature to enable correspondingly localized changes in magnetic state. This 
emerging technology is apparently a serious contender for future mainstream 
magnetic hard-drive technologies.107
102  Chen, H., C.T. Chan, and P. Sheng. 2010. Transformation optics and metamaterials. Nature 
Materials 9:387-396.
103  Liu, V., Y. Jiao, D.A.B. Miller, and S. Fan. 2011. Design methodology for compact photonic-
crystal-based wavelength division multiplexers. Optics Letters 36:591-593.
104  Fushman, I., D. Englund, A. Faraon, N. Stolz, P. Petroff, and J. Vuckovic. 2008. Controlled phase 
shifts with a single quantum dot. Science 320(5877):769-772.
105  Ellis, B., M.A. Mayer, G. Shambat, T. Sarmiento, J. Harris, E.E. Haller, and J. Vučković. 2011. 
Ultralow-threshold electrically pumped quantum-dot photonic-crystal nanocavity laser. Nature 
Photonics 5:297-300.
106  Chen et al. 2011. Nanolasers grown on silicon.
107  Kryder, M.H., E.C. Gage, T.W. McDaniel, W.A. Challener, R.E. Rottmayer, G. Ju, Y.-T. Hsia, and 
M.R. Erden. 2008. Heat assisted magnetic recording. Proceedings of the IEEE 96:1810-1835.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
92
MANUFACTURING
Communications
Optical communications network equipment includes functional elements 
such as transmissions systems; optical networking elements, including add/drop 
multiplexers; crossconnects; and network-management software systems. Substan-
tial numbers of circuit boards for electrical multiplexing, electrical cross-connects, 
and control functions are also required. These optical systems and network ele-
ments are assembled from optical modules (for example, optical transmitters and 
receivers) that in turn are built from optical components, including lasers, optical 
modulators, photodetectors, optical fiber amplifiers, and others.
At the systems’ vendor level, which is a roughly $15 billion annual business, 
there have been significant changes in the industry since Harnessing Light108 was 
written. Nortel, a major Canadian vendor, has gone out of business. Lucent Tech-
nologies has been acquired by Alcatel to form Alcatel-Lucent, with headquarters 
in Paris, France. Of the top 10 optical network systems vendors, two—Cisco and 
Tellabs—are headquartered in the United States. Alcatel-Lucent, with significant 
R&D operations in the United States, and Huawei, headquartered in Shensen, 
China, have vied for the market-leader position over the last several years. ZTE, 
also from China, is also in the top 5.109 In the optical module and component busi-
ness, nearly half of the market share is owned by U.S.-based companies: Finisar 
and JDSU are the market number one and number two leaders, respectively.110 The 
growth and fabrication of the III-V semiconductor chips to build the basic laser 
and detector discrete devices are done in the United States, Japan, and Taiwan and 
are increasingly in areas like Singapore and Southeast Asia. There is little evidence 
that companies in China have mastered this highly specialized technology at this 
time, but work in the research laboratory is ongoing there.
At the circuit board and optical module level, manufacturing assembly is 
increasingly being done in Asia. However, some U.S. companies continue to do 
assembly of leading-edge boards—such as 100 Gb/s transmitters and receivers—in 
the United States. Infinera, a metropolitan and long-haul optical networking com-
pany based in the United States and a leading proponent of photonic integrated 
circuits (PICs) to provide transmitter and receiver arrays for WDM transmission 
108  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
109  Ovum. 2011. “Ovum: ZTE Ranked Third in Growing Global Optical Networking Market.” 
Ovum. Available at http://www.tele.net.in/news-releases/item/7010-ovum-zte-ranked-third-in-
growing-global-optical-networking-market. Accessed July 26, 2012.
110  Ovum. 2012. “Oclaro Combines with Opnext to Challenge Finisar for No. 1.” Available at http://
ovum.com/2012/03/27/oclaro-combines-with-opnext-to-challenge-finisar-for-no-1/. Accessed July 
26, 2012.

93
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
systems, produces the PIC chip in the United States. Because PICs provide on-
chip integration of basic components that otherwise would be done by hand, this 
technology eliminates much of the manually intensive activity of assembling and 
connecting individual components that is currently done more cost-effectively in 
low-labor-cost regions. More highly integrated optical modules will be needed for 
next-generation systems from a functional point of view. By being the technology 
leader in this area, the United States could potentially increase the value added in 
the United States that, with today’s modules made up of discrete devices, is mov-
ing offshore.
Optical components for communications networks still involve several 
­technologies—indium phosphide (InP), CMOS, lithium niobate, and silica. At the 
same time, volumes addressed by each technology are rather limited. The company 
and/or nation that finds a consolidation technology (if possible) could have sub-
stantial advantage. Some might suggest that silicon photonics has the potential to 
displace other passive technologies as well as non-lasing electro-optic technologies 
such as lithium niobate.
Also worth noting is anecdotal evidence which suggests that as the manu-
facturing of optical systems equipment or optical modules moves to lower-cost 
manufacturing regions, the development function tends eventually to move to 
that region as well.
Information Processing
Current optoelectronic systems are dominated by III-V semiconductors in 
systems with generally small integration levels. To make the transition to a new 
technology such as silicon-based photonics with high integration levels is difficult, 
and it appears to need high volumes to justify it.111 There is, therefore, a “chicken 
and egg” issue with this major potential technology shift. There is substantial 
medium-to-long-term potential for a very high volume market for optical inter-
connections, one that could help retain a U.S. technology and market leadership 
in information processing equipment, but it may need a shift to a low-cost, pos-
sibly silicon-based technology to satisfy that market. The same silicon photonics 
platform, if successfully adopted, also has the capability to create a broad range of 
nanophotonic structures.
111  Fuchs, E., R. Kirchain, and S. Liu. 2011. The future of silicon photonics—Not so fast?: The case 
of 100G Ethernet LAN transceivers. Journal of Lightwave Technology 29(15):2319-2326.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
94
Data Storage
At present, the substantial majority of manufacturing for optical data storage 
products, such as DVDs, is likely in Asia.112 Given that the impact of a next genera-
tion of optical disk storage faces strong competition from networks as a distribu-
tion medium for video, it is not clear that a major push to manufacture such a 
technology in the United States is a strong choice. There is significant research in 
the United States in future areas such as the HAMR optically assisted hard-drive 
technology, which may influence some future manufacture of such magnetic hard 
drives in the United States.
At this time, beyond the strong possibilities in HAMR and some continuing use 
of optical disks such as DVDs, the path for other optical data storage approaches 
is less clear, although there is continuing development of holographic storage for 
commercial archiving, with possible capacities in the 500 Gb to 1 Tb range in a 
disk of a size comparable to that of current DVDs.113 Other approaches remain in 
research at the present.
ECONOMIC IMPACT
Communications networks have taken on a role well beyond people-to-people 
voice communications; they provide the information and trade routes of the new 
global digital economy. They will also likely provide the sensor integration and 
distributed control for the power grid, transportation, and freight networks and 
smart enterprises and cities in the future. Optical interconnects are very likely to 
have a key role in future information processing technology and systems, allowing 
performance to continue to scale. Leadership in communications networks and 
interconnects, including the underpinning optical networks, both in the R&D and 
in commercialization, deployment, and effective use, will be absolutely essential 
to maintaining and enhancing economic growth and improving the quality of 
people’s lives in the 21st century. These optical technologies will be increasingly 
indispensable for the technology of the information age.
This critical importance of communications networks to the future has driven 
action in countries around the world. Several countries, including Australia for 
example, have mandated broadband fiber to the home. Europe continues to pro-
112  Esener S.C., M.H. Kryder, W.D. Doyle, M. Keshner, M. Mansuripur, and D.A. Thompson. 2012. 
International Technology Research Institute, World Technology (WTEC) Division. 1999. WTEC 
Panel Report on the Future of Data Storage Technologies. Available at http://www.wtec.org/pdf/hdmem.
pdf. Accessed August 1, 2012.
113  More information is available at General Electric’s Global Research website at http://
ge.geglobalresearch.com/blog/breakthrough-in-micro-holographic-data-storage/. Accessed June 26, 
2012.

95
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
vide substantial research funding, as do Korea and Japan. However, the single 
most important threat to U.S. leadership, especially with respect to network equip-
ment development and manufacture, is likely to come from China, where the 
­government-sponsored Huawei ranks as number 1 or number 2 in global market 
share,114 followed closely by ZTE, another systems vendor from China. Already 
extremely innovative in its products, China is now focused on research and inno-
vation. Its paper submissions to international optics journals and to the premier 
global optical communications conferences have increased substantially in the 
last 5 years.115 There is particularly strong research in Europe and recently also in 
Japan in the emerging silicon photonics platforms for networks and interconnects.
Given that labor-intensive industries will continue to migrate their manufac-
turing to low-labor-cost regions, it is imperative that the United States stay at the 
leading edge of optical technology at the component, platform, and system levels. 
This approach appears to have served the U.S. electronics industry well. To keep 
a substantial portion of the value chain in the United States, it will be important 
for U.S. enterprises to have the critically enabling intellectual property that pro-
vides a barrier of entry without financial compensation. To have that intellectual 
property, it is essential to be at the leading edge of enabling the fundamental and 
applied research. Suggested areas of focus on the component side include very high 
speed electronics and optical components, including modulators and detectors at 
operating rates of 400 Gb/s and 1 Tb/s; advanced signal processing to overcome 
transmission impairments for coherent systems; and on-chip integration that pro-
vides increased functionality while reducing size, power consumption, and cost. 
Such integrated chips also do not require the substantial manual assembly that is 
now being performed in low-labor-cost regions. In the systems and networks area, 
finding a new approach to cost-effectively achieve several-orders-of-magnitude 
long-haul and metropolitan distance transmission capacity and to rapidly get that 
technology to market will be critical in order for the United States to maintain a 
strong global leadership position. Such technology evolution will also underpin the 
increasing move to optics inside information processing that will be essential for 
the continued scaling of an information-driven economy. The successful develop-
ment of an integrated platform technology, such as some version of silicon photon-
ics that can service a broad range of applications and integration with electronics, 
could be a major enabler for U.S. economic impact.
114  Huawei. 2010. Milestones. Available at http://www.huawei.com/en/about-huawei/corporate-info/
milestone/index.htm. Accessed July 26, 2012.
115  Cao, J. 2012. A new journal in optics and photonics—Light: Science and Applications. Editorial. 
Light: Science and Applications 1:Online. Available at http://65.199.186.23/lsa/journal/v1/n3/full/
lsa20123a.html. Accessed July 26, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
96
Comparison Between the United States and the Rest of the World
For decades the United States has been the envy of the entire world in terms of 
R&D in high-tech fields, including optics and photonics for communications. For 
decades the most prestigious international journals, conferences, and professional 
societies have been based in the United States. Many of the most impactful R&D 
advances came from the U.S. industrial laboratories (e.g., AT&T Bell Laboratories, 
Corning, RCA Sarnoff Labs, IBM), with several Nobel Prizes as well. The U.S. uni-
versity system was unrivaled, with student researchers flocking to the United States 
from countries around the world. The combined R&D in optics from corporate 
laboratories and federally funded university labs set the bar high in terms of quality 
and quantity. Critical advances were made in the United States, including low-loss 
fibers, semiconductor lasers, optical amplifiers, and information theory.
The scenario has changed somewhat in the past 20 years. In general, corporate 
laboratories no longer enjoy steady, long-term funding, and the main sources of 
university research funding have not grown at a pace consistent with that in the 
rest of the world. The main sources of university funding in communications and 
information processing, such as the NSF and the Department of Defense (DOD), 
tend to fund a relatively small percentage of new proposals, particularly with a 
10-year focus.
In the area of optical research for information processing, U.S. efforts are gen-
erally comparable in size to efforts in Europe and Japan in the emerging technolo-
gies for optics in information processing, but the United States has no overall lead 
against these research competitors. The United States lacks the larger European 
framework projects that help tie together a broad range of players from academia 
to industry. Both Europe and Japan are making substantial investments in silicon 
photonics technology research now.
Trends in terms of the United States in relation to the rest of the world include 
the following:
·	 Research funding. Nations all over the world view the United States as a 
benchmark in terms of research funding. In order for countries to com-
pete, many nations focus on specific, strategic areas in which to invest in 
long-term photonics research. The United States tends not to make such 
strategic, long-term “bets.” The effect is that in any given area, the United 
States will share leadership with, and perhaps be surpassed by, research in 
specific countries. High-speed communications in Germany, integrated 
photonics in Japan, and access technologies in China are all examples of 
thrusts centered in various countries.
·	 Professors. Several nations have invested in hiring distinguished researchers 
to prominent, well-paid professorial positions. Oftentimes, these research-

97
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
ers have made their reputations in the United States, only to be drawn away 
in their prime. Countries including Australia, Canada, China, and Germany 
have hired excellent researchers in communications with generous research 
funding. This trend, if it accelerates, could have a profound impact.
·	 China. When observing statistics of prestigious optical communications 
journals, it is undeniable that the quantity of research from China is grow-
ing rapidly. Looking at “optical communication” in the Scopus database, 
there are 15,003 journal publications from 1969 to 2012 from 21 common 
optical communications journals;116 in total, the United States represents 
3,909 of those, and China, 1,303. However, since 2000 the U.S. scientists 
have published 42 percent of their work, or 1,642 publications, whereas 
Chinese scientists have published 85 percent of their work, or 1,108 publi-
cations. Most of the Chinese publications have appeared since 2000. More-
over, the quality gap, according to rejection ratio statistics, is narrowing. 
Using the number of citations that a paper receives as a metric of quality 
also points to China’s gaining on the United States. A comparison between 
the two countries with respect to publications related to the three keywords 
(Optics, Photonics, and Communication) in the Scopus database, using 
the highest-cited papers, gives the following results: currently there are 2.3 
citations of a U.S. paper for each citation that a Chinese paper receives; 
however, 5 years ago this number was 2.8, or 16 percent higher.117 Further-
more, China is aggressively funding research in optical communications 
and has a foothold as home to some of the world’s largest communications 
companies. China is poised to make great strides in the coming decade.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
In spite of great progress in optical communications over the last three decades, 
the optics and photonics community faces a great challenge if optical communica-
tions networks are to continue to satisfy the insatiable global demand for informa-
116  The selected journals were these: Optics Communications, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Op-
tics Express, Journal of Lightwave Technology, Optical Engineering, Microwave and Optical Technology 
Letters, Journal of Optical Communications, Physical Review A Atomic Molecular and Optical Physics, 
Optics Letters, Photonic Network Communications, Applied Optics, Applied Physics Letters, Journal of 
the Optical Society of America B Optical Physics, Fiber and Integrated Optics, Optical and Quantum 
Electronics, Proceedings of SPIE the International Society for Optical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 
Communications, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, IEEE Proceedings Optoelec-
tronics, Journal of Optical Networking, and Photonics Spectra.
117  Data from SciVerse Scopus, www.scopus.com. Data derived using the top 25 papers and averag-
ing over 5-year periods. Accessed March 21, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
98
tion processing, data storage, bandwidth, and ubiquitous connectivity that, in turn, 
drive global economic growth.
Key Finding:  The growth in bandwidth demand over the next 10 years is expected 
to be at least another 100-fold, possibly much more. It is important to note that 
the previous 100-fold gain in capacity that came very naturally with wavelength 
division multiplexing has been used up; growth by means of higher bit rates per 
wavelength comes more slowly; hence without a new breakthrough, increases in 
data transmission capacity will stall.
Key Finding:  Cloud services not only drive capacity demand, but also make critical 
the role of large data centers. This will usher in a new and important era for short-
distance optical links in massive numbers to provide cost- and energy-efficient 
high-density interconnects inside data centers and in information processing sys-
tems generally.
Key Finding:  Silicon-based photonic integration technologies offer great potential 
for short-distance applications and could have great payoff in terms of enabling 
continued growth in the function and capacity of silicon chips if optics for inter-
connection could be seamlessly included in the silicon CMOS platform. It is also 
highly likely that integrated optoelectronics is a critical development area with 
significant growth potential for continuing the advance of defense systems.
Finding:  Nanophotonic technologies promise very compact and high-performance 
optics and optoelectronics that could allow such platforms to continue to scale to 
higher density and performance. Information processing in general and data centers 
will also require massive and exponentially growing data storage.
Finding:  Magnetic storage will continue as the primary data storage technology, 
and optics-assisted magnetic techniques may play an important future role.
Finding:  Communications networks and information processing consume a 
relatively small fraction of the global energy budget (approximately 2 percent). 
However, with the growing network demands, this percentage will likely grow sig-
nificantly unless successful action is taken to reduce systems’ energy requirements.
Finding:  Leveraging networks with applications like telepresence to reduce energy-
hungry activity such as travel would reduce total energy consumption.
Finding:  Optics has the potential to increase the energy efficiency in networks by, 
for example, replacing high-energy-loss electrical conductors in data centers and 
wireless backhaul or, perhaps, even on silicon chips.

99
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
Conclusion:  The committee believes that a strong partnership among industry, 
universities, and government agencies will be crucial to overcoming technical 
challenges and to ensuring that the United States leverages that knowledge to gain 
market leadership.
Finding:  Many of the optical communications successes over the last 10 years 
are built on earlier research that came from research laboratories of vertically 
integrated companies, as well as strongly supporting government agencies. The 
industry is no longer integrated, but instead is segmented by material fabrication, 
components, modules, systems, network providers, and content and service pro-
viders. In this fragmented environment there has been a reduction in industrial 
research laboratories, because the reduced scale makes it difficult for companies to 
capture the value that is prudently needed to justify investing in research.
Finding:  Today’s broadband access by individual users in the United States is nei-
ther high-capacity nor available at reasonable cost to a large fraction of the popu-
lation. Bandwidths of 1 Gb/s represent the current state of the art in broadband 
access to the home in leading installations today.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTIONS
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. government and private industry, in combina­tion 
with academia, need to invent technologies for the next factor-of-100 cost-effective 
capacity increase in long-haul, metropolitan, and local-area optical networks.
The optics and photonics community needs to inform funding agencies, and 
information and entertainment providers, about the looming roadblock that will 
interfere with meeting the growing needs for network capacity and flexibility. There 
is a need to champion collaborative efforts, including consortia of companies, to 
find new technology—transmission, amplification, and switching—to carry and 
route at least another factor-of-100 capacity in information over the next 10 years.
This key recommendation leads directly to the first grand challenge question:
1.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community invent technologies for 
the next factor-of-100 cost-effective capacity increases in optical networks?
The first recommendation of the chapter states a goal for increased capacity; 
the next recommendation offers a path to help achieve that goal, especially with re-
spect to very short range communication, such as that required inside a data center.
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. government, and specifically the Department of 
Defense, should strive toward harmonizing optics with silicon-based electronics 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
100
to provide a new, readily accessible and usable, integrated electronics and optics 
platform.
They should also support and sustain U.S. technology transition toward low-
cost, high-volume circuits and systems that utilize the best of optics and electronics 
in order to enable integrated systems to seamlessly provide solutions in commu-
nications, information processing, biomedical, sensing, defense, and security ap-
plications. Government funding agencies, the DOD, and possibly a consortium of 
companies requiring these technologies should work together to implement this 
recommendation. This technology is one approach to assist in accomplishing the 
first key recommendation of this chapter concerning the factor-of-100 increase in 
Internet capability.
The second key recommendation in this chapter leads to the second grand 
challenge question:
2.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community develop a seamless inte-
gration of photonics and electronics components as a mainstream platform 
for low-cost fabrication and packaging of systems on a chip for communica-
tions, sensing, medical, energy, and defense applications?
In concert with meeting the first grand challenge, achieving the second grand 
challenge would make it possible to stay on a Moore’s law-like path of exponen-
tial performance growth. The seamless integration of optics and photonics at the 
chip level has the potential to significantly increase speed and capacity for many 
applications that currently use only electronics, or that integrate electronics and 
photonics at a larger component level. Chip-level integration will reduce weight 
and increase speed while reducing cost, thus opening up a large set of future pos-
sibilities as devices become further miniaturized.
The size and number of data centers in the United States and globally is ex-
pected to grow dramatically over the next decade to address the needs of a global 
digital society, especially if cloud services become more pervasive. It is clear that 
these data centers will be the focal point for the development and deployment of 
new optics and photonics communications technologies, and as such will be very 
important for the economy.
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. government and private industry should position 
the United States as a leader in the optical technology for the global data center 
business.

101
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s ,  I n f o r m a t i o n  P r o c e s s i n g ,  a n d  D a t a  S t o r a g e
Optical connections within and between data centers will be increasingly 
important in allowing data centers to scale in capacity. The committee believes 
that strong partnering between users, content providers, and network providers, 
as well as between businesses, government, and university researchers, is needed 
for ensuring that the necessary optical technology is generated, which will support 
continued U.S. leadership in the data center business.
Recommendation:  The U.S. government and private industry, in conjunction with 
academia, should strive to develop technology to have optics take over the role of 
communicating and interconnecting information, not just at long distances, but at 
shorter distances as well, such as inside information processing systems, even to the 
silicon chip itself, thereby allowing substantial reductions in energy consumption 
in information processing and allowing the performance of information processing 
machines and systems to continue to scale to keep up with the exploding growth 
of the use of information in society.
Recommendation:  The U.S. government and private industry, in conjunction with 
academia, need to encourage the exploitation of emerging nanotechnology for 
the next generation of optics and optoelectronics for the dramatic enhancement 
of performance (size, energy consumption, speed, integration with electronics) in 
information communications, storage, and processing.
Recommendation:  The optics and photonics community needs to position the 
United States in broadband to the home and business space. The U.S. government 
should pursue policies that will enable at least gigabits per second broadband access 
to the substantial majority of society at a reasonable cost by 2020.
Recommendation:  A multi-agency and cross-discipline effort is recommended to 
identify the opportunities and optical technologies to significantly increase the en-
ergy efficiency in communications networks, information processing, and storage. 
In addition, new ideas for the use of energy-efficient optical approaches to displace 
current energy-hungry practices—for example, travel—should be identified and 
supported. Greater focus and support in this area, especially at the fundamental 
level where companies are less likely to invest and where payoff could be huge, will 
be important.

102
4
Defense and National Security
INTRODUCTION
Many technological opportunities have been made possible by the advances in 
optics and photonics since the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) publication 
in 1998 of Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century.1 
Because optics and photonics are playing an increasingly important role in national 
defense, the United States is at a critical juncture in maintaining technological 
superiority in these areas. The gap between sophisticated and less sophisticated 
adversaries is not as large as it once was, and provides little or no advantage in 
several key technical areas, such as conventional night-vision equipment.
Sensor systems are becoming the next “battleground” for dominance in intelli-
gence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), with optics-based sensors represent-
ing a significant fraction of ISR systems.2 In addition, laser weapons are poised to 
cause a revolution in military affairs, and integrated optoelectronics is on the verge 
of replacing many traditional integrated circuit functions. Sophisticated platforms 
have reduced the need for a large set of traditional warfighters, but there is an in-
creased need for a high-tech workforce to support those platforms. This workforce 
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2  Details of additional defense and national security technologies may be found in Appendix C in 
this report. Topics covered include surveillance; night vision; laser rangefinders, designators, jam-
mers, and communicators; laser weapons; fiber-optic systems; and special techniques focusing on 
chemical and biological species detection, laser gyros for navigation, and optical signal processing.

103
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
relies on advanced training in technical areas with a basis in science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), which are precisely the areas in which it 
is becoming more difficult to find continued optics and photonics education in 
the United States. The ability of U.S. defense forces to leverage technology for 
dominance while using a small force is also threatened by an ongoing migration 
of optics and photonics capabilities to offshore manufacturing sites. This means 
that the United States may lose both first access and assured access to new optics 
and photonics defense capabilities.
Although conventional night-vision imagers have become commodities avail-
able to anyone with money, more sophisticated optical-based surveillance systems 
have made major progress in the past decade and provide a great opportunity. A 
number of very-wide-field-of-view passive sensor systems have been developed 
and are discussed in this chapter. It is now possible by using such systems to view 
large areas with moderate to high resolution, especially during the day. Large por-
tions of a city can thus be continuously monitored and the data from the system 
stored. If something of interest occurs, it is possible to re-examine that event to 
determine exactly what happened. Once areas of interest have been detected, it 
would be useful to have exquisite detail in certain critical areas, highlighted by 
the wide-area detection sensor. There have recently been long-range identifica-
tion demonstrations using active electrooptical (EO) systems called laser radar, 
or ladar. Although synthetic aperture radar (SAR) has been around for decades, it 
is only recently that synthetic aperture ladar systems have been flown. These are 
briefly discussed below. Multiple sub-aperture-based, potentially conformal, active 
sensor developments are also discussed. This is a developing technology that will 
allow lighter-weight, long-range imaging systems that can also be applied to laser 
weapons. After an object has been detected and identified, it may be recognized 
as a threat that has to be dealt with. “Speed-of-light” weapons are ideal choices 
for certain applications, such as for a boosting missile. These laser weapons can 
destroy a boosting ballistic missile, causing whatever warhead is on the missile to 
fall back on the nation that fired the missile. Recently the Airborne Laser Test Bed 
(ALTB)3 shot down a boosting ballistic missile with an onboard laser for the first 
time. Although this was a highly successful test, it was done with a chemical laser, 
using a mixture of oxygen iodine as the gain medium. There is strong interest in 
and great potential for laser weapons that run on electricity. If sufficient electricity 
can be generated from onboard fuel, one could use the same fuel, already in use. 
Multiple all-electric laser options are briefly discussed below.
The three areas just referred to have made major progress over the last decade, 
3  More information on the Airborne Laser Laboratory is available at http://www.fas.org/spp/
starwars/program/all.htm (accessed November 22, 2011) and http://boeing.mediaroom.com/index.
php?s=43&item=1075 (accessed November 7, 2012).

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
104
but they have been pursued as stovepiped activities. A laser weapon needs to detect 
a potential target, the target must be identified, and an aim point must be selected 
and maintained. Additionally, as communication between sensors producing “in-
put” about a situation and systems taking action (output) needs to be faster, there is 
a technological need to put these sensors and systems as close together as possible. 
The committee believes that there is significant synergy between these activities 
and that photonics technologies will be an integral part of this new integrated 
system capability.
Over the last decade, significant work has evolved on silicon photonics, to 
closely integrate optics and electronics in a cost-effective manner, as was discussed 
in the previous chapter, on communications. Most of this work has been driven 
by communications needs, but it will be an enabler for the defense arena as well. 
Optics is becoming integrated in defense systems other than optical systems, such as 
into microwave radars, using radio-frequency (RF) photonics. It is anticipated that 
more and more areas of defense “electronics” will become defense optoelectronics.
OPTICS AND PHOTONICS: IMPACT ON DEFENSE SYSTEMS
There is virtually no part of a modern defense system that is not impacted in 
some way by optics and photonics, even when the system is not optically based. 
Modern defense systems are migrating toward optically based imaging, remote 
sensing, communications, and weapons. This trend makes maintaining leadership 
in optics and photonics vital to maintaining the U.S. position in defense applica-
tions. Additional areas of impact include the following: precision laser machining, 
optical lithography for electronics, optical signal interconnects, solar power for 
remote energy needs, and generation of a stable timebase for the Global Positioning 
System (GPS). Even when the actual sensor is not optics-based, in many cases optics 
plays an important role, such as the migrating of RF photonics into microwave 
radar systems mentioned above.
TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
There have been significant advances in optics and photonics for national de-
fense both in components and in systems since the publication of Harnessing Light 
in 1998.4 Some of the key areas include surveillance, night vision, laser systems, 
fiber-optics systems, chemical and biological detection, and optical processing. 
One example of a significant advance in component technologies is laser diode 
efficiency, which has directly impacted the efficiency of laser systems. In addition, 
there has been significant progress in both laser power and available wavelengths 
4  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.

105
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
for applications important to national defense. These advances in laser technology 
have also enabled several significant system advances. One example is the area of 
optical aperture synthesis, which rapidly went from the laboratory to flight sys-
tem demonstrations within several years during the period since Harnessing Light 
appeared.
While the advances described above have enabled new capabilities for the 
United States, they have also narrowed the technology gap for adversaries. Impor-
tantly, the proliferation of low-cost, high-powered lasers has provided inexpensive 
countermeasures for adversaries. One example is the use of high-powered handheld 
laser pointers as laser dazzlers against helicopter pilots, causing a bedazzled pilot to 
become temporarily blinded or disoriented. The low cost and abundance of these 
devices put them in anyone’s reach.
Changes Since the Harnessing Light Study
This section briefly discusses the changes in each of the areas that were ad-
dressed in Chapter 4, “Optics in National Defense” in the NRC’s 1998 report Har-
nessing Light. For a more detailed discussion of these topics, see Appendix C in this 
report. The most significant changes have been due to the advances made in optical 
components that have enabled new sensors to be developed and demonstrated (see 
the section below entitled “Identification of Technological Opportunities from 
Recent Advances”). The following subsections provide an update for the areas of 
surveillance, night vision, laser systems operating in the atmosphere and in space, 
fiber-optic systems, and special techniques (e.g., chemical and biological species 
detection, laser gyros, and optical signal processing).
Surveillance
Surveillance still plays a critical role in detecting and assessing hostile threats 
to the United States. The progress in optical sensors over the past decade has 
created an exponential growth in ISR data from both passive and active sensors, 
including an increase in area coverage rate and an increase in sensor capabilities 
and performance. As the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
chief Regina Dugan puts it, “We are swimming in sensors and drowning in data.”5 
Materials advances have made collection at new wavelengths feasible, and improved 
components provide new data signatures, including vibrometry, polarimetry, hy-
per-spectral signatures, and three-dimensional data that mitigate camouflage for 
targets of interest.
5  Comment can be found in Norris, P. 2010. Watching Earth from Space: How Surveillance Helps 
Us—and Harms Us. Chichester, U.K.: Praxis Publishing.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
106
Night Vision
The proliferation of night-vision equipment over the past few decades has 
led to a significant amount of surplus equipment available at very low cost. This 
equipment has eroded the tactical advantage that the United States previously had 
in this area of warfare during the night.
Laser Rangefinders, Designators, Jammers, and Communicators
The significant increase in laser diode efficiency coupled with the decrease 
in cost has enabled recent advances in the area of laser designators. One of the 
key motivators for moving to, for example, optical communications, is that they 
minimize the probability of interception, jamming, and detection, while dramati-
cally minimizing the power needed. The improved efficiency and availability of 
high-powered lasers at a broader range of wavelengths has also enabled the de-
velopment of countermeasure systems for several applications, including defense 
against the now-prolific man portable air defense systems (MANPADS) capabilities 
that threaten commercial and military aircraft. The specific developments are not 
covered in detail in this report.
Laser Weapons
The Missile Defense Agency demonstrated the potential use of directed energy 
to defend against ballistic missiles when the Airborne Laser Test Bed successfully 
destroyed a boosting ballistic missile on February 11, 2010. As discussed in a Missile 
Defense Agency news release,6 this revolutionary use of directed energy is very at-
tractive for missile defense, with the potential to attack multiple targets at the speed 
of light, at a range of hundreds of kilometers, and at a low cost per interception 
attempt compared to current technologies (see Figure 4.1). Since publication of the 
1998 NRC report, there have also been other successful demonstrations, including 
the Tactical High Energy Laser (THEL),7 the Mobile Tactical High Energy Laser 
(MTHEL), and the Maritime Laser Demonstrator (MLD).8
6  Missile Defense Agency, U.S. Department of Defense. 2010. “Airborne Laser Test Bed Successful 
in Lethal Intercept Experiment.” MDA news release. Available at http://www.mda.mil/news/10news 
0002.html. Accessed August 2, 2012.
7  Shwartz, J., J. Nugent, D. Card, G. Wilson, J. Avidor, and E. Behar. 2003. Tactical high energy laser. 
Journal of Directed Energy 1(1):34-47.
8  More information is available through the Office of Naval Research, at http://www.onr.navy.mil/
Media-Center/Press-Releases/2011/Maritime-Laser-MLD-Test.aspx. Accessed June 4, 2012.

107
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
Fiber-Optic Systems
Fiber-optic systems have continued to evolve to achieve higher performance 
with lower power in a smaller volume. In addition, fiber-based supercontinuum 
sources have significantly advanced since the advent of photonic-crystal fibers 
(PCFs) in 1996.9 PCFs simultaneously provide high nonlinearity and a variable 
zero dispersion wavelength for a broadband continuum that can span more than 
an octave. Since the NRC’s 1998 report Harnessing Light, these sources have gone 
from concept, to demonstration, and finally to commercial products.
Special Techniques
The special techniques (i.e., chemical and biological species detection and opti-
cal signal processing) evaluated in the 1998 Harnessing Light report have evolved 
in different ways. Optical signal processing has also advanced, but not at the pace 
forecasted at that time. Importantly, recent advances in optical integrated circuits 
should enable significant advances in optical signal processing over the next decade.
Chemical and Biological Species Detection. Weapons of mass destruction, includ-
ing nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons, continue to be a high-priority threat. 
Long-range chemical and biological detection has advanced considerably since the 
9  Knight, J., T. Birks, P. Russell, and D. Atkin. 1996. All-silica single-mode optical fiber with pho-
tonic crystal cladding. Optics Letters 21:1547.
FIGURE 4.1  Airborne Laser Test Bed (ALTB). (a) The ALTB is a platform for the Department of De-
fense’s directed-energy research program. Two solid-state lasers and a megawatt-class chemical 
oxygen iodine laser (COIL) are housed aboard a modified Boeing 747-400 Freighter. (b) An infrared 
image of the Missile Defense Agency’s Airborne Laser Test Bed (at right in the image) destroying a 
threat representative short-range ballistic missile (at left in the image). SOURCE: Images available from 
the Missile Defense Agency, at http://www.mda.mil/news/gallery_altb.html.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
108
NRC’s 1998 Harnessing Light report. One example is the Joint Biological Stand-off 
Detection System (JBSDS), a light detection and ranging (lidar)-based system that 
is designed to detect aerosol clouds out to 5 kilometers (km) in a 180-degree arc 
and to discriminate clouds with biological content from clouds without biological 
material at distances of 1 to 3 km or more.
Optical Signal Processing. Optical signal processing has not changed very much 
since the NRC’s 1998 report was issued. Optical processing continues to be very 
promising, since some mathematical functions can be performed very rapidly using 
optical analog techniques. One example is optical correlations that rely on Fourier 
transforms. Optical correlators compare two-dimensional image data at very high 
speeds. The most promising advances are discussed below, in the section entitled 
“Integrated Optoelectronics.”
Identification of Technological Opportunities from Recent Advances
As the military capabilities of other countries have been expanding quickly, 
sensor systems are becoming the next battleground for dominance in ISR, as noted 
above. Advanced systems have reduced the reliance on the traditional warfighter 
so that now there is a need for a more technologically focused personnel. The data 
generated by deployed sensor systems have grown significantly due to the advances 
in sensor capabilities. This change has allowed new intelligence data products, but 
it has also driven the need for more sophisticated data processing and transmission 
in order to handle these data rates. The following subsections provide an overview 
of opportunities in synthetic aperture laser radar, multi-mode laser sensing, sparse 
aperture laser sensing, wide-area surveillance sensors, Geiger-mode imaging, and 
hyper-spectral sensing.
Synthetic Aperture Laser Radar
The diffraction limit presents a significant limitation on cross-range resolution 
for long-range remote sensing applications. Synthetic aperture sensing and analysis 
techniques provide a method of overcoming this limitation in some applications 
requiring high-resolution coherent images at great distances. These techniques 
have been employed in the RF domain for many years in synthetic aperture radar 
systems. Only in the past several years have advances in simultaneously stable and 
widely tunable coherent optical systems enabled the application of SAR techniques 
to the optical domain, allowing a potential for greatly improved illumination ef-
ficiency and image acquisition time. As pointed out by Beck et al. in their paper 
“Synthetic-Aperture Imaging Laser Radar: Laboratory Demonstration and Signal 
Processing,” the first Synthetic Aperture Imaging Ladar (SAIL) image of a fixed, dif-

109
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
fusely scattering target with a moving aperture10 demonstrated the use of a chirped 
optical source to provide a demonstration with 60-micron-range resolution and 
50-micron cross-range resolution. The earliest synthetic aperture experiments11 in 
the optical domain were performed at the United Aircraft Research Laboratories 
in the late 1960s, using inverse techniques to focus a moving point target. Another 
experiment12 used a technique to perform synthetic aperture imaging in two di-
mensions. A later effort13 used a continuous wave Nd:YAG microchip laser to dem-
onstrate inverse-SAIL imaging in one dimension together with diffraction limited 
conventional imaging in the other dimension (with an asymmetric high-aspect-
ratio aperture) to produce two-dimensional images. Other demonstrations14,15 
achieved one-dimensional SAIL imaging of a point target, using a continuous wave 
CO2 system, and a two-dimensional inverse-SAIL image of a translated target.16 
More recent efforts include the DARPA Synthetic Aperture Ladar for Tactical Im-
aging (SALTI) Program.17
The progress from laboratory to flight demonstration within several years 
shows that optical synthetic aperture imaging is becoming a valuable technology, 
with several recent additional advancements in combining synthetic aperture imag-
10  Beck, S.M., J.R. Buck, W.F. Buell, R.P. Dickinson, D.A. Kozlowski, N.J. Marechal, and T.J. Wright. 
2005. Synthetic-aperture imaging laser radar: Laboratory demonstration and signal processing. Ap-
plied Optics 44:7621-7629.
11  Lewis, T.S., and H.S. Hutchins. 1970. A synthetic aperture at 10.6 microns. Proceedings of the 
IEEE 58:1781-1782.
12  Aleksoff, C.C., J.S. Accetta, L.M. Peterson, A.M. Tai, A. Klossler, K.S. Schroeder, R.M. Majewski, 
J.O. Abshier, and M. Fee. 1987. Synthetic aperture imaging with a pulsed CO2 TEA laser. In Laser 
Radar II. Becherer R.J., and R.C. Harney, eds. Proceedings of the SPIE 783:29-40.
13  Green, T.J., S. Marcus, and B.D. Colella. 1995. Synthetic-aperture-radar imaging with a solid-
state laser. Applied Optics 34(30):6941-6949.
14  Yoshikado, S., and T. Aruga. 2000. Short-range verification experiment of a trial one-dimensional 
synthetic aperture infrared laser radar operated in the 10-µm band. Applied Optics 39(9):1421-1425.
15  Bashkansky, M., R.L. Lucke, E. Funk, L.J. Rickard, and J. Reintjes. 2002. Two-dimensional syn-
thetic aperture imaging in the optical domain. Optics Letters 27:1983-1985.
16  Using 10 nm of near-linear optical chirp at 1.5 microns with an analog reference channel (to mit-
igate waveform uncertainties) with path length exactly matched to the target channel’s path length.
17  Dierking, M., B. Schumm, J.C. Ricklin, P.G. Tomlinson, and S.D. Fuhrer. 2007. Synthetic aperture 
LADAR for tactical imaging overview. Proceedings of the 14th Coherent Laser Radar Conference 191-
194. Available at http://toc.proceedings.com/05549webtoc.pdf. Accessed June 27, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
110
ing and digital holography.18,19,20 Another flight demonstration21 has shown that 
the techniques are well understood and can be implemented with near-real-time 
processing.
Applying aperture synthesis techniques to the optical domain provides two 
significant advantages: (1) improved image acquisition time and (2) illumination 
efficiency.22 Improvement in illumination efficiency can be understood by consid-
ering that illuminating only a 10-m-diameter area of interest with a 10 gigahertz 
(GHz) signal at a range of 100 km would require a transmit aperture of approxi-
mately 300 m for the RF case, compared to approximately 1.5 centimeters (cm) for 
an optical system with a wavelength of 1.5 microns. It is clear that this technology 
has the potential to be further developed and that it can provide additional benefits 
if it is combined directly with defensive systems.
Multi-Mode Laser Sensing
Multi-function sensors seek to exploit the maximum information that a laser-
based sensor can obtain by incorporating several functions into a single sensor 
(e.g., three-dimensional imaging, vibrometry, polarimetry, aperture synthesis, agile 
apertures, etc.). Ideally these sensors utilize waveforms matched to the require-
ments of both the hardware (e.g., optical amplifiers, modulators) and the targets 
being imaged. Recent demonstrations23 have achieved 7-millimeter (mm)-range 
resolution (0.1-mm-range precision) along with simultaneous vibrometry.24 The 
inherent multi-functionality of these systems allows maximal use of available ap-
erture, volume, and power. Therefore, a multi-function system will enable practi-
cal, high-performance ladar remote sensing systems with scalable, reconfigurable 
18  Stafford, J.W., B.D. Duncan, and M.P. Dierking. 2010. Experimental demonstration of a stripmap 
holographic aperture ladar system. Applied Optics 49:2262.
19  Duncan, B.D., and M.P. Dierking. 2009. Holographic aperture ladar. Applied Optics 48:1168.
20  Rabb, D.J., D.F. Jameson, J.W. Stafford, and A.J. Stokes. 2010. Multi-transmitter aperture synthe-
sis. Optics Express 18:24937.
21  Krause, B., J. Buck, C. Ryan, D. Hwang, P. Kondratko, A. Malm, A. Gleason, and S. Ashby. 2011. 
“Synthetic Aperture Ladar Flight Demonstration.” Conference paper. CLEO: Applications and Tech-
nology (CLEO: A and T), Baltimore, Md., May 1, 2011. Available at http://www.opticsinfobase.org/
abstract.cfm?uri=CLEO:%20A%20and%20T-2011-PDPB7. Accessed June 27, 2012.
22  For a given cross-range resolution, the image acquisition time scales with the carrier wavelength. 
For an RF system with l = 3 cm, vplatform = 100 m/s, R = 100 km, and dx = 1 cm, the image collection 
time would be 1500 sec for the required baseline of 150 km. For an optical system with l = 1550 nm, 
the same specifications require a baseline of 7.75 m with an image collection time of 78 ms. 
23  Buck, J., A. Malm, A. Zakel, B. Krause, and B. Tiemann. 2007. High-resolution 3D coherent laser 
radar imaging. Proceedings of the SPIE 6550:655002.
24  Buck, J., A. Malm, A. Zakel, B. Krause, and B. Tiemann. 2007. Multi-function coherent ladar 3D 
imaging with S3. Proceedings of the SPIE 6739:67390F.

111
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
operating modes to obtain spectral, spatial, and temporal information about a 
target along with information about the target’s depolarization properties. This 
combined information set can provide an unprecedented ability to characterize 
targets with a single sensor and shows a possible path for the future development 
of more complex systems.
Sparse Aperture Laser Sensing
The use of small-aperture modules can lead to revolutionary optical sens-
ing and communications approaches, eliminating large, complex, and expensive 
apertures.25,26,27,28 Many sub-aperture modules have a much shorter focal length 
than one large EO aperture with the same F number. As a result, the overall aperture 
array will be much shallower and will weigh much less than the monolithic system. 
Phased-array approaches will enable using optical apertures along the surface of 
a vehicle because of the shallow aperture depth. Small, standard modules can en-
able responsive space, with an array of modules stored and ready to be configured 
and launched. Conformal and structural optical sensing and communications 
approaches (i.e., those that can be implemented on a platform without modify-
ing its skin and thereby avoiding the impacting of platform aerodynamics) can be 
developed. RF systems already have conformal and structural weight-bearing RF 
apertures. A conformal array system is robust to element failure, which is impor-
tant for system operation in hazardous environments. In conformal systems, beam 
focusing and retargeting can be performed using fast control of wave-front phase 
tip and tilt at each conformal system sub-aperture.29 This would allow orders-of-
magnitude faster retargeting of the outgoing or received optical waves. With con-
formal optical systems, atmospheric turbulence-induced phase distortions can be 
pre-compensated using adaptive optics (AO) elements that are directly integrated 
25  McManamon, P.F. 2008. “Long Range ID Using Sub-Aperture Array Based Imaging.” Confer-
ence paper. Coherent Optical Technologies and Applications (COTA), Boston, Mass., July 13, 2008.
26  McManamon, P.F., and W. Thompson. 2003. Phased array of phased arrays (PAPA) laser systems 
architecture. Fiber and Integrated Optics 22(2):79-88.
27  McManamon, P.F. 2004. “The Vision of Optical Phased Array and Phased Array of Phased Ar-
rays.” Conference paper. SPIE Great Lakes Photonics Symposium, Cleveland, Ohio, June 8, 2004.
28  McManamon, P.F., and W. Thompson. 2002. Phased array of phased arrays (PAPA) laser systems 
architecture. IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 3:1465-1472.
29  Vorontsov, M.A., T. Weyrauch, L. Beresnev, G. Carhart, L. Liu, S. Lachinova, and K. Aschenbach. 
2009. Adaptive array of phase-locked fiber collimators: Analysis and experimental demonstration. 
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 15:269-280.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
112
into individual sub-apertures. This enables the cost-effective integration of AO 
capabilities into conformal optical systems.30,31
Spatial heterodyne, a form of digital holography, is also being developed as a 
method of active imaging with high-resolution multiple sub-apertures and framing 
cameras.32,33,34,35 This is a new area with potential significant advantages, and it is 
anticipated that multiple-sub-aperture-based imaging will grow over time.
Wide-Area-Surveillance Sensors
One of the developments that will make a difference in U.S. military capa-
bility is wide-area surveillance, especially for cities. The U.S. military has a great 
surveillance capability in open spaces, but cities, in which there are many non-
combatants, present a new problem. From a security point of view, in cities there 
is a large amount of “clutter” in terms of buildings and people. The ability to watch 
everything all the time in a city improves the ability to do surveillance, especially 
when one can store the imagery and replay it at any time. A number of wide-area-
surveillance systems are being developed. One example is an airborne system de-
veloped in concert with the Philadelphia Police Department to show the value of 
such a system.36 The system was flying over a troubled neighborhood for one day 
as a test. When a woman got home from work she called the police to report that 
her house had been broken into during the day. The police reviewed the imagery 
collected that day and could see someone enter and leave the house around 2:00 
p.m. They could trace the person who left the house to another house 8 blocks 
away. This imagery provided sufficient proof for a warrant to search the house to 
which the person was traced, and there the stolen goods were found and an arrest 
30  Vorontsov, M.A., and S.L. Lachinova. 2008. Laser beam projection with adaptive array of fi-
ber collimators. I. Basic considerations for analysis. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 
25:1949-1959.
31  Lachinova, S.L., and M.A. Vorontsov. 2008. Laser beam projection with adaptive array of fiber 
collimators. II. Analysis of atmospheric compensation efficiency. Journal of the Optical Society of 
America A 25:1960-1973.
32  Marron, J.C., and R.L. Kendrick. 2007. Distributed aperture active Imaging. Proceedings of the 
SPIE 6550:65500A.
33  Rabb, D.J., D.F. Jameson, A.J. Stokes, and J.W. Stafford. 2010. Distributed aperture synthesis. 
Optics Express 18:10334-10342.
34  Marron, J.C., R.L. Kendrick, N. Seldomridge, T.D. Grow, and T.A. Höft. 2009. Atmospher-
ic turbulence correction using digital holographic detection: Experimental results. Optics Express 
17:11638-11651.
35  Miller, N.J., J.W. Haus, P. McManamon, and D. Shemano. 2011. Multi-aperture coherent imag-
ing. Proceedings of the SPIE 8052:8052-8056.
36  Written communication to the committee, October 25, 2011, from the President of Persistent 
Surveillance Systems.

113
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
was made. This example illustrates the power of surveillance that is conducted 100 
percent of the time. Whether it is employed in a military or security application, 
wide-area high-resolution surveillance can have a major impact.
There have been a number of efforts to develop wide-area-surveillance systems 
in the visible region. The largest system so far by pixel count is the DARPA-funded 
ARGUS (Autonomous Real-time Ground Ubiquitous Surveillance) system, with 
1.8 billion pixels (Figure 4.2).
One possible next step could be to build a large-format mid-wavelength infra-
red (MWIR) system in order to image during moonless nights (see Figure 4.3 and 
FIGURE 4.2  A sample of the ARGUS-IS imagery. The system was mounted under a YEH-60B helicopter fly-
ing at 17,500 feet over Quantico, Va. The Argus-IS images an area more than 4 km wide. The ARGUS system 
uses a large number of inexpensive cell phone cameras to create a whole new imaging modality with a huge 
format. SOURCE: Image available from DARPA Information Innovation Office, Autonomous Real-time Ground 
Ubiquitous Surveillance-Imaging System (ARGUS-IS), at http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/I2O/Programs/
Autonomous_­Real-time_Ground_Ubiquitous_Surveillance-Imaging_System_%28ARGUS-IS%29.aspx.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
114
Box 4.1). One approach to wide-area MWIR surveillance is to use the largest MWIR 
camera available, and then to use a step and stare technique to cover a larger area.37
Another example of a wide-area MWIR imager is the DARPA Large Area Cov-
erage Optical Search-while-Track and Engage (LACOSTE) program. As discussed 
on DARPA’s webpage,38 this is a wide field-of-view (FOV) coded aperture imaging 
37  Masterson, H., R. Serati, S. Serati, and J. Buck. 2011. “MWIR wide-area step and stare imager.” 
Proceedings of SPIE 8052, Acquisition, Tracking, Pointing, and Laser Systems Technologies XXV, 
80520N. doi 10.1117/12.884290:
38  More information is available at web-ext2.darpa.mil. Accessed August 6, 2012.
FIGURE 4.3  (Right) Wide-area mid-wavelength infrared (MWIR) step and stare imager. (Left) Each element of 
the Hex-7 lens array has a 6° × 6° field of view (FOV). Each FOV is imaged onto the same focal plane array (FPA) 
to provide seven distinct viewing angles. The effective FOV of the system is 17.5° × 17.5°. SOURCE: Reprinted, 
with permission, from Masterson, H., R. Serati, S. Serati, and J. Buck. 2011. MWIR wide-area step and stare 
imager. Proceedings of the SPIE 8052, Acquisition, Tracking, Pointing, and Laser Systems Technologies XXV.
BOX 4.1 
MWIR Step and Stare Wide-Angle Image
A step and stare mid-wavelength infrared (MWIR) imager, recently developed by Boulder 
Nonlinear Systems (BNS) for the Air Force Research Laboratory, switches between fields of 
view in a Hex-7 pattern to achieve 0.1 milli-radian resolution within a 17.5° × 17.5° field of 
view. Historically, step and stare techniques required a nominal 5 milliseconds (msec) to stare, 
and then 150-200 msec to move from one angular location to another. By using switchable 
shutters to move from one angular location to another, the BNS system dramatically changed 
the ratio of staring time to stepping time, reducing the step time to approximately 1 msec. The 
demonstration was accomplished using a 1 km × 1 km MWIR focal plane array, which covers 
an area of 3 km × 3 km using a Hex-7 scan pattern; 4 km × 4 km MWIR cameras have been 
developed, and with a Hex-19 pattern would cover a 20 km × 20 km circular pixel area. For a 
4 msec staring time and 1 msec step time, 5 msec per hex element yields 95 msec per frame, 
for a rate of >10 Hz over a 20 km × 20 km region. An 8 km × 8 km array would provide a 40 
km × 40 km picture with the same frame rate, which could be scaled to larger frames with a 
Hex-37 step pattern at a slower frame rate.

115
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
technology approach for the single-sensor day/night persistent tactical surveillance 
of all moving vehicles in a large urban battlefield. LACOSTE coded aperture imag-
ing technology focused on achieving a very wide instantaneous FOV using multiple 
simultaneous wide-FOV images.39,40,41,42,43,44 Discussions within the references 
cited in footnotes 39 through 44 make it clear that in coded apertures, a structured 
mask of pinhole cameras is created such that the image from each individual pin-
hole falls across a common focal plane array (FPA). With a large-area mask centered 
above a small FPA, the pinhole camera structure opens as a lens in the desired look 
direction, while the remainder of the mask remains opaque. With a known mask 
structure, the multiple images on the same focal plane are digitally deconvolved to 
form an image, which provides several unique and enabling features.
Geiger-Mode Imaging
Geiger-mode detectors based on avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are highly 
sensitive semiconductor electronic devices that exploit the photoelectric effect to 
convert light to electricity. They can have high quantum efficiencies and can be 
thought of as photodetectors that provide a built-in first stage of gain through 
avalanche multiplication. Since the publication of the NRC’s 1998 report, Geiger-
mode arrays have been developed and used for several demonstrations, including 
the DARPA Jigsaw program,45 which provided a three-dimensional flash imaging 
system.
39  Mahalanobis, A., C. Reyner, H. Patel, T. Haberfelde, D. Brady, M. Neifeld, B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, 
and S. Rogers. 2007. IR performance study of an adaptive coded aperture diffractive imaging system 
employing MEMS eyelid shutter technologies. Proceedings of the SPIE 6714:67140D.
40  Mahalanobis, A., C. Reyner, T. Haberfelde, M. Neifeld, and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar. 2008. 
Recent developments in coded aperture multiplexed imaging systems. Proceedings of the SPIE 
6978:6978G-69780G-8.
41  Mahalanobis, A., M. Neifeld, B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, and T. Haberfelde. 2008. Design and analysis 
of a coded aperture imaging system with engineered PSFs for wide field of view imaging. Proceedings 
of the SPIE 7096:7096C-70960C-11.
42  Mahalanobis, A., M. Neifeld, B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, T. Haberfelde, and D. Brady. 2009. Off-axis 
sparse aperture imaging using phase optimization techniques for application in wide-area imaging 
systems. Applied Optics 48(28):5212-5224.
43  Slinger, C., M. Eismann, N. Gordon, K. Lewis, G. McDonald, M. McNie, D. Payne, K. Ridley, 
M. Strens, G. DeVilliers, and R. Wilson. 2007. An investigation of the potential for the use of a 
high-resolution adaptive coded aperture system in the mid-wave infrared. Proceedings of the SPIE 
6714:671408.
44  McNie, M.E., D.J. Combes, G.W. Smith, N. Price, K.D. Ridley, K.L. Lewis, C.W. Slinger, and S. 
Rogers. 2007. Reconfigurable mask for adaptive coded aperture imaging (ACAI) based on an address-
able MOEMS microshutter array. Proceedings of the SPIE 6714:67140B.
45  More information on the Foliage-Penetrating 3D Imaging Laser Radar System is available at 
http://www.ll.mit.edu/publications/journal/pdf/vol15_no1/15_1jigsaw.pdf. Accessed June 27, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
116
Hyper-Spectral Sensing
Hyper-spectral imaging is an extreme form of color imaging. People are very 
familiar with color imaging. We all know that spotting a bright red object lying 
on a green lawn is much easier than seeing a green object on a green lawn. Color 
in an image can be divided into many wavebands for more resolution. One of the 
significant issues associated with multi- or hyper-spectral imaging is whether or 
not one needs to see at night. Daytime viewing uses the visible and near-infrared 
regions of the spectrum, where as nighttime viewing requires detectors for longer 
wavelengths. Although there is a phenomenon called night glow46 in the near-
infrared, and often in man-made lighting or light from the Moon, reliable view-
ing requires moving to the mid- or long-wave infrared (IR). Most of the current 
commercial applications of spectral, or hyper-spectral, imaging use the visible and 
near-IR regions.
Multi- or hyper-spectral imaging can be used for telling the status of crops, for 
finding minerals, and for surveillance. Spectral information is always valuable for 
looking at surface material properties. In addition, hyper-spectral imaging technol-
ogy is very useful for search-and-rescue applications.47 One of the disadvantages 
of hyper-spectral imaging is signal availability, because the narrow bands provide 
limited signal for a passively illuminated scene. For hyper-spectral imaging, the 
resolution of the sensor must be traded with the available signal levels.
Defense Systems
Defense systems (laser weapons) have made great progress since the 1998 NRC 
report was issued. The Airborne Laser Laboratory (ABL) intercepted two ballistic 
missiles in February 2010 (see Figure 4.1)48 with the megawatt-class oxygen iodine 
laser emitted from the nose of the aircraft. After this successful test, ABL was con-
verted to the Airborne Laser Test Bed to explore issues associated with potential 
follow-on activities. As of this writing, no follow-on activity has been identified. 
Until April 2009, ABL was on a path to deployment in small numbers. However, 
46  Barber, D.R. 1957. A very early photographic observation of the spectrum of the night glow. 
Nature 179(4556):435.
47  Eismann, M.T., A.D. Stocker, and N.M. Nasrabadi. 2009. Automated hyperspectral cueing for 
civilian search and rescue. Proceedings of the IEEE 97(6):1031-1055.
48  Wolf, Jim, and David Alexander. 2010. “U.S. Successfully Tests Airborne Laser on Missile.” 
Available at http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/02/12/usa-arms-laser-idUSN1111660620100212? 
type=marketsNews. Accessed October 26, 2011.

117
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
at that time the second ABL aircraft was recommended for cancellation, with the 
program to return to a research and development effort.49
Another major laser weapons effort was the advanced tactical laser (ATL), a 
short-range weapon for use on a gunship-like aircraft, with the laser replacing 
a gun. In August 2008, the first test-firing of the “high-energy chemical laser” 
mounted in a Hercules transport plane was announced. In August 2009, a ground 
target was “defeated” from the air with the ATL aircraft.50 This laser weapon is also 
based on an oxygen iodine laser, requiring hauling hazardous chemicals to the field. 
At the time of this writing, there is no planned follow-on effort.
Because of the interest in electric-powered lasers that do not require a spe-
cialized logistics tail, the High Energy Laser-Joint Technology Office (HEL-JTO) 
initiated a program to demonstrate a 100-kilowatt (kW)-output, electric-powered 
laser capable of being used in a laser weapon system, called the Joint High Power 
Solid State Laser (JHPSSL). As discussed in the December 2010 news release from 
DARPA entitled “Compact High-Power Laser Program Completes Key Milestone,”51 
JHPSSL operated above the rated 100-kW power level for 6 hours.52,53 The goal of 
the High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System (HELLADS) is to demonstrate 
150 kW of power in a lightweight package. In June 2011, DARPA completed the 
laboratory testing of a fundamental building block for HELLADS, a single laser 
module that successfully demonstrated the ability to achieve high power and beam 
quality from a significantly lighter and smaller laser.54 Another DARPA program 
that is developing an approach to laser weapons is the Adaptive Photonic Phase 
Locked Elements (APPLE) program.55 APPLE uses a modular system (Figure 4.4) 
to scale the available power, which requires high-powered lasers with sufficiently 
49  Gates, Dominic. 2009. “Boeing Hit Harder than Rivals by Defense Budget Cuts. Available at 
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2008997361_defensecuts07.html. Accessed Octo-
ber 26, 2011.
50  Boeing. 2009. “Boeing Advanced Tactical Laser Defeats Ground Target in Flight Test.” Available 
at http://boeing.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=817. Accessed June 27, 2012.
51  DARPA. 2011. “Compact High-Power Laser Program Completes Key Milestone.” Available at 
http://www.darpa.mil/NewsEvents/Releases/2011/2011/06/30_COMPACT_HIGH-POWER_LASER_
PROGRAM_COMPLETES_KEY_MILESTONE.aspx. Accessed October 26, 2011.
52  JHPSSL first achieved the 100-kW power levels in March 2009. More information is available 
at http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=161575. Accessed June 4, 2012.
53  Optics. 2010. “Northrop’s 100 kW Laser Weapon Runs For Six Hours.” Available at http://optics.
org/news/1/7/13. Accessed October 26, 2011.
54  DARPA. 2011. “Compact High-Power Laser Program Completes Key Milestone.” 
55  Dorschner, Terry A. 2007. “Adaptive Photonic Phase Locked Elements: An Overview.” Raytheon 
Network Centric Systems presentation. Available at http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?Location 
=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf&AD=ADA503733. Accessed June 27, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
118
narrow linewidth for phasing. There are several other efforts to investigate electric 
laser-based defense systems.56,57,58,59
Free-Space Laser Communications
The Air Force 405B program started the thrust toward free-space laser com-
munications in 1971 with a goal of 1 gigabit per second (Gb/s) free-space laser 
communications, with a flight demonstration in 1979. The Department of Defense 
(DOD) is interested in free-space laser communications for high-speed com-
munications with mobile platforms (e.g., aircraft, satellites, ground vehicles, dis-
mounted solders). Although the DOD can and does make use of the Internet, there 
is a strong need to extend high-bandwidth communications to mobile platforms, 
with RF communications used as the baseline for mobile DOD communications. 
56  Optics. 2010. “Northrop’s 100 kW Laser Weapon Runs for Six Hours.”
57  DARPA. 2011. “Compact High-Power Laser Program Completes Key Milestone.”
58  Dorschner, Terry A. 2007. “Adaptive Photonic Phase Locked Elements: An Overview.”
59  Page, Lewis. 2007. “DARPA Looking to Kickstart Raygun Tech.” Available at http://www.­theregister.
co.uk/2007/08/23/darpa_laser_blast_cannon_plan. Accessed October 26, 2011.
FIGURE 4.4  Overview of the Adaptive Photonic Phase Locked Elements (APPLE) system, which uses a 
distributed fiber laser with a master oscillator power amplifier (MOPA) train and coherently combined 
beams to scale the optical power while correcting for wavefront errors. NOTE: Stochastic parallel 
gradient descent (SPGD). SOURCE: Raytheon Co. Reprinted with permission.

119
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
At the 2011 Defense Security and Sensing Symposium Fellows luncheon, Larry 
Stotts, from DARPA, pointed out that the DOD owns 300 megahertz (MHz) of RF 
bandwidth for communications, which represents the total extent of RF bandwidth 
legally available to the DOD for communications. The primary disadvantage of 
free-space optical communications is the limited penetration of significant cloud 
depths, resulting in DOD programs combining RF and optical communications 
to maintain continuous link management. Because the technology for laser com-
munications is very similar to that of laser radar sensors, both areas have jointly 
benefited from the advances in each.60 However, it is also believed that there is 
possible synergy by fully merging optical surveillance technology, laser weapon 
technology, and free-space laser technology based on the reduced communication 
paths, close integration of sensors, and increased reliability. Traditionally these 
areas have been addressed as separate technologies, but since progress has been 
made in many of these fields, integration can clearly result in additional synergies.
Solar Power for Military Applications
The military uses a substantial amount of energy in various forms, with sig-
nificant logistics complications due to the remote deployment of forces. Reducing 
the overall cost of energy along with simplifying remote energy-supply methods 
represents a promising application of solar technologies. The dismounted soldier 
going into remote areas typically carries a heavy backpack, with batteries represent-
ing a significant fraction of the weight. Therefore, the remote charging of batteries 
is the simplest application of solar power. Because solar power represents one of 
the primary energy sources for space-based platforms, solar power for space has 
been one of the sources of funding for very high efficiency solar cells.
There is a strong military interest in developing long-dwell platforms, such as 
the DARPA Vulture program.61 Vulture is supposed to fly continuously for 5 years 
at an altitude above 60,000 ft and is expected to be solar-powered. Another, similar 
effort is the NASA Helios work, which has performed demonstration flights of a 
prototype (see Figure 4.5). Integrated Sensor Is Structure (ISIS) is another long-
dwell, high-altitude DARPA program; it uses a blimp with solar cells for power.62
60  Stotts, L.B., L.C. Andrews, P.C. Cherry, J.J. Foshee, P.J. Kolodzy, W.K. McIntire, M. Northcutt, R.L. 
Phillips, H.A. Pike, B. Stadler, and D.W. Young. 2009. Hybrid optical RF airborne communications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 97(6):1109-1127.
61  Defense Industry Daily. 2010. “DARPA’s Vulture: What Goes Up, Needn’t Come Down.” Avail-
able at http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/DARPAs-Vulture-What-Goes-Up-Neednt-Come-
Down-04852/. Accessed October 26, 2011.
62  Defense Industry Daily. 2011. “USA’s HAA & ISIS Projects Seek Slow, Soaring Surveillance Su-
periority.” Available at http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/darpas-isis-project-seeks-slow-soaring-
surveillance-superiority-updated-02189/. Accessed October 26, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
120
FIGURE 4.5  Overview of long-dwell platforms. (Top) The NASA Helios prototype during its test-
flight over the Pacific Ocean. SOURCE: Defense Industry Daily. 2010. “DARPA’s Vulture: What Goes 
Up, Needn’t Come Down.”Available at http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/DARPAs-Vulture-What-
Goes-Up-Neednt-Come-Down-04852/. (Bottom) A depiction of the DARPA Integrated Sensor Is 
the Structure (ISIS) concept. SOURCE: Defense Industry Daily. 2011. “USA’s HAA & ISIS Projects 
Seek Slow, Soaring Surveillance Superiority.” Available at http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/
darpas-isis-project-seeks-slow-soaring-surveillance-superiority-updated-02189/.

121
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
Integrated Optoelectronics
For more than 40 years, fulfillment of the promise of a truly integrated opto-
electronic circuit—that is, a single-crystal monolithically integrated circuit com-
bining lasers, waveguides, modulators, detectors, and amplifiers—has been awaited. 
Such an advance would enable unprecedented capability for optical systems, much 
in the same way that electronics have evolved using integrated circuits.63 It is also 
known that electronic components are susceptible to being influenced by stray 
electromagnetic radiation, whereas optical components are not affected by most 
microwave radiation. As more and more of the “circuit” components are converted 
from electronics to optics, the vulnerability of the U.S. military’s electronic systems 
to electromagnetic pulse and other electronic vulnerabilities is being reduced.
In order for computing power to continue to adhere to Moore’s law, it is likely 
that the integration of optics and electronics in a single chip will be required 
(see the discussion in Chapter 3 in this report). However, as speed increases, it 
is important to integrate optics and electronic functions seamlessly in very close 
proximity, reducing communication time between functions best done in optics 
and functions best done in electronics. The most promising advances for defense 
applications have been in the development of indium phosphide (InP)-based 
subsystems, which, although more costly than silicon, allow the needed subsystems 
to be created with a single material. There is currently very little InP work being 
done in the United States, and limited trusted foundries are suitable for these ap-
plications. The potential for scaling processing power beyond that possible with 
electronics, along with the reduction in electromagnetic interference and power 
requirements, makes this a very promising technology for dealing with the large 
data rates being generated with new optical sensors.
MANUFACTURING
In order for the United States to maintain leadership in advanced defense 
systems, it is critical for the nation to be at the forefront of both research and 
manufacturing. Defense systems have unique needs that require both first access 
and assured access to important technology components, and both types of access 
are compromised if the manufacturing capabilities do not exist within the United 
States. There has been a steady migration of photonics manufacturing overseas64 
at precisely the same time that these technologies are becoming critical in defense 
applications. Some of this migration has been driven by the need to cut costs for 
high-volume consumer products, but there is an alarming shift of manufacturing 
63  Yariv, A. 1981. Integrated optoelectronics. Engineering and Science 44(3):17-20.
64  NAS-NAE-IOM. 2007. Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for 
a Brighter Economic Future. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
122
for critical items due to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR). Al-
though these regulations were originally designed to keep critical technologies out 
of the hands of adversaries, their current implementation has created an incentive 
for companies to move manufacturing overseas in order to be well positioned for 
commercial applications of their technologies. This has resulted in some companies 
moving the related research and development efforts to be near the manufactur-
ing for a more rapid development cycle. A previous National Research Council 
study has reported on the impacts of ITAR controls on U.S. technology.65 With 
insufficient funding from the DOD to maintain first and assured access to many 
critical photonics components, companies are unable to maintain a manufacturing 
capability when potentially larger commercial markets are restricted. Manufactur-
ing for cutting-edge photonics has become increasingly globalized over the past 
several years, and ITAR controls have not been changed to reflect these shifts. The 
committee understands that the ITAR issue is very complex in scope and cannot 
even begin to be fully addressed in this report, but the committee also recognizes 
that the issue directly affects the defense optics and photonics community in a 
negative fashion.
Another important consideration for manufacturing related to defense tech-
nologies is the spiral threading of innovations in optics and photonics that feeds 
itself. For example, improvements in lasers (i.e., stability, agility, and efficiency) and 
detectors (i.e., arrays, expanded wavelengths, improved efficiency, bandwidth) have 
enabled new remote sensing capabilities over the past decade. The developments 
in lasers and detectors have also led to the improved manufacturing of devices, 
which further improves the devices for sensors, and also improves manufacturing, 
in a continuous loop. Thus, there are secondary impacts as a consequence of the 
progressive loss of photonics manufacturing in the United States.
U.S. GLOBAL POSITION
For many years, the United States has taken for granted its position as one of 
the leaders in defense technologies. However, several trends have been developing 
over the past few decades that seriously threaten that position. The military capa-
bilities of other countries have been expanding quickly, as sensor systems become 
the next battleground for dominance in ISR, with optics- and photonics-based sen-
sors representing an increasing fraction of ISR systems. During difficult economic 
times, long-term R&D is an easy target for cuts in favor of shorter-term applica-
tions. However, it is the long-term developments that provide the most significant 
65  National Research Council. 2008. Space Science and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations: 
Summary of a Workshop. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

123
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
advantages for defense applications. The current U.S. position relies on leadership 
in research, which is also being negatively impacted by the manufacturing trends.
The U.S. defense STEM workforce in photonics and other areas will be signifi-
cantly diminished owing to retirements over the next decade, whereas the technical 
workforce of potential adversaries is expanding rapidly.66 For example, the College 
of Optics and Photonics at the University of Central Florida has only approximately 
40 percent U.S. nationals in its graduate optics program,67 and according to the 
2009 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), the United States ranks 
17th in science and 25th in mathematics education. Figure 4.6 shows the percent 
age of U.S. national PhDs in physics in U.S.-based institutions of higher learning 
between 1969 and 2008. Although optics accounts for only one part of the physics 
student population, this trend should give a good idea of the percentage of foreign 
optics graduate students in U.S. graduate schools.
These trends in the STEM workforce are creating a tipping point for photonics 
defense work, with fewer individuals who are capable of obtaining security clear-
ances being trained in the United States. If the United States continues to shrink 
its STEM workforce and market share in photonics, innovations in research will 
bolster the economy and the defense technology of countries poised to take ad-
vantage of those advances.
The trends in manufacturing are further straining the U.S. position in photon-
ics. It is critical for the United States to be at the forefront of both research and 
manufacturing in order to maintain a leadership position in photonics for defense 
applications. The need for first and assured access combined with ITAR controls 
imposes an additional need on the United States for a U.S.-based manufacturing 
capability for these technologies. ITAR controls have also hastened the steady 
migration of photonics manufacturing for advanced technologies overseas, where 
companies want to be positioned for commercial applications of those technolo-
gies. These companies have also begun moving research groups overseas to facilitate 
a rapid development cycle for such capabilities. Although the ITAR controls were 
meant to keep critical technologies out of the hands of adversaries, they are reduc-
ing the effectiveness of technology development for defense applications. When 
coupled with the workforce trends, the U.S. position in photonics for defense ap-
plications is potentially reaching a tipping point, which must be reversed in order 
to maintain leadership in critical areas for defense.
66  NAS-NAE-IOM. 2007. Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for 
a Brighter Economic Future. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
67  Private communication with Dr. M.J. Soileau, Vice President for Research and Professor of Op-
tics, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Physics, at the University of Central Florida.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
124
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
Finding:  The committee notes that there have been several areas of optics and 
photonics with significant advancement for defense and security since the NRC’s 
report Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century was 
published in 1998. These areas include the following:
·	 Long-range, laser-based identification capabilities, including multiple ap-
erture and synthetic aperture demonstrations, wide-area passive surveil-
lance capabilities in the visible and infrared regions, and signal processing 
capabilities to handle some of the new sensor data;
·	 Long-range, high-powered laser demonstrations from flight platforms for 
FIGURE 4.6 Citizenship of physics PhDs in U.S. institutions of higher learning from 1969 through 
2008. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Mulvey, Patrick J., and Starr Nicholson. 2011. Phys-
ics Graduate Degrees: Results from the Enrollments and Degrees and the Degree Recipient Follow-up 
Surveys, available at http://www.aip.org/statistics/trends/reports/physgrad2008.pdf.

125
D e f e n s e  a n d  N a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y
intercepting ballistic missiles. Although these programs have had successful 
demonstrations, the DOD has not set a roadmap for this technology; and
·	 High-speed free-space laser communication.
Key Conclusion:  There is possible synergy between optical surveillance technol-
ogy, laser weapon technology, and free-space laser technology. Because of orga-
nizational and funding issues within the Department of Defense, these technical 
areas have been pursued mostly as separate technologies. Great progress has been 
made, as highlighted above, but it is likely that a higher level of cooperation can 
result in additional synergies.
Conclusion:  The findings of previous National Research Council studies report-
ing the potential workforce shortages for the United States in the areas of science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics are consistent for the areas of optics 
and photonics in relation to defense and security. There are additional constraints 
for the defense workforce, which requires either a sufficient number of qualified 
U.S. nationals or a new way of leveraging uncleared individuals in the U.S. defense 
workforce, and will be significantly impacted by a decrease of senior personnel due 
to the retirement of a disproportionately older workforce over the next 15 years.
Conclusion:  It is possible that the United States is losing both first access and as-
sured access to critical optics and photonics technologies at precisely the same time 
that these capabilities are becoming a crucial defense technological advantage. This 
problem, which is not unique to photonics within defense-related technologies and 
systems, is believed to be primarily due to these factors:
·	 The ongoing migration of optics and photonics capabilities offshore as 
the manufacture and assembly of these components and systems becomes 
increasingly globalized; and
·	 The inability of companies to maintain a U.S.-based manufacturing ca-
pability for critical technologies when the larger commercial markets are 
restricted due to ITAR controls, which have not been changed to reflect 
the globalization of manufacturing for cutting-edge photonics systems and 
components.
Key Finding:  Silicon-based photonic integration technologies offer great potential 
for short-distance applications and could have a great payoff in terms of enabling 
continued growth in the function and capacity of silicon chips if optics for inter-
connection could be seamlessly included in the silicon complementary metal oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS) platform. It is also highly likely that integrated optoelec-

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
126
tronics in InP is a critical development area with significant growth potential for 
continuing the advance of defense systems.
RECOMMENDATION AND GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTIONS
On the basis of the conclusions presented above, the committee makes the 
following recommendation in order to enable the United States to maintain a 
competitive position in optics and photonics for security and defense:
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. defense and intelligence agencies should fund the 
development of optical technologies to support future optical systems capable of 
wide-area surveillance, exquisite long-range object identification, high-bandwidth 
free-space laser communication, “speed-of-light” laser strike, and defense against 
both missile seekers and ballistic missiles. Practical application for these purposes 
would require the deployment of low-cost platforms supporting long dwell times.
These combined functions will leverage the advances that have been made in 
high-powered lasers, multi-function sensors, optical aperture scaling, and algo-
rithms that exploit new sensor capabilities, by bringing the developments together 
synergistically. These areas have been pursued primarily as separate technical fields, 
but it is recommended that they be pursued together to gain synergy. One method 
of maintaining this coordination could include reviewing the coordination efforts 
among agencies on a regular basis.
This key recommendation leads directly to the third grand challenge question:
3.	 How can the U.S. military develop the required optical technologies to sup-
port platforms capable of wide-area surveillance, object identification and 
improved image resolution, high-bandwidth free-space communication, 
laser strike, and defense against missiles?
Optics and photonics technologies used synergistically for a laser strike fighter 
or a high-altitude platform can provide comprehensive knowledge over an area, the 
communications links to download that information, an ability to strike targets at 
the speed of light, and the ability to robustly defend against missile attack. Clearly 
this technological opportunity could act as a focal point for several of the areas in 
optics and photonics (such as camera development, high-powered lasers, free-space 
communication, and many more) in which the United States must be a leader in 
order to maintain national security.

127
5
Energy
INTRODUCTION
This chapter discusses the use of optics and photonics in the generation of 
energy and the use of optics in lighting. Energy use in data centers is discussed in 
Chapter 3, “Communications, Information Processing, and Data Storage.” Optics 
and photonics are very important in energy generation, in energy conservation, 
and in monitoring the effects of both on the environment. The main topic re-
lated to energy generation discussed in this chapter is solar energy. As noted in a 
previous report from the National Research Council (NRC): “Solar energy could 
potentially produce many times the current and projected future U.S. electricity 
consumption.”1 Inertial confinement fusion is a potential optical technique that 
could generate abundant energy in the future2,3 A recent article discusses the Na-
tional Ignition Facility, which has a near-term goal of achieving ignition (defined 
as 1-MJ [megajoule] output energy from a fusion burn for 1 MJ of laser energy 
1  NAS-NAE-NRC. 2010. America’s Energy Future: Technology and Transformation. Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press, p. 20.
2  Lindl, J.D., and E.I. Moses. 2011. Special topic: Plans for the National Ignition Campaign (NIC) 
on the National Ignition Facility (NIF): On the threshold of initiating ignition experiments. Physics 
of Plasmas (18)5:050901-050902. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3591001.
3  Dunne, M., E.I. Moses, P. Amendt, T. Anklam, A. Bayramian, E. Bliss, B. Debs, R. Deri, T. Diaz 
de la Rubia, B. El-Dasher, J.C. Farmer, D. Flowers, K. J. Kramer, L. Lagin, J.F. Latkowski, J. Lindl, W. 
Meier, R. Miles, G.A. Moses, S. Reyes, V. Roberts, R. Sawicki, M. Spaeth, and E. Storm. 2011. Timely 
delivery of laser inertial fusion energy (LIFE). Fusion Science and Technology 60:19-27.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
128
input into the target system).4 This paper mentions that plans are already underway 
to define the laser driver for inertial fusion energy applications. However, inertial 
confinement fusion is not discussed in greater detail in this chapter partially be-
cause a current NRC study is specifically addressing this topic; the interim report 
of that study was recently released.5 Optics can also be used in isotope separation,6 
but very little information is available on that subject at the unclassified level, and 
so it was not considered in this unclassified study. Also, optical sensors can be used 
to assist in oil drilling and recovery, as is briefly discussed in Box 5.1.
Solar energy is discussed here with respect to its primary use by electric utili-
ties competing against other forms of electricity generation such as new natural 
gas- or coal-fired electricity generation plants. For an electric utility, sunlight can be 
concentrated to generate solar power in a manner potentially more cost-effective, 
depending on the cost of the concentrating technology, than would be possible with 
competing forms of electricity generation in new electric power plants. Concentrat-
ing solar power (CSP) uses a heated liquid and a turbine. The heated liquid stores 
energy until it is converted to electricity. This is advantageous because one of the 
issues with solar energy generation is the storage of energy for periods of time when 
the Sun is not out, such as at night and in overcast situations. Concentrated photo­
voltaic (CPV) power generation involves the use of solar cells after the incoming 
light is concentrated. For CPV, the price of the actual solar cell is not as critical in 
that the area covered by solar cells can be reduced up to 2,000 times as compared 
4  From Willner, A.E., R.L. Byer, C.J. Chang-Hasnain, S.R Forrest, H. Kressel, H. Kogelnik, G.J. 
Tearney, C.H. Townes, and M.N. Zervas. 2012. Optics and photonics: Key enabling technologies. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 100(Special Centennial Issue):1604-1643: “The year 2009 saw the comple-
tion of the National Ignition Facility (NIF), a 2-MJ, single shot laser facility at Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory (Livermore, CA) designed to compress targets to generate fusion burns and 
ignition of a target for energy generation. The NIF laser has now been operating for three years at 
close to 200 shots per year, with a greater than 95% availability rate for requested shots on targets. 
The goal in the near term is to achieve ignition defined as 1-MJ output energy from a fusion burn 
for 1 MJ of laser energy input into the target system. Plans are already underway to define the laser 
driver for inertial fusion energy applications.” Ibid. p. 1609: “We know that a fusion reaction works 
at even larger power scales. What we have yet to demonstrate is a nuclear burn in a laboratory under 
controlled conditions. When this is accomplished, it will be a “man on the moon” moment. Laser 
inertial fusion will open the possibility of amplifying the laser drive power by 30-100 times and in 
turn allow the operation of an electrical power plant with GWe output for 35-MWe laser power in-
put. Based on our knowledge of the rate at which new infrastructure is adopted, we can predict that 
fusion energy will take 25-50 years to make a significant impact on our energy supply. By that time 
it will probably be known simply as laser energy” (p. 1608).
5  National Research Council. 2012. Interim Report—Status of the Study “An Assessment of the Pros-
pects for Inertial Fusion Energy.” Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 
6  Broad, W.J. 2011. “Laser Advances in Nuclear Fuel Stir Terror Fear.” New York Times. August 20. 
Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/21/science/earth/21laser.html?pagewanted=all. Ac-
cessed July 24, 2012.

129
E n e r g y
to non-concentrating systems. With CPV, higher-cost, and more efficient, solar 
cells can be used. The cost of the concentrators will be the main issue, as stated 
in the NAS-NAE-NRC report Overview and Summary of America’s Energy Future: 
Technology and Transformation published in 2010: “In general, nearly all of the costs 
involved in using renewable energy for power generation are associated with the 
manufacturing and installation of the equipment.”7 For high-concentration CPV, 
more concentrating options are available for larger electric plants, and so CPV may 
favor utility-scale plants over the smaller plants used by an individual. Photosyn-
thesis is also briefly discussed below as another method of capturing light from the 
Sun and turning it into energy. However, it is clear that a successful deployment of 
7  NAS-NAE-NRC. 2010. Overview and Summary of America’s Energy Future, p. 22.
BOX 5.1 
Oil and Gas Production
Optical systems are increasingly being used by the oil and gas industry as a means for 
monitoring wells, allowing increased production, and mitigating risks. Industry adoption of 
optics has been relatively recent, as the high pressure and temperature conditions in a well 
reduce the lifetime of conventional fiber optics to be substantially shorter than the 20 years 
over which most wells are expected to produce. Since 2000, fiber-based distributed temperature 
sensors have become common tools for monitoring the performance of wells, and have proven 
to be a robust source of information about the well performance.
Distributed temperature sensors rely on the fiber locally changing temperature and scat-
tering light back up the fiber owing to the temperature change. Thus, when combined with 
a pulsed laser source, the backscattered light allows a temperature profile of the well to be 
determined. The temperature of the fiber is changed locally owing to fluids flowing into the 
well bore (Joule-Thomson effect). This information is combined with geothermal models to 
accurately locate and quantify fluid flows in the well.
More recently, fiber systems have been deployed for distributed acoustic sensing (DAS), 
to monitor well activity during several phases of well completion. DAS uses a principle similar 
to that for distributed temperature sensors, but uses acoustic waves generated from within the 
well to alter the refractive index of the fiber probe. The backscattered radiation from this index 
variation can be collected and processed to discriminate between various sources and depths. 
These systems offer reliable discrimination between perforation clusters that are active during 
the acid injection stage and those that are taking most of the proppant throughout the job. 
This technology also shows promise for many other functions, such as sand detection and gas 
breakthrough detection.
  SOURCES: Algeroy, J., J. Lovell, G. Tirado, R. Meyyappan, G. Brown, R. Greenaway, M. 
Carney, J. Meyer, J. Davies, and I. Pinzon. 2010. Permanent monitoring: Taking it to the 
reservoir. Oilfield Review 22(1):34-41; Molenaar, M., D. Hill, P. Webster, E. Fidan, and B. 
Birch. 2011. “First Downhole Application of Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) for Hydraulic 
Fracturing Monitoring and Diagnostics.” Society of Petroleum Engineers Hydraulic Fracturing 
Technology Conference, January 24-26, 2011, The Woodlands, Tex.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
130
solar power on a large scale in the United States will need the technology to have 
reached cost parity with current energy sources. The energy delivered to the grid 
as electricity will, for solar, need to reach “grid parity”; the faster solar power can 
do that, the better for the U.S. economy as a whole.
Solid-state (SS) lighting is clearly the next step in lighting. It has already become 
entrenched in many niche applications and is moving quickly toward adoption as 
the new standard for general lighting. The record efficiency for SS lighting today 
is 231 lumens per watt (lm/W),8 compared to 4-15 lm/W for a conventional in-
candescent bulb, and approximately 55 lm/W for a compact fluorescent bulb. Cost 
is the main issue preventing widespread adoptions of SS lighting, but substantial 
progress is being made in lowering the cost of light-emitting diodes (LEDs).
In the 1998 NRC study Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for 
the 21st Century,9 solar cells are discussed for space application, with a short sec-
tion on terrestrial application. At the time of that publication, the cost to purchase 
solar cell panels for terrestrial application was $4.50 per watt (W), compared to the 
current cost, which is as low as $0.75/W. LEDs, also called SS lighting, were barely 
discussed in the 1998 report, in which Figure 3.12 shows efficiencies from 20-80 
lm/W for LEDs, compared to the current record of 231 lm/W.
SOLAR POWER
Solar power has received great interest recently as a renewable energy solu-
tion capable of providing energy independence and environmental stability while 
beginning to deliver power at a competitive price. Because of high costs relative to 
other energy generation technologies, solar power currently satisfies only a small 
fraction of the world’s energy need. Government support and private investments 
have led to a boom of technical advances over the past years that have continued 
to drive solar power toward eventually being a mainstream source of power.10
Solar power has great potential for home, off-grid, and utility-scale generation. 
Solar cells have become common in applications for which grid power is not ac-
cessible (see Figure 5.1) or convenient, such as powering remote devices or small 
handheld electronics. As will be seen in this chapter, utility-scale solar plants are not 
yet competitive with alternative sources of energy, yet the cost of solar electricity 
8  More information about Cree is available at http://www.cree.com/press/press_detail.asp?i=13049 
45651119. Accessed December 17, 2011.
9  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
10  Tyner, C. E., G.J. Kolb, M. Geyer, and M. Romero. 2001. “Concentrating Solar Power in 2001—An 
IEA/SolarPACES Summary of Present Status and Future Prospects.” International Energy Agency—
SolarPACES. Available at http://www.solarpaces.org/Library/docs/CSP_Brochure_2001.pdf. Accessed 
August 1, 2012.

131
E n e r g y
FIGURE 5.1  Small solar cell installation monitoring the water supply in Shenandoah National Park 
in Virginia.
is dropping, and it is reasonable to see a future in which solar power will be cost-
competitive for new electric power plants.
It typically requires a large capital investment to build solar plants for a life 
cycle of a few decades, but once built they do not require period payments for fuel, 
like fossil-fuel-powered electric plants do. Comparisons are therefore somewhat 
complicated. A common metric for the economic viability of a solar installation 
is dollars per watt produced ($/W), which divides the module cost by the peak 
output power.
A more extensive measure of the economic feasibility of a solar power system 
is provided by the levelized cost of energy (LCOE), which is commonly measured 
in cents per kilowatt-hour (¢/kWh). This is a more realistic cost for an investor to 
use when comparing a solar plant to other potential electricity generation alterna-
tives. The LCOE can be expanded to include known factors such as the financing 
structure of the plant, incentives, and system degradation. Projecting the LCOE 
accurately requires detailed information both on the system performance over the 
lifetime of the plant and on the financial structure of the installation.11 The com-
plexity and variability of the assumptions used in this metric highlight a need for 
11  Cambell, M. 2008. “The Drivers of the Levelized Cost of Electricity for Utility-Scale Photovol-
taics.” San Jose, Calif.: Sunpower Corporation. Available at http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2010/
ph240/vasudev1/docs/sunpower.pdf. Accessed July 24, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
132
better economic modeling. A solar plant is different from a fossil-fuel electricity 
generation plant in that most of the cost is in building the solar plant, but no fuel 
must be purchased on a regular basis.
In 2011, the United States launched the SunShot Initiative (see Box 5.2 and 
Figure 5.2.1), with the goal of advancing solar technology to be competitive with 
conventional sources of electricity. This cost comparability, or grid parity, is very 
important to the widespread adoption of solar power. Traditionally, grid parity is 
BOX 5.2 
The SunShot Initiative
“The DOE [Department of Energy] SunShot Initiative is a collaborative national initiative 
to make solar energy cost competitive with other forms of energy by the end of the decade. 
Reducing the installed cost of solar energy systems by about 75 percent will drive widespread, 
large-scale adoption of this renewable energy technology and restore U.S. leadership in the 
global clean energy race.” (See Figure 5.2.1.)
FIGURE 5.2.1  In this photograph of a concentrating solar power (CSP) technology, stretched 
membrane heliostats with silvered polymer reflectors will be used as demonstration units at 
the Solar Two central receiver. The Solar Two project will refurbish this 10-megawatt central 
receiver power tower, known as Solar One. SOURCE: Image available at https://www.eere 
multimedia.energy.gov/solar/.
  SOURCE: The quotation above from the Department of Energy is available at http://www1.
eere.energy.gov/solar/sunshot/. Accessed November 23, 2011.

133
E n e r g y
defined as cost per watt (energy/time) but occasionally as cost per kilowatt-hour 
(energy). If watts are used, grid parity is reached when the power plants are equal 
in price to build; if kilowatt-hours are used, grid parity is reached when “selling” 
the different energy sources costs the same. In the latter case, solar includes the 
free energy from the Sun, whereas coal-fired electricity generation includes the cost 
of coal. The goal of competitive solar energy requires an LCOE of approximately 
$0.06/kWh, which corresponds to approximately $1.00/W installed for a module.12 
Installed cost will of course be more than production costs. There are already solar 
modules less the $1.00/W for module cost.
Solar technologies fall primarily into two broad categories: (1) photovoltaics 
(PV), which convert solar radiation directly into electricity, and (2) concentrating 
solar power. CSP uses optical elements to focus the Sun’s energy, and a heated liq-
uid, along with a heat engine, to generate electricity. Once the Sun’s light is focused, 
it can heat an intermediate material, which can be used to drive a turbine to gen-
erate electricity. Concentrated photovoltaics also concentrate the Sun’s radiation, 
but not to the same extent that CSP does. With CPV, the light is concentrated so 
that high-efficiency solar cells can be used without there being too much concern 
about cell cost. The cost of the concentrating optics must of course now be consid-
ered. With current solar cells, the temperature of the cells must be kept near room 
temperature in CPV in order to maintain high efficiency, and so an efficient heat-
removal process must be used. CPV solar cells have been measured at 1,000 Suns 
concentration and 43 percent efficiency,13 and it is anticipated that at least 2,000 
Suns concentration can be used, although it may cost some conversion efficiency. 
Below, solar conversion optics that can work at higher temperatures are discussed. 
These options also provide the potential to allow higher Sun concentration.
Photovoltaic Systems
As of 2010, approximately 39,611 megawatts (MW) of PV capacity had been 
installed around the world, with most of that in Europe.14 Between 2010 and 2017, 
the installed capacity of PV is expected to increase to more than 185,000 MW, 
with Europe continuing to have the largest portion, but with the rest of the world 
gaining market share as costs continue to decrease and newer technologies come to 
market. The growth projections over this forecast period are shown in Figure 5.2. 
12  More information on the U.S. Department of Energy SunShot Initiative is available at http://
www1.eere.energy.gov/solar/sunshot/. Accessed October 25, 2011.
13  Wiemer, M., V. Sabnis, and H. Yuen. 2011. 43.5% efficient lattice matched solar cells. Proceedings 
of the SPIE 8108:810804-810804-5.
14  In comparison, the total net electricity generation for the United States alone was 602,076 MW 
in 2010. More information is available at www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/pdf/table1.1.a.pdf. Accessed 
June 4, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
134
The compound annual growth rate of these devices is projected to be 25 percent 
from 2010 to 2017.
Despite the rapid growth in installed capacity over the next several years, 
photovoltaics are still expected to provide for only a small part of the energy de-
mand in the regions highlighted in Figure 5.2. As a point of comparison, the total 
electricity generated in the United States over the last few years has ranged from 
about 300,000 MW to 400,000 MW.15 The primary barrier preventing wider accep-
tance of utility-scale PV generation is that it is still expected to be more expensive 
than alternative energy sources over this 2010-2017 time frame. The PV industry 
is still largely reliant on government subsidies and incentives to provide power at 
an LCOE competitive with alternative energy sources. It is expected that a com-
petitive solar technology must be below $1.00/W peak installed cost. Most current 
PV systems are substantially above this mark, even for the production cost alone, 
as shown in Figure 5.3. There will be installation costs and possible cost of land 
use for electric plants. As with all methods of generating electricity, there will be 
environmental considerations, such as the impact on a desert when large areas are 
covered by reflectors or solar cells. Current cost figures represent a drastic decrease 
from the average production cost of $4.50/W in 1998, when the NRC’s Harnessing 
Light16 was published.
15  The U.S. Energy Information Administration’s Electricity Monthly Update is available at http://
www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/update/. Accessed July 24, 2012.
16  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
FIGURE 5.2  Forecasted installed capacity and growth rate of photovoltaic devices divided regionally. The base 
year is 2010. SOURCE: “Global Solar Power Market.” Frost and Sullivan Analytics. July 2011. Reprinted with 
permission.

135
E n e r g y
Investor literature for major solar cell manufacturers does promise reaching the 
cost parity level of $1.00/W for installed cost around 2015.17,18 Obviously investor 
literature may be optimistic, but major PV solar cell companies at least have plans 
on how to meet the dollar per watt cost goals. The LCOE of photovoltaics continues 
to drop due to manufacturing infrastructure improvements and more advanced 
technologies becoming available.19 Figure 5.4 shows installed cost LCOEs for a 
number of installed projects based on a very recent National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory article.20
17  More information on the First Solar corporate overview, third quarter, 2011, is available at http://
www.firstsolar.com/. First Solar corporate overview accessed December 7, 2011.
18  More information on the SunPower third quarter 2011 earnings is available at http://us.sun 
powercorp.com/. SunPower, November 3, 2011, Supplementary Slides accessed December 7, 2011.
19  For more about information about installed cost time lines for solar technology, see Appendix 
C in this report.
20  National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 2011. “Cost of Utility-Scale Solar: One Quick Way to 
Compare Projects.” Available at https://financere.nrel.gov/finance/content/cost-utility-scale-solar-
one-quick-way-compare-projects. Accessed July 24, 2012.
FIGURE 5.3  Average cost per watt of current widely deployed photovoltaic technologies in 2011. SOURCE: “PV 
Technology, Production and Cost Outlook: 2010-2015” (GTM Research). Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
136
Even though Figure 5.4 shows the LCOE for installed systems, there is uncer-
tainty because of assumptions such as expected lifetime.
First-Generation Silicon Cells
Photovoltaic technologies that rely on a silicon (Si) p-n junction are referred 
to as first-generation technologies, which encompass polycrystalline silicon, mono-
crystalline silicon, and silicon ribbon technologies. The typical conversion effi-
ciency of these technologies ranges from 14 to 22 percent for a module. A labora-
tory record of 25 percent was achieved at the University of New South Wales.21 
The theoretical limit for cells of this family is approximately 33 percent conversion 
efficiency.22
21  Green, M. 2009. The path to 25% silicon solar cell efficiency: History of silicon cell evolution. 
Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 17(3):183-189.
22  Meillaud, F., A. Shah, C. Droz, E. Vallat-Sauvain, and C. Miazza. 2006. Efficiency limits for single-
junction and tandem solar cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 90(18-19):2952-2959.
FIGURE 5.4  Levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for installed systems. SOURCE: Publicly available data from 
the websites of the Department of Energy Loan Program Office, Xcel Energy, Green Fire Times, Tri-State 
­Generation, Getsolar, California PUC, Business Wire, U.S. Air Force Academy, Juwi Solar, Winston-Salem 
Journal, ­iStockAnalyst, EarthTechling, Environmental Leader, and pv-magazine. Figure from Renewable Energy 
Project Finance, and available at https://financere.nrel.gov/finance/content/cost-utility-scale-solar-one-quick-
way-­compare-projects. Accessed July 24, 2012. Reprinted with permission.

137
E n e r g y
In 2010, over 75 percent of the capacity of PV systems installed was first-
generation solar cells.23 Si photovoltaics are the most mature and widely accepted 
form of PV, and they still exhibit some of the highest conversion efficiencies of 
available technologies. First-generation PVs are expected to continue to dominate 
the market through 2017, although they are expected to lose market share to emerg-
ing technologies. Production of first-generation solar cells is highly competitive, 
with no single company holding a market share substantially larger than 10 percent, 
and different companies leading in each geographic region.24 The focus for advanc-
ing first-generation solar cells is on reducing manufacturing costs. It is not expected 
that this technology will be capable of being produced for less than $1.00/W in-
stalled cost. Figure 5.5 shows first-generation solar cells for power company use.
Second-Generation Photovoltaic Technologies
The second-generation solar cells consist of thin films of silicon, or other 
semiconductors, deposited on glass or flexible substrates. The most prominent 
thin-film technologies that have emerged are cadmium telluride (CdTe) (see Figure 
5.6), thin-film silicon, and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS). These films 
do not convert sunlight into electricity as efficiently as the first-generation silicon 
devices do, but the potential for reduced manufacturing costs makes them attrac-
tive. Second-generation photovoltaics accounted for approximately 21 percent of 
the global installed capacity in 2010 and are projected to gain market share over 
the next several years, providing 38.0 percent of installed capacity in 2017.25
The second-generation cell accounting for most of this installed capacity is a 
thin-film CdTe cell. First Solar has commercialized this cell and gained a substan-
tial market share, as the greatly reduced manufacturing cost compensates for the 
reduced conversion efficiency (approximately 17 percent)26 compared to standard 
Si panels. Several large-scale solar projects based on CdTe technology have been 
built, such as the 80-MW facility at Sarnia in Canada shown in Figure 5.6.
CdTe cells have already reached the $1.00/W goal for production cost, but it 
is not yet clear how this translates into LCOE. For example, CdTe thin films are 
relatively new, so there has not been enough time to establish the lifetime and 
23  Frost and Sullivan Research Service. 2011. Global Solar Power Market. July. Available at http://
www.frost.com/prod/servlet/report-brochure.pag?id=N927-01-00-00-00. Accessed July 24, 2012.
24  Kann, S. 2010. The U.S. Utility PV Market: Demand, Players, Strategy, and Project Economics 
Through 2015. GTM Research. Available at https://www.greentechmedia.com/research/report/us-
utility-pv-market-2015/. Accessed July 24, 2012.
25  Frost and Sullivan Research Service. 2011. Global Solar Power Market.
26  Kanellos, M. 2011. “First Solar Sets Efficiency Record: 17.3% Percent.” Greentech Media. Avail-
able at http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/first-solar-sets-efficiency-record-17.3 percent/. 
Accessed June 6, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
138
FIGURE 5.5  Silicon solar cells deployed for utility power production. SOURCE: Courtesy of Suntech 
Power Holdings, Inc.
FIGURE 5.6  Eighty-megawatt thin-film cadmium telluride (CdTe)-based solar plant in Canada. 
SOURCE: Courtesy of First Solar.

139
E n e r g y
degradation rate accurately under actual outdoor conditions. Another concern is 
that the materials used are rare and extremely toxic. Although initial indicators are 
that the production and deployment of these cells do not release cadmium into the 
environment, further adoption will require more extensive environmental impact 
testing. CdTe technology shows promise of gaining grid parity in a relatively short 
time frame if these obstacles can be overcome.
An accurate cost benchmark exists for CdTe solar cells. Warren Buffett recently 
contracted for a 550-MW facility from First Solar for $2 billion,27 which works out 
to be $3.63/W. First Solar has started building this facility. If $1.00/W is equivalent 
to 6 ¢/kWh, then the installed facility would be 21.8 ¢/kWh. Although this is more 
expensive than a fossil fuel plant, California utilities are required to obtain at least 
20 percent of their power from renewable sources and are on a path to a 33 percent 
requirement by 2020.28,29
An alternative embodiment of thin-film technology uses a much more efficient 
gallium arsenide (GaAs)-based film. A thin-film GaAs solar cell was reported in 
2011 by Alta Devices to have an efficiency of 28.2 percent30 for unconcentrated 
solar illumination, a record for single-junction devices. Using a process known as 
epitaxial liftoff in order to reduce manufacturing costs, it is projected to be com-
petitive with CdTe cells currently in production on a dollars per watt basis while 
delivering almost three times the area efficiency when in production. At present 
this is just a projection, however.
Several immature technologies in development show promise, but they are 
not ready for large-scale commercialization. These exotic schemes are frequently 
grouped into the third generation of photovoltaics. Active research is being carried 
out on dye-sensitized cells, organic cells, nanocrystal cells, photoelectrochemical 
cells, and other technologies that have potential to dramatically reduce cost and/
or increase efficiency compared to current systems.
27  RTTNews. 2011. “Buffet’s MidAmerican Energy to Buy First Solar’s $2 Bln Power Plant.” Avail-
able at http://www.rttnews.com/1776646/buffet-s-midamerican-energy-to-buy-first-solar-s-2-bln-
power-plant.aspx. Accessed December 18, 2011.
28  More information on the California Renewables Portfolio Standard is available at http://www.
cpuc.ca.gov/PUC/energy/Renewables/index.htm. Accessed December 18, 2011. 
29  Sullivan, Colin. 2010. “Calif. Raises Renewable Portfolio Standard to 33%.” New York Times. 
July 24. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/gwire/2010/09/24/24greenwire-calif-raises-renewable-
portfolio-standard-to-3-24989.html. Accessed December 18, 2011.
30  Kayes, B., H. Nie, R. Twist, S.G. Spruytte, F. Reinhardt, I.C. Kizilyalli, and G.S. Higashi. 2011. 
“27.6% Conversion Efficiency, a New Record for Single-Junction Solar Cells Under 1 Sun Illumina-
tion.” 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference 000004-000008.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
140
Concentrated Photovoltaics
Concentrated photovoltaics offer an alternative approach, using inexpensive 
optics to concentrate light onto a small area of a highly efficient photovoltaic cell. 
By concentrating light from the Sun (see Figure 5.7), less PV material is required. 
A limitation for high concentration is that the module must be placed on a solar 
tracker in order to maintain accurate alignment with the Sun, and the accuracy 
of the tracker must increase as the concentration of the system increases. This 
limited acceptance angle also dictates that the system is only able to capture direct 
sunlight, meaning that it is ineffective on cloudy days. The amount of concentra-
tion provided by the optics will produce differing systems, which generally fall 
into the low-concentration (2-50 times) or high concentration (100-2,000 times) 
categories. This has some similarities to concentrated solar power, discussed below.
The low-concentration systems typically use conventional single-junction solar 
cells and rely on the optics being inexpensive enough that the reduced PV material 
required justifies the added cost of concentrating. These systems can frequently be 
mounted on a one-axis tracking system, and the cells can usually be kept within 
their normal operating temperature using passive cooling systems.
The high-concentration systems allow for the use of multi-junction cells in 
the system.31 Multi-junction cells can reach higher conversion efficiencies than 
are possible with single-junction PV devices, with the record currently being set 
by the company Solar Junction at 43.5 percent,32 eclipsing the recent record by 
Spire Semiconductor, LLC, of 42.3 percent33 conversion efficiency. These cells are 
expensive, but by reducing the area required for a module by two or three orders 
of magnitude, the cost can be justified. These cells showed a peak efficiency of 43.5 
percent between 400 and 600 Suns concentration and maintained efficiencies above 
43 percent at 1,000 Suns concentration.34
A key driving cost of making these cells is the substrate on which the photovol-
taic layers are grown. This material is very expensive and currently must be disposed 
of after a cell is grown on it. Substantial research is being done on the epitaxial 
liftoff technique, which allows the substrate to be reused for growing successive 
cells. The disadvantages of CPV systems are primarily the extra cost associated with 
31  Multi-junction solar cells contain several p-n junctions, each of which can be tuned to a different 
wavelength of light, thus capturing more of the incoming light.
32  Wesoff, E. 2011. “Update: Solar Junction Breaking CPV Efficiency Records, Raising $30M.” 
Greentech Media. Available at http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/solar-junction-setting-
new-cpv-efficiency-records/. Accessed December 25, 2011.
33  Wojtczuk, S., P. Chiu, X. Zhang, D. Derkacs, C. Harris, D. Pulver, and M. Timmons. 2010. InGaP/
GaAs/InGaAs 41% concentrator cells using bi-facial epigrowth. 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists 
Conference 001259-001264.
34  Wiemer, M., V. Sabnis, and H. Yuen. 2011. 43.5% efficient lattice matched solar cells.

141
E n e r g y
FIGURE 5.7  A high-concentration photovoltaic panel using Fresnel lens optics and III-V solar cells. 
SOURCE: Courtesy of Amonix.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
142
having a precise two-axis tracker and an active cooling system required to maintain 
a reasonable chip temperature at high concentration, as well as the limitation to 
the system’s use on sunny days.
Concentrated photovoltaics of both concentration regimes require perfor-
mance and cost advances before they can become competitive on a utility scale. 
Moreover, the concentration system, including the tracker, also constitutes a large 
percentage of the cost. For the high-concentration systems, increasing the perfor-
mance and reliability of high-efficiency cells will improve the conversion efficiency, 
and improved thermal management systems would allow the cells to operate at 
lower temperatures, at which they are more efficient.
Expected Market Share for Various PV Technologies
Over the next few years, it is expected that disruptive new technologies will 
gradually gain market share from the currently dominant first-generation photo-
voltaics. It is expected that second-generation photovoltaics will begin to rival the 
capacity of the first-generation PVs, and concentrating photovoltaics will begin to 
gain a greater market share.35 Third-generation systems are much more difficult 
to predict. The estimate of relative capacities of the various technologies over the 
short term is shown in Figure 5.8.
Concentrating Solar Power Systems
Concentrating solar power provides an alternative to photovoltaics for produc-
ing electricity. A key deficiency of photovoltaics is energy storage, as batteries or 
other means of storage must be employed to store the power generated when the 
Sun is out.36 The need for storage is mitigated if solar power is used to fill a peak-
load requirement to meet air conditioning needs. Peak pricing in some cases has 
made energy storage less desirable. CSP installations have a much more efficient 
means of storing energy, as the heated intermediate media can be stored and used 
on demand. CSP systems can have energy-conversion efficiencies comparable to 
those of photovoltaics.
In 2010, the installed CSP capacity around the world was 1,327 MW, with Eu-
rope and North America dominating the market. The installed capacity is expected 
to increase more than 10-fold by 2017, with more than 15,000 MW of expected 
installed capacity. North America and Europe are expected to maintain dominance 
in this market, with the rest of the world gaining some market share. The best 
35  Frost and Sullivan Research Service. 2011. Global Solar Power Market.
36  For more about information about supporting technologies associated with solar power, see 
Appendix C in this report.

143
E n e r g y
currently implemented CSP installations are producing energy at an LCOE of 
approximately 12¢/kWh to 15¢/kWh, which is higher than for alternative energy 
sources. This is expected to drop to below 12¢/kWh by 2017 as manufacturing 
improves and new technologies are brought to market. CSP functions best on large 
scales, and thus building an efficient plant requires a large capital investment. The 
expected growth of installations broken down regionally is provided in Figure 5.9. 
FIGURE 5.8  Market share for various photovoltaic (PV) technologies. SOURCE: “Global Solar Power Market.” 
Frost and Sullivan Analytics. July 2011. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 5.9  Expected installed capacity of concentrated solar power market divided regionally, and compound 
annual growth rate; 2010 is the base year. SOURCE: “Global Solar Power Market.” Frost and Sullivan analysis. 
July 2011. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
144
The compound annual growth rate of the CSP market is expected to be 42.1 percent 
from 2010 to 2017.37
The most common available form of CSP is the parabolic trough concentra-
tor, as seen in Figure 5.10. These systems are usually set up on one-axis tracking 
systems, which track the Sun over the course of the day. This type of plant consists 
of a parabolic mirror focusing sunlight onto a tube of heat-transfer medium, usu-
ally oil, which is then heated and used to create steam, which can drive an electric 
generator. The maximum temperature is limited by the oil-based heat-transfer 
medium and the lower concentration required with single-axis tracking, limiting 
the efficiency of these systems to approximately 15 percent.38
As of 2009, parabolic trough concentrators accounted for more than 83 percent 
of installed CSP capacity.39 The oil intermediate is difficult to store efficiently for 
use during off-peak hours. Hence it is possible that trough technology with oil 
intermediates might lose market share and will have a harder time reaching grid 
parity.40
The solar tower is a relatively recent incarnation of CSP, using a large field of 
flat mirrors called heliostats to direct incident sunlight to a focal point in a central 
tower, as shown in Figure 5.11. A heat-exchange medium, usually a molten salt, 
absorbs the energy and is heated to temperatures up to 1000°C, which can then 
be used to generate electricity. This larger temperature difference allows more ef-
ficient electricity generation than the common trough technology, with conversion 
efficiencies in the range of 20 to 35 percent.41
Power tower systems offer a much more efficient alternative to the parabolic 
troughs that currently dominate the CSP landscape. In addition to the greater 
conversion efficiency, the power towers make more efficient use of the land, and 
the heliostats are less expensive to manufacture and maintain than the parabolic 
37  Frost and Sullivan Research Service. 2011. Global Solar Power Market.
38  Acciona Energy. Technology and Experience in Concentrating Solar Power. Available at http://
www.acciona-energia.com/media/315798/Technology%20and%20experience%20in%20concentrat 
ing%20solar%20power.pdf. Accessed October 25, 2011.
39  Greenpeace International. 2009. Global Concentrating Solar Power Outlook 09: Why Renewable 
Energy Is Hot. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Greenpeace International. Available at http://www.green 
peace.org/international/en/publications/reports/concentrating-solar-power-2009/. Accessed July 24, 
2012.
40  Feldhoff, J.F., D. Benitez, M. Eck, and K.-J. Riffelmann. 2010. Economic potential of solar ther-
mal power plants with direct steam generation compared with HTF plants. Journal of Solar Energy 
Engineering 32:1001-1009.
41  Hinkley, J., B. Curtin, J. Hayward, A. Wonhas, R. Boyd, C.C. Grima, A. Tadros, R. Hall, K. 
Naicker, and A. Mikhail. 2011. Concentrating Solar Power—Drivers and Opportunities for Cost-
Competitive Electricity. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: CSIRO Energy Transformed. Available at 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/update-2011/commissioned-work/concentrating-solar-power-
drivers-opportunities-cost-competitive-electricity.pdf. Accessed July 24, 2012.

145
E n e r g y
FIGURE 5.10  A para-
bolic trough concen-
trator solar thermal 
plant in Nevada. 
SOURCE: Courtesy of 
Acciona Solar Power.
FIGURE 5.11  Eleven-
megawatt Solar Power 
Tower near Seville, 
Spain. SOURCE: 
Courtesy of Abengoa 
Solar.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
146
mirrors used in trough systems. A primary drawback of tower technology is the 
large investment required, with only large-scale plants making economic sense.
Dish concentrators (see Figure 5.12) are an emerging technology that functions 
on a principle similar to that of a solar tower but is scalable to smaller units. A 
reflective parabolic dish tracks the Sun and focuses onto a small power-conversion 
unit. A heat-transfer fluid is heated several hundred degrees Celsius and is subse-
FIGURE 5.12  A dish solar thermal power generation module test unit in Phoenix, Arizona. The dish is 
approximately 75 feet in diameter. SOURCE: Courtesy of Southwest Solar Technologies.

147
E n e r g y
quently used to generate electricity. These systems are expected to have conversion 
efficiencies similar to those of solar tower concentrators, although dish concentra-
tor systems have not yet been successfully commercialized.
Dish concentrators with a combined capacity of more than 1,700 MW are 
being developed; over 35 percent of them are in the Asia Pacific region.42 These 
systems require that an efficient and inexpensive generator be developed on a much 
smaller scale than that needed for tower systems. These systems lack the centralized 
storage capability of the power tower approach, and thus alternate storage methods 
must be employed to store power.
Hybrid Systems
Some research is being conducted on the possibility of integrating CPV and 
CSP systems. In a photovoltaic system, the energy that is not converted into elec-
trical power is dissipated as heat, which has the potential to be recycled, especially 
in a concentrated photovoltaic system. This waste heat can either be recycled to 
generate more electricity or can serve a variety of other uses, such as the heating of 
water.43 The primary difficulty is that most PV chips become less efficient as they 
increase in temperature. Wide-bandgap materials will work better for solar cells 
at higher temperatures, but there will still be a loss of efficiency.44 Researchers at 
Stanford University are conducting research on a “photovoltaic-like” device that 
becomes more efficient at higher temperatures, which would be ideal for integra-
tion into a hybrid system.45 The Stanford approach, also discussed in a paper by 
Andrews et al.,46 has calculated efficiencies for an idealized device, which can exceed 
the theoretical limits of single-junction photovoltaic cells. The device is based on 
thermionic emission of photoexcited electrons from a semiconductor cathode at 
high temperature. Temperature-dependent photoemission-yield measurements 
from gallium nitride (GaN) show strong evidence for photon-enhanced thermionic 
emission. As mentioned by CleanEnergyAuthority,47 the proposed solar converter 
42  Frost and Sullivan Research Service. 2011. Global Solar Power Market.
43  For information about hybrid solar/wind systems, see Appendix C in this report.
44  Landis, G.A., D. Merritt, R.P. Raffaelle, and D. Scheiman. 2005. High-Temperature Solar Cell 
Development. Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, pp. 241-247. Avail-
able at http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20050206368_2005207966.pdf. Accessed 
July 24, 2012.
45  Schwede, J.W., I. Bargatin, D.C. Riley, B.E. Hardin, S.J. Rosenthal, Y. Sun, F. Schmitt, P. Pianetta, 
R.T. Howe, Z.-X. Shen, and N.A. Melosh. 2010. Photon enhanced thermionic emission for solar 
concentrator systems. Nature Materials 9:762-767.
46  Andrews, J.C., F. Meirer, Y. Liu, Z. Mester, and P. Pianetta. 2011. Transmission x-ray microscopy 
for full-field nano imaging of biomaterials. Microscopy Research and Technique 74(7):671-681.
47  More information is available at www.cleanenergyauthority.com. Accessed August 6, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
148
would operate at temperatures exceeding 200°C, enabling its waste heat to be used 
to power a secondary thermal engine, boosting theoretical combined conversion 
efficiencies above 50 percent. There will be very interesting trade-offs if one decides 
to optimize a hybrid system. It would be possible to make a system optimized for 
CSP, operating at high temperatures, and then to add high-temperature solar cells 
to it to boost efficiency. Alternately it would be possible to design an optimum 
CPV system with high PV efficiency, and then to add whatever power could be 
generated using a lower-temperature, and therefore less efficient, heat cycle ap-
proach to generate electricity. In general, PV makers and CSP companies have not 
mixed much, and so this is a somewhat unexplored design space with potential to 
achieve high efficiency.
LCOE Outlook for Solar Power Compared to Other 
Current and Possible Future Fuel Sources
The most likely initial geographical locations for commercial utility-scale 
solar power will have high solar irradiance and high energy prices from alterna-
tive sources. For areas with high direct solar radiation, such as the southwestern 
United States, high-concentration photovoltaics are expected to reach the lowest 
LCOE of any solar technology. These systems are only viable in areas with little 
cloud cover, where the direct component of solar radiation is much greater than 
the diffuse component, and thus can be focused. In areas such as the Southwest, 
energy storage capability may not be a significant factor owing to peak-load pricing 
considerations. Additionally, the grid needs to be considered in any final estimates 
of success for solar power. The NRC’s Overview and Summary of America’s Energy 
Future: Technology and Transformation states:
Greatly expanding the fraction of electricity generated from renewable sources will 
require changes in the present electric system because of variability over space and 
time in the availability of renewables such as wind and the difficulty of scaling up 
renewable resources. Integrating an additional 20 percent of renewable electricity, 
whether from wind, solar, or some combination of sources, will require an expan-
sion of the transmission system as well as large increases in manufacturing, employ-
ment in the wind power industry, and investment.48
The projected LCOE for various technologies deployed in optimal locations 
for solar energy is shown in Figure 5.13.49 This forecast cannot predict the effect 
48  NAS-NAE-NRC. 2010. Overview and Summary of America’s Energy Future, p. 21.
49  More information is available on the GTM Research webinar “Concentrating Photovoltaics 
(CPV): Ready for Take-Off?” September 27, 2011. Available at http://www.greentechmedia.com/
events/webinar/concentrated-photovoltaics-cpv-now-an-indispensable-part-of-the-energy-equa/. 
Accessed July 24, 2012.

149
E n e r g y
FIGURE 5.13  Levelized cost of energy (LCOE) projections for various solar technologies, 2010-2020. SOURCE: 
“Concentrating Solar Power 2011: Technology, Costs and Markets” (GTM Research). Reprinted with permission.
of disruptive research and development, but it shows that many solar technologies 
have the potential to compete with conventional energy sources. The same graph 
also depicts the LCOE for natural gas, which was at $0.10/kWh in 2010 and was 
predicted to steadily increase to about $0.14/kWh in 2020, a point at which it is 
possible that many of the solar technologies will be at a lower LCOE. The recent 
advances in the production of natural gas owing to fracking will change the cost 
comparison by making natural gas power plants cheaper than previously envi-
sioned. Production of shale gas from fracking has soared 12-fold between the years 
2000 and 2011, driving down the price of natural gas.50 As can be seen in Figure 
5.13, the cost of solar power is projected to keep dropping, and so even with the 
lower cost comparison, it is anticipated that at some point, and in certain circum-
stances, solar power will be cost-competitive.
Other alternative methods might become possible in the near future as well. 
One alternative method of harvesting solar power is through the use of a chemical 
process that mimics photosynthesis. The creation of fuels from abundant inputs 
such as water and carbon dioxide (CO2) using sunlight has the potential to offer 
conventional liquid fuels while still being carbon-neutral (see Figure 5.14). This 
technology resembles photosynthesis, in that it involves a chemical reaction on a 
thin membrane, which then splits the products to be fuel and oxygen. In the case 
of natural photosynthesis these products are sugars as the fuel and oxygen that is 
50  The Economist. 2011. “Fracking Here, Fracking There.” Available at http://www.economist.com/
node/21540256. Accessed July 24, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
150
released into the atmosphere. Artificial photosynthesis has many different possible 
inputs and outputs, and research is being pursued to tune the process in order to 
maximize catalytic conversion into the standard n-hydrocarbons that can easily 
be used as fuels.
Research to advance artificial photosynthesis is being carried out at the Joint 
Center for Artificial Photosynthesis in California.51
SOLID-STATE LIGHTING
Incandescent lightbulbs have been in use for well over 100 years. English chem-
ist Humphry Davy demonstrated the first electrically driven incandescent light in 
1802. In the ensuing 80 years many people worked on improving the incandescent 
bulb. Thomas Edison developed the first commercially viable approach.52 These 
bulbs are not efficient but are still in widespread use, and as a result, lighting 
51  The website of the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis is available at www.solarfuelshub.
org. Accessed October 25, 2011.
52  Friedel, R., and P. Israel. 1986. Edison’s Electric Light: Biography of an Invention. New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, pp. 115-117.
FIGURE 5.14  Water and CO2 are converted catalytically into fossil fuels and oxygen in the presence 
of sunlight. The membrane separates the fuel from the oxygen. SOURCE: Joint Center for Artificial 
Photosynthesis, available at http://solarfuelshub.org/home. Reprinted with permission.
Courtesy of Freefoto.com
H
H
O
O
H
H
O
O
C
O C O
CH3 O H
CH3
O H
O
O
O O

151
E n e r g y
consumes more than 20 percent of the electricity used in the United States and 
Europe and a higher percentage in developing nations.53 Incandescent bulbs ra-
diate most of the input energy as infrared radiation or heat, not as visible light. 
Halogens have been added to some incandescent bulbs, allowing a higher operating 
temperature and slightly more efficiency. These are referred to as halogen bulbs, 
although neither the efficiency nor the lifetime has been changed substantially. 
In the 1930s, fluorescent bulbs became available. They are significantly more ef-
ficient then incandescent bulbs, but they contain mercury, a hazardous material.54 
Compact fluorescent bulbs fitting most lamps started to be commercially available 
in 1985.55 Fluorescent lights take minutes to come to full brightness, which makes 
some people avoid these lights despite their higher efficiency as compared with 
incandescent bulbs.56 Color balance can also be an issue for fluorescents, depend-
ing on the phosphors used.
Mercury vapor and sodium vapor lamps are another available lighting option. 
Mercury vapor and sodium vapor lamps can be very efficient, ranging from 100 
lm/W up to 150 or even 200 lm/W.57 Vapor lamps are used extensively in street 
lighting, where their long start-up time is not a significant disadvantage. Although 
people like the color spectrum of mercury vapor lamps, the United States banned 
them in 2008 and the European Union is banning them in 2015 because of the mer-
cury usage.58,59 Sodium vapor streetlights have a color spectrum that is less desir-
able. Figure 5.15 shows the lighting efficiency for various lighting types as of 2008.
A critical factor for consumers purchasing lightbulbs is the light efficiency of 
the bulb, in terms of both lumens60 per watt and lumens per dollar. At a wave-
length of 555 nanometers (nm), a 100 percent efficient light source would produce 
53  Azevedo, I.L., M.G. Morgan, and F. Morgan. 2009. The transition to solid-state lighting. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE 97(3):481-510.
54  It is unlawful to dispose of fluorescent bulbs as universal waste in the states of California, Illinois, 
Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin. More information is available at http://www.
epa.gov/waste/hazard/wastetypes/universal/lamps/index.htm. Accessed October 25, 2011.
55  Kane, R, and H. Sell, eds. 2001. Revolution in Lamps: A Chronicle of 50 Years of Progress (2nd ed.). 
Lilburn, Ga.: Fairmont Press.
56  More information is available through General Electric (GE) Lighting, “Why does my compact 
fluorescent light bulb flicker or appear dim when I first turn it on?” Compact Fluorescent Light Bulb 
(CFL) FAQs. GE Lighting. Available at http://www.gelighting.com/na/consumer/education/faqs/. 
Accessed July 24, 2012.
57  de Groot, J.J., and J.A.J.M. van Vliet. 1986. The High-Pressure Sodium Lamp. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Macmillan Education.
58  Mercury vapor banned in 2008; Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-58).
59  More information on the European Union directive on street, office, and industry lighting is 
available at http://ec.europa.eu/energy/lumen/professional/legislation/index_en.htm. Accessed July 
24, 2012.
60  Lumen (lm) is the International System of Units (SI) unit of luminous flux, which is a measure 
of the total amount of visible light emitted.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
152
683 lm/W by definition, but for a white light spectrum desired by consumers, 
maximum light-producing efficiency will be lower, approximately 400 lm/W. A 
typical 100-W incandescent bulb puts out about 1,500 lm, or 15 lm/W per watt 
of electricity. Lower-wattage incandescent bulbs are even less efficient. Another 
important characteristic is the lifetime of the bulb. A longer lifetime will allow for 
fewer replacements over a given period of time, which is beneficial for cost, labor, 
and convenience. Lifetime considerations are especially important for bulbs in 
inconvenient places, or for those that involve a high labor cost to replace. A second 
benefit of much longer lifetimes will be the innovative use of lighting in areas that 
are only accessible when a structure is being built. It will be possible to plan lighting 
use as a one-time installation in areas that are difficult to reach. A pleasing color 
spectrum can influence the efficiency of a lightbulb; sometimes undesirable color 
FIGURE 5.15  Efficiency of various types of lighting in 2008. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Aze-
vedo, I.L., M.G. Morgan, and F. Morgan. 2009. The transition to solid-state lighting. Proceedings of the IEEE 
97(3):481-510.

153
E n e r g y
content can be more efficient than pleasing color content. The format of the bulb 
and environmental impacts are additional factors. Some bulbs contain mercury, a 
hazardous material, increasing their environmental impact.
Light-emitting diodes first started to be applied in niche markets like flash-
lights, where battery usage and ruggedness are important. Traffic lights were an-
other early use, as the long lifetime helped reduce the labor cost of replacing 
bulbs. LEDs are widely used in cars and are making an entry to headlights as well, 
although attaining the required brightness for headlights is difficult with LEDs.61 
LEDs are frequently used in brake lights owing to the faster turn-on time of LEDs; 
replacing incandescent bulbs with LEDs in brake lights results in a faster turn-on 
time by almost 0.2 second. At 60 miles per hour, that translates to approximately 
18 feet of additional stopping distance, thus helping prevent collisions. For dash-
board lighting, LEDs generally last longer than the life of the vehicle and thus do 
not require replacement for the life of the vehicle. LED lights are also changing 
how lights are designed in an automobile, such as with turning-signal lights being 
deployed on side mirrors for better visibility.
Large flat-panel televisions are becoming reliant on LEDs for lighting, as dis-
cussed in this report in Chapter 10, “Displays.” The light modulation in these large 
displays is still done using a liquid crystal modulator, with LEDs providing the 
light. Large-display manufacturers such as Samsung have made major investments 
in LED technology and are gaining increasing market share in the LED industry.
LEDs for lighting purposes are becoming more feasible. Walmart recently 
replaced the overhead lighting in many of its stores with LEDs.62 A number of cit-
ies have replaced the street lighting with LEDs.63,64,65,66 When the cost of labor to 
replace bulbs is taken into account, this can be economically reasonable even now, 
61  Car LED Lights. 2010. “Car LED Tail Lights: Where to Get Them.” Available at http://
www.­car-ledlights.com/. Accessed October 25, 2011.
62  Treehugger. 2011. “Lighting the Future: Walmart Converting Hundreds of Stores’ Lot Lighting 
to LEDs.” Available at http://www.treehugger.com/sustainable-product-design/lighting-the-future-
walmart-converting-hundreds-of-stores-lot-lighting-to-leds.html. Accessed November 23, 2011.
63  Green Sheet, City of Ann Arbor Environmental News. 2008. “LEDS—Ann Arbor ‘Lights’ the Way 
to Energy Savings.” Available at http://www.a2gov.org/government/publicservices/systems_planning/
Documents/publicservices_systems_envtlcoord_greennews_ledlights_2008_09_08.pdf. Accessed De-
cember 23, 2011.
64  “Town of Chapel Hill.” Available at http://www.townofchapelhill.org/index.aspx?NID=1986. 
Accessed December 23, 2011.
65  Los Angeles Times. 2009. “L.A. Mayor Meets with Clinton on City Light Plan.” Available at http://
latimesblogs.latimes.com/lanow/2009/02/la-mayor-meets.html. Accessed December 23, 2011.
66  City of Seattle, Washington. 2010. “Seattle City Light Begins LED Streetlight Rollout.” Available 
at http://www.seattle.gov/light/news/newsreleases/detail.asp?ID=10888. Accessed December 23, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
154
according to a recent article in the Wall Street Journal.67 As the prices come down 
and efficiency increases, LEDs are likely to comprise a larger portion of lighting. 
The same Wall Street Journal article says that when Home Depot dropped the price 
of an LED bulb equivalent to a 40-W incandescent bulb from $21.00 to $9.97, the 
sales doubled. Solid-state lighting is used now in locations with inconvenient access 
due to the long lifetime, often from 30,000 to 80,000 hours. This is an advantage 
over the nominal 1,000-hour lifetime of incandescent bulbs. Halogen bulbs can 
have up to 5,000 or 6,000 hours of lifetime, while fluorescent bulbs can run 6,000 
to 10,000 hours. Table 5.1 shows some LEDs available in August 2012 from a com-
mon supplier.
The Department of Energy issued the “L Prize” to promote the development 
of efficient lighting (see Box 5.3). In addition to the webpage shown in Box 5.3, a 
second website (see Table 5.2)68 describes the requirements for the 60-W replace-
ment bulb. There were two submissions for the 60-W replacement “L Prize.” Philips 
Lumileds Lighting won this prize. 
There is an upcoming “21st century” prize, which has not yet been officially 
published. In spite of that, one LED maker has already announced a bulb that ap-
pears capable of meeting the stringent requirements for the 21st century bulb.69 
This concept bulb emits 1,331 lumens at 8.7 W with a Color Rendering Index (CRI) 
of 91 and a warm color of 2800 kelvin (K). A standard 75-W incandescent bulb 
puts out about 1,170 lumens. Figure 5.16 shows a picture of the bulb.
The United States has two companies in the top-10 list of high-brightness LED 
manufacturers. These are Philips Lumileds Lighting and Cree.70 Philips also has a 
strong European presence. Table 5.3, from LED Magazine, gives the top-10 high-
brightness LED manufacturers by revenue in 2010.71
There are several key technical challenges to be met before LEDs can be widely 
deployed in homes for everyday use.
The CRI, a measure of the quality of light, has maximum value of 100. When 
illuminated by a low-CRI light source, objects appear to be different colors than 
they would if illuminated by the Sun. To obtain a high CRI, the light source must 
contain the right colors. This can be accomplished either using fluorescent phos-
67  Linebaugh, Kate. 2011. “The Math Changes on Bulbs: Modern LEDS, While Expensive, Save 
Companies on Labor.” Wall Street Journal. Available at http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424 
052970203537304577031912827196558.html. Accessed July 24, 2012.
68  More information on the Department of Energy’s “L Prize” is available at http://www.lighting 
prize.org/requirements.stm. Accessed October 25, 2011.
69  Jetson Green. 2011. “Cree Demos 152 LPW LED Bulb Concept.” Available at http://www.jetson 
green.com/2011/08/cree-demos-21st-century-led-bulb.html. Accessed July 24, 2012.
70  LED Magazine. 2011. “Strategies Unlimited Unveils Top-Ten List of LED Manufacturers.” Avail-
able at http://www.ledsmagazine.com/news/8/2/29. Accessed July 24, 2012.
71  LED Magazine. 2011. “Strategies Unlimited Unveils Top-Ten List of LED Manufacturers.” 

155
E n e r g y
TABLE 5.1  Selected Light-Emitting Diode (LED) Lightbulbs Available on the Web in August 2012
Bulb 
Power (watts)
Lumens
Lumens per Watt
Lifetime (hours)
Price ($)
MR-16
4.5
348
77
30,000
19.95
A19
8.5
610
71
40,000
28.95
PAR 30
9
673
75
30,000
44.00
SOURCE: LED Waves. Available at www.ledwaves.com.
phors, or by 3 or 4 narrowband lines at the right wavelengths. In the phosphor 
converted (PC)-LED approach, an LED emits blue light, generally around 450 to 
460 nm. Some of this light is emitted directly, and some of it is down-converted by 
a phosphor from the 450-to-460 nm wavelength (blue) to longer wavelengths (e.g., 
green, yellow, red) to produce white light.72 The 3 or 4 line approach is often called 
RGB, for red, green, blue. If the efficiency of all blue, green, and red LEDs is as high 
as that of blue LEDs, theoretically about 20 percent higher efficiency can be gained 
using RGB color rendering compared to blue + phosphor LED due to the nar-
rowband spectra, and another 20 percent can be gained in efficiency because there 
is no Stokes loss in the phosphor. RGB color rendering is theoretically the most 
efficient. Unfortunately there are no green LEDs, and also, color shifts during the 
lifetime of products (as R, G, and B will degrade at different rates). Currently, white 
LEDs are manufactured with violet/blue LEDs covered with yellow phosphors to 
convert part of the violet/blue light to yellow. Since the emission wavelength of an 
LED changes with its drive current, fixture, temperature, and age, the CRI is highly 
variable. Research on solving the droop problem, efficient phosphors to convert 
to green and red wavelengths, and efficient yellow/green/red LEDs is important. 
Many recent promising works are based on nanostructured materials such as In-
GaN nanowire LEDs and quantum-dot phosphors. For the RGB approach to color 
rendering, there is a lack of a green LED at the right wavelength, about 540 nm.
The cost of white LEDs is still very high due to the lack of scalability in the 
manufacturing processes. Often the (In, Al) GaN material is grown by ­metalorganic 
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) on a sapphire substrate. The sapphire sub-
strate is relatively expensive and does not scale down with increasing wafer size. 
The processing steps, typically involving a flip-chip or liftoff process to remove 
the substrate, are complex and difficult to mass-produce. Recently, there has been 
increased interest in using Si as the substrate for GaN LED manufacturing. This 
can greatly simplify the substrate removal process, as the substrate cost would 
72  Bardsley Consulting, Navigant Consulting, Inc., Radcliffe Advisors, Inc., SB Consulting, and 
Solid State Lighting Services, Inc. 2012. Solid-State Lighting Research and Development: Multi Year 
Program Plan March 2011 (Updated May 2011). Report prepared for Lighting Research and Devel-
opment Building Technologies Program, DOE. Available at http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/
publications/pdfs/ssl/ssl_mypp2011_web.pdf. Accessed July 24, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
156
BOX 5.3 
Department of Energy Establishes the L Prize
“The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 directs the U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE) to establish the Bright Tomorrow Lighting Prize (L Prize) competition. The L 
Prize competition is the first government-sponsored technology competition designed to spur 
development of ultra-efficient solid-state lighting products to replace the common light bulb.” 
(See Figure 5.3.1.)
FIGURE 5.3.1  Webpage showing the “L Prize” World Wide Web page (July 2, 2011). SOURCE: 
Figure available at http://challenge.gov/DOE/43-bright-tomorrow-lighting-prize.
 SOURCE: The quotation above from the Department of Energy is available at http://­challenge.
gov/DOE/43-bright-tomorrow-lighting-prize.

157
E n e r g y
TABLE 5.2  Requirements for a 60-W Incandescent Replacement Lamp
More than 90 lumens per watt
Less than 10 watts
More than 900 lumens
More than 25,000 hour life
More than 90 in Color Rendering Index
Between 2700 and 3000 K in Correlated Color Temperature
SOURCE: Information available at http://www.lightingprize.org/requirements.stm.
TABLE 5.3  Top-10 High-Brightness LED 
­Manufacturers, by Revenue in 2010
2010 Ranking
Company Name
1
Nichia
2
Samsung LED
3
Osram Opto Semiconductors
4
Philips Lumileds Lighting
4
Seoul Semiconductor
6
Cree
6
LG Innotek
8
Sharp
9
Everlight
9
Toyoda Gosei
NOTE: Companies have the same ranking when the difference 
in revenue is within the margin of error. Revenue includes pack-
aged LED sales only.
SOURCE: LED Magazine. 2011. “Strategies Unlimited Unveils 
Top-Ten List of LED Manufacturers.” Available at http://www.
ledsmagazine.com/news/8/2/29.
FIGURE 5.16  Bulb 
that exceeds the 
21st-century “L Prize” 
standards. SOURCE: 
Courtesy of Cree, Inc.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
158
decrease with increasing size. Finally, the production volume can be easily scaled 
up, leveraging manufacturing equipment developed for silicon integrated circuits. 
This makes GaN on Si a promising approach for lowering costs. Recently ­Bridgelux 
showed cool-white LED efficiencies as high as 160 lm/W at a correlated color 
temperature of 4350 K, and warm-white GaN on Si LEDs delivered 125 lm/W 
at a color temperature of 2940 K and CRI of 80.73 As an alternative to a sapphire 
substrate, at least one company, Cree, uses SiC. It currently has cost issues similar 
to those involved in using sapphire but produces the highest-efficiency LEDs. The 
231 lm/W record was obtained using an SiC substrate. SiC holds the promise of 
significantly lower costs74 if SiC can be made on larger wafers and scaled for larger-
volume applications.
The alternating current-direct current (AC-DC) converter and heat sink for 
high-brightness LEDs also contribute to the high cost. LEDs are DC devices and 
thus require an AC-DC converter for many applications. Due to parasitic series 
resistance and other irradiative recombination paths, a substantial amount of heat 
is produced under high current injection, which degrades the LED performance. 
In fact, the LED chip itself contributes only 40 percent of the total cost of an LED 
bulb—more than half of the cost is for converter, heat sink, and light ray design.
The LED efficiency at operating temperatures is still low. The high lumen per 
watt efficiencies reported by various companies and laboratories were typically 
measured at room temperature, yet during normal operation, the temperature of 
the device usually rises to 80-100°C. This reduces the efficiency by 15 to 20 percent. 
To increase the efficiency, a number of aspects have to be improved.
LED package designs need to focus on heat removal to keep operating tem-
peratures low, even for bulbs producing significant light.
The internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of InGaN/GaN quantum wells (QWs) 
needs to improve. The IQE is defined as the percentage of electron-hole recom-
binations in the active region that generates light. GaN materials are grown on 
a sapphire substrate with a large lattice mismatch, which results in a high defect 
density (approximately 109 cm−3). In addition, there is a greater than 2 percent 
lattice mismatch between the well and barrier materials for a typical active region, 
InGaN/GaN QWs, which also leads to defects. These defects present paths for non-
radiative recombination of carriers, leading to a reduced IQE and increased heat 
dissipation in the active region. Improving material quality is thus critical. Many 
73  Nusca, Andrew. 2011. “Bridgelux Shatters LED Efficiency Record with Silicon Tech.” Smart 
Planet. Available at http://www.smartplanet.com/blog/smart-takes/bridgelux-shatters-led-efficiency-
record-with-silicon-tech/18252. Accessed December 18, 2011.
74  Ozpineci, B., and L. Tolbert. 2011. “Silicon Carbide: Smaller, Faster, Tougher.” IEEE Spec-
trum. Available at http://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/materials/silicon-carbide-smaller-faster-
tougher. Accessed July 24, 2012.

159
E n e r g y
recent publications indicate that defects can be greatly reduced in nanostructures 
grown on lattice-mismatched substrates.75,76
There is a built-in electric field in InGaN QWs grown on a c-plane sapphire, 
the lowest-cost and most commonly used sapphire substrate. This built-in electric 
field leads to Quantum-Confined Stark Effect (QCSE) in QWs, causing an even 
lower IQE and blue-shifted wavelength with current injection. The latter reduces 
the conversion efficiency of yellow phosphors. Finally, better current-spreading 
schemes are critical to avoid current crowding, which in turn reduces ohmic heat 
and Auger recombination. With less heat produced, efficiency droop at high injec-
tion current can be suppressed.
FINDINGS
Finding:  When compared to today’s fossil fuel alternatives, current solar power is 
not yet cost-effective in most areas for utility-scale application without subsidies. 
Solar-based electricity generation for utility-scale power is, however, making ex-
cellent progress toward the goal of cost parity against fossil-fuel-based electricity 
generation approaches. It is the opinion of the committee that development of 
cost-competitive solar power for utility-scale application over the next decade is 
feasible, and in fact likely. Major solar cell providers have plans to reach cost parity 
by about 2015. Cost parity will come in stages and initially will occur only in areas 
of bright sunlight, with expensive alternatives, during peak-load times.
Finding:  If cost parity or better is achieved, with solar power becoming the most 
economically attractive method of building a new electricity generation facility, 
then much more land will be used for solar power, regardless of the particular 
solar power approach.
Finding:  Optimal solar power concentration approaches are key to effective 
utility-scale solar power plants in areas with significant direct sunlight.
Finding:  The electric grid distribution system can influence the benefits associ-
ated with solar power if power can be transferred across time zones, making use 
of available sunlight in multiple time zones.
Finding:  Solid-state lighting is making great progress in efficiency, brightness, 
75  Sburlan, S., A. Nakano, and P.D. Dapkus. 2012. Effect of substrate strain on critical dimensions of 
highly lattice mismatched defect-free nanorods. Journal of Applied Physics 111(5):054907-054907-6.
76  Zytkiewicz, Z.R. 2002. Laterally overgrown structures as substrates for lattice mismatched epi-
taxy. Thin Solid Films 412(1-2):64-75.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
160
color balance, and cost and is already very attractive for many niche applications. 
Solid-state lighting is already cost-competitive for general lighting applications in 
which significant labor is involved in changing lightbulbs.
Finding:  There is no suitable green LED available to allow efficient RGB color 
rendering.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTION
Key Recommendation:  The Department of Energy (DOE) should develop a plan 
for grid parity across the United States by 2020.
“Grid parity” is defined here as the situation in which any power source is no 
more expensive to use than power from the electric grid. Solar power electric plants 
should be as cheap, without subsidies, as alternatives. It is understood that this will 
be more difficult in New England than in the southwestern United States, but the 
DOE should strive for grid parity in both locations.
Even though significant progress is being made toward reducing the cost of 
solar energy, it is important that the United States bring the cost of solar energy 
down to the price of other current alternatives without subsidy and maintain a 
significant U.S. role in developing and manufacturing solar energy alternatives. 
There is a need not only for affordable renewable energy but also for creating jobs 
in the United States. A focus in this area can contribute to both. Lowering the cost 
of solar cell technology will involve both technology and manufacturing advances.
This key recommendation leads directly to the fourth grand challenge 
question:
4. 	How can U.S. energy stakeholders achieve cost parity across the nation’s 
electric grid for solar power versus new fossil-fuel-powered electric plants 
by the year 2020?
The impact on U.S. and world economies from being able to answer this ques-
tion would be substantial. Imagine what could be done with a renewable energy 
source, with minimal environmental impact, that is more cost-effective than nonre-
newable alternatives. Although this is an ambitious goal, the committee poses it as 
a grand challenge question, something requiring an extra effort to achieve. Today, 
it is not known how to achieve this cost parity with current solar cell technologies. 
Additionally, it is important to recall the statement made in 2010 by the America’s 
Energy Future Panel on Electricity from Renewable Resources in the report Electric-
ity from Renewable Resources: Status, Prospects, and Impediments.

161
E n e r g y
For the time period from the present to 2020, there are no current technological con-
straints for wind, solar photovoltaics and concentrating solar power, conventional 
geothermal, and biopower technologies to accelerate deployment. The primary 
current barriers are the cost-competitiveness of the existing technologies relative 
to most other sources of electricity (with no costs assigned to carbon emissions or 
other currently unpriced externalities), the lack of sufficient transmission capacity 
to move electricity generated from renewable resources to distant demand centers, 
and the lack of sustained policies.77
The second major area in which optics can contribute to energy security in the 
United States is through solid-state lighting.
Key Recommendation:  The DOE should strongly encourage the development 
of highly efficient light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for general-purpose lighting and 
other applications.
For example, the DOE could move aggressively toward its 21st-century light-
bulb, with greater than 150 lm/W, a color rendering index greater than 90, and a 
color temperature of approximately 2800 K. Since one major company has already 
published results meeting the technical requirements for the 21st-century lightbulb, 
the DOE should consider releasing this competition in 2012. Major progress is be-
ing made in solid-state lighting, which has such advantages over current lighting 
alternatives as less wasted heat generation and fast turn-on time. The United States 
needs to exploit the current expertise in solid state lighting to bring this technology 
to maturity and to market.
Recommendation:  The DOE should:
1.	 Develop high-temperature solar cells suitable for use in conjunction with 
CSP systems. These solar cells can provide sunlight conversion to electricity 
in addition to the CSP thermal conversion. Moderate-efficiency solar cell 
electricity generation in addition to thermal electricity generation could 
drive total efficiency greater than 50 percent;
2.	 Develop more efficient, and less expensive, methods of solar power con-
centration for both low and high levels of concentration;
3.	 Develop methods to reduce LED costs, such as growing LEDs on silicon, 
or increasing SiC wafer sizes, or other LED substrate cost-reduction ap-
proaches; and
4.	 Develop efficient green LEDs to support quality RGB LED color rendering.
77  NAS-NAE-NRC. 2010. Electricity from Renewable Resources: Status, Prospects, and Impediments. 
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, p. 4.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
162
Recommendation:  Governmental land use planning bodies should consider the 
potential impacts of a significant increase in land use associated with solar electric 
power plants.
Recommendation:  The DOE and electric utilities should evaluate the electric grid 
for power movement across multiple time zones and evaluate whether changes 
should be made to support the period of time when grid parity is reached for 
solar power.

163
6
Health and Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The U.S. health care industry representing approximately $3 trillion of annual 
expenditures1 and employing roughly 15 million people2 comprises one of the 
largest sectors of the national economy. Our nation boasts the most technologically 
advanced, and the most costly, health care system in the world: almost 20 cents of 
every dollar is spent on health care. To remain the world leader in developing and 
introducing innovative medical instrumentation while improving and bringing 
down the cost of health care will require continued investment in research and 
development. Photonics technology plays a key role in providing the most effec-
tive, lowest-cost approaches for diagnosing, treating, and preventing disease and 
maintaining a healthy U.S. citizenry.3 In the nearly 15 years since the publication 
of the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) Harnessing Light: Optical Science and 
Engineering for the 21st Century,4 advances in photonics technologies and develop-
1  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2012. “National Health Expenditures 2010 High-
lights.” Available at http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/highlights.pdf. Accessed August 1, 2012.
2  SelectUSA. 2012. “The Health and Medical Technology Industry in the United States.” Available at 
http://selectusa.commerce.gov/industry-snapshots/health-and-medical-technology-industry-united-
states. Accessed August 1, 2012.
3  For a more detailed description of the optics and photonics in the service of health and medicine, 
see the full description in Appendix C of this report.
4  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
164
ments in the field of biophotonics have created many opportunities for significant 
improvements in the quality of health care as well as for substantial reductions in 
the overall cost.
The discipline of biophotonics deals with the interaction of light, or electro-
magnetic radiation, with living organisms and biologically active macromolecules: 
proteins (hemoglobin), nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), and metabolites (glucose 
and lactose). Light interacts with biological material and organisms in many diverse 
ways, depending primarily on the energy or color of the photon. At both high (x 
ray) and low (radio frequency [RF]) energies the body is mostly transparent, thus 
allowing the non-invasive imaging of the internal structure of organs and bones. 
In contrast, certain colors or wavelengths in the infrared (IR) and ultraviolet (UV) 
regions are absorbed strongly by biological tissues. The intense, focused light of 
lasers with these colors can be used for a wide variety of unique therapeutic inter-
ventions: making incisions, cauterizing and sealing wounds, and selectively heating 
or even vaporizing specific regions of organs and tissues. In the visible region of 
the spectrum, some biologically active macromolecules naturally absorb specific 
photon energies or colors. The amount of this intrinsic absorption can be used to 
determine the physiological health of an organ—for example, whether the tissue 
is getting sufficient oxygenated blood flow. Non-absorbing macromolecules can be 
labeled using specifically engineered dyes that selectively bind to macromolecules. 
These dyes or biomarkers can be used in conjunction with visible and near-infrared 
light to highlight specific cell and tissue types, such as metastatic cancer cells cir-
culating in the bloodstream. Modern biomedical instrumentation takes advantage 
of this wide range of interactions between photons and biological materials and 
provides a remarkably broad set of tools for the physician and life scientist.
HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF THE IMPACT 
OF TECHNOLOGY ON MEDICINE
Prior to the modern age of medicine, physicians primarily used their five senses 
directly to determine the causes of ill health.5 For example:
•	 The color of a person’s eyes was studied to detect jaundice and possible liver 
failure.
•	 The urine of patients was tasted for sweetness, to detect the presence of 
glucose and diagnose diabetes.
•	 An ammonia-like odor in urine implied possible kidney failure.
5  Berger, D. 1999. A brief history of medical diagnosis and the birth of the clinical laboratory. 
Part 1—Ancient times through the 19th century. Medical Laboratory Observer 31(7):28-30, 32, 34-40.

165
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
•	 The chest was struck or thumped and the resulting sound analyzed to iden-
tify the presence of fluid in the lungs, implying tuberculosis or pneumonia.
•	 The abdomen and breasts were palpated to detect cancerous lumps.
Currently biomedical technology extends and enhances the senses of the physi-
cian and thus dramatically increases the ability of the physician to diagnose disease.
Considering that the primary sense used by physicians in diagnosis was sight, it 
is understandable that optics and imaging have played a critical role in improving 
health care. Over the past 100 years, optics and imaging have allowed the clinician 
to see the previously unseen. For example, observation of bacteria and microbial 
parasites led to the development of antibiotics, and direct imaging of skeleton and 
organs with x ray aided in observing and setting bone fractures and diagnosing 
traumatic injuries to other organs. For example, laser-based flow cytometers pro-
vide detailed quantification of critical blood cell types, which is one of the primary 
tools for diagnosing and monitoring the treatment of AIDS patients.6
In addition to allowing the physician to see what could not be seen unaided, 
state-of-the-art optical technologies increase the sensitivity and specificity of mea-
surements far beyond the physician’s sense of taste, smell, hearing, and touch.7 
Photonics plays a major role in many modern molecular diagnostic instruments. 
Optical technologies now provide precise measurements of blood serum chemistry 
for maintaining safe glucose levels in patients with diabetes, replacing urine taste 
tests.8 Kidney function tests rely on accurate optical measurements of the glo-
merular filtration rate (GFR) rather than smelling a patient’s urine. Lung diseases 
such as emphysema, lung cancer, and tuberculosis are detected using computed 
tomography (CT) and chest x ray imaging. In addition, these imaging modalities 
provide more complete diagnosis of potential tumors detected by palpation.
During the 20th century, improvements in medical technology have doubled 
the life expectancy9 of individuals in high-income countries, changing the primary 
causes of death for a typical individual. One hundred years ago, infectious diseases 
often killed most individuals before the age of 50, whereas today the typical indi-
vidual in a high-income country lives until the age of 80. Optics and photonics have 
been essential technologies leading to this dramatic increase in life expectancy. For 
example, the microscope was the key technology allowing discoveries in microbi-
6  Hazenberg, M.D., S.A. Otto, B.H. van Benthem, M.T. Roos, R.A. Coutinho, J.M. Lange, D. 
­Hamann, M. Prins, and F. Miedema. 2003. Persistent immune activation in HIV-1 infection is asso­
ciated with progression to AIDS. AIDS 17(13):1881-1888.
7  Bynum, W.F., and Roy Porter, eds. 1933. Medicine and the Five Senses. Cambridge, Mass.: 
­Cambridge University Press.
8  For more information, see Appendix C in this report.
9  See, for example, the CIA’s World Factbook, available at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/. Accessed December 1, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
166
ology which determined that germs are the underlying cause of most infectious 
diseases, leading to the development of effective antibiotic drugs.
The primary causes of death today (heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and neuro-
degenerative diseases) are diseases that are more prevalent at older ages. The success 
of modern medicine has therefore created a series of new challenges, requiring 
further innovation.
Many of these challenges are being met using optics and photonics instrumen-
tation, which is providing scientific insights into the underlying molecular biology 
causing these diseases as well as quantitative new diagnostic instruments to help 
steer effective interventional therapies.
In low-income countries, infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, malaria, and 
AIDS, remain leading causes of death. This is due in large part to the absence of 
low-cost diagnostic tests that can detect these diseases at an early stage when the 
infections can be more easily contained and cost-effective intervention strategies 
can be employed. (See Figure 6.1.)
OPTICS AND PHOTONICS IN MEDICAL PRACTICE TODAY
A patient entering the emergency room (ER) with chest pains or a severe 
headache almost invariably receives a high-resolution, three-dimensional scan us-
ing CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as an initial diagnostic screening, 
which can assist in the diagnosis of a heart attack, pulmonary embolism, or stroke. 
CT and MRI both use photons with wavelengths for which the human body is very 
FIGURE 6.1  Life expectancy: 2011 estimates by CIA World Factbook. SOURCE: CIA. 2011. World Factbook. 
Available at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2102rank.html.

167
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
transparent, creating comprehensive, high-resolution, three-dimensional images 
of the anatomy: CT uses x-ray photons and MRI uses RF photons.10 Stroke and 
heart attack can lead to sudden death, but effective interventions exist if the condi-
tions can be diagnosed swiftly. If a nonresponsive patient comes to the ER with an 
unlabeled prescription in his or her pocket, how can the ER attendant determine 
whether or not the patient’s drugs have contributed to his or her condition? New 
technology using lasers has the potential to provide a fast method for identifying 
drugs by exposing the pills to laser light and observing the spectra emitted in re-
sponse to the laser excitation. The colors emitted by the sample provide a unique 
fingerprint, which can be compared with a database of more than 5,000 common 
pharmaceuticals to determine the precise makeup of the patient’s prescription and 
to determine quickly whether these drugs contributed to the patient’s condition.11
In the surgical suite, brain damage occurs in less than 5 minutes in anesthetized 
patients during surgery if sufficient oxygen levels are not maintained. During the 
early and mid-20th century, the monitoring of blood oxygen levels required taking 
a blood sample and sending it to the hospital laboratory for analysis. This process 
typically took tens of minutes to complete, presenting significant hazards to the 
patient with such slow feedback. These procedures were revolutionized by opti-
cal pulse oximeters, developed in the 1980s, which precisely measure the ratio of 
the absorption levels of the blood at two wavelengths, using convenient, low-cost, 
disposable optical probes based on light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and inexpensive 
solid-state detectors.12 In the past, mortality rates of 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 7,000 were 
reported in developed countries, and many patients suffered brain damage owing 
to oxygen deprivation during surgery;13 today such deaths and injuries have es-
sentially been eliminated.
Surgery almost always results in some unavoidable trauma to the patient. 
Minimizing the size of the surgical incision reduces this trauma and can dramati-
cally speed recovery. Modern optical endoscopes provide a close-up view of organs 
and a method for implementing laser surgery, utilizing incisions of less than a few 
centimeters. In addition, endoscopic visualization is now the standard of care for 
screening for colon cancer and for diagnosing esophageal cancer. Commonly used 
today in orthopedic surgery for repairing injuries in almost all of the major joints 
10  For more information about developments in CT instruments, see Appendix C.
11  Gendrin, C., Y. Roggo, and C. Collet. 2008. Pharmaceutical applications of vibrational chemi-
cal imaging and chemometrics: A review. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 48(3): 
533-553.
12  For more information about O2 saturation measurements, see Appendix C in this report.
13  World Health Organization (WHO). 2008. Global Pulse Oximetry Project. Background docu-
ment. First International Consultation Meeting. WHO Headquarters, Geneva, CH. Available at 
http://www.who.int/patientsafety/events/08/1st_pulse_oximetry_meeting_background_doc.pdf. Ac-
cessed August 1, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
168
(knee, elbow, hip, wrist), this technology has allowed many surgeries to become 
outpatient procedures, eliminating hospital stays and greatly reducing health care 
costs.
Besides being ubiquitous in the hospital, optical methods and instruments are 
also used in monitoring chronic conditions and in many outpatient surgical proce-
dures.14 The most pervasive use of optics and lasers in surgery is in ophthalmology. 
Laser treatments are standard therapy for treating blindness due to diabetes as 
well as age-related degenerative disease. One of the most common laser cosmetic 
surgeries today is the correction of focus of the eye lens by the precise shaping of 
the cornea, a procedure that has been performed on tens of millions of patients. 
Lasers and optics are also used in many outpatient elective cosmetic procedures, 
such as skin resurfacing and hair and tattoo removal.
Almost everyone has had blood drawn and sent to the clinical laboratory for 
blood tests, but few people are aware that these blood samples are analyzed using 
lasers and optical imaging to provide the measurements characterizing the status of 
the patient’s blood and circulatory system. Many types of blood cells have distinct 
shapes and unique internal structures, which can be detected by illuminating the 
cells with a laser beam and analyzing the transmitted and scattered laser light. The 
laser-based instruments used for these purposes can count many thousands of cells 
per second and are used to measure with great precision the different types of cells 
present in the bloodstream.
A doctor detecting a suspicious lump in a patient will often order an explor-
atory biopsy, which is sent to the pathology laboratory. High-resolution imaging of 
the excised tissue and analysis of the size and shape of the cells provide the most 
precise diagnosis of tumor malignancy and aggressiveness. These images also can 
help determine the boundaries between healthy and diseased tumor tissue, provid-
ing a surgeon with guidance about how much tissue needs to be removed to fully 
excise a tumor.
ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY PROVIDING THE OPPORTUNITY 
FOR NEW APPLICATIONS OF PHOTONICS
New optical technology has accelerated the translation of remarkable new 
capabilities into medical practice. As an example, just 30 years ago the standard 
technique for sequencing genes involved the radioactive labeling (using a radioac-
tive isotope of phosphorous) of the gene bases, gel electrophoresis to separate the 
gene fragments by size, and the overnight exposure of an optical film placed in close 
proximity to the gel. This laborious and time-consuming process allowed the se-
quencing of only several hundred bases during a typical day. With the introduction 
of optical methods in the 1980s, including four-color sequencing and optical scan-
14  For more information, see Appendix C.

169
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
ning of the gel, the speed of sequencing increased by a factor of 10. The develop-
ment of superior separation technologies, including capillary electrophoresis and 
better optical designs using confocal laser scanning, increased sequencing speed by 
about another factor of 10. Recently, single molecular fluorescence detection dur-
ing single-strand DNA synthesis, synthesis-based sequencing (SBS), has replaced 
electrophoresis. Low-noise, high-resolution charge-coupled device (CCD) imaging 
devices allow the simultaneous sequencing of millions of individual DNA strands. 
These technologies have increased the speed of sequencing by a factor of 1,000. 
(See Figure 6.2.) Not only has the speed increased by 100,000-fold, but the cost 
of sequencing the genome has decreased from billions of dollars to under $1,000. 
Data collected during 1 day in a typical sequencing laboratory in 1970 would fill 
approximately half of a single page in a lab notebook. In 1990, the technology 
produced enough data to fill a chapter of a lab book, or about 20 pages in a single 
day. In the year 2000, a single day’s data would fill a whole lab book.
Present-day technology, driven by advances in laser sources, nanophotonics, 
and detectors, generate enough data in 1 hour to fill the contents of 10, 24-volume 
encyclopedias.
ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY PROVIDING THE OPPORTUNITY 
FOR FUTURE APPLICATIONS OF PHOTONICS
Continuing advances in several critical areas of technology have dramatically 
increased the capabilities of biomedical optical instrumentation and herald a new 
era of innovation in biomedical optics, leading to improvements in treating many 
types of diseases. New optical sources and materials, imaging devices, microfluidic 
technologies, and detection methods will provide remarkable increases in speed, 
sensitivity, and precision for biomedical optical instrumentation.
Nucleic Acid Sequence Detection and Mutation Detection
Predilections for many diseases are the result of the specific makeup of an in-
dividual’s inherited genetic code. Specific alterations in certain genes can dramati-
cally increase the likelihood of cancer, cognitive impairment, and severe allergic 
reactions to certain types of food. Early identification of these inherited tendencies 
allows preventive strategies to be in place before the disease causes significant dam-
age. With the advent of rapid and much-lower-cost methods for whole genome 
sequencing, many of which rely on optical methods, the possibility exists that a 
wide range of correlations between genetic makeup and disease predilection can 
be detected earlier, and appropriate interventions put in place.15
Today, sequencing a complete human genome costs less than $5,000; it is 
15  For more information, see Appendix C.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
170
FIGURE 6.2  Technologies have increased the speed of 
­sequencing by a factor of 1,000. Time to sequence a sin-
gle human genome with (a) pre-laser DNA sequencers 
(1970s), (b) 1990s laser-based DNA sequencers, and (c) 
second-­generation laser-based DNA sequencers. SOURCE: 
­Congressional briefing by Thomas Baer, Executive Director, 
Stanford Photonics Research Center, Stanford University, Palo 
Alto, Calif. November 30, 2010. Available at http://portal.acs.
org/preview/fileFetch/C/CNBP_026401/pdf/CNBP_026401.
pdf. Accessed November 8, 2012.
(a)
(b)
(c)

171
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
projected that the next generation of instruments will reduce the cost to $1,000 
over the next few years.16 The new generation of SBS sequencers (see Box 6.1 and 
Figure 6.3) combines nanotechnology with photonics to achieve this remarkable 
increase in speed.17 To reach their full potential, these instruments will require fur-
ther investment in research to develop higher-speed and -sensitivity CCD cameras, 
more efficient labeling dyes, high-speed software to extract quantitative informa-
tion from large, high-resolution images, and nanophotonic structures optimized 
to localize the fluorescent signals from the individual DNA strands.
Proteomic Analysis Through Protein and Tissue Arrays
Detecting cancer recurrence early, determining the most appropriate drug 
therapy to slow tumor growth, and detecting and/or diagnosing a number of 
deadly infectious diseases are all examples of diagnostic tests that rely on measuring 
specific proteins in the blood serum. Recent advances in protein detection using 
photonics technology platforms are providing dramatic increases in sensitivity 
and specificity.
Microfluidics and robotics combined with optics provide the technology to 
create arrays of tissue samples on slides that can be automatically laser scanned 
and analyzed after exposure to fluorescently labeled antibodies which attach to 
tumor-specific proteins. These tissue arrays are analyzed using laser scanners and 
automated image analysis of the digital images. Drug interactions and molecular 
structures can be studied across hundreds of diseased and healthy patient samples 
all located on a single slide. This technology has the potential for greatly accelerat-
ing the drug development process and reducing development costs.
These protein-measuring instruments use automated, high-resolution micros-
copy, wide-field-of-view, low-noise imaging devices, and quantitative fluorescence 
microscopy. The performance of these instruments will improve greatly with ad-
vances in the areas of optics and photonics technology.
High-Throughput Screening
The development of new drugs based on small molecules is often limited by 
the rate at which candidate molecules can be screened for their therapeutic effect 
on target cell cultures. In recent years, optical technology has been combined with 
16  Bio-IT World Staff. 2011. “Illumina Announces $5,000 Genome Pricing.” Available at http://
www.bio-itworld.com/news/05/09/2011/Illumina-announces-five-thousand-dollar-genome.html. 
Accessed August 1, 2012.
17  Margulies, M., M. Egholm, and W.E. Altman, et al. 2005. Genome sequencing in microfabricated 
high-density picolitre reactors. Nature 437:376-380.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
172
robotics to provide the ability to screen hundreds of thousands of drug candidates 
per day, dramatically accelerating the drug discovery process. This high-throughput 
screening technology relies on robotic sample-handling automation for the precise 
and rapid parallel processing of multiple samples as well as on optical technology 
for high-speed quantitative data collection. Optical methods, including fluores-
cence, bioluminescence, and colorimetry, are used to identify and count viable 
and nonviable cells affected by the candidate compounds, determine activated 
molecular pathways in target cells, and detect the overall cellular response to po-
tential small-molecule drugs. An example of an approach that allows very low con-
centrations of proteins to be detected by actually counting the protein molecules 
individually is seen in Figure 6.4. More recently, by combining microfluidics with 
microscopic imaging to enhance protein quantification, researchers have increased 
sample throughput by 1,000-fold, to an astounding 10 million samples per day, 
BOX 6.1 
Nucleic Acid Synthesis-Based Sequencing
The first human genome was sequenced using technology based on electrophoresis, a process by 
which molecules of different sizes and chemical makeup are separated spatially in special gelatins by 
running an electric current through the gel. This process allowed different nucleic acid sequences to be 
isolated and the genetic code to be read out using fluorescent tags and laser scanners.
The newest approaches to gene sequencing use a radically different approach—called synthesis-
based sequencing (SBS)—which relies on several key photonics technologies. A sample containing a 
quantity of DNA molecules with unknown sequences is placed in a special microfluidics chamber. In 
this chamber separate strands of DNA are captured in different locations and then are copied by special 
enzymes. As the copy is created, each added base is incorporated into the growing DNA strand along 
with a fluorescent dye. Each of the four bases is coupled to a different-colored dye. The addition of each 
new base is detected by exciting the fluorescence dye with a laser and detecting the color of the fluores-
cence using a high-resolution, high-sensitivity CCD (charge-coupled device) camera. After the dye color 
is detected and the added base is identified, the dye molecule is enzymatically cleaved from the DNA 
strand. This process is repeated until the all of the bases have been added and identified and the DNA 
sequence has been determined.
This synthesis of copies of the various DNA molecules in the sample takes place simultaneously in 
hundreds of thousands of distinct locations, all of which can be monitored in parallel by high-sensitivity 
cameras that can detect signals as low as a single photon from each synthesis site. This approach has 
increased the speed of the sequencing of nucleic acids by many orders of magnitude. Currently, a single 
instrument can sequence the 3 billion base pairs in a human genome in less than a day. In contrast, the hu-
man genome project employed many hundreds of instruments and took more than 10 years to complete.
  SOURCE: Fuller, C.W., L.R. Middendorf, S.A. Benner, G.M. Church, T. Harris, X. Huang, S.B. 
­Jovanovich, J.R. Nelson, J.A. Schloss, D.C. Schwartz, and D.V. Vezenov. 2009. The challenges of 
­sequencing by synthesis. Nature Biotechnology 27(11):1013-1023.

173
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
FIGURE 6.3  The Pacific Biosciences PacBio RS platform is used for single-molecule sequence data. SOURCE: 
© Pacific Biosciences. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 6.4  Showing single occupancy: 
reaction wells approximately 5 microns in 
diameter contain a single bead coated with 
antibodies that trap a single target protein 
molecule. This single protein in turn binds a 
fluorescent enzyme that creates a fluorescent 
signal localized in the well, which is detected 
by laser scanning the well array. This 
approach allows very low concentrations of 
proteins to be detected by actually counting 
the protein molecules individually. SOURCE: 
Subbaraman, N. 2010. “Detecting Single 
Cancer Molecules.” Technology Review. 
Available at http://www.technologyreview.
com/biomedicine/25462/. Reprinted with 
permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
174
and radically reduced the sample volume and the time required for analysis.18 
These instruments utilize and will benefit from improvements in high-sensitivity, 
quantum-limited imaging detectors and new, compact, long-lived laser sources.
Flow Cytometry Mass Spectrometry
Although essential to survival, the human immune system also is a key factor 
in a number of common diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, childhood or Type 
I diabetes, and arteriosclerosis. Understanding the complex processes that make up 
an immune response requires the simultaneous monitoring of the activity and con-
centration of dozens of immune-system cell types. Lasers have traditionally been 
used in flow cytometer instruments to evaluate patient blood samples, identifying 
and counting the immune-system cell types. These instruments were limited in the 
past to quantifying only a few different cell types simultaneously. A new generation 
of flow cytometry instruments combines optical detection with mass spectrometry. 
This new technology promises to allow a status check of a patient’s immune system 
by simultaneously quantifying all of the major cellular constituents. When com-
bined with other advanced proteomic technologies, including tissue microarrays 
and protein mass spectrometry, the CyTOF instrument (see Figure 6.5) will provide 
the most complete understanding of the immune system to date.19 Identifying 
immune cell types along with their associated functions in affected tissues—that 
is arthritic joints, inflammatory tissues, and pancreatic islets—will allow the most 
complete understanding of the local and systemic processes that underlie many 
degenerative diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, Alzheimer’s disease, 
and heart disease.20
Ophthalmology
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and diabetic retinopathy (DR) are 
two of the leading causes of blindness, particularly in older patients.21 Laser-based 
surgical and drug therapies can slow the disease progression, particularly if the 
disease is detected prior to major damage to the retina. Early detection is difficult 
because the disease primarily impacts tissue beneath the surface of the retina, which 
18  Agrestia, J.J., E. Antipov, A.R. Abate, K. Ahn, A.C. Rowat, J.-C. Baret, M. Marquez, A.M. Klibanov, 
A.D. Griffiths, and D.A. Weitz. 2009. Ultrahigh-throughput screening in drop-based microfluidics 
for directed evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
107(9):4004-4009.
19  Cheung, R.K., and P.J. Utz. 2011. Screening: CyTOF—the next generation of cell detection. 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology 7(9):502-503.
20  For information about use in HIV status, see Appendix C.
21  For more information, see the section on “Ophthalmology” in Appendix C.

175
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
FIGURE 6.5  (a) A CyTOF instrument, which extends the capability of multi-parameter flow cytometry 
by atomic mass spectrometry to measure up to 100 biomarkers simultaneously in single cells at a rate 
of 1,000 cells per second; (b) data: 138-178 segment of mass spectrum for a homogeneous sample 
of several enriched isotopes of lanthanides. SOURCE: DVS Sciences, Inc. Available at http://www.
dvssciences.com/index.html. Reprinted with permission.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
176
is not easily observed in the early stage. New optical methods employing optical 
coherence tomography (OCT), a type of microscopic laser radar imaging that can 
probe beneath the surface of the retina, provide a method for precise subsurface 
imaging. OCT provides a high-resolution, three-dimensional image of the interior 
of the eye, allowing subsurface structures to be resolved down to a depth of about 1 
millimeter below the surface of the retina. This capability allows early diagnosis and 
early intervention, which can stop or slow down the disease progression, provid-
ing the potential for many additional years of visual acuity to affected individuals.
The number of cases of AMD and DR has increased greatly due to the aging of 
the population and the obesity epidemic.22 Early detection and intervention with 
new anti-angiogenesis drugs have proven to be remarkably effective in treating 
AMD. Moreover, the efficacy of new drugs currently under development can be 
quantitatively assessed and compared using the three-dimensional OCT images, 
which accurately define the volume of the lesions in the retina caused by AMD. 
Changes in the lesion volumes provide a direct measure of the drug efficacy and 
can help determine effective and safe dosage levels.
OCT also provides the capability for the accurate mapping of the lens and sur-
rounding tissue capsule, which can be measured with great precision in all three 
dimensions. This information, when combined with laser surgery using ultrafast 
lasers, has the potential to revolutionize the protocol for treating cataracts. Using 
OCT guidance, femtosecond lasers can be precisely focused on the capsule and 
automatically cut close to perfectly round incisions in the capsule. These precise 
incisions greatly assist in locating and centering the replacement lens. The same 
ultrafast pulsed laser can also be used to segment the original occluded lens, which 
can then be much more easily extracted from the patient’s eye. This combination 
of OCT for precise measurement of eye morphology, along with precision fem-
tosecond ultrafast laser machining, is setting a new standard for quality in these 
ophthalmic procedures, as seen in Figure 6.6.23
Image-Guided Surgery
For most solid tumor cancers, surgical excision is often the optimal interven-
tion strategy when it is feasible. Most often it is very important to balance the 
22  AMD Alliance International. 2011. Increasing Understanding of Wet Age-Related Macular Degen-
eration (AMD) as a Chronic Disease to ensure that all patients have access to early intervention, regular 
proactive treatment, and integrated care, and that research is ongoing for improved treatment options. 
Available at http://www.amdalliance.org/user_files/documents/AMD_ChronicDiseasePolicy_M03_
NoCrops_Low_Res.pdf. Accessed August 1, 2012.
23  Friedman, N.J., D.V. Palanker, G. Schuele, D. Andersen, G. Marcellino, B.S. Seibel, J. Batlle, R. 
Feliz, J.H. Talamo, M.S. Blumenkranz, and W.W. Culbertson. 2011. Femtosecond laser capsulotomy. 
Journal of Cataract and Refractive Surgery 37(7):1189-1198.

177
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
FIGURE 6.6  Excised and stained lens capsule samples from (top) a manual capsulorhexis and (bot-
tom) a laser capsulotomy with clearly improved boundaries of lens capsule cutting with optical coher-
ence tomography (OCT)-guided femtosecond laser surgery. SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from 
Friedman, N.J., D.V. Palanker, G. Schuele, D. Andersen, G. Marcellino, B.S. Seibel, J. Batlle, R. Feliz, 
J.H. Talamo, M.S. Blumenkranz, and W.W. Culbertson. 2011. Femtosecond laser capsulotomy. Journal 
of Cataract and Refractive Surgery 37(7):1189-1198.
need to remove the tumor completely versus the desire to maintain the integrity 
and function of the surrounding tissue. This is of particular importance in organs 
such as the brain, liver, and pancreas. Currently many surgical procedures require 
the excision of a sample portion of the affected organ, which is then sent to the 
pathology lab for analysis to determine the tumor boundaries, which then help 
guide the surgeon’s decision as to how much tissue to remove. This process is 
time-consuming and is typically performed while the patient is anesthetized. New 
optical techniques are being developed24 that provide real-time images of the tu-
mor boundaries. These techniques employ fluorescent biomarkers (see Figure 6.7), 
which selectively bind to the tumor cells, providing a clear demarcation between 
the healthy and diseased tissues that can be visualized directly by the surgeon 
during the operation. Similar techniques can be used to highlight nearby nerves 
24  For additional information, see Appendix C.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
178
and lymph nodes that may need to be carefully avoided or excised as part of the 
operational procedure.25
Dual Energy CT and Quantitative Image Analysis
The primary causes of death in the United States today are heart disease, cancer, 
and pulmonary disease, such as emphysema.26 In all of these modern ailments, 
early detection is the key to effective intervention. Since, in their early stages, these 
diseases often develop with minor or no symptoms, appropriate routine screen-
ing of at-risk populations must be implemented to detect disease in apparently 
healthy individuals. These screens must be low-cost, minimally invasive, and have 
low false-positive results in order to prevent unnecessary follow-on procedures. 
Imaging methods can provide a very effective approach to meeting these criteria.
Recent large-scale clinical trials have demonstrated the ability of low-dose 
x ray CT scanning as a very effective method to screen for lung cancer tumors, 
25  For information about the use of optic and photonics in biopsies, see Appendix C.
26  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2012. “Leading Causes of Death.” Available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/lcod.htm/. Accessed August 1, 2012.
FIGURE 6.7  Comparisons highlighting different fluorescent biomarkers. (a) White light reflectance 
only used in (a-c); (b) Cy5 fluorescence (pseudocolored cyan, overlaid on reflectance) image high-
lighting deeply buried nerve (long-stemmed arrow); (c) yellow fluorescent compound (YFP) fluores-
cence (pseudocolored yellow, overlaid on reflectance) image highlights additional branches (large 
arrowhead); (d) white light reflectance only used in (d-f); (e) FAM fluorescence (pseudocolored cyan, 
overlaid on reflectance) image highlighting a stained buried nerve branch (large arrowhead); (f) Cy5 
fluorescence (pseudocolored green, overlaid on reflectance) image highlighting a tumor (small arrow-
heads). SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Whitney, M.A., J.L. Crisp, L.T. Nguyen, B. Friedman, 
L.A. Gross, P. Steinbach, R.Y. Tsien, and Q.T. Nguyen. 2011. Fluorescent peptides highlight peripheral 
nerves during surgery in mice. Nature Biotechnology 29:352-356.

179
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
cardiovascular disease, and early signs of emphysema. High-resolution CT scans of 
the chest provide data sets that allow precise measurement of the size of lesions in 
the lung and allow tracking of changes in the size of these lesions, which is a very 
specific indication of malignancy. These CT data sets can also provide measures of 
occlusions or obstruction in cardiac vasculature (early indication of heart attack 
risk) and assessment of pulmonary function (indicative of emphysema).
CT imaging is a fast (a scan takes less than 10 seconds), non-invasive, and 
low-cost method for obtaining critical data that can be used to determine effec-
tive early intervention, preventing disease progression and greatly reducing the 
cost of treatment and improving the quality of life for the patient. To achieve the 
full potential of this technology will require new approaches to data analysis and 
quantitative feature extraction. For example, to deploy effective screening services, 
more precise methods for quantifying tumor size, determining the level of calcifi-
cation in cardiac vasculature, and extracting measures of lung expiration capacity 
must be developed.
The critical contributions of optical technology to CT instrumentation (and 
other imaging platforms such as MRI and ultrasound) are often overlooked. Fun-
damentally, CT devices are optical instruments, employing photons chosen with 
wavelengths for which the body is partially transparent to precisely image the inter-
nal physiology of the patient. The x ray photon sources, the optics for focusing the 
x rays, and the detectors used to detect the x ray photons are designed employing 
many of the same techniques developed for the design of imaging instruments 
using visible light. Similarly, the mathematical methods for analyzing the raw trans-
mitted x ray data, for reconstructing and visualizing three-dimensional models 
of internal anatomy, are almost identical to comparable techniques employed in 
other imaging modalities using visible or infrared light. Thus advances in detector 
technology, image reconstruction models, and techniques for quantitative feature 
extraction from large three-dimensional data sets will greatly enhance the perfor-
mance of CT, MRI, and ultrasound imaging platforms.27
In general, advances in developing quantitative imaging data analysis pro-
cedures are hindered by the inability of the scientific community to access com-
mon data sets useful for comparing the performance of automated computerized 
methods to analyze the data. Establishment of the infrastructure to support public 
access to large data sets of image data and open-source software tools to extract 
clinically significant features from these data should be a national priority. Such an 
infrastructure is vital to accelerating advances in many different imaging modali-
ties, including OCT, CT, MRI, ultrasound, x ray, diffuse optical imaging, and others.
27  Baer, T.M., J.L. Mulshine, and J.J. Jacobs. 2007. Biomedical Imaging Archive Network. Skeletal 
Radiology 36(9):799-801.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
180
Biomedical Optics in Regenerative Medicine
One of the most active frontiers of modern medicine is in the field of stem cell 
research. As more is learned about the fundamental processes behind how progeni-
tor cells differentiate and develop into cell types that make up specific tissues and 
how tissue expands and develops into organs, the potential arises for using this 
knowledge to repair or replace organs that are damaged due to aging or traumatic 
injury. Time-lapse microscopic imaging of stem cells as they differentiate into dif-
ferent cells types is playing a key role in identifying specific stages that characterize 
both normal and abnormal growth pathways. These data can potentially be used 
to determine which cells are safe to transplant into patients and which may be give 
rise to tumors.28
Biomedical Optics in Research
Advances in technology and the application of new instruments often provide 
the basis for further insights and discoveries that lead to a deeper understanding of 
the causes and the molecular basis of diseases. Significant improvements in optical 
technology have dramatically increased the ability to measure and study biological 
processes in both in vitro and in vivo environments.
The past few years have witnessed the birth and genesis of a whole new field 
of biophotonics called optogenetics.29 (This field was declared the Method of the 
Year in 2010 by the journal Nature Methods.30) As defined by Carl Deisseroth, one 
of its primary developers: “Optogenetics is the combination of genetic and optical 
methods to achieve gain or loss of function of well-defined events in specific cells 
of living tissue.”31 This technique has seen primary application in neuroscience, 
where the function of single neurons or groups of neurons can be monitored and 
controlled by specific wavelengths of light. Neurons in live, behaving animals can 
be genetically programmed to fire or be prevented from firing by exposure to dif-
ferent colors of light. Moreover, the active or inactive state of the neuron can be 
detected by observing fluorescence from the neuron. This provides neuroscientists 
with tools very analogous to those used by engineers to study electronic circuits: 
specific neural circuits can be activated or deactivated, and the overall circuit re-
28  Wong, C.C., K.E. Loewke, N.L. Bossert, B. Behr, C.J. De Jonge, T.M. Baer, R.A. Reijo Pera. 2010. 
Non-invasive imaging of human embryos before embryonic genome activation predicts development 
to the blastocyst stage. Nature Biotechnology 28:1115-1121.
29  For additional information, see Appendix C.
30  Nature Methods. 2011. “Method of the Year 2010.” Editorial. Available at http://www.nature.com/
nmeth/journal/v8/n1/full/nmeth.f.321.html. Accessed July 27, 2012.
31  Lin, S.-C., K. Deisseroth, and J.M. Henderson. 2011. Optogenetics: Background and Concepts 
for Neurosurgery. Neurosurgery 69(1):1-3.

181
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
sponse to these changes and the changes to information flow through the neuronal 
circuit can be monitored in real time. All of these types of measurements have been 
performed in a wide variety of alert, active animals.
These remarkable capabilities are made possible by the combination of the 
development of new forms of bioengineered, light-sensitive proteins and the ap-
plication of two photon imaging instruments that allow the subsurface probing 
of neural anatomies. These new bioengineered materials and optical techniques 
have revolutionized the field of neuroscience and provide, essentially for the first 
time, the possibility of reverse engineering and modeling of the neural circuitry of 
complex brains in live animals.
One of the fundamental principles of imaging that has limited the size of ob-
jects that can be resolved is the diffraction limit. In essence, objects smaller than 
the wavelength of light used to illuminate the sample cannot be imaged clearly. 
Over the past 10 years, several techniques have been developed that allow the pre-
cise location of single molecules to be determined to a fraction of a wavelength 
of light. These approaches allow startlingly vivid images illustrating the locations 
of proteins and small molecules in organelles and other structures within cells, 
providing a new capability for gaining insight into the mechanisms and functions 
of proteins within cells.
Several other areas of biophotonics are in early stages of development but show 
great promise. These include the use of free electron laser coherent x ray sources to 
probe the structure of membrane bound proteins in situ. These proteins are often 
key drug targets, since they control signaling pathways within the cell that are in-
volved with a number of diseases. Laser tweezers and atomic force microscopy are 
being used to measure what the impact of localized forces on cell membranes is and 
how these forces can initiate biochemical signaling within the cell. This research 
has important ramifications on the engineering of tissue structures to support the 
appropriate growth of specific cell types for organ transplantation.
FINDINGS
Key Finding:  Many chronic, debilitating, and often fatal degenerative diseases 
impacting the aging population are mediated or exacerbated by the patient’s own 
immune system. Understanding and controlling the immune system are thus 
among the major challenges facing modern medicine today. Optical instrumenta-
tion will continue to be the principal enabling technology allowing advances in the 
understanding of the immune system.
Key Finding:  Stem cell science is advancing rapidly, providing great insight into 
how cells progress from progenitor cells (capable of transforming into any tissue 
type) to cells of a phenotype characteristic of a specific tissue. Controlling these 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
182
processes in vivo and developing confidence that once the cells are transplanted 
into a patient they will continue to develop normally, present a major remaining 
challenge that must be overcome before stem cells can be used broadly in regen-
erative medicine. Microscopic imaging technologies will provide key non-invasive 
methods to monitor the growth process of stem-cell-derived tissues and help en-
sure their safety and efficacy for transplantation.
Finding:  Optical techniques using solid-state light sources and detectors com-
bined with microfluidics are the ideal technology base for automated, low-cost, 
portable devices that can be operated by personnel without their needing extensive 
training. In high-income countries the primary causes of death and patient mor-
bidity are degenerative diseases due to longer life expectancy; in contrast, in low-
income countries the infectious diseases remain leading causes of death. One of the 
primary challenges for infectious diseases in low-income countries is to develop 
low-cost diagnostic methods that can identify disease in its pre-symptomatic and 
pre-infectious early stage. Additionally, diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis 
have different phenotypes that can be identified using optically based diagnostic 
methods and thus help determine the most effective course of therapy.
Finding:  The current generation of imaging instruments (CT, MRI, OCT, and 
ultrasound) provides unprecedented resolution, allowing spectacular three-dimen-
sional, non-invasive images of human anatomy. These data sets contain informa-
tion that will allow early diagnosis of many potentially fatal diseases, including lung 
cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and Alzheimer’s disease. Early detection often 
provides the opportunity for the most effective intervention. However, these images 
contain an enormous amount of information, at times overwhelming the ability 
of the radiologist or clinician to effectively evaluate and digest all the information 
available from the raw images. Similar challenges are faced by ophthalmologists in-
terpreting three-dimensional data sets generated by OCT instruments, and likewise 
by pathologists dealing with large data sets generated by the automated scanning of 
large tissue sections imaged with subcellular resolution. Automated image-analysis 
software can provide reliable quantitative measurement of key features from these 
complex data sets, improving the diagnostic reliability, decreasing the amount of 
time required, and lowering cost. Clearly all of these new image approaches have 
many challenges in common and could benefit from a centralized infrastructure 
for sharing data and image-analysis software algorithms.
Finding:  A person’s genes determine, in part, that person’s tendency to succumb 
to specific diseases. Developing more cost-effective methods to sequence human 
genomes could lead to effective identification of an individual’s risk factors and 
potentially to effective early intervention and preventative strategies. Almost all of 

183
H e a l t h  a n d  M e d i c i n e
the most recent generation of high-throughput sequencing instruments are based 
on optical methods.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. optics and photonics community should develop 
new instrumentation to allow simultaneous measurement of all immune-system 
cell types in a blood sample. Many health issues could be addressed by an improved 
knowledge of the immune system, which represents one of the major areas requir-
ing better understanding.
Key Recommendation:  New approaches, or dramatic improvements in existing 
methods and instruments, should be developed by industry and academia to in-
crease the rate at which new pharmaceuticals can be safely developed and proved 
effective. Developing these approaches will require investment by the government 
and the private sector in optical methods integrated with high-speed sample-
handling robotics, methods for evaluating the molecular makeup of microscopic 
samples, and increased sensitivity and specificity for detecting antibodies, enzymes, 
and important cell phenotypes.
Recommendation:  The U.S. health care diagnostics industry, in cooperation with 
academia, should prioritize the development of low-cost diagnostics for extremely 
drug-resistant and multi-drug-resistant TB, malaria, HIV, and other dangerous 
pathogens, and low-cost blood-serum- and tissue-analysis technology to poten-
tially save millions of lives per year.
Recommendation:  The U.S. health care industry, in cooperation with academia, 
should prioritize the development of new optical instruments and integrated incu-
bation technology capable of imaging expanding and differentiating cell cultures in 
vitro and in vivo, to provide important tools for predicting the safety and efficacy 
of stem-cell-derived tissue transplants.
Recommendation:  The U.S. software and information technology industry, in 
cooperation with academia, should prioritize the development of new software 
methods automating the extracting, quantifying, and highlighting of important 
features in large, two- and three-dimensional data sets to optimize the utility of 
the latest generation of imaging instruments.
Recommendation:  The U.S. life science instrumentation industry, in cooperation 
with academia and the federal government, should prioritize the development of 
the next generation of super-high-throughput sequencing devices, required for 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
184
lowering the cost of sequencing down to the target cost of $1,000 per genome. 
This will require advances in high-sensitivity, low-noise, high-resolution CCD 
cameras, high-efficiency laser sources, and nanophotonic devices integrated with 
microfluidics and automated systematic analysis.
Recommendation:  The U.S. government should expand investment in multidis-
ciplinary centers (e.g., at universities with medical and engineering schools) at 
which critical developments combining medical and engineering discoveries can 
be efficiently fostered.
Recommendation:  The U.S. government, in cooperation with scientific and medi-
cal societies, should facilitate the creation of an information technology infra-
structure for sharing large amounts of medical and clinical data (e.g., quantitative 
imaging and molecular data) and open-source analysis tools.

185
7
Advanced Manufacturing
INTRODUCTION
As of 2009, the United States accounted for 21 percent of global manufactur-
ing value added, measured at 2009 purchasing-power exchange rates.1 The U.S. 
share has declined since at least 1990, and the share of producers (including U.S.-
owned production facilities) in the industrializing economies in Southeast Asia 
and elsewhere has grown. Nevertheless, a great deal of cutting-edge innovation 
and a modest amount of manufacturing activity to support it have remained in 
the United States, and this generalization applies to photonics and other high-
technology industries.
This chapter discusses photonics manufacturing, emphasizing three distinct 
but closely linked issues. First, it examines the relocation of production of pho-
tonics components and products in three key product fields—displays, solar tech-
nologies, and optoelectronic components—and the factors behind the offshore 
movement of much of this production activity. Next, it discusses the relationship 
between manufacturing and innovation in photonics technologies, highlighting 
the contrasts and similarities among the three cases in an effort to explain how 
and where the United States has been able to retain dominance in both production 
and innovation in selected photonics technologies. Finally, the chapter examines 
photonics in manufacturing, discussing new advances in manufacturing tech-
1  United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). 2010. International Yearbook of 
Industrial Statistics. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
186
nologies and production capabilities made possible by applications of photonics 
technologies.
PRODUCTION AND INNOVATION IN PHOTONICS 
TECHNOLOGIES: THREE CASE STUDIES
This section presents three case studies—displays, solar cells, and optoelectron-
ics components for the converging communications and computing industry—to 
examine trends in the offshoring of manufacturing and the relationship between 
manufacturing and innovation. All three deal with optic and photonic applications 
based on semiconductor technologies that originated in AT&T Bell Laboratories 
and other large corporate laboratories. While all three cases have similarities, im-
portant differences among them have implications for innovative performance, 
industry structure, and public policy. It is noteworthy that there is a continued 
need for increased resolution, smaller features, and increased packing density in 
all cases of production technologies. This need will drive a need for optical sources 
and imaging tools supporting the increase in resolution.
Displays
Of the three industries, the earliest to move manufacturing overseas from the 
United States was displays. As discussed by Macher and Mowery in the National 
Research Council report Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in 
a New World,2 although the technological foundations of the display industry were 
developed in the United States in the 1960s, the industry’s production operations 
quickly migrated to Japan and then to Korea and Taiwan.3 By 1995, liquid-crystal 
displays (LCDs) accounted for greater than 95 percent of flat panel display sales 
by value and thin-film transistor (TFT) LCDs accounted for more than 90 percent 
of LCD sales, having first found their way into application in calculators, then in 
cell phones and computers applications, and more recently, as prices continued to 
decline, largely replacing cathode ray tubes in television receivers.4 Large TFT LCDs 
accounted for about 75 percent of the value of TFT LCD sales, although the unit 
production volume of small and medium-size LCDs was five to six times that of 
large TFT LCDs.5 TFT LCDs remain the dominant display technology.
TFT LCD manufacturing and innovation have their roots in the United States 
2  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a 
New World (Collected Studies), J.T. Macher and D.C. Mowery, eds. Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press.
3  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
4  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
5  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.

187
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
in the late 1960s with a number of research advances by such major firms as RCA, 
Westinghouse, Exxon, Xerox, AT&T, and IBM.6 Of those firms, only IBM invested 
in high-volume manufacturing—through a joint venture with Toshiba in Japan.7 
In contrast, all the major Japanese electronics firms invested in high-volume manu-
facturing. Manufacturers of TFT LCDs face primarily two strategic decisions: when 
to invest in the construction of a new fabrication facility and whether to move to 
the next generation of substrates. In 1996, greater than 95 percent of all TFT LCDs 
were produced in Japan. By 2005, fewer than 11 percent were made in Japan, and 
the top two production locations were Korea and Taiwan, each of which produced 
roughly 40 percent of total output. The main reasons for the shift in production 
location were the lower engineering and labor costs in Korea and Taiwan and the 
ability of first Korea and then Taiwan to raise the large amounts of capital needed 
for investing in state-of-the-art fabrication facilities. The window of opportunity 
for Korean entry occurred in 1991 when Japanese firms were unable to raise the 
capital needed for investing. Similarly, the window of opportunity for Taiwanese 
entry came during the Asia crisis of 1997-1998 when Korean firms experienced 
difficulties in financing new plants.8 (See Figure 7.1.)
Although the successful integration of each generation of production equip-
ment depended on investment in high-volume production, new materials and 
equipment were not necessarily developed in the same countries that invested in 
manufacturing. Figure 7.1(b) shows the changing proportion of U.S. versus total 
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents in LCDs. Although it might 
be tempting to focus on the United States’ declining share of total worldwide LCD 
patents, it is important to note both that this represents only LCDs, not the next 
big thing in display technologies, and that even in LCDs the share of patents fails 
to show a full picture.9 Thus, in addition to IBM’s joint effort with Toshiba for 
TFT LCD manufacturing, a number of important U.S. firms participated in the 
industry—most notably, Corning (in substrate materials), Applied Materials (in 
chemical vapor deposition equipment), and Photon Dynamics (in test, inspection, 
and repair equipment). These firms remained key players in the market through 
their ability to acquire knowledge by working collaboratively with manufacturers 
outside the United States. At the global level, liquid-crystal materials were devel-
6  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
7  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
8  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
9  The data described above are based on the U.S. versus other nations’ shares of patents in the 
USPTO database. Past research suggests that U.S. patents are a reasonable measure of unique inven-
tive activity worldwide by internationally competitive companies. Notably, the patents described 
in this data are in no way weighted by their scientific or market value. Thus, there is no way to tell 
which patents described in Figure 7-1b may be highly incremental additions to existing knowledge 
rather than revolutionary.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
188
FIGURE 7.1  (a) Percentages of production shares of thin-film transistor (TFT) liquid crystal displays 
(LCDs). SOURCE: Murtha, T., S.A. Lenway, and J.A. Hart. 2001. Managing New Industry Creation. 
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. (b) U.S. firms’ or laboratories’ share of total USPTO LCD 
patents. SOURCE: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 2012. “Patenting in Technology Classes, Breakout 
by Organization.” Available at http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/tecasga/349_tor.htm.
(a)
(b)

189
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
oped and fabricated primarily in Western Europe and sold to East Asian produc-
ers. Chemical vapor deposition equipment was developed primarily in the United 
States and Western Europe. Testing equipment was developed mainly in Japan 
and the United States. Finally, lithographic equipment was developed primarily in 
Japan, the United States, and Western Europe. Given the time pressures created by 
the frequent transitions from one generation of production technology to the next, 
materials and equipment suppliers became more important. Unlike their Japanese 
counterparts, Korean and Taiwanese firms were generally unable to build their 
own production equipment and instead had to rely largely on external suppliers.10
Although IBM, Corning, Applied Materials, and Photon Dynamics were suc-
cessful in the display industry, other U.S. firms were less successful. A number of 
relatively small, niche producers of TFT LCDs engaged in a variety of efforts to 
catch up with the Japanese, some of which involved financial support from the 
U.S. government, in particular the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA). Murtha, Lenway, and Hart argue that successful entry by these U.S. 
firms at this late stage required that they work with partners in East Asia that were 
experienced in high-volume production.11 U.S. government policies made it dif-
ficult for firms receiving government funding to work closely with manufacturers 
in Asia, and most of these firms did not recognize the importance of collaborating 
with high-volume manufacturers.12
TFT LCDs dominate today’s display markets, but new market opportunities in 
displays are opening up particularly in flexible displays. Today, the primary sources 
of innovation in flexible displays are in the United States, and forecasts suggest that 
this technology’s market share in mobile devices will grow in the next few years.
Solar Cells
As in the case of displays, manufacturing and innovation of solar photovoltaics 
(PVs) have their roots in the United States. As discussed by Colatat, Vidican, and 
Lester in the paper Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry: The Role 
of Public Research Institutions, the first silicon photovoltaic device was invented 
in 1954 at Bell Laboratories and found a niche market in space satellites.13 The 
photovoltaic industry in the 1960s remained very small—the annual market of 
10  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries.
11  Murtha, T.P., S.A. Lenway, and J.A. Hart. 2001. Managing New Industry Creation: Global Knowl-
edge Formation and Entrepreneurship in High Technology—The Race to Commercialize Flat Panel 
Displays. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
12  Murtha et al. 2001. Managing New Industry Creation.
13  Colatat, P., G. Vidican, and R. Lester. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry: 
The Role of Public Research Institutions. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Industrial Performance 
Center Working Paper Series. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
190
solar cells was worth $5 million to $10 million, or the equivalent of 50 to 100 kW 
of capacity—and the U.S. government was the primary customer.14,15 Throughout 
the 1950s and 1960s, only five companies produced photovoltaic cells. Two were 
start-ups: Hoffman Electronics, which acquired National Fabricated Products and 
its patent license for the Bell Laboratories patents, and Heliotek, founded by Al-
fred Mann as a spin-off from his previously founded company, Spectrolab.16 The 
remaining three entrants were established companies that had diversified into the 
solar cell market: RCA (which produced radios), International Rectifier (which 
produced semiconductors), and Texas Instruments (which produced semiconduc-
tors). All three of the established companies left the market by the end of the 1960s 
because it was small and unpredictable.17
In 1973, the Arab oil embargo strengthened interest in terrestrial applications 
of photovoltaics and expanded the market for them.18 Two well-known U.S. PV 
firms were founded shortly thereafter by former employees of Spectrolab: Solar 
Technology International (1975) and Solec International (1976).19,20 Between the 
mid-1980s and the mid-1990s, the United States, Japan, and Germany competed for 
the lead in solar cell production on the basis of the location of production activities. 
In the mid-1980s, Japan overtook the United States as the number one producer 
of solar cell modules, with Germany in a distant third place. The United States and 
Germany then surpassed Japan in world PV module shipments in the mid-1990s. 
Since the 1995, however, although U.S. production of PVs has risen, the U.S. share 
of global PV production has fallen from its 43 percent peak in 1995 to an all-time 
low of 6 percent in 2009.21 (See Figure 7.2 (b).) As of 2009, Germany is the leader 
14  Colatat et al. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry.
15  National Research Council. 1972. Solar Cells: Outlook for Improved Efficiency. Washington D.C.: 
National Academy Press.
16  Colatat et al. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry.
17  Colatat et al. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry.
18  Colatat et al. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry.
19  Colatat et al. 2009. Innovation Systems in the Solar Photovoltaic Industry.
20  Although both firms are still in operation, both were eventually acquired by non-U.S. compa-
nies. Solar Technology International was acquired by Atlantic Richfield Company (ARCO) in 1977 
and renamed ARCO Solar. By the time it was acquired by Siemens (a German company) in 1990, 
ARCO Solar was the largest PV manufacturer in the world. ARCO Solar was later sold by Siemens to 
an Anglo-Dutch company, Shell, before being sold to Solarworld (a German company). Solec Inter-
national, which was eventually sold to Sanyo (a Japanese company), is also still in operation today.
21  Le, Minh, Chief Engineer, Solar Energy Technologies Program, U.S. Department of Energy. 2011. 
“The SunShot Program—The Great Solar Race: The Apollo Mission of Our Times.” Presentation to 
the NRC Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Challenges 
for Future Research, February 24, 2011.
Optics and Photonics: Essential Technologies for Our Nation
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

191
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
FIGURE 7.2  (a) U.S. share of global patenting. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Andersson, 
B.A., and S. Jacobsson. 2000. Monitoring and assessing technology choice: The case of solar cells. 
Energy Policy 28(2000):1037-1049. (b) U.S. share of global PV cell module market and production. 
SOURCE: Le, Minh, Chief Engineer, Solar Energy Technologies Program, U.S. Department of Energy. 
2011. “The SunShot Program—The Great Solar Race: The Apollo Mission of our Times.” Presentation 
to the NRC Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Challenges for 
Future Research, February 24, 2011.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
192
in global production of PV followed by China, with Japan in third place.22 But the 
growth of international production means that three of the top five manufacturers 
of PV modules (measured in megawatts of shipments23) in 2010 were Chinese. The 
firm in second place on the basis of its volume (megawatts) of shipments at the 
end of the fourth quarter of 2010 is First Solar, a U.S. thin-film PV company that 
uses cadmium telluride instead of silicon (the material used by all 9 other compa-
nies in the top 10) as its semiconductor. First Solar has manufacturing facilities in 
Perrysburg, Ohio; Frankfurt, Germany; and Kulim, Malaysia. There are no other 
U.S. companies in the top 10. The Japanese company Sharp is in fourth place, and 
a Canadian company, Canadian Solar, is in sixth place. The top 10 manufacturers 
accounted for more than 50 percent of total global PV shipments in 2010.24
Although the United States no longer dominates global production of solar 
modules, it has maintained its lead in patenting in solar technologies,25 followed 
by Japan (according to the geographic location reported by the corporate assignees 
on the patent). As can be seen in Figure 7.2, the United States was the dominant 
source of solar technology patents during 1975-1995, although Japan’s share of 
global patenting increased significantly after 1980.26 The United States retains a 
position of leadership in solar-related USPTO patents, accounting for 52 percent of 
total solar patents in 2002-2010, followed by Japan at 26 percent and Germany at 
6 percent.27 The 10 leading corporate patentees during 2002-2010 were (in order) 
Canon (Japanese), Sharp (Japanese), Boeing (U.S.), Sunpower (U.S.), Kanegafuchi 
(Japanese), Sanyo (Japanese), Emcore (U.S.), Applied Materials (U.S.), Konarka 
(U.S.), and Rabinowitz (U.S.).28
As this discussion suggests, the United States no longer is among the leading 
22  Le, Minh, Chief Engineer, Solar Energy Technologies Program, U.S. Department of Energy. 2011. 
“The SunShot Program—The Great Solar Race: The Apollo Mission of Our Times.” Presentation to 
the NRC Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Challenges 
for Future Research, February 24, 2011. 
23  The conditions for measuring the nominal power of a photovoltaic module are specified in 
standards such as IEC 61215, IEC 61646, and UL 1703; the term “power” is also used in describing 
the size of a shipment or an installation.
24  PVinsights. 2011. “Suntech Lost Championship of Solar Module Shipment to First Solar in 2Q 
11.” Available at http://pvinsights.com/Report/ReportPMM31A.php. Accessed December 27, 2011.
25  The above-described data are based on shares of patents in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of-
fice database. Past research suggests that U.S. patents are a reasonable measure of unique inventive 
activity worldwide by internationally competitive companies. Here, patent locations are assigned on 
the basis of company assignee location, as reported in the filed patent.
26  Andersson, B.A. and S. Jacobsson. 2000. Monitoring and assessing technology choice: The case 
of solar cells. Energy Policy 28(14):1037-1049.
27  Cardona, V. 2011. “Clean Energy Patents—Winners and Losers, Renewable Energy World.” Avail-
able at http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/rea/news/print/article/2011/03/2010-clean-energy-
patents-winners-and-losers. Accessed July 5, 2011.
28  Cardona, V. 2011. “Clean Energy Patents—Winners and Losers, Renewable Energy World.”

193
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
sites (by volume) for the manufacturing of solar modules.29 Notable is the apparent 
lack of correlation between the nations in which the bulk of solar module manu-
facturing is sited and the nations that dominate inventive activity (as measured 
by USPTO patenting). (See Figure 7.2 (b).) Indeed, the United States continues 
to dominate global inventive activity in solar technologies despite not being the 
location for the greatest volume of solar module manufacturing output. (See Fig-
ure 7.2 (a).) Notably, the largest volume in the world of patents is in cutting-edge 
solar technologies, such as thin films, which are still produced largely in the United 
States. In contrast, the largest volume of manufacturing is in crystalline silicon 
technology modules—a technical field that no longer dominates solar technology 
patenting in the USPTO.
Innovation in the materials that underpin solar technologies used for energy 
generation may prove important in affecting the future site of manufacturing 
activity in this field. Numerous materials and designs can produce photovoltaic 
effects.30 Overall, PV technologies can be grouped into four main categories: 
wafer and thin film (including crystalline and amorphous silicon and cadmium 
telluride technologies), concentrator, excitonic (including organic polymer and 
dye-sensitized solar technologies), and novel, high-efficiency technologies (such 
as plasmonics).31 Designs based on crystalline silicon have dominated commercial 
PV technology, accounting for more than 80 percent of the market for commer-
cial modules since the industry’s origin.32 Crystalline silicon may not, however, be 
the future. Today, thin-film solar technologies hold the second-largest proportion 
of the commercial market after crystalline silicon, hovering below 20 percent.33 
In the 1980s, both the United States and Japan invested in thin-film amorphous 
silicon technologies.34 One report finds that between 1994 and 1998 the number 
of USPTO patents granted in amorphous silicon exceeded the number granted in 
crystalline silicon.35 A more recent report based on National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory data concluded that the cost per watt of producing thin-film PV was 
closing the gap with the cost of producing crystalline PV in the late 1990s and early 
29  At the firm level, one U.S.-headquartered firm is among the corporate leaders (by volume) in 
global manufacturing of solar modules. However, the national headquarters of the corporate entities 
that dominate solar manufacturing may not correlate with the geographic location of those corpora-
tions’ manufacturing activities.
30  Baumann, A., Y. Bhargava, Z.X. Liu, G. Nemet, and J. Wilcox. 2004. Photovoltaic Technology 
Review. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California, Berkeley.
31  Curtright, A.E., M.G. Morgan, and D. Keith. 2008. Expert assessment of future photovoltaic 
technology. Environmental Science and Technology 42(24): 9031-9038.
32  Baumann et al. 2004. Photovoltaic Technology Review.
33  PVinsights. 2011. “Suntech Lost Championship of Solar Module Shipment to First Solar in 2Q 
11.” Available at http://pvinsights.com/Report/ReportPMM31A.php. Accessed December 27, 2011.
34  Baumann et al. 2004. Photovoltaic Technology Review.
35  Andersson and Jacobsson. 2000. Monitoring and assessing technology choice.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
194
2000s.36 However, even in-depth assessments find it difficult to assess which of the 
thin-film or the many other PV material and design technologies may be dominant 
in the future.37 Inasmuch as the basic materials underpinning solar technologies 
are likely to undergo considerable change, it is possible that U.S.-based innovation 
can lead to expanded U.S.-based production of new technologies in this field.
Optoelectronic Components for Communications Systems
Optoelectronic components—which include lasers, modulators, amplifiers, 
photodetectors, and waveguides produced on semiconductors—are the compo-
nents necessary to send and receive information in light-based communications 
systems. The origins of this technology can be traced to the 1960 demonstration 
of the laser at Hughes Aircraft that followed from research at Columbia University 
and AT&T Bell Laboratories (see Chapter 2 for further discussion). Further research 
and development (R&D), much of it at Bell Laboratories, yielded the fabrication 
methods by which fiber and the other system-critical optoelectronic components 
could be manufactured economically. In 1970, Corning was the first firm to develop 
the optical waveguide technology—in particular, low-loss optical fiber that would 
prove critical to the development of optoelectronics. Corning entered into joint-
development cross-licensing agreements with AT&T and cable suppliers in Europe 
and Japan. By 1986, several other giant corporations had begun production of fiber 
optics and related components, including DuPont, ITT, Allied Signal, ­Eastman 
Kodak, IBM, and Celanese. Large Japanese corporations, including Nippon Electric 
Company, made similar investments.38
The 1984 consent decree that resolved the federal antitrust suit against AT&T 
produced dramatic changes in the structure of R&D and manufacturing in the 
U.S. communications industry, and these changes affected the development of 
optoelectronics in the United States. In 1996, AT&T spun off Bell Laboratories with 
most of its equipment manufacturing business into a new company named Lucent 
Technologies. In 2006, Lucent signed a merger agreement with the French company 
Alcatel to form Alcatel-Lucent. On August 28, 2008, Alcatel-Lucent announced that 
it was pulling out of basic science, material physics, and semiconductor research 
to work in more immediately marketable fields.39
During the 1990s, many small and medium-size optoelectronic component 
36  Baumann et al. 2004. Photovoltaic Technology Review. 
37  Curtright et al. 2008. Expert assessment of future photovoltaic technology. 
38  Sternberg, E. 1992. Photonic Technology and Industrial Policy: U.S. Responses to Technological 
Change. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press.
39  Ganapati, Priya. 2008. Bell Labs kills fundamental physics research. Wired Magazine. August 27. 
Available at http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2008/08/bell-labs-kills/. Accessed November 12, 2012.

195
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
manufacturers for communications were founded in the United States.40 In March 
2000, however, the telecommunications bubble burst, throwing the industry into 
turmoil. By 2002, optical fiber sales had fallen short of monthly projections by 
more than 80 percent,41 and competitive survival of producers of fiber and com-
ponents required that they reduce production costs rather than develop novel 
technologies.42
The collapse of the U.S. telecommunications equipment market led to dra-
matic change in the location of optical components production. Between 2000 and 
2006, the majority of optoelectronic component manufacturers moved manufac-
turing activities from the United States to developing countries, in particular to 
developing East Asia.43 By 2005, five U.S.-based companies (Agilent Technologies, 
­JDSUniphase, Bookham, Finisar, and Infineon) and two Japanese-based companies 
(Mitsubishi and Sumitomo Electric/ExceLight) accounted for 65 percent of rev-
enues in optoelectronic components.44 All five of the top U.S. manufacturers had 
moved assembly activities to East Asia, and all but JDSUniphase had also moved 
some or all of their fabrication activities to East Asia. The offshore production 
activities of these U.S. firms did not rely on contract manufacturers, instead pro-
ducing components in wholly owned foreign subsidiaries. Only a few U.S. entities, 
mainly start-ups relying on funding from venture capitalists or Small Business 
Innovation Research (SBIR), chose to keep all manufacturing in the United States. 
Included among these start-ups were Infinera, Kotura, and Luxtera.
Despite these changes in the location of manufacturing, as can be seen in Fig-
ure 7.3, the United States has maintained a dominant role in total optoelectronics 
patent production as measured by USPTO data, with Japan a close second. In 
the 4-year period (2001-2004) after the bursting of the telecommunications and 
Internet bubble, U.S. patents filed annually by assignees in the United States fell 
while U.S. patenting during the same period by assignees in Japan continued to rise.
Although those data depict trends in issued patents, which have to pass a formal 
review for novelty and non-obviousness by USPTO examiners, they do not adjust 
for the fact that the economic or technological importance of individual patents 
varies widely. Nor do these patent data indicate the location of the inventive activity 
40  Yang, C., Nugent, R., and Fuchs, E. 2011. Gains from Other’s Losses: Technology Trajectories and 
the Global Division of Firms. Carnegie Mellon University Working Paper. Available at http://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2080595. Accessed November 12, 2012.
41  Fuchs, E.R.H., E.J. Bruce, R.J. Ram, and R.E. Kirchain. 2006. Process-based cost modeling of 
photonics manufacture: The cost competitiveness of monolithic integration of a 1550-nm DFB 
laser and an electroabsorptive modulator on an InP platform. Journal of Lightwave Technology 
24(8):3175-3186.
42  Fuchs et al. 2006. Process-based cost modeling of photonics manufacture.
43  Yang et al. 2011. Gains from Other’s Losses.
44  Fuchs et al. 2006. Process-based cost modeling of photonics manufacture.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
196
FIGURE 7.3  (a) The United States and Japan dominate U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents in 
optoelectronics. NOTE: Country assigned by patent assignee’s filed location. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permis-
sion, from Ventura, S., R. Nugent, and E. Fuchs. 2012. Methods Matter: Revamping Inventor Disambiguation 
Algorithms with Classification Models and Labeled Inventor Records. Working paper. Abstract available at http://
ssrn.com/abstract=2079330. (b) Optoelectronic publications of some major countries (1970-2005). Historically, 
the United States dominates publications in optoelectronics, followed by Japan and then various countries in 
Europe; in recent years, however, publication rates from East Asia have risen dramatically. SOURCE: Reprinted, 
with permission, from Doutriaux, T., 2009. “The Resiliency of the Innovation Ecosystem: The Impact of Off-
shoring on Firms Versus Individual Technology Trajectories.” Work toward a master’s thesis. Advisor: E. Fuchs. 
Pittsburgh, Pa.: Carnegie Mellon University.
(a)
(b)

197
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
that led to the patents that were issued in the United States. The trends in patenting 
thus provide some information on the location of inventive activity, but they also 
reflect inventor (or assigned) perceptions about the location of market opportuni-
ties for the exploitation of the inventions. And the United States retains a dominant 
position as a focus of global patenting activity in optoelectronics.
Publication records covering the 1970-2005 period in optoelectronic compo-
nents reveal a slightly different picture. For the first three decades of this period, 
the United States accounts for the largest number of publications, followed by key 
countries in Europe and Japan. Since roughly 2000, however, an almost exponential 
rise can be seen in publications from developing East Asia as the total number of 
publications from China, Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore surpassed the total num-
ber of publications from Japan by 2003 and reached parity with the number of 
publications from Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the 
United Kingdom by 2005. Those publication data are not normalized for quality 
and therefore can be best interpreted as measures of overall research activity in 
optoelectronics within each country, in contrast with the patent data described 
above. Arguably, the publications data indicate a significant rise in optoelectronics 
research activity in the industrializing economies of East Asia since 2000.
To elucidate the relationship between manufacturing location and the rate 
and direction of innovation in optoelectronic components better, the following 
discussion addresses the technical details of the innovations that U.S. optoelec-
tronic component manufacturers were pursuing when they began to move their 
production activities offshore. As was true of the electronics industry 30 years ago, 
three competing design technologies are used in optoelectronic components. Older, 
more established designs use discrete components that are wire-bonded together. 
The most recent designs, however, rely on the capability to do “monolithic inte-
gration”—the fabrication and integration (using semiconductor techniques) of 
multiple functions on a single chip. Between those extremes are designs that use 
intermediary “hybrid integration” techniques with a variety of methods to bond 
components to one another. Monolithic integration holds considerable promise for 
product innovation in the photonics industry, because it significantly reduces size, 
packing alignment, complexity, and cost while potentially improving the reliability 
of photonic components, thereby enabling their application to markets outside 
telecommunications, such as computer chips (especially optical buses), biosensors, 
and other small-scale sensing and information processing applications.45
During the 1980s and 1990s, when optoelectronics was being used extensively 
45  Akinsanmi, W., R. Reagans, and E.R.H. Fuchs. 2011. Economic Downturns, Technology Trajec-
tories, and the Careers of Scientists. Presented June 2 at Atlanta Conference on Science and Innova-
tion Policy. Available at http://smartech.gatech.edu/bitstream/handle/1853/42529/527-1641-1-PB.
docx?sequence=1. Accessed November 12, 2012. 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
198
in telecommunications, an optoelectronic firm’s competitiveness depended on 
the speed with which it could bring the latest innovations to market.46 During 
that period, firms manufacturing optoelectronics components for applications in 
telecommunications focused their process-technology development on monolithic 
integration (Figure 7.4) to improve component reliability and reduce cost.47 The 
transfer by many U.S. optoelectronic component manufacturers of their assembly 
and fabrication activities offshore after the bursting of the telecommunications 
bubble shifted their focus in process innovation away from monolithic integra-
tion to discrete-technology solutions. That shift largely reflected the different 
manufacturing-cost environment of the 1990s in the industrializing East Asian 
economies within which the U.S. firms were operating their offshore facilities and 
the shift in the competitive environment to favor low-cost production over rapid 
introduction of new component designs.48
Those firms found that the lowest-cost option was to manufacture the discrete 
technologies in developing countries and abandon U.S. production of monolithi-
cally integrated technologies.49 It is not clear, however, that the apparent declines in 
monolithic-integration patenting in the firms that have moved production activi-
ties offshore will necessarily lead to a decline in overall innovation by U.S. firms in 
monolithic integration. Several start-up firms that focus on monolithic-integration 
technologies have emerged in the United States since 2000. It is also possible that 
established U.S. optoelectronic component manufacturers that have kept fabrica-
tion in the United States will increase R&D and patenting in monolithic integration 
for optoelectronics. Finally, and perhaps most important, firms outside telecom-
munications and data communications, such as computing firms, may find it in 
their interest to develop monolithic-integration design and fabrication capabilities 
for communications applications, as evidenced by Intel’s recent establishment of a 
silicon photonics design and fabrication facility at the University of Washington.
The case of optoelectronics components illustrates a strong relationship be-
tween the location of production activities by U.S. firms and the direction of these 
firms’ innovative efforts. But the evidence presented in this case suggests that the 
movement of optoelectronics-component production to non-U.S. locations has 
thus far not resulted in the “loss” by the U.S. economy of innovative capabilities 
46  Fuchs, E.R.H., and R.E. Kirchain. 2010. Design for location: The impact of manu­facturing off-
shore on technology competitiveness in the optoelectronics industry. Manage­ment Science 56(12): 
2323-2349.
47  Fuchs et al. 2010. Design for location.
48  Yang et al. 2011. Gains from Other’s Losses.
49  Recent research shows that moving assembly activities offshore is associated with a decrease in 
monolithic integration patenting activities, although overall patenting other than monolithic inte-
gration increases. U.S. firms that move both assembly and fabrication activities offshore, however, 
display declines in all optoelectronics patenting. Yang et al. 2011. Gains from Other’s Losses.

199
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
FIGURE 7.4  (a) U.S. monolithically integrated design produced in the United States cannot cost-compete with 
the discrete design produced in developing East Asia (D.E.A.). SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from 
Fuchs, E., and R. Kirchain. 2010. Design for location: The impact of manufacturing offshore on technology 
competitiveness in the optoelectronics industry. Management Science 56(12):2323-2349. (b) U.S. firms maintain 
cumulative dominance in USPTO patents in optoelectronic integration; however, Japanese firms have equal or 
higher numbers of patents in some years. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Yang, C., R. Nugent, and 
E. Fuchs. 2011. Gains from Others’ Losses: Technology Trajectories and the Global Division of Firms. Carnegie 
Mellon University Working Paper. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2080595.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
200
in monolithic integration. Instead, the committee observes that a different set of 
U.S. corporations (and universities) now have become active in this technological 
field.50,51
Similarities and Differences Among the Three Cases
The displays, solar, and optoelectronic communications components cases 
demonstrate important similarities and differences. All three cases involve semi-
conductor processing technologies in which R&D and manufacturing activities are 
linked. In all three, technologies originated in the 1950s and 1960s in corporate 
R&D laboratories in the United States—for example, AT&T Bell Laboratories, 
IBM, and Corning. In all three cases, manufacturing (often in U.S.-owned facili-
ties) has moved overseas and the United States has lost its position as the leading 
site for production activities. In the case of displays, manufacturing moved first 
to Japan, then to Korea and then Taiwan. In the case of solar, the dominant site 
of manufacturing moved to Germany and China. In the case of optoelectronic 
components for communication systems, the dominant manufacturing position 
moved to developing East Asia.
In all of those cases, manufacturing moved overseas, but the primary offshore 
manufacturing site did not always become the leading source of innovation. Indeed, 
in all three cases, U.S.-based firms and inventors are leading technological advances, 
at least some of which could displace established and dominant producers. The 
potentially disruptive technologies include flexible displays, thin-film and other 
technologies in the solar field, and monolithically integrated design and fabrication 
technologies in optoelectronic communications systems.
In contrast with the pattern of innovation, entry, and early-stage growth of 
many of these technologies in the 1950s and 1960s, the new technological pos-
sibilities are being pursued by start-up firms, often in collaboration with U.S. 
government laboratories or universities (see Figure 7.5, which shows the growing 
role of U.S. universities in optoelectronics patenting). Moreover, the U.S. defense 
market often is a less central source of demand for innovative technologies. The 
new approach to technology development that relies more heavily on universities 
and small and medium-size firms for innovation, in which venture-capital fund-
ing plays a more important role, may increase the importance of mechanisms to 
support cross-industry and cross-institutional coordination in helping the United 
States to maintain leadership in photonics innovation.
The three cases also highlight important differences among the technologies. 
In displays and optoelectronic components, the vast majority of manufacturing has 
50  Akinsanmi et al. 2011. Economic Downturns, Technology Trajectories, and the Careers of Scientists.
51  Yang et al. 2011. Gains from Other’s Losses.

201
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
FIGURE 7.5  The institutional locus of innovation in optics. An example from optoelectronic compo-
nents for the communications industry. (a) Over the last nearly four decades, firms have remained 
the predominant source of U.S. Patent and Trademark Office patents in optoelectronics. NOTE: The 
industry, government, or university label is according to patent assignee. (b) Over the last four de-
cades, universities have contributed to a growing percentage of optoelectronic publications. SOURCE: 
Reprinted, with permission, from Doutriaux, T. 2009. “The Resiliency of the Innovation Ecosystem: 
The Impact of Offshoring on Firms Versus Individual Technology Trajectories.” Work toward a master’s 
thesis. Advisor: E. Fuchs. Pittsburgh, Pa.: Carnegie Mellon University.
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
202
moved to developing countries where labor and engineering are cheaper. In solar, 
however, the leading producer, Germany, is a developed country in which direct-
line and engineering wages are as high as or higher than those in the United States.
The close tie between R&D and manufacturing also has different consequences 
in the three cases. In the case of displays, the close tie led U.S. firms to collaborate 
with foreign manufacturers to remain at the cutting edge of innovation. In the case 
of solar, the close tie between R&D and manufacturing means that R&D occurs 
largely in the same country as manufacturing and has enabled U.S.-based R&D and 
manufacturing of thin-film technologies to remain dominant. Finally, in the case 
of optoelectronic components for communications systems, the close tie between 
R&D and manufacturing led firms that moved manufacturing overseas to abandon 
monolithically integrated technologies. As a result, monolithic integration contin-
ues to be dominated by private firms that remain in the United States.
Those differences yield different policy implications for each industry. In the 
case of displays, government policies preventing firms from collaborating with 
foreign enterprises (such as might exist as stipulations for certain work with the 
Department of Defense [DOD] could have a negative impact on innovation. In 
the case of solar, the dominant position of German-based production suggests that 
developing countries may not be the site for cost-competitive manufacturing. The 
dominance of patenting and production in thin-film technologies by U.S.-based 
firms suggests that the United States may have the opportunity to be a leader not 
only in innovating but also in the next generation of advanced solar manufactur-
ing. Finally, in the case of optoelectronic components for communications systems, 
government and venture funding of small and medium-size enterprises pursuing 
next-generation monolithically integrated technologies may be critical to overcome 
the gap between current market demands and longer-term markets in computing 
and biotechnology that may require the low-power and smaller form-factor perfor-
mance offered by monolithically integrated solutions. Those differences highlight 
the importance of avoiding a single-blanket policy for all of photonics. Instead, it is 
essential to engage technical and industry experts in policy development to exploit 
their contextual understanding of implications and possible outcomes.
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING IN OPTICS
This section discusses advances in manufacturing technologies in optical com-
ponent and optical systems production, which have experienced considerable 
progress over the last decade. Technologies that were considered innovative a dozen 
years ago have undergone significant evolution and are now found in operation in 
many optics manufacturing firms. Improvements in generation, finishing, assem-
bly, and metrology technologies are being leveraged to generate higher-performing 
optical systems and push the upper end of the precision scale. Many of these sys-

203
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
tems include aspherical lenses, which have advantages over spherical lenses but are 
more difficult to produce. This section briefly describes the advantages of aspherical 
lenses and then addresses some of the recent improvements in their production (for 
a much more detailed description, see Appendix C). The push toward the upper 
end of the precision scale will drive the need for improvements in optical sources 
and imaging tools to support the increase in resolution.
Optical Surfaces
Spherical lenses have been the workhorse of optical systems for centuries. The 
curved surfaces of a lens cause rays of light from a point on a distant object to 
come to a focus. A single lens with spherical surfaces forms an image that is not a 
perfect point. (See Figure 7.6.) Optical design has traditionally been a search for 
combinations of spherical-surfaced components.
FIGURE 7.6  Light rays are focused to a single focal point with an ideal lens (top). A lens with a spheri-
cal surface has an associated spherical aberration, and therefore has no distinct focal point (bottom). 
(Image is exaggerated).

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
204
Spherical components are relatively inexpensive, partly because of improve-
ments in lapping processes that allow the simultaneous processing of multiple 
lenses. Although time-consuming, lapping is capable of producing high-quality 
polished surfaces that deviate from the designer’s specifications by as little as a 
few hundredths of a wavelength. The result is high-precision, cost-effective lenses.
Aspherical Lenses
Aspherical lenses allow an expansion in the optical designer’s solution set. In 
an aspherical lens, the surfaces can be nonspherical. The addition of high-order 
curvature to an otherwise spherical surface in an aspherical lens permits indepen-
dent correction or balancing of spherical aberration. That leads to a reduction in 
the number of lens surfaces needed for aberration-corrected imagery.
Because they can reduce lens surfaces, the use of aspherical lenses can improve 
transmission and reduce the weight, space requirements, and cost of optical sys-
tems. Although their potential for improving performance of an optical design had 
been known for many years, their use had been limited by the inability to produce 
them reliably and accurately. Advances in manufacturing process technologies—
including deterministic computer numerically controlled (CNC) manufacturing 
equipment and processes, single-point diamond turning and grinding, polymer 
molding, glass molding, and precision metrology—have made possible the manu-
facture and use of these important surface geometries.52 Among the diverse appli-
cations of high-precision aspheric lenses (aspheres) are military aerospace systems, 
optical data storage, photolithography, and astronomy. Lower-precision aspheres 
have a wider range of application, including photography and video imaging (espe-
cially zoom lenses), such medical instruments as endoscopes, telecommunications, 
and document scanners and printers. At the low end of the market, aspheres find 
use in such applications as condenser elements for illumination. Asymmetrical 
aspheres are also becoming important, especially in conformal applications, in 
which the outer surface of an optical component must conform to the aerody-
namic shape of an aircraft or missile.
Fabrication Processes and Equipment
Processes and equipment available to fabricate optical surfaces, particularly 
aspherical surfaces, have undergone notable improvement during the last decade. 
Improvements have been made in both the ability to produce and the ability to 
measure precision optical components. Improvement has included nearly all as-
52  For more information on the techniques discussed in this section, see Appendix C of this report.

205
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
pects of fabrication from surface generation to coating and the ability to measure 
these surfaces.
Today, CNC grinding and polishing allow dynamically adjustable cutting paths 
for tool wear and can be programmed for edging, beveling, sagging, concave, and 
convex surface grinds. Polymer molding has also become common in fabrication 
of lenses for consumer and commercial products. Mobile phones, DVD players, 
digital cameras, and conferencing systems have all incorporated polymer lenses. 
Glass-molding technology also has become increasingly available in the last decade, 
as has magnetorheological finishing (MRF) in the fabrication of optical compo-
nents. In MRF, ferrous-laden fluid passes through an electromagnetic field, where 
its viscosity is increased, allowing the creation of a precise and repeatable polish-
ing tool. Single-point diamond turning (SPDT) has also grown in popularity in 
fabricating optical components. It is now routinely used to produce mold inserts 
for polymer lenses, mold inserts for glass molding, and finished optical elements. 
The machining process uses single-crystal diamond cutting tools and nanometer-
precision positioning to generate spherical surface geometries and more complex 
geometries, such as toroids, aspheres, and diffractives.
Optical thin-film coatings technology has advanced in response to require-
ments in diverse markets, including telecommunications, health and medicine, 
biometrics, and defense. Evaporation deposition processes, in which materials are 
deposited by way of a transformation from solid to vapor and back to solid, are 
the most widely used in the optics industry in spite of problems stemming from 
the porosity of coatings and their sensitivity to humidity and thermal conditions. 
Metrology is an important enabling technology in the optics industry. There is an 
old saying, “If you can’t measure it, you can’t make it;” over the last decade, advances 
in interferometry have improved the ability to measure increasingly challenging 
optics, particularly aspheres.53,54,55
APPLICATIONS OF PHOTONICS IN MANUFACTURING
This section discusses photonics-enabled advances in process technologies with 
potentially broad applications in numerous manufacturing industries. As noted 
below, many of these process-technology innovations hold considerable potential 
53  PalDey, S., and S.C. Deevi. 2003. Single layer and multilayer wear resistant coatings of (Ti,Al)N: 
A review. Materials Science and Engineering A 342(1-2):58-79. 
54  Kelly, P.J., and R.D. Arnell. 2000. Magnetron sputtering: A review of recent develop­ments and 
applications. Vacuum 56:159-172.
55  Svedberg, E.B., J. Birch, I. Ivanov, E.P. Munger, and J.E. Sundgren. 1998. Asymmetric interface 
broadening in epitaxial Mo/W (001) superlattices grown by magnetron sputtering. Journal of Vacuum 
Science and Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 16(2):633-638.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
206
to enable the United States to retain manufacturing capability in the face of inten-
sifying international competition.
Photolithography
For the last several decades, photolithography has been the dominant printing 
technology used by integrated circuit (IC) manufacturers, and it is a key factor in 
increasing the transistor density per silicon area and lowering the cost per transistor 
as described by Moore’s law.56 It has played an important role in fabricating high-
volume ICs, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and other microdevices 
and nanodevices. Since the publication of the National Research Council report 
Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century, photolithog-
raphy in IC manufacturing has remained dominant and has continued to achieve 
impressive technical advances.
Photolithography is similar to photography in that both use imaging optics 
and a photosensitive film to record an image. In photolithography, the surface of 
a semiconductor wafer is coated with a light-sensitive polymer known as a pho-
toresist. Light passing through a mask that contains the desired pattern is focused 
on the photoresist-coated wafer. The material properties of a photoresist change 
when it is exposed to light, and the changed material can be selectively removed 
from the wafer surface. The wafer is then chemically treated to engrave (etch) the 
exposure pattern in it. The process is repeated many times with different masks 
to form billions of complicated three-dimensional structures (such as transistors 
and interconnections) on the wafer. A generic lithographic process is schematically 
shown in Figure 7.7.
Photolithography has enabled manufacturers to increase transistor density 
(and thus the complexity of advanced chips) while lowering the cost per transistor; 
historically, the cost per transistor has decreased by close to 30 percent per year. An 
important aspect in the advancement of photolithography is the minimum feature 
size (resolution) provided by the optical projection system that projects the mask 
image onto the wafer. The minimum feature size is generally formulated by the 
Rayleigh scaling equation and is directly related to λ, the exposure wavelength, 
and inversely related to the numerical aperture (NA) of the projection optics, by 
k1, a scaling constant that is a function of the process, the photoresist, the type of 
feature being printed, and other factors. From Rayleigh’s equation, resolution can 
56  Brunner, T.A. 2003. Why optical lithography will live forever. Journal of Vacuum Science and 
Technology B 21(6):2632-2637.

207
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
FIGURE 7.7  Generic schematic diagram of the lithographic process. SOURCE: Bill Wilson. 2007. 
“Photolithography.” Connexions. Available at http://cnx.org/content/m1037/2.10/. Reprinted with 
permission.
be improved by (1) reducing the wavelength of the light source, (2) increasing the 
NA of the lens, and (3) decreasing the value of k1.57
One common approach to reducing the feature size is to reduce the wavelength 
of light. In the early days of photolithography, the mercury arc lamp “G-line” opti-
cal source with a wavelength of 436 nm was used; this resulted in a feature size down 
to about 700 nm. The transition to “I-line” sources at a 365-nm wavelength enabled 
resolution below 400 nm, and the use of KrF excimer lasers at a 248-nm wavelength 
57  Mack, C.A. 2007. Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithography: The Science of Micro­fabrication. 
Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
208
allowed resolution down to 150 nm. Current state-of-the-art lithography technol-
ogy uses light with a 193-nm wavelength to fabricate feature sizes below 32 nm.
Feature size could also be reduced by increasing the NA of the projection 
system. The first projection lithography tools had an NA of 0.16 in 1973, and the 
NA has steadily increased to its current value of 1.35 with the use of immersion 
imaging; note that at a wavelength of 193 nm, water has a refractive index of 1.44 
relative to air and is quite transparent.
Small features can also be achieved by decreasing k1, at least for a single ex-
posure, and this method has been demonstrated with resolution enhancement 
technology (RET).58 RET approaches include optical proximity correction (OPC), 
off-axis illumination (OAI), and phase-shifting masks (PSM). However, in the 
printing of dense patterns of lines and spaces, there is a 0.25 lower limit of k1.
The demise of photolithography was predicted so often that John Sturtevant 
remarked in 1997 that “the end of optical lithography is always 7 years away;” this 
statement has come to be known as Sturtevant’s law.59 Nonetheless, photolithogra-
phy has remained the most desirable technology among IC manufacturers. A main 
reason for this preference has to do with productivity. Over the last several decades, 
lithography tools have progressed to the state-of-the-art production line lithogra-
phy with an exposure wavelength of λ = 193 nm for a feature size of 22 nm.60 Over 
the same period, the cost of a state-of-the-art lithography tool has grown from 
$100,000 to greater than $50 million. Fortunately, such dramatic increases in tool 
cost have been accompanied by equally dramatic increases in tool throughput, so 
the cost of printing a square centimeter of silicon has remained roughly constant.
Continued improvement in resolution while maintaining cost-effectiveness 
cannot be taken for granted. At the 193-nm wavelength, increasing NA above 1.35 is 
a serious challenge and will require the development of higher-index lens materials 
and immersion fluids. Moreover, k1 is nearing its theoretical minimum of 0.25. Pos-
sible approaches to decreasing k1 below 0.25 include the use of double patterning, 
in which the original design is split into two masking layers, each patterned by a 
single exposure. Various approaches have been taken to implement double pat-
58  Brunner, T.A. 2003. Why optical lithography will live forever. Journal of Vacuum Science and 
Technology B 21(6):2632-2637.
59  Mack, C.A. 2007. The future of semiconductor lithography: After optical, what next? Future Fab 
International 23.
60  Sivakumar, S. 2011. EUV lithography: Prospects and challenges. Proceedings of the 2011 16th Asia 
and South Pacific Design Automation Conference. January 25-28, 2011, Yokohama, Japan. 

209
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
terning schemes, for example, litho-etch-litho-etch (LELE), litho-litho-etch (LLE), 
litho-freezing-litho-etch (LFLE), and self-aligned double patterning (SADP).61,62,63
Lowering the wavelength below 193 nm offers the potential for continued prog-
ress in photolithography, but challenges remain. The industry is working diligently 
to enable extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, with a wavelength of 13.5 nm for 
high-volume production of 10-nm resolution by 2015. One of the challenges faced 
by EUV is the light source at the 13.5-nm wavelength. Two types of light sources 
that are being developed to help meet that challenge are laser-produced plasma 
(LPP) sources and discharge-produced plasma (DPP) sources. The LPP sources 
shown by Cymer and Gigaphoton have produced 10-20-W EUV at the intermedi-
ate focus. The DPP sources produced by Xtreme Technologies can project 15 W of 
EUV at the intermediate focus. For comparison, the output of a modern of a 193 
nm laser is as much as 90 W in high-volume production.
Table 7.1 shows the top semiconductor equipment suppliers in 2011; the 
United States has an important but not dominant position. Recently, the Nether-
lands’ Advanced Semiconductor Materials Lithography (ASML) has begun using 
a preproduction EUV tool (NXE:3100) that has shown the ability to print lines 
with a periodicity of 18 nm.64 Using this machine, Imec, a Belgium-based leading 
nanoelectronics research company, expects to improve the technology to pro-
duce 16-nm features by 2013.65 Yet, Intel, the world’s largest semiconductor chip 
manufacturer, is expected to use EUV for 10-nm features and 193-nm immersion 
lithography for its 14-nm features.66
Although lithography has seen significant technical advances in feature-size 
61  Lucas, K., C. Cork, A. Miloslavsky, G. Luk-Pat, L. Barnes, J. Hapli, J. Lewellen, G. Rollins, V. 
Wiaux, and S. Verhaegen. 2008. Interactions of double patterning technology with wafer processing. 
Proceedings of SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering Conference on Optical Micro-
lithography XXI, February 26-29, 2008, San Jose, Calif. Belling­ham, Wash.: The International Society 
for Optical Engineering.
62  Pan, D.Z., J. Yang, K. Yuan, M. Cho, and Y. Ban. 2009. Layout optimizations for double patterning 
lithography. Proceedings of IEEE 8th International on Application Specific Inte­grated Circuit (ASIC), 
October 20-23, 2009, Changsha, Hunan, China.
63  Hori, M., T. Nagai, A. Nakamura, T. Abe, G. Wakamatsu, T. Kakizawa, Y. Anno, M. Sugiura, S. 
Kusumoto, Y. Yamaguchi, and T. Shimokawa. 2008. Proceedings of SPIE—The International Society 
for Optical Engineering Conference on Advances in Resist Materials and Processing Technology XXV, 
February 25-27, 2008, San Jose, Calif. Bellingham, Wash.: The International Society for Optical 
Engineering.
64  Advanced Semiconductor Materials Lithography. 2012. “EUV Questions and answers.” Available 
at http://www.asml.com/asml/show.do?ctx=41905&rid=41906. Accessed June 5, 2012.
65  Advanced Semiconductor Materials Lithography. 2012. “EUV Questions and answers.” Available 
at http://www.asml.com/asml/show.do?ctx=41905&rid=41906. Accessed June 5, 2012.
66  LaPedus, M. 2011. “Intel EUV late for 10-nm milestone.” EETimes. Available at http://www.
eetimes.com/electronics-news/4213628/Intel—EUV-misses-10-nm-milestone. Ac­cessed August 3, 
2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
210
reduction,67 there remain several challenges, including (1) brighter EUV light 
sources to enable high throughput and low per wafer cost, (2) photoresists that can 
operate at low exposure doses while providing both high resolution and small line-
edge roughness, (3) the ability to manufacture and inspect defect-free masks at the 
smaller resolutions, and (4) overcoming line-edge roughness, which is caused by 
photon and chemical stochastic effects that begin to dominate at feature sizes under 
30 nm and might be mitigated by directed self-assembly of molecules.68,69 However, 
the economic issues are also significant. For example, it is possible to make smaller 
features but not necessarily while lowering the manufacturing cost per transistor. 
Thus, efforts to improve resolution while maintaining cost-effectiveness are of 
great interest. It is noted that even greater resolution enhancements are possible 
in the future if soft x-ray sources (wavelengths shorter than EUV) with reasonable 
brightness and cost would be available.
67  Brueck, S.R.J. 2005. Optical and interferometric lithography—Nanotechnology en­ablers. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE 93(10):1704-1721.
68  Mack, C.A. 2006. Field Guide to Optical Lithography. Bellingham, Wash.: SPIE Press.
69  Galatsis, K., K.L. Wang, M. Ozkan, C.S. Ozkan, Y. Huang, J.P. Chang, H.G. Mon­bouquette, Y. 
Chen, P. Nealey, and Y. Botros. 2010. Patterning and templating for nano­electronics. Advanced Ma-
terials 22(6):769-778.
TABLE 7.1  Top Semiconductor Equipment Suppliers in 2011
2011 
Rank
Area of the World
Company Name
2011 Sales ($ Millions; 
2011 exchange rates)
1
Europe
ASML
7,877.1
2
North America
Applied Materialsa
7,437.8
3
Japan
Tokyo Electron
6,203.3
4
North America
KLA-Tencor
3,106.2
5
North America
Lam Research
2,804.1
6
Japan
Dainippon Screen Mfg. Co.
2,104.9
7
Japan
Nikon Corporation
1,645.5
8
Japan
Advantestb
1,446.7
9
Europe
ASM International
1,443.0
10
North America
Novellus Systems
1,318.7
11
Japan
Hitachi High-Technologies
1,138.7
12
North America
Teradyne
1,106.2
13
North America
Varian Semiconductor Equipmentc
1,096.3
14
Japan
Hitachi Kokusai Electric
838.4
15
North America
Kulicke and Soffa
780.9
Total, Top 15
40,347.7
aApplied Materials includes Varian revenues for November 1 to December 31, 2011.
bAdvantest includes Verigy’s revenues from July 1 to December 31, 2011.
cVarian includes revenue as an independent company from January 1 to October 31, 2011.
SOURCE: Ha, P., and R. Puhakka. 2012. “2011 Top Semiconductor Equipment Suppliers.” VLSIresearch. News 
release. Available at https://www.vlsiresearch.com/public/cms_pdf_upload/706001v1.0.htm.

211
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
Lasers in Manufacturing
Since the first carbon dioxide (CO2) laser demonstrations in the 1960s, the 
use of laser systems in manufacturing has grown rapidly. Expanded applications 
of lasers throughout manufacturing have been driven by continual innovation in 
this technology. Laser systems have been transformed from tools applicable only 
to highly specialized processes to commonplace tools that are used extensively in 
shop floor operations, such as cutting, drilling, piercing, and welding. In 2011, 
lasers used to process materials, including applications in shop floor operations, 
accounted for 26 percent of the lasers in use. (See Figure 7.8.) Many of these lasers 
were CO2 lasers. Fiber lasers, however, are replacing CO2 lasers in some applica-
tions, in part because of their superior operating economics, low upfront cost, high 
energy efficiency, and lower maintenance cost. The laser marking industry is one 
of the largest users of fiber lasers.
Precision lasers that are used to process materials by cutting, welding, drill-
ing, and piercing can provide advantages over conventional processes, including 
improvements in the ability to hold tight tolerances, reduction in downtime as-
sociated with setups, reduction in part cleaning and deburring, and reduction in 
distortion of parts during processing. Those attributes lend themselves well to 
complex machining operations. (See Figure 7.9.) Lasers not only provide the ability 
to cut materials but provide the ability to produce high-quality components and 
assemblies precisely and repeatedly.
Lasers have done much to enable micromachining. In particular, solid-state 
and excimer lasers have been deployed to produce microstructures that would 
have been either impossible to produce or too costly with conventional machin-
FIGURE 7.8  Review of lasers by application by sales, 2011. SOURCE: Courtesy of Strategies Unlimited 
and Laser Focus World (2012).
Materials 
Processing
26%
Excimer 
Lithography
11%
Communication
30%
Data Storage
11%
Medical & 
Aesthetic
7%
Military & R&D
6%
Instruments & 
Sensors
4%
Printing
1%
Displays & 
Pointers
0%
Pumps 
4%

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
212
ing processes. Diode-pumped solid-state lasers operating in the near infrared (IR) 
and excimer lasers operating in the UV to the near IR are most frequently used. 
Laser selection is a function of a variety of factors, including process scalability, the 
characteristics of the materials being machined, and operating cost. An important 
feature of micromachining lasers is their high-pulsed, non-continuous output, 
with pulse repetition rates that range from a few hertz to several hundred hertz and 
pulse durations between a few picoseconds and microseconds. The nature of the 
pulsing aids in the management of the heat load in the material being machined. 
Figure 7.10 shows slots cut into in stainless steel as small at 75 µm in width.
ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING
“Additive manufacturing,” three-dimensional printing, describes a group of 
technologies that are used to create parts by building up layers to, in effect, “grow 
a part.” Additive processes are fundamentally different from traditional subtractive 
processes in which material is removed from a block to create a part. One of the 
big advantages of additive processes is that the amount of waste material is greatly 
minimized because only as much source material as is needed is used to build the 
part. First developed in the mid-1980s, additive manufacturing has grown in ac-
FIGURE 7.9  Laser cutting is used to produce exact components. SOURCE: Image by Bystronic.

213
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
ceptance and practice to the point that today it is an effective development and shop 
floor tool. The improvements in performance and cost-competitiveness associated 
with additive manufacturing reflect advances in a number of enabling technologies, 
many of which are based on photonics.
Although not yet a complete replacement for conventional machining or 
fab­ri­ca­tion processes, additive manufacturing has several key advantages. Most 
notable of the advantages are the short time from computer-aided design (CAD) 
file to “part complete” and the cost-effectiveness of low-volume production, which 
reflect the elimination of time to design and produce custom tools or fixtures. 
Low-volume cost-effectiveness comes from the elimination of high-cost capital 
tools that would be required to be leveraged over the production of a low number 
of parts.
FIGURE 7.10  Slots cut into stainless steel are 75 µm wide. It should be pointed out that lasers are 
going to be needed in the future not only for machining but for interferometry for precision manu-
facturing. Laser interferometry is already being used in IC manufacturing for controlling etching and 
deposition on a nanometer scale and is going to be even more important in future high-resolution 
three-dimensional additive manufacturing. SOURCE: Courtesy of Potomac Photonics.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
214
Combined advances in three-dimensional design tools, CNC technologies, 
and lasers have enabled a steady growth in additive-manufacturing capability. 
Whereas in the past the technology was confined to simple parts for experimental 
purposes, today complex geometries with a high degree of precision are produced 
in the laboratory and on the shop floor. The improved capability leveraged with 
the advantages described earlier makes additive manufacturing a good fit for a 
class of products that can be produced effectively in the United States. They are 
prototypes, products with a high degree of customization and complexity, and 
products produced in low volume.
The following are brief descriptions of a few of the additive-manufacturing 
processes that illustrate the use of laser technology to produce parts.
Stereolithography
In contrast with photolithography, stereolithography is used in larger-scale 
products. Developed in 1988, it was the first of the rapid prototyping processes. 
As shown in Figure 7.11, the stereolithographic process deposits layers of approxi-
mately 0.002-0.003 in. thick and uses a UV laser to cure the resin only where the 
FIGURE 7.11  Stereolithography schematic. SOURCE: Image by Usdabhade.

215
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
material is needed for the part. The laser wavelength and power can vary between 
manufacturers but is approximately 325 nm from a low-power He-Cd source. The 
part is built up in layers until the final geometry is completed.
On completion of the layering process, the part is subjected to high-intensity 
UV light for the postcuring process, which fully hardens the resin. A chess piece 
fabricated with stereolithography is shown in Figure 7.12.
Selective Laser Sintering
Selective laser sintering (SLS) was developed in the mid-1980s and is capable of 
producing parts from thermoplastics, ceramics, or metals. Like stereolithography, 
SLS, shown in Figure 7.13, is a layering process that builds a part from a powder 
based on a three-dimensional CAD model. In the SLS process, a laser fuses the 
layers of powder in localized areas to create the final part geometry. Although 
systems vary between manufacturers, the laser used is approximately a 50-W CO2 
laser. The process can yield very accurate parts with tolerances of ±0.05-0.25 mm. 
Components fabricated with SLS require no postprocessing. Figure 7.14 shows a 
replica of a violin produced with the SLS process.
FIGURE 7.12  A stereolithographed chess piece. SOURCE: Courtesy of Potomac Photonics.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
216
FIGURE 7.13  Selective laser sintering (SLS) schematic. SOURCE: Image by Materialgeeza.
FIGURE 7.14  Martha Cohen, of the Hochschule für Musik und Theater, München, plays a replica of a 
Stradivarius violin fabricated with SLS during the Kleine Zukunftsmusik der Photonik event. SOURCE: 
Erik Svedberg, National Research Council.

217
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
Laser Engineered Net Shaping
Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS™) was developed in the mid-1990s 
at the Sandia National Laboratories. The process, shown in Figure 7.15, uses a 
neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser operating at 500-600 
W that is enclosed in an argon gas environment. The laser creates a molten pool 
into which powdered metal is injected. Parts have been produced from stainless-
steel alloys, nickel-based alloys, tool-steel alloys, titanium alloys, and other specialty 
materials, including composites. As in other additive-manufacturing processes, 
parts originate from three-dimensional CAD models, and material is built up in 
layers to create the final part. The significant difference between LENS and other 
additive processes is that the parts obtain the same density as the metal used to 
fabricate them. Figure 7.16 shows a tool produced with the LENS process.
FIGURE 7.15  Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS™) process schematic. SOURCE: Worldwide Guide 
to Rapid Prototyping Website, © Copyright Castle Island Co., all rights reserved. Available at http://
www.additive3d.com/len_int.htm. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
218
A common opportunity exists among these techniques to increase the preci-
sion of three-dimensional manufacturing. If shorter-wavelength lasers and imag-
ing were available, it would be possible to reduce the scale of the smallest-possible 
three-dimensional voxel (a three-dimensional pixel).
In general, one important part of additive manufacturing is an increased em-
phasis on in situ metrology that uses coherent optics (interference) for feedback 
and control, especially when the dimensions of parts shrink. Pattern-placement 
metrology, used ordinarily for lithographic purposes, can rely on phase-coherent 
fiducial gratings patterned by interference lithography.70 Potential uses include 
measuring process-induced distortions in substrates, patterning distortions in 
pattern-mastering systems, and measuring field distortions and alignment errors 
in steppers and scanners. For example, spatial-phase-locked electron-beam lithog-
raphy has been implemented to correct pattern-placement errors at the nanometer 
level.71
70  Schattenburg, M.L., C. Chen, P.N. Everett, J. Ferrera, P. Konkola, and H.I Smith. 1999. Sub-100 
nm metrology using interferometrically produced fiducials. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology 
B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures 17(6):2692-2697.
71  Hastings, J.T., F. Zhang, and H.I. Smith. 2003. Nanometer-level stitching in raster-scanning 
electron-beam lithography using spatial-phase locking. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B: 
Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures 21(6):2650-2656.
FIGURE 7.16  H13 tooling created with LENS™ process. SOURCE: Courtesy of Sandia National 
Laboratories.

219
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
PHOTONICS AND THE FUTURE OF U.S. MANUFACTURING
As noted earlier, U.S.-based manufacturing now accounts for a smaller share 
of global manufacturing value added than 20 years ago. The drive for competitive-
ness and increased shareholder value has caused corporations in nearly every area 
of photonics to search for alternative manufacturing locations. The exception may 
be products that have substantial defense-related markets and applications and 
that therefore are subject to controls over their export (International Traffic in 
Arms Regulations, ITAR). But government licensing has allowed “offshoring” for 
some components in this product field as well. During the same period, however, 
some components continue to be manufactured in the United States and have 
remained competitive. What distinguishes the components and final assemblies 
whose production has remained in the United States from those now produced 
mainly offshore?
A critical factor affecting the location of production is volume. Typically, high-
volume production operations are more sensitive to labor and capital cost differ-
entials, and these activities have been among the most likely to move offshore from 
the United States in photonics and other high-technology products. In photonics, 
as in other high-technology industries, high-volume production operations are 
most common in consumer products, and low-volume operations range from the 
production of test lots to the manufacture of specialized systems.
Advances in optical materials and processing have enabled the manufacture of 
precision optical components for very low cost with sufficient volume to amortize 
the required tooling. One example is the mass production of molded polymer 
aspheres. Their unit costs can be very low as long as the volume is sufficiently high. 
Low-volume production of these components, however, tends to be expensive 
because of the large amounts of labor and time required to manufacture and test 
precision tools. Even when advanced capabilities are used in a highly automated 
manufacturing process, the cost of the equipment coupled with low volume drives 
production costs up significantly. Recent advances in several manufacturing capa-
bilities, such as different methods of additive manufacturing, hold out considerable 
promise for the development of low-cost machines capable of providing precision 
optics, with surface figures not restricted to the narrow range of surfaces possible 
with current grinding and finishing techniques. In addition to providing a new set 
of potential optical surface figures and the associated capabilities, these advances 
may enable low-cost precision optics even for low-volume applications and thereby 
remove much of the benefit of moving optics manufacturing overseas by minimiz-
ing the impact of labor costs on the optics. Photonics-enabled advances in manu-
facturing technology thus could slow the erosion, or perhaps support renewed 
growth, in U.S.-based manufacturing activity.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
220
High-Volume Products
High-volume products, particularly consumer retail products, generally have 
cost as a high priority and tend to use manufacturing processes focused on pro-
duction cost minimization. Manufacturing processes that minimize labor and 
infrastructure costs are preferred. U.S. manufacturers have, over the years, had 
difficulty in competing in the high-volume market and have seen much of this 
work move offshore. That move has been driven in large part by the cost of labor 
in the United States, which is reflected in raw materials, operations, and overhead. 
In an effort to compete in at least a portion of the high-volume market (the 
lower-volume portion of the high-volume market), U.S. manufacturers have used 
a variety of strategies. For example, manufacturers have changed from commodity 
components and moved toward precision components and subassemblies in their 
U.S.-based operations. The high-volume sector tends to be very cost-sensitive, but 
the lower-volume end of this sector is somewhat less so.
In addition to focusing on products that are less cost-sensitive, manufactur-
ers have reduced the amount of direct labor in their U.S.-based manufacturing 
processes. In optics grinding and polishing operations, such as lens centering, use 
of CNC equipment capable of running unattended, as shown in Figure 7.17, has 
FIGURE 7.17  Automated lens handling. SOURCE: Courtesy of Rochester Precision Optics.

221
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
helped to reduce the amount of labor at the component level. In polymer lens 
molding, the use of automation to remove parts from molds, degate those parts, 
and the use of molds with higher cavitation, has reduced per part cost and im-
proved competitiveness. Those cost-saving strategies can be capital-intensive, and 
manufacturers must evaluate the associated economics case by case. The purchase, 
installation, and maintenance costs of labor-saving equipment must be offset by 
actual labor savings to justify expenditures.
Low-Volume Products
Low-volume products are generally high-precision and complex or subject 
to export restrictions linked to national security concerns, as in the case of ITAR. 
ITAR thus has offsetting effects on the location of innovation and production for 
U.S. firms. On the one hand, restrictions on export of ITAR-controlled products 
may lead U.S. firms to site their self-financed product development activities for 
these products offshore to avoid the restrictions; at least some types of innovation 
may move offshore from the United States as a result of ITAR. On the other hand, 
the production of ITAR-controlled products, especially products based on R&D 
that draw on defense-funded programs or products that are sold in large part to 
federal agencies, may be less likely to move offshore because of ITAR restrictions on 
procurement of such products from foreign producers or foreign production sites.
Products not subject to ITAR in the low-volume sector are often in early-stage 
development and require prototypes or are products in the medical industry, such 
as complex Lasik surgery equipment. A common characteristic of these products 
is the requirement for tightly specified precision optical components; emphasis is 
placed on consistently and reliably satisfying difficult specifications. Although cost 
is always an important element with all products, it often falls behind the require-
ment for precision and reliability.
U.S. manufacturers have excelled in the production of low-volume, high-
precision optical components and devices. Manufacturers have successfully pushed 
legacy technologies and adopted newer technologies to satisfy the requirements of 
this segment. Precision CNC equipment capable of producing components repeat-
edly and accurately is in wide use. Assembly processes that often require active 
alignment are used to enable compliance with the requirement for tight tolerances. 
Complex precision metrology is used for testing components and assemblies to 
ensure that specifications are met.
THE U.S. MANUFACTURING WORKFORCE
It is the judgment of this committee that advances in photonics provide 
clear potential for growth in U.S.-based manufacturing by (1) expanding the ap-

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
222
plications of photonics throughout manufacturing and thereby improving the 
cost-competitiveness of processes used to produce high-volume products, (2) 
accelerating the commercial exploitation of new photonics-based technological 
opportunities, and (3) improving the cost-competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing 
of photonics products and components.
Realizing that potential, however, requires a well-trained manufacturing work-
force that includes both advanced-degree holders and skilled operators and crafts-
people. As was discussed in previous chapters, because of the nature of photonics 
as a technology rather than an industry on which data are collected by U.S. gov-
ernment statistical agencies, the committee was not able to assemble estimates of 
current employment in photonics-enabled production activity, nor was it able to 
forecast growth for various occupations within this sector.72 The collection and 
reporting of better employment data in photonics will be important for any future 
federal initiative in this field.
Nonetheless, it is the judgment of the committee that U.S. holders of ad-
vanced degrees from university-based programs in photonics, optics, and related 
disciplines too often pursue careers in R&D or academia rather than pursue op-
portunities in design or manufacturing within industry. It is important that U.S. 
firms develop more attractive career paths for advanced-degree holders to pursue 
careers in photonics manufacturing and in the applications of photonics technolo-
gies throughout manufacturing.
Some committee members cited the example of the U.S. semiconductor indus-
try as one that has developed attractive employment opportunities in manufactur-
ing for engineering and science advanced-degree holders. That industry seems to 
have experienced fewer problems in recruiting top graduates into manufacturing 
process development, perhaps because leading firms recognize its significance and 
are willing to make manufacturing jobs attractive by acknowledging that manu-
facturing is a key ingredient in their competitive advantage.
Similarly, the committee concluded that improvements in technical educa-
tion are needed to increase the quality of skilled blue-collar workers in optics 
and photonics. Although U.S. community colleges provide abundant opportuni-
ties for students to pursue technical education, there are fewer opportunities for 
apprenticeship-based training in the U.S. optics industry than in similar industries 
72  Although Chapter 2 presents rough estimates of employment in U.S. firms that are active in pho-
tonics, based on their membership in professional or trade organizations, the committee notes in that 
discussion that such estimates do not represent measures of “photonics-dependent” employment, nor 
do they enable an analysis of employment prospects or current shortages of skilled workers, scientists, 
or engineers in photonics-related production or applications. Chapter 4 discusses concerns about the 
effects of impending retirements and the small pool of U.S. nationals with advanced degrees available 
for employment in defense-related production and R&D activities, although here, too, precise data 
on the implications of these trends for photonics applications are lacking. 

223
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
in Germany. The difficulties of expanding a skilled technical workforce in the 
United States are considerably exacerbated by the declining performance of U.S. 
primary and secondary education.73,74 It is, of course, true that weaknesses in the 
quality and quantity of the skilled blue-collar workforce in the United States can 
be partially compensated for by expanded investment in automation. But even the 
intelligent deployment of more highly automated manufacturing processes will be 
hampered by weaknesses in the skilled workforce in U.S. manufacturing.
FINDINGS
Finding:  Production of many photonics applications—such as TFT displays, solar 
modules, and optoelectronic components for communications systems, most of 
which were first developed and commercialized by U.S. firms in the U.S. econ-
omy—now is dominated by foreign production sites, even when these production 
activities are still controlled by U.S.-based firms. The effects of this offshore move-
ment of manufacturing on innovation in photonics, however, vary considerably 
among different sectors and technologies within photonics. Indeed, the United 
States remains the leading source of USPTO patents in two key sectors of photon-
ics (solar and communications components) and is the leader in potential next-
generation technologies, such as flexible displays, “paint-on” and other thin-film 
solar cells, and monolithically integrated optoelectronic devices.
Key Finding:  To enable the United States to be productive in manufacturing pho-
tonics goods, a capable and fully trained workforce must exist at all levels, includ-
ing shop floor associates, technicians, and engineers. Because photonics is not yet 
recognized as an industry and data are not tracked in a way that facilitates analysis, 
it is difficult to evaluate the extent of personnel shortages in photonics manufactur-
ing and in applications of photonics elsewhere in the manufacturing industry in 
general. It seems that it would be beneficial if industry and government did more 
to increase training and employment opportunities in photonics manufacturing.
Key Finding:  Additive manufacturing, which uses significant optics and photonics 
technologies, has become important in manufacturing, and its position is expected 
to increase. Additive manufacturing tends to require low labor use and is therefore 
advantageous in regions with high labor costs, such as the United States.
73  National Research Council. 2010. Standards for K-12 Engineering Education? Wash­ington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press. 
74  National Research Council. 2011. Successful STEM Education: A Workshop Summary. Washing-
ton, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
224
RECOMMENDATIONS AND GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTION
Key Recommendation:  The United States should aggressively develop additive-
manufacturing technology and implementation.
Current developments in the area of lower-volume, high-end manufacturing 
include, for example, three-dimensional printing, also called additive manufactur-
ing. With continued improvements in manufacturing tolerances and surface finish, 
additive manufacturing has the potential for substantial growth. The technology 
also has the potential to allow three-dimensional printing near the end user no 
matter where the design is done.
Key Recommendation:  The U.S. government, in concert with industry and aca-
demia, should develop soft x-ray light sources and imaging for lithography and 
three-dimensional manufacturing.
Advances in table-top sources for soft x rays will have a profound impact on 
lithography and optically based manufacturing. Therefore, investment in these 
fields should increase to capture intellectual property and maintain a leadership 
role for these applications. The committee views development of soft x-ray light 
sources and imaging as an appropriate field for expanded federal R&D funding 
under the sponsorship of a national photonics initiative undertaken with the ad-
vice and financial support of U.S. industry. This chapter indicates the need for an 
order-of-magnitude or greater increase in resolution in manufacturing.
The above two key recommendations help to inform the fifth and last grand 
challenge question:
5.	 How can the U.S. optics and photonics community develop optical sources 
and imaging tools to support an order of magnitude or more of increased 
resolution in manufacturing?
Meeting this grand challenge could facilitate a decrease in design rules for 
lithography, as well as providing the ability to do closed-loop, automated manufac-
turing of optical elements in three dimensions. Extreme ultraviolet is a challenging 
technology to develop, but it is needed in order to meet future lithography needs. 
The next step beyond EUV is to move to soft x rays. Also, the limitations in three-
dimensional resolution on laser sintering for three-dimensional manufacturing are 
based on the wavelength of the lasers used. Shorter wavelengths will move the state 
of the art to allow more precise additive manufacturing that could eventually lead 
to three-dimensional printing of optical elements.

225
A d v a n c e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
Recommendation:  Industry and public (both federal and state) sources should ex-
pand financial support for the training of skilled workers in photonics production 
and in applications of photonics-based technologies in manufacturing. The pho-
tonics industry also should enhance incentives for holders of advanced degrees in 
photonics, optics, physics, and related fields to pursue employment opportunities 
in manufacturing. One potential vehicle for such expanded support and for needed 
improvements in data collection on photonics employment trends at all levels is 
the federal initiative in photonics discussed in the recommendations of Chapter 2.

226
8
Advanced Photonic 
Measurements and Applications
INTRODUCTION
Advances in sensing, imaging, and metrology over the last decade have been 
critically dependent on optics and photonics, and precision sensing has moved 
progressively to optically based measurements. Optical techniques are already at the 
core of some of the most precise measurements. For example, the NIST-F1 cesium 
time standard in use in the United States since 1998, around the time of the publi-
cation of the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) report Harnessing Light: Optical 
Science and Engineering for the 21st Century,1 exploits laser cooling of cesium atoms, 
optical monitoring of fluorescence, and various other optical techniques to lock in 
the microwave frequency of the atomic clock, and a second generation of such a 
system is under construction.2 This chapter describes the advances made in these 
technologies since 1997.
Precision metrology is important for advances in the following: fundamental 
research that relies on precision measurements, communication that relies on 
precision timing for high data rates and long ranges, and the Global Positioning 
System (GPS), which relies on precision timing. GPS devices were just becoming 
commercially available in 1998, and now they are in nearly every cell phone. The 
advent of octave-spanning optical frequency combs allows a small table-top appa-
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2  Jefferts, S.R., T.P. Heavner, T.E. Parker, and J.H. Shirley. 2007. NIST cesium fountains—Current 
status and future prospects. Acta Physica Polonica A 112(5):759-767.

227
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
ratus to provide a direct link between radio frequency (RF) and optical standards, 
which took several rooms to perform at only a few laboratories around the world 
a decade ago. Now this capability is commercially available. Since the NRC’s 1998 
study, miniature atomic clocks on a chip have been developed to provide precise 
local measurements. Quantum cascade lasers on the market extend the range of 
chip-scale laser sources for near and remote sensing applications into the middle-
infrared wavelength range of the electromagnetic spectrum (3-30 μm). The field of 
terahertz imaging has matured to the point of deployable systems in airports and 
other points of entry into our nation for the secure and efficient passage of trade 
goods. New construction—such as bridges, tunnels, dams, skyscrapers, pipelines, 
railroad tracks, and power plants—and renovation of civilian and military infra-
structure around the world routinely have many kinds of active and passive optical 
sensors (for example, of vibration, temperature, strain, displacement, and cracks) 
embedded for the real-time monitoring of operation and for the forecasting of 
hazardous conditions before disaster strikes. Optical sensors are also common in 
cars, trucks, airplanes, and ships.
Optics and photonics advances have enabled advances in precision manufac-
turing, which have enabled further improved sensors. Low-cost, high-resolution 
cameras in cell phones now make advanced digital imaging available to a substan-
tial fraction of the world’s population with capabilities comparable with the best 
high-end cameras of a decade ago. Those components will enable a new wave of 
secondary niche markets that have the potential to have a significant impact on 
the U.S. economy and job pool. This broad growth of optical sensing and metrol-
ogy—from the most precise scientific applications to universal consumer devices—
makes the next decade an exciting time for optics and photonics in sensing and 
measurement, in research, and in consumer and industrial applications and offers 
significant opportunities for U.S. leadership.
IMPACT OF OPTICS AND PHOTONICS ON 
SENSING, IMAGING, AND METROLOGY
Advanced photonic measurements and applications have had a profound im­
pact on our daily lives. For example, GPS has had a significant impact on naviga-
tion. In the late 1990s, consumer GPS devices were only beginning to enter the 
market. Now this capability is a commonplace consumer item found in cell phones, 
car navigation equipment, and even pet identification tags. GPS relies on preci-
sion timing to enable high-resolution positioning, which also enables high data 
rates and long-range communications. That timing is enabled by several advances 
in photonics, such as compact atomic clocks on a chip (see Figure 8.1). Sensing 
and metrology have enabled a new level of integrated-circuit (IC) manufacturing, 
which has driven the entire consumer electronics industry. Those advances have 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
228
also enabled the incorporation of low-cost, high-resolution imaging sensors in a 
broad range of consumer devices (such as cell phones and tablets). The prolifera-
tion of low-cost sensors connected by a high-bandwidth data transfer capability 
will enable the rapid growth of applications that would not have been economically 
viable without this large technology base. One example will be low-cost medical 
sensing devices that leverage consumer electronics components.
Since the NRC’s 1998 study, advances in octave-spanning optical combs have 
enabled a small table-top apparatus that provides a direct link between RF and 
optical frequency and time standards—apparatus that used to take several rooms 
full of specialized equipment. Such advances have narrowed the gap in measure-
ment capabilities between premium laboratories with specialized equipment and 
those with modest funding, and this will be a game changer in advancing both 
basic and applied research.
Photonic measurement and application advances have enabled improvements 
FIGURE 8.1  Schematic (left) and photograph (right) of a microfabricated atomic clock. The total volume of the 
device is less than 1 cm3, making it practical for use in handheld, battery-powered electronics. (See source for 
detailed image labels.) SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Knappe, S., L. Liew, V. Shah, P. Schwindt, J. 
Moreland, L. Hollberg, and J. Kitching. 2004. A microfabricated atomic clock. Applied Physics Letters 85:1460.

229
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
in manufacturing (for example, in lithography, machining, cutting, and welding), 
which have provided improved devices that are used to make improved sensors. 
That spiral threading of improvements feeds itself. Although the United States 
tends not to compete well in high-volume manufacturing, there is now a market 
opportunity for leveraging the application of these improved capabilities, as in 
the examples above, from consumer devices to address lower-volume niche sensor 
markets.
There has been a steady progression from RF to optically based sensing, which 
has advanced significantly since the Harnessing Light appeared in 1998. One ex-
ample is in synthetic aperture imaging. Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) has been 
used since the 1950s; however, only in the last decade have advances in photonics 
enabled simultaneously agile and stable optical sources that have made SAR viable 
at optical wavelengths. The move to optically based sensing is partially due to the 
potential for improved resolution made possible by the much shorter wavelength. 
However, in many systems the resolution requirements are modest. In those cases, 
the primary motivations are to achieve easily interpreted imaging and improve il-
lumination efficiency. The shorter wavelength enables a smaller illumination area 
because of diffraction, and the reflectivity at optical wavelengths closely matches 
what we are accustomed to viewing with our eyes. In contrast, typical SAR images 
require significant training for interpreting the resulting data.
Since the NRC’s 1998 study, there have been significant advances in emitter 
and detector materials for practical sources and sensors at new wavelengths. One 
example is the substantially improved capability at wavelengths near 2 µm, which 
is important for atmospheric research and military sensing. Significant advances 
in devices have also enabled photon-counting detectors to be extended to Geiger-
mode detector arrays and to photon-number-resolving Geiger-mode detectors. 
Such advanced photon-counting techniques need to be expanded not only to 
higher count rates but to exploitation of novel quantum states of light in advanced 
optical sensors that are likely to come onto the horizon in the next decade or so.3,4,5 
Moreover, current research will potentially provide a true linear-mode single-
photon detector that will open new doors for sensing, imaging, and metrology.
3  An example is the planned incorporation of squeezed quantum states of light in the advanced 
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). Johnston, Hamish. 2008. Prototype 
gravitational-wave detector uses squeezed light. Physics World. Available at http://physicsworld.com/
cws/article/news/33755. Accessed August 1, 2012.
4  More information on the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is avail-
able at http://www.ligo.caltech.edu/. Accessed August 1, 2012.
5  More information is available at LIGO Scientific Cooperation, http://www.ligo.org/. Accessed 
August 1, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
230
TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
Since the issuance of Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 
21st Century 14 years ago,6 the role of optics in advanced photonic measurements 
and applications has undergone a revolution. New fields have blossomed, such as 
the advent of carrier-envelope mode locking (which earned the 2005 Nobel Prize 
in physics for John L. Hall and Theodor W. Hänsch),7 which enables highly coher-
ent pulse trains and precisely spaced lines of optical frequency (about 1 cycle per 
second, 1 Hz) that span more than an octave in spectrum from middle-infrared to 
deep blue. That enables a direct link between RF and optical standards in a small 
table-top apparatus; such precision makes possible extremely precise spectroscopy 
for metrological applications, which would have been impossible when Harness-
ing Light was published. Moreover, the availability of mass-market optical imagers 
(such as fairly high-resolution cell phone cameras) is making possible personalized 
sensing and imaging applications. Such applications are likely to be not only afford-
able but highly precise in sensitivity and resolution because of the tight linking that 
exists between the optics and the sophisticated onboard electronic signal process-
ing tools. We have also seen significant new technological opportunities emerge as 
nanotechnology has increasingly enabled new kinds of optical and optoelectronic 
structures, some without precedent in the classical optical world. Nanophotonic 
structures that are patterned or fabricated on sub-wavelength scales open new or 
enhanced functions for almost any application in which tailoring the properties 
of light is important.
While the new scientific developments are breathtaking and will continue to 
spawn new directions in advanced photonic measurements and applications in 
laboratories worldwide, it is the category of transitioning to mass-market devices 
that might have a much greater impact on the economy and people’s daily qual-
ity of life. Imagine an optics-enabled attachment to one’s cell phone that allows 
monitoring of blood glucose by simply inserting a finger into an orifice in the 
attachment, thereby avoiding pricking one’s finger several times a day. What if the 
same attachment had sensing elements that recorded other vital signs at the same 
time, to keep track of the user’s general well-being and issue an early warning when 
a trend in some vital measure was spotted?
Much has happened in science in the years since Harnessing Light appeared. 
Many scientific breakthroughs that were in their infancy in 1998 have matured, 
6  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
7  More information on the Nobel Prize is available at http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
physics/laureates/2005/. Accessed August 18, 2011.

231
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
have penetrated the marketplace, and are having an impact on our lives.8 Of course, 
many other breakthroughs are just beginning to be understood. The following are 
some the exciting areas of science and technology that are being pursued aggres-
sively today:
•	 Development of coherent sensing and imaging techniques;
•	 Emergence of highly coherent optical pulse trains (carrier-envelope mode 
locking made possible by highly nonlinear and novel microstructure optical 
fibers);
•	 Development of attosecond pulse trains by means of high-harmonic 
generation;
•	 Table-top availability of extreme intensities by means of chirped pulse 
amplification;
•	 Terahertz and middle-infrared sources of radiation (for example, quantum-
cascade lasers);
•	 High-power fiber lasers;
•	 Advances in non-linear optics, quasi-phase matching, photonic bandgap 
fibers, and magneto-optics;
•	 Nano optics and plasmonics, negative index materials, and transformation 
optics;
•	 Advances in controlled generation of quantum light states and their ma-
nipulation and detection;
•	 Advances in detector technologies, wider wavelength coverage, pixel count, 
quantum limited operation, and single-photon and photon-number re-
solved counting;
•	 Advances in adaptive optical techniques, guide stars, deformable mirrors, 
and turbulence control; and
•	 Computational imaging and sensing.
Some of these areas are expected to mature technologically and lead to new 
applications that will penetrate the marketplace or make existing applications work 
better in the coming years. The next section presents a few of the major advances 
with an eye toward the technologies that might have the most impact on society 
in the future.
It should be noted that the list of scientific advances above only briefly touches 
on subjects pertaining to quantum information science and technology. Light plays 
8  Optical coherence tomography is one example. More information is available at Optical Coher-
ence Tomography News, http://www.octnews.org/. Accessed October 26, 2011. The ubiquitous social 
networking enabled by massive wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) optical communications 
is another example.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
232
an important role in almost all implementations of quantum processing, not just 
quantum communications and the so-called linear-optics paradigm of quantum 
computing. Those subjects are aptly covered in the National Research Council re-
port Controlling the Quantum World: The Science of Atoms, Molecules, and Photons.9 
In a similar vein, scientific advances in astronomy are only briefly touched on where 
adaptive optics and photon-counting arrays are playing a transformative role in 
Earth-based telescopes and photon-counting arrays are likely to play a similar role 
in space-based telescopes, such as the James Webb Space Telescope.10 The focus of 
this chapter is the advances that may have direct applications in sensing, imaging, 
and metrology systems.
CHANGES SINCE HARNESSING LIGHT
There have been significant changes in advanced photonic measurements and 
applications since the publication of Harnessing Light.11 The changes have created 
new capabilities, improved the resolution and precision of measurements, and 
provided capabilities to modest facilities that were previously available in only a few 
locations around the world. Some of the significant changes are highlighted here.
Changes in SI Definitions
Around the time that Harnessing Light was published, the Système Interna-
tional (SI, or International System of Units) definition of the second was changed 
from the 1967 definition—the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation 
corresponding to the transition between the hyperfine levels of a cesium-133 
atom—to include the stipulation of ground state at a temperature of 0 K. The 
change is made practical by the extremely low temperature that is available from 
the use of optical cooling of collections of cesium atoms to temperatures as low as 
1.3 µK. Combined with the 1983 change in the definition of the meter (defined as 
the path traveled by light in vacuum in 1/299,792,458 second), the change in the 
definition of the second reflects the continued importance of optics and photonics 
in precision measurements. The definition of the kilogram is also undergoing a 
fundamental change: the current definition defines the kilogram as the mass of the 
9  National Research Council. 2007. Controlling the Quantum World: The Science of Atoms, Molecules, 
and Photons. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
10  More information on NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope is available at http://www.jwst.nasa.
gov/index.html. Accessed May 28, 2012.
11  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.

233
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
international prototype kilogram, and the new definition relates it to the equivalent 
energy of a photon by means of Planck’s constant.12
Development of Attosecond Pulse Trains by Means 
of the Generation of High Harmonics
When light passes through a medium, such as glass, its wavelength usually is 
not affected; such transmission of light through matter is termed linear optics. 
However, when the strength of the light is high, nonlinear optical phenomena oc-
cur, one of which is harmonic generation. Consider what happens when we turn 
the volume up too high in a loudspeaker. Instead of clean, pure tones, we get distor-
tion, which consists of higher harmonics of the pure tones and other frequencies 
produced by mixing the tones. In similar fashion, light is a wave—just like a sound 
wave, but made of electromagnetic (EM) energy. When the light passing through 
a material gets too intense, harmonics of the light wave can be created. Blue light, 
for example, is the second harmonic (one-half the wavelength and twice the fre-
quency) of near-infrared light and can be created by a non-destructive change in 
the response of the medium to the intense lightwave. Such phenomena are captured 
by the field of nonlinear optics.
By using the techniques of laser mode-locking and chirped-pulse amplification, 
scientists in the United States, Europe, and Japan have learned to create compact, 
cost-effective table-top sources of highly intense pulses of light. When such pulses 
of light are focused on inert gases, extreme nonlinear optical phenomena occur.13 
Generation of these high-harmonics leads to extremely short pulses of light at a 
very short wavelength (the second harmonic is one-half the wavelength, the third 
harmonic is one-third the wavelength, and so on). Scientists at JILA (University 
of Colorado, Boulder) have created table-top sources of coherent x rays14 by such 
methods of extreme nonlinear optics.15 Such x-ray light sources are likely to have 
a revolutionary impact on such applications as imaging and lithography on the 
nanoscale. (See Box 8.1.)
12  Mohr, P. 2010. “Recent Progress in Fundamental Constants and the International System of 
Units.” White paper. Third Workshop on Precision Physics and Fundamental Physical Constants. 
Available at http://physics.vniim.ru/SI50/files/mohr.pdf. Accessed January 17, 2012.
13  As the second and third harmonics are generated, which themselves can become very intense, 
this can cause generation of harmonics of the harmonics, which generate further harmonics, and 
so on.
14  Popmintchev, T., M.-C. Chen, P. Arpin, M.M. Murnane, and H.C. Kapteyn. 2010. The attosecond 
nonlinear optics of bright coherent x ray generation. Nature Photonics 4:822-832.
15  Kapteyn, H.C., M.M. Murnane, and I.P. Christov. 2005. Extreme nonlinear optics: Coherent 
x rays from lasers. Physics Today 58:39-44.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
234
Table-top Availability of Extreme Intensities by 
Means of Chirped-Pulse Amplification
Among the many attributes of laser light (monochromaticity, directionality, 
polarization purity, and brightness), the brightness or intensity (power density) is 
the most used property. Applications include cutting, welding, printing, data stor-
BOX 8.1 
Table-Top, Lensless, Soft-X ray Microscope
The optical microscope has contributed greatly to our understanding of the world around 
us. Unfortunately, the smallest object that can be imaged is determined—and limited—by the 
wavelength of the light used. To visualize much smaller objects on the nanoscale, x-ray mi-
croscopes are needed. A team led by the Kapteyn–Murnane research group at JILA (University 
of Colorado, Boulder) has recently demonstrated a table-top, lensless, soft-x-ray microscope 
with a resolution that is very close to the wavelength of the extreme ultraviolet light used. A 
lensless microscope uses a computer algorithm to analyze the scatter patterns produced from 
the illuminated sample. Figure 8.1.1 shows imaging of a test sample with 13-nm coherent 
light. A resolution of 92 nm is obtained. Higher-repetition-rate ultrafast lasers currently under 
development will significantly reduce image capture time and thus improve resolution toward 
the wavelength-limited value. This table-top soft-x-ray diffraction microscope should find ap-
plications in biology, medicine, nanoscience, and materials science.
FIGURE 8.1.1  Lensless diffractive imaging combined with multiple-reference fast Fourier 
transform holography. The spatial autocorrelation of the object can be retrieved. Further re-
finement of the image to a resolution of 50 nm is possible with phase-retrieval algorithms to 
recover the spatial frequency information scattered at high angles. SOURCE: Reprinted with 
permission from McKinnie, I., and H. Kapteyn. 2010. High-harmonic generation: Ultrafast 
lasers yield x rays. Nature Photonics 4(3):149-151.
  SOURCE: McKinnie, I., and H. Kapteyn. 2010. High-harmonic generation: Ultrafast lasers 
yield x rays. Nature Photonics 4(3):149-151.

235
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
age, and many more. Much has been accomplished in the technology of boosting 
laser beams to high, and sometimes lethal, power.16 However, amplifying laser light 
without affecting its other attributes presents several challenges.
Nano-optics and Plasmonics, Negative-Index 
Materials, and Transformation Optics
Modern nanofabrication techniques allow us to control the size, shape, and 
structure of the material used with features on deeply sub-optical-wavelength 
scales, thereby opening up a broad range of technical opportunities. Such con-
trolled fabrication means that optical properties can be tailored by the size, shape, 
or structure rather than by just the natural properties of materials themselves. 
Structures with controlled dimensions from tens to hundreds of nanometers fab-
ricated in dielectrics, semiconductors, and metals17 allow a broad range of new 
optical possibilities, such as photonic crystal structures, metamaterials,18 compact 
high-quality-factor micro-ring resonators, and other nanometallic and plasmonic 
structures.19 Those approaches offer new ways of concentrating or manipulating 
light20 for enhancing or controlling sensing of various kinds,21 such as chemical 
sensors, or such techniques as Raman scattering, and allow us to tailor optical 
response, such as spectral sensitivity, in ways beyond conventional optics. The 
science and basic technology of many such opportunities have been increasingly 
explored in research over the last decade as various nanofabrication tools have 
become more available.
Sensing with surface plasmon phenomena,22 in which light is concentrated 
very near the surface of a metal, has been exploited in commercial biochemical 
sensing devices since the 1990s. Small changes in refractive index resulting from 
specific biochemical activity can be detected in very small detection volumes. The 
16  More information on chirped-pulse amplification is available at http://www.rp-photonics.com/
chirped_pulse_amplification.html. Accessed January 17, 2012.
17  von Freymann, G., A. Ledermann, M. Thiel, I. Staude, S. Essig, K. Busch, and M. Wegener. 2010. 
Three-dimensional nanostructures for photonics. Advanced Functional Materials 20:1038-1052.
18  Chen, H., C.T. Chan, and P. Sheng. 2010. Transformation optics and metamaterials. Nature 
Materials 9:387-396.
19  Brongersma, M.L., and V.M. Shalaev. 2010. The case for plasmonics. Science 328:440-441.
20  Schuller, J.A., E.S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y.C. Jun, J.S. White, and M.L. Brongersma. 2010. Plasmonics 
for extreme light concentration and manipulation. Nature Materials 9:193-204.
21  Richens, J.L., P. Weightman, W.L. Barnes, and P. O’Shea. 2010. “In Vivo Spectroscopic Imaging 
of Biological Membranes and Surface Imaging for High-Throughput Screening.” Chapter 17 in 
Nanoscopy and Multidimensional Optical Fluorescence Microscopy, A. Diaspro, ed. Boca Raton, Fla.: 
CRC Press.
22  Homola, J. 2008. Surface plasmon resonance sensors for detection of chemical and biological 
species. Chemical Reviews 108:462-493.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
236
use of nanometallic particles is expected to improve such sensitivities further.23 
Another example of a nanometallic approach, recently commercialized, uses sub-
wavelength holes in metals to allow optical detection of individual nucleotides in 
DNA sequencing.24
Nanophotonic techniques with dielectrics or metallic nanostructures show 
promise for making extremely compact spectrometers. Quantum mechanical prop-
erties can also be tailored once dimensions can be controlled on about a 10-nm 
or smaller scale. For example, quantum-dot (QD) fluorescent tags for biological 
experiments allow the fluorescent color to be controlled by choice of the size of 
the quantum dots.25
Advances in Controlled Generation of Quantum Light 
States and Their Manipulation and Detection
An ideal laser—and many practical lasers approach this ideal limit—emits 
light in the form of what is called a coherent state, so termed by Roy J. Glauber26 
in the early 1960s. In this quantum state, the light quanta (photons) exit the laser 
at random times, forming a Poisson distributed stream of photons even though the 
emitted light beam has constant power in the case of a continuous-wave laser. At the 
macroscopic level, the EM field associated with the emitted light wave approaches a 
sinusoid much like that seen on a string when it is repetitively shaken. Microscopi-
cally, however, the same randomness causes the wave to possess an uncertainty in 
its amplitude (height of the crests and troughs) and phase (zero-crossing points 
of the wave amplitude), but in this wave picture the uncertainty can be tied to the 
fluctuations in the vacuum EM field that permeates all space. The fundamental 
uncertainty caused by the vacuum field cannot be removed, but its effect can be 
manipulated in judicious ways to bypass its degrading effect on precise measure-
ments in some situations. For example, the uncertainty in the amplitude can be 
traded at the expense of the uncertainty in the phase and vice versa, whereas the 
uncertainty product remains unchanged, as dictated by the Heisenberg uncertainty 
23  Offermans, P., M.C. Schaafsma, S.R.K. Rodriguez, Y. Zhang, M. Crego-Calama, S.H. Brongersma, 
and J. Gómez Rivas. 2011. Universal scaling of the figure of merit of plasmonic sensors. ACS Nano 
5:5151-5157.
24  More information is available at Pacific Biosciences, http://www.pacificbiosciences.com/. Ac-
cessed August 1, 2012.
25  Alivisatos, P. 2004. The use of nanocrystals in biological detection. Nature Biotechnology 22:47-52.
26  Roy J. Glauber shared the 2005 Nobel Prize in physics “for his contribution to the quantum the-
ory of optical coherence.” More information is available at http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
physics/laureates/2005/. Accessed November 14, 2011.

237
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
principle,27 a fundamental law of quantum physics. Such novel quantum light states 
have been called squeezed states, and tremendous progress has been made in the 
development of sources of squeezed light in the last couple of decades.28
One current grand challenge in the scientific world of sensing and precision 
measurement is the quest for the detection of gravity waves predicted by Einstein’s 
theory of general relativity. Even though these waves in the fabric of space-time 
continuum were predicted almost a century ago, their direct observation has eluded 
scientists. National-scale efforts are underway in different parts of the world to 
detect gravity waves, and the most advanced sensor is in the Laser Interferometer 
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).29,30,31,32 It turns out that the strain sensi-
tivity achieved in the current generation of LIGO does not reach a level that is high 
enough to ferret out the faint signatures of the gravity waves. The ultimate bar-
rier to improving the strain sensitivity of the LIGO further is the above-discussed 
fundamental noise on the waves of light that bounce between the arms of LIGO’s 
giant interferometer. The use of squeezed light can lead to enhanced performance, 
and a prototype demonstration of the expected enhancement has been made (see 
Figure 8.2).33,34 It is expected that the use of this novel quantum state of light will 
play a pivotal role in the ultimate detection of gravity waves and in the opening of 
a new window on the universe. Continued development of highly efficient sources 
of squeezed light motivated by the grand challenge of detecting gravity waves, par-
ticularly those in the telecommunications wavelength bands prevalent in today’s 
27  More information on Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is available at AIP Center for the His-
tory of Physics, http://www.aip.org/history/heisenberg/. Accessed August 1, 2012.
28  Vahlbruch, H., M. Mehmet, S. Chelkowski, B. Hage, A. Franzen, N. Lastzka, S. Goßler, K. 
­Danzmann, and R. Schnabel. 2008. Observation of squeezed light with 10 dB quantum noise reduc-
tion. Physical Review Letters 100:033602-033606.
29  Johnston, H. 2008. “Prototype Gravitational-Wave Detector Uses Squeezed Light.” Physics World. 
Available at http://physicsworld.com/cws/article/news/33755. Accessed August 1, 2012.
30  A more advanced interferometer is also being planned. More information on the Laser Interfer-
ometer Space Antenna (LISA) is available at http://lisa.nasa.gov/. Accessed August 1, 2012.
31  More information is available at Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), 
http://www.ligo.caltech.edu/. Accessed August 1, 2012.
32  More information is available at LIGO Scientific Cooperation, http://www.ligo.org/. Accessed 
August 1, 2012.
33  Goda, K., O. Miyakawa, E.E. Mikhailov, S. Saraf, R. Adhikari, K. McKenzie, R. Ward, S. Vass, A.J. 
Weinstein, and N. Mavalvala. 2008. A quantum-enhanced prototype gravitational-wave detector. 
Nature Physics 4(6):472-476.
34  The LIGO Scientific Collaboration. 2011. A gravitational wave observatory operating beyond 
the quantum shot-noise limit. Nature Physics 7(12):962-965.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
238
communication and sensing systems,35 is likely to spawn new sensing applications, 
such as quantum-enhanced laser radar (LADAR) imagers as recently proposed.36
35  Mehmet, M., S. Ast, T. Eberle, S. Steinlechner, H. Vahlbruch, and R. Schnabel. 2011. Squeezed 
light at 1550 nm with a quantum noise reduction of 12.3 dB. Optics Express 19:25763-25772.
36  Dutton, Z., J.H. Shapiro, and S. Guha. 2010. LADAR resolution improvement using receivers 
enhanced with squeezed vacuum injection and phase-sensitive amplification. Journal of the Optical 
Society of America B 27:A63-A72.
FIGURE 8.2  View into the GEO600 central building in Schäferberg, Germany. In the front, the squeez-
ing bench containing the squeezed-light source and the squeezing injection path is shown. The opti-
cal table is surrounded by several vacuum chambers containing suspended interferometer optics. 
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from The LIGO Scientific Collaboration. 2011. A gravitational 
wave observatory operating beyond the quantum shot-noise limit. Nature Physics 7(12):962-965.

239
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
High-Resolution Remote Sensing with Optical Synthetic Aperture Radar
Although high-resolution remote sensing with optical synthetic aperture radar 
is discussed in Chapter 4 on defense, the ability to do high-resolution imaging at 
long ranges can have applications in areas other than for the military. Planet Earth 
videos37 used defense-developed equipment for what at the time was long-range 
imaging, so animals could be remotely observed in their natural habitat without 
the observation changing the animals’ behavior. In disaster scenarios, long-range 
imaging can help to plan relief activities.
Advances in Adaptive Optical Techniques
The performance of astronomical telescopes and free-space laser communica-
tion systems is severely limited by the effects of atmospheric distortion. Similarly, in 
microscopy and retinal imaging, optical aberrations can prevent one from achiev-
ing diffraction-limited resolution. “Adaptive optics (AO) is a technology that is used 
to improve the performance of optical systems by reducing the effect of wavefront 
distortions. It works by measuring the distortions in a wavefront and compensating 
for them with a device that corrects the errors, such as a deformable mirror or a 
liquid-crystal array.”38 Tremendous advances continue to occur in the technology 
and applications of adaptive optics.39 For example, in the not-too-distant future, a 
patient may, after having cataract surgery, be able to have a personalized aberration-
corrected lens implanted that would give the person better vision than she or he 
had been born with.40
Identification of Technological Opportunities from Recent Advances
The ultimate technical challenge in sensing is to be able to detect something 
even at very low levels or with very high specificity, such as trace concentrations of 
toxic pollutants in the atmosphere, a specific biochemical structure, vibrations on 
the fuselage or wings of an airplane in order to gain early indications of crack for-
mation, or variations in Earth’s gravity to facilitate a search for oil or other hidden 
objects. Imaging is sensing as a function of location to obtain a spatial rendering 
of whatever is being sensed. The goal of metrology is to ensure that the output 
37  More information on the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC’s) Planet Earth series is avail-
able at http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mywy. Accessed August 1, 2012.
38  BBC News. 2011. “‘Adaptive Optics’ Come into Focus.” Available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
science-environment-12500626. Accessed May 29, 2012.
39  BBC News. 2011. “‘Adaptive optics’ Come into Focus.”
40  Chris Dainty, Professor of Applied Optics, National University of Ireland, Galway. Communica-
tion to the committee. May 15, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
240
of a sensing device can be accurately tied to the sensed quantity, such as “This 
many units of the sensor reading correspond to this many grams of the pollutant 
per liter” in the first example above. Therefore, harnessing light for ever-more-
advanced and reliable applications in advanced photonic measurements and ap-
plications is intimately tied to our basic understanding of how light interacts with 
matter and how we can manipulate and detect light at the very fundamental level. 
The technological advances since the publication of the NRC’s 1998 Harnessing 
Light report41 have already enabled new measurement capabilities and narrowed 
the gap between “high-end” laboratories and more modest facilities in terms of 
measurement capabilities. Those advances will be a significant catalyst for the next 
wave of advances in both fundamental and applied research. The proliferation of 
high-resolution sensors in consumer devices has enabled a market opportunity to 
leverage these new measurement capabilities for applications that would otherwise 
not be economically viable. Below are some examples of technological opportuni-
ties enabled by recent advances in sensing, imaging, and metrology.
Cost-Effective Biomedical Sensing Devices
The general field of nanophotonics is likely to remain promising and active in 
research in coming years for biochemical and biomedical sensing. Because many 
nanopatterning and nanofabrication tools (such as optical lithography developed 
for IC fabrication and other novel techniques, such as nanoimprint lithography42) 
are capable of mass manufacture of precisely controlled nanostructures, there 
is significant potential for implementing novel practical applications. Research 
focused on those application possibilities will be increasingly important. Highly 
chemical-specific and low-cost biochemical sensing will be a particularly important 
application.
Such devices as cell phone cameras already offer a ubiquitous optical sensing 
platform that is networked. Mobile phone subscriptions worldwide have passed 
5 billion.43 Extensions of such technology—possibly with the addition of light 
sources to excite fluorescence, novel microscopy approaches, or more sophisticated 
spectral detection capabilities—may allow widely available remote medical or 
41  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
42  Osborne, M. 2005. “Enhanced Nanoimprint Process for Advanced Lithography Applications.” 
White paper. Available at http://www.fabtech.org/white_papers/_a/enhanced_nanoimprint_process_
for_advanced_lithography_applications/. Accessed January 17, 2012.
43  Associated Press. 2010. “Number of Cell Phones Worldwide Hits 4.6B.” Available at http://www.
cbsnews.com/stories/2010/02/15/business/main6209772.shtml. Accessed December 5, 2011.

241
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
physiological monitoring or diagnostic techniques44 with major impact on global 
health.
Exploiting the Quantum Detection and Manipulation of Light
At the macroscopic level, such as experienced when one is sitting in a lighted 
room, one perceives light to vary in a continuous, classical manner. For instance, a 
dimmer switch can control the brightness of light in a room and can be continu-
ously varied from daylight conditions to the extreme darkness of nighttime. At the 
microscopic level, however, light consists of quantized packets of energy. A beam 
of light can be thought of as a flux of photons. When faint light is detected, instead 
of a detector output changing continuously, the detector observes random clicks 
corresponding to the absorption of specific photons by the detector. A familiar 
analogy is watching sand flow through an hourglass. When viewed from a distance, 
the falling of sand appears to be a smooth continuous flow. However, when viewed 
close up, it can be seen as the granular dropping of the sand particles. If one were to 
count the number of sand particles crossing the neck of the hourglass per second, 
one would obtain a randomly varying number from one second of counting to the 
next, and the flow rate would only seem to be constant. The same applies to the 
measurement of light by a detector. The light that one would want to detect after it 
interacts with the transducer in the sensor would have random variations (usually 
called noise) in the measured photon count, yielding uncertainty or error in the 
value of the sensed quantity. That kind of noise is called the shot noise, and the 
resulting error is a fundamental property of the process because it is related to the 
elementary nature of light. Thus, it would appear that the error due to shot noise 
would set ultimate limits on the sensitivity of sensing, imaging, and metrology 
systems. That is, the very basic granular nature of light would in general prevent 
us from sensing extremely weak signals.45
The quantum manipulation of the generation and detection of light, however, 
offers new opportunities. Research in the last couple of decades has shown that the 
arrangement of quanta in a beam of light can be manipulated. For example, instead 
44  Zhu, H., S. Mavandadi, A.F. Coskun, O. Yaglidere, and A. Ozcan. 2011. Optofluidic fluorescent 
imaging cytometry on a cell phone. Analytical Chemistry 8(17):6641-6647.
45  For example, it is possible to reduce shot noise by means of squeezed light injection in the LIGO; 
this is leading to enhanced sensitivity in the quest for the detection of the gravity waves.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
242
of being a random flow,46 the photons in a light beam can be regularized (photon 
antibunching47) so that on detection the uncertainty in measurement would be 
reduced. Similarly, many other types of manipulations of photons in light beams 
can be made, such as creating paired photons that maintain their intimate quantum 
mechanical phase-coherent correlation (entanglement48) no matter how far apart 
they are.49,50 Such novel photonic quantum states of light are already proving to be 
extremely potent. For example, there is the possibility of using entangled photons 
for creating shared secrets between remote users for the purpose of communicating 
securely.51 Such techniques of quantum cryptography have been demonstrated and 
are being commercialized,52,53 and there is much potential for ensuring the privacy 
of communications in ways that are tamperproof.54 However, much more research 
and technology development need to happen before the promise of global-scale, 
highly secure communications protected by the fundamental laws of quantum 
physics can be realized. For example, the current systems have limited reach ow-
ing to the lack of a suitable quantum repeater technology—unlike the ubiquitous 
optical amplifiers in the case of conventional optical communications—and are 
slow owing to poor quantum efficiency and low speed of single-photon detectors. 
Many promising paths of research and technology development are being pursued 
worldwide, but the United States is consistently losing ground in this field for lack 
46  It turns out that ordinary lasers at their best emit light beams in the form of random flow of 
photons characterized by the so-called Poisson distribution. When such light is detected, the shot-to-
shot variation in the photon count (standard deviation) in a unit time interval equals the square root 
of the average photon count in that time interval. Detection of light is thus very uncertain when the 
irradiance is weak enough (low-light-level illumination) for the detector to see only a few photons 
over its response time.
47  Teich, M.C., and B.E.A. Saleh. 1990. Antibunched light. Physics Today (43)6:26-34.
48  Zeilinger, A. 2010. Dance of the Photons: From Einstein to Quantum Teleportation. New York, 
N.Y.: Farrar Straus Giroux.
49  Ursin, R., F. Tiefenbacher, T. Schmitt-Manderbach, H. Weier, T. Scheidl, M. Lindenthal, B. 
Blauensteiner, T. Jennewein, J. Perdigues, P. Trojek, B. Ömer, M. Fürst, M. Meyenburg, J. Rarity, Z. 
Sodnik, C. Barbieri, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger. 2007. Entanglement-based quantum communi-
cation over 144 km. Nature Physics 3:481-486.
50  Dynes, J.F., H. Takesue, Z.L. Yuan, A.W. Sharpe, K. Harada, T. Honjo, H. Kamada, O. Tadanaga, 
Y. Nishida, M. Asobe, and A.J. Shields. 2009. Efficient entanglement distribution over 200 kilometers. 
Optics Express 17:11440-11449.
51  Gisin, N., G. Ribordy, W. Tittel, and H. Zbinden. 2002. Quantum cryptography. Reviews of 
Modern Physics 74:145-195.
52  More information on the products offered by ID Quantique is available at http://www.idquan 
tique.com. Accessed August 1, 2012.
53  More information on the products offered by NuCrypt, LLC, is available at www.nucrypt.net. 
Accessed August 1, 2012.
54  Scarani, V., H. Bechmann-Pasquinucci, N.J. Cerf, M. Dušek, N. Lütkenhaus, and M. Peev. 2009. 
The security of practical quantum key distribution. Reviews of Modern Physics 81:1301-1350.

243
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
of adequate support for basic science and technology development. For instance, 
Europe, Japan, and China have roadmaps for breaching the distance limit by way 
of low-Earth-orbit satellite terminals, but the U.S. funding agencies, once a leader 
in free-space quantum cryptography and communications, so far have announced 
no plans.55
The fundamental quantum nature of light is such that our ability to produce 
light beams with prearranged photonic structure (light of a specified quantum 
state) is intimately tied to our ability to measure the arrangement of photons in 
a light beam. Although tremendous progress has been made in the last couple 
of decades in “seeing” photons,56 it remains a technical challenge to detect light 
at single-photon resolution with a high degree of confidence and precision and 
certainly in a cost-effective manner. This is despite the widely accepted belief that 
the human eye is capable of resolving single or very small numbers of photons57 
and that photomultiplier tubes capable of detecting light at the single-photon 
level have been around for over a half-century. Instead of measuring light with 
single-photon resolution, the current generation of instruments puts out either 
no click with high probability when no photons arrive or one click no matter 
how many photons arrive in the detector’s response time. In addition, when the 
photons do arrive, the probability of detection is very limited (about 70 percent 
for visible to near-infrared light and about 20 percent in the telecommunications 
waveband).58,59 Nonetheless, progress is being made; devices and instruments 
with arrays of single-photon detectors for imaging applications are beginning to 
appear on the market, and technologies based on superconducting devices have 
been demonstrated in research laboratories.
In addition to diagnosing the photonic structure of light beams, the technology 
of detecting light efficiently and reliably at the single-photon level will open a host 
of other opportunities because such technology will revolutionize how we quantify 
light. Measuring light level (brightness) is typically an analog measurement that is 
notoriously hard to make precise and accurate. Counting photons will turn such 
measurements into an inherently digital form by basing the measurements on fun-
55  Hughes, R., and J. Nordholt. 2011. Refining quantum cryptography. Science 333:1584-1586.
56  National Research Council. 2010. Seeing Photons: Progress and Limits of Visible and Infrared Sen-
sor Arrays. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
57  Wolpert, H.D. 2002. “Life lessons: Photonic Systems in Nature Can Offer Technical Insights to 
Designers of Optical Systems and Detectors.” SPIE Newsroom. Available at http://spie.org/x25379.
xml?ArticleID=x25379. Accessed August 1, 2012.
58  More information on the products offered by ID Quantique is available at http://www.idquan 
tique.com. Accessed August 1, 2012.
59  More information on the products offered by NuCrypt, LLC, is available at www.nucrypt.net. 
Accessed August 1, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
244
damental unit of energy.60 Because the precision resulting from counting increases 
with the count rate, the ability to count photons at a high rate would spawn new 
metrological applications of light.
Manufacturing
Although many advances that originated in the United States address optical 
manufacturing capabilities, there is almost no high-volume manufacturing of sen-
sors and imagers within the United States. However, the proliferation of devices 
developed for consumer products presents a significant marketing opportunity. 
Many niche sensor markets could not be addressed without the capabilities enabled 
by these devices. One example is in biomedical sensing. There are capabilities in 
microscope systems costing more than $400,000 that could be partially addressed 
in a small device costing less than $10,000 that leverages capabilities provided by 
high-volume consumer device components. Because the resulting sales could be 
about 1,000 per year, these markets would not be efficiently addressed by a large 
microscope manufacturer. However, a small company could profitably address such 
a market. These niche markets rely on moving research advances into the market 
efficiently while exploiting the capabilities of components developed and priced 
for high-volume markets. A small company could keep most of the created jobs 
within the United States by leveraging the manufacture of low-cost devices that 
have steadily moved overseas. To address this market opportunity efficiently, an effi-
cient coupling between basic and applied research in optics- and photonics-related 
technologies with industrial application partners is critical. An efficient partnership 
in this field could significantly add to U.S.-based jobs at all levels.
U.S. GLOBAL POSITION
For many years, the United States has benefited from a leadership position 
in research in optics and photonics. However, the research capabilities of many 
countries have been steadily improving, and the gap is rapidly narrowing. As dis-
cussed earlier, several advances over the last decade have hastened that narrowing, 
and cutting-edge measurement capabilities are now available to a much broader 
set of researchers. While continued research in fundamental optical sciences will 
be critical in maintaining a leadership position, it will also be critical for the U.S. 
economy to move those advances into the market efficiently to capture the financial 
benefit of generated intellectual property. Although high-volume manufacturing 
is not typically done within the United States, there is a significant market oppor-
60  Migdall, A. 1999. Correlated photon metrology without absolute standards. Physics Today 52: 
41-46.

245
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
tunity for leveraging high-volume consumer components with research advances 
to address low-volume markets. Capitalizing these niche markets efficiently could 
have a significant impact on U.S.-based jobs.
FINDINGS
Key Finding:  Optics and photonics have been critically important to advances in 
precision metrology, which has had a significant impact since publication of the 
NRC’s 1998 study Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century (for example, GPS, communications, and manufacturing). The impor-
tance of optics and photonics is now reflected in the adoption of optics-based SI 
definitions of the second and the meter.
Key Finding:  There is a significant opportunity for the U.S. economy to exploit 
niche sensor markets that leverage consumer components and cutting-edge re-
search applications. One example is in biomedical sensing in which low-volume 
manufacturing of devices could efficiently be maintained within the United States 
by leveraging high-volume consumer components, such as the high-resolution 
networked imagers now almost universally available in the form of cell phone 
cameras. Exploiting this advanced technology could enable portable and/or remote 
health monitoring and diagnosis.
Key Finding:  Techniques of extreme nonlinear optics that promise table-top, co-
herent sources of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and x-ray light have been developed. 
If this promise becomes real, it will profoundly affect such applications as sub-
nanometer-scale lithography and determination of the structure of complex matter 
(biological proteins, for instance) on the atomic scale, further enabling advances 
in fields such as optical machining that rely on progressively shorter illumination 
wavelengths to improve manufacturing tolerances. This increased precision will be 
important for maintaining advances consistent with Moore’s law of ICs.
Key Finding:  The ultimate sensitivity of any advanced photonic measurement and 
application system is fundamentally tied to the intrinsic photonic granularity of 
light. Measuring light with single-photon resolution and accuracy at high speeds 
will therefore improve the performance of such systems tremendously in analogy to 
how counting cycles of light waves for shorter and shorter wavelengths is paving the 
way for more accurate and precise measurements of time (first key finding above).
Finding:  Precision metrology has improved and become more widely available 
because of the significant technological advances since the NRC’s Harnessing Light 
study was published in 1998. One example is octave-spanning optical combs, which 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
246
provide a direct link between RF and optical standards within a small table-top 
apparatus that is now commercially available. At the time of the 1998 study, linking 
between RF and optical standards took instrumentation that filled several rooms 
and was performed at only a few locations around the world.
Finding:  Several countries around the world have made significant advancements 
in photonics research capabilities in the measurement area, and the research leader-
ship gap between these countries and the United States has significantly narrowed 
in many disciplines.
Finding:  Progress in nanophotonics, plasmonics, metamaterials, and other related 
fields of science and technology is opening a broad range of possibilities for the 
enhanced sensitivity, greater specificity, lower size, and lower cost of sensors. These 
possibilities will have significant impacts in various fields, including biochemical 
sensing.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND GRAND CHALLENGE QUESTION
Entangled photons and squeezed states are new subjects of research and devel-
opment in the optics and photonics field and allow sensing options never previ-
ously considered.
Key Recommendation:  The United States should develop the technology for gen-
erating light beams whose photonic structure has been prearranged to yield better 
performance in applications than is possible with ordinary laser light.
Prearranged photonic structures in this context include generation of light with 
specified quantum states in a given spatiotemporal region, such as squeezed states 
with greater than 20-dB measured squeezing in one field quadrature, Fock states 
of more than 10 photons, and states of one and only one photon or two and only 
two entangled photons with greater than 99 percent probability. These capabilities 
should be developed with the capacity to detect light with over 99 percent efficiency 
and with photon-number resolution in various bands of the optical spectrum. 
The developed devices should operate at room temperature and be compatible 
with speeds prevalent in state-of-the-art sensing, imaging, and metrology systems. 
U.S. funding agencies should give high priority to funding research and develop-
ment—at universities and in national laboratories where such research is carried 
out—in this fundamental field to position the U.S. science and technology base at 
the forefront of applications development in sensing, imaging, and metrology. It is 
believed that this field, if successfully developed, can transfer significant technology 
to products for decades to come.

247
A d v a n c e d  P h o t o n i c  M e a s u r e m e n t s  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n s
Key Recommendation:  Small U.S. companies should be encouraged and sup-
ported by the government to address market opportunities for applying research 
advances to niche markets while exploiting high-volume consumer components. 
These markets can lead to significant expansion of U.S.-based jobs while capital-
izing on U.S.-based research.
Recommendation:  U.S. funding agencies should continue to support fundamental 
research in optics and photonics. Important subjects for future research include 
nanophotonics, extreme nonlinear optics, and number-resolving photon counters 
for a truly linear-mode single-photon detector. Support should be provided for 
applying advances to devices for market application.
The fifth grand challenge question is partially supported by the discussion in this 
chapter and is thus repeated here with some supporting information.
	
How can the U.S. optics and photonics community develop optical sources 
and imaging tools to support an order of magnitude or more of increased 
resolution in manufacturing?
Meeting this grand challenge could facilitate a decrease in design rules for 
lithography, as well as providing the ability to do closed-loop, automated manufac-
turing of optical elements in three dimensions. Extreme ultraviolet is a challenging 
technology to develop, but it is needed in order to meet future lithography needs. 
The next step beyond EUV is to move to soft x rays. Also, the limitations in three-
dimensional resolution on laser sintering for three-dimensional manufacturing are 
based on the wavelength of the lasers used. Shorter wavelengths will move the state 
of the art to allow more precise additive manufacturing that could eventually lead 
to three-dimensional printing of optical elements.

248
9
Strategic Materials for Optics
INTRODUCTION
Materials are playing an increasingly important role in the technological evolu-
tion of photonic and optical applications. Whether the applications are related to 
imaging of cellular functions, the development of new types of sensors and solar 
cells, or the integration of materials for optoelectronics, the study of techniques to 
alter how light interacts with materials has become an important element in the 
advancement of various applications. Moreover, defense applications require an 
assured and secure manufacturing source of key materials. While materials were 
not called out in the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) 1998 report Harnessing 
Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century,1 the role of materials in 
optics and photonics has become much greater since its publication. Engineered 
materials, including photonic crystals, have come of age. We have seen key op-
toelectronic materials play an important role in negotiations between countries. 
Material development has always been a slow and expensive process, but with the 
advent of engineered materials and the rise of awareness of the importance of 
certain materials, materials have taken on a strong enough strategic importance 
to warrant their own chapter in the present report.
One specific challenge that optics faces in most industries where it is being 
used is that optics remains an enabling technology, supporting another area such 
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

249
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
as cancer treatment or welding. The principal value of a product is not always at-
tributed to the optical technologies associated with the product’s applications. For 
example, developing new biological materials, such as fluorescent proteins,2 that 
have new optical characteristics is associated more with new advances in biotech-
nology than with optical imaging.
This chapter outlines the role that strategic materials play in the development 
of new optical phenomena in specific categories of applications, outlines a few 
key technological problems that need to be solved to enhance the impact of these 
materials on the evolution of those applications, and, finally, identifies a set of chal-
lenges that need to be addressed by policy makers to support the research needed 
to solve the technological problems.3
ENERGY APPLICATIONS
The Sun has been identified as one of the primary sources of alternative energy 
as the United States transitions from a fossil-fuel-driven energy infrastructure in 
the next 20 years. However, for solar energy to become a viable and cost-effective 
source, its price needs to drop significantly. As discussed in Chapter 5, energy criti-
cal elements (ECEs) were identified as extremely important for the development of 
thin-film photovoltaics (TFPV), which will be instrumental in meeting cost targets. 
The ECEs are critical because of their limited supply in the United States. Gallium, 
germanium, indium, selenium, silver, and tellurium are all critical elements for de-
velopment of TFPV. A challenge for the United States in connection with the ECEs 
is to determine whether there is a need to produce them in the United States as 
opposed to relying on a foreign supply.4 For example, most of the easily extractable 
lithium in the world is localized in South American countries. Lithium is present 
in most of the promising battery technologies being produced and developed, and 
access to this material could be restricted by government intervention.
Several of the exotic elements required by emerging solar technologies rely on 
joint production methods, which pose another potential risk to scale-up. These 
2  The 2008 Nobel Prize in chemistry was awarded jointly to Martin Chalfie, Osamu Shimomura, 
and Roger Y. Tsien “for the discovery and development of the green fluorescent protein, gfp.” More 
information is available at http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2008/. Ac-
cessed May 31, 2012.
3  For further discussion of strategic materials, such as erbium and other rare earths, see National 
Research Council. 2012. The Role of the Chemical Sciences in Finding Alternatives to Critical Resources: 
A Workshop Summary. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
4  American Physical Society (APS) and Materials Research Society (MRS). 2011. Energy Critical 
Elements: Securing Materials for Emerging Technologies. A report by the APS panel on public affairs 
and the MRS. Available at http://www.aps.org/policy/reports/popa-reports/loader.cfm?csModule= 
security/getfile&PageID=236337. Accessed February 10, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
250
materials are currently produced as by-products of refinement or extraction of 
more common materials and are bought from suppliers as waste products. In-
creased demand for these materials may surpass the amount extracted with current 
production methods, thus placing a risk on the scaling up of systems reliant on 
these elements. Elements that are known to pose joint-production risks are gallium, 
tellurium, and selenium. Gallium, an essential component of many high-efficiency 
thin-film and multi-junction photovoltaic cells, is obtained as a by-product of 
aluminum refining, and tellurium and selenium are most often obtained as by-
products of copper refining. The locations of these common production metals 
will determine production of these ECEs and are shown in Figure 9.1. Cadmium 
is usually produced from zinc processing but is refined out because of its toxic-
ity and thus is commercially available at relatively low and stable prices and not 
qualified as an ECE.5
The use of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for lighting is another example of how 
optics is affecting energy conservation in several industrial nations. Several coun-
tries around the world have initiatives to phase out the use of incandescent light-
bulbs by 2020. LEDs have been identified as the leading replacement technology for 
this mass market. One promising approach to obtain white light is to use gallium-
nitride (GaN)-based blue LEDs in conjunction with fluorescent phosphors, which 
convert part of the blue light into yellow and red. Many of the efficient phosphors 
contain rare earth elements (REEs). The two key REEs that provide color LED light-
ing are europium and terbium. Currently, the majority of the REEs are produced in 
China, and the Chinese government has imposed export restrictions.6 The United 
States will have to develop a novel strategy either to develop new materials for LED 
applications or to encourage research toward cost-effective and environmentally 
friendly purification, mining, and production. Finally, the United States should 
consider reclamation from waste to extract rare materials inasmuch as U.S. waste 
management derives most of its profit from processing waste to remove precious 
and rare metals and other substances.
NOVEL STRUCTURES: SUB-WAVELENGTH OPTICS, 
METAMATERIALS, AND PHOTONIC CRYSTALS
In addition to new core materials, there is much promise in tailoring existing 
materials in novel ways to produce innovative results. These new materials, known 
as metamaterials or nanophotonic materials, are materials that can be developed 
5  APS and MRS. 2011. Energy Critical Elements.
6  Bradsher, K. 2010. “China Said to Widen Its Embargo of Minerals.” New York Times. October 
19. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/20/business/global/20rare.html?pagewanted=all. 
Accessed August 29, 2011.

251
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
FIGURE 9.1  Location of current copper and aluminum-ore production. Energy critical elements required for 
several emerging solar technologies are obtained as by-products of refinement.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
252
to exhibit new optical properties that the original materials themselves would not 
naturally possess. Structuring materials with features less than or close to one 
wavelength of light can lead to these novel properties, with the optical behavior 
coming more from the nanopatterning or nanostructuring than from the specific 
underlying materials. Such sub-wavelength structuring can be used with metals, 
semiconductors, or dielectrics, including combinations of these. The resulting 
effective materials or complex structures with sub-wavelength patterning allow 
control of such properties as spectral and polarization dependence in transmission, 
refraction, reflection, absorption, and emission of light. If a sub-wavelength struc-
ture is periodic in two or three dimensions, it is called a photonic crystal (PhC)7,8,9 
because the structure shows effects on the motions of an optical wave similar to 
the effects of a semiconductor crystal on an electron wave.10,11 Since its inception, 
rapid progress has been made on this topic. Complex PhC structures with varied 
dimensions have been reported; these structures allow devices to be made that can 
control properties such as spectral and polarization dependence in transmission, 
refraction, reflection, absorption, and emission of light.12,13,14 Interesting metal 
patterns have been added to such periodic structures to produce negative refractive 
index and superlens effects;15,16 these patterns can focus light below the conven-
tional diffraction limit. PhC devices are also being actively deployed in biosensors, 
semiconductor lasers, and hollow-core fibers.17,18,19,20
A new class of dielectric sub-wavelength grating exhibits very different prop-
7  Yablonovitch, E. 1987. Inhibited spontaneous emission in solid-state physics and electronics. 
Physical Review Letters 58:2059-2062.
8  John, S. 1987. Strong localization of photons in certain disordered dielectric superlattices. Physical 
Review Letters 58:2486-2489.
9  Joannopoulos, J.D., P.R. Villeneuve, and S. Fan. 1997. Photonic crystals: Putting a new twist on 
light. Nature 386:143-149.
10  Yablonovitch, E. 1987. Inhibited spontaneous emission in solid-state physics and electronics.
11  John, S. 1987. Strong localization of photons in certain disordered dielectric superlattices. 
12  Joannopoulos et al. 1997. Photonic crystals: Putting a new twist on light.
13  Busch, K., G. von Freymann, S. Linden, S.F. Mingaleev, L. Tkeshelashvili, and M. Wegener. 2007. 
Periodic nanostructures for photonics. Physical Review Letters 444:101-202.
14  Painter, O., R.K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J.D. O’Brien, P.D. Dapkus, and I. Kim. 1999. Two-
dimensional photonic band-gap defect mode laser. Science 284(5421):1819-1821.
15  Pendry, J.B. 2000. Negative refraction makes a perfect lens. Physical Review Letters 85:3966-3969.
16  Zhang, X., and Z. Liu. 2008. Superlenses to overcome the diffraction limit. Nature Materials 
7:435-441.
17  Skivesen, N., A. Têtu, M. Kristensen, J. Kjems, L.H. Frandsen, and P.I. Borel. 2007. Photonic-
crystal waveguide biosensor. Optics Express 15:3169-3176.
18  Noda, S., M. Yokoyama, M. Imada, A. Chutinan, and M. Mochizuki. 2001. Polarization mode 
control of two-dimensional photonic crystal laser by unit cell structure design. Science 293:1123-1125.
19  Knight, J.C. 2003. Photonic crystal fibres. Nature 424:847-851.
20  Russell, P. 2003. Photonic crystal fibres. Science 299:358-362.

253
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
erties from PhCs or traditional gratings. This grating leverages a high contrast in 
refractive indexes for the grating medium and its surroundings and sub-wavelength 
period to lead to extraordinary properties; hence the name high-contrast grating.21,22 
They can be easily designed to exhibit super-broadband, high-reflectivity mirrors 
for light incident in a surface-normal direction and at a glancing angle, ultra-
high-Q (over 106) resonators with surface-normal output, planar high-focusing 
power reflectors and lenses (numerical aperture, over 0.9), ultra-low-loss hollow-
core waveguides, slow-light waveguides,23 and high-efficiency vertical to in-plane 
waveguide couplers.24
The United States has several research groups working on these types of ma-
terials that can potentially lead to solar cells that more efficiently absorb and trap 
sunlight and convert it to electrical energy. Researchers have designed materials that 
can bend visible light at unusual but precise angles, regardless of its polarization,25 
as a step toward perfectly transparent solar cell coatings that would direct all the 
Sun’s rays into the active area to improve solar power output. In addition, research-
ers are working on novel antireflective solar cell coatings in the hope of getting 
more light into the cells.26,27 Finally, metastructured materials can be used to sepa-
rate the solar spectrum efficiently to optimize solar energy conversion.28
The versatility of metamaterials and photonic nanostructures in tailoring 
optical properties could lead to radical improvements and completely new types 
of devices. Metamaterials have been proposed for superlens applications29 where 
they can to some extent go beyond the conventional diffraction limit of focusing 
in some special situations. Moreover, PhC devices are being deployed in biosensors, 
21  Vlasov, Y.A., M. O’Boyle, H.F. Hamann, and S.J. McNab. 2005. Active control of slow light on a 
chip with photonic crystal waveguides. Nature 438:65-69.
22  Mateus, C.F.R., M.C.Y. Huang, Y. Deng, A.R. Neureuther, and C.J. Chang-Hasnain. 2004. 
­Ultrabroadband mirror using low-index cladded subwavelength grating. IEEE Photonics Technology 
Letters 16:518-520.
23  Chang-Hasnain, C.J. 2011. High-contrast gratings as a new platform for integrated optoelectron-
ics. Semiconductor Science and Technology 26:014043.
24  Stöferle, T., N. Moll, T. Wahlbrink, J. Bolten, T. Mollenhauer, U. Scherf, and R. Mahrt. 2010. An 
ultracompact silicon/polymer laser with an absorption-insensitive nanophotonic resonator. Nano 
Letters 10:3675-3678.
25  Burgos, S.P., R. de Waele, A. Polman, and H.A. Atwater. 2010. A single-layer wide-angle negative-
index metamaterial at visible frequencies. Nature Materials 9:407-412.
26  Xi, J.Q., M.F. Schubert, J.K. Kim, E.F. Schubert, M. Chen, S.Y. Lin, W. Liu, and J.A. Smart. 2007. 
Optical thin-film materials with low refractive index for broadband elimination of Fresnel reflection. 
Nature Photonics 1:176-179.
27  Diedenhofen, S.L., G. Vecchi, R.E. Algra, A. Hartsuiker, O.L. Muskens, G. Immink, E.P.A.M. 
­Bakkers, W.L. Vos, and J.G. Rivas. 2009. Broad-band and omnidirectional antireflection coatings 
based on semiconductor nanorods. Advanced Materials 21:973-978.
28  Burgos et al. 2010. A single-layer wide-angle negative-index metamaterial at visible frequencies.
29  Zhang and Liu. 2008. Superlenses to overcome the diffraction limit.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
254
semiconductor lasers, and hollow-core fibers.30,31,32,33 Higher-dimensional meta-
materials or custom nanophotonic structures provide extra design “knobs” to turn 
to modify optical characteristics and design devices with no precedent in conven-
tional optics. Whereas one-dimensional photonic nanostructures have long been 
used in commercial products in the form of Bragg reflectors, dielectric interference 
filters, or antireflection coatings, higher-dimensional photonic nanostructures are 
not easy to fabricate and require more research on process technology.
TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES OF NANOSTRUCTURED MATERIALS
Nanostructured materials became a subject of great interest because of the 
promise to “tailor” materials’ innate physical properties when they are made small 
enough for the wave functions of electrons, phonons, or photons to be signifi-
cantly confined by the structured boundaries. Control of matter on nanometer 
scales would allow manipulation of absorption, emission, transmission, refraction, 
transport, and energy conversion and storage in innovative ways that could have 
profound implications for many applications.
The applications of nanostructures for optoelectronic devices started when 
one-dimensional confinement structures, quantum wells, were demonstrated in 
1974.34 Double heterostructured material with a thickness under 20 nm was shown 
to provide quantum confinement of electrons to alter the material’s effective band-
gap energy. Today, most semiconductor diode lasers and integrated optoelectronics 
use quantum wells as a means to control wavelength, reduce threshold, and provide 
modulation. In the near future, it will be possible to extend this quantum confine-
ment to two-dimensional (quantum wires) and three-dimensional (quantum dots, 
QDs) to achieve temperature-independent, ultra-low-threshold laser diodes and 
ultra-broadband semiconductor optical amplifiers.
In addition to changing the effective bandgap due to the quantization effect, 
nanostructures may enable monolithic integration of lattice-mismatched materi-
30  Block, I.D., L.L. Chan, and B.T. Cunningham. 2006. Photonic crystal optical biosensor incorpo-
rating structured low-index porous dielectric. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 120:187-193.
31  Park, H.G., S.H. Kim, S.H. Kwon, Y.G. Ju, J.K. Yang, J.H. Baek, S.B. Kim, and Y.H. Lee. 2004. 
Electrically driven single-cell photonic crystal laser. Science 305:1444-1447.
32  Allan, D.C., N.F. Borrelli, J.C. Fajardo, D.W. Hawtof, and J.A. West. 2001. Photonic Crystal Fiber. 
U.S. Patent 6 243 522.
33  Temelkuran, B., S.D. Hart, G. Benoit, J.D. Joannopoulos, and Y. Fink. 2002. Wavelength-scalable 
hollow optical fibres with large photonic bandgaps for CO2 laser transmission. Nature 420:650-653.
34  Dingle, R., W. Wiegmann, and C.H. Henry. 1974. Quantum states of confined carriers in very 
thin Al{x}Ga(1-x}As-GaAs-Al{x}Ga(1-x}As heterostructures. Physical Review Letters 33:827-829.

255
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
als on a single substrate by drastic increases in their critical thicknesses.35,36,37 For 
materials grown on lattice-mismatched substrates, there are thickness limits below 
which single-crystal material can be grown on substrates with mismatch. The larger 
the mismatch is, the lower the critical thickness. Typically, this layer is very thin; 
for 2 percent lattice mismatch, the thickness is about 8 nm, at which the quanti-
zation energy can be easily observed. This is therefore called a strained quantum 
well. For typical III-V semiconductors, such as gallium arsenide (GaAs), indium 
phosphide (InP), or indium arsenide (InAs), on silicon (Si), the lattice mismatches 
are 4 percent, 8 percent, and 12 percent, respectively. Such mismatches are so large 
that the critical thicknesses are too small for device applications. This is not an 
issue for nanowires or nanopillars. For about 80-nm-diameter GaAs nanowires 
on Si, the height can be infinite without mismatches. Moreover, the core/shell 
layers grown later can accommodate much thicker lattice-mismatched materials. 
Various devices have already been demonstrated on such III-V nanopillars grown 
on silicon, including room-temperature operation of LEDs, avalanche photodi-
odes, and optically pumped lasers.38,39 Such materials are grown at low enough 
temperature to be compatible with wafers with fabricated complementary metal-
oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuits. That makes such nanostructured growth 
promising for integration of various III-V materials device structures on silicon.
Besides III-V on silicon, the recent advancement of germanium (Ge) or ger-
manium tin (GeSn) grown on Si has enabled optoelectronics devices operating in 
the telecommunication region, 1.3 to about 1.6 μm,40,41,42,43 to be fabricated in a 
35  Chuang, L.C., M. Moewe, C. Chase, N. Kobayashi, S. Crankshaw, and C. Chang-Hasnain. 2007. 
Critical diameter for III-V nanowires grown on lattice-mismatched substrates. Applied Physics ­Letters 
90:043115.
36  Glas, F. 2006. Critical dimensions for the plastic relaxation of strained axial heterostructures in 
free-standing nanowires. Physical Review B 74:121302.
37  Chuang, L.C., M. Moewe, K.W. Ng, T. Tran, S. Crankshaw, R. Chen, W.S. Ko, and C. Chang-
Hasnain. 2011. GaAs nanoneedles grown on sapphire. Applied Physics Letters 98:123101.
38  Chuang, L.C., F.G. Sedgwick, R. Chen, W.S. Ko, M. Moewe, K.W. Ng, T.D. Tran, and C. Chang-
Hasnain. 2011. GaAs-based nanoneedle light emitting diode and avalanche photodiode monolithi-
cally integrated on a silicon substrate. Nano Letters 11(2):385-390.
39  Chen, R., T.-T.D. Tran, K.W. Ng, W.S. Ko, L.C. Chuang, F.G. Sedgwick, and C. Chang-Hasnain. 
2011. Nanolasers grown on silicon. Nature Photonics 5:170-175.
40  Fidaner, O., A.K. Okyay, J.E. Roth, R.K. Schaevitz, Y. Kuo, K.C. Saraswat, J.S. Harris, and D.A.B. 
Miller. 2007. Ge-SiGe quantum-well waveguide photodetectors on silicon for the near-infrared. IEEE 
Photonics Technology Letters 19:1631-1633.
41  Tang, L., S.E. Kocabas, S. Latif, A.K. Okyay, D. Ly-Gagnon, K.C. Saraswat, and D.A.B. Miller. 2008. 
Nanometre-scale germanium photodetector enhanced by a near-infrared dipole antenna. Nature 
Photonics 2:226-229.
42  Tsybeskov, L., and D.J. Lockwood. 2009. Silicon-germanium nanostructures for light emitters 
and on-chip optical interconnects. Proceedings of the IEEE 97:1284-1303.
43  Michel, J., J. Liu, and L.C. Kimerling. 2010. High-performance Ge-on-Si photodetectors. Nature 
Photonics 4:527-534.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
256
way that is compatible with CMOS electronic device fabrication, opening many 
new possibilities for the intimate integration of optoelectronics and electronics in 
manufacturable platforms, Ge-nanostructured emitters44 with high luminescence 
quantum efficiency, and Ge photodetectors with large 3-dB bandwidth and high 
responsivity have been demonstrated all on an Si-compatible platform. Strong 
optical modulation mechanisms previously observed practically only in III-V 
materials have been demonstrated in Ge quantum well layers grown on silicon.45 
Such Ge-based materials and structures on silicon are thus very strong candidates 
for dense integration of optoelectronics and electronics in such applications as 
optical data interconnections.
Another special feature of nanostructured materials is their large surface-
to-volume ratio. For optoelectronic devices, that is detrimental inasmuch as the 
surface recombination represents dark current46 and non-radiative recombination. 
However, for sensors and applications requiring large surface-to-volume ratio, it 
is very desirable.47
The full potential for nanostructured materials is still limited to some extent 
by non-uniformities and large numbers of defects in currently available materials. 
In addition, the smaller structures have an associated larger quantization energy; 
hence the greater the impact of non-uniformity of size.
There are two main approaches to synthesizing nanostructured materials: 
bottom-up and top-down. The former refers to various self-assembly methods, in-
cluding molecular-beam epitaxy, metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 
catalyst CVD, electrodeposition, pulsed-laser synthesis, and solution-based syn-
thesis. Small and nearly uniform (for example, a few percent to 10 percent non-
uniformity) particle-like structures can be created by using chemical solutions.48 
Such QDs have seen wide applications in biosensing and bioimaging applica-
tions, where the uniformity requirement is not very stringent.49,50 They face ma-
jor challenges if one is to make electrical contacts to them or form p-n junctions 
44  Tang et al. 2008. Nanometre-scale germanium photodetector enhanced by a near-infrared dipole 
antenna.
45  Kuo, Y.-H., Y.-K. Lee, Y. Ge, S. Ren, J.E. Roth, T.I. Kamins, D.A.B. Miller, and J.S. Harris. 2005. 
Strong quantum-confined Stark effect in germanium quantum-well structures on silicon. Nature 
437:1334-1336.
46  Dark current is current present even in the absence of a direct source.
47  Medintz, I.L., A.R. Clapp, H. Mattoussi, E.R. Goldman, B. Fisher, and J.M. Mauro. 2003. Self-
assembled nanoscale biosensors based on quantum dot FRET donors. Nature 2:630-638.
48  Alivisatos, P. 2000. Colloidal quantum dots: From scaling laws to biological applications. Pure 
and Applied Chemistry 72:3-9.
49  Michalet, X., F.F. Pinaud, J.M. Tsay, S. Doose, J.J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A.M. Wu, S.S. Gambhir, and 
S. Weiss. 2005. Quantum dots for live cells, in vivo imaging, and diagnostics. Science 307:538-544. 
50  Medintz, I.L., H.T. Uyeda, E.R. Goldman, and H. Mattoussi. 2005. Quantum dot bioconjugates 
for imaging, labelling and sensing. Nature Materials 4:435-446.

257
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
with them, however. Hence, they have limited device or integrated optics appli-
cations. Self-assembled InAs QDs can be grown on GaAs substrates through the 
Stranski-Krastanov growth mode.51,52 This type of QD has about 5 to 10 percent 
non-uniformity. However, recent advances have been made in diode lasers and 
semiconductor optical amplifiers53,54 to exploit QDs. These are very promising for 
deployment in the near future.
The top-down approach involves various lithography techniques to define the 
structures, using e-beam lithography, nanoimprint,55,56 or dip pen technologies57 
and subsequent etching or growth of materials. These methods can lead to higher 
uniformity, but they still suffer from surface defects.58,59
OPTICAL MATERIALS IN THE LIFE SCIENCES AND SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY
Synthetic biology is a new field of biological research and technology develop-
ment that combines science and engineering with the goal of designing and con-
structing novel and useful biological systems not found in nature. Synthetic biology 
has provided the means of both genetically engineering specific optical properties 
51  Stranski, Ivan N., and Lubomir Krastanov. 1938. Abhandlungen der Mathematisch-
Naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse IIb. Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 146:797-810.
52  Eaglesham, D.J., and M. Cerullo. 1990. Dislocation-free Stranski-Krastanow growth of Ge on 
Si(100). Physical Review Letters 64:1943-1946.
53  Zhukov, A.E., A.R. Kovsh, V.M. Ustinov, Y.M. Shernyakov, S.S. Mikhrin, N.A. Maleev, E.Y. 
Kondrat’eva, D.A. Livshits, M.V. Maximov, B.V. Volovik, D.A. Bedarev, Y.G. Musikhin, N.N. Ledentsov, 
P.S. Kop’ev, Z.I. Alferov, and D. Bimberg. 1999. Continuous-wave operation of long-wavelength 
quantum-dot diode laser on a GaAs substrate. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 11:1345-1347.
54  Akiyama, T., M. Ekawa, M. Sugawara, K. Kawaguchi, Hisao Sudo, A. Kuramata, H. Ebe, and 
Y. Arakawa. 2005. An ultrawide-band semiconductor optical amplifier having an extremely high 
penalty-free output power of 23 dBm achieved with quantum dots. IEEE Photonics Technology Let-
ters 17:1614-1616.
55  Vieu, C., F. Carcenac, A. Pepin, Y. Chen, M. Mejias, A. Lebib, L. Manin-Ferlazzo, L. Couraud, and 
H. Launois. 2000. Electron beam lithography: Resolution limits and applications. Applied Surface 
Science 164:111-117.
56  Colburn, M., S.C. Johnson, M.D. Stewart, S. Damle, T.C. Bailey, B. Choi, M. Wedlake, T.B. 
­Michaelson, S.V. Sreenivasan, J.G. Ekerdt, and C.G. Willson. 1999. Step and flash imprint lithography: 
A new approach to high-resolution patterning. Proceedings of the SPIE 3676:379.
57  Lee, K.B., S.J. Park, C.A. Mirkin, J.C. Smith, and M. Mrksich. 2002. Protein nanoarrays generated 
by dip-pen nanolithography. Science 295:1702-1705.
58  Cao, X.A., H. Cho, S.J. Pearton, G.T. Dang, A.P. Zhang, F. Ren, R.J. Shul, L. Zhang, R. Hickman, 
and J.M. Van Hove. 1999. Depth and thermal stability of dry etch damage in GaN Schottky diodes. 
Applied Physics Letters 75:232-234.
59  Tanaka, S., Y. Kawaguchi, N. Sawaki, M. Hibino, and K. Hiramatsu. 2000. Defect structure in 
selective area growth GaN pyramid on (111)Si substrate. Applied Physics Letters 76:2701.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
258
into living organisms and manufacturing optically active materials, both of which 
are now routinely used in life science research.
One of the major advances of the last two decades in the life sciences (the 
subject of a Nobel Prize in 2008) was the development of genetic engineering 
techniques that allow the programming of individual cells to produce protein 
molecules that fluoresce in response to specific stimuli. The approach is used for 
optical detection of the turning on and turning off of specific genes in cells in 
response to drugs or environmental conditions. Similarly, neurons engineered to 
produce fluorescent dyes based on proteins that report the active and inactive states 
of neurons in living animals are being used to map out the neuronal wiring of living 
brains and to track the flow of information through neural circuits in live animals.
New, highly efficient inorganic dyes have been developed that can be chemically 
linked to nucleic acids and provide an optical readout of nucleic acid sequences in 
high-throughput DNA sequencing instruments. The optical materials are a critical 
element in the technology that will ultimately enable the $1,000 genome, which 
will help to make possible a new era of personalized medicine.60
New nanostructured materials have also demonstrated new methods for label-
ing cells and intracellular organelles with biocompatible optical materials by us-
ing nano-scale semiconductor structures (QDs) and nanometer gold spheres and 
rods. The new materials provide several advantages, including greatly improved 
resistance to photo-bleaching, tunable and very narrow spectral features, and the 
ability to functionalize the nanoparticle surface with antibodies to allow it to bind 
specifically to a wide variety of biological surfaces.
FINDINGS
This chapter illustrates the strategic role that materials and nanostructuring 
can play in the development of new optical systems. Below are the findings of the 
committee regarding strategic materials for optics.
Finding:  There is much promise in tailoring existing materials in novel ways to 
produce innovative results. The new metamaterials and photonic nanostructures 
enable original optical properties that can be developed for innovative functions 
that could not be exhibited in traditional materials. Realizing the full potential of 
nanostructured materials is still hampered by non-uniformities and many defects. 
The smaller the structure, the more issues with non-uniformity.
Finding:  Gallium, germanium, indium, selenium, silver, and tellurium are all criti-
cal elements for development of thin-film photovoltaics (TFPV).
60  For more information, see discussions in Chapter 6 and Appendix C of this report.

259
S t r a t e g i c  M a t e r i a l s  f o r  O p t i c s
Finding:  Most current white-light LEDs require rare materials to fluoresce in the 
proper wavelengths. Many of the efficient phosphors contain rare earth elements. 
The two key rare earth materials that provide color LED lighting are europium 
and terbium.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The committee presents the following recommendations with respect to stra-
tegic materials for optics.
Recommendation:  The U.S. R&D community should increase its leadership role 
in the development of nanostructured materials with designable and tailorable 
optical material properties, as well as process control for uniformity of production 
of these materials.
Recommendation:  The United States should develop a plan to ensure the avail-
ability of critical energy-related materials, including solar cells for energy genera-
tion and fluorescent materials to support future LED development.

260
10
Displays
INTRODUCTION
Displays are a critical enabling technology for the information age. Over the last 
two decades, liquid-crystal displays (LCDs) have become the dominant type of dis-
play, displacing the cathode-ray tube (CRT). During this period, LCD technology 
improved dramatically in several aspects, including resolution, quality, reliability, 
size, cost, and capability. The 1998 National Research Council report Harnessing 
Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century1 mentioned 10.4-inch 
LCD displays and postulated the potential for 40-inch plasma displays. Today, LCD 
displays are ubiquitous. Small ones are used for mobile appliances (cell phones) 
and e-readers, and large ones for desktop computers, table-based displays, TVs, and 
wall-mounted displays. However, there is always a drive toward bigger displays.2
LCDs will probably dominate displays for the next decade. There are technical 
challenges in LCD displays that can be turned into opportunities. For a detailed 
description of the various display technologies, see Appendix C in this report.
Although they are less developed than LCDs, the use of organic light-emitting 
diodes (OLEDs) is a growing trend in displays. The fact that the principal pixel 
component in an OLED display is an LED eliminates the need for external back-
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2  Ultimately, if large generic displays were available at low cost, they could replace larger and larger 
information devices until movie theater systems and billboards were included.

261
D i s p l a y s
lighting technology. However, several challenges need to be solved before OLED 
technology becomes pervasive for large displays, as discussed later in this chapter.
One of the most important trends in recent years is the rapid spread of touch 
displays. Touch technology already has matured to a point where its performance, 
reliability, and robustness are outstanding. Touch technology was invented in the 
United States, and many improvements are still coming from U.S. academic and 
industrial research and development (R&D) laboratories.3 Given that significant 
innovations and improvements are expected in the next decade, this field has po-
tential for continued U.S. leadership.
One of the technologies changing how people study, spend leisure time, and 
get information involves e-readers and computer tablets. Within the next gen-
eration, it is possible that people will be dependent on e-readers and tablets for 
many of their educational and general reading needs. With respect to e-readers, a 
revolution is taking place, from a simple electrophoretic ink (E-ink) product, to a 
higher-resolution E-ink, to color-passive LCD, to full-blown LCD-based e-readers. 
As the displays are improved, there are opportunities to develop low-cost, durable, 
and green materials and manufacturing processes.
An interesting technology that might have a major impact in the future but 
will require major investment and innovation is that of flexible displays. Flexible 
material (such as glass or a polymer) could be used for newspapers, magazines, 
and work papers. The idea is to simulate the paper media that many people are still 
using, but with a flexible organic or inorganic material that is essentially a com-
puter system with a wireless transceiver. Such flexible displays could communicate 
with servers to download information and display it as though it were printed on 
paper. The flexible materials should be lightweight, sturdy, robust, and reusable 
and should provide exceptional text, picture, and video quality whether indoors 
or in bright sunlight (similar to printed-paper quality). To create flexible displays, 
however, it is necessary to develop flexible substrate materials and processes that 
exhibit chemical resistance, thermal stability, and endurance of high temperatures 
and pressures during fabrication.
Most of the current state-of-the-art display technologies require backlight-
ing subsystems to provide the necessary brightness. LCDs do not produce light 
themselves, and so they need illumination to produce a visible image. In general, 
backlights are needed to illuminate the display panel from the side or the back. 
3  A Scopus search on “touch display” gives a total of 2,706 publications, of which the following 
institutions are the top 10 publishers: University of Tokyo (47), Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy (39), University of British Columbia (29), University of Calgary (23), University of Toronto (22), 
KAIST (formerly Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology) (22), University of Oxford 
Medical Sciences Division (20), Stanford University (20), Microsoft Research (20), and Carnegie 
Mellon University (19). SOURCE: Scopus database. Available at http://www.scopus.com/home.url. 
Accessed November 28, 2011.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
262
Several backlighting technologies exist, and they depend critically on advances in 
optical and photonic technologies. Solid-state lighting (LEDs) is now replacing 
most other lighting approaches for backlighting.4,5
Another technology with potential for big future impact and leadership by the 
United States is three-dimensional holographic displays.6 Uses today are mainly 
for military applications, but the technology could become widely available if the 
technology advances and cost declines.
THE NEAR FUTURE
The next few years should see a continuation of the trend of ever-larger dis-
plays at lower prices. In addition, higher-quality LED illumination with higher 
refresh rates (up to 240 hertz [Hz]) will be developed. In the United States, the 
display market has transitioned to flat panels; LCD displays now account for a high 
percentage of new sales. Plasma captures a smaller share of the TV market and is 
expected to decline as a fraction of the total TVs produced.7 There is considerable 
interest in OLED TVs, but they are at least several years away from capturing a sig-
nificant share of the market. However, when the remaining technical challenges are 
solved, OLED displays should become a significant competitor to LCD displays.8 
Another big trend is “three-dimensional-ready” televisions, although most of them 
are limited by the need for special glasses for viewing. Innovations are needed for 
three-dimensional displays that do not require special glasses. Additional trends for 
display products include thinner and lower-power-consumption displays. Several 
countries are beginning to impose restrictions on the total power consumption 
of display units, forcing manufacturers to come up with better designs, especially 
for lighting, which consumes approximately 25 to 40 percent of the total display 
unit power.9 On the notebook computer side, where low power consumption is 
a major consideration, LED lighting is the dominant technology. For desktops, 
fluorescent lighting is still being used because thickness and power consumption 
4  Anandan, M. 2008. Progress of LED backlights for LCDs. Journal of the Society for Information 
Display. Volume 16(2):287-310.
5  Flanders, V. 2012. Liquid Crystal Display and Technology. New Delhi: World Technologies.
6  Zebra Imaging. 2012. Available at http://www.zebraimaging.com. Accessed July 31, 2012.
7  In 2010, LCDs increased by 31 percent to 187.9 million units, while plasma grew by 29 percent 
to 18.24 million units. Data from Displaybank’s Month-to-Month FPD TV Shipment Information 
report; see Slipokoyenko Y., ed. 2012. Plasma vs LCD vs LED. Available at http://www.hdtvreviewspro.
com/plasma-vs-lcd-vs-led/. Accessed August 2, 2012.
8  Semenza, P. 2010. Display week 2010 review and market outlook: Can OLED displays make the 
move from the mobile phone to the TV? Information Display 26(8):14-17.
9  Lubarsky, G. 2011. “A Holistic Approach to Reducing Backlight Power Consumption.” How 2 ­Power 
Today. Available at http://www.how2power.com/newsletters/1110/articles/­H2PowerToday1110_­
design_TexasInstruments.pdf. Accessed November 28, 2011.

263
D i s p l a y s
are not critical. Higher refresh rates and three-dimensional displays are beginning 
to penetrate the desktop market.
Although traditionally associated mostly with “science fiction” movies, the abil-
ity to create and view three-dimensional optical holographic images has potential 
applications in which full three-dimensional viewing is of great benefit, such as in 
defense, telemedicine, high-skill-level training, and collaborative rapid prototyp-
ing. A U.S. company, Zebra Imaging,10 is taking a leadership role in trying to com-
mercialize this technology, and its ZScape holographic motion displays were named 
by Time magazine as one of the top 50 inventions of 2011.11 With this technology, 
teams of people can collaborate in real time by viewing lifelike, interactive images 
from any angle and with fine detail.
OVERVIEW OF DISPLAYS
This section briefly describes the different display technologies. For a more 
in-depth description, see Appendix C.
Liquid-Crystal Displays
Polarized light and its manipulation are fundamental to the operation of an 
LCD. Such manipulation allows the creation of light valves (devices for varying the 
amount of light from an illumination source to a desired target), with millions of 
miniature valves in a single high-definition display.12 To achieve color, each pixel is 
subdivided into subpixels, with red, green, and blue (RGB) filters. Transistors on a 
glass substrate control the voltage and thus the amount of light passed through each 
subpixel. The early motivation for color LCDs was use in notebook computing. 
Improvements in LCDs resulted in wider applications and led to the displacement 
of competing technologies, including CRTs in traditional television sets.
There has been at least some market interest in extending LCDs to three-
dimensional displays, exploiting polarization in a different way.13 In one tech-
nique, a polarizer on the glasses worn by the viewer matches the orientation of 
the polarized output of the display. Another possible approach for creating three-
10  Zebra Imaging. 2012. “Motion Displays.” Available at www.zebraimaging.com/products/motion-
displays. Accessed July 30, 2012.
11  Grossman, L., M. Thompson, J. Kluger, A. Park, B. Walsh, C. Suddath, E. Dodds, K. Webley, 
N. Rawlings, F. Sun, C. Brock-Abraham, and N. Carbone. 2011. Top 50 inventions. November 28. 
Time magazine. Available at http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2099708,00.html. 
Accessed November 15, 2012.
12  For information on the control of polarization in LCD to define color, see Appendix C.
13  For more information, see Appendix C.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
264
dimensional displays is the use of lenticular arrays14,15 to create a fixed number 
of viewing zones (usually about seven to nine) in which the left and right images 
are coherent although with reduced resolution (see Figure 10.1). At present, the 
acceptance of the latter approach has been limited by restriction of the positions 
from which the display can be observed; image quality suffers significantly if an 
improper position is used.
Another trend for LCDs is in providing greater color fidelity than is currently 
possible. That is related to another recent trend: the replacement of fluorescent 
tubes with LEDs in the display backlight. The most common backlight now consists 
of white LEDs, which themselves consist of blue emitters passing through a color-
converting phosphor, typically cerium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Ce:YAG).
A problem with such white LEDs in an LCD backlight application is that the 
color filters are not perfect. The light from the green and the red filters overlaps with 
yellow wavelengths passed by both filters. That results in colors that are less true, so, 
for example, a completely green image appears more yellow-green than true green.
It has been suggested that the color-filter deficiencies might be addressed by 
substituting LEDs that emit only in relatively narrow wavelength bands of RGB. 
Although that might be done with RGB rather than white LEDs, another possibility 
is that quantum dots (QDs) would substitute for phosphor (see Figure 10.2). QDs 
would have the advantage of providing much more precise and narrow-wavelength 
color conversion so that emission of the white LED with QD color conversion 
would not need to emit at all in the yellow band where the green and red filters 
overlap. The result would be more pure colors and a broader color gamut.
Touch Displays
Of the several kinds of touch technologies, three are most prevalent: resistive, 
in which a touching object presses down and causes two separated layers to connect 
to each other at that point; optical, in which a touching object appears as a shadow, 
and cameras can locate and measure the size of the object; and capacitive, in which 
an electrically conducting finger touching a screen results in a distortion of the 
screen’s electrostatic field and a change in capacitance. Resistive touch technology 
was the first to be used, most commonly in bank automated teller machines and 
cash registers. It has low cost but low resolution. Optical touch technology was 
invented and commercialized (for example, the HP 150 PC in 1984) with much 
14  Johnson, R.B., and G.A. Jacobsen. 2005. Advances in lenticular lens arrays for visual display. 
Proceedings of SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering. Volume 5874.
15  Kim, H., and J. Hahn. 2010. Optimal design of lens array for wide-viewing angle multi-view len-
ticular 3D displays. Proceedings of the International Meeting on Information Display and International 
Display Manufacturing Conference and Asia Display, October 11-15, 2010, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

265
D i s p l a y s
FIGURE 10.1  Multiple autostereoscopic viewing zones with lenticular array. SOURCE: International 
Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) and Organisation Internationale de Normalisation (IEC). 2008. 
“Introduction to 3D Video.” Available at http://mpeg.chiariglione.org/technologies/general/mp-3dv/
index.htm. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 10.2  Improved color gamut with quantum dots. SOURCE: Photo Credit: Nanosys/Thom 
Sanborn. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
266
better resolution and performance, but it was not easily scaled to larger displays. 
Not until capacitive touch technology was commercialized on a large scale (for 
example, the Apple iPhone) did consumers begin to expect mobile appliances 
and laptops to incorporate touch. Regardless of the sensing mechanism (resistive, 
capacitive, or optical), touch technologies have two important aspects that rely on 
optics: the display function (brightness, contrast, resolution, refresh rate, and so 
on) and the construction of the touch sensors.
Capacitive coupling in touch displays exploits the fact that the signal driven 
on one conductor will couple to an adjacent conductor. Before 2007, this phenom-
enon was not widely perceived as a good means of implementing touch, although 
it had been used on all the notebook touchpads since the mid-1990s and on the 
iPod since 2001. However, as a result of Apple’s introducing its first iPhone, which 
incorporated projected capacitive multi-touch, considerable new interest in this 
technology has been generated.
In projected capacitive touch, the display area is divided into a grid of unit 
cells of roughly 5 mm × 5 mm each, the size commonly selected for the typical size 
of a fingertip.16 The most common implementation of projected capacitive touch 
involves a touch sensor array bonded directly behind a cover glass. In the display ap-
erture area, the conductors are transparent and typically made of indium tin oxide 
(ITO).17,18 The fundamental challenge in projected capacitive touch technology is 
the poor conductivity of the transparent conductors. The technology requires that 
the touching instrument (digit) be a conducting one. Thus, a gloved hand or non-
metallic pen would not be detected. In addition, the system is typically optimized 
for the size of a finger, and so using a stylus, even if it is conductive, would result 
in errors due to poor interpolation. One potential substitute for capacitive touch 
is optical, but thus far the application of optical sensors has been limited mostly 
to very large displays. In wall-size optical touch displays, infrared (IR) LEDs and 
imagers are typically positioned in the upper corners of the array, and retroreflec-
tors are along the sides and bottom. The reflectors return the IR to the imagers 
unless interrupted by the shadow of a touch.
A plastic front polarizer, which would be prone to damage from touch unless 
protected by a cover glass, is currently used for LCDs of all sizes. One potential 
trend could be to eliminate this polarizer by substituting an internal polarizer. 
Although this would be difficult to achieve, an internal polarizer would sit on the 
liquid-crystal side of the front color filter glass. With that configuration, the face of 
16  For details about touch displays, their composition, and challenges faced in their development, 
see Appendix C.
17  Chopra, K.L., S. Major, and D.K. Pandya. 1983. Transparent conductors—A status review. Thin 
Solid Films 102(1):1-46.
18  Granqvist, Claes G. 2007. Transparent conductors as solar energy materials: A panoramic review. 
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 91(17):1529-1598.

267
D i s p l a y s
the display would be the color filter glass rather than the polarizer plastic. Achieving 
such a substitution would motivate efforts to eliminate the stand-alone cover glass 
and integrate the protection of a cover into the color filter glass itself.
OLED Displays
OLEDs make use of the electrophosphorescence exhibited by some organic 
molecules to create light directly at the diode itself when desired; the color of the 
diode can be adjusted by the choice of organic molecules. Therefore, an array 
of OLEDs can directly generate the displayed image rather than light a modula-
tor, such as an LCD, to create the displayed image. Because the image is directly 
generated, light is not wasted by attenuating it with the modulator that creates 
the image, and these displays can be thinner because generating the image is a 
single-step process. OLED-based displays can therefore be brighter than LCDs 
and consume less power.19,20 Two principal ways are used to supply the electrical 
bias to the individual OLEDs in a display: passive- and active-matrix designs.21 
In a passive-matrix scheme, the individual anodes and cathodes are connected 
by perpendicular conducting strips, and external circuitry applies voltages to the 
rows and columns that are necessary to determine which pixels will be turned on. 
At present, the external circuitry required for a passive-matrix design results in 
higher power consumption than is needed with an active-matrix display. Active-
matrix displays incorporate a thin-film transistor (TFT) array as part of the device 
to supply the power to the individual OLEDs. This biasing scheme uses less power 
than is needed for the passive-matrix design and has a higher refresh rate, and so 
it is suitable for large displays.22
Because non-rigid substrates can be used, OLED displays can be more robust 
than displays that incorporate glass. That makes OLEDs potentially useful in ap-
plications in which they will be subjected to rough handling, such as in cell phones 
or other consumer electronics. Furthermore, in the case of completely flexible 
substrates, the displays could be used in applications in which no other display 
currently can be contemplated, such as being integral with an article of clothing.
OLEDs offer several advantages over both LCDs and LEDs for small and large 
19  Kelley, T.W., P.F. Baude, C. Gerlach, D.E. Ender, D. Muyres, M.A. Haase, D.E. Vogel, and S.D. 
Theisset. 2004. Recent progress in organic electronics: Materials, devices, and processes. Chemistry 
of Materials 16(23):4413-4422.
20  Iwamoto, M., Y. Kwon, and T. Lee. 2011. Nanoscale Interface for Organic Electronics. Singapore. 
Hackensack, N.J.: World Scientific.
21  Ju, S., J. Li, J. Liu, P. Chen, Y. Ha, F. Ishikawa, H. Chang, C. Zhou, A. Facchetti, D.B. Janes, and 
T.J. Marks. 2008. Transparent active matrix organic light-emitting diode displays driven by nanowire 
transistor circuitry. Nano Letters 8(4):997-1004.
22  For more details about OLED displays, see Appendix C.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
268
displays: they can have substrates that are flexible and more impact-resistant than 
glass or rigid plastic; they have higher brightness than LEDs; they do not require 
backlighting, as LCDs do, which is a significant power drain that limits battery 
life; they offer ease of deposition on very large substrates; and they have a larger 
field of view and a wider operating temperature range than LCDs. However, pres-
ent OLEDs also have significant disadvantages, including shorter lifetimes23,24 and 
lower efficiency.
Flexible Displays
Future flexible displays could be extremely thin, light, and inexpensive. More-
over, flexible displays could enable the display market to expand to new applica-
tions, including e-paper and large signage.
In recent years, engineers worldwide have been developing the organic ma-
terials and manufacturing processes to make flexible displays a reality. Such new 
materials could be OLEDs, liquid crystals, and electrophoretic particles. Moreover, 
plastic substrates and printable semiconductors are now available to help to create 
flexible back planes. Other key technologies are needed for future flexible LCDs 
or OLEDs, such as the use of stable and heat-resistant organic materials and low-
temperature printing.
In the next decade, flexible substrates (such as thin-film polymers) could have a 
large impact, enabling the possibility of printing reports on e-paper25,26 that is both 
thin and reusable. Cell phones could have large displays that could be unfurled. 
Displays might even be placed on non-flat clothing surfaces. Commercial labora-
tories are working on flexible displays27 that can be 15-inch displays and larger.
23  Wellmann, P., M. Hofmann, O. Zeika, A. Werner, J. Birnstock, R. Meerheim, G. He, K. Walzer, 
M. Pfeiffer, and K. Leo. 2005. High-efficiency p-i-n organic light-emitting diodes with long lifetime. 
Journal of the Society for Information Display 13(5):393-397.
24  Luiz, Pereira. 2010. Organic Light Emitting Diodes: The Use of Rare Earth and Transition Metals. 
Singapore: Pan Stanford.
25  Burns, S.E., K. Reynolds, W. Reeves, M. Banach, T. Brown, K. Chalmers, N. Cousins, M. Etchells, 
C. Hayton, K. Jacobs, A. Menon, S. Siddique, P. Too, C. Ramsdale, J. Watts, P. Cain, T. Von Werne, J. 
Mills, C. Curling, H. Sirringhaus, K. Amundson, and M.D. McCreary. 2005. A scalable manufactur-
ing process for flexible active-matrix e-paper displays. Journal of the Society for Information Display 
13(7):583-586.
26  Blankenbach K., L-C Chien, S.-D. Lee, and M.H. Wu. 2011. “Advances in Display Technologies, 
e-papers and Flexible Displays.” Proceedings of SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineer-
ing. January 26-27. San Francisco, Calif. Bellingham, Wash.: SPIE.
27  Choi, M.-C., Y. Kim, and C.-S. Ha. 2008. Polymers for flexible displays: From material selection 
to device applications. Progress in Polymer Science 33(6):581-630.

269
D i s p l a y s
Projection Displays
Although projectors are widely used in schools and for presentations to large 
audiences, price has been the major factor in their adoption rather than the size, 
the power consumption, or, to some extent, the brightness of these projectors. 
In contrast, size, power consumption, and brightness are the dominant technical 
specifications that inhibit the incorporation of projectors in handheld devices of 
various types. The market for such battery-powered “personal projectors” is ex-
pected to be much larger than that for “traditional” mains-powered projectors.28
Currently, three major technologies are used to project images that are created 
or transmitted electronically: digital light processors (DLPs), which use an array of 
micromirrors to create an image by the reflection of light illuminating the mirrors; 
liquid crystal on silicon (LCoS), which creates an image by modulating the intensity 
of the light by means of liquid crystals; and beam steering of one or more lasers, 
which is used to “write” an image directly on a screen. All three are candidates for 
future development for incorporation in handheld devices. Such devices have strict 
requirements on energy consumption, as well as size.
Each of those technologies has advantages and disadvantages, and there is 
no clear overall winner yet. DLP projectors incorporating RGB LEDs have high 
image quality and low power consumption, but they have lower resolution than 
LCoS projectors. Laser scanning also has low power consumption, but laser speckle 
noise affects image quality. In all cases, the challenge is to provide an image that 
is large enough to be advantageous over a handheld device’s built-in screen and 
that is bright enough to be seen under less than ideal lighting conditions and is of 
a quality that end users consider acceptable and to provide this capability without 
unacceptable battery drain.
Three-Dimensional Holographic Displays
A display can sometimes create the illusion of being three-dimensional when 
a stereoscopic technology is used to produce images. The human visual system, 
however, experiences a two-dimensional plane, and it is not true three-dimensional 
images that are being displayed. In contrast, modern holographic displays are able 
to produce true three-dimensional images (or holograms) that do not require any 
28  The technology for storing images has completely outpaced the technology of the projectors 
needed to display them. A carousel holding 140 35-mm slides is comparable in volume to that of the 
projector. Similarly, 140 plastic foils are comparable in volume to that of a portable overhead projec-
tor. In contrast, today it is possible to carry more than 10,000 high-resolution images on a tiny flash 
drive. This capability is driving the desire to create portable projectors, comparable in size to a cell 
phone, that are capable of displaying these electronically stored images.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
270
special eyewear (see the two images in Figure 10.3.29 The first interactive three-
dimensional holographic system was demonstrated in 1990 at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Media Lab.30 Note that a simple hologram can be created 
by superimposing two coherent plane waves; the resulting interference pattern 
produces a straight-line fringe across the recording medium.
In an electroholographic display, the three-dimensional object is converted into 
a fringe pattern. To do that, a computer graphic stage is used to perform lighting, 
shading, occlusion, and rendering to two-dimensional images. For some cases, 
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data, this stage is trivial inasmuch as 
the data may already be stored as three-dimensional voxels, and each voxel might 
already have the color and shading information. Later, the fringe generation stage 
computes a large two-dimensional holographic fringe based on the result of the 
computer graphic stage. It is worth mentioning that significant computing power 
is necessary to produce realistic computer-generated holograms (real-time three-
dimensional displaying and telepresence), and recent progress in digital signal 
processing has enabled the present advances.
After generation of fringe patterns, spatial-light modulators (SLMs) are used 
to convert the three-dimensional information in electronic bits into optical pho-
tons with a computed holographic fringe pattern. It should be noted that either 
amplitude modulation or phase modulation can be used in three-dimensional 
holographic imaging.31 LCDs tend to use phase modulators because of their optical 
efficiency, and they can have many gray-scale levels that are useful for generating 
complex images. Acousto-optic modulator SLMs have also been used in holovideo 
because of their fast response, and this technique was used in the first demonstra-
tion of three-dimensional holographic displays (see Figure 10.4).32
The applications of three-dimensional displays are potentially far-reaching 
and include medical training, military simulation, situational awareness, and 
entertainment.
29  Blanche P.-A., A. Bablumian, R. Voorakaranam, C. Christenson, W. Lin, T. Gu, D. Flores, P. Wang, 
W.-Y. Hsieh, M. Kathaperumal, B. Rachwal, O. Siddiqui, J. Thomas, R.A. Norwood, M. Yamamoto, 
and N. Peyghambarian. 2010. Holographic three-dimensional telepresence using large-area photore-
fractive polymer. Nature 468:80-83.
30  Reichelt, S., R. Haussler, N. Leister, G. Futterer, and A. Schwerdtner. 2008. “Large Holographic 
3D Displays for Tomorrow’s TV and Monitors—Solutions, Challenges, and Prospects.” IEEE Lasers 
and Electro-Optics Society Annual Meeting, November 9-13, 2008, Newport Beach, Calif.
31  Lucente, M. 2003. “Interactive Holographic Displays: The First 10 Years.” In Holography: The First 
50 Years, Fournier, J.M., ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
32  Lucente, M. 2003. “Interactive Holographic Displays: The First 10 Years.”

271
D i s p l a y s
FIGURE 10.3  Pictures of colored holograms. (Left) Hologram of two model cars recorded. (Right) Hologram of 
a vase and flowers. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Blanche P.-A., A. Bablumian, R. Voorakaranam, 
C. Christenson, W. Lin, T. Gu, D. Flores, P. Wang, W.-Y. Hsieh, M. Kathaperumal, B. Rachwal, O. Siddiqui, J. 
Thomas, R.A. Norwood, M. Yamamoto, and N. Peyghambarian. 2010. Holographic three-dimensional telepres-
ence using large-area photorefractive polymer. Nature 468:80-83.
FIGURE 10.4  Holographic optical modulation using a typical high-resolution spatial-light modulator 
(SLM). At present, a minimum of 2 million modulation elements is required to produce even a small 
three-dimensional image the size of a thumb. SOURCE: Lucente, M. 2003. “Interactive Holographic 
Displays: The First 10 Years.” In Holography: The First 50 Years, Fournier, J.M., ed. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
272
DISPLAY PRODUCT MANUFACTURING
As discussed in Chapter 7, the bulk of LCD panel production occurs outside the 
United States; the leading countries are Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and China.33 In 1998, 
when Harnessing Light was published, most production had already moved outside 
the United States. At that time, Japan was dominant, and Korea was just starting 
to play a big role. The same holds true in the production of touch sensors; Taiwan 
holds a slightly stronger position than the others. The segment of the touch-display 
technologies in which the United States leads is the touch controller circuits, in 
whose production the major firms are Atmel,34 Broadcom,35 and Synaptics.36 In the 
United States, Corning is producing large sheets of the high-quality glass needed for 
the display panels (color filter and thin-film transistors) in factories in Kentucky.
The committee believes that the role best played by U.S. companies in the 
future of displays is in the research and development of new technologies. The 
committee would like to see a future in which new manufacturing remains in this 
country.
FINDINGS
Key Finding:  Although traditional LCD manufacturing has migrated out of the 
United States, there are opportunities in future display technologies that can give 
U.S. industry competitive leadership advantages in R&D and manufacturing. They 
include energy-efficient backlighting, OLED displays and flexible displays, and 
real-time three-dimensional-holographic displays.
Finding:  An overarching issue for U.S. leadership and revolutionary advances in 
displays involves new materials that are low cost, durable, green, and easy to pro-
cess. For example, the dominant LCD technology consumes a significant amount 
of energy; backlighting subsystems consume about 25 to 40 percent of the total 
display power.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Solid-state lighting (with LEDs) is discussed in Chapter 5. Not only is great 
progress being made, but it is a field that the United States should emphasize.
33  National Research Council. 2008. Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a 
New World (Collected Studies), J.T. Macher and D.C. Mowery, eds. Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press.
34  Atmel Corporation. 2012. See http://www.atmel.com/Default.aspx/. Accessed July 31, 2012.
35  Broadcom Corporation. 2012. See http://www.broadcom.com/. Accessed July 31, 2012.
36  Synaptics, Inc. 2012. See http://www.synaptics.com/. Accessed July 31, 2012.

273
D i s p l a y s
Recommendation:  U.S. private display companies should invest in and take ad-
vantage of the development of solid-state lighting for more efficient and uniform 
illumination of displays.
Recommendation:  U.S. private companies and the Department of Defense should 
ensure a leadership role by funding R&D related to new materials for flexible, low-
power, holographic and three-dimensional display technologies.


Appendixes


277
A
Statement of Task, with 
Introductory Information
The statements below introduced and presented the statement of task for the 
Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science Trends and Chal-
lenges for Future Research.
BACKGROUND
The National Research Council will convene a committee to: (1) Review up-
dates in the state of the science that have taken place since publication of the 
National Research Council report Harnessing Light in 1998.1 (2) Identify the tech-
nological opportunities that have arisen from recent advances in optical science and 
engineering. (3) Assess the current state of optical science and engineering in the 
United States and abroad. (4) Prioritize a set of research grand-challenge questions 
to fill identified technological gaps. (5) Recommend actions for the development 
and maintenance of global leadership in the photonics-driven industry.2
INTRODUCTION
The discipline of optical science and engineering (OSE) has been founda-
tional for many of the scientific and technical advances of the past 100 years and 
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2  See the full formal statement below, in the section “Statement of Task.”

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
278
is one of the key transformative disciplines driving innovation in the 21st-century 
economy. In 1998, the National Research Council through the Board on Physics 
and Astronomy and the National Materials Advisory Board issued a landmark 
report, Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st Century, that 
(1) captured the importance of optics and photonics, (2) described the major chal-
lenges facing the field, (3) made strategic recommendations for national policy, 
and (4) impacted the discussions of institutions around the world. As the first 
comprehensive report in the field of optics, Harnessing Light clearly demonstrated 
that optics is an enabling technology to many educational, governmental, health 
care, industrial, and military organizations. While the original Harnessing Light 
report has been extremely useful to both U.S. and foreign, academic, industrial, and 
governmental organizations, in the past 10 years enormous progress has been made 
in photonics sciences and technologies. Irrespective of the economic conditions, 
OSE is headed toward another strong growth period, driven by developments in 
advanced materials, solid state lighting, solar technologies, sensors, lasers, imaging, 
fiber-optic communications, digital photography, diagnostic medicine, computing/
processing, and consumer displays/TVs. The impacted markets encompass criti-
cal issues that affect society, ranging from energy, data storage, and health care to 
manufacturing, communications, and security. A revisiting of the technology and 
policy issues would be quite timely. The new report would address the role that 
photonics plays in national competitiveness and innovation. For example, the infu-
sion of photonics-related technologies into mass-market applications will require 
careful thought in order to economically and appropriately harness the necessary 
multifunctional manufacturing capabilities. The new study could identify national 
strengths and weaknesses in relation to current and future needs including eco-
nomic impact, workforce needs, and future research directions. Given that the 2007 
National Research Council report Controlling the Quantum World: The Science of 
Atoms, Molecules, and Photons3 includes much of the area of basic optical science, 
this study would consider the technology areas where optics is an enabler that can 
dramatically impact the economy of the country.
STATEMENT OF TASK
A committee of the National Academies will be convened to:
1.	 Review updates in the state of the science that have taken place since pub-
lication of the National Research Council report Harnessing Light;
3  National Research Council. 2007. Controlling the Quantum World: The Science of Atoms, Molecules, 
and Photons, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

279
A p p e n d i x  A
2.	 Identify the technological opportunities that have arisen from recent ad-
vances in and potential applications of optical science and engineering;
3.	 Assess the current state of optical science and engineering in the United 
States and abroad, including trends in private and public research, market 
needs, examples of translating progress in photonics innovation into com-
petitiveness advantage (including activities by small businesses), workforce 
needs, manufacturing infrastructure, and the impact of photonics on the 
national economy;
4.	 Prioritize a set of research grand-challenge questions to fill identified tech-
nological gaps in pursuit of national needs and national competitiveness;
5.	 Recommend actions for the development and maintenance of global lead-
ership in the photonics-driven industry—including both near-term and 
long-range goals, likely participants, and responsible agents of change.
In carrying out this charge, the committee will consider the materials necessary for 
the technological development of optics.
THE COMMITTEE
This project will be executed by an ad hoc National Research Council com-
mittee appointed to carry out this study and produce the report, under the over-
sight of the Board on Manufacturing and Engineering Design. In recognition of 
the increasing importance of materials science to innovations in engineering and 
manufacturing, the National Materials and Manufacturing Board was formed. This 
Board combines the charges of two preexisting boards: the National Materials Ad-
visory Board and the Board on Manufacturing and Engineering Design. The com-
mittee will consist of about 16 experts chosen to cover the breadth of fields that are 
relevant to the charge. The committee membership will ideally include experts and 
researchers from universities, national laboratories, and industrial research centers. 
The committee will meet in person a total of four times over about 12 months.

280
B
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AAAS	
American Association for the Advancement of Science
ABL	
Airborne Laser Laboratory
AC	
alternating current
ACF	
anisotropic conducive film
AFOSR	
Air Force Office of Scientific Research
AIDS	
acquired immune deficiency syndrome
AIP	
American Institute of Physics
ALTB	
Airborne Laser Test Bed
ALTSim	
alternative liquid fuels simulation model
AMD	
age-related macular degeneration
AMO	
atomic, molecular, optics
AO	
adaptive optics
APD	
avalanche photodiode
APPLE	
Adaptive Photonic Phase Locked Elements (program)
APRS	
advanced plasma reactive sputtering
APS	
American Physical Society
ARGUS-IS	
Autonomous Real-Time Ground Ubiquitous Surveillance-Imaging 
System
ARO	
Army Research Office
ARPA	
Advanced Research Projects Agency
ASML	
Advanced Semiconductor Materials Lithography (Dutch company)
ATL	
advanced tactical laser
ATP	
Advanced Technology Program

281
A p p e n d i x  B
BER	
bit error rate
BRCA1	
breast cancer susceptibility gene 1
BRCA2	
breast cancer susceptibility gene 2
CAD	
computer-aided design
CCD	
charge-coupled device
CCT	
correlated color temperature
Ce:YAG	
cerium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet
CIA	
Central Intelligence Agency
CIGS	
copper indium gallium selenide
CLEO	
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
CMOS	
complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CMU	
Carnegie Mellon University
CNC	
computer numerically controlled
CO	
carbon monoxide
CO2	
carbon dioxide
COIL	
chemical oxygen iodine laser
CPV	
concentrating photovoltaic
CRI	
Color Rendering Index
CSP	
concentrating solar power
CT	
computed tomography
CTE	
coefficient of thermal expansion
CVD	
chemical vapor deposition
DARPA	
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DAS	
distributed acoustic sensing
DC	
direct current
DHS	
Department of Homeland Security
DLP	
digital light processor
DNA	
deoxyribonucleic acid
DOD	
Department of Defense
DOE	
Department of Energy
DPP	
discharge-produced plasma
DPSK	
differential phase-shift keying
DQPSK	
differential quadrature phase-shift keying
DR	
diabetic retinopathy
DSO	
Defense Sciences Office
DSP	
digital signal processing
ECE	
energy critical element
ECOC	
European Conference on Optical Communication

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
282
EDFA	
erbium-doped fiber amplifier
EE	
electrical engineering
EECS	
electrical engineering and computer science
EERE	
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
EM	
electromagnetic
EO	
electrooptical
EPMD	
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (Division, NSF)
ER	
emergency room
EU	
European Union
EUV	
extreme ultraviolet
FACS	
flow cytometry
FDI	
foreign direct investment
flops	
floating point operations per second
FOV	
field of view
FPA	
focal plane array
FPD	
flat panel display
FTTH	
fiber to the home
FY	
fiscal year
GaAs	
gallium arsenide
GFP	
green fluorescent protein
GFR	
glomerular filtration rate
GHz	
gigahertz
GPS	
Global Positioning System
GPT	
general-purpose technology
HALOE	
halogen occultation experiment
HAMR	
heat-assisted magnetic recording
HDTV	
high-definition television
HEL JTO	
High Energy Laser-Joint Technology Office
HELLADS	
High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System
HGP	
Human Genome Project
HIV	
human immunodeficiency virus
Ho:YAG	
holmium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet
HT	
high-throughput
IAD	
ion-assisted deposition
IBS	
ion beam sputtering
IC	
integrated circuit
IEA	
International Energy Agency

283
A p p e n d i x  B
IEEE	
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IGZO	
indium gallium zinc oxide
InAs	
indium arsenide
InP	
indium phosphide
IP	
intellectual property
IPO	
initial public offering
IQE	
internal quantum efficiency
IR	
infrared
IRR	
internal rate of return
IRS	
Internal Revenue Service
ISAT	
Information Science and Technology Board (DARPA)
ISIS	
Integrated Sensor Is Structure (program)
ISR	
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
IT	
information technology
ITAR	
International Traffic in Arms Regulations
ITO	
indium tin oxide
ITRS	
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
IWGN	
Interagency Working Group of Nanotechnology
JBSDS	
Joint Biological Stand-off Detection System
JHPSSL	
Joint High Power Solid State Laser
JTEC	
Japanese Technology Evaluation Center
JTO	
Joint Technology Office
LACOSTE	
Large Area Coverage Optical Search-while-Track and Engage
LADAR	
laser radar
LAN	
local area network
LASIK	
laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis
LCD	
liquid-crystal display
LCM	
laser capture micro dissection
LCOE	
levelized cost of energy
LCoS	
liquid crystal on silicon
LED	
light-emitting diode
LELE	
litho-etch-litho-etch
LENS™	
Laser Engineered Net Shaping
LEOS	
Lasers and Electro-Optics Society
LFLE	
litho-freezing-litho-etch
LIA	
Laser Institute of America
LIDAR	
light detection and ranging
LIGO	
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
LISA	
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
284
LLE	
litho-litho-etch
LOCI	
Ladar and Optical Communications Institute
LP	
linear polarization
LPP	
laser-produced plasma
MANPADS	 man portable air defense systems
MDR	
multi-drug resistant
MEMS	
microelectromechanical system
MIMO	
multiple-input, multiple-output
MIPS	
millions of instructions per second
MIT	
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MLD	
Maritime Laser Demonstrator
MOCVD	
metal-organic chemical vapor deposition
MONET	
multiwavelength optical networking
MOPA	
master oscillator power amplifier
MOS	
metal oxide semiconductor
MRF	
magnetorheological finishing
MRI	
magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA	
messenger ribonucleic acid
MTHEL	
Mobile Tactical High Energy Laser
MTO	
Microsystems Technology Office
MWIR	
mid-wavelength infrared
NA	
numerical aperture
NAE	
National Academy of Engineering
NAICS	
North American Industry Classification System
NAS	
National Academy of Sciences
NASA	
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NATO	
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCI	
National Cancer Institute
Nd:YAG	
neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet
NEI	
National Eye Institute
NHLBI	
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
NIH	
National Institutes of Health
NIST	
National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMMB	
National Materials and Manufacturing Board
NNAP	
National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel
NNI	
National Nanotechnology Initiative
NRC	
National Research Council
NRDA	
Nanotechnology Research and Development Act
NREL	
National Renewable Energy Laboratory

285
A p p e n d i x  B
NSE	
nanoscale science and engineering
NSET	
Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology
NSF	
National Science Foundation
NVCA	
National Venture Capital Association
OADM	
optical add/drop multiplexer
OAI	
off-axis illumination
OCT	
optical coherence tomography
OFC	
Optical Fiber Communications Conference
OFDM	
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
OIDA	
Optoelectronics Industry Development Association
OITDA	
Optoelectronics Industry and Technology Development 
Association
OLED	
organic light-emitting diode
ONR	
Office of Naval Research
OOK	
on-off keying
OPC	
optical proximity correction
OSA	
Optical Society of America
OSE	
optical science and engineering
OSTP	
Office of Science and Technology Policy
PC	
personal computer
PCAST	
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
PCF	
photonic-crystal fiber
PCR	
polymerase chain reaction
PDM	
polarization division multiplexed
PhC	
photonic crystal
PIC	
photonic integrated circuit
PISA	
Program for International Student Assessment
PON	
passive optical network
PRK	
photorefractive keratectomy
PSA	
prostate-specific antigen
PSK	
phase-shift keying
PSM	
phase-shifting masks
PV	
photovoltaic
PVOCT	
phase variance optical coherence tomography
QAM	
quadrature-amplitude-modulation
QCMC	
quantum communication, measurement, and computing
QCSE	
Quantum-Confined Stark Effect 
QD	
quantum dot

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
286
QELS	
quantum electronics and laser science
QKD	
quantum key distribution
QPSK	
quadrature-phase-shift-keying
QW	
quantum well
R&D	
research and development
RCA	
Radio Corporation of America
RET	
resolution enhancement technology
RF	
radio frequency
RGB	
red green blue
RIN	
relative intensity noise
RMS	
root mean square
RNA	
ribonucleic acid
ROADM	
reconfigurable optical add/drop multiplexer
RT-PCR	
real-time polymerase chain reaction
S&T	
science and technology
SAIL	
Synthetic Aperture Imaging Ladar
SAM	
Solar Advisor Model
SAR	
synthetic aperture radar
SBIR	
Small Business Innovation Research
SBS	
synthesis-based sequencing
SDM	
space division multiplexing
SEMATECH	 Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology
SEMI	
Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International
SIC	
Standard Industrial Classification
SIM	
sensing, imaging, and metrology
SLS	
selective laser sintering
SOP	
state of polarization
SPDT	
single-point diamond turning
SPIE	
International Society for Optics and Photonics
SRC	
Semiconductor Research Corporation
SS	
solid state
STEM	
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
SWaP	
size, weight, and power
TFPV	
thin-film photovoltaics
TFT	
thin-film transistor
THEL	
Tactical High Energy Laser
TIP	
Technology Innovation Program

287
A p p e n d i x  B
UAV	
unmanned aerial vehicle
UNCTAD	
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNESCO	
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
UNIDO	
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USPTO	
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
UV	
ultraviolet
VCSEL	
vertical cavity surface emitting laser
WDM	
wavelength division multiplexing
YAG	
yttrium aluminum garnet

288
C
Additional Technology Examples
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
This appendix gives examples of additional technologies in the area of optics 
and photonics as they relate to many of the fields described in the chapters of 
this report. The Committee on Harnessing Light: Capitalizing on Optical Science 
Trends and Challenges for Future Research believes that this compilation puts ad-
ditional emphasis on how optics and photonics truly are enabling technologies, 
and at the same time it provides the reader with further examples that highlight 
the many complex ways that optics and photonics support the foundation of many 
common areas not always directly associated with the fields of optics and photonics.
DEFENSE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
This section discusses the changes in many of the areas that were addressed in 
“Optics in National Defense,” Chapter 4 of the National Research Council’s (NRC’s) 
1998 Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering in the 21st Century.1 The 
subsections below provide an update for the areas of surveillance, night vision, 
laser systems operating in the atmosphere and in space, fiber-optic systems, and 
special techniques (e.g., chemical and biological species detection, laser gyros, and 
optical signal processing).
1  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light: Optical Science and Engineering for the 21st 
Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

289
A p p e n d i x  C
Surveillance
Surveillance still plays a critical role in the detection and assessment of hostile 
threats to the United States. High-resolution imaging satellites have been deployed 
for more than 50 years to provide critical data for U.S. defense experts over de-
nied airspace. The progress in optical sensors over the past decade has created an 
exponential growth in intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) data 
from both passive and active sensors. This progress includes not just an increase 
in area coverage rate, but also an increase in sensor capabilities and performance. 
Material advances have made collection at new wavelengths feasible, and improved 
components provide new data signatures including vibrometry, polarimetry, hy-
per-spectral signatures, and three-dimensional data that mitigate camouflage for 
targets of interest.
A key advance since the NRC’s 1998 study is the dramatic increase in the ap-
plication of active optical sensors for surveillance. The primary impetus for this 
increase has been the advances made in laser technology, including advances in 
robustness, efficiency, and optical power (see Figure C.1) for many wavelengths. 
In order for optical sensors to be widely fielded, they must also meet eye-safety 
requirements, which have driven advances in sources and amplifiers for 1.5 and 
2 µm wavelength lasers.
In order to maximize atmospheric transmission, there has been a push for 
longer wavelength amplifiers in regimes with efficient detectors. Recent advances 
in thulium (Tm)-doped fiber amplifiers enable laser sensor operation in the 1.9 
to 2.1 µm wavelength range. Average power levels are approaching the kilowatt 
level, and pulsed amplifiers with peak powers approaching 100 kW have been 
demonstrated.2,3,4,5 Several vendors are offering lasers with output powers up to 
150 W. There are also several vendors offering narrow line-width, rapidly tunable 
2.1 µm laser sources. The atmospheric transmission at this wavelength combined 
with the availability of commercial amplifiers, sources, and detectors makes 2.1 µm 
an attractive wavelength for long-range laser sensing. The efficiency of the current 
2  Cristensen, S., G. Frith, and B. Samson. 2008. “Developments in Thulium-Doped Fiber Lasers 
Offer Higher Powers.” SPIE Newsroom. DOI: 10.1117/2.1200807.1152. Available at http://spie.org/
x26003.xml. Accessed July 31, 2012.
3  Moulton, P.F., G.A. Rines, E.V. Slobodtchikov, K.F. Wall, G. Firth, B. Samson, and A.L.G. Carter. 
2009. Tm-doped fiber lasers: Fundamentals and power scaling. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in 
Quantum Electronics 15(1):85-92.
4  Sudesh, V., T.S. McComb, R.A. Sims, L. Shah, M. Richardson, and J. Stryjewsky. 2009. Latest de-
velopments in high power, tunable, CW, narrow line thulium fiber laser for deployment to the ISTEF. 
Proceedings of SPIE 7325:73250B.
5  McComb, T.S., R.A. Sims, C.C.C. Willis, P. Kadwani, V. Sudesh, L. Shah, and M. Richardson. 2010. 
High-power widely tunable thulium fiber lasers. Applied Optics 49(32):6236.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
290
commercial amplifiers is approximately 6.25 percent6 limited by the efficiency of 
the pump source. However, there have been many investments made in these areas, 
which should improve the efficiency over time.
6  See, for example, IPG Photonics, “2 Micron CW Fiber Lasers.” Available at http://www.­ipgphotonics.
com/products_2microns.htm. Accessed July 31, 2012.
FIGURE C.1  Progress in output power for 1 µm, 1.5 µm, and 2 µm optical amplifiers. This plot tracks 
the historical progress in output power from a single fiber amplifier. Ytterbium (Yb)-fiber amplifiers 
(1 µm) have a significant lead over other technologies primarily due to their low quantum defect and 
the abundance of high-brightness pump sources at 915 to 975 nm. However, thulium (Tm)-fiber am-
plifiers (1.9 to 2.1 µm) have been demonstrated with average output powers approaching 1 kW and 
pulsed operation approaching 100 kW without sacrificing beam quality. There are several commercial 
units available with an average power ~150 W. Their efficiency is set by the efficiency of the pump 
source, which should continue to improve over time as demand for Tm-lasers increases. SOURCE: 
Cristensen, S., G. Frith, and B. Samson. 2008. “Developments in Thulium-Doped Fiber Lasers Offer 
Higher Powers.” SPIE Newsroom. DOI: 10.1117/2.1200807.1152. Available at http://spie.org/x26003.
xml. Reprinted with permission.

291
A p p e n d i x  C
Night Vision
Night-vision capabilities continue to be an important tactical tool for the 
warfighter. In fact, the proliferation of equipment over the past few decades has 
led to a significant amount of surplus equipment available at very low cost, which 
has eroded the tactical advantage for the United States that existed for some time. 
During the First Gulf War, the United States “owned the night,” with U.S. night-
vision systems significantly outperforming Iraqi night-vision sensors.7 However, 
the current commercially available night-vision sensors are nearly equivalent to 
the best U.S. night-vision systems. Since the NRC’s 1998 Harnessing Light8 study, 
there have been substantial improvements in sensitivity, performance for uncooled 
systems, and expanded wavelength applicability, which have enabled practical ther-
mal imaging systems for size, weight, and power (SWaP)-constrained platforms.
Laser Rangefinders, Designators, Jammers, and Communicators
The significant increase in laser diode efficiency coupled with the decrease in 
cost has enabled recent advances in laser designators. However, similar advances 
in night vision and imaging detector arrays have limited the use of laser designa-
tors and led to ground force casualties in recent engagements. Therefore, there is 
a greater push for SWaP improvements to enable designators on small unmanned 
platforms (e.g., micro-unmanned aerial vehicles [UAVs]), which will also carry 
over to active sensors and optical communication systems. Early laser designator 
systems used neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd=YAG) lasers at 
1 µm. However, improvements in laser materials and efficiency have enabled a 
wider range of wavelengths to be implemented.
A large investment in laser communications had been made prior to publica-
tion of the NRC’s 19989 report and has continued since that time. Optical commu-
nication in fibers has been steadily advancing in the past decade. The high carrier 
frequency of light, combined with the low attenuation in fiber, makes it attractive 
for telecommunications applications. For free-space applications, the short wave-
length improves directivity by minimizing diffraction when compared to radio-
frequency (RF) communications. This is one of the key motivators for moving to 
optical communications, which minimize the probability of interception, jamming, 
and detection while dramatically minimizing the power needed for a given com-
munication bandwidth, since most of the energy can be focused on the receiver.
7  National Research Council. 2010. Seeing Photons: Progress and Limits of Visible and Infrared Sensor 
Arrays. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
8  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
9  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
292
Laser Weapons
The Missile Defense Agency demonstrated the potential use of directed energy 
to defend against ballistic missiles when the Airborne Laser Test Bed (ALTB) suc-
cessfully destroyed a boosting ballistic missile on February 11, 2010.10 The experi-
ment, conducted at Point Mugu Naval Air Warfare Center-Weapons Division Sea 
Range off the coast of central California, served as a proof-of-concept demonstra-
tion for the directed-energy technology. The ALTB is a pathfinder for the nation’s 
directed-energy program and its potential application for missile defense technol-
ogy. For the demonstrations, a short-range threat-representative ballistic missile 
was launched from an at-sea mobile launch platform. Within seconds, the ALTB 
used onboard sensors to detect the boosting missile and used a low-energy laser 
to track the target. A second low-energy laser was fired to measure and compen-
sate for atmospheric disturbances. Finally, the ALTB fired its megawatt-class high 
energy laser, heating the boosting ballistic missile to critical structural failure. The 
entire engagement occurred within 2 minutes of the target missile launch, while its 
rocket motors were still thrusting. This was the first directed-energy lethal intercep-
tion demonstration against a liquid-fuel boosting ballistic missile target from an 
airborne platform. This revolutionary use of directed energy is very attractive for 
missile defense, with the potential to attack multiple targets at the speed of light, 
at a range of hundreds of kilometers, and at a low cost per interception attempt 
compared to the cost with current technologies.
Fiber-Optic Systems
Fiber-optic systems have continued to evolve to achieve higher performance 
with lower power in a smaller volume. Fiber-optic systems (e.g., gyros, communi-
cation links) have several attractive attributes including low loss, high transmis-
sion rates, and freedom from electromagnetic interference. Therefore, they have 
continued to be adopted into military platforms as they are upgraded.
Special Techniques
The special techniques (i.e., chemical and biological species detection, laser 
gyros, and optical signal processing) evaluated in the NRC’s 1998 report11 have 
evolved in different ways. Optical signal processing has also advanced, but not at 
the pace forecasted at that time. Importantly, recent advances in optical integrated 
10  Missile Defense Agency, U.S. Department of Defense. 2010. “Airborne Laser Test Bed Suc-
cessful in Lethal Intercept Experiment.” MDANews Release. Available at http://www.mda.mil/
news/10news0002.html. Accessed August 2, 2012.
11  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.

293
A p p e n d i x  C
circuits should enable significant advances in optical signal processing over the 
next decade.
Chemical and Biological Species Detection
Weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear, biological, and chemical 
weapons, continue to be a high-priority threat. Long-range chemical and biological 
detection has advanced considerably since the 1998 report.12 One example is the 
Joint Biological Stand-off Detection System (JBSDS), a light detection and ranging 
(LIDAR)-based system that is designed to detect aerosol clouds out to 5 km in a 
180 arc and to discriminate clouds with biological content from clouds without 
biological material at distances of 1 to 3 km or more. This system will provide 
advance warning of the presence of potential biological weapon aerosol cloud 
hazards so that a commander can implement individual and collective protective 
measures for assigned forces.
Laser Gyros for Navigation
Laser gyros were already very mature at the time of the 1998 report.13 They are 
critical in maintaining precision navigation when the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) is unavailable due to platform constraints or jamming. A new advance since 
the 1998 report is in the area of star-trackers, which can augment inertial naviga-
tion systems to improve long-term stability.
Optical Signal Processing
Optical processing has not changed very much since the NRC’s 1998 study.14 
It continues to be very promising, since some mathematical functions can be 
performed very rapidly using optical analog techniques. One example is optical 
correlations that rely on Fourier transforms. Optical correlators compare two-
dimensional image data at very high speeds. They were invented in the mid-1960s 
and have traditionally been used in high-cost military applications such as the 
analysis of satellite photographs. With recent advances in liquid-crystal technology, 
optical correlators have become more commercially viable—at a fraction of the 
high costs previously associated with such high-performance systems. Image data 
that are entered into the optical system are compared during the correlation process 
in terms of two criteria, similarity and relative position. Typically, the comparison 
12  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
13  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.
14  National Research Council. 1998. Harnessing Light.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
294
is done between a reference image (e.g., from a database) and an input image (e.g., 
from an external camera or sensor).
ENERGY
Cost of Solar Technology
In a 2008 study, leading experts in the solar field working on various technolo-
gies were asked to estimate the probability of any technology reaching two different 
“dollars per watt” benchmarks.15 The two price benchmarks were $1.20/W installed 
cost, the point at which a technology can be considered commercially viable, and 
$0.30/W installed cost, the point at which a technology would likely emerge as 
dominant in supplying utility-scale energy. The experts were asked to gauge the 
probability that any solar technology would meet these price points by the years 
2030 and 2050. The results of this study are shown in Figure C.2, in which a larger 
circle corresponds to a larger number of experts giving this probability.
Hybrid Solar and Wind Power Systems
Another approach to harvesting the Sun’s energy is a solar updraft tower, 
which uses the greenhouse effect to create a hybrid of solar and wind power. This 
technology uses a large base area sealed by a transparent material. The air heats to 
approximately 70°C due to the greenhouse effect. This air is then forced out of the 
high central tower, referred to as a “solar chimney,” as shown in Figure C.3. This is 
expected to produce wind, which will then be used to power turbines. Two 200-MW 
plants have been proposed for installation in western Arizona.16
Supporting Technologies for Solar Power
The solar power industry has several supporting technologies that are crucial to 
further development but not directly involved in converting the Sun’s energy into 
electric power. Technologies such as mounts for solar modules and electronics are 
also crucial to the commercialization of solar power technologies.
Work has been done to model the competitiveness of a given solar technology 
quantitatively given the variability of many uncertain factors. Several modeling 
programs are being developed, one of which has become widely available: the Solar 
15  Curtright, A., M. Granger Morgan, and D. Keith. 2008. Expert assessments of future photovoltaic 
technologies. Environmental Science and Technology 42(24):9031-9038.
16  Southern California Public Power Authority. 2008. “La Paz Solar Tower Project.” Available at 
http://www.scppa.org/pages/projects/lapaz_solartower.html. Accessed July 30, 2012.

295
A p p e n d i x  C
FIGURE C.2  Estimates of the probability of any solar technology reaching two dollars-per-watt price 
points—$1.20/W and $0.30/W—by 2030 and 2050, according to experts in the solar field. Larger 
circles correspond to a larger number of experts giving this probability. SOURCE: Estimates based 
on Curtright, A., M. Granger Morgan, and D. Keith. 2008. Expert assessments of future photovoltaic 
technologies. Environmental Science and Technology 42(24):9031-9038. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE C.3  An updraft solar tower power plant scheme. SOURCE: Redrawn and slightly modified by 
Cryonic07. Original jpg-drawing made by fr:Utilisateur:Kilohn limahn.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
296
Advisor Model (SAM), produced by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(NREL) and Sandia National Laboratories.17 This system considers a wide range 
of module performance options, financing options, and government subsidies 
and will calculate the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for an expected situation. 
A sample output of SAM is shown in Figure C.4, although the program produces 
an enormous amount of information and only a small part of the output is rep-
resented in the figure.
Models that can predict the performances of solar power relative to alternate 
sources of energy have been developed. Among these is the program ALTSim, 
developed at Hobart and William Smith Colleges to determine the viability of 
17  Mooney, D., M. Mehos, N. Blair, C. Christensen, S. Janzou, and P. Gilman. 2006. “Solar Advi-
sor Model (SAM) Overview.” P. 23 in 16th Workshop on Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells and Modules: 
Materials and Processes; Extended Abstracts and Papers. Sopori, B.L., ed. Proceedings of the NREL/
BK-520-40423 workshop held August 6-9, 2006, in Denver, Colo. Golden, Colo.: National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory.
FIGURE C.4  A sample output graph produced from the Solar Advisor Model. SOURCE: Mooney, D., M. Mehos, 
N. Blair, C. Christensen, S. Janzou, and P. Gilman. 2006. “Solar Advisor Model (SAM) Overview.” P. 23 in 16th 
Workshop on Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells and Modules: Materials and Processes; Extended Abstracts and 
Papers. Sopori, B.L., ed. Proceedings of the NREL/BK-520-40423 workshop held August 6-9, 2006, in Denver, 
Colorado. Golden, Colo.: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Reprinted with permission.

297
A p p e n d i x  C
biofuels competing with fuels such as oil and coal.18 Elaboration and integration 
of economic modeling programs such as these would enable more quantitative 
comparisons among technologies and allow more informed investment decisions.
A large portion of the module cost for solar applications, particularly those that 
require concentration, comes from the tracker that the system must be mounted 
on. These systems must be able to keep accurate alignment with the Sun, moving 
a large panel area. Maintaining the proper alignment is made more difficult by 
the requirement that the system stay aligned despite the significant wind loading 
generated by the solar panel carried. The tracker can comprise approximately half 
the cost of a current concentrating system. Reducing this cost while not compro-
mising the performance or lifetime of a tracker would make these systems much 
more commercially viable.
Although the majority of the cost for a solar plant is the solar collection mod-
ule, the electronics required to interface with the power grid and power storage still 
form a substantial portion of the cost. Solar panels produce direct current (DC) 
power, which must be transformed into alternating current (AC) to be sent into 
the power grid, requiring the use of an inverter. In some cases solar power can be 
matched to the load—for example, in the southwestern United States, where air 
conditioning drives peak load. Solar power up to some level can be used to handle 
this peak and is thus matched to the load. If solar power is also to be used at night, 
however, photovoltaic (PV) devices require a battery, or some other method of 
storage to store the power produced to be used when the system is not producing 
power. Charging a battery requires a charge controller, further adding to the system 
costs. Improving the performance or reducing the cost of any of these devices will 
make solar power more cost-effective. An approximate cost breakdown of these 
components is presented in Table C.1.19
The electronics cost is substantially reduced for concentrating solar power 
(CSP) systems, as the generator can produce AC power directly to the grid and the 
battery is unnecessary. These systems do have a large additional cost of thermal 
storage systems for on-demand generation, which costs approximately 30 percent 
as much as the solar module.20 Technical or manufacturing advances in this field 
will drive the cost of CSP plants down.
18  Drennen, T., R. Williams, and A. Baker. 2009. Alternative Liquid Fuels Simulation Model (AltSim). 
Sandia Report SAND2009-7602. Albuquerque, N. Mex.: Sandia National Laboratories.
19  Solarbuzz. 2011. “Solar Buzz Retail Pricing.” SB_Retail_Pricing_111013.xls. Available at http://
www.solarbuzz.com/facts-and-figures/retail-price-environment/module-prices. Accessed June 22, 
2011.
20  Greenpeace International. 2009. “Global Concentrating Solar Power Outlook 09.” Available at 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/reports/concentrating-solar-power-2009/. 
Accessed July 31, 2012.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
298
HEALTH AND MEDICINE
The roles played by imaging, optics, and photonics in modern medicine are 
mentioned in Chapter 6. Some of the details of the technologies used are examined 
below.
Optics and Photonics in the Emergency Room
In the modern emergency room, the technologies mention take advantage 
of photons with energies chosen so that they can penetrate deep into the human 
body. The performance of present-day CT instruments has improved dramatically 
over the past decades owing to advances in x-ray sources and the introduction of 
sophisticated multi-element, high-efficiency x-ray detectors. These instruments 
provide images with submillimeter resolution over large volumes of the body 
in mere seconds. These almost instantaneous three-dimensional images provide 
visual evidence of life-threatening disorders, saving precious minutes in life-and-
death situations in the emergency room.
Optics and Photonics in Diagnostics
The high-speed blood work mentioned in Chapter 6 can also help determine 
the status of the patient’s immune system. When the AIDS epidemic was first 
detected in the early 1980s, the cause of the disease was unknown. It took several 
years for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) to be identified as the infec-
tious agent and several more years for the affected immune system cell types to 
TABLE C.1  Approximate Cost Breakdown Between Module Cost and Various Complementary 
Electronics Required
Module
Unit
September 2010
September 2011
Module
US $/Wp (?125 W)
$3.61
$2.65
Euro €/Wp (?125 W) 
€3.23
€2.43
Inverter
US $/continuous Watt
$0.715
$0.714
Euro €/continuous Watt
€0.558
€0.500
Battery
US $/output Watt hour
$0.207
$0.213
Euro €/output Watt hour
€0.161
€0.149
Charge Controller
US $/Amp
$5.87
$5.93
Euro €/Amp
€4.58
€4.15
Solar Systems
Residential ¢/kWh
34.28
29.53
Commercial ¢/kWh
24.32
19.97
Industrial ¢/kWh
18.95
15.56
SOURCE: Frost and Sullivan analysis.

299
A p p e n d i x  C
be determined. Optical methods based on laser spectroscopy of stained immune 
system cells provided the key technology that enabled the identification of the 
specific immune system cells impacted by the virus, out of the dozens of circulat-
ing cell types in the immune system. Currently, optical methods based on flow 
cytometry are still the standard of care for monitoring the immune system status 
of HIV patients and determining the efficacy of specific antiviral agents used to 
control the viral load in the patient’s bloodstream.
Pathologists also utilize optics and photonics. Today’s microscopes are inter-
faced to computers to speed diagnosis, assist the pathologist in recognizing diseased 
tissue, and provide a permanent electronic record of the images of tissue biopsies. 
Computerized microscopes combined with genetically engineered fluorescent an-
tibody stains highlight the tumor region, identifying and quantifying the specific 
mutations and molecular changes in the tissue that are contributing to tumor 
growth. Knowing the molecular makeup of a tumor helps guide the physician and 
patient in choosing the most appropriate drug therapies. Although the microscope 
was invented more than 300 years ago, it still plays a major role as a primary diag-
nostic tool in the clinical laboratory.
The Human Genome Project Outcomes
One of the major motivations for sequencing of the human genome was to 
find the particular genes that determine the likelihood that individuals will develop 
specific diseases. Optical instrumentation was essential for the successful comple-
tion of the Human Genome Project (HGP). Using the HGP data, researchers 
have demonstrated conclusively that mutations in DNA repair genes (BRCA1 and 
BRCA2) dramatically increase the risk of breast cancer in both men and women. 
Individuals with these mutations can choose mastectomy or other preventive mea-
sures to reduce greatly their risk of developing tumors. Mutations in other genes 
(P450) are used to predict a patient’s ability to tolerate chemotherapy, allowing the 
oncologist to determine the optimal dosage more precisely. These key portions of 
a patient’s genome are measured today in optical instruments that can quantify 
millions of sequences in a single test using optical lithography technology, which 
was developed originally to manufacture integrated circuits and was modified to 
work with DNA molecules. The activity levels of specific genes can provide insight 
into the causes of tumor growth and thus allow oncologists to prescribe the most 
effective drugs. The activity or expression levels of specific genes can be measured 
from tumor biopsies using extremely sensitive fluorescence techniques based on 
amplifying and measuring the activity levels of genes using a technique called 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This technique is so sensitive and 
specific that it can detect in a sample the presence of a single molecule with a unique 
genetic sequence, even in the presence of billions of DNA molecules with slightly 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
300
different sequences. Doctors can evaluate data indicating gene expression levels in 
a tumor biopsy and use these results to predict the aggressiveness of certain types 
of cancer and the response of specific tumors to hormonal therapy, thus helping 
to determine the optimal drug options for each patient.
Biomedical Optics in Everyday Life
Glucose Monitors
Optical methods are also used to monitor chronic conditions, such as the 
monitoring of the glucose level in diabetic patients by means of compact, cell-
phone-sized, battery-operated readers that analyze the concentration in the blood 
serum. These devices use optically active reagents that react with glucose in a small 
blood sample placed on a very inexpensive disposable paper strip and change the 
optical properties of the strip depending on the amount of glucose in the sample. 
These measurements can be done in a few seconds using a device that easily fits in 
a shirt pocket or purse, providing people who have diabetes with portable methods 
for measuring and maintaining safe levels of blood sugars.
Cosmetic Biomedical Optics
Far-infrared lasers are selectively absorbed at the surface of the skin, provid-
ing a sterile method for removing or modifying large areas of skin either to serve 
cosmetic purposes or to aid in the recovery of burn victims. Subsequent healing 
and regrowth can provide a smooth, more physically appealing surface. Hair fol-
licles also selectively absorb certain infrared (IR) wavelengths emitted by solid-state 
lasers. Heating follicles above 50°C destroys the cells that cause hair to grow, thus 
eliminating unwanted hair without surgery.
Both nearsighted and farsighted patients can be treated with precision shap-
ing of the cornea with lasers, which can also correct for astigmatism and other eye 
aberrations, eliminating the need for glasses in many patients. Contact lenses and 
standard eyewear provide both disposable and permanent options for correcting 
vision for those who prefer to avoid surgery.
Proteomic Analysis Through Protein and Tissue Arrays
High-throughput protein-detection instruments that trap individual protein 
molecules on microscopic beads have recently been developed. These protein 
molecules are in turn detected by genetically engineered enzymes that bind to the 
proteins and efficiently generate a fluorescent signal. This signal is highly concen-
trated near the microscopic bead and can be detected using high-sensitivity, low-

301
A p p e n d i x  C
noise, charge-coupled-device (CCD) imaging devices. Very low concentrations of 
protein molecules can be detected with such high efficiency that individual protein 
molecules can be counted digitally, providing very high accuracy and precision. 
This technology increases the sensitivity of the detection of proteins by almost three 
orders of magnitude. Such improvements in sensitivity provide the possibility of 
detecting early signs of cancer recurrence. Medical studies are currently underway 
to use these new approaches to look for low levels of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
in prostate cancer patients who have had their prostates removed. The presence 
of PSA is evidence that prostate cells maybe proliferating in other organs, which 
indicates a recurrence of the cancer through metastasis. Another potential applica-
tion of protein-detection technology would allow the early detection in peripheral 
blood of very low levels of proteins indicative of Alzheimer’s disease. The current 
protocol involves proteomic analysis of spinal fluid requiring much more invasive 
lumbar puncture procedures.
Ophthalmology
Excessive blood vessel growth is one symptom of diabetic retinopathy (DR), 
one of the most common causes of late-onset vision loss. A common method for 
diagnosing retinal disease such as DR involves photographing the blood vessels in 
the retina. Current methods use an injectable fluorescent dye (sodium fluorescein) 
and excite the dye in the retina using flash photography or a scanning laser system 
that raster scans over the patient’s retina. Adverse reactions to the intravenous dye 
occur in a significant fraction of elderly patients and particularly in those with hy-
pertension. Intravenous administration of fluorescein can cause nausea, vomiting, 
hives, acute hypotension, and anaphylactic shock. A version of optical coherence to-
mography (OCT), called phase variance optical coherence tomography (PVOCT), 
appears to have the potential to eliminate the need for the administration of an 
intravenous fluorescent dye, thus making this procedure much safer. PVOCT 
measures the changes in the light reflected from the retina due to the motion of 
the blood flowing through the retina. These signals can be detected without using 
fluorescent dyes, and the resulting images have resolution and contrast comparable 
to the standard dye-based procedures. An additional advantage of the PVOCT 
protocol is that three-dimensional information about the vasculature is obtained, 
providing further valuable information that can aid in diagnosis of retinal disease.21
Head trauma can result in partially detached retinas, which can be “welded” 
back in place using pulsed lasers. Occluded lenses caused by cataracts can be sec-
21  Kim, D.Y., J. Fingler, J.S. Werner, D.M. Schwartz, S.E. Fraser, and R.J. Zawadzki. 2011. In vivo 
volumetric imaging of human retinal circulation with phase-variance optical coherence tomography. 
Biomedical Optics Express 2(6):1504-1513.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
302
tioned and more easily removed using pulsed lasers. Using lasers with different 
output colors, doctors can repair almost every major element in the eye: cornea, 
lens, and retina.
Millions of individuals have had their vision permanently corrected using the 
photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) procedure that uses excimer lasers to modify 
the lens in the eye precisely. New methods involving ultrafast lasers allow the 
removal of an ultrathin corneal flap prior to PRK surgery (laser-assisted in situ 
keratomileusis, or LASIK). This flap is placed over the machined cornea and helps 
protect the corneal surface and promotes faster healing. LASIK eliminates the use of 
a scalpel to cut this sensitive tissue and provides a much more precise and thinner 
flap covering the surgical incision. Moreover, in the LASIK procedure the precise 
laser incision allows a tab to be retained, which assists in repositioning the flap 
over the incision. This process reduces the risk of infection by eliminating physi-
cally touching the eye with a scalpel and provides a much more precise method for 
determining the diameter and symmetry of the incision; see Figure C.5.
One of the most common causes of visual impairment is the development of 
cataracts or cloudiness in the eye lens, which leads to reduced visual acuity and 
difficulty in seeing at night. The standard treatment procedure involves the surgical 
removal of the clouded lens and its replacement with a clear plastic lens. Common 
cataract procedures involve cutting the lens capsule surrounding the lens and then 
segmenting the occluded lens prior to manual removal by the surgeon. Current 
methods require making an incision in the eye and inserting scissors to cut the lens 
capsule surrounding the clouded lens manually. This method can often be impre-
cise and result in uneven or torn lens capsules, which compromise the placement 
of the replacement lens. This process can now be performed with phenomenal 
precision using laser surgery guided by OCT data.22
Advances in Endoscopic Surgery
Prosthetic devices can restore hearing in many older adults who have experi-
enced degenerative hearing loss and in children born with hearing deficits. Insert-
ing these devices often requires delicate surgery in the close environment of the ear 
canal, surrounded by very delicate tissue structures. Far-infrared lasers can be used 
to resculpt the inner ear to allow effective incorporation of a prosthetic device. The 
tissues in the ear canal strongly absorb mid-infrared (mid-IR) laser light, which can 
be used to cut and oblate tissue to allow insertion of the prosthetic device. Until 
recently lasers were not easily employed in this application, since directing the beam 
into the ear canal was complicated by the complex physiology and small confines 
of the ear canal. Building on advances in fiber-optic technology stimulated by the 
22  See Chapter 6 in the main text of this report for a description.

303
A p p e n d i x  C
FIGURE C.5  (a) Steps in the photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) procedure. (b) Steps in the laser-
assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) procedure.
telecommunications industry, several new types of fiber-optic cables have been 
developed that allow the effective delivery of mid- and far-IR lasers, wavelengths 
that are highly absorbed by soft tissue, into previously inaccessible portions of the 
human anatomy like the inner ear. Thus mid-IR lasers can now be used in a variety 
of surgical procedures that were not previously possible. Novel fiber optic designs 
use nanostructured geometries to confine the far-IR light of a carbon dioxide 
(CO2) laser into a flexible fiber cable, as shown in Figure C.6. These geometries 
(a)
(b)

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
304
utilize submicron layers of optical materials surrounding a hollow core, which al-
lows the far-IR light from the CO2 laser to be delivered to delicate bone and tissue 
structures of the inner ear. This new fiber-coupled source has found great utility 
in otology, providing effective methods for the surgical implantation of prosthetic 
devices restoring hearing to adults and children who have hearing impairments. 
These advances have relied heavily on fundamental research in nanophotonics 
and photonic crystal devices, technology originally developed primarily for the 
telecommunications industry.
Similarly, kidney stones can be very effectively fragmented using fiber-coupled, 
near-IR pulsed lasers. High-energy, short pulses from these lasers are absorbed by 
the kidney stone, creating a thermal shock wave, disrupting the stone. New, low-
water-content fibers allow a holmium-doped (Ho):YAG laser to be focused into 
an optical fiber, which is incorporated into a flexible endoscope. This endoscope 
can be threaded through the urethra and guided to the kidney stone. This laser 
effectively fragments kidney stones and provides a low-morbidity, less expensive, 
and highly effective alternative to previous treatments using high-intensity sound 
shock waves to disrupt the stones.
FIGURE C.6  Omniguide fiber for otology. SOURCE: Courtesy of OmniGuide, Inc.® Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts. Reprinted with permission.

305
A p p e n d i x  C
Advances in Oxygen Saturation Measurements
When firefighters come upon an unconscious person, they must often assess 
whether the victim has been subjected to high levels of carbon monoxide (CO). A 
rapid assessment of the levels of CO in the blood is critical so that intervention can 
take place before brain damage occurs. Exposure to CO and the effect of a number 
of common drugs on the blood’s ability to transport oxygen throughout the body 
alter the spectroscopic properties or color of the blood, providing key indications of 
the cause and expediting the appropriate intervention. Exposure to CO reduces the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of blood and causes the IR transmission of the blood to 
increase, whereas exposure to certain drugs decreases the absorption in the orange 
region of the visible spectrum. These optical signatures, as indicated in Figure C.7, 
can be used to diagnose quickly and noninvasively the cause of hypoxia and can 
help determine the most effective treatment.
Rapidly growing tumors require high blood flow to supply sufficient nutrients 
and oxygen to support tumor growth. Using near-IR wavelengths of light, which 
can penetrate through most normal tissues but are absorbed preferentially by 
highly oxygenated blood, tumors can be detected by monitoring the increase in 
oxygenated blood flow to regions of tissue deep beneath the surface of the skin. 
FIGURE C.7  Blood changes color depending on the hemoglobin status. The absorption profiles of four differ-
ent hemoglobin statuses are shown. Simple disposable probes that can be mounted on a patient’s finger can 
precisely measure the absorption level of the blood at different wavelengths and help determine the extent and 
cause of hypoxia. SOURCE: Masimo. 2012. “Rainbow SET Pulse CO-Oximetry.” Available at http://www.masimo.
co.uk/Rainbow/about.htm. Reprinted with permission.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
306
This increased blood flow can be measured and tumor images can be generated by 
positioning multiple sources and detectors around the affected tissue and observing 
“shadows” of the tumor due to this increased blood flow required by the tumor.
Biomedical Optics in Research
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was discovered in the early 1980s. The 
PCR provides one of the most sensitive and specific methods for measuring nucleic 
acid molecules in vitro. Using high-efficiency fluorescent organic dyes and low-
noise detectors, single DNA molecules with specific sequences can be detected 
even when contained in a sample with a large concentration of background DNA 
molecules. This high sensitivity and specificity have allowed the development 
of techniques that separate the sample into multiple individual wells, where the 
number of wells is large enough that only a single molecule is likely to be in any 
individual well. The absolute number of molecules in the original sample can be 
determined simply by counting the number of wells in which single molecules are 
detected. This approach to quantitative PCR, called digital PCR, allows a significant 
increase in the accuracy with which low levels of specific nucleic acid molecules 
can be detected. Digital PCR may also provide a method for developing precise 
standard reference materials and detection protocols for ultra-low trace concentra-
tions of nucleic acids.
Cancer biopsies often contain heterogeneous mixtures of various types of 
normal and tumor cells. It is thought that even within a tumor, specific tumor cells 
(cancer stem cells) have an enhanced ability to reproduce and to survive chemo-
therapy treatment, leading to the post-treatment regrowth of the tumor. Cancer 
stem cells are rare and are located close to both normal tissue and non-stem tu-
mor cells. Studying these rare cells requires isolating and removing them from the 
surrounding tissue sample. Automated laser-based methods for performing these 
micro-dissections have been developed, providing a fast and precise method for 
excising single cells from the complex tissue environment found in most biopsies. 
These methods combine ultraviolet (UV) lasers used for isolating the single cells, 
with IR lasers which capture the cells, and allow an efficient method for extraction 
of the sample from the biopsy. Automated laser capture micro-dissection (LCM) 
has been combined with microfluidic technology, allowing the macromolecules 
to be extracted efficiently from the micro-dissected samples and reagents that 
provide a means to copy and thus amplify specific target molecules of messen-
ger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) or DNA within the microscopic samples to allow 
precise quantification. The abilities to isolate, extract, and analyze single cells on 
the basis of optical imaging and laser technologies have created the new field of 
microgenomics, which has found applications in many fields of research including 
microbiology, neuroscience, developmental biology, and forensics.

307
A p p e n d i x  C
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING
CNC Grinding and Polishing
Computer numerically controlled (CNC) grinding and polishing have brought 
a deterministic approach to centuries-old processes. Applying technology from 
the machine tool industry, CNC grinding and polishing have made significant 
advancements in the ability to produce precision aspheric components. Aspheric 
geometry is much more difficult to generate and polish than are spheres, however. 
Five-axis CNC grinding and polishing equipment, as shown in Figure C.8, makes 
it possible to produce these challenging geometries. Computer controllers dynami-
cally adjust cutting paths for tool wear and can be programmed for edging, bevel-
ing, sagging, concave, and convex surface grinds.
Polymer Molding
Molded plastic lenses have become commonplace in consumer and com-
mercial products. Mobile phones, DVD players, digital cameras, and conferencing 
systems have incorporated polymer lenses. Hydraulic injection molding presses 
and injection compression molding presses are now employed by most optical 
FIGURE C.8  (Left) A commercially available 5-axis computer numerically controlled grinder. (Right) A closeup 
image of the grinding head. SOURCE: Courtesy of Optipro.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
308
component molding shops. Presses in the 20- to 50-ton range are frequently used 
and have excellent process control. Single- and multiple-cavity (2 and 4 cavities) 
molding tools with replaceable inserts are standard in the industry. For compo-
nents associated with higher-volume products which have a long product life, 
higher tool cavitation can often be justified. In these cases, molds of 16, 18, or 20 
cavities may be employed. Automation to pick and degate parts is employed for 
high-volume products in an effort to reduce costs.
In the past few years, several new materials have been proven to be moldable. 
Table C.2 indicates some of the polymers commonly used today. The capability of 
the molding process has also been advanced. Depending on material, lens type, and 
size, newer polymer molding processes routinely hold tight tolerances of 1 fringe 
accuracy during testing.
TABLE C.2  Table of Commonly Used Polymers
Unit
Acrylic
Acrylic Copolymer
Polystyrene
Polyetherimide
Trade name
Plexiglas
UVT
Styron
Ultem
Refractive Index
nf (486.1 nm)
1.497
1.604
1.689
nd (589 nm)
1.419
1.49
1.59
1.682
nc (656.3 nm)
1.486
1.585
1.653
Abbe value Vd
57.2
50-53
30.8
18.94
Transmission
1%
92-95
92-95
87-92
82
Maximum continuous 
service temp.
°F
161
190
180
338
°C
72
88
82
170
Water absorption
3%
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.25
Haze
%
1-2
2
2-3
dN/dN × 10–5
/°C
−8.5
−10 to −12
−12
Color/tint
Water clear
Water clear
Water clear
Amber
Benefit 1
High transmission 
and purity
High transmission 
and purity
High index
Impact resistant
Benefit 2
Scratch resistance
Chemical resistance
Excellent UV 
properties
Clarity
Thermal and 
chemical resistance
Benefit 3
High Abbe value
Low dispersion
High melt flow
82% transmission 
at 924-301 nm, 1 
mm CT
High index
SOURCE: Courtesy of Syntec.

309
A p p e n d i x  C
Glass Molding
Glass molding technology, first developed in the early 1970s, has become in-
creasingly available in the past decade. Prior to the turn of the century, most glass 
molding technology was proprietary and only available to the corporations that 
developed it. During the past decade, domestic and offshore manufacturers have 
marketed systems capable of producing precision-molded glass lenses. Figure C.9 
shows a molding machine developed and produced in the United States and com-
mercially available around the world, and Figure C.10 shows molding inserts and 
molded asphere lenses.
Not all glass is moldable. Several factors are important in the determination 
of moldability. Constituents in the glass and the glass transition temperature are 
factors to be considered. Molding trials are conducted to ensure moldability. Fig-
ure C.11 shows glass types that are moldable by one U.S. manufacturer with its 
Polycarbonate
Methylpentene
ABS
Cyclic Olefin 
Polymer
Nylon
NAS
SAN
Lexan
TPX
Acrylon
Zeonex
Polyamide
Methyl
Styrene 
Acrylonitrile
1.593
1.473
1.537
1.575
1.578
1.586
1.467
1.538
1.53
1.535
1.533-1.567
1.567-1.571
1.58
1.464
1.527
1.558
1.563
34
51.9
55.8
35
37.8
85-91
90
79-90.6
90-92
88
90
88
255
253
179.6
199.4
174-190
124
123
82
93
79-88
0.15
<0.01
3.3
0.15
0.2-0.35
1-3
5
12
1-2
7
3
3
−11.8 to 
−14.3
−8
−14
−11
Water clear
Slight yellow
Durable
Water clear
Water clear
Water clear
Impact 
strength
Chemical 
resistance
High transmission 
and purity
Chemical 
resistance
Good index 
range
Stable
Temperature 
resistance
Low moisture 
absorption
Good thermal 
stability

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
310
FIGURE C.9  Commercially available glass molding machine. SOURCE: Courtesy of Moore Nanotech, 
LLC.

311
A p p e n d i x  C
FIGURE C.11  Moldable glasses types available from Rochester Precision Optics. SOURCE: Courtesy of ­Rochester 
Precision Optics.
FIGURE C.10  Generic molding inserts and molded asphere lenses. SOURCE: Courtesy of Rochester 
Precision Optics.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
312
FIGURE C.12  Magnetorheological finishing polishing. SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Photonics 
Tech Briefs.
proprietary process. Figure C.11 indicates that lenses can be produced from glass 
with indices of refraction that range from approximately 1.48 to above 1.9, with 
Abbe numbers from 84.47 to 20.88, respectively.
The quality of lenses produced from the glass molding process is highly de-
pendent on the ability to produce molding tools. Molding inserts are single-point 
diamond turned or ground and post-polished. The resulting inserts and tools are 
very capable with surface roughness as low as 5 A root mean square (RMS) and a 
surface accuracy of 1/10 λ. High-precision tools are capable of producing lenses 
with tolerances for power of 3 fringes and irregularity of ½ fringe.
Magnetorheological Finishing
The use of magnetorheological finishing (MRF) has increased in the fabrica-
tion of optical components. MRF requires the starting surfaces to be polished and 
is a deterministic polishing process that uses interferometry to provide feedback 
to the polishing tools. Figure C.12 shows a schematic of the polishing process. 
Ferrous-laden fluid passes through an electromagnetic field where its viscosity is 
stiffened, allowing the creation of a precise and repeatable polishing tool. When 
the fluid rotates out of the magnetic field, it is collected and recirculated. Constant 
monitoring of the polishing process parameters such as pressure and flow rate and 

313
A p p e n d i x  C
the addition of process fluids provides for a predictable removal rate. Very accurate 
surfaces, particularly aspheric surfaces, can be produced using the MRF process. 
Surface accuracies of better than 1/20 λ peak to valley are standard for this process.
Single-Point Diamond Turning
Single-point diamond turning (SPDT) as a fabrication process for optical 
components has grown in popularity since the mid-1970s. SPDT is now routinely 
used to produce finished optical elements as well as mold inserts for polymer 
lenses and glass molding. The machining process uses single-crystal diamond cut-
ting tools combined with nanometer-precision positioning to generate spherical 
surface geometries as well as more complex geometries such as toroids, aspheres, 
and diffractives.
The materials best suited to SPDT include metals, crystals, and polymers. Box C.1 
provides a list of optical materials that have been demonstrated to be machinable. It 
is important to note that Box C.1 is not an exhaustive list of the materials that are 
machinable in the SPDT process, but rather a general listing. It is known that ferrous 
metals generate excessive tool wear; non-ferrous metals are thus the preferred metals. 
Metals such as aluminum 6061 and electroless nickel can be machined to produce a 
very high quality optical surface. As demand has increased for optical components 
that transmit in the infrared, the capability to machine IR materials has improved. 
Single-crystal materials such as those listed in Box C.1 can be reliably machined to 
BOX C.1 
Materials Suitable for Single-Point Diamond Turning
Metals
Nonmetals
Polymers
Aluminum
Calcium Fluoride
Cyclic Olefin
Brass
Magnesium Fluoride
Polymethylmethacrylate
Copper
Cadmium Telluride
Polycarbonates
Beryllium Copper
Zinc Selenide
Polyimide
Bronze
Zinc Sulphide
Polystyrene
Gold
Gallium Arsenide
Silver
Sodium Chloride
Lead
Calcium Chloride
Platinum
Germanium
Tin
Strontium Fluoride
Zinc
Sodium Fluoride
Electroless Nickel
Potassium di-hydrogen phosphate
Potassium titanyl phosphate
Silicon

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
314
FIGURE C.13  Ion-assisted deposition with sources, heaters, and substrates labeled as well as detec-
tors for monitoring the process. SOURCE: Courtesy of Edmunds Optics, Inc.
produce the required components. Polycrystalline materials are more difficult to 
machine and generally considered not diamond-machinable. Polymers have become 
popular in optical systems. SPDT provides an excellent solution for the manufacture 
of polymer prototypes, low and mid production, and inserts for polymer molds.
Optical Coating
Optical thin-film coatings technology has been advanced in response to re-
quirements in multiple and diverse markets including telecommunications, health 
and medical, biometrics and defense markets. Evaporation deposition processes in 
which materials are deposited by means of a transformation from solid to vapor 
back to solid have been the most widely used processes in the optical industry. 
Although the coatings satisfy requirements, they are often porous and sensitive to 
humidity and thermal conditions. The ion-assisted deposition (IAD) process, as 
highlighted in Figure C.13, more tightly “packs” coating layers, yielding a more ro-
bust coating. These evaporation processes, both assisted and unassisted, are widely 

315
A p p e n d i x  C
used for antireflection coatings, mirrors, filters, and beam splitters, all typically 
with less than 100 layers.
Responding to industry requirements for higher-precision coatings, ion beam 
sputtering (IBS) was developed. This process uses an ion gun to excite ions such 
that they collide with the source, resulting in sputtering of material from the source 
to the part being coated. The process provides very high quality coatings, although 
the cost of the equipment and its maintenance is high relative to IAD. IBS is often 
chosen for high- and ultrahigh-precision coatings.
In the past few years a technology newer than IBS, advanced plasma reactive 
sputtering (APRS), has been developed and is especially effective for complex coat-
ings of more than 200 layers per run totaling more than 20 µm. Figure C.14 shows 
the APRS system from Leybold Optics. The APRS system uses two dual-magnetron 
sources, which operate at mid-frequency. Material oxidation occurs when the part 
being coated passes through an oxygen plasma. The deposition rate of approxi-
mately 0.5 nm/sec is similar to the deposition rates experienced with evaporation; 
however, the resultant coatings are denser and more stable.
FIGURE C.14  HELIOS advanced plasma reactive sputtering tool. SOURCE: Courtesy of Leybold Optics.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
316
Metrology
Metrology is an important enabling technology in the optics industry. It has 
long been said, “If you can’t measure it, you can’t make it.” Over the past decade 
there have been advances in interferometry improving the ability to measure 
increasingly more challenging optics, particularly aspheres. Extremely tight toler-
ances for some of these aspheric geometries are the challenge for available metrol-
ogy. Testing variability for ultrahigh-precision optics, as in optics for lithographic 
applications, often needs to be 3 to 5 times smaller than the tolerance of the optic 
being measured. Recent advancements, for example in stitching interferometry, 
shown in Figure C.15, have provided the industry with the capability of making 
FIGURE C.15  Stitching interferometer of QED Technologies. (Top) A sub-aperture lattice covers the entirety of 
a high-numerical-aperture part. (Bottom) Simulated fringe patterns for an approximately 50 micon-depatture 
asphere: (a) the lack of data shows because the fringes are not resolved; (b) magnification allows for some 
resolution; (c) correct choice of local best-fit sphere increases fringe resolution even further. SOURCE: Images 
provided courtesy of QED Technologies International, Inc.
(a)
(b)
(c)

317
A p p e n d i x  C
FIGURE C.16  The Verifire Asphere system of Zygo combines interferometer technology. SOURCE: Courtesy of 
Zygo Corporation. Reprinted with permission.
full-aperture measurements on optics exceeding 200 mm in diameter including 
aspheres with up to 650 microns of aspheric departure. Another advancement, 
shown in Figure C.16, combines laser Fizeau interferometry and displacement-
measuring interferometry to reduce measurement uncertainty.
Gray-Scale Lithography for Diffractive- and Micro-Optic Components
Gray-scale lithography has become an important method for the fabrication 
of diffractive- and micro-optical components for optical systems applications 
spanning the range from the deep UV (193 nm) to the infrared (10.6 µm). The 
process involves the exposure of photoresist coated on a substrate. The photore-
sist is exposed using a focused laser beam, which is scanned across the surface of 
the photoresist using air-bearing translation stages. As the laser beam is scanned, 
the intensity is modulated, so that when the photoresist is developed, the desired 
surface-relief pattern is obtained. In the early work in the 1980s, surface-relief 
profiles were typically in the range of 1 to 5 µm; now one can obtain virtually any 
continuous, surface-relief profile with depths up to 100 to 120 µm. The developed 
photoresist master can then be replicated using UV cast and cure materials, or 
it can be used to create a nickel electroform, which in turn can be used in high-
volume manufacturing processes, such as polymer-injection molding and roll-to-

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
318
roll film manufacturing. Examples of surface-relief optical components, produced 
using this gray-scale lithography manufacturing method, are shown in Figure C.17.
Numerous and important applications exist for these lithographically gen-
erated, surface-relief optical components: for example, efficient extraction and 
distribution of light from LED sources for general lighting, laser-beam shaping 
for sensors systems, front- and rear-projection screens, and imaging and display 
systems. Or, one can also place the substrate with the patterned photoresist into 
a reactive-ion etcher chamber in which ions are used to bombard the surface and 
transfer (or etch) the surface-relief pattern directly into the substrate material. 
Common substrate materials for reactive-ion-etched optical components include 
fused silica, silicon, and germanium.
FIGURE C.17  Different types of regular microlens arrays. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Fan, Xiqiu, 
Honghai Zhang, Sheng Liu, Xiaofeng Hu, and Ke Jia. 2006. NIL—A low-cost and high-throughput MEMS fabrica-
tion method compatible with IC manufacturing technology. Microelectronics Journal 37(2):121-126.

319
A p p e n d i x  C
DISPLAYS
Polarization in Liquid-Crystal Displays
If two pieces of polarized material are placed in series between an observer 
and a light source and then rotated relative to one another, at one point the trans-
mission of light will be blocked as the polarization of the two pieces of material is 
perpendicular. If from that point they are rotated another 90º, the polarizers will be 
aligned and about half the light will pass (with the other half absorbed by the first 
polarizer). A variable amount of light can be passed by rotating the polarizers in 
between the extreme perpendicular and aligned positions, as shown in Figure C.18. 
This form of light modulation automatically loses a factor of two in the best case 
unless the initial light source is polarized.
A liquid-crystal display (LCD) works roughly the same way; however, rather 
than rotating the polarizers, the light itself is rotated by a liquid crystal. Light from 
a source is passed through two fixed polarizers with liquid crystal in between. 
The polarizers are crossed, but in the absence of electric current, the thickness 
of the liquid-crystal layer is such that it rotates the polarization by 90°, so light is 
passed. Applying an electric field alters the alignment of the liquid crystal so that 
the light is not rotated and light is thus blocked. Varying the strength of the field 
varies the degree of alignment and thus the amount of light passed, as indicated 
in Figure C.19. A wide variety of colors can be achieved by varying the amount of 
light passed through each of the three subpixels.
FIGURE C.18  Polarized light waves. SOURCE: Image created by Bob Mellish.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
320
Three-Dimensional Technology in LCDs
One method used to achieve a three-dimensional effect using an LCD display 
that was mention in Chapter 10 alternates showing an image for one eye, then a 
slightly displaced image for the other eye. Wireless connection between a pair of 
glasses and the display keeps the polarization of glasses in sync, only passing light 
to the intended eye. The first-generation three-dimensional LCD televisions used 
such active shutter glasses, seen in Figure C.20.
The shutter glasses were themselves crude LCDs, consisting of a single large 
pixel per eye. One of the challenges of this approach is brightness. In an LCD, the 
entire screen is not switched at once, but the screen is painted line by line, typi-
cally from top to bottom. As the screen is being refreshed for one eye, the top of 
the display shows the desired image for that eye, but the bottom of the display still 
shows the previous image for the other eye. The display is constantly refreshing, so 
only for an instant during each cycle would the screen show an image for only one 
eye. To overcome this problem, an image for a given eye was shown twice in suc-
cession and the shutter glasses opened during the second painting. Unfortunately, 
FIGURE C.19  Liquid-crystal changing polarization. NOTE: TFT, thin-film transistor; ITO, indium tin oxide. 
SOURCE: © Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Reprinted with permission.

321
A p p e n d i x  C
this solution meant that the shutter glasses for any one eye were passing light only 
during one out of four frames. Thus, the apparent brightness of the display was 
only one-quarter that of the same display when used in a two-dimensional mode 
without glasses.
More recently an alternative approach to three-dimensional displays has been 
introduced, placing a patterned optical retarder on the face of the display. The role 
of this retarder is to continually twist the polarization of every other row, as shown 
in Figure C.21. To view the display in three dimensions, observers wear passive 
glasses that have polarizers 90° opposed. The left eye can then only observe the odd 
rows, say, while the right eye can only observe the even rows. The screen brightness 
is thus increased because both eyes are constantly receiving signal.
Unfortunately, the trade-off of this alternate scheme is a reduction in verti-
cal resolution. Rather than each eye receiving the 1,080 rows of a standard high-
definition set, each receives only 540 rows. This reduction in vertical resolution 
has motivated some to suggest that future sets be made with the standard 1,920 
horizontal pixels but with double the number of vertical pixels, to 2,160, so that 
each eye then can receive full high definition when viewing in three-dimensional 
mode. In two-dimensional mode, the even and odd row pairs could mimic one 
another to result in standard high definition, as input sources with doubled vertical 
resolution may be rare.
Another possible approach for creating three-dimensional displays puts two 
FIGURE C.20  Shutter glasses blocking left image from entering right eye. Image courtesy of E. Svedberg.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
322
liquid-crystal displays in series. In this active retarder scheme, the rear display has 
the traditional role, while the role of the front display is to rotate the polarization 
on a frame-by-frame basis. The viewer then wears passive glasses to filter out im-
ages not intended for a given eye.
One might expect brightness to be an issue with an active retarder as it is 
with active shutter glasses. However, the brightness issue can be greatly reduced 
by synchronizing the two displays and segmenting the backlight. That is, during 
the refreshing of a given row or set of rows, the backlight can be turned off. As the 
set of rows is updated for the alternate eye, both in terms of image from the rear 
display and polarization from the front display, the backlight is turned on for those 
FIGURE C.21  Highly simplified view of patterned retarder and the observer’s passive glasses. Image courtesy 
of E. Svedberg.

323
A p p e n d i x  C
rows. The dark period is then only during the refreshing of a set of rows rather 
than affecting the entire display.
Other Three-Dimensional Display Methods
The discussion of three-dimensional displays so far has involved glasses of 
one sort or another. Unfortunately, the need for glasses, even the relatively more 
comfortable passive glasses, is thought to be stifling the broad adoption of these dis-
plays. So the question arises as to how to create three-dimensional displays without 
the need for glasses. There are actually two cases to consider: that of the individual 
observer and that involving a group of observers. Of the two, the case of the indi-
vidual observer is the easier, provided that the position from which the individual 
is observing is known. This may be a reasonable assumption when considering 
a handheld device. In such a situation, there are several means of alternating the 
delivery of a left image only to the left eye and a right image only to the right eye. 
For example, the backlight might have an illumination source on the left and right 
side within the display, with those sources alternating and being steered by some 
projection film to one eye, then the other. The far more difficult problem is having 
a three-dimensional display without the need for glasses when multiple viewers 
can be positioned in a wide variety of locations. As was mentioned in Chapter 10, 
the most popular approach is the use of viewing zones created by lenticular arrays.
Touch Displays
The signal detection in capacitive touch displays is dependent on the grid of 
unit cells, defined by a unique combination of row and column electrodes. When 
a signal is applied to a row electrode, the proximity of column electrodes results in 
coupling that can be measured. By sweeping through the rows, measurement can 
be made of the entire screen.
As illustrated in Figure C.22, the signal radiates a small distance through non-
conductive materials, such as the cover glass, and one might say that such coupling 
projects through the cover glass. This coupling is attenuated by a finger touching 
the cover glass, which provides a path to ground through the body. This reduction 
in capacitive coupling can be measured, and based on the readings from each unit 
cell the center of the touch position or positions can be interpolated to higher 
resolution than the cell spacing. This imaging of the touch positions has enabled 
the multi-touch capability.
While the conductors inside the display aperture area must be transparent, 
outside the display aperture, and beneath the black border that commonly sur-
rounds the display, are metal conductors that have lower resistivity than the ITO, 
providing for reduced signal loss en route to an integrated circuit (not shown) 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
324
mounted to a flex circuit bonded to the sensor glass with anisotropic conductive 
film, as shown in Figure C.23.
There have been efforts within the industry to eliminate the separate substrate 
that is dedicated to the touch sensor function. Of the existing substrates considered 
for integration with this function, the leading candidates are the underside of the 
cover glass and the face of the color filter glass.
Although the underside of the cover may seem quite attractive, subtle aspects 
work against this choice. In particular, touch sensors based on dedicated substrates 
are typically fabricated on large glass sheets, which are then diced into the smaller 
sheets needed for the display, even though such large-scale lithography runs coun-
ter to the manner in which cover glass is made.
The common way for cover glass to be fabricated achieves high retained 
strength so that it can survive damage inflicted by everyday use. This is done by 
putting all surfaces under compression. After cutting the cover to shape, it is then 
dipped into an ion exchange acid bath where smaller sodium ions are exchanged 
for larger potassium ions, putting all surfaces under compression. Since glass fails 
FIGURE C.22  Projected capacitive touch operation. (Top) The electric field couples between the source 
and drain through the dielectric touch panel. (Bottom) A grounding by means of touch effects the 
coupling and can be used to sense position of the touch. (Not to scale.)

325
A p p e n d i x  C
under tension, not compression, the compressive stress layer increases damage 
resistance.
Unfortunately, dipping the entire cover in the acid bath results in all exposed 
glass surfaces becoming ion exchanged, not just the large front and back faces. If a 
large sheet of uncut cover glass were to be ion exchanged, after which the transpar-
ent conductors were patterned, dicing individual covers from the large sheet would 
be difficult because the sheet already had been ion exchanged. Even if success in 
dicing were achieved, this still would be problematic because none of the exposed 
edges would have been ion exchanged, and thus central tension would be exposed. 
As integrating touch into the cover is difficult, the face of the color filter glass is an 
alternative location to consider. However, the fundamental challenge here is that 
the switching noise from the transistors painting the display image can be coupled 
FIGURE C.23  Dedicated touch sensor glass. SOURCE: Courtesy of Zytronic Displays Limited.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
326
into the touch electrodes. Designers of touch ICs have made some progress toward 
devising schemes to avoid and/or reject such noise.23
One of the implications of integrating touch into the face of the LCD’s color 
filter glass is the elimination of air gaps. Although the dedicated touch substrate 
is commonly bonded directly to the cover glass, the bonded assembly itself is only 
sometimes bonded to the front polarizer of the display. Such direct bonding results 
in additional coupling of display noise, which is a particularly challenging problem 
with larger displays, like those of tablets, since ITO is such a poor conductor. As a 
result, although direct bonding can improve optical transmission by eliminating 
Fresnel reflections on either side of the air gap, eliminating the air gap is more 
challenging with larger displays because of problems with achieving high yields 
with this process.
These weaknesses and those mentioned in Chapter 10 have motivated inven-
tors to look for other technologies to compete with projected capacitive.
As mentioned in Chapter 10, optical touch displays have limitations. How-
ever, the size and conductivity of the touching object in such a system are im-
material, and there is no reduction in optical transparency as there is with the 
not-completely-transparent conductors and any air gap of a projected capacitive 
touch system; see Figure C.24. However, optical touch capability has not been 
achieved on a large scale and—while the multi-touch experience is now commonly 
expected because of the widespread use of modern handheld devices—has yet to 
be developed.
Display Frames
A trend in the use of LCDs in arrays is the reduction in the gap, or bezel, be-
tween the pixels of adjacent displays for application in video walls. Although still 
not completely seamless, gaps have been reduced to the single-digit millimeter 
range, as represented in Figure C.25. This change benefits the image quality, but 
it has repercussions for touch. In particular, a cover glass can be bonded to a rela-
tively wide bezel, but as that bezel shrinks, it becomes less feasible to use the bezel 
as a mount. Although very narrow brackets might be used to affix cover glass to 
large-format displays, in time that might change to direct bonding of cover glass.
This prospect has numerous challenges, such as cutting the glass after ion 
exchange as mentioned above in the discussion of integrated touch. Thermal ex-
pansion would be an additional challenge, as current color filter substrates match 
the thermal expansion of the glass with the thin-film transistors (TFTs), which are 
23  See, for example, “Development of IPS LCD with Integrated Touch-Panel by Hitachi Displays.” 
2010. Available at http://japantechniche.com/2010/10/08/development-of-ips-lcd-with-integrated-
touch-panel-by-hitachi-displays/. Accessed July 27, 2012.

327
A p p e n d i x  C
FIGURE C.24  Optical sensors in the upper corners of the array detecting touch. SOURCE: ­NextWindow. 
2012. “Optical Touch Overview.” Available at http://www.nextwindow.com/optical/. Reprinted with 
permission.
FIGURE C.25  Narrow-bezel liquid-crystal display array. SOURCE: Courtesy of NEC Display Solutions of America.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
328
switched to control the light valves that form the image. As these transistors are 
based on silicon, the glass substrate material is chosen to match the coefficient of 
thermal expansion of silicon, which is relatively low. Cover glass, by contrast, has 
relatively high thermal expansion, as this is currently thought necessary to achieve 
a glass capable of ion exchange. Nevertheless, if an internal polarizer were to be 
achieved, researchers would be highly motivated to create a glass that combines 
cover and color filter functionality.
OLED Displays
In order to form a light-emitting device, the light-emitting organic layer of 
an organic light-emitting diode (OLED) requires several other layers. These in-
clude a transparent substrate, which can be either rigid or flexible, depending on 
the application; a transparent conducting anode; a conducting organic layer; the 
organic light-emitting layer; and a cathode, which may or may not be transparent, 
depending on the application.
In operation, an electrical potential is applied across the OLED by connecting a 
battery or other power source between the cathode and the anode, causing a current 
to flow. The current flow results in electrons being removed from the molecules 
in the emissive organic layer, creating holes. When these holes are filled at the in-
terface with the conducting organic layer, the electrons give up their excess energy 
as photons. The intensity of the emitted light is determined by the total current 
flow, and the color is determined by the energy level of the hole that is filled by the 
electrons. This, in turn, is determined by the properties of the organic molecules, 
allowing OLEDs to be used in color displays.
OLEDs can be made on transparent substrates to form an all-transparent 
display, or on an opaque or reflective substrate. In the former case, it makes pos-
sible what is known as a heads-up display, since only the displayed information 
interrupts the visual field.
Flexible Displays
“Flexible display technology” is a term used for a desirable technology for the 
next generation of cell phones, military devices, and reading devices. A device with 
flexible display technology would enable the user to overcome the fear of breaking, 
bending, or scratching the device.
One type of flexible display technology uses organic films constructed from 
OLEDs, which in turn are made from layers of organic material and the conductive 
materials needed to inject electrons and holes. When a voltage of proper polarity is 
applied to the conductive layers, electrons from one layer combine with the holes 

329
A p p e n d i x  C
from the other, releasing light. If these OLEDs were constructed from polymers 
with high flexibility, they could be the basis of lightweight, portable, rollup displays, 
or displays that could be used on curved surfaces.
Another promising material technology is amorphous oxides. Some amor-
phous oxides can form thin films that are transparent and electrically conductive, 
which is why they already serve as the see-through electrode layer in displays and 
solar cells. It was this combination of qualities that led to the surge in research that 
began in 1996, when Hideo Hosono and his colleagues at the Tokyo Institute of 
Technology first noted the merits of amorphous transparent conducting oxides. 
The biggest problem when amorphous silicon is deposited on flexible plastic is 
switching and drifts.
Amorphous oxides could do more than simply serve as passive electrodes. 
They could also replace amorphous silicon as the active semiconducting material 
in TFTs. The advantages of oxide semiconductors over amorphous silicon are mo-
tivating much work in the display industry. Only 2 years after the first oxide-based 
transistors were reported, Korea’s LG Electronics Co. revealed a prototype OLED 
display that used indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) transistors to drive its pixels. 
Other companies followed quickly, with oxide-based displays of their own. The 
U.S. $100 billion flat-panel-display industry has been built on amorphous silicon, 
and the new materials will have to compete with its 30-year head start. However, 
amorphous silicon is a mature technology, and most limitations arise from funda-
mental physical and chemical properties requiring breakthroughs.
Amorphous oxide semiconductors will likely challenge amorphous silicon. 
When this will happen depends mainly on the development time for a large-scale 
FIGURE C.26  Crystalline, polycrystalline, and amorphous atomic structures. SOURCE: Reprinted, with 
permission, from Wager, J.F., and Hoffman, R. 2011. Thin, fast, and flexible. IEEE Spectrum 48(5). 
Copyright 2011 by IEEE.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
330
manufacturing capability incorporating these materials. However, the oxide TFT 
fabrication process is very similar to that used for amorphous (for atomic struc-
tures, see Figure C.26) silicon devices; thus the display industry can leverage much 
of the existing infrastructure and know-how. A key advantage amorphous oxides 
hold over amorphous silicon is their higher charge-carrier mobility.

331
D
Biographies of 
Committee Members
PAUL McMANAMON, Co-Chair, is a consultant at Exciting Technology, LLC, and 
is half-time technical director for the Ladar and Optical Communications Institute 
(LOCI) at the University of Dayton. Dr. McManamon had been a member of the 
scientific and technical cadre of senior executives in the Sensors Directorate, Air 
Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, before becom-
ing chief scientist of the directorate. The Sensors Directorate consisted at that 
time of approximately 1,100 people. It is responsible for developing new sensor 
technology for the Air Force. Dr. McManamon was responsible for the directorate’s 
technical portfolio. He served 32 months as acting chief scientist for avionics for 
the Avionics Directorate in Wright Laboratory. He was the technical lead for more 
than 500 scientists and engineers, and he was responsible for the technical content 
of all electro-optical and microwave sensor development, electron device develop-
ment, and automatic target recognition as well as avionics systems, concepts, and 
simulation. Prior to serving in that position, he had been the Sensor Directorate’s 
senior scientist for infrared sensors, developing multidiscriminate electro-optical 
sensors, including multifunction laser radar technology, novel electro-optical coun-
termeasure systems, and optical phased-array beam steering technology. Dr. Mc-
Manamon is widely recognized in the electro-optical community and was elected 
as the 2006 president of SPIE, the International Society for Optical Engineering, 
of which he is also a fellow. He is a member of the executive board and a fellow 
of the Military Sensing Symposia, a fellow of the Air Force Research Laboratory, 
a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and a fellow the 
Optical Society of America.

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
332
ALAN E. WILLNER, Co-Chair, is currently the Steven and Kathryn Sample Chaired 
Professor of Engineering in the Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California (USC). Professor 
Willner received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Columbia University, in 
1988 and an Honorary Doctorate from Yeshiva University in 2012. He was a post-
doctoral member of the technical staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories and a member of 
the technical staff at Bellcore. At USC, he is the associate director of the Center for 
Photonics Technology and was an associate director for student affairs for the Na-
tional Science Foundation Engineering Research Center in Multimedia. Professor 
Willner is a member of the Defense Sciences Research Council, has served on many 
scientific advisory boards for small companies, and has advised several venture 
capital firms. Professor Willner has received the following honors/awards: Interna-
tional Fellow of the U.K. Royal Academy of Engineering, Presidential Faculty Fel-
lows Award from the White House, Packard Foundation Fellowship, Guggenheim 
Foundation Fellowship, National Science Foundation National Young Investigator 
Award, Fulbright Foundation Senior Scholar Fellowship, Optical Society of Amer-
ica (OSA) Forman Engineering Excellence Award, Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (IEEE) Photonics Society Engineering Achievement Award, OSA 
Leadership Award, and 2001 Eddy Paper Award from Pennwell Publications for the 
Best Contributed Technical Article. He is a fellow of the American Association for 
the Advancement of Science, IEEE, OSA, and SPIE. He was an invited foreign dig-
nitary representing the sciences for the 2009 Nobel Prize Ceremonies in Stockholm. 
His professional activities have included serving as president of the IEEE Photonics 
Society (formerly the Lasers and Electro-Optics Society, or LEOS), co-chair of the 
Science and Engineering Council of the OSA, vice president for technical affairs 
of IEEE Photonics Society, Photonics Division chair of OSA, editor-in-chief of the 
OSA Optics Letters, editor-in-chief of IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology, 
editor-in-chief of IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, chair of 
the IEEE TAB Ethics and Member Conduct Committee, and general and program 
co-chair of the Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics. Professor Willner has 975 
publications, including 1 book, 24 U.S. patents, 18 keynote or plenary talks, and 16 
book chapters. His research is in optical communications, optical signal processing 
and networks, fiber optics, and optical technologies.
ROD C. ALFERNESS (NAE) is the dean of engineering at the University of Cali-
fornia at Santa Barbara. Prior to this position, he was the chief scientist at Bell 
Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent. His previous positions were with the Bell Laboratories 
as the research senior vice president and the optical networking research senior 
vice president. Dr. Alferness also was the chief technical officer and advanced tech-
nology and architecture vice president of the Optical Networking Group, Lucent 
Technologies. Prior to that role, he was head of the Photonics Networks Research 

333
A p p e n d i x  D
Department of Lucent Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, New Jersey. Dr. Alferness joined 
Bell Labs in 1976 after receiving a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Michi-
gan, where his thesis research, under the supervision of Professor Emmett Leith, 
concerned optical propagation in volume holograms. His early research at Bell 
Labs included the demonstration of novel waveguide electro-optic devices and cir-
cuits—including switch/modulators, polarization controllers, tunable filters—and 
their applications in high-capacity light wave transmission and switching systems. 
This research led to the early development of titanium-diffused lithium niobate 
waveguide modulators that are now deployed as the high-speed signal-encoding 
engine in fiber-optic transmission systems around the world. Dr. Alferness has also 
made contributions in photonic integrated circuits in indium phosphide, including 
widely tunable lasers, as well as in photonic switching systems and reconfigurable 
wavelength division multiplexed (WDM) optical networks. In the mid-1990s, he 
was an originator of and the Bell Labs program manager for the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency-funded MONET project, which demonstrated the feasi-
bility of wavelength-routed optical networks that are now being implemented for 
both backbone and metro networks. Dr. Alferness has authored more than 100 
papers, 5 book chapters, and 35 patents. He is a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering and a fellow of the Optical Society of America (OSA) and the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Lasers and Electro-Optics Society 
(LEOS). Dr. Alferness received the 2005 IEEE Photonics Award. He has served as an 
elected member of the LEOS Administrative Committee and was the president of 
IEEE LEOS in 1997. He was general co-chair of the 1994 Optical Fiber Communica-
tions Conference. Dr. Alferness has served as associate editor for Optics Letters and 
for Photonics Technology Letters. He has served on many IEEE and OSA committees, 
including fellows and awards committees. He also currently serves on the European 
Conference on Optical Communication Executive Management Committee. He 
served as the editor-in-chief of the IEEE and OSA-sponsored Journal of Lightwave 
Technology from 1995 to 2000. He served as an elected member of the OSA board 
of directors from 2001 to 2003.
THOMAS M. BAER is the executive director of the Stanford Photonics Research 
Center and a member of the Applied Physics Department at Stanford University. 
His current research is focused on developing imaging and analysis technology for 
exploring the molecular basis of developmental biology and neuroscience. From 
1996 to 2005, Dr. Baer was the chief executive officer and chair of Arcturus Biosci-
ence, Inc., a biotechnology company located in Mountain View, California, that 
he established in 1996. Arcturus Bioscience pioneered the area of microgenom-
ics. Prior to establishing Arcturus, Dr. Baer was the vice president of research at 
Biometric Imaging. From 1981 to 1992, he was at Spectra-Physics, Inc., where he 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
334
held positions as vice president of research and Spectra-Physics Fellow. While Dr. 
Baer was at Spectra-Physics, his research focused on ultrafast lasers, optical pulse 
compression, diode-pumped solid-state lasers, and nonlinear optics. He has made 
major contributions in the areas of biotechnology, quantum electronics, and laser 
applications and is listed as an inventor on 60 patents and is a co-author on many 
peer-reviewed publications in a number of scientific fields. His commercial prod-
ucts have received many industry awards for design innovation. Co-founder of four 
companies in Silicon Valley, he was named entrepreneur of the year for emerging 
companies in Silicon Valley in 2000 by the Silicon Valley Business Journal. He gradu-
ated with a B.A. degree in physics (magna cum laude) from Lawrence University 
and received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in atomic physics from the University of 
Chicago. He is also an alumnus of the Harvard Business School, and in 1994 he 
received the Distinguished Alumni Award from Lawrence University. He has been 
elected fellow in two international scientific societies—the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science and the Optical Society of America (OSA)—and 
served as the president of the OSA in 2009.
JOSEPH BUCK is the vice president of program development at Boulder Nonlinear 
Systems, Inc. He is currently focused on integrating nonmechanical beam control 
capabilities into optical communications and ladar remote sensing and imaging 
systems. His work spans Department of Defense, academic, and commercial appli-
cations and markets. He has led cross-disciplinary teams to develop multifunction 
ladar sensors for three-dimensional imaging, vibrometry, polarimetry, and optical 
aperture synthesis for both ground and flight systems. Dr. Buck has also extensively 
studied the limits of both coherent and direct detection theory as applied to com-
munications, imaging, and remote sensing systems. He earned his Ph.D. in phys-
ics from the California Institute of Technology, where he conducted experiments 
on the physics of individual atom-photon interactions using trapped atoms and 
high-finesse cavities and carried out research in the areas of quantum information 
processing as applied to communication protocols. Dr. Buck began his career with 
the Aerospace Corporation, where he was a member of the team that pioneered 
some of the early demonstrations of optical aperture synthesis, and he led efforts 
to combine optical aperture synthesis and laser vibrometry. He then joined Lock-
heed Martin Coherent Technologies, where he became a principal research scientist 
leading teams that developed several new remote sensing systems. Dr. Buck is cur-
rently serving on the Active Optical Sensing Committee for the Optical Society of 
America (OSA) Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics. He is a lifetime member 
of the OSA; the American Physical Society; and SPIE, the International Society for 
Optical Engineering; and a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers Photonics Society (formerly LEOS).

335
A p p e n d i x  D
MILTON M.T. CHANG is managing director of Incubic Management, LLC. Dr. 
Chang, who has an exceptional investment track record, founded Incubic to in-
stitutionalize this approach in a venture capital and management advisory firm. 
He personally built Newport Corporation and New Focus, Inc., to successful 
initial public offering, as chief executive officer, and has provided the first capital 
to more than a dozen high-tech start-up companies, all of which were successful. 
Having been an entrepreneur, he is helpful to other entrepreneurs—his operating 
principle is fairness—he is effective as a sounding board for providing advice to 
entrepreneurs. Dr. Chang is active in the technical and business community and 
has received a number of prestigious awards from professional societies. He is a 
fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Optical 
Society of America, and the Laser Institute of America (LIA), and a former presi-
dent of the IEEE Photonics Society and the LIA. He is well known for sharing his 
experience freely and writes monthly business columns for Laser Focus World and 
contributes articles to Photonics Spectra. He earned a B.S. in electrical engineering 
with highest honors from the University of Illinois and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 
electrical engineering from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and 
completed the Harvard Owner/President Management Program. He has received 
the Distinguished Alumni Award from both the University of Illinois and Caltech 
and is a member of the board of trustees of Caltech and an Overseer of the Hun-
tington Library.
CONSTANCE CHANG-HASNAIN is the John R. Whinnery Chair Professor for the 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department, University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley. Professor Chang-Hasnain received her Ph.D. degree from the same 
department in 1987. Prior to joining the Berkeley faculty, she was a member of 
the technical staff at Bellcore (1987-1992) and an assistant professor of electrical 
engineering at Stanford University (1992-1996). She currently serves as chair of 
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Graduate Group. She is also an honorary 
member of the A.F. Loffe Institute (Russia), Chang Jiang Scholar Endowed Chair at 
Tsinghua University (China), and Visiting Professor of Peking University (China) 
and National Jiao Tung University (Taiwan). Professor Chang-Hasnain’s research 
interests range from devices to materials and physics, particularly focusing on 
new optical structures and materials for integrated optoelectronics. Most recently, 
she and her students achieved groundbreaking results of nanolasers on metal 
oxide semiconductor-silicon based on their discovery of a brand new nanomate-
rial growth mode. Professor Chang-Hasnain is recognized by the international 
scientific community with awards such as the IEEE David Sarnoff Award 2011 for 
pioneering contributions to vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL) arrays 
and tunable VCSELs; the Optical Society of America (OSA) Nick Holonyak, Jr., 
Award, 2007, for significant contributions to VCSEL arrays, injection locking, and 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
336
slow light; and the Japan Society of Applied Physics Micro-optics Award, 2009, 
for distinguished works and contributions to the development and promotion of 
micro-optics technologies. She received the Guggenheim Memorial Foundation 
Fellowship, 2009; Humboldt Research Award from the Alexander von Humboldt 
Stiftung Foundation, 2009; and the Chang Jiang Scholar Endowed Chair Award 
from the People’s Republic of China, 2009. She was also awarded the National 
Security Science and Engineering Faculty Fellowship, one of the most prestigious 
faculty fellowships, by the Department of Defense.
CHARLES M. FALCO is the chair of Condensed Matter Physics, professor of optical 
sciences, and professor of physics at the University of Arizona. Dr. Falco has been 
a professor of optical sciences since 1992, with a joint appointment in physics. He 
is a fellow of the American Physical Society (APS), the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Optical Society of America, and SPIE, and he 
served two year terms (1992-1993) as councilor of the APS and member of the 
Executive Committee of the Division of Condensed Matter Physics of the APS and 
4 years (1994-1998) as secretary/treasurer of the Forum on International Physics of 
the APS. Dr. Falco’s principal research interests are the growth (by molecular beam 
epitaxy and sputtering), structure (using a wide range of probes, including x-ray and 
electron diffraction, in situ and ex situ surface probes, electron ­microscopy, scanning 
probe microscopies, etc.), and studies of the physical properties of ­metallic super-
lattices and ultrathin films, including research on magnetism, super­conductivity, 
x-ray optics, elastic properties, and nucleation and epitaxy of thin films, as well 
as computerized image analysis. He has authored or co-authored more than 250 
­papers and six book chapters, holds six U.S. patents, and co-edited two books; he 
has given more than 150 invited talks at conferences in 24 countries and more than 
200 seminars at universities and research institutions in 15 countries.
ERICA R.H. FUCHS is an assistant professor in the Department of Engineering 
and Public Policy at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Her research focuses 
on the role of government in technology development and the effect of location 
on the competitiveness of new technologies. In 2008 she received the Oak Ridge 
Associated Universities Junior Faculty Enhancement Fellowship for her research 
on the impact of offshoring on technology directions, and in 2011 she received a 
National Science Foundation CAREER award for her research rethinking national 
innovation systems. During 2011, she played a growing role in national meetings on 
the future of U.S. advanced manufacturing. Before joining the faculty at CMU, Dr. 
Fuchs completed her Ph.D. in engineering systems at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) in June 2006. She also received her master’s and her bachelor’s 
degrees from MIT in technology policy (2003) and materials science and engineer-
ing (1999), respectively. Prior to graduate school, Dr. Fuchs spent 1999-2000 as a 

337
A p p e n d i x  D
fellow at the United Nations in Beijing, China. There, she conducted research at 
state-owned industrial boiler manufacturers on policies to encourage innovation. 
Her work has been published in High Temperature Materials and Processes, Journal 
of Lightwave Technology, Composite Science and Technology, International Journal of 
Vehicle Design, Issues in Science and Technology, Research Policy, and Management 
Science. Dr. Fuchs has been an invited speaker at a wide range of venues, including 
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the U.S. Department of 
Commerce’s National Advisory Council on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, and 
the Council on Foreign Relations.
WAGUIH S. ISHAK, Alternate Co-Chair, is the division vice president and director 
of the Corning West Technology Center, Corning Incorporated. Dr. Ishak’s M.Sc. 
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering were awarded by McMaster University, 
Ontario, Canada, in 1975 and 1978, respectively. In 1999, Dr. Ishak completed the 
Stanford Executive Program at Stanford University. In 1987, he became the man-
ager of the Photonics Technology Department of the Instruments and Photonics 
Laboratory at Hewlett-Packard, which is responsible for research and development 
(R&D) programs in fiber optics, integrated optics, optoelectronics, micro-optics, 
and optical interconnects for applications in measurements. In 1995, he was pro-
moted to the position of director of the communications and optics research 
laboratory. Dr. Ishak led his R&D team in the areas of photonics (fiber optics, 
integrated optics, optoelectronics, and micro-optics) and integrated electronics. In 
2003, he became the director of the Photonics and Electronics Research Lab at Agi-
lent Labs, responsible for the R&D programs in photonics, high-speed electronics, 
sensors, semiconductor testing, wireless communications, and consumer electron-
ics. In 2005, he became the vice president and chief technology officer at Avago 
Technologies. Dr. Ishak managed the company’s U.S. Advanced R&D Center and 
was responsible for creating technologies for its Electronic Components Business 
Unit. In 2007, he joined Corning Incorporated. As the division vice president and 
director of the Corning West Technology Center, he manages a team of scientists 
in developing applications for Corning’s glass and fiber technologies and conduct-
ing state-of-the-art research in the areas of microstructures and nanotechnology. 
Dr. Ishak has 7 patents, 2 book chapters, and 75 publications and is currently a 
fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and chair of the 
board-elect of Optoelectronics Industry.
PREM KUMAR is the AT&T Professor of Information Technology for the Electri-
cal Engineering and Computer Science Department at Northwestern University. 
Professor Kumar is also the director of the Center for Photonic Communication 
and Computing and a professor of physics and astronomy. He received his Ph.D. 
in 1980 in physics from the State University of New York, Buffalo, and joined 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
338
Northwestern in 1986 after spending 5 years at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. His publications include 1 edited book, 1 book chapter, 6 patents, 180 
peer-reviewed journal papers, 45 proceedings articles, and 300 (90 invited) confer-
ence papers. His research focuses on photonic devices and applications utilizing 
the principles of nonlinear and quantum optics. Current development areas in 
which he is involved include generation, distribution, and ultrafast processing of 
quantum entanglement for cryptography and computing; novel optical amplifiers 
and devices for networked communications; and novel quantum light states for 
precision measurements and quantum imaging and sensing. He is a fellow of the 
Optical Society of America (OSA), the American Physical Society (APS), the Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Institute of Physics (United 
Kingdom), the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), and 
SPIE, the International Society for Optical Engineering. In 2006 he received the 
Martin E. and Gertrude G. Walder Research Excellence Award from Northwestern 
University. In 2004 he received the Fifth International Quantum Communication 
Award from Tamagawa University, Tokyo, Japan. He has been a Distinguished 
Lecturer for the IEEE Photonics Society (2008-2010). He is active in professional 
societies (OSA, IEEE, APS, SPIE, and AAAS) in various roles including the fol-
lowing: OSA Long-Term Planning Group (2008-2010); general (program) chair, 
Quantum Electronics and Laser Science Conference 2008 (2006); chair, Steering 
Committee, International Conference on Quantum Communication, Measure-
ment, and Computing (Brisbane, Australia, 2010; Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2008; 
Tsukuba City, Japan, 2006; Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2002; Evanston, Illinois, 
1998, principal organizer). He is the founder and managing partner of NuCrypt, 
LLC, in Evanston, Illinois.
DAVID A.B. MILLER (NAS, NAE) is the W.M. Keck Professor of Electrical En-
gineering, a Professor by Courtesy of Applied Physics, and a co-director of the 
Stanford Photonics Research Center at Stanford University. Dr. Miller received his 
B.Sc. from St. Andrews University, Scotland, and, in 1979, the Ph.D. from Heriot-
Watt University, both in physics. He was with Bell Laboratories from 1981 to 1996, 
as a department head from 1987, and in latter years of the period as head of the 
Advanced Photonics Research Department. He has served as director of the Ginz-
ton Laboratory and of the Solid State and Photonics Laboratory at Stanford. His 
research interests include physics and devices in nanophotonics, nanometallics, 
and quantum-well optoelectronics, and fundamentals and applications of optics 
in information sensing, switching, and processing. He has published more than 
230 scientific papers, holds 69 patents, and is the author of Quantum Mechanics 
for Scientists and Engineers (Cambridge, 2008). Dr. Miller has served as a board 
member for both the Optical Society of America (OSA) and the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Lasers and Electro-Optics Society (LEOS), 

339
A p p e n d i x  D
and on various other society and conference committees. He was president of the 
IEEE LEOS in 1995. He has also served on boards for various photonics com-
panies and on the Defense Sciences Research Council for the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency. He was awarded the Adolph Lomb Medal and the R.W. 
Wood Prize from the OSA, the International Prize in Optics from the International 
Commission for Optics, and the IEEE Third Millennium Medal. He is a fellow of 
OSA, IEEE, the American Physical Society, the Royal Society, and the Royal Society 
of Edinburgh; holds honorary doctorates from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel and 
Heriot-Watt University; and is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and 
the National Academy of Engineering.
DUNCAN T. MOORE (NAE) is the Rudolf and Hilda Kingslake Professor of Opti-
cal Engineering and Professor of Biomedical Engineering, as well as professor of 
business administration in the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Ad-
ministration at the University of Rochester. In 2006, he was also appointed director 
for entrepreneurship at the university, and in 2007 he became the vice provost for 
entrepreneurship. From 2004 until 2009, he was responsible for the $3.6 million 
Kauffman grant on entrepreneurship with a $7.2 million matching grant from the 
University of Rochester. The Ph.D. degree in optics was awarded to Dr. Moore in 
1974 from the University of Rochester. He had previously earned a master’s degree 
in optics at Rochester and a bachelor’s degree in physics from the University of 
Maine. Dr. Moore has extensive experience in the academic, research, business, and 
government arenas of science and technology. He is an expert in gradient-index 
optics, computer-aided design, and the manufacture of optical systems. He has 
been a thesis advisor for more than 50 graduate students. In 1993, he began a 1-year 
appointment as science adviser to Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia. 
Dr. Moore was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in February 1998. 
His major areas of research are in gradient-index materials, computer-aided de-
sign (including design for manufacturing methods), the manufacture of optical 
systems, medical optics (especially optics for minimally invasive surgery), and 
optical instrumentation. His most recent Ph.D. thesis topics as a thesis adviser for 
graduate students have been very high efficiency solar cells, polymer gradient index 
optics, a built-in accommodation system for the eye, terahertz imaging, generalized 
three-dimensional index gradients, single-point diamond turning of glass, design 
methods for gradient-index imaging systems, the effect of diffusion chemistry on 
gradient-index profiles formed by means of sol-gel techniques, quantitative phase 
imaging in scanning optical microscopy, integration of the design and manufac-
ture of gradient-index optical systems, and interferometric characterization of the 
chromatic dispersion of gradient-index glasses.
DAVID C. MOWERY is William A. and Betty H. Hasler Professor of New Enter-
prise Development at the Walter A. Haas School of Business at the University of 

O p t i c s  a n d  P h o t o n i c s : E s s e n t i a l  T e c h n o l o g i e s  f o r  O u r  N a t i o n
340
California, Berkeley, and a research associate of the National Bureau of Economic 
Research. He received his undergraduate and Ph.D. degrees in economics from 
Stanford University and was a postdoctoral fellow at the Harvard Business School. 
Dr. Mowery taught at Carnegie Mellon University, served as the study director for 
the Panel on Technology and Employment of the National Academy of Sciences, 
and served in the Office of the United States Trade Representative as a Council on 
Foreign Relations International Affairs Fellow. He has been a member of a num-
ber of National Research Council committees. In 2003-2004, he was the Marvin 
Bower Research Fellow at the Harvard Business School. His research deals with 
the economics of technological innovation and with the effects of public poli-
cies on innovation; he has testified before congressional committees and served 
as an adviser for the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
various federal agencies, and industrial firms. Dr. Mowery has published numer-
ous academic papers and has written or edited a number of books, including the 
Oxford Handbook of Innovation; Innovation, Path Dependency, and Policy: The 
Norwegian Case; Innovation in Global Industries; Ivory Tower and Industrial Inno-
vation: University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the Bayh-Dole Act; 
Paths of Innovation: Technological Change in 20th-Century America; The Interna-
tional Computer Software Industry: A Comparative Study of Industry Evolution and 
Structure; U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competitive Performance; The Sources of 
Industrial Leadership: Studies of Seven Industries; Science and Technology Policy in 
Interdependent Economies; Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth; Alliance 
Politics and Economics: Multinational Joint Ventures in Commercial Aircraft; Tech-
nology and Employment: Innovation and Growth in the U.S. Economy; The Impact 
of Technological Change on Employment and Economic Growth; Technology and the 
Wealth of Nations; and International Collaborative Ventures in U.S. Manufacturing. 
His academic awards include the Raymond Vernon Prize from the Association 
for Public Policy Analysis and Management, the Economic History Association’s 
Fritz Redlich Prize, the Business History Review’s Newcomen Prize, and the Cheit 
Outstanding Teaching Award.
N. DARIUS SANKEY is a currently a portfolio director for Central Portfolio 
Management at Intellectual Ventures, where he participates in developing intel-
lectual property investment strategies for the firm. Dr. Sankey had recently served 
as managing director at Zone Ventures, an affiliate venture capital fund of Draper 
Fisher Jurvetson based in Los Angeles. Dr. Sankey led the Zone Ventures technol-
ogy assessment efforts and oversaw its portfolio investments for more than 8 years, 
serving as a board member for several companies including Siimpel Corporation, 
Lumexis, Inc., and Microfabrica and Neven Vision (acquired by Google). He has led 
several transactions in the microelectronics, wireless telecommunications, media 
and entertainment, and business and consumer software sectors. Dr. Sankey has a 
strong interest in strategizing market applications for basic science research on the 

341
A p p e n d i x  D
university level. This interest has also led him to a position as a visiting professor 
at the Rady School of Business Management at the University of California, San 
Diego. Before his tenure at Zone Ventures, Dr. Sankey worked as a management 
consultant at McKinsey & Company, Inc., and held strategic planning, consulting, 
and research and development positions at the RAND Corporation and AT&T Bell 
Laboratories. Dr. Sankey holds a B.S. in physics and electrical engineering from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a Ph.D. in optical engineering from the 
Institute of Optics, University of Rochester.
EDWARD WHITE, the president of Edward White Consulting and a native of 
New York State, began his career at Kodak after earning a B.S. degree in mechani-
cal engineering from the University of Rochester. He later earned an Executive 
M.B.A., also from the University of Rochester. At Kodak, Mr. White held a variety 
of management positions in engineering, research and development, and the busi-
ness units. As general manager of Kodak’s Optical Products Business Unit and vice 
president of the Commercial Imaging Group, he led an organization responsible 
for designing and manufacturing optical systems for Kodak products as well as for 
high-tech customers external to Kodak. His global organization of more than 1,800 
people included engineering and manufacturing operations located in the United 
States, Europe, Latin America, China, Taiwan, and Japan, with sales of $100 million. 
After retiring from Kodak in 2009, Mr. White took an interim position as president 
and chief executive officer of JML Optical, a manufacturer of precision optical 
components and assemblies, and in 2010 he founded Edward White Consulting, 
LLC. His consulting business specializes in helping engineering and manufactur-
ing companies solve challenging business and operational issues around the world. 
He is currently engaged in helping companies improve operations in the United 
States as well as establish new operations in China and India. Mr. White is active 
in his community and serves on several not-for-profit boards. He currently chairs 
the Rochester United Way Services Corporation Board, is a member of the Finance 
Committee of the Greater Rochester United Way, and is a member of Rochester’s 
Children’s Success Fund.

