STEGANALYSIS AWARE STEGANOGRAPHY:
STATISTICAL INDISTINGUISHABILITY DESPITE HIGH
DISTORTION
Adem Orsdemir, H. Oktay Altun, Gaurav Sharma, and Mark F. Bocko
ECE Department, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14627
ABSTRACT
We consider the interplay between steganographer and the steganalyzer, and develop a steganalysis aware frame-
work for steganography. The problem of determining a stego image is posed as a feasibility problem subject
to constraint of data communication, imperceptibility, and statistical indistinguishability with respect to ste-
ganalyzer’s features. A stego image is then determined using set theoretic feasible point estimation methods.
The proposed framework is applied eﬀectively on a state of the art steganalysis method based on higher order
statistics (HOS) steganalysis. We ﬁrst show that the steganographer can signiﬁcantly reduce the classiﬁcation
performance of the steganalyzer by employing a statistical constraint during embedding, although the image
is highly distorted. Then we show that steganalyzer can develop a counter-strategy against steganographer’s
action, gaining back some classiﬁcation performance. This interchange represents an empirical iteration in this
game between the steganographer and steganalyzer. Finally we consider mixture strategies to ﬁnd the Nash
equilibrium of the interplay.
Keywords: Adaptive Steganography, Steganalysis, Steganalysis Aware Steganography, Game between steganog-
rapher and steganalyzer
1. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of covert communication, or steganography, is to hide both presence of communication and the
secret message itself. The desire for creating innocuous looking stego objects dates back to the early stages of
human history. Today, proliferation of digital signal processing, advances in multimedia technology and the wide
spread use of the Internet switched the secret communication channels from “slowly moving and hard to change”
physical media to “lightning-fast propagating and easy to alter” digital multimedia. In digital steganography,
the steganographer aims to create a secret private channel inside a publicly or semi-publicly accessible digital
communication channel. Steganographer’s endeavors are intended to be blocked by a steganalyzer, who seeks
for statistical and visual evidence of alteration in transmitted multimedia. The steganalyzer and steganographer
can both pick diﬀerent strategies to advance their objectives against each other’s strategies.
The conventional story elucidating steganographic communication takes place in a prison [1].
Alice, the
prisoner, wants to share her escape plans with Bob, her potential associate in this escape plan. Alice is allowed to
communicate with Bob, however as a security measure, Wendy the warden monitors all outgoing communication
traﬃc. Wendy either blocks or alters the communication when she ﬁnds evidence of a secret communication.
Based on the type of her actions, she is typiﬁed either as passive or active warden respectively. We focus on the
“passive warden” scenario where the steganalyzer’s goal is to classify each received image into one of two classes
corresponding to benign images (with no embedding) or stego images (with embedding).
Steganographer’s problem and the dynamics between steganographer and steganalyzer has been formulated
and analyzed in many diﬀerent settings. There are several neat examples of information theoretic [2], game
Further author information: (Send correspondence to A. Orsdemir)
A. Orsdemir: E-mail: orsdemir@ece.rochester.edu, Telephone: 1 585 275 8122
H. O. Altun: E-mail:altun@ece.rochester.edu, Telephone: 1 585 2752390
G. Sharma: E-mail: gsharma@ece.rochester.edu, Telephone: 1 585 275 7313
M.F. Bocko: E-mail: bocko@ece.rochester.edu, Telephone: 1 585 275 40 66
This work is supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) under grant number FA9550-07-1-0017.
Security, Forensics, Steganography, and Watermarking of Multimedia Contents X
edited by Edward J. Delp III, Ping Wah Wong, Jana Dittmann, Nasir D. Memon
Proc. of SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, SPIE Vol. 6819, 681915, © 2008 SPIE-IS&T · 0277-786X/08/$18
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-1

theoretic [3] and communication theoretic approaches. In this paper, we examine the steganographic data hiding
problem from an alternate perspective.
We formulate the problem as a feasibility problem and analyze the
empirical results from a game theoretic perspective.
In our development, we consider the higher order statistics (HOS) steganalysis method [4]. We ﬁrst show
that the steganographer can signiﬁcantly reduce the classiﬁcation performance of the steganalyzer by employing
a statistical indistinguishability constraint during embedding along with other data hiding requirements. The
steganalyzer relies on the statistical diﬀerence between stego image and original image. If these statistics are kept
intact during embedding, the performance of the steganalyzer can be reduced signiﬁcantly. We show practical
application of this idea in a set theoretic framework and obtain a stego-design that meets all constraints along
with statistical indistinguishability at the same time.
We then show that steganalyzer can develop a counter-strategy against steganographer’s action, gaining back
some classiﬁcation performance.The steganalyzer can take into account of the fact that the steganographer creates
stego images by employing the statistical indistinguishability set. A novel aspect of the proposed framework is
that the receiver (Bob in the traditional scenario) does not need to be completely aware of the complete set of
constraints used by the steganographer (Alice). This allows the steganographer to dynamically change constraints
(other than the detection constraints) to stymie steganalysis. We consider several such scenarios. We refer to
the steganographer as sophisticated if he incorporates constraints based on statistical indistinguishability in the
embedding process and naive otherwise. Similarly we refer to the steganalyzer as sophisticated if he assumes
that statistical indistinguishability constraints are used in the embedding and naive otherwise. Then we consider
mixture strategies that randomly choose to include/disregard the statistical indistinguishability constraints.
These options lead them to a game of picking either naive or sophisticated strategy in the game. Finally mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium is determined solving a minmax problem for both agents.We observed that there
does not exist any Nash equilibrium in the empirical payoﬀtables. The game theoretic equilibrium for mixed
strategies is illustrated in the practical framework we have developed.
2.
A FEASIBILITY FORMULATION OF STEGANALYSIS AWARE
STEGANOGRAPHY
A steganographer, aware of being monitored by a passive warden, has to fulﬁll several challenging and possibly
competing requirements to generate a successful stego image. First of all, the stego image should be indistin-
guishable to the steganalyzer’s statistical detector. However, mark embedding without proper adjustment would
most likely disrupt the statistical properties of the image, giving the steganalyzer a chance to distinguish those
with the mark from the original cover images. Second, the image should look perceptually similar to the original
image. A visually distorted stego image will immediately catch attention of a steganalyzer examining the image
with his bare eyes. This will defeat the purpose of steganography. And ﬁnally, the correct message should be
decodable at the receiver side. Inserting a message that interferes partially or totally with the cover fails the
mission of steganography as well.
The steganographer in a passive warden scenario intends to ﬁnd an image that satisﬁes all three requirements
simultaneously. The problem of a steganographer being monitored by a steganalyzer can be formulated as a
feasibility problem.
In the following sections, we will give the details of this formulation and illustrate the
eﬀectiveness of the method.
2.1 Formulating the steganographic requirements:
In this section we introduce the requirements for steganography in images. For visual quality and detectability
we utilize our prior work on set theoretic watermarking [5, 6].
2.1.1 Presence of a HOS Steganalyzer and Formulation of Statistical Indistinguishability
Requirement:
Steganalysis techniques usually assume that, hiding information into natural images disrupt the statistics of the
image. A successful steganalysis method exploits this fact and trains a classiﬁer that distinguishes stego image
statistics from natural image statistics. One of the state of the art steganalysis method is steganalysis with
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-2

HOS [4]. HOS steganalysis has two main steps: extracting a feature vector consisting statistics from the sample
image and classiﬁcation based on this feature vector.
In the feature vector extraction step, the HOS steganalyzer decomposes inspected image into two dimensional
multi-scale wavelet domain representation.
The image is decomposed into vertical, horizontal, diagonal and
approximation subbands. The low pass approximation subband is decomposed further into upper scales, indicated
by subscript i where i = 1, .., n. These multiscale subbands are represented by vi(x), hi(x), di(x) and ai(x)
respectively throughout the paper, where the subbands are represented as a function of the image (x) in spatial
domain. The feature vectors are then estimated by using mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis of each of these
subbands. Additionally, a linear predictor is employed to estimate each of the coeﬃcients at each subband from
their neighboring coeﬃcients. The statistics of the error between observed coeﬃcients and estimated coeﬃcients
are calculated to complete the feature vector.
As a second step, support vector machines (SVM) can be employed for classiﬁcation purpose. Steganalyzer
choses a training set of images. Data is hidden into these images. Feature vectors are extracted for both of the
cover and stego images and the classiﬁer is trained. The feature vector pertaining to inspected image is then fed
into a classiﬁer.
In the presence of a HOS steganalyzer, the steganographer must generate stego images whose statistical
features resemble those of natural images. Otherwise, steganographer’s mission of rendering the very presence
of steganography fails. One way to ensure this statistical indistinguishability is to formulate constraints on the
stego images. In particular, we can see that a steganalyzer based on a given set of statistics cannot distinguish
between the classes of cover and stego images, if the steganographic embedding process preserves the statistics of
the cover image that are used by the steganalyzer. For some statistics, e.g. variance, exact preservation may not
be necessary and it may be acceptable if the statistics of the stego image are bounded by those of the cover.
Accordingly, we formulate indistinguishability of the stego image from cover images as follows:
Si,stat,φ
1
≡{x : stat(φi(x)) ≤stat(φi(xo))}
i = 1, .., n,
φ = vi(x), hi(x), di(x)
(1)
where xo represents the original image, x represents a candidate watermarked image and stat represents ﬁrst
and HOS for the normalized moments: mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis.
2.1.2 Visual Quality Requirements
We employ a spatial masking model proposed by Pereira et al [7] in order to ensure the visual ﬁdelity of the
stego image to the original image. This model exploits the fact that noise in textured areas are less visible than
noise in smooth areas in the image. This model assigns pixel-wise upper and lower bounds to the each pixel.
This is the upper and lower bound of the allowed perturbation. The model assumes that the noise within this
interval is invisible. We can formulate this constraint as [5]
S2 ≡{x : l ≤x −x0 ≤u}
(2)
where u and l form pixel-wise upper and lower bounds respectively. These values are provided by the texture
masking model as a function of the original cover image.
2.1.3 Detectability Requirements
We use a quantization index modulation (QIM) [8] based embedding strategy in which each bit is embedded
by using a scalar quantizers on the mean of L randomly selected pixels [6]. If we denote the randomly selected
pixels with a L × 1 vector y0, the mean of these values is µi = 1
L1T y0 where 1 is a L × 1 vector of 1’s. Let’s
represent Q as the integer scalar quantizer with ∆as scaling parameter, then if we want to embed a bit value b,
assuming b ∈{−1, 1}, the mean of these values must be
1
L1T y = Q(µi −bi
∆
2 , ∆) + bi
∆
2 ≡µq,b
i
(3)
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-3

The detectability set can then be given as [5]:
Si
2 ≡{x : 1
L1T yi = µq,bi
i
}
i = 1, .., M
(4)
where M denotes the number of embedded bits with values {bi}N
i=1, yi denotes the L × 1 sample vector for i’th
bit value. Note that the randomly selected locations for diﬀerent bits may be overlapping. Receiver is aware of
the quantization intervals of diﬀerent bit values so that he can correctly identify the bit value transmitted. This
set is the only requirement for identiﬁcation of message bits.
2.2 Generating An Image Satisfying All Requirements:
We formulated the desired properties of the stego image as constraint sets. Now we want to determine the image
which satisﬁes these requirements. The stego image can be obtained using an iterative algorithm that determines
a point in the intersection of all the constraint sets. When the sets are convex the method of POCS provides
a converging algorithm for this purpose. Given n convex sets {Si}n
i=1 the POCS method determines a point
in their intersection by successive projections. If the intersection of all the sets is non-empty, the sequence of
images {fk}∞
k=0 generated by POCS converges to a point in the intersection, where
fk+1 = (PSn(PSn−1...PS1(fk)...)), k = 0, 1, ..
(5)
PSi is the projection operator onto set Si deﬁned as PSi(x) = arg miny∈Si∥y −x∥.
The detectability and visual quality requirements are inherently convex [6]. The statistical indistinguishability
requirements however are not convex due to the normalized moments. We approximated these sets by convex
sets, where we assume the normalizing coeﬃcients (powers of standard deviations in the denominators of the
moments) do not change during the iteration.
In each iteration we keep the standard deviation same with
the original value by projections. This approximation works quite well and the algorithm yields a stego image
simultaneously satisfying all constraints. Note that detectibility constraint is needed for communication between
the sender and receiver, but for the other constraints sender can decide to incorporate or not without impacting
the detectibility.
2.3 Experimental Results:
We performed a set of experiments to test the eﬀectiveness of the statistical indistinguishability set we propose
in this framework. We used the images from Kodak’s ftp site [9]. It consists of 108 uncompressed∗images in
Kodak PhotoCD format each having a size of 512 × 768. The images were converted to grayscale images for our
experiments by ﬁrst decoding the PhotoCD format to RGB TIFF format and then utilizing Matlab’s rgb2gray
function. Stego data is embedded in the images using set theoretic framework. We used a spreading rate of
L = 2000 pixels/bit. The pixels are selected at random controlled by a pseudo-random key, available for both
detector and receiver side.
Experiments indicated that the variance and kurtosis for the wavelet decomposition of the stego images at
diﬀerent scales were the primary contributers to the HOS based steganalyzer’s accuracy. We therefore employed
a constraint set in the watermark embedding process that constrained these statistics in the stego images to lie
below their values in the cover images.
For steganalysis classiﬁcation purposes we employed a Lagrangian support vector machine (l-SVM) [10, 11]
classiﬁer. We inserted data into images in the database with various embedding rates. Half of the stego images in
the database along with the corresponding original cover images were used for training the classiﬁer. The other
half of the images in the database and the corresponding stego images were used for testing the steganalyzer’s
performance.
We tested the eﬀectiveness of the statistical indistinguishability set by designing two experiments. In one of
these experiments, we only incorporate invisibility and detectability sets but exclude statistical indistinguisha-
bility set. Table 1 summarizes the performance of the classiﬁer when the statistical indistinguishability set is
∗Apart from chroma downsampling
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-4

__________
Embedding Rate (bits)
__________
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Train. Pert
89.81 %
95.37 %
98.15 %
99.14 %
100.00 %
Test Pen.
71.30%
78.70%
85.19%
89.81%
91.67%
F.P.
25.93%
16.67%
11.11%
09.26%
05.56%
rN.
31.48%
25.93%
18.52%
11.11%
11.11%
Av. PSNR
40.17dB
38.20dB
36.68 dB
35.78 dB
34.87 dB
__________
Embedding Rate (bits)
__________
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Train. Pert
8981%
95.37%
98.15%
9914%
100.00%
Test Pen.
50.00 %
50.93 %
50.93 %
50.00 %
50.93 %
F.P.
25.93%
16.67%
11.11%
09.26%
05.56%
rN.
74.07 %
81.78 %
87.04 %
9074 %
92.59 %
Av. PSNR
39.03 dB
37.27dB
3619 dB
34.98 dB
34.04 dB
included. The ﬁrst row of the table shows the performance of the classiﬁer on the training data set after the
training process. The classiﬁcation results are given as success rate percentage values. As expected, as we in-
crease the embedding rate, the distortion on the cover image increases, giving better training performance for
the classiﬁer. The second row of the table shows the test results of the classiﬁer. The results are slightly worse
than the training results as one naturally would expect. The third and forth row of this table distinguishes
between false positive (F.P.) and false negative (F.N.) values of the testing results of the classiﬁer. The last
row shows the average PSNR of the watermarked image with respect to the original image over 108 images.
PSNR = 10 · log(2252/(MSE)) where MSE stands for the average mean square error between the original and
stego image.
In the second set of experiments, we included the statistical indistinguishability set to generate the water-
marked images. Table 2 summarizes the performance of the classiﬁer when the statistical indistinguishability
set is included. Compared to Table 1, we see a drastic decrease in the test performance of the classiﬁer. The
performance is almost random for all embedding rates. And the most signiﬁcant contribution to classiﬁcation
error comes due to the false negative errors. This indicates that classiﬁer can’t distinguish the watermarked
images from the original and misclassiﬁes them as originals. Note that the steganalyzer classiﬁer in this scenario
was trained on stego images generated without the statistical indistinguishability constraints.
The average PSNR values at Table 2 show the eﬀect of including statistical indistinguishability on the
generated image. The statistical indistinguishability set increases the PSNR of the image between 0.5 −1 dB
in average. This extra distortion is the cost on steganographer for being indistinguishable to the steganalyzer’s
statistical detector.
In comparison with other steganographic embedding methods, the PSNR values in tables 1 and 2 are relatively
high for the corresponding embedding rates. This makes the poor steganalysis performance in Table 2 even more
remarkable.
Table 1. Training and testing performance of steganalyzer’s SVM classiﬁer, when steganographer does not apply statistical
indistinguishability set.
Table 2. Training and testing performance of steganalyzer’s SVM classiﬁer, when steganographer applies statistical indis-
tinguishability set.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-5

3. GAME BETWEEN STEGANOGRAPHER AND STEGANALYZER
The feasibility formulation of data hiding brings an interesting dynamics between steganographer and stegana-
lyzer. Each agent can view the opponent agent’s strategy in a naive way or in a sophisticated way. We identify
these agents either naive steganographer/steganalyzer or sophisticated steganographer/steganalyzer. The fun-
damental diﬀerence between naive and sophisticated approach is the way that each agent formulates his own
problem.
Naive steganographer would not consider the fact that steganalyzer is exploiting the statistical diﬀerence
between stego and original image. In simpler terms, he employs only invisibility and detectability sets. On the
other hand, a sophisticated steganographer views the problem in a diﬀerent point of view: he is aware of the
fact that, he can do better by employing a statistical indistinguishability set while embedding information.
Steganalyst’s problem mirrors steganographer’s formulation. In the proposed framework in Section 2, ste-
ganalyst is a naive agent since he trains his classiﬁer with the stego images generated by only invisibility and
detectability sets. He does not consider the fact that steganographer can take a counteraction to depreciate
his classiﬁcation performance. Sophisticated steganalyzer, on the other hand, takes the steganographer’s action
into account to gain back his performance. In this scenario, he trains his classiﬁer with stego images where
they are generated by employing invisibility, detectability and statistical indistinguishability sets. In statistical
indistinguishability set only some statistics are preserved. Steganalyzer relies on the other statistics. Feasibility
formulation of the framework allows steganographer to change his strategy at will. We note that the terms naive
and sophisticated should be only interpreted in this context as using/not using the statistical indistinguishability
constraint and should not be interpreted literally.
The game between steganographer and steganalyzer can be summarized in a classical payoﬀmatrix listed in
Table 3. The payoﬀs are expressed in terms of steganalyst’s classiﬁcation performance. The game can be identiﬁed
as a zero-sum game, since they have to share a 100% performance over test images. For naive-naive† scenario
the performance of the steganalyzer increase with increasing embedding rate. When steganographer chooses
to employ the indistinguishability set to create stego images, the performance of the steganalyzer decreases
drastically. This was the main result of Section 2.
One interesting scenario is when the steganographer behaves naively while the steganalyst assumes steganog-
rapher’s complicated action. This scenario also favors steganographer and leaves steganalyst with a performance
equivalent to random guessing. When both of them chooses to play sophisticated, the classiﬁcation performance
of the steganalyzer is better than the naive-sophisticated strategies however worse than the naive-naive strategy.
We need a simple game theoretic analysis to read the payoﬀtable and predict each player’s strategy. Observing
the table, we can tell that the pure strategies does not have a Nash equilibrium. In each strategy in the game,
one of the player can do better by deviating from it. In naive-naive scenario, the steganographer can do better by
deviating to sophisticated-naive strategy. In sophisticated-naive strategy, steganalyzer is better oﬀby changing
to sophisticated-sophisticated strategy. Similar arguments can be observed for the rest of the two options.
Since the Nash equilibrium does not exist among pure strategies, an equilibrium must exist in the mixed
strategies [12]. We will examine mixed strategies in section 4.
4. MIXED STRATEGIES
The steganographer can do better in the presence of mixed strategies. The steganalyzer can randomize to choose
employment of statistical indistinguishability set while generating the stego images. And correspondingly, the
steganalyzer can do the same to generate his training set.
The mixed strategy Nash equilibriums can be calculated by a minmax strategy. We solved this problem
for the payoﬀTable 2(a) for embedding rate 4000.
The Nash equilibrium exists when steganalyzer chooses
naive strategy with probability p = 0.38 and sophisticated strategy with 1 −p = 0.62, and steganographer
chooses naive strategy with probability q = 0.37 and sophisticated strategy with 1 −q = 0.63.
This Nash
equilibrium correponds to the situation where steganographer alternates between generating the stego image
†In A-B notation, A stands for steganographer’s strategy and B stands for steganalyzer’s strategy.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-6

(a) E.R.=2000
E.R.=2000
Steganographer
Naïve
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
71.3%
50%
Sophisticated
51.85%
64.81%
(b) E.R.=3000

E.R.=3000
Steganographer
Naïve
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
78.70%
50.93%
Sophisticated
54.62%
66.67%
(c) E.R.=4000
E.R.=4000
Steganographer
Naïve
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
85.19%
50.93%
Sophisticated
50.00%
71.29%
(d) E.R.=5000
E.R.=5000
Steganographer
Naïve
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
89.81%
50.00%
Sophisticated
53.70%
72.22%
Table 3. Payoﬀtable for steganographer-steganalysis game for various embedding rates. Payoﬀvalues are expressed in
terms of steganalyst’s classiﬁcation performance.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-7

by using statistical indistinguishability set with 0.63 probability and not using statistical indistinguishability
by 0.37 probability.
Similarly, steganalyzer uses the sophisticated classiﬁer with probability 0.62 and naive
classiﬁer with probability 0.38. At this point steganalyzer’s payoﬀ, which corresponds to expected classiﬁcation
accuracy, is approximately 63%. However in reality steganalyzer would train the classiﬁer by a mixture of stego
images instead of switching between diﬀerent classiﬁers. For the Nash equilibrium mixture, 62% of the images
are obtained by using the statistical indistinguishability set 38% of the images are generated by excluding the
statistical indistinguishability set.
Using this mixture training dataset we found the empirical classiﬁcation
accuracy as 66%. The empirically obtained payoﬀs for the case when the steganographer uses a 50 −50 mixture
strategy and the steganalyzer trains on a corresponding number of images is shown in Table 4. The numbers
indicate that the linearity assumption in the computation of Nash equilibrium does not introduce too much error.
5. CONCLUSION
We consider steganalysis aware steganography that incorporates statistical indistinguishability with respect to
the original cover as an embedding requirement. Combining this constraint with prior work in set theoretic
watermarking, we obtain a feasibility formulation for steganography in which stego image is obtained by suc-
cessive projections onto the constraint sets. We demonstrate that, by adding the statistical indistinguishability
constraint the steganographer signiﬁcantly reduces the classiﬁcation accuracy of steganalyzer. The game between
steganographer and steganalyzer reduces to either viewing the problem in a naive or sophisticated way. The
empirical payoﬀtable for various embedding rates indicates us that there does not exists a pure strategy Nash
equilibrium. However, agents can choose to randomize strategies and obtain a Nash equilibrium.
REFERENCES
1. G. J. Simmons, “The prisoners’ problem and the subliminal channel,” in CRYPTO, pp. 51–67, 1983.
2. P. Moulin and J. O’Sullivan, “Information-theoretic analysis of information hiding,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory 49(3), pp. 563–593, 2003.
3. A. D. Ker, “Batch steganography and the threshold game,” in Security, Steganography, and Watermarking
of Multimedia Contents IX. Edited by Delp, Edward J., III; Wong, Ping Wah. Proceedings of the SPIE,
Volume 6505, pp. 650504 (2007)., Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference 6505, Feb. 2007.
4. S. Lyu and H. Farid, “Steganalysis using higher-order image statistics,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security 1(1), pp. 111–119, 2006.
5. O. Altun, G. Sharma, M. Celik, and M. Bocko, “A set theoretic framework for watermarking and its
application to semifragile tamper detection,” IEEE Trans. Info. Forensics and Security 1, pp. 479–492,
Dec. 2006.
6. O. Altun, G. Sharma, and M. Bocko, “Set theoretic quantization index modulation watermarking,” in Proc.
IEEE Intl. Conf. Acoustics Speech and Sig. Proc., II, pp. 229–232, May 2006.
7. S. Voloshynovskiy, A. Herrigel, N. Baumgaertner, and T. Pun, “A stochastic approach to content adaptive
digital image watermarking,” in Third International Workshop on Information Hiding, pp. 211–236, 1999.
8. B.Chen and G.W.Wornell, “Quantization index modulation: a class of provably good methods for digital
watermarking and information embedding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 47, pp. 1423–1443, 2001.
9. “Kodak PhotoCD images.” ftp://ftp.kodak.com/www/images/pcd.
10. O. Mangasarian and D. R. Musicant, “LSVM Software: active set support vector machine classiﬁcation
software,” 2000. www.cs.wisc.edu/∼musicant/lsvm/.
11. O. L. Mangasarian and D. R. Musicant, “Lagrangian support vector machine classiﬁcation,” Tech. Rep. 00-
06, Data Mining Institute, Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin,
June 2000. ftp://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/pub/dmi/tech-reports/00-06.ps.
12. J. Nash, “Equilibrium points in n-person games,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 36, pp. 48–49, 1950.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-8

(a) E.R.=2000

E.R.=2000
Steganographer
Naive
Mix
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
71.30%
62.03%
50.00%
Mix
67.59%
59.26%
54.63%
Sophisticated
51.85%
59.26%
64.81%
(b) E.R.=3000

E.R.=3000
Steganographer
Naive
Mix
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
78.70%
65.74%
50.93%
Mix
75.00%
62.04%
56.48%
Sophisticated
54.62%
62.96%
66.67%
(c) E.R.=4000

E.R.=4000
Steganographer
Naive
Mix
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
85.19%
69.44%
50.93%
Mix
79.63%
64.81%
54.63%
Sophisticated
50.00%
62.96%
71.29%
(d) E.R.=5000

E.R.=5000
Steganographer
Naive
Mix
Sophisticated
Steganalyzer
Naive
89.81%
71.30%
50.00%
Mix
85.19%
67.59%
59.33%
Sophisticated
53.70%
63.89%
72.22%
Table 4. Payoﬀtable for steganographer-steganalysis game for various embedding rates including uniformly randomized
mixed strategy.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6819  681915-9

