MEMNON,  THE  VOCAL  STATUE
Massimo Pettorino
Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli, Italia
ABSTRACT
The most famous talking statue of the past is the “colossus of
Memnon”, the sandstone colossus still rising over 65 feet in
front of Luxor, the ancient Thebes. For about two centuries, at
dawn, when the sun rays touched the statue, a plaintive sound
came out  of the stone. The 108 epigraphs carved on the legs
of the colossus, together with the words of Strabo, Tacitus and
Pausanias, are the reliable witnesses of the phenomenon. Up
to now, among the various hypotheses, the most common
ascribes the sound to natural causes, such as the temperature,
the rarefaction of the air and so on. The results of recent
researches give a new interpretation of the fact. A careful
exam of the chronology of the epigraphs confirms  that the
death of Antinous, Hadrian’s favourite, has to do with the
secret of the statue.
1. INTRODUCTION
When we have drawn the history of the talking machines [1],
following the tracks  of the artificial voice, we have realized
that it is quite easy to go back until the 17th century, where it
is possible to find wonderful experiments on the acoustics of
the resonating tubes.
To go further back in time, we must be very careful to
separate reality from chronicles and legends mixing
experiments with magic. Nevertheless,  it is really the period
from 11th to 15th century that marks the beginning of the
experimental research in the field of the artificial voice. In
fact, after the first impulse that leads us to smile at the many
talking bronze heads and statues answering to questions, it
becomes evident that in the Middle Age there is a rich thread
of research, mainly due to the Arabic cultural influence,
whose experimental results seem to be work of magic to the
contemporaries’ eyes.
Through the Arabs, we can go back to the ancient Egypt
and  be astonished by the most famous talking statue of the
past, the “colossus of  Memnon”.
The Colossi of Memnon, built in the 14th century B.C.,
are two enormous statues, nearly 16 metres high, plus a four-
metre basement. They stand in front of the ruins of a temple
in the plain of the ancient Thebes, on the left bank of the river
Nile. They depict the Pharaoh Amenophi III sitting with his
hands on his knees (fig. 1). Greeks called them Memnon
because of the resemblance of the name of the Homeric hero
either with the word mennu, term used by ancient Egyptians
to indicate a funerary temple, or with the word noni, which
means “made of stone”, word becoming menoni in the fourth
case [2].
In the Greek mythology Memnon was the son of Tithonus
and Eos, the Aurora.  He was sent by his father, king of Egypt
and Ethiopia, to help the Greeks besieging Troy. After killing
Antilocus, Nestor’s son, Memnon was killed by Achilles. He
had magnificent funerals and many towns in Asia and in
Egypt erected monuments in his honour. The Aurora,
desperate, with loose hair and eyes filled with  tears, threw
herself at Zeus’ feet and begged mercy for  her son. The
prodigious events which took place during the stake did not
soothe her pain. From then on, every morning, Aurora keeps
on shedding tears thus creating what we all call the dew (fig. 2).
At first the two colossi were monoliths very much alike.
It was about in the 27 B.C. that the northern colossus, owing
to an earthquake, broke into two pieces: as the pedestal leaned
of 2° 40’, the bust slid on it along an inclined line of fracture
that is still now evident on the stone. The statue was restored
by order of  Settimius Severus in the year 196 A.D.
During these two centuries, as the 108 epigraphs carved
on the legs of the colossus testify, the phenomenon of the
vocal statue took place. At dawn, when the sun rays touched
the statue, a plaintive sound came out  of the stone. According
to the legend, Zeus, finally moved to pity by Aurora’s tears,
allowed Memnon to come to life again once a day: when his
mother  caressed him with her rays, Memnon answered with a
plaintive voice.
Figure 1. The Colossi of Memnon.
There are many descriptions of the emitted sound:
according to Strabo it was just a noise similar to a faint stroke
[3]; according to Pausanias it was a sound like the one
produced by the breaking of a lyre string [4]; Tacitus calls it
“vocal sound” [5]; for Plinius it was a crackle [6].
The hypotheses advanced in order to explain the
phenomenon can be summarized as follows:
1) natural hypothesis: Memnon’s voice was the result of a
natural phenomenon, in no way provoked by work of man.
According to somebody the phenomenon was due to some
small cavities existing in the statue.
page 1321
ICPhS99          San Francisco

Figure 2. Eos and Memnon.
The inner air, heated by the sun rays, came out through
narrow cracks giving rise to a whistling. According to
somebody else the sound was caused by the high temperature
diurnal range. The sudden heating, at dawn, produced some
microfractures of the sandstone round quartz crystals, in such
a way as to give rise to the sonorous creaking [7]. The main
objection against this kind of hypothesis is that the other
colossus, which stands still intact, made of the same material,
having the same size and shape, has always been silent. If  the
environmental conditions were exactly the same,  why weren’t
there any microfractures of  the sandstone on both?
Furthermore, this  hypothesis cannot explain why, after  the
restoration, the block formed by the pedestal and the legs has
stopped talking. Therefore, this hypothesis leaves many
questions unanswered.
2) artificial hypothesis: the phenomenon is the result of a
device placed somewhere inside the statue. According to
somebody, inside the head there was a concave mirror
conveying the sun rays on a set of metal levers. Their
dilatation, due to the heating, got them to hit a  sort of
keyboard made out of the stone [8]. The main objection to this
hypothesis has always been the following: if the statue has
been made by its creator Amenhotep with a secret device in
order to generate a sound, why did the phenomenon take place
only when the statue was broken into two pieces? And for
what purpose to give voice to a Pharaoh who has  nothing to
do with Eos and her rays?
So, none of the two hypothesis can dispel all doubts.
Taking up the natural hypothesis again, we have to say that
from  Sinai to Egypt, from Amazon to Pyrenees, there are
many examples of resonating stones. Many travellers in their
journals assure us they have heard some noise coming from
the rock and they have always imputed the phenomenon to
natural causes such as sudden changes of temperature,
humidity and so on. Nevertheless, in spite of all appearances,
all these testimonies do not strengthen the natural hypothesis
at all. In fact none of these accounts has ever  aroused great
interest neither in the writers nor in the readers. Charles
Darwin, in his journal on board of the Beagle, gives only a
few lines to the bramidos coming out from a hill near
Copiapo, in Chile. Alexander von Humboldt does the same for
the sound emitted by the rocks of Paraguaxo in Brazil. The
same goes for Jollois and Devilliers, members of  Napoleon’s
Commission of  Egypt, who affirm  to have heard, at dawn, a
sound coming out from the granitic blocks of Karnak temple.
As we have said, nobody has ever doubted about the natural
causes of those creaks of the rocks. Well, in the case of
Memnon things are different. For two centuries the colossus
has been object of pilgrimage in a period when, it is worth
remembering, to travel meant discomforts, sacrifices, often
danger, always great expenses. All the 108 epigraphs carved
on the legs of the statue testify the deep emotion of people
who are aware they have just  witnessed an extraordinary
event. After a first visit, many of them came back with the
family to hear Memnon’s voice. Among them there are simple
wayfarers but also centurions, prefects, consuls, scientists,
cultured men, poets and writers such as Strabo, Pausianias,
Tacitus. Finally, the Roman Emperor himself, Hadrian, with
the Empress Sabine and the whole retinue go to Thebes in
order to hear the voice of the colossus. Is it possible that the
Emperor goes during the night to the plain of Thebes and
waits for the dawn at the foot of the statue in order to hear a
simple creaking of the stone? Honestly, this is even harder to
believe than a talking statue.
 
Let us examine the artificial hypothesis again. The
objections we have made are of course legitimate: first,
Amenothep, the colossus’ creator, cannot have placed any
mechanism inside the statue as it spoke only when it was
broken as a consequence of an earthquake; and furthermore
why should he have done it? So, if it is a mechanism, it must
have been made by someone else, someone for whom it made
sense to give voice to the statue so that Memnon could answer
to his mother’s rays. Therefore it must have been a Greek, or
a man  of  Greek culture. As the phenomenon begins in the
first century B.C., the question is: was there in that period, in
that place, anybody able to plan and carry out a device
emitting a sound when hit by the sun rays?
In that period Egypt was a very important cultural centre,
where Greek rationalism and oriental mysticism merged into a
current of thought based on the relation between philosophy
and religion. The centre of this civilization was Alexandria,
especially in the scientific field, in mathematics, astronomy
and medicine. The first polytechnic in a modern sense started
in Alexandria in that period under the direction of a great
engineer and a brilliant mathematician: Heron.
2. HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
We know very little about Heron’s life. Until the early
twentieth century people have talked about two different
Herons: the Old, called the Mechanical, who lived in the 3rd
century B.C., and the Young, called the Geometer, who lived
between the 3rd and 4th centuries A.D. Nowadays there is a
general agreement that the Mechanical and the Geometer are
the same person, who lived between the 1st century B.C. and
the 1st century A.D.  [9] [10]. Heron developed mechanics
very much, particularly applied mechanics. He wrote also two
important treatises on mechanics, Pneumaticà and Autòmata.
As Heron himself underlines, the machines described in the
two books are intended to arise pleasure and astonishment.
Those described in Pneumaticà are able to emit sounds,
whistlings, cries of birds and voices. They are generally
constituted by a basic vase-shaped structure, called miliarium.
From the descriptions of these devices it comes out that they
have really been built, following the teaching of the
Alexandrian school, according to which theory has to come
out from  practice.
page 1322
ICPhS99          San Francisco

3. SUN AND SOUND
Let us go back to Memnon’s voice and  let us consider the
possibility that Heron has something to do with it. We can
find the first half of the answer in the 47th theorem of
Pneumaticà [11] where Heron describes a fountain which
trickles by the action of the sun’s rays (fig. 3). When the sun
falls upon the globe EF, the air in it, being heated, will drive
out the liquid, which will be carried along the siphon G and
pass through the funnel H into the pedestal ABCD. But when
the globe is in the shade, having the air escaped through the
globe, the tube will again suck up the liquid, and fill the void
which had been produced; and this will take place every time
the sun falls upon the globe.
Figure 3. Heron’s device.
How it is possible to get a sound by pouring water into a
vessel, is explained by Heron in many theorems. In general, if
the base is connected with the outer air trough a very thin
pipe, the inner air will be pushed in it abruptly giving rise to a
hissing sound. According to what there is at the end of the
pipe a bird will chirp, a dragon will hiss or a trumpet will
play (fig. 4).
Heron is able to conceive a device that can emit a sound
by means of the sunbeams. He lives in Egypt in the 1st
century B.C., as it is witnessed by the remains of Heron’s
nilometer that Strabo sees in that period (see also [1]). Heron
has a Greek culture and so he knows the myth of Memnon,
son of  Eos, well.
When the colossus starts speaking, Heron, or one of his
followers, is there to place his device on the left knee of the
statue, as it is proved by a cavity still visible there. If  we
accept this hypothesis some questions arise: how could that
device work for about two centuries? How is it possible that
no one, pushed by curiosity, has ever climbed the statue to
find the source of the sound? Finally, what happened to the
statue when it was restored by Settimius Severus?
Figure 4. Heron’s trumpet player.
4. MEMNON’S WONDER
To find the answers to these questions, we must go on step by
step. Let us suppose that Heron has made a device to give
voice to Memnon. The device keeps on working for two
centuries, so it is evident that this is possible only by means of
the work of someone else. Who else if not the priests
guardians of the temple of Amenophi III, situated just in front
of the two statues? They are the only ones who can have kept
the situation under their control for such a long time. Who
else could benefit from the magic phenomenon which gave a
supernatural halo both to the statue and to its guardians?
Greeks, Romans, poets, ambassadors, the emperor himself,
everybody came to admire that mysterious site. It was a great
advantage for the priests, at first only for a question of
prestige, but soon for an economic reason too, if we consider
the big tourist flow; to cite Heron’s words: “to see, they do not
care about money”.
5. OUR HYPOTHESIS
About 20 B.C. the two statues are linked up with Memnon by
Greeks. Heron, who knows the Greek mythology well, decides
to give voice to Memnon so that he can answer to his mother’s
caresses. The priests of the temple, fascinated by the prodigy,
allow Heron to get ahead with his project. Of course
everything is kept secret, because the aim of the experiment is
not only scientific but it is also to rouse astonishment by the
magic of the “talking statue”. Once the mechanism is going,
the trick works perfectly. The first visitors are astounded by
the event  and begin to carve their names on the stone as a
memory of their fantastic experience. We must suppose that,
after having provoked everybody’s astonishment, Heron
decides to reveal the secret in order to draw the world’s
admiration on his work and on his school. Something or
somebody must have prevented him from  doing it. The point
page 1323
ICPhS99          San Francisco

is that, as we have already said, all information about Heron’s
life and death has been inexplicably lost.
If our reconstruction of the facts is near the mark, then
we have to suppose that, in order to prevent that the secret is
revealed, the priests of the temple get Heron and his assistants
to vanish without leaving any traces. From then on the
guardians of the temple arrange things so that the
phenomenon keeps on taking place: when necessary, they also
repair or substitute the device which they know well. In the
year 130 A.D. the emperor Hadrian himself and his retinue
come and hear Memnon’s voice: is it possible that nobody
discovers the trick? Probably if somebody does, he is reduced
to silence. Antinous, young man of exceptional beauty,
emperor’s favourite, dies mysteriously in that occasion.
6. AN UNSOLVED CASE
The circumstances of Antinous’ death are not clear. According
to Dio Cassius’ “Historia Romana”, he drowns himself in the
Nile owing to the words of an astrologer, who had predicted
that his sacrifice could save Hadrian’s life. Such an
explanation, even if completely unjustified and illogical, has
been accepted reluctantly by many historians only because all
the  hypotheses of a murder  inevitably fail for lack of a
motive. Now, in the light of what we have said about the
sound emitted by the colossus, also the death of Antinous can
be seen from a new point of view. Let us examine why.
Antinous dies on the 30th October of the year 130 and in
that same day Hadrian decides to found the town of
Antinopolis. The funeral celebrations and the visit to the site
where the town will rise last a few days, then the imperial
retinue resumes the journey southwards and without further
stops it reaches Thebes on the 18th November. The day after,
at dawn, Hadrian visits the colossus, but it keeps silent. On
the 20th the empress Sabine with the poetess Balbille visits
the statue in order to hear its mournful voice. This time
Memnon speaks clearly at the first hour after the dawn. The
day after, on the 21st November, Hadrian visits the colossus
again and this time he can hear Memnon’s voice at the second
hour. Now, if we re-examine the chronology of the events
carefully, we realize that the main effect of Antinous’ death is
that the imperial journey stops for some days so that the visit
to the colossus is deferred to about ten days or two weeks
later. Now is it possible that in order to gain just a few days
somebody has decided to kill the emperor’s favourite and,
taking advantage of Hadrian’s superstition, has let a murder
appear as a suicide? Well, according to us things must have
been as follows.
7. THE MOON
The device placed by Heron keeps on working for many years,
giving rise to Memnon’s fame. Then, eventually, the
phenomenon stops, either because the device breaks down or
because of the unskilfulness of people charged to activate it.
In fact in the three years before Hadrian’s visit there are not
any inscriptions of visitors. But now the emperor is coming
here just to hear Memnon and it is necessary to gain time.
Antinous’ death arrives at a too right time to be fortuitous.
This is confirmed by the fact that at Hadrian’s first coming, on
the 19th November, Memnon is silent. Something is evidently
still wrong with the device, but from the following day it
starts working to perfection. Furthermore, 
from 
the
chronology of the epigraphs carved on the statue another
aspect of the problem arises that strengthens our hypothesis. It
has something to do with the moon.
We have already said that the tragic end of Antinous
delayed Hadrian’s visit to a couple of weeks and we have also
underlined the importance to gain time for the guardians of
the statue. But why exactly on the 18th November? Why is
this day different? We have found a curious coincidence: the
night of the 18th November of the year 130 A.D. the plain of
Thebes was completely dark because of the new moon. We
think that for such an important event as the emperor’s venue,
it was much better for the priests to be safe from prying eyes
while they got the miracle ready.
Driven by this conviction, we have checked the lunar
phases of the dates when the other epigraphs had been carved
on the stone [12]. Of course we have excluded the undated
ones as well as those of a doubtful dating. On a total of 37
certainly dated inscriptions, only 4 correspond to nights in
which the moon was, totally or partially, visible. In all the
remaining cases, the plain was immersed in the darkness
either because it was a new moon night, or because the moon
was below the horizon line. So, 90% of moonless vs. 10% of
moonlit nights: it seems to us that this ratio is too unbalanced
to be considered just random.
The last question to be answered is about the restoration
made by Settimius Severus in the year 196 A.D.: why has the
“miracle” ended for ever since then?  The answer is given by
Spartianus when he says that, in order to restore many
Egyptian monuments, Settimius Severus “Memnonem...
diligenter inspexit” [carefully inspected] [13]. So, the priests
must act immediately to avoid the fraud being discovered. The
device is promptly destroyed and since then Memnon has
been silent, maybe waiting for somebody to give him again
the possibility to answer to his mother’s caresses.
REFERENCES
[1] Pettorino, M. and Giannini, A. 1999. Le teste parlanti. Palermo.
Sellerio.
[2] Langlès, L. 1795. Dissertation sur la statue de Memnon. In Norden,
F. L., Voyage d’Egypte et De Nubie. Paris.
[3] Strabone, Rerum Geographicarum. XVII, 561.
[4] Pausania, Attica. I, XLII, 3.
[5] Tacito, Annales. II, 61.
[6] Plinio, Naturalis Historiae. XXXVI, VII, 10-12.
[7] Letronne, J. A. 1833. La statue vocale de Memnon. Imprimerie
Royale, Paris.
[8] Salverte, E. 1829. Des Sciences occultes. Paris, Sédillot.
[9] Kline, M. 1996. Storia del pensiero matematico. Torino, Einaudi.
[10] Boyer, C. B. 1990. Storia della matematica.  Milano, Mondadori.
[11] Herone. 1589. Gli artifitiosi et curiosi moti spiritali di Herrone.
Translated from Greek by G. B. Aleotti. Ferrara.
[12] Bernard, A. and Bernard, E. 1960. Les inscriptions grècques et
latines du colosse de Memnon. Paris.
[13] Spartianus, A. 1603. Severus. in Historia Augustorum Scriptorum.
Paris.
page 1324
ICPhS99          San Francisco

