Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-Tutorial Abstracts, pages 15–16
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-5005
Beyond Words: Deep Learning for
Multiword Expressions and Collocations
Valia Kordoni
Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin
kordonie@anglistik.hu-berlin.de
1
Tutorial Overview
Deep learning has recently shown much promise
for NLP applications. Traditionally, in most NLP
approaches, documents or sentences are repre-
sented by a sparse bag-of-words representation.
There is now a lot of work which goes beyond this
by adopting a distributed representation of words,
by constructing a so-called “neural embedding” or
vector space representation of each word or docu-
ment. The aim of this tutorial is to go beyond the
learning of word vectors and present methods for
learning vector representations for Multiword Ex-
pressions and bilingual phrase pairs, all of which
are useful for various NLP applications.
This tutorial aims to provide attendees with a
clear notion of the linguistic and distributional
characteristics of multiword expressions (MWEs),
their relevance for the intersection of deep learn-
ing and natural language processing, what meth-
ods and resources are available to support their
use, and what more could be done in the future.
Our target audience are researchers and practition-
ers in machine learning, parsing (syntactic and se-
mantic) and language technology, not necessarily
experts in MWEs, who are interested in tasks that
involve or could beneﬁt from considering MWEs
as a pervasive phenomenon in human language
and communication.
This tutorial consists of four parts. Part I starts
with a thorough introduction to different types of
MWEs and collocations, their linguistic dimen-
sions (idiomaticity, syntactic and semantic ﬁxed-
ness, speciﬁcity, etc.), as well as their statisti-
cal characteristics (variability, recurrence, associa-
tion, etc.). This part concludes with an overview of
linguistic and psycholinguistic theories of MWEs
to date.
For MWEs to be useful for language tech-
nology, they must be recognisable automatically.
Hence, Part II surveys computational approaches
to MWEs recognition, both manually-authored ap-
proaches and machine learning ones, as well as
computational approaches to MWE elements com-
bination. We will also review type and token eval-
uation methods for MWE identiﬁcation.
Part III offers a thorough overview of how and
where MWEs can contribute to the intersection of
NLP and Deep Learning, particularly focusing on
recent advances in the computational treatment of
MWEs in the framework of Deep Learning.
Part IV of the tutorial concludes with concrete
examples of where MWEs treatment can con-
tribute to language technology applications such
as machine translation, information extraction, in-
formation retrieval and parsing, as well as MWE-
related multi-level annotation platforms (for in-
stance, pipelines) and resources made available for
a wide range of languages.
2
Tutorial Outline
1. PART I – General overview:
(a) Introduction
(b) Types and examples of MWEs and col-
locations
(c) Linguistic dimensions of MWEs:
id-
iomaticity, syntactic and semantic ﬁxed-
ness, speciﬁcity, etc.
(d) Statistical dimensions of MWEs: vari-
ability, recurrence, association, etc.
(e) Linguistic and psycholinguistic theories
of MWEs
2. PART II – Computational methods (symbolic
and statistical)
(a) Recognizing the elements of MWEs
(b) Recognising how elements are com-
bined
15

(c) Type and token evaluation of MWE
identiﬁcation
(d) Robust automated natural language pro-
cessing with MWEs
3. PART III – At the intersection of Deep learn-
ing and NLP
(a) Beyond learning word vectors
(b) Recursive Neural Networks for parsing
MWEs
(c) Learning
vector
representations
for
Multiword Expressions,
grammatical
relations, and bilingual phrase pairs, all
of which are useful for various NLP ap-
plications
4. PART IV – Resources and applications:
(a) MWEs in resources: corpora, lexicons
and ontologies (e.g., WordNet and Ge-
nia), parsers and tools (e.g., NSP, mwe-
toolkit, UCS, and jMWE), and MWE
website (http://multiword.sf.
net)
(b) Pipelines for MWE treatment: creation
and annotation of resources, identiﬁca-
tion of MWEs in text, evaluation of re-
sults
(c) MWes in Language Technology appli-
cations: Information Retrieval, Informa-
tion Extraction, Machine Translation
3
Tutorial Instructor
Valia Kordoni is a research professor of computa-
tional linguistics at Humboldt University Berlin.
She is a leader in EU-funded research in Ma-
chine Translation, Computational Semantics, and
Machine Learning.
She has organized confer-
ences and workshops dedicated to research on
MWEs, recently including the EACL 2014 10th
Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014)
in Gothenburg, Sweden, the NAACL 2015 11th
Workshop on Multiword Expressions in Denver,
Colorado, and the ACL 2016 12th Workshop
on Multiword Expressions in Berlin, Germany,
among others. She has been the Local Chair of
ACL 2016 - The 54th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics which took
place at the Humboldt University Berlin in August
2016. She has taught a tutorial on Robust Auto-
mated Natural Language Processing with Multi-
word Expressions and Collocations in ACL 2013,
as well as a tutorial on Robust Semantic Anal-
ysis of Multiword Expressions with FrameNet
in EMNLP 2015, together with Miriam R. L.
Petruck. She is also the author of Multiword Ex-
pressions - From Linguistic Analysis to Language
Technology Applications (to appear, Springer).
16

