XIX
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
WE have seen that the Golden Age of Greek geometry
ended with the time of Apollonius of Perga. But the influence
of Euclid, Archimedes and Apollonius continued, and for some
time there was a succession of quite competent mathematicians
who, although not originating anything of capital importance,
kept up the tradition. Besides those who were known for
particular investigations, e.g. of new curves or surfaces, there
were such men as Geminus who, it cannot be doubted, were
thoroughly familiar with the great classics. Geminus, as we
have seen, wrote a comprehensive work of almost encyclopaedic
character on the classification and content of mathematics,
including the history of the development of each subject.
But the beginning of the Christian era sees quite a different
state of things. Except in sphaeric and astronomy (Menelaus
and Ptolemy), production was limited to elementary text-
books of decidedly feeble quality. In the meantime it would
seem that the study of higher geometry languished or was
completely in abeyance, until Pappus arose to revive interest
in the subject. From the way in which he thinks it necessary
to describe the contents of the classical works belonging to
the Treasury of Analysis, for example, one would suppose
that by his time many of them were, if not lost, completely
forgotten, and that the great task which he set himself was
the re-establishment of geometry on its former high plane of
achievement. Presumably such interest as he was able to
arouse soon flickered out, but for us his work has an in-
estimable value as constituting, after the works of the great
mathematicians which have actually survived, the most im-
portant of all our sources.
A a 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

356 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Date of Pappus.
Pappus lived at the end of the third century A.D. The
authority for this date is a marginal note in a Leyden manu-
script of chronological tables by Theon of Alexandria, wliere,
opposite to the name of Diocletian, a scholium says, l In his
time Pappus wrote'. Diocletian reigned from 284 to 305,
and this must therefore be the period of Pappus's literary
activity. It is true that Suidas makes him a contemporary
of Theon of Alexandria, adding that they both lived under
Theodosius I (379-395). But Suidas was evidently not well
acquainted with the works of Pappus; though he mentions
a description of the earth by him and a commentary on four
Books of Ptolemy's Syntaxis, he has no word about his greatest
work, the Synagoge. As Theon also wrote a commentary on
Ttolemy and incorporated a great deal of the commentary of
Pappus, it is probable that Suidas had Theon's commentary
before him and from the association of the two names wrongly
inferred that they were contemporaries.
Works (commentaries) other than the Collection.
Besides the Synagoge, which is the main subject of this
chapter, Pappus wrote several commentaries, now lost except for
fragments which have survived in Greek or Arabic. One was
a commentary on the Elements of Euclid. This must presum-
ably have been pretty complete, for, while Proclus (on Eucl. I)
quotes certain things from Pappus which may be assumed to
have come in the notes on Book I, fragments of his commen-
tary on Book X actually survive in the Arabic (see above,
vol. i, pp. 154-5, 209), and again Eutocius in his note on Archi-
medes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, I. 13, says that Pappus
explained in his commentary on the Elements how to inscribe
in a circle a polygon similar to a polygon inscribed in another
circle, which problem would no doubt be solved by Pappus, as
it is by a scholiast, in a note on XII. 1. Some of the references
by Proclus deserve passing mention. (1) Pappus said that
the converse of Post. 4 (equality of all right angles) is not
true, i.e. it is not true that all angles equal to a right angle are
themselves right, since the ' angle' between the conterminous
arcs of two semicircles which are equal and have their
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

WORKS OTHER THAN THE COLLECTION 
357
diameters at right angles and terminating at one point is
equal to, but is not, a right angle.1 (2) Pappus said that,
in addition to the genuine axioms of Euclid, there were others
on record about unequals added to
equals and equals added to unequals.
Others given by Pappus are (says
Proclus) involved by the definitions,
e.g. that 'all parts of the plane and of
the straight line coincide with one
another', that 'a point divides a line,
a line a surface, and a surface a solid ', and that ' the infinite
is (obtained) in magnitudes both by addition and diminution'.2
(3) Pappus gave a pretty proof of Eucl. I. 5, which modern
editors have spoiled when introducing it into text-books. If
AB, AC are the equal sides in an isosceles triangle, Pappus
compares the triangles ABC and ACB (i.e. as if he were com-
paring the triangle ABC seen from the front with the same
triangle seen from the back), and shows that they satisfy the
conditions of I. 4, so that they are. equal in all respects, whence
the result follows.3
Marinus at the end of his commentary on Euclid's Data
refers to a commentary by Pappus on that book.
Pappus's commentary on Ptolemy's Syntaxls has already
been mentioned (p. 274); it seems to have extended to six
Books, if not to the whole of Ptolemy's work. The Fihrist
says that he also wrote a commentary on Ptolemy's Plani-
sphaerium, which was translated into Arabic by Thabit b.
Qurra. Pappus himself alludes to his own commentary on
the Analemma of Diodorus, in the course of which he used the
conchoid of Nicomedes for the purpose of trisecting an angle.
We come now to Pappus's great work.
The Synagoge or Collection,
(a) Character of the work; wide range.
Obviously written with the object of reviving the classical
Greek geometry, it covers practically the whole field. It is,
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 189-90. 
2 Ib., pp. 197. 6-198. 15,
3 /&., pp. 249. 20-250. 12.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

358 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
however, a handbook or guide to Greek geometry rather than
an encyclopaedia; it was intended, that is, to be read with the
original works (where still extant) rather than to enable them
to be dispensed with. Thus in the case of the treatises
included in the Treasury of Analysis there is a general intro-
duction, followed by a general account of the contents, with
lemmas, &c, designed to facilitate the reading of the treatises
themselves. On the other hand, where the history of a subject
is.given, e.g. that of the problem of the duplication of the
cube or the finding of the two mean proportionals, the various
solutions themselves are reproduced, presumably because they
were not easily accessible, but had to be collected from various
sources. Even when it is some accessible classic which is
being described, the opportunity is taken to give alternative
methods, or to make improvements in proofs, extensions, and
so on. Without pretending to great originality, the whole
work shows, on the part of the author, a thorough grasp of
all the subjects treated, independence of judgement, mastery
of technique; the style is terse and clear; in short, Pappus,
stands out as an accomplished and versatile mathematician,
a worthy representative of the classical Greek geometry.
(/3) List of authors mentioned.
The immense range of the Collection can be gathered from
a mere enumeration of the names of the various mathematicians
quoted or referred to in the course of it. The greatest of
them, Euclid, Archimedes and Apollonius, are of course con-
tinually cited, others are mentioned for some particular
achievement, and in a few cases the mention of a name by
Pappus is the whole of the information we possess about the
person mentioned. In giving the list of the names occurring
in the book, it will, I think, be convenient and may economize
future references if I note in brackets the particular occasion
of the reference to the writers who are mentioned for one
achievement or as the authors of a particular book or investi-
gation. The list in alphabetical order is: Apollonius of Perga,
Archimedes, Aristaeus the elder (author of a treatise in five
Books on the Elements of Conies or of ' five Books on Solid
Loci connected with the conies'), Aristarchus of Samos (On the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION 
359
sizes and distances of the sun and moon), Autolycus (0^ the
moving sphere), Carpus of Antioch (who is quoted as having
said that Archimedes wrote only one mechanical book, that
on sphere-making, since he held the mechanical appliances
which made him famous to be nevertheless unworthy of
written description: Carpus himself, who was known as
mechanicus, applied geometry to other arts of this practical
kind), Charmandrus (who added three simple and obvious loci
to those which formed the beginning of the Plane Loci of
Apollonius), Conon of Samos, the friend of Archimedes (cited
as the propounder of a theorem about the spiral in a plane
which Archimedes proved: this would, however, seem to be
a mistake, as Archimedes says at the beginning of his treatise
that he sent certain theorems, without proofs, to Conon, who
would certainly have proved them had he lived), Demetrius of
Alexandria (mentioned as the author of a work called ' Linear1
considerations', ypap/uical €7U0rao-et9, i.e. considerations on
curves, as to which nothing more is known), Dinostratus,
the brother of Menaechmus (cited, with Nicomedes, as having
used the curve of Hippias, to which they gave the name of
quadratrix, Terpaycoi/igovo-a, for the squaring of the circle),
Diodorus (mentioned as the author of an Analemma), Erato-
sthenes (whose mean-finder, an appliance for finding two or
any number of geometric means, is described, and who is
further mentioned as the author of two Books ' On means'
and of a work entitled 'Loci with reference to means'),
Erycinus (from whose Paradoxa are quoted various problems
seeming at first sight to be inconsistent with Eucl. I. 21, it
being shown that straight lines can be drawn from two points
on the base of a triangle to a point within the triangle which
are together greater than the other two sides, provided that the
points in the base may be points other than the extremities),
Euclid, Geminus the mathematician (from whom is cited a
remark on Archimedes contained in his book ' On the classifica-
tion of the mathematical sciences \ see above, p. 223), Heraclitus
(from whom Pappus quotes an elegant solution of a vevens
with reference to a square), Hermodorus (Pappus's son, to
whom he dedicated Books VII, VIII of his Collection), Heron
of Alexandria (whose mechanical works are extensively quoted
from), Hierius the philosopher (a contemporary of Pappus,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

360 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
who is mentioned as having asked Pappus's opinion on the
attempted solution by' plane' methods of the problem of the two
means, which actually gives a method of approximating to
a solution1), Hipparchus (quoted as practically adopting three
of the hypotheses of Aristarchus of Samos), Megethion (to
whom Pappus dedicated Book V of his Collection), Menelaus
of Alexandria (quoted as the author of Sphaerica and as having
applied the name napdSogos to a certain curve), Nicomachus
(on three means additional to the first three), Nicomedes,
Pandrosion (to whom Book III of the Collection is dedicated),
Pericles (editor of Euclid's Data), Philon of Byzantium (men-
tioned along with Heron), Philon of Tyana (mentioned as the
discoverer of certain complicated curves derived from the inter-
weaving of plectoid and other surfaces), Plato (with reference
to the five regular solids), Ptolemy, Theodosius (author of the
Sphaerica and On Days and Nights).
(y) Translations and editions*
The first published edition of the Collection was the Latin
translation by Commandinus (Venice 1589, but dated at.the
end 'Pisauri apud Hieronymum Concordiam 1588'; ^reissued
with only the title-page changed 'Pisauri... 1602'). Up to
1876 portions only of the Greek text had appeared, namely
Books VII, VIII in Greek and German, by C. J. Gerhardt, 1871,
chaps. 33-105 of Book V, by Eisenmann, Paris 1824, chaps.
45-52 of Book IV in losephi Torelli Veronensis Oeometrica,
1769, the remains of Book II, by John Wallis (in Opera
mathematica, III, Oxford 1699); in addition, the restorers
of works of Euclid and Apollonius from the indications
furnished by Pappus give extracts from the Greek text
relating to the particular works, Breton le Champ on Euclid's
Porisms, Halley in his edition of the Conies of Apollonius
(1710) and in his translation from the Arabic and restoration
respectively of the De sectione rationis and De sectione spatii
of Apollonius (1706), Camerer on Apollonius's Tactiones (1795),
Simson and Horsley in their restorations of Apollonius's Plane
Loci and Inclinations 
published in the years 1749 and 1770
respectively. In the years 1876-8 appeared the only com-
1 See vol. i, pp. 268-70.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS I, II, III 
361
plete Greek text, with apparatus, Latin translation, com-
mentary, appendices and indices, by Friedrich Hultsch; this
great edition is one of the first monuments of the revived
study of the history of Greek mathematics in the last half
of the nineteenth century, and has properly formed the model
for other definitive editions of the Greek text of the other
classical Greek mathematicians, e.g. the editions of Euclid,
Archimedes, Apollonius, &c, by Heiberg and others. The
Greek index in this edition of Pappus deserves special mention
because it largely serves as a dictionary of mathematical
terms used not only in Pappus but by the Greek mathe-
maticians generally.
(8) Summary of coy dents.
At the beginning of the work, Book I and the first 13 pro-
positions (out of 26) of Book II are missing. The first 13
propositions of Book II evidently, like the rest of the Book,
dealt with Apollonius's method of working with very large
numbers expressed in successive powers of the myriad, 10000.
This system has already been described (vol. i, pp. 40, 54-7).
The work of Apollonius seems to have contained 26 proposi-
tions (25 leading up to, and the 26th containing, the final
continued multiplication).
Book III consists of four sections. Section (1) is a sort of
history of the problem of finding two mean proportionals, in
continued proportion, between two given straight lines.
It begins with some general remarks about the distinction
between theorems and problems. 
Pappus observes that,
whereas the ancients called them all alike by one name, some
regarding them all as problems and others as theorems, a clear
distinction was drawn by those who favoured more exact
terminology. According to the latter a problem is that in
which it is proposed to do or construct something, a theorem
that in which, given certain hypotheses, we investigate that
which follows from and is necessarily implied by them.
Therefore he who propounds a theorem, no matter how he has
become aware of the fact which is a necessary consequence of
the premisses, must state, as the object of inquiry, the right
result and no other. On the other hand, he who propounds
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

362 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
a problem may bid us do something which is in fact im-
possible, and that without necessarily laying himself open
to blame or criticism. For it is part of the solver's duty
to determine ths conditions under which the problem is
possible or impossible, and, 'if possible, when, how, and in
how many ways it is possible \ 
When, however, a man pro-
fesses to know mathematics and yet commits some elementary
blunder, he cannot escape censure. 
Pappus gives, as an
example, the case of an unnamed person ' who was thought to
be a great geometer' but who showed ignorance in that he
claimed to know how to solve the problem of the two mean
proportionals by 'plane' methods (i.e. by using the straight
line and circle only). He then reproduces the argument of
the anonymous person, for the purpose of showing that it
does not solve the problem as its author claims. We have
seen (vol. i, pp. 269-70) how the method, though not actually
solving the problem, does furnish a series of successive approxi-
mations to the real solution. 
Pappus adds a few simple
lemmas assumed in the exposition.
Next comes the passage *, already referred to, on the dis-
tinction drawn by the ancients between (1) plant problems or
problems which can be solved by means of the straight line
and circle, (2) solid problems, or those which require for their
solution one or more conic sections, (3) linear problems, or
those which necessitate recourse to higher curves still, curves
with a more complicated and indeed a forced or unnatural
origin (Pefiiacrfiei'rjv) such as spirals, quadratrices, cochloids
and cissoids, which have many surprising properties of their
own. The problem of the two mean proportionals, being
a solid problem, required for its solution either conies or some
equivalent, and, as conies could not be constructed by purely
geometrical means, various mechanical devices were invented
such as that of Eratosthenes (the mean-finder), those described
in the Mechanics of Philon and Heron, and that of Nicomedes
(who used the ' eochloidal' curve). Pappus proceeds to give the
solutions of Eratosthenes, Nicomedes and Heron, and then adds
a fourth which he claims as his own, but which is practically
the same as that attributed by Eutocius to Sporus. All these
solutions have been given above (vol. i, pp. 258-64, 266-8).
1 fiippus, iii, p. 54. 7-22.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK III
363
Section (2). 
The theory of means.
Next follows a section (pp. 69-105) on the theory of the
different kinds of means. 
The discussion takes its origin
from the statement of the ' second problem', which was that
of 'exhibiting the three means' (i.e. the arithmetic, geometric
and harmonic) 'in a semicircle5. Pappus first gives a con-
struction by which another geometer (aAAo? TLS) claimed to
have solved this problem, but he does not seem to have under-
stood it, and returns to the same problem later (pp. 80-2).
In the meantime he begins with the definitions of the
three means and then shows how, given any two of three
terms a, 6, c in arithmetical, geometrical or harmonical pro-
gression, the third can be found. The definition of the mean
(b) of three terms a, 6, c in harmonic progression being that it
satisfies the relation a:c = a — b:b — c, Pappus gives alternative
definitions for the arithmetic and geometric means in corre-
sponding form, namely for the arithmetic mean a:a=a — b:b — c
and for the geometric a:b = a — b:b — c.
The construction for the harmonic mean is perhaps worth
giving. Let AB, BG be two given straight lines. At A draw
DAE perpendicular to AB, and make DA, AE equal. Join
DB} BE. From G draw GF&t right
angles to AB meeting DB in F. D
Join EF meeting A B in C. Then
BC is the required harmonic mean.
For
AB:BG = DA:FG
= EA:FG
' C 
G
= AC:CG
= (AB-BC):(BC-BG). 
"
Similarly, by means of a like figure, we can find BG when
AB, BC are given, and AB when BC, BG are given (in
the latter case the perpendicular DE is drawn through G
instead of A).
Then follows a proposition that, if the three means and the
several extremes are represented in one set of lines, there must
be five of them at least, and, after a set of five such lines have
been found in the smallest possible integers, Pappus passes to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

364 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
the problem of representing the three means with the respective
extremes by six lines drawn in a semicircle.
Given a semicircle on the diameter AC, and B any point on
the diameter, draw BD at right angles to AC. Let the tangent
H v
at D meet AC produced in G, and measure DH along the
tangent equal to DG. Join HB meeting the radius OD in K.
Let BF be perpendicular to OD.
Then, exactly as above, it is shown that OK is a harmonic
mean between OF and OD. Also BD is the geometric mean
between AB, BC, while OC (= OD) is the arithmetic mean
between AB, BC.
Therefore the six lines DO (= 0(7), OK, OF, AB, BC, BD
supply the three means with the respective extremes.
But Pappus seems to have failed to observe that the ' certain
other geometer', who has the same figure excluding the dotted
lines, supplied the same in five lines. For he said that DF
is 'a harmonic mean'. It is in fact the harmonic mean
between AB, BC, as is easily seen thus.
Since ODB is a right-angled triangle, and BF perpendicular
to OD,
DF:BD = BD:D0,
or 
DF. DO = BD* = AB. BC.
But 
DO =
therefore 
DF. (AB + BC) = 2 AB . BC.
Therefore 
AB. (DF- BC) = BC. (AB - DF),
that is, 
AB : BC = (AB - DF): (DF- BC),
and DF is the harmonic mean between AB, BC.
Consequently the Jive lines DO (= OC), DF, AB, BC, BD
exhibit all the three means with the extremes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK III 
365
Pappus does not seem to have seen this, for he observes
that the geometer in question, though saying that BF is
a harmonic mean, does not say how it is a harmonic mean
or between what straight lines.
In the next chapters (pp. 84-104) Pappus, following Nico-
machus and others, defines seven more means, three of which
were ancient and the last four more modern, and shows how
we can form all ten means as linear functions of a, )8, y, where
ot, /3, y are in geometrical progression. The exposition has
already been described (vol. i, pp. 86-9).
Section (3). The 'Paradoxes' of Erycinus.
The third section of Book III (pp. 104-30) contains a series
of propositions, all of the same sort, which are curious rather
than geometrically important. 
They appear to have been
taken direct from a collection of Paradoxes htf one Erycinus.1
The first set of. these propositions (Props. 28-34) are connected
with Eucl. I. 21, which says that, if from the extremities
of the base of any triangle two straight lines be drawn meeting
at any point within the triangle, the straight lines are together
less than the two sides of the triangle other than the base,
but contain a greater angle. 
It is pointed out that, if the
straight lines are allowed to be drawn from points in the base
other than the extremities, their sum may be greater than the
other two sides of the triangle.
The first case taken is that of a right-angled triangle ABC
right-angled at B. Draw AB to any point B on BC Measure
on it BE equal to AB, bisect AE
in F, and join FC. Then shall 
A
BF+FC be > BA + AC
For EF+FC=AF+FC>AC
Add BE and A B respectively,
and we have
BF+FC> BA + AC.
More elaborate propositions are next proved, such as the
following.
1. In any triangle, except an equilateral triangle or an isosceles
1 Pappus, iii, p. 106. 5-9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

366 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
triangle with base less than one of the other sides, it is possible
to construct on the base and within the triangle two straight
lines meeting at a point, the sum of which is equal to the sum
of the other two sides of the triangle (Props. 29, 30).
2. In any triangle in which it is possible to construct two
straight lines from the base to one internal point the sum
of which is equal to the sum of the two sides of the triangle,
it is also possible to construct two other such straight lines the
sum of which is greater than that sum (Prop. 31).
3. Under the same conditions, if the base is greater than either
of the other two sides, two straight lines can be so constructed
from the base to an internal point which are respectively
greater than the other two sides of the triangle; and the lines
may be constructed so as to be respectively equal to the two
sides, if one of those two sides is less than the other and each
of them is less than the base (Props. 32, 33).
4. The lines may be so constructed that their sum will bear to
the sum of the two sides of the triangle any ratio less than
2 : 1 (Prop. 34).
As examples of the proofs, we will take the case of the
scalene triangle, and prove the first and Part 1 of the third of
the above propositions for such a triangle.
In the triangle ABC with base BC let AB be greater
than AC.
Tate D on BA such that BD = \ (BA+AC).
B 
H
On DA between D and A take any point E, and draw EF
parallel to BC. Let G be any point on EF) draw GH parallel
to AB and join GC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK III
367
Now EA + AC> 
EF+FC
> EG + GC and > GC, a fortiori.
Produce GO to K so that GK = EA+AC, and with G as
centre and GK as radius describe a circle. This circle will
meet EC and HG, because GH = EB > BD or DA+AC and
> GK, a fortiori.
Then 
HG + GL = BE+EA+AC 
=
To obtain two straight lines HG', G'L such that HG' + G'L
> BA + AC, we have only to choose G' so that #(?', G'L
enclose the straight lines HG, GL completely.
Next suppose that, given a triangle ABC in which BC > BA
> AC, we are required to draw from two points on BC to
an internal point two straight lines greater respectively than
BA, AC.
With B as centre and BA as radius describe the arc AEF.
Take any point E on it, and any point D on BE produced
but within the triangle. Join DC, and produce it to G so
that DG — AC. Then with D as centre and DG as radius
describe a circle. This will meet both BC and BD because
BA > AC, and a fortiori DB > DG.
Then, if L be any point on BH, it is clear that BD, DL
are two straight lines satisfying the conditions.
A point L/ on BH can be found such that DL' is equal
to AB by marking off DN on DB equal to AB and drawing
with D as centre and DN as radius a circle meeting BH
in //. Also, if DH be joined, DiT = AC.
Propositions follow (35-9) having a similar relation to the
Postulate in Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, I,
about conterminous broken lines one of which wholly encloses
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

368 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
the other, i.e. it is shown that broken lines, consisting of
several straight lines, can be drawn with two points on the
base of a triangle or parallelogram as extremities, and of
greater total length than the remaining two sides of the
triangle or three sides of the parallelogram.
Props. 40-2 show that triangles or parallelograms can be
constructed with sides respectively greater than those of a given
triangle or parallelogram but having a less area.
Section (4). The inscribing of the five regular solids
in a sphere.
The fourth section of Book III (pp. 132-62) solves the
problems of inscribing each of the five regular solids in a
given sphere. After some preliminary lemmas (Props. 43-53),
Pappus attacks the substantive problems (Props. 54-8), using
the method of analysis followed by synthesis in the case of
each solid.
(a) In order to inscribe a regular pyramid or tetrahedron in
the sphere, he finds two circular sections equal and parallel
to one another, each of which contains one of two opposite
edges as its diameter. If d be the diameter of the sphere, the
parallel circular sections have &' as diameter, where d2 = §c£'2.
(b) In the case of the cube Pappus again finds two parallel
circular sections with diameter d' such that d2=%d'2; a square
inscribed in one of these circles is one face of the cube and
the square with sides parallel to those of the first square
inscribed in the second circle is the opposite face.
(c) In the case of the octahedron the same two parallel circular
sections with diameter d' such that d2 = fcT2 are used; an
equilateral triangle inscribed in one circle is one face, and the
opposite face is an equilateral triangle inscribed in the other
circle but placed in exactly the opposite way.
(d) In the case of the icosahedron Pappus finds four parallel
circular sections each passing through three of the vertices of
the icosahedron; two of these are small circles circumscribing
two opposite triangular faces respectively, and the other two
circles are between these two circles, parallel to them, and
equal to one another. The pairs of circles are determined in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS III, IV 
369
this way. If d be the diameter of the sphere, set out two
straight lines x, y such that d> oc, y are in the ratio of the sides
of the regular pentagon, hexagon and 'decagon respectively
described in one and the same circle. The smaller pair of
circles have r as radius where r2 = ^j/
2, and the larger pair
have r' as radius where r'2 = f #2.
(e) In the case of the dodecahedron the saw e four parallel
circular sections are drawn as in the case of the icosahedron.
Inscribed pentagons set the opposite way are inscribed in the
two smaller circles; these pentagons form opposite faces.
Regular pentagons inscribed in the larger circles with vertices
at the proper points (and again set the opposite way) determine
ten more vertices of the inscribed dodecahedron.
The constructions are quite different from those in Euclid
XIII. 13, 15, 14, 16, 17 respectively, where the problem is first
to construct the particular regular solid and then to 'com-
prehend it in a sphere', i. e. to determine the circumscribing
sphere in each case. I have set out Pappus's propositions in
detail elsewhere.1
Book IV.
At the beginning of Book IV the title and preface are
missing, and the first section of the Book begins immediately
with an enunciation. The first section (pp. 176-208) contains
Propositions 1-12 which, with* the exception of Props. 8-10,
seem to be isolated propositions given for their own sakes and
not connected by any general plan.
Section (1). Extension of the theorem of Pythagoras.
The first proposition is of great interest, being the generaliza-
tion of Eucl. I. 47, as Pappus himself calls it, which is by this
time pretty widely known to mathematicians. The enunciation
is as follows.
'If ABC be a triangle and on AB, AC any parallelograms
whatever be described, as ABBE, ACFG, and if BE, FG
produced meet in H and HA be joined, then the parallelo-
grams ABDEy ACFG are together equal to the parallelogram
1 Vide notes to Euclid's propositions in The Thirteen Books of Euclid's
Elements, pp. 473> 480, 477, 489-91, 501-3.
1623-2 
B b
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

370
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
contained by BG, HA in an angle which is equal to the sum of
the angles ABC, BHA!
Produce HA to meet BG in K, draw BLy CM parallel to KH
meeting BE in L and FQ in M, and join LNM.
Then BLHA is a parallelogram, and HA is equal and
parallel to BL.
Similarly HA, GM are equal and parallel; therefore BL, CM
are equal and parallel,
Therefore BLMG is a parallelogram; and its angle LBK is
equal to the sum of the angles ABG, DHA.
Now a ABBE — O BLHA, in the same parallels,
= O BLNK, for the same reason.
Similarly • AGFG = a AGMH = O NKGM.
Therefore, by addition, a ABBE+ CD AGFG = a BLMG.
It has been observed (by Professor Cook Wilson*) that the
parallelograms on AB, AG need not necessarily be erected
ouhvards from AB, AG. If one of them, e.g. that on AG, be
drawn inwards, as in the second figure above, and Pappus's
construction be made, we have a similar result with a negative
sign, namely,
D BLMG = C2BLNK- • GMNK
= a ABBE- • AGFG.
Again, if both ABBE and AGFG were drawn inwards, their
sum would be equal to BLMG drawn outwards. Generally, if
the areas of the parallelograms described outwards are regarded
as of opposite sign to those of parallelograms drawn inwards,
1 Mathematical Gazette, vii, p. 107 (May 1913).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV 
371
we may say that the algebraic sum of the three parallelograms
is equal to zero.
Though Pappus only takes one case, as was the Greek habit,
I see no reason to doubt that he was aware of the results
in the other possible cases.
Props. 2, 3 are noteworthy in that they use the method and
phraseology of Eucl. X, proving that a certain line in one
figure is the irrational called minor (see Eucl. X. 76), and
a certain line in another figure is ' the excess by which the
binomial exceeds the straight line which produces with a
rational area a medial whole' (Eucl.X. 77). The propositions
4-7 and 11-12 are quite interesting as geometrical exercises,
bat their bearing is not obvious : Props. 4 and 12 are remark-
able in that they are cases of analysis followed by synthesis
applied to the proof of theorems. Progs. 8-10 belong to the
subject of tangencies, being the sort of propositions that would
come as particular cases in a book such as that of Apollonius
On Contacts; Prop. 8 shows that, if there are two equal
circles and a given point outside both, the diameter of the
circle passing through the point and touching both circles
is' given'; the proof is in many places obscure and assumes
lemmas of the same kind as those given later a propos of
Apollonius's treatise; Prop. 10 purports to show how, given
three unequal circles touching one another two and two, to
find the diameter of the circle including them and touching
all three.
Section (2). On circles inscribed in the
(c shoemaker's knife').
The next section (pp. 208-32), directed towards the demon-
stration of a theorem about the relative sizes of successive
circles inscribed in the ap(3rj\os (shoemaker's knife), is ex-
tremely interesting and clever, and I wish that I had space
to reproduce it completely. The dpPrjXos, which we have
already met with in Archimedes's 'Book of Lemmas', is
formed thus. BC is the diameter of a semicircle BGC and
BC is divided into two parts (in general unequal) at D\
semicircles are described on BD, DC as diameters on the same
side of BC as BGC is; the figure included between the three
semicircles is the apprjXos.
Bb2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

372 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
There is, says Pappus, on record an ancient proposition to
the following effect. 
Let successive circles be inscribed in the
ap(3r)\o? touching the semicircles and one another as shown
in the figure on p. 3 76, their centres being A} P, 0 .... Then, if
Pi> P2' Pz ••• be the perpendiculars from the centres A, P, 0...
on BC and dly d2, dd... the diameters of the corresponding
circles,
He begins by some lemmas, the course of which I shall
reproduce as shortly as I can.
I. If (Fig. 1) two circles with centres A, C of which the
former is the greater touch externally at J5, and another circle
with centre 0 touches the two circles at Ki L respectively,
then KL produced cuts the circle BL again in D and meets
AC produced in a point E such that AB: BO = AE: EC.
This is easily proved, because the circular segments DL, LK
are similar, and CD is parallel to AG. 
Therefore
AB:BC = AK:CD = AE: EC
Also 
KE.EL = EB*.
For AE:EC = AB : BC = AB:CF = (AE-AB): 
(EC- CF)
FIG 1.
But AE:EC= KE: ED; therefore KE:ED = BE: EF.
Therefore 
KE.EL:EL.ED 
= BE2 : BE. EF.
And EL.ED = BE.EF; therefore KE.EL = EB2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV
373
II. Let (Fig. 2) BC, BD, being in one straight line, be the
diameters of two semicircles BGC, BED, and let any circle as
FGH touch both semicircles, A being the centre of the circle.
Let M be the foot of the perpendicular from A on BC, r the
radius of the circle FGH. There are two cases according
as BD lies along BC or B lies between D and C\ i.e. in the
first case the two semicircles are the outer and one of the inner
semicircles of the apfirjXos, while in the second case they are
the two inner semicircles; in the latter case the circle FGH
may either include the two semicircles or be entirely external
to them. Now, says Pappus, it is to be proved that
in case (1) * 
BM: r = (BC + BD): (BC-BD),
and in case (2) 
BM:r= 
(BC- BD): (BC+BD).
We will confine ourselves to the first case, represented in
the figure (Fig. 2).
Draw through A the diameter HF parallel to BC. Then,
since the circles BGC, HGF touch at (?, and BC, HF are
parallel diameters, GHB, GFC are both straight lines.
Let E be the point of contact of the circles FGH and BED)
then, similarly, BEF, HED are straight lines.
Let HK, FL be drawn perpendicular to BC.
By the similar triangles BGC, BKH we have
BC:BG = BH:BK, or CB . BK = GB.BH;
and by the similar triangles BLF, BED
BF:BL = BD:BE, or DB.BL= 
FB.BE.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

374 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
But OB.BH=FB.BE;
therefore 
GB.BK = DB. BL,
or 
BO:BD = BL:BK.
Therefore (BG + BD): (BG- BD) = (BL + BK): (BL - BK)
= 
2BM:KL.
And KL = 
HF=2r;
therefore 
BM:r = (BG+BD): (BG-BD). 
(a)
It is next proved that BK. LG = AM2.
For, by similar triangles BKH, FLG,
BK:KH = FL: LG, or BK. LG = KH. FL
= AM2, 
(b)
Lastly, since BG: BD = BL: BK, from above,
BG:GD = BL:KL, or BL.GD = BG.KL
= BG.2r. 
(c)
Also BD:GD = BK:KL, or BK.CD= 
BD . KL
= BD.2r. 
(d)
III. We now (Fig. 3) take any two circles touching the
semicircles BQG, BED and one another. Let their centres be
A and P, H their point of contact, d, df their diameters respec-
tively. Then, if AM, PN are drawn perpendicular to BC,
Pappus proves that
Draw BF perpendicular to BG and therefore touching the
semicircles BGG, BED at B. Join AP, and produce it to
meet BF in F.
Now, by II. (a) above,
(BG+BD): (BC- BD) = BM: AH,
and for the same reason = BN:PH;
it follows that 
AH:PH=BM: 
BN
= FA: FP.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK IV
375
Therefore (Lemma I), if the two circles touch the semi-
circle BED in R, E respectively, FRE is a straight line and
FR FHK
But EF.FR = FB2; therefore FH = FB.
If now BH meets PN in 0 and MA produced in S, we have,
by similar triangles, FH: FB = PH: PO = JLff:4/Sf, whence
Pjff = PO and SA = AH, so that 0, £ are the intersections
of PN, AM with the respective circles.
Join BP, and produce it to meet MA in K.
Now 
BM:BN=FA:FP
= AH\PH, from above,
And
Therefore Z>
circle EHG.
Lastly,
that is,
or
BM:BN =
=
S = AS, and K
MK:KS=
(AM+d):\d
(AM+d):d-
BK:
KS:
-.PN
BP
PO.
d, the diameter of the
:P0,
2V:K.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

376 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
IV. We now come to the substantive theorem.
Let FGH be the circle touching all three semicircles (Fig. 4).
We have then, as in Lemma II,
BC.BK = BD.BL,
and for the same reason (regarding FGH as touching the
semicircles BGG, DUG)
From the first relation we have
BC:BD = BL:BK,
N 
K 
DM
FIG. 4.
whence DG:BD = KL: BK, and inversely BD: DG=BK: KL,
while, from the second relation, BC:GD = GK : GL,
whence 
BD:DG=KL: GL.
Consequently 
BK:KL = KL: GL,
or 
BK.LG = KLK
But we saw in Lemma II (b) that BK . LG = AM2.
Therefore 
KL = AM, or p1 = d1.
For the second circle Lemma III gives us
whence, since p1 = d1, 
p2=2d2.
For the third circle
whence pa — 3d3.
And so on ad infinitum.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK IV 
377
The same proposition holds when the successive circles,
instead of being placed between the large and one of the small
semicircles, come down between the two small semicircles.
Pappus next deals with special cases (1) where the two
smaller semicircles become straight lines perpendicular to the
diameter of the other semicircle at its extremities, (2) where
we replace one of the smaller semicircles by a straight line
through D at right angles to BC, and lastly (3) where instead
of the semicircle LUC we simply have the straight line DC
and make the first circle touch it and the two other semi-
circles.
Pappus's propositions of course include as particular cases
the partial propositions of the same kind included in the c Book
of Lemmas' attributed to Archimedes (Props. 5, 6); cf. p. 102.
Sections (3) and (4). Methods of squaring the circle, and of
trisecting (or dividing in any ratio) any given angle.
The last sections of Book IV (pp. 234-302) are mainly
devoted to the solutions of the problems (1) of squaring or
rectifying the circle and (2) of trisecting any given angle
or dividing it into two parts in any ratio. To this end Pappus
gives a short account of certain curves whidh were used for
the purpose.
(a) The Archimedean spiral.
He begins with the spiral of Archimedes, proving some
of the fundamental properties. His method of finding the
area included (1) between the first turn and the initial line,
(2) between any radius vector on the first turn and the curve,
is worth giving because it differs from the method of Archi-
medes. It is the area of the whole first turn which Pappus
works out in detail. We will take the area up to the radius
vector OB, say.
With centre 0 and radius OB draw the circle A'BCD.
Let BC be a certain fraction, say 1 /nt\\, of the arc BCD A'\
and CD the same fraction, OCy OD meeting the spiral in F, E
respectively. Let KS, SVbe the same fraction of a straight
line KR, the side of a square KNLK 
Draw 8T, VW parallel
to KN meeting the diagonal KL of the square in U, Q respec-
tively, and draw MU, PQ parallel to KR.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

378
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
With 0 as centre and OE, OF as radii draw arcs of circles
meeting OF, OB in H, G respectively.
For brevity we will now denote a cylinder in which r is the
radius of the base and h the height by (cyl. r, h) and the cone
with the same base and height by (cone r, h).
K sv
N T w
By the property of the spiral,
OB:BG = (arc A'DCB): (arc CB)
= RK: KS
= NK:KM,
whence 
OB:OG = NK: NM.
Now
(sector OBG): (sector OGF) = OB2: OG2 = NK2: MN*
= (cyl. KN, NT): (cyl. MN, NT).
Similarly
(sector OGD): (sector OEH) = (cyl. 8T, TW): (cyl. PT TW),
and so on.
The sectors OBG, OGD... form the sector OA'DB, and the
sectors OFG, OEH... form a figure inscribed to the spiral.
In like manner the cylinders (KN, TN), (ST% TW)... form the
cylinder (KN, NL), while the cylinders (MN, NT), (PT, TW)...
form a figure inscribed to the cone (KN, NL).
Consequently
(sector OA'DB): (fig. inscr. in spiral)
= (cyl. KN, NL): (fig. inscr. in cone KN, NL).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV 
379
We have a similar proportion connecting a figure circum-
scribed to the spiral and a figure circumscribed to the cone.
By increasing n the inscribed and circumscribed figures can
be compressed together, and by the usual method of exhaustion
we have ultimately
(sector OA'DB): (area of spiral) = (cyl. KN, NL): (cone KN, NL)
= 3:1,
or (area of spiral cut off by OB) = |(sector OA'DB).
The ratio of the sector OA'DB to the complete circle is that
of the angle which the radius vector describes in passing from
the position OA to the position OB to four right angles, that
is, by the property of the spiral, r: a, where r = OB, a = OA.
Therefore (area of spiral cut off by OB) = § - • nr2.
Similarly the area of the spiral cut off by any other radius
r'
vector rf = i — • TTT'2.
* a
Therefore (as Pappus proves in his next proposition) the
first area is to the second as r3 to r'3.
Considering the areas cut off by the radii vectores at the
points where the revolving line has passed through angles
of ^7T, 7T, §7r and 2 IT respectively, we see that the areas are in
the ratio of (J)3, (£)3, (|)3,1 or 1, 8, 27, 64, so that the areas of
the spiral included in the four quadrants are in the ratio
of 1, 7, 19, 37 (Prop. 22).
(j8) The conchoid of Nicomedes.
The conchoid of Nicomedes is next described (chaps. 26-7),
and it is shown (chaps. 28, 29) how it can be used to find two
geometric means between two straight lines, and consequently
to find a cube having a given ratio to a given cube (see vol. i,
pp. 260-2 and pp. 238-40, where I have also mentioned
Pappus's remark that the conchoid which he describes is the
first conchoid, while there also exist a second, a third and a
fourth which are of use for other theorems).
(y) The quadratrix.
The quadratrix is taken next (chaps. 30-2), with Sporus's
criticism questioning the construction as involving a petitio
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

380
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
principii. 
Its use for squaring the circle is attributed to
Dinostratus and Nicomedes. The whole substance of this
subsection is given above (vol. i, pp. 226-30).
Two constructions for the quadratrix by means of
' surface-loci \
In the next chapters (chaps. 33, 34, Props. 28, 29) Pappus
gives two alternative ways of producing the quadratrix ' by
means of surface-loci', for which he claims the merit that
they are geometrical rather than 'too mechanical' as the
traditional method (of Hippias) was.
(1) The first method uses a cylindrical helix thus.
Let ABC be a quadrant of a circle with centre B, and
let BD be any radius. Suppose
that EF, drawn from a point E
on the radius BD perpendicular
to BC, is (for all such radii) in
a given ratio to the arc DC.
11 say', says Pappus,(that the
locus of E is a certain curve.'
Suppose a 
right 
cylinder
erected from the quadrant and
a cylindrical helix GGH drawn
upon its surface. Let DH be
the generator of this cylinder through D, meeting the helix
in H 
Draw BL, El at right angles to the plane of the
quadrant, and draw HIL parallel to BD.
Now, by the property of the helix, EI( = DH) is to th$
arc CD in a given ratio. Also EF: (arc CD) = a given ratio.
Therefore the ratio EF: El is given. And since EF, El are
given in position, FI is given in position. But FI is perpen-
dicular to BG. Therefore FI is in a plane given in position,
and so therefore is /.
But / is also on a certain surface described by the line LH9
which moves always parallel to the plane ABC, with one
extremity L on BL and the other extremity H on the helix.
Therefore / lies on the intersection of this surface with the
plane through FI.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV 
381
Hence I lies on a certain curve. Therefore E\ its .projection
on the plane ABC, also lies on a curve.
In the particular case where the given ratio of EF to the
arc CD is equal to the ratio of BA to the arc CA, the locus of
E is a quadratrix.
[The surface described by the straight line LH is a plectoid.
The shape of it is perhaps best realized as a continuous spiral
staircase, i.e. a spiral staircase with infinitely small steps.
The quadratrix is thus produced as the orthogonal projection
of the curve in which the plectoid is intersected by a plane
through BC inclined at a given angle to the plane ABC. It is
not difficult to verify the result analytically.]
(2) The second method uses a right cylinder the base of which
is an Archimedean spiral.
Let ABC be a quadrant of a circle, as before, and EF, per-
pendicular at F to BC, a straight
line of such length that EF is
to the arc DC as 4 5 is to the
arc ADC.
Let a point on 4 5 move uni-
formly from A to B while, in the
same time, AB itself revolves
uniformly about B from the position BA to the position BC.
The point thus describes the spiral AQB. 
If the spiral cuts
BD in <?,
BA:BG = (arc ADC): (arc DC),
or 
BG: (arc DC) = BA : (arc ADC).
Therefore BG = EF.
Draw GK at right angles to the plane ABC and equal to BG.
Then GK, and therefore K, lies on a right cylinder with the
spiral as base.
But BK also lies* on a conical surface with vertex B such that
its generators all make an angle of \ir with the plane ABC.
Consequently K lies on the intersection of two surfaces,
and therefore on a curve.
Through K draw LKI parallel to BD, and let BL, El be at
right angles to the plane ABC.
Then LKI, moving always parallel to the plane ABC, with
one extremity on BL and passing through K on a certain
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

382
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
curve, describes a certain plectoid, which therefore contains the
point /.
Also IE = EF, IF is perpendicular to BC, and hence IF, and
therefore /, lies on a fixed plane through BG inclined to ABG
at an angle of %TT.
Therefore /, lying on the intersection of the plectoid and the
said plane, lies on a certain curve. So therefore does the
projection of / on ABG, i.e. the point E.
The locus of E is clearly the quadratrix.
[This result can also be verified analytically.]
(S) Digression: a spiral on a sphere.
Prop. 30 (chap. 35) is a digression on the subject of a certain
spiral described on a sphere, suggested by the discussion of
a spiral in a plane.
Take a hemisphere bounded by the great circle KLM,
with H as pole. Suppose that the quadrant of a great circle
HNK revolves uniformly about the radius HO so that K
describes the circle KLM and returns to its original position
at K, and suppose that a point moves uniformly at the same
time from H to K at such speed that the point arrives at K
at the same time that HK resumes its original position. The
point will thus describe a spiral on the surface of the sphere
between the points H and K as shown in the figure.
Pappus then sets himself to prove that the portion of the
surface of the sphere cut off towards the pole between the
spiral and the arc HNK is to the surface of the hemisphere in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK IV
383
a certain ratio shown in the second figure where ABC is
a quadrant of a circle equal to a great circle in the sphere,
namely the ratio of the segment ABC to the sector DABC.
Draw the tangent GF to the quadrant at C. With C as
centre and radius CA draw the circle AEF meeting GF in F.
Then the sector CAF is equal to the sector ADG (since
CA2 = 2AD2, while ZAGF 
=\LADG),
It is required, therefore, to prove that, if 8 be the area cut
off by the spiral as above described,
8: (surface of hemisphere) = (segmt. ABC): (sector CAF).
Let KL be a (small) fraction, say l/nth, 
of the circum-
ference of the circle KLM, and let HPL be the quadrant of the
great circle through H, L meeting the spiral in P. Then, by
the property of the spiral,
(arc HP): (arc HL) = (arc KL): (circumf. of KLM)
Let the small circle NPQ passing through P be described
about the pole H.
Next let FE be the same fraction, l/nth, 
of the arc FA
that KL is of the circumference of the circle KLM, and join EC
meeting the arc ABC in B. With C as centre and CB as
radius describe the arc BG meeting GF in G.
Then the arc CB is the same fraction, l/nth, 
of the arc
CBA that the arc FE is of FA (for it is easily seen that
IFCE = \LBDC, while AFC A = \LCDA\ 
Therefore, since
(arc CBA) == (arc HPL), (arc CB) = (arc HP), and chord CB
= chord flP.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

384 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Now (sector HPN on sphere): (sector HKL on sphere)
= (chord HP)2: (chord HL)2
(a consequence of Archimedes, On Sphere and Cylinder, I. 42).
And 
HP2: HL2 = GB2: GA2
= GB2:GE2.
Therefore
(sector HPN): (sector HKL) = (sector CBG): (sector CEF).
Similarly, if the arc LL' be taken equal to the arc KL and
the great circle through H, Lf cuts the spiral in P\ and a small
circle described about H and through P' meets the arc HPL
in p; and if likewise the arc BB' is made equal to the arc BG,
and GBr is produced to meet AF in E', while again a circular
arc with G as centre and GB' as radius meets GE in b,
(sector HP'p on sphere): (sector HLLf on sphere)
= (sector GB'b): (sector GEfE).
And so on.
Ultimately then we shall get a figure consisting of sectors
on the sphere circumscribed about the area S of the spiral and
a figure consisting of sectors of circles circumscribed about the
segment GB A; and in like manner we shall have inscribed
figures in each case similarly made up.
The method of exhaustion will then give
S: (surface of hemisphere) = (segmt. ABC): (sector GAF)
= (segmt. ABG): (sector BAG).
[We may, as an illustration, give the analytical equivalent
of this proposition. If p, co be the spherical coordinates of P
with reference to H as pole and the arc HNK as polar axis,
the equation of Pappus's curve is obviously co = 4 p.
If now the radius of the sphere is taken as unity, we have as
the element of area
dA = d<o(l —cosp) — 4:dp (1—cosp).
Therefore 
A = 
4dp (1 —cosp) = 2n — 4.
Jo
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV 
385
Therefore
A 2 7 r - 4 i 7 r - £
(surface of hemisphere) *"" 2TT
_ (segment ABC) -.
~~ (sector DABC) 'J
The second part of the last section of Book IV (chaps. 36-41,
pp. 270-302) is mainly concerned with the problem of tri-
secting any given angle or dividing it into parts in any given
ratio. Pappus begins with another account of the distinction
between plane, solid and linear problems (cf. Book III, chaps.
20-2) according as they require for their solution (1) the
straight line and circle only, (2) conies or their equivalent,
(3) higher curves still, 'which have a more complicated and
forced (or unnatural) origin, being produced from more
irregular surfaces and involved motions. Such are the curves
which are discovered in the so-called loci on surfaces, • as
well as others more complicated still and many in number
discovered by Demetrius of Alexandria in his Linear con-
siderations and by Philon of Tyana by means of the inter-
lacing of plectoids and other surfaces of all sorts, all of which
curves possess many remarkable properties peculiar to them.
Some of these curves have been thought by the more recent
writers to be worthy of considerable discussion; one of them is
that which also received from Menelaus the name of the
paradoxical curve. Others of the same class are spirals,
quadratrices, cochloids and cissoids.' He adds the often-quoted
reflection on the error committed by geometers when they
solve a problem by means of an ' inappropriate class' (of
curve or its equivalent), illustrating this by the use in
Apollonius, Book V, of a rectangular hyperbola for finding the
feet of normals to a parabola passing through one point
(where a circle would serve the purpose), and by the assump-
tion by Archimedes of a solid v ever is in his book On Spirals
(see above, pp. 65-8).
Trisection (or division in any ratio) of any angle.
The method of trisecting any angle based on a certain veda-is
is next described, with the solution of the vsvais itself by
1528 2 
C C
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

386 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
means of a hyperbola which has to be constructed from certain
data, namely the asymptotes and a certain point through
which the curve must pass (this easy construction is given in
Prop. 33, chap. 41-2). Then the problem is directly solved
(chaps. 43, 44) by means of a hyperbola in two ways prac-
tically equivalent, the hyperbola being determined in the one
case by the ordinary Apollonian property, but in the other by
means of the focus-directrix property. Solutions follow of
the problem of dividing any angle in a given ratio by means
(1) of the quadratrix, (2) of the spiral of Archimedes (chaps.
45, 46). All these solutions have been sufficiently described
above (vol. i, pp. 235-7, 241-3, 225-7).
Some problems follow (chaps. 47-51) depending on these
results, namely those of constructing an isosceles triangle in
which either of the base angles has a given ratio to the vertical
angle (Prop. 37), inscribing in a circle a regular polygon of
any number of sides (Prop. 38), drawing a circle the circum-
ference of which shall be equal to a given straight lina (Prop.
39), constructing on a given straight line AB a segment of
a circle such that the arc of the segment may have a given
ratio to the base (Prop. 40), and constructing an angle incom-
mensurable with a given angle (Prop. 41).
Section (5). Solution of the vevais of Archimedes,' On Spirals1,
Prop. 8, by means of conies.
Book IV concludes with the solution o£ the vevcris which,
according to Pappus, Archimedes unnecessarily assumed in
On Spirals, Prop. 8. Archimedes's assumption is this. Given
a circle, a chord (BG) in it less than the diameter, and a point
A on the circle the perpendicular from which to BG cuts BG
in a point D such that BD > DC and meets the circle again
in E, it is possible to draw through A a straight line ARP
cutting BG in R and the circle in P in such a way that RP
shall be equal to DE (or, in the phraseology of vevaeLs, to
place between the straight line BG and the circumference
of the circle a straight line equal to DE and verging
towards A).
Pappus makes the problem rather more general by not
requiring PR to be equal to DE, but making it of any given
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK IV
387
length (consistent with a real solution). The problem is best
exhibited by means of analytical geometry.
If BD = a, DG=b, AD = c (so that DE = ab/c), we have
to find the point R on BG such that AR produced solves the
problem by making PR equal to k, say.
Let DR = x. Then, since BR.RC = PR.RA, 
we have
(a - x) (6 + x) = h V{c2 + x2).
An obvious expedient is to put y for V(c2 + x2), when
we have
(a-x)(b + x) = hy, 
(1)
and
(2)
These equations represent a parabola and a hyperbola
respectively, and Pappus does in fact solve the problem by
means of the intersection of a parabola and a hyperbola; one
of his preliminary lemmas is, however, again a little more
general. In the above figure y is represented by RQ.
The first lemma of Pappus (Prop. 42, p. 298) states that, if
from a given point A any straight line be drawn meeting
a straight line BG given in position in R, and if RQ be drawn
at right angles to BG and of length bearing a given ratio
to AR, the locus of Q is a hyperbola.
For draw AD perpendicular to BC and produce it to A'
so that
QR:RA = A'D: DA = the given ratio.
* c c 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

388 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Measure DA" along DA equal to DA'.
Then, if QN be perpendicular to AD,
{AR2-AD2):{QR2-A'D2) 
= (const.),
that is, 
QN2: A'N. A"N = (const.),
and the locus of Q is a hyperbola.
The equation of the hyperbola is clearly
where ji is a constant. In the particular case taken by
Archimedes QR = RA, or /* = 1, and the hyperbola becomes
the rectangular hyperbola (2) above.
The second lemma (Prop. 43, p. 300) proves that, if BG is
given in length, and Q is such a point that, when QR is drawn
perpendicular to BG, BR. RG = k. QR, where k is a given
length, the locus of Q is a parabola.
Let 0 be the middle point of BG, and let OiT be drawn at
right angles to BG and of length such that
= k.K0.
Let QN' be drawn perpendicular to OK.
Then 
QN'* = OR2
= 
0G2-BR.RG
= k. (ZO - QE), by hypothesis,
Therefore the locus of Q is a parabola.
The equation of the parabola referred to DB, DE as axes of
x and y is obviously
which easily reduces to
(a —as) (& + #) = ky, as above (1).
In Archimedes's particular case k = ab/c.
To solve the problem then we have only to draw the para-
bola and hyperbola in question, and their intersection then
gives Q} whence R, and therefore ARP, is determined.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS IV, V 
389
Book V. Preface on the Sagacity of Bees.
It is characteristic of the great Greek mathematicians that,
whenever they were free from the restraint of the technical
language of mathematics, as when for instance they had occa-
sion to write a preface, they were able to write in language of
the highest literary quality, comparable with that of the
philosophers, historians, and poets. We have only to recall
the introductions to Archimedes's treatises and the prefaces
to the different Books of Apollonius's Conies. Heron, though
severely practical, is no exception when he has any general
explanation, historical or other, to give. We have now to
note a like case in Pappus, namely the preface to Book V of
the Collection. The editor, Hultsch, draws attention to the
elegance and. purity of the language and the careful writing;
the latter is illustrated by the studied avoidance of hiatus.1
The subject is one which a writer of taste and imagination
would naturally find attractive, namely the practical intelli-
gence shown by bees in selecting the hexagonal form for the
cells in the honeycomb. Pappus does not disappoint us; the
passage is as attractive as the subject, and deserves to be
reproduced.
' It is of course to men that God has given the best and
most perfect notion of wisdom in general and of mathematical
science in particular, but a partial share in these things he
allotted to some of the unreasoning animals as well. To men,
as being endowed with reason, he vouchsafed that they should
do everything in the light of reason* and demonstration, but to
the other animals, while denying them reason, he granted
that each of them should, by virtue of a certain natural
instinct, obtain just so much as is needful to support life.
This instinct may be observed to exist in very many other
species of living creatures, but most of all in bees. In the first
place their orderliness and their submission to the queens who
rule in their state are truly admirable, but much more admirable
still is their emulation, the cleanliness they observe in the
gathering of honey, and the forethought and housewifely care
they devote to its custody. Presumably because they know
themselves to be entrusted with the task of bringing from
the gods to the accomplished portion of mankind a share of
1 Pappus, vol. iii, p. 1233.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

390 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
ambrosia in this form, they do not think it proper to pour it
carelessly on ground or wood or any other ugly and irregular
material; but, first collecting the sweets of the most beautiful
flowers which grow on the earth, they make from them, for
the reception of the honey, the vessels which we call honey-
combs, (with cells) all equal, similar and contiguous to one
another, and hexagonal in form. And that they have con-
trived this by virtue of a certain geometrical forethought we
may infer in this way. They would necessarily think that
the figures must be such as to be contiguous to one another,
that is to say, to have their sides common, in order that no
foreign matter could enter the interstices between them and
so defile the purity of their produce. Now only three recti-
lineal figures would satisfy the condition, I mean regular
figures which are equilateral and equiangular; for the bees
would have none of the figures which are not uniform. . . .
There being then three figures capable by' themselves of
exactly filling up the space about the same point, the bees by
reason of their instinctive wisdom chose for the construction
of the honeycomb the figure which has the most angles,
because they conceived that it would contain more honey than
either of the two others.
' Bees, then, know just this fact which is of service to them-
selves, that the hexagon is greater than the square and the
triangle and will hold more honey for the same expenditure of
material used in constructing the different figures. We, how-
ever, claiming as we do a greater share in wisdom than bees,
will investigate a problem of still wider extent, namely that,
of all equilateral and equiangular plane figures having an
equal perimeter, that which has the greater number of angles
is always greater, and the greatest plane figure of all those
which have a perimeter equal to that of the polygons is the
circle/
Book V then is devoted to what we may call isojierimetry,
including in the term not only the comparison of the areas of
different plane figures with the same perimeter, but that of the
contents of different solid figures with equal surfaces.
Section (1). Isoperimetry after Zenodorus.
The first section of the Book relating to plane figures
(chaps. 1-10, pp. 308-34) evidently followed very closely
the exposition of Zenodorus nepl 
io-ofiirpcDu <rxv/jL<^rc0J/ ( s e e
pp. 207-13, above); but before passing to solid figures Pappus
inserts the proposition that of all circular segments having
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK V 
391
the swuie circumference the semicircle is the greatest, with some
preliminary lemmas which deserve notice (chaps. 15, 16).
(1) ABC is a triangle right-angled at B. 
With C as centre
and radius GA describe the arc
AD cutting GB produced in D.
To prove that (R denoting a right
angle)
(sector CAD): (area ABD)
> R.lBCA.
Draw AF at right angles to GA meeting GD produced in F,
and draw BH perpendicular to AF. 
With A as centre and
AB as radius describe the arc QBE.
Now (area EBF): (area EBH) > (area EBF): (sector ABE),
and, componendo, AFBH: (EBH) > AABF: (ABE).
But (by an easy lemma which has just preceded)
AFBH: (EBH) = 
AABF-.(ABD),
whence 
AABF: (ABD) > AABF: (ABE),
and 
(ABE) > (ABD).
Therefore 
(ABE): (ABG) > (ABD): (ABG)
> (ABD): A ABC} a fortiori.
Therefore 
Z BAF: Z BAG > (ABD): A ABG,
whence, inversely, AABG:(ABD) > 
IBAG.Z.BAF.
and, componendo, (sector ACD): (ABD) > R: Z BCA.
[If oc be the circular measure of /.BCA, this gives (if AC=b)
%ocb2:(%ocb2—^ sin a cos a. 62) >^7r:a,
or 
2a:(2a —sin2a) > 7r:2a;
that is, 
0/{0- sin 6) > TT/6, where 0 < 6 < TT.]
(2) ABC is again a triangle right-angled at B. With C as
centre and GA as radius draw a circle AD meeting i?C pro-
duced in D. To prove that
(sector CAD): (area ABD) > R: LAGD.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

392
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Draw AE at right angles to AC. With A as centre and
AC as radius describe the circle FCE meeting AB produced
in i^and AE in E.
Then, since LACD > ICAE, (sector AGB) > (sector ACE).
Therefore 
(AOD): A ABC > (ACE): AABC
> (ACE): (ACF), a fortiori,
> 
/.EACilCAB.
Inversely,
AABC:(ACD) < /.CAB :£ EAC,
and, componendo,
(ABD): (ACD) < Z EAB: Z EAC
Inversely, 
(ACD): (ABD) > Z EAC: Z EAB
>R:LACD.
We come now to the application of these lemmas to the
proposition comparing the area of a semicircle with that of
other segments of equal circumference (chaps. 17, 18).
A semicircle is the greatest of all segments of circles which
have the same circvmiference.
Let ABC be a semicircle with centre G, and DEF another
segment of a circle such that the circumference DEF is equal
to the circumference ABC. I say that the area of ABC is
greater than the area of DEF.
Let H be the centre of the circle DEF. Draw EHK, BG at
right angles to DF> AC respectively. Join DH, and draw
LHM parallel to DF.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK V 
393
Then 
LE:AG = (arcLE): (arc AB)
= (arc 
LE):(&YCDE)
= (sector LEE): (sector BEE).
Also 
Li/2: 4(?2 = (sector LEE): (sector .4 GB).
Therefore the sector LEE, is to the sector AGB in the
ratio duplicate of that which the sector LEE has to the
sector DEE.
Therefore
(sector LEE): (sector DEE) = (sector DEE): (sector J.GJS).
Now (1) in the case of the segment less than a semicircle
and (2) in the case of the segment greater than a semicircle
(sector EDE): (EDK) > B.Z. DEE,
by the lemmas (1) and (2) respectively.
That is,
(sector EDE): (EDK) > L LEE: L DEE
> (sector LEE): (sector DEE)
> (sector EDE): (sector AGB),
from above.
Therefore the half segment EDK is less than the half
semicircle AGB, whence the semicircle ABC is greater than
the segment DEF.
We have already described the content of Zenodorus's
treatise (pp. 207-13, above) to which, so far as plane figures
are concerned, Pappus added nothing except the above pro-
position relating to segments of circles.
Section (2). 
Comparison of volumes of solids having their
surfaces equal. Case of the sphere.
The portion of Book V dealing with solid figures begins
(p. 350. 20) with the statement that the philosophers who
considered that the creator gave the universe the form of a
sphere because that was the most beautiful of all shapes also
asserted that the sphere is the greatest of all solid figures
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

394 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
which have their surfaces equal; this, however, they had not
proved, nor could it be proved without a long investigation.
Pappus himself does not attempt to prove that the sphere is
greater than all solids with the same surface, but only that
the sphere is greater than any of the five regular solids having
the same surface (chap. 19) and also greater than either a cone
or a cylinder of equal surface (chap. 20).
Section (3). 
Digression on the semi-regular solids
of Archimedes.
He begins (chap. 19) with an account of the thirteen semi-
regular solids discovered by Archimedes, which are contained
by polygons all equilateral and all equiangular but not all
similar (see pp. 98-101, above), and he shows how to determine
the number of solid angles and the number of edges which
they have respectively; he then gives them the go-by for his
present purpose because they are not completely regular; still
less does he compare the sphere with any irregular solid
having an equal surface.
The sphere is greater than any of the regular solids which
has its surface equal to that of the sphere.
The proof that the sphere is greater than any of the regular
solids with surface equal to that of the sphere is the same as
that given by Zenodorus. Let P be any one of the regular solids,
S the sphere with surface equal to that of P. To prove that
S>P. 
Inscribe in the solid a sphere s, and suppose that r is its
radius. Then the surface of P is greater than the surface of s,
and accordingly, if R is the radius of 8, R > r. But the
volume of S is equal to the cone with base equal to the surface
of S, and therefore of P, and height equal to R; and the volume
of P is equal to the cone with base equal to the surface of P
and height equal to r. Therefore, since R>r, volume of S >
volume of P.
Section (4). Propositions on the lines of Archimedes,,
' On the Sphere and Cylinder9.
For the fact that the volume of a sphere is equal to the cone
with base equal to the surface, and height equal to the radius,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK V 
395
of the sphere, Pappus quotes Archimedes, On the Sphere and
Cylinder, but thinks proper to add a series of propositions
(chaps. 20-43, pp. 362-410) on much the same lines as those of
Archimedes and leading to the same results as Archimedes
obtains for the surface of a segment of a sphere and of the whole
sphere (Prop. 28), and for the volume of a sphere (Prop. 35).
Prop. 36 (chap. 42) shows how to divide a sphere into two
segments such that their surfaces are in a given ratio and
Prop. 37 (chap. 43) proves that the volume as well as the
surface of the cylinder circumscribing a sphere is 1^ times
that of the sphere itself.
Among the lemmatic propositions in this section of the
Book Props. 21, 22 may be mentioned. Prop. 21 proves that,
if C, E be two points on the tangent at H to a semicircle such
that CH = HE, and if CD, EF be drawn perpendicular to the
diameter AB, then (CD + EF) CE = AB. DF; Prop. 22 proves
a like result where 0, E are points on the semicircle, CD, EF
are as before perpendicular to AB, and EH is the chord of
the circle subtending the arc which with CE makes up a semi-
circle ; in this case (CD + EF) CE = EH. DF. Both results
are easily seen to be the equivalent of the trigonometrical
formula
sin (x + y) + sin (x — y) = 2sina;cos2/,
or, if certain different angles be taken as x, y,
2 = cot±(x-y).
cosy — cosx
Section (5). Of regular solids with surfaces equal, that is
greater which has more faces.
Returning to the main problem of the Book, Pappus shows
that, of the five regular solid figures assumed to have their
surfaces equal, that is greater which has the more faces, so
that the pyramid, the cube, the octahedron, the dodecahedron
and the icos^hedron of equal surface are, as regards solid
content, in ascending order of magnitude (Props. 38-56).
Pappus indicates (p. 410. 27) that 'some of the ancients' had
worked out the proofs of these propositions by the analytical
method; for himself, he will give a method of his own by
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

396 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
synthetical deduction, for which he claims that it is clearer
and shorter. 
We have first propositions (with auxiliary
lemmas) about the perpendiculars from the centre of the
circumscribing sphere to a face of (a) the octahedron, (b) the
icosahedron (Props. 39, 43), then the proposition that, if a
dodecahedron and an icosahedron be inscribed in the same
sphere, the same small circle in the sphere circumscribes both
the pentagon of the dodecahedron and the triangle of the
icosahedron (Prop. 48); this last is the proposition proved by
Hypsicles in the so-called ' Book XIV of Euclid', Prop. 2, and
Pappus gives two methods of proof, the second of which (chap.
56) corresponds to that of Hypsicles. Prop. 49 proves that
twelve of the regular pentagons inscribed in a circle are together
greater than twenty of the equilateral triangles inscribed in
the same circle. The final propositions proving that the cube
is greater than the pyramid with the same surface, the octa-
hedron greater than the cube, and so on, are Props. 52-6
(chaps. 60-4). Of Pappus's auxiliary propositions, Prop. 41
is practically contained in Hypsicles's Prop. 1, and Prop. 44
in Hypsicles's last lemma; but otherwise the exposition is
different.
Book VI.
On the* contents of Book VI we can be brief. It is mainly
astronomical, dealing with the' treatises included in the so-
called Little Astronomy, that is, the smaller astronomical
treatises which were studied as an introduction to the great
Syntaxis of Ptolemy. The preface says that many of those
who taught the Treasury of Astronomy, through a careless
understanding of the propositions, added some things as being
necessary and omitted others as unnecessary. Pappus mentions
at this point an incorrect addition to Theodosius, Sphaerica,
III. 6, an omission from Euclid's Phaenomena, Prop. 2, an
inaccurate representation of Theodosius, On Days and Nights,
Prop. 4, and the omission later of certain other things as
being unnecessary. His object is to put these mistakes
right. Allusions are also found in the Book to Menelaus's
Sphaerica, e.g. the statement (p. 476. 16) that Menelaus in
his Sphaerica called a spherical triangle TpiirXtvpov, three-side.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS V, VI 
397
The Sphaerica of Theodosius is dealt with at some length
(chaps. 1-26, Props. 1-27), and so are the theorems of
Autolycus On the moving Sphere (chaps. 27-9), Theodosius
On Days and Nights (chaps. 30-6, Props. 29-38), Aristarchus
On the sizes and distances of the Sun and Moon (chaps. 37-40,
including a proposition, Prop. 39 with two lemmas, which is
corrupt at the end and is not really proved), Euclid's Optics
(chaps. 41-52, Props. 42-54), and Euclid's Phaenomena (chaps.
53-60, Props. 55-61).
Problem arising out of Euclid's ' Optics \
There is little in the Book of general mathematical interest
except the following propositions which occur in the section on
Euclid's Optics.
Two propositions are fundamental 
in solid geometry,
namely:
(a) If from a point A above a plane AB be drawn perpen-
dicular to the plane, and if from B a straight line BD be
drawn perpendicular to any straight line EF in the plane,
then will AD also be perpendicular to EF (Prop. 43).
(6) If from a point A above a plane AB be drawn to the plane
but not at right angles to it, and AM be drawn perpendicular
to the plane (i.e. if BM be the orthogonal projection of BA on
the plane), the angle ABM is the least of all the angles which
AB makes with any straight lines through S, as BP, in the
plane; the angle ABP increases as BP moves away from BM
on either side; and, given any straight line BP making
a certain angle with BA, only one other straight line in the
plane will make the same angle with BA, namely a straight
line BP' on the other side of BM making the same angle with
it that BP does (Prop. 44).
These are the first of a series of lemmas leading up to the
main problem, the investigation of the apparent form of
a circle -as seen from a point outside its plane. In Prop. 50
(= Euclid, Optics, 34) Pappus proves the fact that all the
diameters of the circle will appear equal if the straight line
drawn from the point representing the eye to the centre of
the circle is either (a) at right angles to the plane of the circle
or (b), if not at right angles to the plane of the circle, is equal
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

398
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
in length to the radius of the circle. In all other cases
(Prop. 51 = Eucl. Optics, 35) the diameters will appear unequal.
Pappus's other propositions carry farther Euclid's remark
that the circle seen under these conditions will appear
deformed or distorted (napeo-Traaixzvos), proving (Prop. 53,
pp. 588-92) that the apparent form will be an ellipse with its
centre not, 'as some think', at the centre of the circle but
&t another point in it, determined in this way. Given a circle
ABDE with centre 0, let the eye be at a point F above the
plane of the circle such that FO is neither perpendicular
to that plane nor equal to the radius of the circle. Draw FG
perpendicular to the plane of the circle and let ADG be the
diameter through G. Join AF, DF, and bisect the angle AFD
by the straight line FG meeting AD in G. Through G draw
BE perpendicular to AD, and let the tangents at B, E meet
A G produced in K. Then Pappus proves that G (not 0) is the
centre of the apparent ellipse, that AD, BE are its major and
minor axes respectively, that the ordinates to AD are parallel
to BE both really and apparently, and that the ordinates to
BE will pass through K but will appear to be parallel to AD.
Thus in the figure, G being the centre of the apparent ellipse,
it is proved that, if LGM is any straight line through C, LG is
apparently equal to CM (it is practically assumed—a proposi-
tion proved later in Book VII, Prop. 156—that, if LK meet
the circle again in P, and if PM be drawn perpendicular to
AD to meet the circle again in M, LM passes through G).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS VI, VII 
399
The test of apparent equality is of course that the two straight
lines should subtend equal angles at F.
The main points in the proof are these. The plane through
CF, CK is perpendicular to the planes BFE, PFM and LFR;
hence CF is perpendicular to BE, QF to PM and HF to LR,
whence BC and CE subtend equal angles at F: so do LH, HR9
and PQ, QM.
Since FC bisects the angle AFDS and AC:CB = AK: KB
(by the polar property), Z CFK is a right angle. And CF is
the intersection of two planes at right angles, namely AFK
and BFE, in the former of which FK lies; therefore KF is
perpendicular to the plane BFE, and therefore to FN. 
Since
therefore (by the polar property) LN:NP 
= LK :KP, it
follows that the angle LFP is bisected by FN\ hence LN, NP
are apparently equal.
Again LC:CM = LN:NP = LF:FP = LF:FM.
Therefore the angles LFC, CFM are equal, and LC, CM
are apparently equal.
Lastly LR:'PM=LK:KP=LN:NP=LF:FP; 
therefore
the isosceles triangles FLRy FPM are equiangular; there-
fore the angles PFM, LFR, and consequently PFQ, LFH, are
equal. Hence LP, RM will appear to be parallel to AD.
We have, based on this proposition, an easy method of
solving Pappus's final problem (Prop. 54). ' Given a circle
ABBE and any point within it, to find outside the plane of
the circle a point from which the circle will have the appear-
ance of an ellipse with centre C!
We have only to produce the diameter AB through C to the
pole K of the chord BE perpendicular to AB and then, in
the plane through AK perpendicular to the plane of the circle,
to describe a semicircle on CK as diameter. Any point F on
this semicircle satisfies the condition.
Book VII. On the 'Treasury of Analysis'.
Book VII is of much greater importance, since it gives an
account of the books forming what was called the Treasury of
Analysis {avaXvofievos TOKOS) and, as regards those of the books
which are now lost, Pappus's account, with the hints derivable
from the large collection of lemmas supplied by him to each
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

400 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
book, practically constitutes our only source of information.
The Book begins (p. 634) with a definition of analysis and
synthesis which, as being the most elaborate Greek utterance
on the subject, deserves to be quoted in full.
'The so-called Mi/aAvo/zei/o? is, to put it shortly, a special
body of doctrine provided for the use of those who, after
finishing the ordinary Elements, are desirous of acquiring the
power of solving problems which may be set them involving
(the construction of) lines, and it is useful for this alone. It is
the work of three men, Euclid the author of the Elements,
Apollonius of Perga and Aristaeus the elder, and proceeds by
way of analysis and synthesis.'
Definition of Analysis and Synthesis.
'Analysis, then, takes that which is sought as if it were
admitted and passes from it through its successive conse-
quences to something which is admitted as the result of
synthesis: for in analysis we assume that which is sought
as if it were already done (yeyovos), and we inquire what it is
from which this results, and again what is the antecedent
cause of the latter, and so on, until by so retracing our steps
we come upon something already known or belonging to the
class of first principles, and such a method we call analysis
as being solution backwards {avdirakiv Xvcriv).
' But in synthesis, reversing the process, we take as already
done that which was last arrived at in the analysis and, by
arranging in their natural order as consequences what before
were antecedents, and successively connecting them one with
another, we arrive finally at the construction of what was
sought; and this we call synthesis.
' Now analysis is of two kinds, the one directed to searching
for the truth and called theoretical, the other directed to
finding what we are told to find and called problematical.
(1) In the theoretical kind we assume what is sought as if
it were existent and true, after which we pass through its
successive consequences, as if they too were true and established
by virtue of our hypothesis, to something admitted': then
(a), if that something admitted is true, that which is sought
will also be true and the proof will correspond in the reverse
order to the analysis, but (b), if we come upon something
admittedly false, that which is sought will also be false.
(2) In the problematical kind we assume that which is pro-
pounded as if it were known, after which we pass through its
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
401
successive consequences, taking them as true, up to something
admitted: if then (a) what is admitted is possible and obtain-
able, that is, what mathematicians call given, what was
originally proposed will also be possible, and the proof will
again correspond in the reverse order to the analysis, but if (6)
we come upon something admittedly impossible, the problem
will also be impossible.'
This statement could hardly be improved upon except that
it ought to be added that each step in the chain of inference
in the analysis must be unconditionally convertible; that is,
when in the analysis we say that, if A is true, B is true,
we must be sure that each statement is a necessary conse-
quence of the other, so that the truth of A equally follows
from the truth of B. This, however, is almost implied by
Pappus when he says that we inquire, not what it is (namely
B) which follows from A, but what it is (B) from which A
follows, and so on.
List of works in the ' Treasury of Analysis'.
Pappus adds a list, in order, of the books forming the
s, namely:
1 Euclid's Data, one Book, Apollonius's Cutting-off of a ratio,
two Books, Cutting-off of an area, two Books, Determinate
Section, two Books, Contacts, two Books, Euclid's Porisms,
three Books, Apollonius's Inclinations or Vergings (vevaeis),
two Books, the same author's Plane Loci, two Books, and
Conies, eight Books, Aristaeus's Solid Loci, five Books, Euclid's
Surface-Loci, two Books, Eratosthenes's On meansx two Books.
There are in all thirty-three Books, the contents of which up
to the Conies of Apollonius I have set out for your considera-
tion, including not only the number of the propositions, the
diorismi and the cases dealt with in each Book, but also the
lemmas which are required; indeed I have not, to the best
of my belief, omitted any question arising in the study of the
Books in question.'
Description of the treatises.
Then follows the short description of the contents of the
various Books down to Apollonius's Conies; no account is
given of Aristaeus's Solid Loci, Euclid's Surface-Loci and
1623.2 
D d
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

402 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDKIA
Eratosthenes's On means, nor are there any lemmas to these
works except two on the Surface-Loci at the end of the Book*
The contents of the various works, including those of the
lost treatises so far as they can be gathered from Pappus,
have been described in the chapters devoted to their authors,
and need not be further referred to here, except for an
addendum to the account of Apollonius's Conies which is
remarkable. Pappus has been speaking of the ' locus with
respect to three or four lines' (which is a conic), and proceeds
to say (p. 678. 26) that we may in like manner have loci with
reference to five or six or even more lines; these had not up
to his time become generally known, though the synthesis
of one of them, not by any means the most obvious, had been
worked out and its utility shown. Suppose that there are
five or six lines, and that pvp2, 
p3,p±, p5 or 
p1,p2,pz>p±,p5,p6
are the lengths of straight lines drawn from a point to meet
the five or six at given angles, then, if in the first case
PiPzPz = ^P4:P5a (where X is a constant ratio and a a given
length), and in the second case p1p2p3 
= ^P^PSPQ* the locus
of the point is in each case a certain curve given in position.
The relation could not be expressed in the same form if
there were more lines than six, because there are only three
dimensions in geometry, although certain recent writers had
allowed themselves to speak' of a rectangle multiplied by
a square or a rectangle without giving any intelligible idea of
what they meant by such a thing (is Pappus here alluding to
Heron's proof of the formula for the area of a triangle in
terms of its sides given on pp. 322-3, above ?). But the system
of compounded ratios enables it to be expressed for any
number of lines thus, & . ^ . . . .£» (or £ W ) = Xm pappus
Ih P* 
« V 
PnJ
proceeds in language not very clear (p. 680. 30); but the gist
seems to be that the investigation of these curves had not
attracted men of light and leading, as, for instance, the old
geometers and the best writers. Yet there were other impor-
tant discoveries still remaining to be made. For himself, he
noticed that every one in his day was occupied with the elements,
the first principles and the natural origin of the subject-
matter of investigation; ashamed to pursue such topics, he had
himself proved propositions of much more importance and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
403
utility. In justification of this statement and ' in order that
he may not appear empty-handed when leaving the subject},
he will present his readers with the following.
{Anticipation of Guldins Theorem.)
The enunciations are not very clearly worded, but there
is no doubt as to the sense.
' Figures generated by a complete revolution of a plane figure
about an axis are in a ratio compounded (1) of the ratio
of the areas of the figures, and (2) of the ratio of the straight
lines similarly drawn to {i.e. drawn to meet at the same angles)
the axes of rotation from the respective centres of gravity.
Figures generated by incomplete revolutions are in the ratio
compounded {1) of the ratio of the areas of the figures and
{2) of the ratio of the arcs described by the centres of gravity
of the respective figures, the latter ratio being itself compounded
{a) of the ratio of the straight lines similarly drawn (from
the respective centres of gravity to the axes of rotation) and
(b) of the ratio of the angles contained {i. e. described) about
the axes of revolution by the extremities of the said straight
lines {i.e. the centres of gravity).'
Here, obviously, we have the essence of the celebrated
theorem commonly attributed to P. Guldin (1577-1643),
'quantitas rotunda in viam rotationis ducta producit Pote-
statem Rotundam uno grado altiorem Potestate sive Quantitate
Rofcata'.1
Pappus adds that
f these propositions, which are practically one, include any
number of theorems of all sorts about curves, surfaces, and
solids, all of which are proved at once by one demonstration,
and include propositions both old and new, and in particular
those proved in the twelfth Book of these Elements/
Hultsch attributes the whole passage (pp. 680. 30-682. 20)
to an interpolator, I do not know for what reason; but it
seems to me that the propositions are quite beyond what
could be expected from an interpolator, indeed I know of
no Greek mathematician from Pappus's day onward except
Pappus himself who was capable of discovering such a pro-
position.
1 Centrobaryca, Lib. ii, chap, viii, Prop. 3. Viennae 1641,
D d 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

404 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
If the passage is genuine, it seems to indicate, what is not
elsewhere confirmed, that the Collection originally contained,
or was intended to contain, twelve Books.
Lemmas to the different treatises.
After the description of the treatises forming the Treasury
of Analysis come the collections of lemmas given by Pappus
to assist the student of each of the books (except Euclid's
Data) down to Apollonius's Conies, with two isolated lemmas
to the Surface-Loci of Euclid. It is difficult to give any
summary or any general idea of these lemmas, because they
are very numerous, extremely various, and often quite diffi-
cult, requiring first-rate ability and full command of all the
resources of pure geometry. Their number is also greatly
increased by the addition of alternative proofs, often requiring
lemmas of their own, and by the separate formulation of
particular cases where by the use of algebra and conventions
with regard to sign we can make one proposition cover all the
cases. The style is admirably terse, often so condensed as to
make the argument difficult to follow without some little
filling-out; the hand is that of a master throughout. The
only misfortune is that, the books elucidated being lost (except
the Conies and the Cutting-off of a ratio of Apollonius), it is
difficult, often impossible, to see the connexion of the lemmas
with one another and the problems of the book to which they
relate. In the circumstances, all that I can hope to do is to
indicate the types of propositions included in the lemmas and,
by way of illustration, now and then to give a proof where it
is sufficiently out of the common.
(a) Pappus begins with Lemmas to the Sectio rationis and
Sectio spatii of Apollonius (Props. 1-21, pp. 684-704). The
first two show how to divide a straight line in a given ratio,
and how, given the first, second and fourth terms of a pro-
portion between straight lines, to find the third term. The
next section (Props. 3-12 and 16) shows how to manipulate
relations between greater and less ratios by transforming
them, e.g. componendo, convertendo, &c, in the same way
as Euclid transforms equal ratios in Book V; Prop. 16 proves
that, according as a: 6 > or < c: d, ad > or < 6c. Props.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK VII 
405
17-20 deal with three straight lines a, &, c in geometrical
progression, showing how to mark on a straight line containing
a, b, c as segments (including the whole among 'segments'),
lengths equal to a + c ± 2 s/{ac); the lengths are of course equal
to a + c ± 2 b respectively. These lemmas -are preliminary to
the problem (Prop. 21), Given two straight lines AB, BC
(C lying between A and B)} to find a point B on BA produced
such that BB:BA = CB: (AB + BC-2VAB.BC). 
This is,
of course, equivalent to the quadratic equation (a + x):x
= (a — c + x): (a + c — 2 Vac), and, after marking off AE along
AB equal to the fourth term of this proportion, Pappus solves
the equation in the usual way by application of areas.
(fi) Lemmas to the c Beberminate Section' of Apollonius.
The next set of Lemmas (Props. 22-64, pp. 704-70) belongs
to the Beterminate Section of Apollonius. As we have seen
(pp. 180-1, above), this work seems to have amounted to
a Theory of Involution. 
Whether the application of certain
of Pappus's lemmas corresponded to the conjecture of Zeuthen
or not, we have at all events in this set of lemmas some
remarkable applications of ' geometrical algebra'. They may
be divided into groups as follows
I. Props. 22, 25, 29
If in the figure AB.BC = BB.BE, 
then
BB:BE = AB.BC:AE.EC.
The proofs by proportions are not difficult. 
Prop. 29 is an
alternative proof by means of Prop. 26 (see below). The
algebraic equivalent may be expressed thus: if ax = by, then
II. Props. 30, 32, 34.
If in the same figure AB.BE= 
BB.BC, then
BC = AB.BtJ:EC.CA.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

406 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Props. 32, 34 are alternative proofs based on other lemmas
(Props. 31, 33 respectively). The algebraic equivalent may be
, , , ,, 
.« 
T 
x, 
b 
(a + b)(b — x)
stated thus: if ax = by, then - = 
\ •
III. Props. 35, 36.
If AB.BE=CB.BD, 
then AB :BE = DA . AC:CE. ED,
and GB:BD = AC .CE:AD. DE, results equivalent to the
following: if ax = by, then
a __ (a—y) (a — b) 
b _ (a —6) (b — x)
x~ (6—a?) (3/ —OJ) a n 
y ~ 
(a-y)(y-x)'
IV. Props. 23, 24, 31, 57, 58.
If ^.5 = CD, and 1? is any point in CD,
and similar formulae hold for other positions of E. If E is
between B and (7, AC .CD = AE .ED-BE. 
EC] and if #
is on AD produced, BE. EC = AE .ED + BD . DC.
V. A small group of propositions relate to a triangle ABC
with two straight lines AD, AE drawn from the vertex A to
points on the base BC in accordance with one or other of the
conditions (a) that the angles BAC, DAE are supplementary,
(6) that the angles BAE, DAC are both right angles or, as we
may add from Book VI, Prop. 12, (c) that the angles BAD,
EAC are equal. The theorems are:
In case 
(a) BC.CD:BE.ED 
= CA2: AE\
(b) BC.CE:BD.DE= 
CA*: AD2,
(c) DC.CE:EB.BD 
=
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
407
Two proofs are given of the first theorem. We will give the
first (Prop. 26) because it is a case of theoretical analysis
followed by synthesis. Describe a circle about ABD: produce
EAy CA to meet the circle again in F, 0, and join BF, FG.
Substituting GC. CA for BC. CD and FE.EA for BE. ED,
we have to inquire whether GC.CA: CA2 = FE.EA: 
AE2,
i.e. whether GC:CA = 
FE.EA,
i.e. whether GA: AC=FA: 
AE,
i.e. whether the triangles GAF, CAE are similar or, in other
words, whether GF is parallel to BC.
But GF is parallel to BC, because, the angles BAC, DAE
being supplementary, Z DAE = Z GAB = Z GFB, while at the
same time ZDAE = suppt. of /.FAD = LFBD.
The synthesis is obvious.
An alternative proof (Prop. 27) dispenses with the circle,
and only requires EKH to be drawn parallel to CA to meet
AB, AD in H, K.
Similarly (Prop. 28) for case (b) it is only necessary to draw
FG through D parallel to AC meeting BA in, F and AE
produced in G.
Then, I FAG, LADF (= ID AC) being both right angles,
FD.DG = DA2.
Therefore CA2: AD2 = CA2 :FD.DG = (CA :FD).{CA :DG)
= 
(BC:BD).(CE:DE)
= 
BC.CE:BD.DE.
In case (c) a circle is circumscribed to ADE cutting AB in F
and AC in (?. Then, since Z J^ID = Z GAE, the arcs D.F, #(?
are equal and therefore FG is parallel to DE. 
The proof is
like that of case (a).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

408 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
VI. Props. 37, 38.
If AB:BC = AD2:DC*, whether AB be greater or less
than AD, then
BC = BD2.
[E in the figure is a point such that ED = CD.]
A 
(f) 
D 
c 
B
A 
C B 
P 
(B)
The algebraical equivalent is: If - = •}, ~ 4> ^ n e n ac=62.
These lemmas are subsidiary to the next (Props. 39, 40),
being used in the first proofs of them.
Props. 39, 40 prove the following:
If AGDEB be a straight line, and if
BA . AE: BD. DE = AC2: CD2,
then 
AB.BD:AE.ED= 
BC2: CE2;
if, again, 
AC.CB:AE.EB 
= CD2:DE2,
then 
EA.AC:CB.BE 
= AD2: DB2.
If AB — a, BC = b, BD = c, BE = d, the algebraic equiva-
lents are the#following.
a(a-d)_(a-b)2 
ac 
_ 
b2 .
c(c-d) " (6-c)2' 
e (a-d) (c-d) ~ (6-d)23
and if T -j^ = T 
^ , then v 
p. 
- = —^-L .
(a — d)d 
(c — dy 
bd 
c2
VII. Props. 41, 42, 43.
If AD.DC=BD.DE, 
suppose that in Figures (1) and (2)
0) O mA 
q p 
E B
(2) 
A 
E 
D C 
B
(3) A 
E B 
C 
C p
k = AE+CB, and in Figure (3) & = AE-BC, 
then
= AB.BC}
k.DE=AE.EC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK VII 
409
The algebraical equivalents for Figures (1) and (2) re-
spectively may be written (if a = AD, b = DC, c = BD,
d^DE):
If 
ab = cd, then (a±d + c±b) a== (<x + c) (a±d),
(a±d + c±b) b= (c±b)(b + d),
(a±d + c±b) c = (c + a) (c±b),
(a±d + c±b) d== (a±d)(d + b).
Figure (3) gives other varieties of sign. Troubles about
sign can be avoided by measuring all lengths in one direction
from an origin 0 outside the line. Thus, if 0A = a, OB = b,
&c, the proposition may be as follows :
If (d — a)(d-c) = (b-d)(e-d) 
and 1c = e-a + b-c,
then k(d—a) = (6 —a)(e—a), k(d — c) = (b-c)(e—c),
k(b~d) = (6—a){b—c) and h(e—d) = (e — a)(e — c).
VIII. Props. 45-56.
More generally, if AD. DC = BD.DE and k = AE±BC,
then, if F be any point on the line, we have, according to the
position of F in relation to A, B, C, D} E,
±AF.FC±EF.FB = lc.
Algebraically, if 0A = a, OB = b ... OF = x, the equivalent
is: If (d — a)(d — c) = (b—d)(e — d), and /c = (e — a) + (6 — c),
then 
(# — a)(# — c) + (# — e) (6 — #) = k(x — d).
By making ^ = a, 6, c, e successively in this equation, we
obtain the results of Props. 41-3 above.
IX. Props. 59-64.
In this group Props. 59, 60, 63 are lemmas required for the
remarkable propositions (61, 62, 64) in which Pappus investi-
gates ' singular and minimum' values of the ratio
AP.PD.BP.PC,
where (A, D), (B, C) are point-pairs on a straight line and P
is another point on the straight line. He finds, not only when
the ratio has the' singular and minimum (or maximum)' value,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

410
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
but also what the value is, for three different positions of P in
relation to the four given points.
I will give, as an illustration, the first case, on account of its
elegance. It depends on the following Lemma. 
AEB being
a semicircle on AB as diameter, (7, D any two points on AB,
and CE} DF being perpendicular to AB, let EF be joined and
AC
produced, and let BG be drawn perpendicular to EG. To
prove that
CB.BD = BG*, 
(1)
AC.DB^FG2, 
(2)
AD.BC = EG2. 
(3)
Join GO, GD} FB, EB, AF.
(1) Since the angles at Gy B are right, F, G, B, D are concyclic.
Similarly E, G, B, C are concyclic.
Therefore
IBGD = LBFD
— Z FEB, in the same segment of the semicircle,
= Z GCB, in the same segment of the circle EGBG.
And the triangles GOB, DGB also have the angle CBG
common; therefore they are similar, and GB: BG = BG: BD,
or 
CB.BD = BG2.
(2) We have AB.BD = BF2;
therefore, by subtraction, AC. DB = BF2-BG2 
= FG\
(3) Similarly AB . BG = BE2;
therefore, by subtraction, from the same result (1),
AD.BC= 
BE2-BG2 
= EG2.
Thus the lemma gives an extremely elegant construction for
squares equal to each of the three rectangles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII
411
Now suppose (A, D), (B, C) to be two point-pairs on a
straight line, and let P, another point on it, be determined by
the relation
AB.BD:AC.CD =
then, says Pappus, the ratio AP . PD : BP . PC is singular and
a minimum, and is equal to
AD2: (y/AG.BD- VAB. CDf.
On AD as diameter draw a circle, and draw BF, CG perpen-
dicular to AD on opposite sides.
Then, by hypothesis, AB.BD:AC.CD 
= BP2: CP2;
therefore 
BF2: CG2 = BP2: CP\
or 
BF:CG = BP:CP,
whence the triangles FBP, GCP are similar and therefore
equiangular, so that FPG is a straight line.
Produce GC to meet the circle in H, join FH, and draw DK
perpendicular to FH produced. Draw the diameter FL and
join LH.
Now, by the lemma, FK2 = AC.BD, and HK2= 
AB.CD\
therefore FH = FK-HK = V(AC. BD)- V(AB . CD).
Since, in the triangles FHL, PCG} the angles at H, C are
right and Z FLU— L PGC, the triangles are similar, and
. CD)}.
But
therefore
= AD:{ V(AC. BD)~
GP:PC=FP:PB]
GP2: PC2 = 
FP.PG.BP.PC
= 
AP.PD:BP.PC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

412
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA-
Therefore
AP.PD : BP.PG = AD2 : { V(AG.BD)- V(AB .CD)}2.
The proofs of Props. 62 and 64 are different, the former
being long and involved. The results are:
Prop. 62. If P is between C and D, and
AD.DB:AG.GB = DP2: PC2,
then the ratio AP . PB: GP . PD is singular and a minimum
and is equal to { V(AC. BD) + V(AD . BG) }2: DC2.
Prop. 64. If P is on AD produced, and
AB.BD:AC.CD=: BP2: GP2,
then the ratio AP. Pi) : BP. PC is singular and a maximum,
and is equal to AD2: { V(AC. BD) + / ( ^ 5 . GD)}2.
(y) Lemmas on the Nevcreis of Apollonwts.
After a few easy propositions (e.g. the equivalent of the
proposition that, if ax + x2 = by + y2, then, according as a >
or < 6, a + # > or < b + y), Pappus gives (Prop. 70) the
lemma leading to the solution of the veva-is with regard to
the rhombus (see pp. 190-2, above), and after that the solu-
tion by one Heraclitus of the same problem with respect to
a square (Props. 71, 72, pp. 780-4). The problem is, Given a
square ABCD, to draw through B a straight line, meeting CD
in H and AD produced in E, such that HE is equal to a given
length.
The solution depends on a lemma to the effect that, if any
straight line BHE through B meets CD in H and AD pro-
duced in E, and if EF be drawn perpendicular to BE meeting
BG produced in F, then
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
413
Draw EG perpendicular to BF.
Then the triangles BCH, EGF are similar and 
since
BC = EG) equal in all respects; therefore EF = BH.
Now 
BF2 = BE2 + EF2,
or 
BC. BF+ BF. FC = BH. BE+ BE.EH+ 
EF2.
But, the angles HCF, HEF being right, H, C, F, E are
concyclic, and 
BC .BF= BH. BE.
Therefore, by subtraction,
BF ..FC = BE. EH+ EF2
= BH.HE+EH2 
+ BH2
= FB.BC+EH2.
Taking away the common part, BC. CF, we have
Now suppose that we have to draw BHE through B in
such a way that HE = k. Since BC, EH are both given, we
have only to determine a length x such that x2 = BC2 + k2,
produce BG to F so that CF = x} draw a semicircle on BF as
diameter, produce AD to meet the semicircle in E, and join
JBJ&. BE is thus the straight line required.
Prop. 73 (pp. 784-6) proves that, if D be the middle point
of BC, the base of an isosceles triangle ABC, then BC is the
shortest of all the straight lines through D terminated by
the straight lines AB, AC, and the nearer to i?(7is shorter than
the more remote.
There follows a considerable collection of lemmas mostly
showing the equality of certain intercepts made on straight
lines through one extremity of the diameter of one of two
semicircles having their diameters in a straight line, either
one including or partly including the other, or wholly ex-
ternal to one another, on the same or opposite sides of the
diameter.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

414
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
I need only draw two figures by way of illustration.
In the first figure (Prop. 83), ABC, DEF being the semi-
circles, BEKG is any straight line through G cutting both;
FG is made equal to AD; AB is joined; GH is drawn per-
pendicular to BK produced. It is required to prove that
L
FIG. 1.
la1 Li
BE = KH. 
(This is obvious when from i, the centre of the
semicircle DEF, LM is drawn perpendicular to BK.) 
If E, K
coincide in the point M' of the semicircle so that B'CH' is
a tangent, then B'M' = M'H' (Props. 83, 84).
In the second figure (Prop. 91) D is the centre of the
semicircle ABG and is also the extremity of the diameter
of the semicircle DEF. If BEGF be any straight line through
A 
o 
c 
P
FIG. 2.
F cutting both semicircles, BE = EG. This is clear, since DE
is perpendicular to BG.
The only problem of any difficulty in this section is Prop.
85 (p. 796). Given a semicircle ABC on the diameter AC
and a point D on the diameter, to draw a semicircle passing
through *D and having its diameter along DC such that, if
GEB be drawn touching it at E and meeting the semicircle
ABG in Bt BE shall be equal to AD.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
415
The problem is reduced to a problem contained in Apollo-
nius's Determinate Section thus.
Suppose the problem solved by the semicircle DEF} BE
being equal to AD. 
Join E to the centre G of the semicircle
F c
DEF. Produce DA to H, making HA equal to AD. Let K
be the middle point of DC.
Since the triangles ABC, GEC are similar,
AG2:GC2 = BE2: EC"
= AD2: EC2, by hypothesis,
= AD2:GC'-DG2 
(since DG = GE)
= 
AG2-AD2:DG2
= 
HG.DG:DG2
= HG: DG.
Therefore
HG:DG = AD2: GC2-DG2
= 
AD2:2DC.GK.
Take a straight line L such that AD2 = L.2DC;
therefore 
HG:DG = L: GK,
or 
HG.GK = L.DG.
Therefore, given the two straight lines HD9 DK (or the
three points H, D, K on a straight line), we have to find
a point G between D and K such that
which is the second epitagma of the third Problem in the
Determinate Section of Apollonius, and therefore may be
taken as solved. 
(The problem is the equivalent of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

416 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
solution of a certain quadratic equation.) 
Pappus observes
that the problem is always possible (requires no Siopia-f/Losi),
and proves that it has only one solution.
(S) Lemmas on the treatise,' On contacts' by Apollonius.
These lemmas are all jfretty obvious except two, which are
important, one belonging to Book I of the treatise, and the other
to Book II. The two lemmas in question have already been set
out^i propos of the treatise of Apollonius (see pp. 182-5, above).
As, however, there are several cases of the first (Props. 105,
107, 108, 109), one case (Prop. 108, pp. 836-8), different from
that before given, may be put down here: Given a circle and
two points D, E within it, to draw straight lines through B, E
to a point A on the circumference in such a way that, if they
meet the circle again in B, C, BO shall be parallel to BE.
We proceed by analysis. Suppose the problem solved and
BA, EA drawn (' inflected') to A in such a way that, if AB,
AE meet the circle again in B, 0,
BC is parallel to BE.
Draw the tangent at B meeting
EB produced in F.
Then LFBB = Z AGB = lAEB;
therefore A, E, B, F are coneyclic,
and consequently
FB.BE=AB.BB.
But the rectangle AB. BB is given, since it depends only
on the position of B in relation to the circle, and the circle
is given.
Therefore the rectangle FB. BE is given.
And BE is given; therefore FB is given, and therefore F.
If follows that the tangent FB is given in position, and
therefore B is given. Therefore BBA 'is given and conse-
quently AE also.
To solve the problem, therefore, we merely take F on EB
produced such that FB. BE = the given rectangle made by
the segments of any chord through D, draw the tangent FB,
join BB and produce it to A, and lastly draw AE through to
G; BC is then parallel to BE.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
417
The other problem (Prop. 117, pp. 848-50) is, as we have
seen, equivalent to the following: Given a circle and three
points D} E, F in a straight line external to it, to inscribe in
the circle a triangle ABC such that its sides pass severally
through the three points D, Ey F. 
For the solution, see
pp. 182-4, above.
(e) The Lemmas to the Plane Loci of Apollonius (Props.
119-26, pp. 852-64) are mostly propositions in geometrical
algebra worked out by the methods of Eucl., Books II and VI.
We may mention the following:
Prop. 122 is the well-known proposition that, if D be the
middle point of the side BC in a triangle ABC,
2=2 (AD2 + DC2).
Props. 12a and 124 are two cases of the same proposition,
the enunciation being marked by an expression which is also
found in Euclid's Data. Let AB: BC be a given ratio, and
B 
C
let the rectangle CA.AD 
be given; then, if BE is a mean
proportional between DB, BC, ' the square on AE is greater
by the rectangle CA . AD than in the ratio of AB to BC to the
square on EC\ by which is meant that
A 7?
gg EC\
or 
(AE°--CA.AD):EC> =
The algebraical equivalent may be expressed thus (if AB=a,
B E )
g
BC =b, AD = c, BE=x):
If 
x = V(a-c)b, then 
(x + bf 
1'
Prop. 125 is remarkable: If C, D be two points on a straight
line AB,
AG.0B+ 3£ • CD*.
i5is,t 
£ e
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

418 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
This is equivalent to the general relation between four
points on a straight line discovered by Simson and therefore
wrongly known as Stewart's theorem:
AD2. BC+BD2. CA + CD2. AB + BC. CA .AB = 0.
(Simson discovered this theorem for the more general case
where D is a point outside the line ABG.)
An algebraical equivalent is the identity
+ (b—c) (c — a) (a~b) = 0.
Pappus's proof of the last-mentioned lemma is perhaps
worth giving.
C, D being two points on the straight line AB, take the
point F on it such that
FD:DB = AG:OB. 
(1)
Then 
FB : BD = AB: BC,
and 
(AB-FB): (BC-BD) = AB: BC,
or 
AF:CD = AB:BC,
and therefore
AF.GD: CD2 = AB.BC. 
(2)
From (1) we derive
and from (2)
We have now to prove that
AD2 + BD. DF = AC2 + AC. CB + AF. CD,
or 
AD* + BD.DF=CA.AB + AF.CD,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION, BOOK VII 
419
i.e. (if DA . AC be subtracted from each side)
that 
AD . DC + FD. DB = AC.DB + AF. CD,
i.e. (if -4JF\ (7Z) be subtracted from each side)
that 
FD.DC+FD. 
DB = AC.DB}
or 
FD.CB = AC.DB:
which is true, since, by (1) above, FD : DB = AC: CB.
(£) Lemmas io the ' Porisms' of Euclid.
The 38 Lemmas to the Porisms of Euclid form an important
collection which, of course, has been included in one form or
other in the ' restorations' of the original treatise. Chaslesl
in particular gives a classification of them, and we cannot
do better than use it in this place : '23 of the Lemmas relate
to rectilineal figures, 7 refer to the harmonic ratio of four
points, and 8 have reference to the circle.
'Of the 23 relating to rectilineal figures, 6 deal with the
quadrilateral cut by a transversal; 6 with the equality of
the anharmonic ratios of two systems of four points arising
from the intersections of four straight lines issuing from
one point with two other straight lines; 4 may be regarded as
expressing a property of the hexagon inscribed in two straight
lines; 2 give the relation between the areas of two triangles
which have two angles equal or supplementary; 4 others refer
to certain systems of straight lines; and the last is a case
of the problem of the Cutting-off of an area.9
The lemmas relating to the quadrilateral and the transversal
are 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 (Props. 127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133).
Prop. 130 is a general proposition about any transversal
whatever, and is equivalent to one of the equations by which
we express the involution of six points. If A, A' \ B, B';
C, C be the points in which the transversal meets the pairs of
1 Chasles, Les trots? Uvres de Porismes d'Euclide, Paris, 1860, pp. 74 sq.
E e 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

420 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
opposite sides and the two diagonals respectively, Pappus's
result is equivalent to
AB.B'C _ GA
TB\ BC ~~ CTA''
Props. 127, 128 are particular cases in which the transversal
is parallel to a side; in Prop. 131 the transversal passes
through the points of concourse of opposite sides, and the
result is equivalent to the fact that the two diagonals divide
into proportional parts the straight line joining the points of
concourse of opposite sides; Prop. 132 is the particular case
of Prop. 131 in which the line joining the points of concourse
of opposite sides is parallel to a diagonal; in Prop. 133 the
transversal passes through one only of the points of concourse
of opposite sides and is parallel to a diagonal, the result being
CA* = CB . CB:.
Props. 129, 136, 137, 140, 142, 145 (Lemmas 3, 10, 11, 14, 16,
19) establish the equality of the anharmonic ratios which
four straight lines issuing from a point determine on two
transversals; but both transversals are supposed to be drawn
from the same point on one of the four straight lines. Let
ABy AC, AD be cut by transversals HBCD, HEFG. It is
required to prove that
HE.FG HB.CD
HG.EF~HD.BC'
Pappus gives (Prop. 129) two methods of proof which are
practically equivalent. The following is the proof 'by com-
pound ratios'.
Draw HK parallel to AF meeting DA and AE produced
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
421
in K, L; and draw LM parallel to AD meeting GH pro-
duced in M.
_ 
HE.FG 
HE FG LH AF LH
I h AH 
* 
zzi • 
• 
zzz 
• 
— 
•
In exactly the same way, if DH produced meets LM in M'
we prove that
HB.CD _ LH
HD.BC~ HK'
__ 
„ 
HE.FG' HB.CD
Therefore 
WTEF= 
BD^f
(The proposition is proved for HBCD and any other trans-
versal not passing through H by applying our proposition
twice, as usual.)
Props. 136, 142 are the reciprocal; Prop. 137 is a particular
case in which one of the transversals is parallel to one of the
straight lines, Prop. 140 a reciprocal of Prop. 137, Prop. 145
another case of Prop. 129.
The Lemmas 12, 13, 15, 17 (Props. 138, 139, 141, 143) are
equivalent to the property of the hexagon inscribed in two
straight lines, viz. that, if the vertices of a hexagon are
situate, three and three, on two straight lines, the points of
concourse of opposite sides are in a straight line; in Props.
138, 141 the straight lines are parallel, in Props. 139, 143 not
parallel.
Lemmas 20, 21 (Props. 146, 147) prove that, when one angle
of one triangle is equal or supplementary to one angle of
another triangle, the areas of the triangles are in the ratios
of the rectangles contained by the sides containing the equal
or supplementary angles.
The seven Lemmas 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34 (Props. 148-53
and 160) are propositions relating to the segments of a straight
line on which two intermediate points are marked. Thus:
Props. 148, 150.
If (7, D be two points on AB, then
(a) if 2AB . CD = CB2
f AD2 = AC2 + DB2:
(b) if 2 AC. BD = CD2, AB2 = AD* + CB2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

422 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Props.
If
en
149, 151.
AB. BC =• BD\
(AD±DC)BD =
(AD±DC)BC =
A 
C 
B
A 
D^ 
C
AD.
DC*,
DG,
0
8
and 
(AD ± DC) BA = AD2.
Props. 152, 153.
If 
AB:BG = AD*: DC2, then AB. BC = BD2.
Prop. 160.
If AB:BC=AB
A
A
A
c
D
: BC, then,
BE.
BB.
EB.
#D:
BE:
BB
D
B
c
if^be
= EC\
= AD.
= AB.
c
D
B
the middle
DG,
BC.
8
point of 4(7,
The Lemmas about the circle include the harmonic proper-
ties of the pole and polar, whether the pole is external to the
circle (Prop. 154) or internal (Prop. 161). Prop. 155 is a
problem, Given a segment of a circle on AB as base, to inflect
straight lines AC, BC to the segment in a given ratio to one
another. -
Prop. 156 is one which Pappus has already used earlier
in the Collection, It proves that the straight lines drawn
from the extremities of a chord (BE) to any point (F) of the
circumference divide harmonically the diameter (AB) perpen-
dicular to the chord. Or, if ED, FK be parallel chords, and
EF, BK meet in G, and EK, BF in H, then
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII
423
Since AB bisects DE perpendicularly, (arc .42?) = (arcj4D)
and LEFA = lAFD, or AFbisects the angle EFD.
Since the angle AFB is right, FB bisects IHFG, the supple-
ment of /.EFD.
Therefore (Eucl. VI. 3) GB : BH = GF: FH=GA: 
AH,
and, alternately and inversely, AH:HB — AG: GB.
Prop. 157 is remarkable in that (without any mention of
a conic) it is practically identical with Apollonius's Conies
III. 45 about the foci of a central conic. Pappus's theorem
is as follows. Let AB be the diameter of a semicircle, and
GVA
from A, B let two straight lines AE, BD be drawn at right
angles to AB. 
Let any straight line DE meet the two perpen-
diculars in D, E and the semicircle in F. Further, let FG be
drawn at right angles to DE, meeting AB produced in G.
It is to be proved that
AG.GB = AE.BD
Since Fy D, G, B are concyclic, Z BDG = Z BFG.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

424 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
And, since AFB, EFG are both right angles, 
lBFG=lAFE.
But, since A, Ey G, F are coneyclic, LAFE = A AGE.
Therefore 
ABDG = /.AGE;
and the right-angled triangles DBG, GAE are similar.
Therefore 
AG:AE=BD:GB,
or 
AG.GB = AE.DB.
In Apollonius G and the corresponding point G' on BA
produced which is obtained by drawing F/G/ perpendicular to
ED (where DE meets the circle again in F') are the foci
of a central conic (in this case a hyperbola), and DE is any
tangent to the conic; the rectangle AE. BD is of course equal
to the square on half the conjugate axis.
(rj) The Lemmas to the Conies of Apollonius (pp. 918-1004)
do not call for any extended notice. There are a large number
of propositions in geometrical algebra of the usual kind,
relating to the segments of a straight line marked by a number
of points on it; propositions about lines divided into propor-
tional segments and about similar figures; two propositions
relating to the construction of a hyperbola (Props. 204, 205)
and a proposition (208) proving that two hyperbolas with the
same asymptotes do not meet one another. There are also
two propositions (221, 222) equivalent to an obvious Agone-
A . -
metrical formula. Let ABGD be a rectangle, and let any
straight line through A meet DC produced in E and BC
(produced if necessary) in F.
Then 
EA . AF = ED. DC + CB. BF.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VII 
425
For 
EA2 + A F2 = ED2 + DA2 + AB2 + BF2
Also 
EA2 + AF2= EF2 + 2EA. AF.
Therefore
2EA . AF = EA2 + 
AF2-EF2
= 2ED.DC+2CB.BF-,
.AF=ED. DC+CB . £#
This is equivalent to sec 0 cosec 0 = tan 0 + cot 0.
The algebraical equivalents of some of the results obtained
by the usual geometrical algebra may be added.
Props. 178, 179, 192-4.
Prop. 195. 4a2 = 
2{(a-x
Prop. 196.
Props. 197, 199, 198.
If 
(x + y + a) a + a2 = (a + a?)2,
or if 
(a; + 2/ + a) a + #2 = (a + y)2, L then x = y.
or if 
(a + y - a ) a + (a;-~a)2 = y2,
Props. 200, 201. If (a + b)x = b\ then ^±5? = J ± 5 and
a 
6 —a;
Prop. 207. If (a + b)b = 2a2, then a = b.
(6) The two Lemmas to the Surface-Loci of Euclid have
already been mentioned as significant. The first has the
appearance of being a general enunciation, such as Pappus
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

426 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
is fond of giving, to cover a class of propositions. The
enunciation may be translated as follows: ' If AB be a straight
line, and CB a straight line parallel to a straight line given in
position, and if the ratio AB. BB: BG2 be given, the point G
lies on a conic section. If now AB be no longer given in
position, and the points A, B are no longer given but lie
(respectively) on straight lines AE, EB given in position, the
point G raised above (the plane containing AE, EB) lies on
a surface given in position. And this was proved.' Tannery
was the first to explain this intelligibly;
and his interpretation only requires the
very slight change in the text of sub-
stituting euOeicu? for evdeia in the |)hr&se
ykvr\T(ti Se npbs Oecrei evOela TOLLS AE, EB.
It is not clear whether, when AB ceases
to be given in position, it is still given
in length. If it is given in length and A, B move on the lines
AE, EB respectively, the surface which is the locus of G is
a complicated one such as Euclid would hardly have been
in a position to investigate. 
But two possible cases are
indicated which he may have discussed, (1) that in which AB
moves always parallel to itself and varies in length accord-
ingly, (2) that in which the two lines on which A, B move are
parallel instead of meeting at a point. The loci in these two
cases would of course be a cone and a cylinder respectively.
The second Lemma is still more important, since it is the
first statement on record of the focus-directrix property of
the three conic sections. The proof, after Pappus, has been
set out above (pp. 119-21).
(i) An unallocated Lemma.
Book VII ends (pp. 1016-18) with a lemma which is not
given under any particular treatise belonging to the Treasury
of Analysis, but is simply called ' Lemma to the 'AvaXvojievos \
If ABC be a triangle right-angled at B, and AB, BG be
divided at F, G so that AF: FB = BG: OG = AB: BG, and
if AEG, CEF be joined and BE joined and produced to BT
then shall BB be perpendicular to AC.
The text is unsatisfactory, for there is a long interpolation,
containing an attempt at a proof by reductio ad absurdum',
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOKS VII, VIII 
427
but the genuine proof is indicated, although it breaks off
before it is quite complete.
Since 
AF: FB = BG: GC,
AB:FB = BC:GC9
or 
AB:BC = FB: GC.
But, by hypothesis, AB:BC = BG:GC;
therefore 
BF = BG.
From this point the proof apparently proceeded by analysis.
' Suppose it done' (yeyo^erco), i.e. suppose the proposition true,
and BED perpendicular to AC.
Then, Jby similarity of triangles, AD: DB = 
AB.BC;
therefore AF:FB=AD:DBy 
and consequently the angle
ADB is bisected by DF.
Similarly the angle BDC is bisected by DG.
Therefore each of the angles BDF, BDG is half a right
angle, and consequently the angle FDG is a right angle.
Therefore B, G} D, .Fare concyclic; and, since the angles
FDB, BDG are equal, 
FB = BG.
This is of course the result above proved.
Evidently the interpolator tried to clinch the argument by
proving that the angle BDA could not be anything but a right
angle.
Book VIII.
Book VIII of the Collection is mainly on mechanics, although
it contains, in addition, some propositions of purely geometrical
interest.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

428 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Historical preface.
It begins with an interesting preface on the claim of
theoretical mechanics, as distinct from the merely practical
or industrial, to be regarded as a mathematical subject.
Archimedes, Philon, Heron of Alexandria are referred to as
the principal exponents of the science, while Carpus of Antioch
is also mentioned as having applied geometry to l certain
(practical) arts'.
The date of Carpus is uncertain, though it is probable that
he came after Geminus; the most likely date seems to be the
first or second century A. D. Simplicius gives the authority of
Iamblichus for the statement that Carpus squared the circle
by means of a certain curve, which he simply called a curve
generated by a double motion.1 Proclus calls him ' Carpus the
writer on mechanics (o ixrjyavLKos) ', and quotes from a work of
his on Astronomy some remarks about the relation between
problems and theorems and the 'priority in order' of the
former.2 
Proclus also mentions him as having held that an
angle belongs to the category of quantity (iroaoi/), since it
represents a sort of ' distance' between the two lines forming
it, this distance being 'extended one way' (k<f> %v SiecrTcis)
though in a different sense from that in which a line represents
extension one way, so that Carpus's view appeared to be ' the
greatest possible paradox ' 3; Carpus seems in reality to have
been anticipating the modern view of an angle as representing
divergence rather than distance, and to have meant by k^> ev
in one sense (rotationally), as distinct from one way or in one
dimension (linearly).
Pappus tells us that Heron distinguished the logical, i.e.
theoretical, part of mechanics from the practical or manual
(xeLpovpyiKov), the former being made up of geometry, arith-
metic, astronomy and physics, the latter of work in metal,
architecture, carpentering and painting; the man who had
been trained from his youth up In the sciences aforesaid as well
as practised in the said arts would naturally prove the best
architect and inventor of mechanical devices, but, as it is diffi-
cult or impossible for the same person to do both the necessary
1 Simplicius on Arist. Categ, p. 192, Kalbfleiscli.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 241-3. 
a Ib., pp. 125. 25-126. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VIII 
429
mathematics and the practical work, he who has not the former
must perforce use the resources which practical experience in
his particular art or craft gives him. 
Other varieties of
mechanical work included by the ancients under the general
term mechanics were (1) the use of the mechanical powers,
or devices for moving or lifting great weights by means of
a small force, (2) the construction of engines of war for
throwing projectiles a long distance, (3) the pumping of water
from great depths, (4) the devices of 'wonder-workers'
(Oavjiacriovpyoi), some depending on pneumatics (like Heron
in the Pneumatica), some using strings, &c, to produce move-
ments like those of living things (like Heron in 'Automata and
Balancings'), some employing floating bodies (like Archimedes
in ' Floating Bodies'), others using water to measure time
(like Heron in his 'Water-clocks'), and lastly ' sphere-making',
or the construction of mechanical imitations of the movements
of the heavenly bodies with the uniform circular motion of
water as the motive power. Archimedes, says Pappus, was
held to be the one person who had understood the cause and
the reason of all these various devices, and had applied his
extraordinarily versatile genius and inventiveness to all the
purposes of daily life, and yet, although this brought him
unexampled fame the world over, so that his name was on
every one's lips, he disdained (according to Carpus) to write
any mechanical work save a tract on sphere-making, but
diligently wrote all that he could in a small compass of the
most advanced parts of geometry and of subjects connected
with arithmetic. Carpus himself, says Pappus, as well as
others applied geometry to practical arts, and with reason:
1 for geometry is in no wise injured, nay it is by nature
capable of giving substance to many arts by being associated
with them, and, so far from being injured, it may be said,
while itself advancing those arts, to be honoured and adorned
by them in return/
The object of the Book.
Pappus then describes the object of the Book, namely
to set out the propositions which the ancients established by
geometrical methods, besides certain useful theorems dis-
covered by himself, but in a shorter and clearer form and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

430 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
in better logical sequence than his predecessors had attained.
The sort of questions to be dealt with are (1) a comparison
between the force required to move a given weight along
a horizontal plane and that required to move the same weight
upwards on an inclined plane, (2) the finding of two mean
proportionals between twQ unequal straight lines, (3) given
a toothed wheel with a certain number of teeth, to find the
diameter of, and to construct, another wheel with a given num-
ber of teeth to work on the former. Each of these things, he says,
will be clearly understood in its proper place if the principles
on which the ' centrobaric doctrine' is built up are first set out.
It is noknecessary, he adds, to define what is meant by ' heavy'
and 'light' or upward and downward motion, since these
matters are discussed by Ptolemy in his Mathematical but
the notion of the centre of gravity is so fundamental in the
whole theory of mechanics that it is essential in the first
place to explain what is meant by the 'centre of gravity'
of any body.
On the centre of gravity.
Pappus then defines the centre of gravity as 'the point
within a body which is such that, if the weight be conceived
to be suspended from the point, it will remain at rest in any
position in which it is put \1 The method of determining the
point by means of the intersection, first of planes, and then of
straight lines, is next explained (chaps. 1, 2), and Pappus then
proves (Prop. 2) a proposition of some difficulty, namely that,
if D, E, F be points on the sides BG, GA, AB of a triangle ABC
such that 
BD:DG=GE:EA 
= AF:FB,
then the centre of gravity of the triangle ABC is also the
centre of gravity of the triangle DEF.
Let H, K be the middle points of BG, GA respectively;
join AH, BK. 
Join HK meeting DE in £.
Then AH, BK meet in G, the centre of gravity of the
triangle ABG} and AG = 2 GH, BG = 2 GK, so that
= AG: GH.
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1030. 11-13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VIII
431
Now, by hypothesis,
CE:EA = BD:DO,
whence 
CA : AE = BC: CD,
and, if we halve the antecedents,
AK:AE=HC:CD;
therefore 
AK : EK = HC: HD or BH: HD,
whence, componendo, CE: EK = £i) : DH. 
(1)
But 
4JF: FB = BD:DC= (BD : Z>#). (DH: DC)
= (CE:EK).(DH:DC). 
(2)
Now, ELD being a transversal cutting the sides of the
triangle KHC, we have
HL:KL = (CE.EK). (DH:DC). 
(3)
[This is 'Menelaus's theorem'; Pappus does not, however,
quote it, but proves the relation ad hoc in an added lemma by
drawing CM parallel to DE to meet HK produced in M. The
proof is easy, for HL:LK = (HL : LM). (LM: LK)
= 
(HD:DC).(CE:EK).]
It follows from (2) and (3) that
AF:FB = HL:LK,
and, since AB is parallel to HK, and AH, BK are straight
lines meeting in Q, FGL is a straight line.
[This is proved in another easy lemma by reductio ad
absurdum.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

432 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
We have next to prove that EL = LD.
Now [again by 'Menelaus's theorem', proved ad hoc by
drawing GN parallel to HK to meet ED produced in N]
EL:LD = (EK: KG). (CH: HD). 
(4)
But, by (1) above, CE:EK = BD: DH;
therefore 
GK: KE = BH: HD = GH: HD,
so that (EK:KC).(GH:HD) 
= 1, and therefore, from (4),
EL = LD.
It remains to prove that FG = 2 GL, which is obvious by
parallels, since 
FG: GL = AG:GH = 2 :1.
Two more propositions follow with reference to the centre
of gravity. The first is, Given a rectangle with AB, BC as
adjacent sides, to draw from G a straight line meeting the side
opposite BC in a point D such that, if the trapezium ADCB is
hung from the point D, it will rest with AD, BG horizontal.
A
F
Q
0
E 
\
"1
B 
M
N
In other words, the centre of gravity must be in DL drawn
perpendicular to BG. 
Pappus proves by analysis that
CL2= 3BL2, so that the problem is reduced to that of
dividing BC into parts BL, LC such that this relation holds.
The latter problem is solved (Prop. 6) by taking a point,
say X, in CB such that GX = 3X2?, describing a semicircle on
BG as diameter and drawing XY at right angles to BG to
meet the semicircle in F, so that X F 3 = T\JB(72, and then
dividing GB at L so that
CL :LB = CX : X F ( = f : J-/S = N/3 :1).
The second proposition is this (Prop. 7). Given two straight
lines AB, AC, and B a fixed point on AB, if CD be drawn
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK VIII 
433
with its extremities on AC, AB and so that AC: BD is a given
ratio, then the centre of gravity of the triangle ADC will lie
on a straight line.
Take E, the middle point of AC, and jPa point on BE such
that DF=2 FE. Also let if be a point on BA such that
BH = 2HA. 
Draw FG parallel to AC.
Then AG = §AD, 
and 
jLff=J4JB;
therefore HG = § 5D.
Also JFG = § J 1 # = J j«7. Therefore,
since the ratio AC.BD 
is given, the
ratio 6rfiT: ©.F is given.
And the angle FGH (= A) is given;
therefore the triangle FGH is given in
species, and consequently the angle GHF
is given. 
And if is a given point.
Therefore HF is a given straight line, and it contains the
centre of gravity of the triangle ADC.
The inclined plane.
Prop. 8 is on the construction of a plane at a given inclina-
tion to another plane parallel to the horizon, and with this
Pappus leaves theory and proceeds to the practical part.
Prop. 9 (p. 1054. 4 sq.) investigates the problem 'Given
a weight which can be drawn along a plane parallel to the
horizon by a given force, and a plane inclined to the horizon
at a given angle, to find the force required to draw the weight
upwards on the inclined plane'. This seems to be the first
or only attempt in ancient times to investigate motion on
an inclined plane, and as such it is curious, though of no
value.
Let A be the weight which can be moved by a force C along
a horizontal plane. Conceive a sphere with weight equal to A
placed in contact at L with the given inclined plane; the circle
OGL represents a section of the sphere by a vertical plane
passing through E its centre and LK the line of greatest slope
drawn through the point L. Draw EGH horizontal and there-
fore parallel to MN in the plane of section, and draw LF
perpendicular to EH. 
Pappus seems to regard the plane
as rough, since he proceeds to make a system in equilibrium
152S.2 
F f
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

434 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
about FL as if L were the fulcrum of a lever. Now the
weight A acts vertically downwards along a straight line
through E. To balance it, Pappus supposes a weight B
attached with its centre of gravity at G.
Then 
A:B=GF:EF
= (EL-EF):EF
[= (1 -sin 6): sin 0,
where /.KMN = ff\\
and,since Z.KM2Tis given, the ratioEF: EL,
and therefore the ratio (EL - EF): EF, is
M 
N given; thus B is found.
Now, says Pappus, if D is the force which will move B
along a horizontal plane, as G is the force which will move
A along a horizontal plane, the sum of G and D will be- the
force required to move the sphere upwards on the inclined
plane. He takes the particular case where 6 = 60°. Then
sin 0 is approximately £§§ (he evidently uses \ . ff for \ Vs),
and 
A: B= 16:104.
Suppose, for example, that A = 200 talents; then B is 1300
talents. Suppose further that C is 40 man-power; then, since
D:G= B:A, D = 260 man-power; and it will take D + G, or
300 man-power, to move the weight up the plane!
Prop. 10 gives, from Heron's Barulcus, the machine con-
sisting of a pulley, interacting toothed wheels, and a spiral
screw working on the last wheel and turned by a handle;
Pappus merely alters the proportions of the weight to the
force, and of the diameter of the wheels. At the end of
the chapter (pp. 1070-2) he repeats his construction ior the
finding of two mean proportionals.
Construction of a conic through five points.
Chaps. 13-17 are more interesting, for they contain the
solution of the problem of constructing a conic through five
given points. The problem arises in this way. Suppose we
are given a broken piece of the surface of a cylindrical column
such that no portion of the circumference of either of its base
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VIII 
435
is left intact, and let it be required to find the diameter of
a circular section of the cylinder. We take any two points
A, B on the surface of the fragment and by means of these we
find five points on the surface all lying in one plane section*
in general oblique. This is done by taking five different radii
and drawing pairs of circles with i , 5 as centres and with
each of the five radii successively. These pairs of circles with
equal radii, intersecting at points on the surface, determine
five points on the plane bisecting AB at right angles. The five
points- are then represented on any pl^ine by triangulation.
Suppose the points are A, B, C, D, E and are such jfchat
no two of the lines connecting the different pairs are parallel.
This case can be reduced to the construction of a conic through
the five points A, B, D, E, F where EF is parallel to AB.
This is shown in a subsequent lemma (chap. 16).
For, if EF be drawn through E parallel to AB, and if CD
meet AB in 0 and EF in 0', we have, by the well-known
proposition about intersecting chords,
C0.0D:A0.0B 
= CO'. O'D:E0'.O'F,
whence O'F is known, and F is determined.
We have then (Prop. 13) to construct a conic through A, B}
2), E, F} where EF is parallel to AB.
Bisect AB, EF at F, W; then VW produced both ways
is a diameter. Draw DR, the chord through D parallel
F f 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

436 
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
to this diameter. Then R is determined by means of the
relation
RG.GD:BG.GA=RH.HD:FH.HE 
(1)
in this way.
Join DB, RA, meeting EF in K, L respectively.
Then, by similar triangles,
RG.GD:BG.GA 
= 
(RH:HL).(DH:HK)
= 
RH.HD:KH.HL.
Therefore, by (1), FH. HE = KH. HL,
whence HL is determined, and therefore L. The intersection
of AL, DH determines R,
Next, in order to find the extremities P, P' of the diameter
through F, W, we draw ED, RF meeting PP' in M, JV respec-
tively.
Then, as before,
FW. WE:P'W. WP = FH.HE.RH. 
HD, by the ellipse,
= FW.WEiFW.WM, by similar triangles.
Therefore 
P' W. WP = NW. WM;
and similarly we can find the value of P'V. VP.
Now, says Pappus, since P'W. WP and P'V.VP are given
areas and the points F, W are given, P, P/ are given. His
determination of P, P/ amounts (Prop. 14 following) to an
elimination of one of the points and the finding of the other
by means of an equation of the second degree.
Take two points Q, Q' on the diameter such that
P'V.VP=WV.VQ, 
(a)
P'W.WP = VW.WQ'; 
(13)
Q, Q' are thus known, while P, P' remain to be found.
By (a) 
P'V: VW= QV: VP,
whence 
P'W:VW=PQ: 
PV.
Therefore, by means of (/3),
PQ:PV=Q/W:WP)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. BOOK VIII 
437
so that 
PQ'-QV=Q'W:PQ\
or 
PQ.PW=QV.Q'W.
Thus P can be found, and similarly P\
The conjugate diameter is found by virtue of the relation
(conjugate diam.)2: PP'2 = p \ PP\
where p is the latus rectum to PP' determined by the property
of the curve 
P F = 
AV>..PV.VI».
Problem, Given two conjugate diameters of an ellipse,
to find the axes.
Lastly, Pappus shows (Prop. 14, chap. 17) how, when we are
given two conjugate diameters, we can find the axes. The
construction is as follows. Let AB, CD be conjugate diameters
(CD being the greater), E the centre.
Produce EA to H so that
EA.AH=DE\
Through A draw FG parallel to CD. Bisect EH in K> and
draw KL at right angles to EH meeting FG in L.
With L as centre, and LE as radius, describe a circle cutting
GF in G,F.
Join EF, EG, and from A draw AM, AN parallel to EF} EG
respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

438
PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Take points P, R on EG, EF such that
EP2 = OE.EM, and EW = FE.EN.
Then EP is half the major axis; and ER half the minor axis.
Pappus omits the proof.
Problem of seven hexagons in a circle.
Prop. 19 (chap. 23) is a curious problem. To inscribe seven
equal regular hexagons in a circle in such a way that one
is about the centre of the circle, while six others stand on its
sides and have the opposite sides in each case placed as chords
in the circle.
Suppose GHKLNM to be the hexagon so described on HK,
a side of the inner hexagon; OKL will then be a straight line.
Produce OL to meet the circle in P.
Then OK = KL = LN 
Therefore, in the triangle OLN,
OL = 2LJSr, while the included angle OLN (= 120°) is also
given. Therefore the triangle is given in species; therefore
the ratio ON: NL is given, and, since ON is given, the side NL
of each of the hexagons is given.
Pappus gives the auxiliary construction thus. Let AF be
taken equal to the radius OP. Let AC — ^AF, and on i O as
base describe a segment of a circle containing an angle of 60°.
Take CE equal to f AC, and draw EB to touch the circle at B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTION. 
BOOK VIII 
439
Then he proves that, if we join AB, AB is equal to the length
of the side of the hexagon required.
Produce BC to D so that BD = BA, and join DA. 
ABD
is then equilateral.
Since EB is a tangent to the segment, AE.EC = EB2 or
AE:EB = EB: EC, and the triangles EAB, EEC are similar.
Therefore 
BA2: BC2 = AE?: EB2 = 
AE:EC=9:4',
and 
5(7 = %BA = §BD, so that 5(7 = 2 CD.
But CF=2CA\ 
therefore AC:CF= DC:CB, and AD, BF
are parallel.
Therefore BF: AD = BC: CD = 2 :1, so that
= 2 A D = ; 2 J L B .
Also IFBC = Z.BDA = 60°, so that Z ^ J B F = 120°, and
the triangle J.5i^is therefore equal and similar to the required
triangle NLO.
Construction of toothed wheels and indented screivs.
The rest of the Book is devoted to the construction (1) of
toothed wheels with a given number of teeth equal to those of
a given wheel, (2) of a cylindrical helix, the cochlias, indented
so as to work on a toothed wheel. The text is evidently
defective, and at the end an interpolator has inserted extracts
about the mechanical powers from Heron's Mechanics.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

