John Cantwell · Takabumi Hayashi    
Editors 
Paradigm Shift 
in Technologies 
and Innovation 
Systems

Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems

John Cantwell
• Takabumi Hayashi
Editors
Paradigm Shift
in Technologies
and Innovation Systems
123

Editors
John Cantwell
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ, USA
Takabumi Hayashi
Rikkyo University
Tokyo, Japan
ISBN 978-981-32-9349-6
ISBN 978-981-32-9350-2
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
Singapore

Preface
Innovation is essential to maintain market competitiveness and sustainable growth,
as well as to drive socioeconomic development. Accordingly, at all times, larger
companies have been committed to research and development (R&D) investment,
securing outstanding R&D personnel, and building an effective R&D management
system.
However, there is no universally desirable R&D strategy that a ﬁrm should
pursue. For example, the nature of the qualities required for R&D talent appropriate
to drive innovation will change over time and will vary across industries. The
importance of cooperative relationships with other companies in R&D also chan-
ges, and the purpose of cooperation also varies. A critical reason is that technology
continues to evolve and the technological structure required by ﬁrms and industries
changes. As the set of technologies at the core of the technological system changes,
not only the size of the R&D project required and the composition of researchers
will change, but so too the combination of proprietary development and technical
cooperation with other institutions. In other words, the paradigm of innovation in a
systemic sense continues to evolve. The sustained growth of a ﬁrm’s market
competitiveness depends upon its capacity to reﬂect, respond and adapt to this
evolving paradigm. The most common reason for the decline of an excellent
company in the past has been the failure to adapt to a shift in the prevailing
paradigm. Understanding the changing character of the technological paradigm is,
therefore, an important research theme in management and economics. The purpose
of this book is to elucidate various unexplored aspects of a technological paradigm,
and of paradigm change over time.
As is well known, information technology (IT) has been at the core of techno-
logical architecture since the late-twentieth century. IT has streamlined factories,
ofﬁce labor, and social infrastructure not only in the electrical and electronics
industries, but in all industries, and it has spurred numerous product innovations to
create a variety of innovative new products, thereby creating a new kind of con-
sumer society. It appears that Japanese companies were initially successful in
adapting successfully to the IT-centered innovation paradigm and strengthening
their market competitiveness.
v

However, the technological architecture has evolved further, now becoming
centered on digital technology, and the paradigm of innovation has changed
accordingly. As symbolized by the concept of a knowledge-based economy at the
end of the twentieth century, innovations in the massive and highly sophisticated
use and processing of data and knowledge have continuously emerged. Within IT,
software technologies such as computer programming, computer system design,
and artiﬁcial intelligence have become the core of the technology system rather than
hardware. The foundations for the primacy of these software technologies include
the explosive evolution of the internet, the digitization of data, and the dramatic
improvement in computer information processing capabilities.
This new technological architecture is in the process of further transforming the
paradigm of innovation. For example, we have witnessed the emergence of an open
modular industrial system in place of a closed integral system as in the past, which
had taken the form of a vertically integrated business model in which all tech-
nologies were developed and produced internally. The current shift toward an open
modular business model is based on the premise of a global division of labor, and
therefore, a platform-type business model that acquires global standards through an
increasingly open international division of labor, and this has been gradually
undermining strategies of concealing and monopolizing technologies in speciﬁc
ﬁrms or locations. Software development and the explosive spread of the internet,
which do not require large-scale equipment and funds, have enabled some areas of
knowledge to be disseminated throughout the world including in developing
countries, as well as facilitating the sharing and integration of excellent knowledge
from around the world. As a result, the globalization of R&D systems, which can
take advantage of geographically diversiﬁed talented human resources, has become
an indispensable R&D strategy. Furthermore, since basic research has become more
important for the development of these advanced technologies, a strengthening
of the collaboration between private companies, universities, and other research
institutions has become an important strategic issue.
Firms that failed to adapt successfully to this new paradigm have lost their
competitive advantage and have stagnated, whereas those that have succeeded in
adapting have gained a competitive advantage.
What kinds of strategic adaptation will enterprises and industries need to adapt to
the new paradigm in the future? From this viewpoint, the book will analyze the state
of internationalization of corporate R&D, the new development of global stan-
dardization strategies, and the role played by large cities, where research institutes
are concentrated, in the exchange of technical knowledge, the development of
human resources for knowledge, and methods for formulating research and
development strategies.
Accordingly, the book consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part, which consists of the
following ﬁve chapters, mainly discusses the concept of a techno-paradigm from
the perspective of its historical and macroeconomic sides. Then, in the second part,
paradigm shifts are examined from the perspective of speciﬁc industrial sectors and
companies.
vi
Preface

Here we would like to highlight some of the key themes to emerge from each
chapter.
Chapter 1 of the ﬁrst part, entitled “The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the
History of Social Evolution” by John Cantwell, begins by deﬁning and explaining
the meaning of a technological paradigm, and of paradigm shift. The chapter places
the idea of paradigm change in a philosophical context, arguing that a paradigm
shift can be seen as representing a Hegelian evolutionary process in a social or
cultural setting. The development of a techno-socio-economic paradigm at a
society-wide level is a process of continual co-evolution between three sets of
factors: knowledge, institutions, and technology in production.
In Chap. 2, “Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections in
Urban Innovation Systems” by Salma Zaman, it is argued that innovation today
cannot be realized by only one company or even by one location in isolation, and
often there is a need for cross-city and cross-ﬁrm knowledge exchange. Therefore,
taking the world’s largest cities for innovation leading to patenting, this study
examines between which cities knowledge ﬂows occur more intensively. For this
purpose, by analyzing the pattern of connections between cities from a mapping
of the locations of the inventors of pairs of citing and cited patents, based on the
data of the United States Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce, this chapter elucidates the
city-based knowledge network that shows the geography of knowledge exchange
relationships. The chapter discusses the effect of paradigm shift on this subnational
geography of knowledge sourcing in innovation.
Chapter 3, “World-Wide Dispersion of Research and Development (R&D)
Capabilities” by Takabumi Hayashi and Atsuho Nakayama, examines to what
extent R&D capabilities have been geographically disseminated and dispersed
worldwide over the past 40–50 years, analyzing scientiﬁc papers and US patents as
R&D outputs. The analysis shows that the number of different nationalities of
author afﬁliations on papers and the range of locations of the ﬁrst-named inventors
of U.S. patents have increased and diversiﬁed.
Chapter 4, “International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm: A
Strategy for Royalty-Free Intellectual Property” by Yasuro Uchida, starts from the
point that in the past, the international standardization of intellectual property
(IP) was an important strategy. One of the roles of IP has been to generate a source
of revenues from royalties, but what is now increasing in IT-related business ﬁelds
is actually royalty-free exchange. This means that we have witnessed a paradigm
shift in IP strategy in the IT-related ﬁelds. This chapter examines in detail why such
royalty-free cases are increasing, and the background to this emergent phenomenon.
Chapter 5, “New Roles for Japanese Companies at the Knowledge-Based
Economy” by Fumio Komoda, examines how the technology paradigm has shifted
from being hardware-oriented to becoming software-oriented in accordance with
trends in the progress and adaptation of IT. The author argues here that one of the
reasons for the downturn of Japanese companies is that they had not been suc-
cessful in adapting themselves to the transition from hardware to software tech-
nologies, remaining overly committed to their hardware heritage.
Preface
vii

In Chap. 6, moving into the second part of the book, “Paradigm Shifts in the
TFT-LCD Industry and Japan’s Competitive Position in East Asia”, by Kazuhiro
Asakawa, identiﬁes paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry that have directly or
indirectly led to a change in Japan’s competitive position. The chapter shows that
the declining competitiveness of a country and a ﬁrm cannot be fully understood
without closely relating it to the shifts in the paradigm of the industry. In addition,
this chapter shows the mutual alignment between paradigm shifts in the industry,
the changing competitive positions of a country and a ﬁrm, as well as the changing
locus of innovation, in terms of the distribution of efforts between domestic versus
international or in-house versus collaborative activities.
In Chap. 7, “Business-University Collaboration in a Developing Country in the
Industry 4.0 Era—The Case of Hungary” by Annamaria Inzelt, discusses how in
recent years the majority of Hungarian business R&D expenditure has come from
companies wholly, or majority-owned by foreign interests. This high proportion
indicates the substantial role of foreign companies in the Hungarian research agenda
and in business-university collaboration. This chapter focuses on how foreign
companies are shaping business-university collaboration in research and experi-
mental development and touches upon the role of government as facilitator.
Chapter 8, “Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies” by
Fumio Komoda, Yoshihiro Muragaki and Ken Masamune, examines how under a
new technology paradigm, identifying market needs and ﬁnding appropriate tech-
nical ideas become much more unpredictable. In order to solve this problem, using
pinpoint focus type text mining may successfully provide useful solution methods
for companies. To demonstrate this, the authors use the illustration of a neurosur-
gical robot and discuss how well-founded ideas for the development of a surgical
robot can successfully be discovered.
Chapter 9, “Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry” by
Sarah Edris, argues that with the advancement of molecular biology as a science,
we see a paradigm shift in the nature of R&D in the development of new drugs from
around the 1990s. As a result, many new forms of cooperation in R&D among
private companies, universities, and public research institutions have now become
unavoidable.
Chapter 10, “Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives on
Corporate Socialization Mechanisms and Human Resource Management” by
Tamiko Kasahara, explores the role played by corporate socialization mechanisms
(CSMs) and human resource management (HRM) practices in knowledge sharing
and creation in multinational corporations. Drawing on a longitudinal case study of
Cambridge Technology Partners (CTP), the ﬁndings of this study show that CSMs
were incorporated into HRM practices. Speciﬁcally, training and development
practices played a role in transferring knowledge from the headquarters to a focal
subsidiary at the corporate level, and from senior to junior consultants at the
individual level. At present, CSMs have laid the foundation for further knowledge
creation for CTP.
viii
Preface

Finally, Chap. 11, “Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities: How
Far Have the Firms’ R&D Members of US and Japanese Companies Been
Diversiﬁed?”, by Takabumi Hayashi, examines how the role played by foreign
researchers and engineers engaged in R&D activities in the US and in the overseas
R&D activities of US multinational corporations are no longer negligible. The
chapter also examines the extent to which the internationalization of R&D by US
companies would be affected if the outcomes of their activities in the US were
included in the internationalization of R&D. Finally, analyzing the case of Canon
Inc., the most active Japanese-based company in patenting, it is shown how much
the internationalization of R&D activities differs between IBM and Canon.
The further evolution of IT, and of international knowledge creation and sharing
will doubtless continue to lead to further gradual changes in the innovation para-
digm. The various themes presented in this book help us to better understand at
least some aspects of this evolution. We encourage further research on these topics
in the future, and hope to contribute to such efforts ourselves.
Finally, in editing the book, we would like to express our gratitude to the
following editing staff members of Springer publishing: Ms. Swetha Divakar, Mr.
Yutaka Hirachi, and Ms. Shinko Mimura, for their valuable comments and kind
cooperation.
Newark, USA
John Cantwell
Tokyo, Japan
Takabumi Hayashi
Preface
ix

Contents
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History of Social
Evolution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
John Cantwell
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections
in Urban Innovation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Salma Zaman
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research and Development (R&D)
Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Takabumi Hayashi and Atsuho Nakayama
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm:
A Strategy for Royalty-Free Intellectual Property . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Yasuro Uchida
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies at the Knowledge-Based
Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Fumio Komoda
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry and Japan’s
Competitive Position in East Asia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
Kazuhiro Asakawa
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing Country
in the Industry 4.0 Era—The Case of Hungary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Annamaria Inzelt
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies . . . . . .
197
Fumio Komoda, Yoshihiro Muragaki and Ken Masamune
xi

9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical
Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
239
Sarah Edris
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives
on Corporate Socialization Mechanisms and Human Resource
Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
265
Tamiko Kasahara
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities:
How Far Have the Firms’ R&D Members of US and Japanese
Companies Been Diversiﬁed? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
295
Takabumi Hayashi
xii
Contents

Editors and Contributors
About the Editors
John Cantwell (Co-editor, Chap. 1) (Ph.D., Reading) is Distinguished Professor
of International Business at Rutgers University (New Jersey, USA) since 2002. He
was previously Professor of International Economics at the University of Reading
in the UK. His early work helped to launch a new literature on multinational
companies and international networks for technology creation, beyond merely
international technology transfer. Professor Cantwell’s total citation count on
Google Scholar is well over 15,000. His published research spans the ﬁelds of
International Business and Management, Economics, Economic History and
Philosophy, Economic Geography, and Innovation Studies. He served as the
Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of International Business Studies (JIBS) from 2011–16.
He was the elected Dean of the European International Business Academy (EIBA)
Fellows from 2015–18. He is also an elected Fellow of the Academy of International
Business (AIB) since 2005.
Takabumi Hayashi (Co-editor, Chap. 9 and Chap. 10) (Ph.D. in Economics,
Rikkyo University) is Professor Emeritus of Rikkyo University, Tokyo. He suc-
cessively ﬁlled the position of Senior Lecturer at Fukuoka University, Associate
Professor, and Professor of International Business at Rikkyo University, and
Professor at Kokushikan University, Tokyo. His recent research areas are innova-
tion systems and R&D management, focusing on knowledge creation and diversity
management. His works have been widely published in books and journals. His
book “Multinational Enterprises and Intellectual Property Rights” (in Japanese;
Moriyama Shoten, Tokyo, 1989.)” is widely cited, and “Characteristics of Markets
in Emerging Countries and New BOP Strategies” (in Japanese; Bunshindo, Tokyo,
xiii

2016) received the award from Japan Scholarly Association of Asian Management
(JSAAM) in 2018. He has been sitting on the editorial board of several academic
journals.
Contributors
Kazuhiro
Asakawa Graduate
School
of
Business
Administration,
Keio
University, Yokohama, Japan
John Cantwell Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
Sarah Edris Rutgers Business School, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
Takabumi Hayashi Rikkyo University, Tokyo, Japan;
Tokyo Fuji University, Tokyo, Japan
Annamaria Inzelt IKU Innovation Research Centre, Financial Research Co.,
Budapest, Hungary
Tamiko Kasahara School of Information and Management, University of
Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan
Fumio Komoda Honorary Professor, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan
Ken Masamune Institute of Advanced Bio-Medical Engineering and Science,
Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan
Yoshihiro
Muragaki Institute
of
Advanced
Bio-Medical
Engineering
and
Science, Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan
Atsuho Nakayama Marketing Sience, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo,
Japan
Yasuro Uchida Graduate School of Business, University of Hyogo, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan
Salma Zaman Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), Lahore,
Pakistan
xiv
Editors and Contributors

Chapter 1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change
in the History of Social Evolution
John Cantwell
Abstract A technological paradigm identiﬁes the coherent features consistently
present in the evolution of an innovation system over time. These shared charac-
teristics refer to a widespread cluster of innovations during a given era that rely on a
common set of scientiﬁc principles and on similar organizational methods. The idea
of an overarching paradigm that depicts commonalities in innovation efforts may be
applied at the level of an industry, a technical ﬁeld, or in society as a whole, as in
the case of a techno-socio-economic paradigm. Occasional paradigm shifts entail
some change in the framework for innovation, while preserving certain features of
the old ways in a new synthesis. Thus, paradigm shift takes the form of an Hegelian
evolutionary or dialectical process. The evolution of an innovation system as a
whole derives from the interaction or co-evolution of its central elements: knowl-
edge, institutions, and technology in production. While conventional science iso-
lates causal associations between speciﬁc parts of a system, Hegelian conceptual
reasoning addresses the combined and interconnected movement of a complex
relational system with multiple interdependencies. In the light of this contention,
I argue that we should move away from age-old debates over whether social
evolution or development is driven primarily by knowledge, by institutions or by
the forces of production. Our attention should now turn instead to how these parts
move together in an evolving system, and how their mutual goodness of ﬁt adjusts
during phases of paradigm shift and realignment.
Keywords Technological paradigm  Techno-socio-economic paradigm 
Paradigm shift  Hegelian approach  Social evolution  Technological evolution
J. Cantwell (&)
Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
e-mail: cantwell@business.rutgers.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_1
1

1.1
The Meaning of a Technological Paradigm,
and of Paradigm Shift
Based on the original contribution of Perez (1983), Christopher Freeman and
various of his co-authors and associates at the Science Policy Research Unit
(SPRU) in Sussex developed the concept of a techno-socio-economic paradigm
(Freeman 1987; Freeman and Perez 1988; von Tunzelmann 1995, 2003; Freeman
and Louça 2001; Perez 2002, 2009). While one critical element of the emergence of
a new techno-socio-economic paradigm is some radical breakthrough ‘macroin-
vention’ that forms the basis for a newly pervasive strand of general purpose
technology (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995; Lipsey Carlaw and Bekar 2006)—
such as machinery, electrical equipment or information technology in each of the
three industrial revolutions respectively—in the SPRU tradition a paradigm refers
to considerations that range beyond the immediate characteristics of technological
innovation itself to the wider social and economic context in which a given tech-
nological trajectory is embedded. In this tradition a technological paradigm can be
deﬁned as a system of scientiﬁc and productive activity based on a widespread
cluster of innovations that rely on a common set of scientiﬁc principles and on
similar organizational methods (as suggested by Dosi 1984). Thus, a prevailing
paradigm regulates the cognitive frames shared by technological practitioners in
knowledge-based communities, establishes the heuristics of search for solutions to
technological problems, and encompasses normative considerations such as the
criteria for assessing potential solutions, and goals for the improvement of practice
(Dosi and Nelson 2010). In the sense of a paradigm as a society-wide
techno-socio-economic paradigm, each paradigmatic system characterizes an
epoch, of which there have been three since the ﬁrst industrial revolution: the
mechanical age, the science-based mass production age, and the information age.
The concept of a technological paradigm is bound up with a certain set of social
institutions, and with selected organizational forms or methods in the economic
domain of production, distribution and exchange. It is a concept that can be applied
at various levels of analysis. In particular, the notion of a technological paradigm
may also be applied in a microtechnological sense such as the semiconductor
paradigm (Dosi 1982), or in the sense of a technological regime that characterizes
the nature of innovation among the ﬁrms of a given industry (Nelson and Winter
1977) such as the pharmaceutical industry (which is the sense of a paradigm used
by Edris 2019). The broader sense of a techno-socio-economic paradigm as used by
Freeman, Perez or von Tunzelmann constitutes a constellation of technological
paradigms in these narrower senses of the term (Dosi and Nelson 2010), and in this
chapter when speaking of a paradigm I will refer primarily to the more macro or
integrative concept of a techno-socio-economic paradigm. This conceptualization
helps us to explain how a new paradigm emerges once an earlier one has run out of
steam, and so innovation becomes increasingly constrained, difﬁcult and costly
under the old paradigm. However, it also helps to account for an often lengthy
gestation period of slower growth and impaired economic development in the
2
J. Cantwell

transition between paradigms, since social institutions must be adapted to the new
requirements, and this creates problems and resistance from those who believe their
interests to be threatened by the change. Another key implication of the gradual
adaptation of social institutions during phases of paradigm change, allied to the
cumulative nature of technological knowledge which always builds upon and
recombines some elements of prior knowledge (Pavitt 1987; Cantwell 1989; Arthur
2007), is that each new paradigm partially incorporates and synthesizes earlier
paradigms in the process of reconstituting a new social formation. Thus, for
instance, in the realm of technology we move from the centrality of the mechanical
to the electro-mechanical, and then to the electronic, as we move from one age to
another. In other words, shifting from one paradigm to another is an evolutionary
process, not a revolutionary overthrow of the paradigms that preceded it.
Another frequently used and somewhat related construct in the innovation
studies literature is the concept of a system of innovation. This has been variously
used to refer to a national system of innovation (Nelson 1993; Freeman 1995), a
regional system of innovation (Asheim and Gertler 2005), or a sectoral system of
innovation (Malerba 2004). This conceptualization might be extended to include
the emergence of a global system of innovation in the information age of ‘intel-
lectual capitalism’ (Granstrand 2018). Just as with the idea of a paradigm, an
innovation system generally supposes a framework of interconnectedness across
multiple actors, a given institutional context, and a prevalence of certain kinds of
business organization and relationships between organizations engaged in pro-
ductive activities. However, the difference with paradigm shift is that an innovation
system is a comparative construct intended to analyze variation across some
characteristic forms of innovation arranged in a typology, whether across countries,
regions or industries, or for the more (versus less) globally connected forms of
activities. It is designed to answer the question ‘what is distinctive about the
structure of innovation in this country, region or industry, or kind of activity,
compared to others?’. In this respect e.g. the national systems of innovation liter-
ature bears some relationship to the varieties of capitalism literature, or that on
national business systems, and so on.
In contrast, the notion of paradigm shift is intended to focus attention on an
evolutionary process over time. In particular, a paradigm shift refers to the occa-
sionally punctuated character of evolutionary change. The counterpart of this social
process in evolutionary biology is the normal stability of a species once it has been
established (corresponding to the conduct of normal science within some estab-
lished settled framework in Kuhn’s (1962) terminology of the workings of scientiﬁc
communities), but with occasional processes of speciation (akin to the occasional
scientiﬁc revolutions that episodically transform the nature of science according to
Kuhn 1962). Once a new species emerges it shares many of the characteristics of
the species from which it has descended, and yet it also has some new distinctive
features that ensure that there is a structural shift in the way in which it interacts
with its environment, thereby implying a shift in its path of evolutionary devel-
opment. Likewise, occasional scientiﬁc revolutions lay the foundation for a new
theoretical and methodological framework for science, setting it on some new
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
3

direction that leads to new kinds of discoveries. In the context of technological
change, as one technological paradigm comes to succeed another it is not just the
leading
edge
of
technological
knowledge
and
the
focus
of
innovative
problem-solving that shifts (as would also occur in a scientiﬁc revolution), but the
associated governance structures, organizational forms and business relationships
shift as well (von Tunzelmann 2003).
The distinction between change within a paradigm, and change due to a shift in
paradigm, delineates the two major components of an evolutionary process. First is
the within-paradigm element of continuity or persistence that is a consequence of
path dependence, and which is sometimes associated with lock-in and positive
feedback effects (e.g. Arthur 1989). Within a technological paradigm, the cumu-
lative and incremental character of technological change is the basis for the con-
ceptualization of technological accumulation in which new knowledge discovery
and recombination is interconnected with knowledge use and application (Cantwell
1989). The biological equivalent of a sustained path is the role of inheritance in
reproduction, and in the progress of science it is the consistency of the received
theoretical framework and the kinds of experiments to which this regularly gives
rise in normal scientiﬁc endeavor. Second is the occasional paradigm-shifting
emergence of some radical new departure that supercedes and yet also absorbs
many aspects of the previously established path, thereby altering the character and
behavior of a system. The biological representation of such a path-shifting synthesis
of older and newer elements generating a related but novel form begins with genetic
mutation (which may be reinforced by environmental diversity or divergence) that
then leads to variety in characteristics and ultimately to speciation. In science such
novelty is brought about by occasional scientiﬁc revolutions that alter some of the
fundamental assumptions or premises on which the science in question builds, and
so set a new and usually more complex agenda for the subject.
In the case of a techno-socio-economic paradigm we are addressing evolutionary
processes at the level of a society or community, rather than in a particular stream of
technology or in a speciﬁc industry. So when the paradigm shifts the society and its
system of technology, production methods and social institutions must be expected
to interact differently in some respects. Thus, as we move from the mechanical age
to the science-based era of mass production, and then to the information age, the
nature of capitalism changes, and society and the economy function somewhat
differently than they did in the past. For this reason attempts to derive some fun-
damental ‘laws of capitalist development’ or some ‘stylized facts of economic
development’ that are universally applicable from the time of Ricardo or Marx
through to the present day are likely to be ﬂawed. One such widely discussed recent
attempt has been by Piketty (2013), in his contention that a rising inequality of
income and wealth is an inherent tendency in a capitalist economy, which of course
echoes some of the claims of Marx in the nineteeth century and calls to mind the
so-called gilded age of the late nineteenth century. To maintain a kind of continuity
between the gilded age and the trends of the early twenty-ﬁrst century Piketty
4
J. Cantwell

argues that the period between 1930 and 1975 in which inequality fell was a kind of
temporary aberration.
Yet we should recall that during that same period Kuznets (1955) had convinced
many with his ‘stylized facts’ that income inequality tends to fall with economic
development, while the capital-output ratio remains roughly constant—which
trends again ﬁtted well the context of the period in which he was writing. So rather
than referring to a lengthy period of exceptional circumstances, it seems more
plausible to simply say that the techno-socio-economic paradigms of the mechan-
ical age, the science-based mass production age, and the information age are dis-
tinct, and aggregate tendencies change as we move from one to the other. One
feature shared by the mechanical age and the information age is an increase in rents
from land and natural resources, associated with a rising price of land and hence
substantial gains by landowners in their holdings of wealth. Yet the institutional
context for this commonality varies considerably between the 19th and 21st cen-
turies: in the 19th century there remained an aristocracy, or those who aspired to
join an aristocracy, whereas in the 21st century holdings of land and natural
resources are more linked to ﬁnancial institutions.
1.2
Paradigm Shift as an Hegelian Evolutionary Process
I will argue that in philosophical terms the course of paradigm change can be
depicted as an Hegelian evolutionary or dialectical process. In an Hegelian per-
spective as humans or human societies or groups interact with our environment we
may consolidate or change our way of life, our knowledge about ourselves and
about our environment. As we reﬂect on the relationship between ourselves and our
environment we may also come to reconﬁgure and to challenge not just our prior
knowledge, but the very way in which we think about ourselves, our values or
beliefs, our actions, and our way of life. Thus, a contradiction may arise between
our old way of looking at the world and some new way of thinking about it. Since
the new way of thinking and acting is likely to also imply challenges to our existing
norms or institutions, to the prevailing social or organizational structures, and to the
interests that may be embedded within them, the contradiction is liable to give rise
to a period of conﬂict or tension between the old and the new, as well as giving rise
to increased uncertainty. Yet ultimately some form of reconciliation is generally
found between the old and the new approaches, some way of combining the two
that preserves aspects of both in some form of synthesis.
Any synthesis between the old ways and the new provides a generally more
profound and distinctive way of thinking about the world, which tends to facilitate
the scope for sustaining greater diversity or pluralism both within and between
societies or social structures such as organizations, by increasing the extent of
mutual recognition of relational interdependencies between the various elements of
a complex social system. In the Hegelian perspective an evolutionary process of
social transformation is inherently systemic or interconnected, the different parts or
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
5

particulars of a system must move together or co-evolve. Thus, it is not just our way
of thinking about the world that comes to be reshaped, but the nature of the
reasoning we give for our actions (how we interpret rationality), and our system of
practice. Much of this has been reﬂected in the re-thinking of Hegel that has been
under way in recent years among philosophers in the English language literature.
These scholars have shown how, in an Hegelian view, through mutual recognition
and acceptance of common norms or institutions we can exercise free and rational
agency in collaborative endeavors, which may lead to social transitions if crises
arise in the authority of norms (Pippin 2008); how human knowledge and ideas are
rooted in practice (Westphal 2003); and how there is always a social or relational
content in the exercise of rational intentionality (Pinkard 1994), requiring us to
move beyond methodological individualism.1
An Hegelian approach to paradigms and paradigm change is therefore grounded
in the historical evolution of technological or social practice, and is concerned with
how the parts of an innovation system interact with one another, and thereby move
the system as a whole. Since, as we have seen, a techno-socio-economic paradigm
is an interconnected or complex social system, we can think of a paradigm as an
historically speciﬁc form of interaction between knowledge, institutions, and
technology and production, and paradigm shift as the emergence of a new form of
capitalism characterized inter alia by a shift in the nature of innovation. The nature
of knowledge, beliefs or institutions, and practice or conduct of actors within a
paradigm is shaped by the system in which they live and operate (which Hegel
referred to as a shape of consciousness, or the spirit of an age as a self-conscious
way of life). Thus, a paradigm incorporates an outlook on innovation in terms of
what are regarded as being the most relevant problems that need to be addressed,
and how they can be solved, which includes some understanding about how pre-
vailing practice works, and its limits (Dosi and Nelson 2013). As an outlook, a
paradigm includes both the cognitive frames shared by practitioners that orient their
innovative or problem-solving activity (Constant 1980), and the normative con-
siderations involved in judgments about how to search for and to share knowledge,
and how to set and assess the goals of innovation. In this kind of Hegelian evo-
lutionary process there is a continual interaction and interdependence between the
subjective side of knowledge, values and beliefs, and the objective side of the use of
technologies in production and their impacts on organizations, society and the
natural world.
1I note in passing that these re-readings of Hegel have the effect of bringing our interpretation of
his work closer to that of the early Marx, whose writings were deeply Hegelian in these senses.
This calls into question the exaggerated distinction between Hegel’s ‘idealism’ and Marx’s ‘ma-
terialism’ that remains commonplace in the Marxist literature. For a critique of the view that Marx
was an ontological materialist, in the sense that our ideas are essentially just a reﬂection of the
character of ‘matter in motion’ or what Engels termed the ‘dialectics of nature’, see Kline (1988).
6
J. Cantwell

In political philosophy the focus of Hegelian scholarship has been on the his-
torical evolution of justice and freedom (e.g. Pinkard 2017). Part of that process of
evolution has been a change over time in the very meaning of these terms as
institutions have evolved. My focus here is on another feature, namely the
improvement and transformation of our knowledge base in the course of social
evolution. We may think of what Hegel called ‘absolute knowledge’ as that kernel
which is held in common among various societies or organizations (or other social
units), and which has been preserved or inherited from the past. Of course, this kind
of foundational knowledge base will not necessarily be held by every society or
organization, and some forms of knowledge may atrophy, recede or be lost or
forgotten over time. In the case of technological knowledge the relevant distinction
is between private knowledge which is held mainly by ﬁrms, and public knowledge
that is shared and held in common in the public domain in some social context or
setting (Nelson 1989). This latter public knowledge base constitutes the foundation
for any paradigm. The public aspect of technology is associated with knowledge
diffusion and enables the community as a whole to beneﬁt from technological
innovation. As indicated earlier, a paradigm is constituted by some common set of
scientiﬁc principles and organizational methods.
It is worth touching here on the role of teleology in an Hegelian perspective. It is
necessary to distinguish between two senses of teleology, one of which relates to
the present day, and the other to an imagined future hypothetical state of the world,
which carry very different meanings and should not be confused.2 With respect to
the present day, an Hegelian perspective is exclusively backward looking or his-
torical. This is the contention that we can trace out from the past how we came to
have the kinds of knowledge or ways of thinking, the institutions, and the tech-
nologies that we have today. In other words, we can ﬁnd the origins or roots of our
current techno-socio-economic paradigm, in the form of an historical evolutionary
path that led us to where we are now. It is important to appreciate that a social
evolutionary framework is not predictive, but explanatory. At any critical juncture
in the past where the path has shifted it did so in ways that were conditional at the
time they happened. A complex social system is open and creative, and not closed
or pre-determined. However, with respect to an imagined future hypothetical state
of the world an Hegelian perspective is forward looking, but considers a desirable
condition that can never be actually realized. This is what Hegel referred to as the
absolute, in which knowledge would be inﬁnite, and we would enjoy perfect
relationships between ourselves and with the world. Hegel associated this state of
perfection with God. For an evolutionary approach, the relevance of this aspira-
tional state, rather like the notion of utopia (Hodgson 1999), is that it identiﬁes our
ultimate consistent goals and purposes. While we can never attain perfect justice,
2Confusing these two is responsible for various false attributions, such as the assertion that for
Hegel the Prussian state of the 1820s was an ideal state, or Fukuyama’s claiming as Hegelian his
notion that liberal capitalism represented the ‘end of history’.
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
7

freedom, or comprehensive knowledge, we can strive towards these goals. Seeking
to continuously improve our knowledge becomes a goal of self-conscious rational
actors.
Following an Hegelian typology, knowledge tends to develop ﬁrst as an
understanding of some processes as phenomena through some form of abstraction
that isolates a regular cause and effect relationship. In the case of technological
knowledge this relates to the acquisition of know-how and then usually later
know-why, sometimes guided by science. Yet in the case of technological
knowledge even when there is some know-why, know-how cannot be easily
replicated across different contexts, whether across ﬁrms or across locations (Winter
and Szulanski 2001). To the extent that there is a richer pool of relevant shared
public knowledge, the costs of technology transfer or diffusion may be reduced, but
not eliminated. Within a paradigm these costs can be somewhat offset when the
relevant public knowledge pool lies in and around the core technologies of that
paradigm, in which area of problem-solving search there is a greater common
awareness of the properties of a wider range of distinct applications across a variety
of contexts. This feature of a paradigm also helps to perpetuate the paradigm itself,
since it encourages innovation that connects to these core ﬁelds of understanding
that mark out the paradigm, since these are likely to have a greater potential spread
of applications. In such core domain activities within a paradigm, in Hegelian terms
understanding passes over into more fundamental conceptual reason, in the sense of
a capacity to conceptually recognize and to relate (and hence to learn from) dif-
ferences in particular behaviors associated with individual concrete applications
across speciﬁc contexts.
Turning from the development of technological knowledge within paradigms to
the wider social and economic characteristics of a techno-socio-economic paradigm
that tend to remain relatively stable within a paradigm, but may be disturbed during
a paradigm shift, the relevance of a distinction between Hegelian understanding and
reason is equally germane. In understanding some social or economic relationship
through the abstraction entailed in a formal theory, or a mathematical representa-
tion, or in claiming a ﬁxed law or consistent tendency in observed data, a claim is
usually made for the generalization (or universality) of that relationship over time
and across contexts. As suggested earlier, this kind of generalization may carry
some justiﬁcation within a paradigm, by representing the stylized facts of an era—
e.g. the existence of a rising capital-output ratio in the mechanical age (as described
in Marx’s version of the law of the tendency of the rate of proﬁt to fall), or the
constancy of the capital-output ratio in the science-based mass production era that
prevailed for much of the 20th century (as described by Kuznets 1955). Using the
terminology of evolutionary economics (Nelson 2018), formal theory is relatively
better suited to an analysis of these kinds of regularities within paradigms that
provide an Hegelian understanding of some selected prominent and consistently
observed phenomena. Instead, appreciative theory relatively better allows for
complex interdependencies, and for the kinds of systemic movements or shifts
8
J. Cantwell

associated with the emergence of contradictions or tensions within a complex social
system that moves us into the Hegelian realm of conceptual reason.3 As explained
earlier, when a techno-socio-economic paradigm occasionally shifts, not only is
there a shift in the commonly observed regularities of behavior at a systemic level,
but allied to this there is a shift in our ways of thinking about the world and of
reasoning about it. From a philosophical perspective it is important to try and better
grasp the generally subtle shifts in modes of reasoning or rationality that provide a
kind of foundational underpinning to the occasional shifts in techno-socio-
economic paradigms.
1.3
The Continual Co-evolution of Knowledge,
Institutions, and Technology in Production
In any social and economic system there is a continual interaction between the
knowledge base of a society or community, its institutions—ranging from values
and beliefs through informal norms to formal laws or regulations—and its tech-
nology developed and used in production. In a capitalist society of the kind that
took root after the ﬁrst industrial revolution from the techno-socio-economic
paradigm of the mechanical age onwards, in which innovation in production
became central, all three of these elements (knowledge, institutions and technology)
have been changing and interacting with one another continuously. In the heyday of
a paradigm the three elements advance together faster and more effectively, as the
paradigm ensures a good ﬁt between them. The nature of the interaction between
the three elements follows a consistent pattern or structure which reﬂects the
essential outlook of the age, and which ensures some degree of regularity of pro-
gress within that structure, although the precise form of that progress is always
characterized by some ex ante uncertainty and unpredictability. However, once a
paradigm runs out of steam, experimentation with different kinds of practical
solutions and new ways of thinking begin to spread more widely, and as they do the
three elements tend to ﬁt less well together, creating greater frictions and conﬂicts at
a systemic level. Within a paradigm the structure of interaction between the three
elements of the system is largely consistent, but during windows of paradigm shift
the very nature of the structure of that interaction changes. The change in the way in
which knowledge, institutions and technology interact in a new paradigm is
3It may be worth noting in passing the sharp difference between the simplistic and impoverished
interpretation of reason or rationality found in contemporary Economics as a pure economic
self-interest, and the much more sophisticated accounts of rationality found in the philosophical
literature of the Enlightenment era, culminating in Kant’s critical philosophy. Hegel’s critique of
Kant moved us yet another step forward in allowing for the social evolution of reason or
rationality, in the way that I echo here, and which is precluded if we treat human rationality as
being ﬁxed or given in nature.
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
9

manifested in some differences in behaviors or tendencies in the workings of a
system as we move from one paradigm to another, as discussed earlier.
So, I am arguing, in any social system knowledge, institutions and technology
continually co-evolve. Within a paradigm the evolution of each of these three
elements is largely consistent, and so as they change they still continue to ﬁt
relatively well with one another, hence leading to mutually reinforcing positive
feedback effects on each part of the system. Instead, during periods of paradigm
shift, the three elements evolve in ways that become potentially less consistent, and
so the form of co-evolution of the three parts involves an increasing number of
negative feedback effects that may disrupt and stymie progress in the system as a
whole. Establishing a new paradigm is essentially a process of ﬁnding some new
form of re-alignment between the three elements that once more ensures a better ﬁt
between these parts in the course of their mutual co-evolution. The overall evo-
lution of a social system depends on the development of a satisfactory structure of
mutual relational interdependencies between its various parts. A structure of
interconnected social co-evolution that is satisfactory for at least a time can be
described as a paradigm, while the necessity of an occasional shift in that structure
can be represented as a paradigm shift. Once this is appreciated, then we should
focus our attention on the changing goodness of ﬁt between the parts of a social and
economic system as that system evolves over time.
Unfortunately, most of the relevant social science and economic history litera-
ture has not focused on this co-evolutionary goodness of ﬁt issue. Rather, much of
this literature has debated what is the primary direction of causality between the
parts of an economic and social system—which debate, from a co-evolutionary
perspective, is rather like trying to resolve the ‘chicken and egg’ problem. In
Hegelian terms, this debate remains trapped at the level of attempting to discern a
simple understanding of an observed pattern of behavior in a nutshell (in the
deterministic form that ‘A causes B’), rather than moving on to a more mature form
of conceptual reasoning that can better accommodate complex relational interac-
tions. It is perhaps especially sad that Hegel and Marx are today often interpreted
purely through this kind of identiﬁcation of a primary causal chain of directionality.
In the usual Marxist account, the economic structure or the forces of production are
believed to drive the superstructure of social institutions, and the ideas and beliefs
that prevail in a society are said to reﬂect the interests of the dominant class in the
existing mode of production (see e.g. Cohen 1978). Indeed, the conventional per-
spective of neoclassical economics is somewhat similar in the primacy it attributes
to the economic realm, although this is interpreted more in terms of exchange rather
than production, and it stresses in particular the role of markets in coordinating the
decisions of independent utility maximizing actors. However, within economics
there has been a gradual shift in recent years towards the alternative perspective of
institutional economics, which argues the other way round that institutions tend to
drive and to regulate the way in which an economy functions (see e.g. Acemoglu
and Robinson 2012, on the effects of extractive vs. inclusive institutions, or the
similar distinction between limited access vs. open access orders by North et al.
2009). While the ﬁrst two approaches argue for the primacy either of the economy
10
J. Cantwell

or of institutions, a third makes the case for the primacy of knowledge or ideas.
Among economic historians, Mokyr (2002) contends that the development of
knowledge and scientiﬁc breakthroughs can explain industrialization and economic
development, while McCloskey (2016) claims that it is ideas and values that have
driven economic growth.
These kinds of debates over the causal sequencing of the elements of social
evolution can never really be resolved, since each of the three camps can refer to
legitimate historical evidence that is supportive of their claims. From a
co-evolutionary perspective the arguments are akin to the story of the blind men and
the elephant: each school of thought provides a valid way of thinking about the
evolution of a social system historically, so long as one shares their starting point
for analysis and their framing of the critical issues. What is more, their accounts of a
complex reality are potentially consistent, even though none of these contributors is
generally willing to countenance the possibility of a synthesis, since they remain
trapped in a common belief that the fundamental question is one of establishing
causal primacy. Addressing that question all depends on how one sets up the
problem at hand. The antecedents of most knowledge or ideas can generally be
traced back a very long way. So if the question posed is ‘which came ﬁrst?’ the case
for knowledge or values or beliefs as the driver is at its strongest. However, when
knowledge or ideas ﬁrst arise they may be relatively little related to practice, or at
least narrowly constrained in their practical applicability. An extreme illustration
would be da Vinci’s helicopter, which was realized in practice only around
450 years later. So if instead the appropriate question is ‘what drives the devel-
opment of practice?’ the answer is the accumulation of technological knowledge
and expertise through a continual process of innovative problem-solving in and
around production (Rosenberg 1982). So this takes us back to the story of the
system of production and technology as the primary driver of social evolution. Yet
at this stage we are reminded of how Freeman and Perez (1988) showed how the
selection of viable new technologies, organizational methods and products depends
on the adaptability of institutions. So if the question becomes ‘what drives the
take-up, diffusion and survivability of lines of innovation once they have been
hatched?’ we are more likely to turn to an institutional story, such as whether
institutions are more extractive or inclusive in nature.
Once we step back in Hegelian fashion and attempt to conceptualize the
movement of a social system as a whole in history, it becomes necessary to rec-
ognize the continual relational interdependence between knowledge, institutions
and technology in production in the course of development, rather than a neat
primary causal direction of change. This is especially true if our focus of attention is
on the evolution of a holistic techno-socio-economic paradigm, as opposed to an
attempt to explain some certain speciﬁc chain of events or phenomena, or some
particular phase of history. An encompassing techno-socio-economic paradigm
evolves organically and interdependently, thereby exhibiting a kind of inner life or
vitality from within itself, rather than through a simple deterministic response to
some underlying primary exogenous mechanism or driver. The movement of the
whole entails a necessary co-evolution of the parts, such that we must consider the
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
11

complex relational interaction between each of the parts and the overall system. The
behavior of a system, whether within a paradigm or in a period of paradigm shift, is
related to the ever-changing and continuously tested degree of ﬁt or compatibility
between the elements of that system, and the extent to which the goodness of ﬁt can
be retained or improved. In an Hegelian co-evolutionary approach we must con-
sider the movement of both the whole system and the particulars within it.
Hegel once said famously that a philosopher can only present a philosophy that
reﬂects the context of his or her own time, and the spirit of the age in which he or
she lives. This follows from his backward-looking evolutionary approach to explain
the roots of the present and the selective absorption of ideas taken from the past,
and a belief that the future is unpredictable. It is also related to his even better
known saying that ‘the owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the
dusk’, meaning that the philosophical knowledge that captures the spirit of an age
can only reach full fruition once we have passed the zenith of that age. In other
words, only once a society or a way of life has reached maturity can we fully
conceptualize the course of its evolution over its entire lifetime. However, on this
point I believe that Hegel was not entirely right. As commented upon a moment ago
in a different context, ideas can sometimes arise well ahead of their greatest
applicability to practice. Indeed, some of the ideas that Hegel took from Aristotle
are arguably of this kind, and they were more relevant in his era than they had been
in ancient Greece. I would contend that despite his own opinion on the matter,
Hegel is more relevant to our age than he was to his own. This would help to
account for the shunning of Hegel’s work among English speaking philosophers
following his death for most of the 19th and 20th centuries, and yet the revival of
interest and rediscovery of his writings today.
The spirit of the Enlightenment era was perhaps given its ultimate expression in
the classical political economy of Adam Smith and the critical philosophy of Kant.
The progress in scientiﬁc thought and methods
also inherited
from
the
Enlightenment laid the foundations for modern science and social science, groun-
ded on the principle of examining deterministic cause-effect relationships by iso-
lating phenomena and separating them (controlling for) any other extraneous
inﬂuences. This has led to the dramatic growth and an ever faster expansion of
increasingly specialized bodies of knowledge. Yet although these methods continue
to be highly useful and productive, we have surely now reached the stage at which
the relevance of complex interdependencies must also be given greater attention.
With regard to the topic of this paper and this book, we need to be able to analyze
the entirety of a techno-socio-economic paradigm and its constituent elements of
knowledge, institutions and technology in production, rather than treating the parts
separately or continuing to debate which of these parts should be accorded primacy
(which is just another variant of the traditional scientiﬁc focus on causality). In
today’s techno-socio-economic paradigm in the information and digital age, not
only are knowledge, institutions and technology more interconnected than ever
before, but in our way of life we have begun to increasingly appreciate the inter-
relationship between our society, our production, and the natural world around us
and the planet on which we live. In our current paradigm in which co-evolution is
12
J. Cantwell

more pronounced than ever before, we need to be able to better conceptualize the
movement of a complex relational system. This calls for an Hegelian approach, as I
have argued here.
References
Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2012). Why nations fail: The origins of power prosperity and
poverty. New York: Crown Business.
Arthur, W. B. (1989). Competing technologies, increasing returns and lock-in by historical events.
Economic Journal, 99(1), 106–131.
Arthur, W. B. (2007). The structure of invention. Research Policy, 36(2), 274–287.
Asheim, B., & Gertler, M. S. (2005). The geography of innovation: Regional innovation systems.
In J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of innovation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bresnahan, T. F., & Trajtenberg, M. (1995). General purpose technologies: Engines of growth?
Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), 83–108.
Cantwell, J. A. (1989). Technological innovation and multinational corporations. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Cohen, G. A. (1978). Karl Marx’s theory of history: A defence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Constant, E. (1980). The origins of the turbojet revolution. Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press.
Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: A suggested interpre-
tation of the determinants and directions of technical change. Research Policy, 11(2), 147–162.
Dosi, G. (1984). Technical change and industrial transformation. London: Macmillan.
Dosi, G., & Nelson, R. R. (2010). Technological change and industrial dynamics as evolutionary
processes. In B. Hall & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the economics of innovation (Vol.
1). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Dosi, G., & Nelson, R. R. (2013). The evolution of technologies: An assessment of the
state-of-the-art. Eurasian Business Review, 3(1), 3–46.
Edris, S. (2019). Paradigm change in the history of the pharmaceutical industry. In J. A. Cantwell
& T. Hayashi (Eds.), Paradigm shift in technologies and innovation systems. Berlin: Springer.
Freeman, C. (1987). Technology policy and economic performance: Lessons from Japan. London:
Frances Pinter.
Freeman, C. (1995). The national system of innovation in historical perspective. Cambridge
Journal of Economics, 19(1), 5–24.
Freeman, C., & Louça, F. (2001). As time goes by: From the industrial revolutions to the
information revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, C., & Perez, C. (1988). Structural crises of adjustment, business cycles and investment
behaviour. In G. Dosi, C. Freeman, R. R. Nelson, G. Silverberg, & L. L. G. Soete (Eds.),
Technical change and economic theory. London: Frances Pinter.
Granstrand, O. (2018). Evolving properties of intellectual capitalism: Patents and innovations for
growth and welfare. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Hodgson, G. M. (1999). Economics and utopia: Why the learning economy is not the end of
history. London: Routledge.
Kline, G. L. (1988). The myth of Marx’ materialism. In H. Dahm, T. J. Blakeley, & G. L. Kline
(Eds.), Philosophical sovietology. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuznets, S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. American Economic Review, 45(1),
1–28.
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
13

Lipsey, R. G., Carlaw, K. I., & Bekar, C. T. (2006). Economic transformations: General purpose
technologies and long-term economic growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Malerba, F. (Ed.). (2004). Sectoral system of innovation: Concepts, issues, and analyses of six
major sectors in Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (2016). Bourgeois equality: How ideas, not capital or institutions. Enriched the
World, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mokyr, J. (2002). The gifts of Athena: Historical origins of the knowledge economy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Nelson, R. R. (1989). What is private and what is public about technology? Science, Technology
and Human Values, 14(3), 229–241.
Nelson, R. R. (Ed.). (1993). National innovation systems: A comparative analysis. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Nelson, R. R. (2018). Economics from an evolutionary perspective. In R. R. Nelson, G. Dosi, C.
E. Helfat, A. Pyka, P. P. Saviotti, K. Lee, K. Dopfer, F. Malerba, & S. G. Winter (Eds.),
Modern evolutionary economics: An overview. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1977). In search of a useful theory of innovation. Research Policy,
6(1), 36–76.
North, D. C., Wallis, J. J., & Weingast, B. R. (2009). Violence and social orders: A conceptual
framework for interpreting recorded human history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pavitt, K. L. R. (1987). The objectives of technology policy. Science and Public Policy, 14(4),
182–188.
Perez, C. (1983). Structural change and the assimilation of new technologies in the economic and
social systems. Futures, 15(5), 357–375.
Perez, C. (2002). Technological revolutions and ﬁnancial capital: The dynamics of bubbles and
golden ages. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Perez, C. (2009). The double bubble at the turn of the century: Technological roots and structural
implications. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 33(4), 779–805.
Piketty, T. (2013). Capital in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Pinkard, T. (1994). Hegel’s phenomenology: The sociality of reason. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pinkard, T. (2017). Does history make sense: Hegel on the historical shapes of justice. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Pippin, R. B. (2008). Hegel’s practical philosophy: Rational agency as ethical life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1982). Inside the black box: Technology and economics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
von Tunzelmann, G. N. (1995). Technology and industrial progress: The foundations of economic
growth. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
von Tunzelmann, G. N. (2003). Historical coevolution of governance and technology in the
industrial revolutions. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 14(4), 365–384.
Westphal, K. R. (2003). Hegel’s epistemology: A philosophical introduction to the phenomenol-
ogy of spirit. Indiannapolis: Hackett.
Winter, S. G., & Szulanski, G. (2001). Replication as strategy. Organization Science, 12(6),
730–743.
14
J. Cantwell

John Cantwell (Ph.D., Reading) is Distinguished Professor of International Business in Rutgers
University (New Jersey, USA) since 2002. He was previously Professor of International
Economics at the University of Reading in the UK. His early work helped to launch a new
literature on multinational companies and international networks for technology creation, beyond
merely international technology transfer. Professor Cantwell’s total citation count on Google
Scholar is well over 15,000. His published research spans the ﬁelds of International Business and
Management, Economics, Economic History and Philosophy, Economic Geography, and
Innovation Studies. He served as the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of International Business
Studies (JIBS) from 2011–16. He was the elected Dean of the European International Business
Academy (EIBA) Fellows from 2015–18. He is also an elected Fellow of the Academy of
International Business (AIB) since 2005.
1
The Philosophy of Paradigm Change in the History …
15

Chapter 2
Paradigm Changes in Technological
Knowledge Connections in Urban
Innovation Systems
Salma Zaman
Abstract The late twentieth century marked the advent of a new information based
and internationally networked paradigm, much different from its old science-based
predecessor. As we enter the diffusion stage of this paradigm, we expect to see
changes in the way organizations and locations interact with one another. We
envision that cities and clusters will not rely exclusively on local knowledge
sources but will need to combine local with complementary geographically distant
(trans-local) knowledge sources. This chapter contributes to the literature on the
changing geographic composition of knowledge connections in the new paradigm.
Using social network analysis techniques, we construct a unidirectional network of
62 selected cities, since backward citations point in just one direction to prior
knowledge sources. We observe how the spatial distribution of our technological
network changes during our time period, both in the aggregate and at the level of
ﬁve selected sectors. The nodes in our network represent cities while the edges
represent citations from one city to another. We calculate network statistics such as
degree strength and eigenvector centrality to determine which cities have gained
inﬂuence over time and which cities have become relatively less important. Overall,
we observe that the technological knowledge network between our cities is getting
denser and more dispersed over our time period. We see that many developing
cities are gradually increasing in their centrality to our constructed network and that
this increase in centrality is more pronounced in certain sectors, characteristic of the
new paradigm, such as the ICT sector. We also observe that while developing cities
have become important sources of technological knowledge, they still lag in terms
of the knowledge they receive from external sources.
S. Zaman (&)
Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), Lahore, Pakistan
e-mail: salma.zaman@lums.edu.pk
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_2
17

2.1
Introduction
Despite expectations that new information and communication technologies will
result in ‘the death of distance’ (Cairncross 1997) and a ‘ﬂat world’ (Friedman
2005), economic activity around the world remains ‘spiky’ (Florida 2005) and
geography continues to play an important role (Hortz-Hart 2000; Scott 2001).
Improvements in transport and communication have actually reinforced clustering
of economic activity because they widen the range of accessible markets for any
given region (Scott and Storper 2003).
Innovation, the driver of economic growth is even more concentrated than
economic activities (Florida 2005). Large innovative city regions or ‘super
agglomerations’ are coming into being and they play a foundational role in the
current world system (Scott 1988, 2001; Veltz 1996). For most of the twentieth
century, the United States housed most of the world’s innovative regions with a few
scattered in Europe and Japan (Florida 2005). But now, major new urban areas
which resemble each other are starting to emerge. Hong Kong, Tokyo, Sao Paulo,
Singapore, Toronto, Sydney and many other cities are growing bigger and richer
while former rich, middle sized cities such as Pittsburgh, St. Louis and Cleveland,
built around manufacturing are starting to decline (Storper and Manville 2006;
Storper 2013).
A reason for this is, innovation potential of regions depends on internationally
mobile factors including research institutions, highly skilled labor and niche mar-
kets (Hotz-Hart 2000). Locations, thus, specialize around their national knowledge
base and comparative advantages. With increasing globalization, factors of pro-
duction move towards regions which are the most efﬁcient for certain activities
thereby reinforcing their specialization (Hoz-Hart 2000). This increases heightened
geographic differentiation and local specialization (Scott 2001).
Additionally, despite the lowered cost of communication, importance for face to
face contact for the transmission of complex and ambiguous messages still exists
(Leamer and Storper 2001). This idea has been demonstrated by several scholars.
Jaffe (1989) and Jaffe et al. (1993) used patent citations to show how distance limits
the ﬂow of ideas. Audretsch and Feldman (1996) showed that intellectual inno-
vations are strongly concentrated in urban areas. The recent growth of Silicon
Valley further shows that spatial agglomeration is conducive to creating cutting
edge technology (Saxenian 1994). Often these face to face meetings are necessary
to establish mutual conﬁdence and trust and to evaluate potential partners in a
constantly changing business relationship (Storper and Venables 2004).
In fact, rather than seeing a ﬂat world, large city regions or ‘super agglomer-
ations’ are coming into being which play a foundational role in the current world
system (Veltz 1996; Scott 1988, 2001). These large cities possess some similar
characteristics. They typically consist of several urban areas and extended suburban
surroundings (Hall 2001; Scott and Storper 2003). They are also characterized by
high degrees of centrality and interconnectedness in the global networks that
18
S. Zaman

provide an infrastructure for the global economy (Sassen 1991, 2012; Wall and van
der Knaap 2011; Goerzen et al. 2013).
In many developed countries, evidence shows that major metropolitan areas are
growing faster than other areas within the same country (Frey and Alden 1988;
Forstall and Fitzsimmons 1993; Summers et al. 1993, Scott and Storper 2003). In
many developing countries, economic growth is also seen to be fastest in the large
metropolitan areas (Scott and Storper 2003).
Our aim in this chapter is to study these cities of today and their changing
technological knowledge connections. Using patent data of 62 innovative cites
around the world, we observe how patterns of technological knowledge connec-
tivity between them are changing. We can expect that these new innovative cities
are more connected with each other in this current information age (Florida 2005).
This is partly because labor is able to move freely between the innovative centers
(Florida 2005). It is also because, it is important for the city regions to form useful
technological knowledge connections with other regions in order to remain inno-
vative (Uzzi 1997; Bramanti and Ratti 1997; Maillat 1998; Scott 1998; Bresnahan
et al. 2001; Bathelt 2007). Advancements in information and communication
technologies (ICT) have accelerated the process of knowledge creation and diffu-
sion (Foss and Pederson 2004). In addition, ICT has made previously distant
technological combinations possible (Cantwell and Santangelo 2002). Therefore,
this age is characterized by an increase in inter-organizational collaboration and
openness (Chesbrough 2003).
We also expect that new cities will emerge as important technological knowl-
edge sources and will be more central to the overall technological knowledge
network around the world. We also expect some previously rich cities to decline in
importance and centrality in the current world system.
2.2
Local-Global Linkages
The success and importance of cities is often attributed to agglomeration econo-
mies. Marshall (1890) argued that the reason innovative activity is concentrated is
because individuals in close proximity learn from each other when they interact
frequently. Therefore, dense urban interactions increase the ﬂow of ideas.
According to Marshall, in these dense areas, there exists ‘something in the air’ since
the co-location of ﬁrms, employees, individuals and researchers facilitate the gen-
eration and the transfer of knowledge, especially tacit knowledge. According to
Lucas (1988), ideas ﬂow more freely and can be put into practice quicker if large
number of diverse actors are in constant contact with one another. Recent studies
have conﬁrmed that there is some truth to these claims.
Jacobs (1969) advanced the idea that cities enjoy an advantage because of their
economic and social diversity. This diversity, packed into limited space, facilitates
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
19

haphazard serendipitous contact amongst people. According to her, it is the
exchange of complementary knowledge sources across diverse ﬁrms and economic
agents which yields a greater return on new economic knowledge. She hypothesizes
that the variety of industries within a geographic region promote knowledge spil-
lovers and eventually innovative activity and economic growth. Florida (2002)
argued that in cosmopolitan cities the openness of their networks also facilitates
innovative activity.
More recently, Jaffe (1989) and Jaffe et al. (1993) use patent citations to show
how distance limits the ﬂow of ideas. Audretsch and Feldman (1996) show that
innovations are strongly concentrated in urban areas. The recent growth of Silicon
Valley also shows that spatial agglomeration is conducive to intellectual innovation
and to creating cutting edge technology (Saxenian 1994).
Economic geographers including Storper and Venables (2004), Owen-Smith and
Powell (2004) and Grabher (2002) have also argued for the importance of local
interactions to transmit knowledge. Storper and Venables (2004) use the term ‘local
buzz’ for the technological knowledge communicated by face to face contact and
facilitated by co-presence and co-location of people in a region. This buzz consists
of intended and accidental technological knowledge transfer through organized or
accidental meetings. This sharing of information allows actors within the region to
combine and re-combine similar and non-similar resources to produce innovations
and new knowledge (Bathelt et al. 2004).
Although local
technological
knowledge
sharing remains
important,
an
increasing number of studies have questioned the seemingly dominant local
learning processes (Malecki and Oinas 1999; Bathelt 2001; Gertler 2001; Vatne
2001). Much of this literature points to the importance of combining both close and
distant interactions for the creation of new technological knowledge (Uzzi 1997;
Bramanti and Ratti 1997; Oinas 1999; Maillat 1998; Bresnahan et al. 2001; Bathelt
2007).
These external linkages, referred to as ‘pipelines’, a term coined by Owen-Smith
and Powell (2004), are considerably different from local buzz which is character-
ized as largely unstructured, frequent and broad. The knowledge transferred over
pipelines is much more planned, with the amount to be disclosed being decided
beforehand (Bathelt et al. 2004). Typically, in a pipeline, procedural rules are set
out in the beginning and initial small risks are taken which may be followed by
larger risks and commitments (Lorenz 1999). The knowledge that is transferred
through these pipelines is rather decisive, non-incremental knowledge ﬂows
(Owen-Smith and Powell 2004).
The external technological knowledge connections are important because they
offer actors within a region knowledge from disperse sources. When knowledge is
continuously reused in different contexts, new knowledge generation processes may
be triggered. Geographical separation may, thus, be conducive to innovation
(Bathelt and Glucker 2011). An increase in external linkages will therefore lead to
an increase in innovation and an increase in local knowledge exchange as well
(Cantwell and Zaman 2018).
20
S. Zaman

Indeed, local networks that are too closed, exclusive and rigid may affect the
competitiveness of the region (Kern 1996; Bathelt et al. 2004). Uzzi (1996, 1997)
coined the term ‘over-embeddedness’ to describe the resulting technological lock in
that occurs when groups of suppliers are embedded with the same set of customers
for long periods of time. Burt (1992) discusses ‘structural holes’ that exist within
any region that can only be overcome by non-redundant linkages to external
sources of technological knowledge. He refers to network relations as ‘plumbing’
through which information and resources are being transmitted.
Hence, it can be argued that in order for a region to remain competitive, it needs both
local buzz and global pipelines. Local buzz is beneﬁcial to the innovation process
because it generates opportunities for actors in a region to interact and form interpre-
tative communities (Nanoka et al. 2000). Global pipelines are also necessary because
they allow the integration of multiple select environments that feed the local network
with knowledge residing elsewhere. Malecki (2000) sums this line of reasoning well
when stating that “Some places are able to create, attract and keep economic activity…
because people in those places ‘make connections’ with other places…”.
2.2.1
Global Linkages in the Information Age
Although the importance of establishing external technological knowledge con-
nections have been established by previous literature, it still remains a difﬁcult task.
This is because establishing a successful pipeline involves the development of a
shared institutional context between partners which would enable shared learning
and joint problem solving since actors are spread out in different cultural and
institutional contexts (Owen-Smith and Powell 2004). In addition, building pipelines
is not an automatic process and requires advance planning and investments. It is a
complex and costly process especially since information about potential partners and
their actual capabilities is usually incomplete (Malmgren 1961). The advancements
in information and communication technologies (ICT) have lowered transport and
communication costs thereby accelerating the process of knowledge creation and
diffusion (Foss and Pederson 2004). In addition, ICT have made previously distant
technological knowledge combinations possible (Cantwell and Santangelo 2002).
Existing technological competencies have multiple uses both within and outside
their primary sector of activity (Robertson and Langlois 1995).
In this current age, technology is becoming increasingly complex in character and
ﬁrms must now possess a wider range of technological skills (Feldman and
Audretsch 1995). As a consequence, technological interrelatedness is also rising.
There is also evidence that industrialized countries are becoming more technologi-
cally specialized and differentiated from each other over time (Cantwell and Vertova
2004), thereby increasing the importance of international linkages. Because of these
changes in the current information age, we expect that despite barriers to knowledge,
there should be an increase in trans-local knowledge sourcing. We should therefore
expect to see an increase in international connectivity between our cities with time.
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
21

We also expect to see new cities emerging as more central to the technological
knowledge network with time. According to scholars in the ﬁeld of urban planning
and policy, a new world order exists today with a new geography of city centrality
and marginality that cuts across national boundaries and the north south divide
(Friedman 1986; Sassen 1991). Friedman (1995) describes the current world system
as a dynamic hierarchy in which ranks and entrance criteria of cities are open. Cities
that attract investment and possess more of the command control functions of the
world economy will be higher up in the urban hierarchy and their ranking may
change with time. Sassen (1994) also paints a similar picture of these cities today
and claims that areas that were once considered core are now considered peripheral
whereas peripheral areas are now joining the core city system. Our analysis will
clarify whether this is true and will try and understand which cities are gradually
becoming more important with time.
2.3
Data
2.3.1
Patent Data
Our main source of data is the United States Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO)
database. We prefer to use the USPTO database over the patent databases such as
European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) and Japanese Patent Ofﬁce (JPO) because the
USPTO database is user friendly because of its superior organization. From all the
databases, it is known that the USPTO provides the richest information (Kim and
Lee 2015). The USPTO data is rich because it provides disaggregation by
cross-country, cross-ﬁrm, structural and historical dimensions (Cantwell 2006). In
addition, the US patent ofﬁce imposes common screening and legal procedures
which provides a benchmark for comparison (Pavitt 1988). Also, since the US is the
largest single market in the world, it is more likely that even international players
will register for a patent there after their home country even if they are currently not
selling in the market (Archibugi 1992; Cantwell 2006).
The patents in the USPTO database provide comprehensive information of the
patents. This includes the patent grant date, the technological classes, information
about the inventor, information about the assignees and patent citation information.
For our purpose, we extracted the patent grant date, the ﬁrst technological class, ﬁrst
inventor location and patent citation information.
We extracted patent information for the years 1976–2016 from the electronic
ﬁles made available by the USPTO ofﬁce. The total number of patents in our
database is 5.5 million. We then cleaned and sorted the data according to
metropolitan areas.
The ﬁrst inventor location was used to determine the location of the patent. The
reason for not using assignee location is that the assignee corresponds to the
22
S. Zaman

location of the headquarters of the organization rather than where the patented
invention was actually developed. Hence, since we are interested in the geography
of the innovations itself, it is necessary to look at the inventor locations.
We then used backward citations to identify the location of the knowledge
source and the recipient. The cited patent is regarded as the knowledge source while
the citing patent is the recipient. The location of the patents are determined by ﬁrst
inventor locations. This method of using patent citation data to identify knowledge
ﬂow has been commonly used in previous literature (Jaffe et al. 1993; Jaffe and
Trajtenberg 1999; Singh 2004).
2.4
City Deﬁnitions
We conducted our study on 62 cities. We used metropolitan areas and not just the
central city to determine the number of patents for every city. The reason behind
this is, since we are using ﬁrst inventor’s address to determine the location of the
patent, we have to cater for the fact that the inventor can live anywhere this is a
drivable distance to the central city. We use government deﬁned metropolitan areas
to mark the boundaries of our cities.
For the European patents, we additionally used a database developed by Dr.
John Cantwell while he was at the University of Reading (and used in Cantwell and
Iammarino 2005) to determine the city boundaries. This database was developed by
a team of expert geographers who went through the entire patent database and
determined which locations should be included in the city region. In addition, we
rechecked the data in the database and matched it with city boundaries deﬁned by
the European Union.
For selecting our cities, we ﬁrst looked at the comprehensive list provided by
GaWC (Globalization and World Cities Research Network). The GaWC chooses
city on the basis of their connectivity and concentration of producer services. In
these cities, the trends we want to observe will be heightened because of their
characteristics. However, since we are using patent citations for our data source, we
wanted to include those cities that had enough patents for us to conduct a mean-
ingful analysis. Therefore, we set a threshold for number of patents and selected
cities that were above that threshold. This threshold was lower for those cities that
were from developing countries.
GaWC ranks cities into categories based on their connectivity and concentration
of producer services. These categories include: alpha ++, alpha + , alpha, alpha–
and beta + cities. We made sure that we included in our sample, cities from each
category. We also tried to include cities from all over the world, and not just from
particular regions. Therefore our sample includes cities from North America, South
America, Europe, South East Asia, Asia and Oceania. In addition, we wanted to
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
23

insure that our database contained cities from different stages of development so we
included developed and emerging cities in our sample.
Our complete selection of cities is show in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Our selection of cities
City name
Country name
City name
Country name
North America
Seattle
United States
Boston
United States
Austin
United States
Chicago
United States
San Diego
United States
The Bay Area
United States
Pittsburgh
United States
Miami
United States
New York City
United States
Atlanta
United States
Los Angeles
United States
Toronto
Canada
Dallas
United States
Vancouver
Canada
Houston
United States
Montreal
Canada
Mexico City
Mexico
South America
Buenos Aires
Argentina
Sao Paulo
Brazil
Europe
London
UK
Paris
France
Glasgow
UK
Lyon
France
Manchester
UK
Grenoble
France
Birmingham
UK
Eindhoven
Netherlands
Berlin
Germany
Vienna
Austria
Frankfurt
Germany
Zurich
Switzerland
Munich
Germany
Basel
Switzerland
Hamburg
Germany
Stockholm
Sweden
Stuttgart
Germany
Copenhagen
Denmark
Dusseldorf
Germany
Brussels
Belgium
Madrid
Spain
Milan
Italy
Barcelona
Spain
Rome
Italy
Dublin
Ireland
Oslo
Norway
Helsinki
Finland
Moscow
Russia
Asia
Mumbai
India
Nagoya
Japan
Delhi
India
Beijing
China
Bangalore
India
Shanghai
China
Tokyo
Japan
Guangzhou
China
Osaka
Japan
Oceania
Sydney
Australia
Auckland
New Zealand
24
S. Zaman

2.5
Methodology
In this study, we aim to present an overall picture of the network of technological
knowledge between our cities and how it has changed throughout our time period,
1981–2014. To achieve this, we calculated network statistics from the year 1981 to
2014 for the 62 cities in our study. Though we have patent data from the year 1976,
the years before 1981 were excluded from the network analysis because we do not
have information for a substantial number of cited patents for those years.
We divided our time period (1981–2014) into six time periods of ﬁve consec-
utive years each, except the last time period, 2011–2014, which consists of the four
consecutive years. We calculated the average node strength and the eigenvector
centrality for each of the time periods. We ranked each city in terms of average
outdegree strength, indegree strength and eigenvector centrality for each of the time
periods and observed how the cities changed over time relative to each other.
Using cities as nodes and unidirectional arrows representing citations from one
city to another, we calculated the following network statistics:
Node Strength: This refers to the strength of ties of each node. In our case, the
strength of the tie refers to the number of times a location is cited by another.
Because we have a directed network, we distinguish between indegree node
strength and outdegree strength. Indegree node strength of a location refers to the
number of times it is cited by other locations and the outdegree node strength of a
location refers to the number of times it cites other nodes.
Eigenvector Centrality: Eigenvector centrality is the measure of the inﬂuence of
a node in the network. It assigns relative scores to all nodes in the network based on
the concept that connections to high scoring nodes contribute more than equal
connections to low scoring nodes. In our case, this implies that location connected
to other high inﬂuencing locations will have a greater score than locations con-
nected to less inﬂuencing location.
Because of the current wave of globalization and because of facilitating ICT
technologies, we expect to see developing cities emerging as important contributors
and recipients of technological knowledge in our network. We hope that observing
the change in network over our time period will help us understand which devel-
oping cities are becoming more important to the technological network and the
extent of their success. We expect that not all developing cities will succeed in
becoming more central to the network and the degree of their success will also vary.
We also expect that some old technology leaders will lose their centrality in the
network during our time period. Because innovation is cumulative (Pavitt 1987), it
is liable to lock into a particular industrial pattern or conﬁguration in any location
and this pattern is only likely to change gradually over time since a shift to a sector
in which technological opportunities are rising most rapidly might not be easy to
achieve (Cantwell 1991). Therefore, we can anticipate that some cities might be still
locked into the old technologies of the science paradigm which preceded this
current information age and will gradually lose their importance in the network of
technological knowledge.
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
25

2.6
Data Analysis
2.6.1
Outdegree Strength
We ﬁrst observe how the cities change with regards to their outdegree strength
throught our time period. We ranked each city according to their average outdegree
strength relative to each other in each of the time periods, where rank 1 is the city
with the highest outdegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest. The outdegree
strength will tell us which cities have the most trans-local (as deﬁned by Turkina
and Van Assche 2018) knowledge sources within our dataset.
We can see that New York City, Los Angeles, the Bay Area, Tokyo and Boston
remain amongst the top cities with the most outdegree strength throughout our time
period. Even though there is less shifting amongst the top few cities, we see
developing cities such as Beijing, Taipei, Seoul and Bangalore gaining considerably
in terms of outdegree strength.
We show in Table 2.2 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
As expected, we also see that some cities have considerably decreased in terms
of their outdegree strength.
Table 2.3 depicts which cities have decreased the most in their ranks in terms of
outdegree strength by the end of our time period.
In our case, outdegree strength represents the number of citations made by the
city to other cities. Therefore we can conclude from our calculation of outdegree
strengths, at the end of our time period a lot of developing cities have become
bigger recipients of technological knowledge compared to the beginning of our time
period. Previously large recipients of technological knowledge have declined rel-
ative to other cities in our network.
Table 2.2 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
56
48
31
19
14
13
13
Taipei
50
40
27
23
18
18
19
Singapore
57
57
53
45
33
31
32
Helsinki
49
43
42
37
32
29
27
Beijing
59
58
57
55
47
38
Guangzhou
62
61
62
60
57
44
Seattle
23
18
17
15
12
10
6
Austin
26
21
20
13
10
12
11
Bangalore
59
61
62
60
56
54
47
Stockholm
36
25
26
26
25
23
24
26
S. Zaman

2.6.2
Indegree Strength
We then observe how the cities change with regards to their indegree strength
throughout our time period. The indegree strength will tell us which cities are the
most important sources of technological knowledge in our network. We ranked
each city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree strength in
each of our time periods, where a rank of 1 indicates the highest indegree strength
while 62 marks the lowest. We show in Table 2.4 the cities which have shown the
greatest increase in rank by the end of our time period.
Table 2.3 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Frankfurt
46
38
41
46
46
50
56
Milan
25
27
25
28
30
32
35
Munich
19
19
23
25
26
30
30
Dusseldorf
15
14
16
20
23
25
28
Manchester
35
31
36
41
43
43
49
Rome
37
45
46
48
48
49
51
Mexico City
45
50
52
55
58
61
61
Oslo
28
44
45
44
45
45
45
Toronto
5
22
21
22
21
21
22
Birmingham
29
29
33
39
39
42
48
Basel
21
26
28
32
36
40
43
Table 2.4 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
55
38
19
11
13
8
9
Guangzhou
61
62
62
54
33
26
Singapore
58
53
46
33
23
23
27
Bangalore
59
62
60
59
50
37
29
Shanghai
58
57
60
53
40
30
Taipei
45
28
23
19
16
16
18
Beijing
54
56
53
51
30
31
Seattle
22
15
12
13
12
6
5
Copenhagen
47
42
38
37
37
36
33
Auckland
54
52
55
54
52
53
42
Austin
23
21
16
9
9
10
11
San Diego
19
14
11
10
7
9
7
Helsinki
48
40
36
32
31
29
37
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
27

We see that in the beginning of our time period, New York City, Toronto, Los
Angeles, the Bay Area, Chicago and Tokyo have the highest indegree strength in
our network. However, in the later periods Osaka, Seattle and Houston also occupy
the spots of the ﬁve highest indegree strength at one period or another.
Interestingly, we can see that developing cities have improved more in terms of
their indegree strength as compared to their outdegree strength. As an example, we
can see that Seoul is ranked 13 according to its outdegree strength but 9 according
to its indegree strength. This means that these new emerging cities are better
sources of knowledge than they are recipients when compared to other cities in our
network.
While some cities show improvement in their relative indegree strength, we also
see that some cities have considerably decrease in their relative indegree strength.
Table 2.5 depicts which cities have decreased the most in their ranks in terms of
indegree strength by the end of our time period.
2.6.3
Eigenvector Centrality
Lastly, we also observe how cities change with respect to their eigenvector cen-
trality. This measure helps us determine which cites have the most inﬂuence in the
network since it assigns higher weights to those cities that have more inﬂuence in
the network. We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their
average eigenvector centralities in each of our time periods, where a rank of 1
indicates the highest eigenvector centrality while 62 marks the lowest.
We see that the cities with highest eigenvector centralities change throughout the
period. In our ﬁrst time period, the Bay Area, New York City, Los Angeles,
Table 2.5 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Basel
24
26
32
41
42
52
52
Rome
32
43
45
50
55
57
57
Dusseldorf
14
13
18
23
24
31
34
Mexico City
41
56
58
57
60
62
61
Mumbai
42
59
59
61
61
61
62
Manchester
40
39
39
45
44
51
58
Milan
27
25
26
29
34
41
45
Oslo
28
44
44
44
43
43
46
Toronto
2
20
22
20
20
19
19
Birmingham
33
33
37
40
39
47
49
Lyon
36
31
33
39
40
48
51
Sao Paulo
46
55
54
56
62
59
60
28
S. Zaman

Chicago and Boston have the highest eigenvector centralities. In the later periods,
Tokyo and Osaka exhibit increased eigenvector centralities and rank in the top ﬁve
cities with the highest eigenvector centralities in some of our periods.
We show in Table 2.6 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
While some cities show improvement in their relative eigenvector centrality, we
also see that some cities have considerably decrease in their relative eigenvector
centrality. Table 2.7 depicts which cities have decreased the most in their ranks in
terms of eigenvector centrality by the end of our time period.
As we anticipated our results show that some cities from emerging countries
now play a more central role in our network of cities. On the other hand, we see
some cities especially those from developed countries show considerable decline
throughout our timer period.
The network of our cities in 2014 is displayed in the ﬁgure below. The size of
the node represents the eigenvector centrality of each city in 2014 (Fig. 2.1).
We explore further by separating patents on the basis of their primary techno-
logical ﬁeld into ﬁve broad classiﬁcation ﬁelds: chemical, information and
Table 2.6 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
56
46
28
21
8
19
18
Singapore
57
57
50
49
38
36
30
Austin
27
26
23
23
16
11
1
Bangalore
59
62
62
59
57
49
33
Stockholm
48
25
24
28
25
25
26
Guangzhou
61
61
62
61
53
40
Taipei
43
38
26
20
14
21
22
Seattle
23
17
10
15
17
16
4
Shanghai
58
58
58
56
50
44
Table 2.7 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Birmingham
25
30
37
40
39
46
50
Basel
26
28
40
32
43
42
46
Manchester
38
39
41
41
44
47
55
Mexico City
46
55
56
57
59
62
62
Frankfurt
39
41
42
45
45
43
54
Rome
37
45
44
48
49
56
52
Vienna
34
35
35
39
40
45
48
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
29

communication technologies (ICT), mechanical, other electrical equipment and
transport according to their primary technological ﬁeld (as done in for example
Cantwell and Kosmopoulou 2002). We then analyzed the network separately for
different classiﬁcation ﬁelds and calculated the same network statistics outdegree
strength, indegree strength and eigenvector centrality for each classiﬁcation ﬁeld.
2.7
Data Analysis on the Network of Chemical Patents
2.7.1
Outdegree Strength
Just like we did with the overall network of cities, we rank each city according to
how they rank in terms of their average outdegree strength in each of our time
periods, where rank 1 is the city with the highest outdegree strength and 62 is the
one with the lowest.
Fig. 2.1 The network of our cities in 2014
30
S. Zaman

In the Chemical network, we observe that those cities that ranked highest based
on outdegree strength continue to rank high throughout our time period. These
cities are New York City, Tokyo and the Bay Area.
We show in Table 2.8 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
We can see that in the chemical network only Seoul and Taipei have improved
considerably in their outdegree strength. The rest of the cities that show
improvement are developed cities.
Table 2.9 depicts the cities that have declined the most in terms of their out-
degree strength.
We see that mostly developed cities, with the exception of Mexico City, have
declined in terms of outdegree strength in the chemical network.
Table 2.8 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength in
the chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
49
48
45
31
23
21
21
Taipei
55
51
48
45
35
32
35
Seattle
28
24
19
17
15
11
10
Vancouver
42
43
36
28
28
26
24
Atlanta
30
26
21
22
17
18
15
Helsinki
46
38
41
35
27
28
32
San Diego
17
14
15
10
9
7
6
Table 2.9 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength in the
chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Manchester
20
22
24
27
37
35
40
Frankfurt
21
28
30
34
34
34
39
Mexico City
45
50
51
54
55
60
60
Birmingham
34
37
40
43
39
44
47
Milan
14
17
18
21
22
24
26
Brussels
27
34
34
38
38
36
38
Glasgow
41
44
46
48
49
52
52
Eindhoven
33
31
33
41
45
43
43
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
31

2.7.2
Indegree Strength
We then observe how which cities ranked the highest in terms of indegree strength.
We see that cities such as New York City and the Bay Area are the only ones who
are consistently amongst the top ranked cities for indegree strength. We ranked each
city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree strength in each
of our time periods, where a rank of 1 indicates the highest indegree strength while
62 marks the lowest.
Cities such as Chicago which had the third highest indegree strength in the ﬁrst
time period had only the eighth highest at the end of our time period. Similarly
Dusseldorf which had the ﬁfth highest indregree strength in the ﬁrst two time
periods had only the fourteenth highest by the end of our time period and Tokyo
which had the second highest indegree strength in the ﬁrst two time periods had
only the seventh highest at the end of our time period.
This indicates that different knowledge sources are gaining importance in the
chemical network.
We show in Table 2.10 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
We can see that cities such as Shanghai, Guangzhou and Beijing which did not
show considerable improvement in terms of outdegree strength, still show con-
siderable improvement in indegree strength. This implies that these cities have
become important sources of knowledge for those patents that belong to the
chemical classiﬁcation, but have not become signiﬁcant recipients of technological
knowledge.
Table 2.11 depicts the cities that have declined the most in terms of their
indegree strength.
We can see that there is a decline in a lot of developed cities in terms of indegree
strength. This shows that their relative importance as sources of technological
knowledge for chemical patents has decreased throughout our time period.
Table 2.10 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength in
the chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
53
46
24
21
17
13
13
Shanghai
56
59
60
59
43
26
Taipei
49
51
36
29
25
26
28
Guangzhou
61
62
62
51
41
Singapore
59
60
51
47
31
35
40
Vancouver
42
41
30
24
22
22
23
Seattle
28
22
18
15
15
12
9
Beijing
53
53
45
41
41
38
Dublin
46
43
48
48
53
55
32
32
S. Zaman

2.7.3
Eigenvector Centrality
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average eigen-
vector centrality in each of our time periods, where a rank of 1 indicates the highest
eigenvector centrality while 62 marks the lowest.
Eigenvector centrality is a measure of inﬂuence a node has on the network. We
see a slight shift in the cities with the highest eigenvector centralities in the network
of chemical patents. In the beginning of our time period, New York City, Tokyo
and Chicago had the three highest eigenvector centralities. By the end of our time
period, Boston, Los Angeles and Chicago have the three highest eigenvector
centralities while Tokyo has the ﬁfth highest eigenvector centrality and New York
City has the sixth highest.
We show in Table 2.12, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
We can see that developing cities such as Seoul, Shanghai, Taipei and Singapore
have gained considerably more inﬂuence in our network throughout our time
period.
Table 2.13 depicts the cities that have declined the most in terms of their
eigenvector centrality.
Table 2.11 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength in the
chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Frankfurt
23
28
31
38
42
36
49
Birmingham
36
42
43
46
49
62
61
Munich
21
24
33
30
44
38
44
Rome
31
39
46
42
48
52
52
Stuttgart
30
29
32
36
35
44
50
Manchester
26
26
25
39
43
46
46
Milan
14
18
21
23
24
29
34
Basel
13
10
17
22
27
28
27
Table 2.12 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of eigenvector centrality in the
chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
53
47
31
26
20
16
18
Shanghai
58
59
60
56
51
31
Taipei
52
51
44
39
36
29
28
Seattle
28
24
14
18
16
13
8
Singapore
58
60
52
49
44
42
41
Vancouver
43
42
32
27
27
22
27
Toronto
29
19
20
17
19
17
15
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
33

We see that a lot of developed have declined considerably in terms of eigen-
vector centrality in the chemical network. Some developing cities such as Buenos
Aires and Mexico City have also shown considerable decline.
The network of patents with chemical as their primary classiﬁcation in 2014 is
given in Fig. 2.2. The size of the node represents the eigenvector centrality of each
city.
Table 2.13 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality in the
chemical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Birmingham
30
41
38
44
43
48
52
Manchester
23
28
34
38
40
39
43
Rome
36
39
43
41
46
46
51
Frankfurt
25
30
33
36
37
31
39
Stockholm
20
27
30
32
30
36
34
Buenos Aires
46
54
57
54
59
59
59
Mexico City
49
52
50
57
57
61
60
Fig. 2.2 The network of patents classiﬁed as chemical in the year 2014
34
S. Zaman

2.8
Data Analysis on the Network of ICT Patents
2.8.1
Outdegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average outdegree
strength in each of our time periods, where rank 1 is the city with the highest
outdegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
In the ICT network, we see cities that had the highest outdegree strength, New
York City, the Bay Area and Tokyo, continued to have the highest outdegree
strength throughout our time period.
We show in Table 2.14 below the cities which have shown the greatest increase
in rank by the end of our time period.
We see that a lot of developing cities have shown considerable improvement in
terms of outdegree strength in the ICT network. This time the developing cities that
show considerable improvement in outdegree strength also include cities such as
Bangalore, Beijing and Guangzhou which did not show such improvement in the
network of chemical patents. We also see that cities such as Guangzhou which did
not have any ICT patent in the ﬁrst three time period was able to catch up and move
up the rankings very quickly.
Table 2.15 shows the cities which have declined the most in terms of outdegree
strength in the network of ICT patents.
Table 2.14 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength in
the ICT network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
52
42
22
14
11
12
12
Singapore
56
46
34
29
27
29
Beijing
57
55
53
50
35
32
Bangalore
58
60
50
48
41
34
Sydney
42
37
39
32
33
30
19
Helsinki
43
45
41
31
27
24
22
Taipei
41
35
28
25
22
20
21
Guangzhou
61
61
55
43
Table 2.15 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength in the
ICT network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Birmingham
29
32
37
41
42
46
50
Vienna
28
33
35
42
45
49
47
Brussels
34
34
36
40
44
45
52
Frankfurt
39
44
47
52
54
54
56
Hamburg
27
29
33
36
41
42
44
Manchester
31
31
30
38
37
44
48
Milan
23
24
25
28
32
33
39
Rome
35
38
40
43
47
50
51
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
35

We see that a lot of developed cities have shown considerable decline in terms of
relative outdegree strength in the ICT network. We see cities such as Milan and
Rome also show considerable decline in their relative outdegree strength in the ICT
network although they didn’t show a decline in the overall network of patents or in
the network of chemical patents.
2.8.2
Indegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree
strength in each of our time periods for the ICT patent network, where rank 1 is the
city with the highest indegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
In the ICT network, we see that cities that had the highest indegree strength,
New York City, the Bay Area and Tokyo, in our ﬁrst time period continue to have
the highest indegree strength throughout our time periods.
We show in Table 2.16 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
We see that cities such as Bangalore and Guangzhou have increased even more
in terms of indegree strength than they did in terms of outdegree strength. This
means that these cities have become even more important sources of technological
knowledge than recipients.
Table 2.17 shows which cities have declined the most in terms of relative
indegree strength in the ICT network.
A lot of developed cities have declined in terms of relative indegree strength
throughout our time period. Hence we can infer that now different cities are
becoming more vital sources of technological knowledge in the ICT network while
older cities are declining in importance.
Table 2.16 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength in
the ICT network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
46
26
11
9
10
8
8
Bangalore
57
51
51
33
29
21
Guangzhou
62
57
36
29
Sydney
41
34
31
33
26
19
13
Beijing
51
55
50
41
25
27
Taipei
40
27
24
20
17
15
16
Shanghai
54
60
61
54
40
31
Singapore
47
35
31
21
23
28
Barcelona
54
56
56
53
45
35
36
36
S. Zaman

2.9
Eigenvector Centrality
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average eigen-
vector centralities in each of our time periods for the ICT patent network, where
rank 1 is the city with the highest eigenvector centrality and 62 is the one with the
lowest.
When calculating eigenvector centrality, we observed that the cities with the
highest inﬂuence in the beginning of our time period, Tokyo, the Bay Area and
New York City continued to have the highest inﬂuence till the end of our time
period.
We show in Table 2.18 below the cities which have shown the greatest increase
in rank by the end of our time period.
As expected, we see a lot of developing cities show considerable improvement
in terms of their eigenvector centralities throughout our time period. Even
Guangzhou which had no patents in the ﬁrst three time periods managed to con-
siderably increase eigenvector centrality.
Table 2.17 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength in the ICT
network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Milan
25
24
26
30
32
44
50
Vienna
27
32
39
43
44
50
52
Brussels
29
43
42
48
43
55
53
Manchester
35
37
40
45
48
51
55
Eindhoven
15
15
19
21
27
31
34
Glasgow
38
44
45
46
49
54
57
Zurich
22
23
28
36
36
37
41
Table 2.18 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
in the ICT network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
49
37
17
12
9
11
12
Bangalore
59
58
49
47
34
28
Guangzhou
62
60
48
33
Beijing
55
56
51
48
32
29
Singapore
53
44
33
29
30
30
Shanghai
57
60
58
57
47
36
Taipei
39
30
27
23
20
18
18
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
37

Table 2.19 shows the cities which have declined considerably in terms of their
eigenvector centrality in the ICT network throughout our time period.
Table 2.19 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality in the
ICT network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Birmingham
27
33
34
37
40
51
50
Manchester
32
31
37
41
45
46
53
Hamburg
29
27
35
38
43
44
47
Vienna
30
35
36
39
38
40
48
Brussels
35
41
40
44
44
50
52
Milan
24
25
26
30
35
39
40
Glasgow
41
45
47
47
46
54
56
Fig. 2.3 The network of patents classiﬁed as ICT in the year 2014
38
S. Zaman

The network of patents with ICT as their primary classiﬁcation in 2014 is given
in Fig. 2.3. The size of the node represents the eigenvector centrality of each city.
2.10
Data Analysis on the Network of Mechanical Patents
2.10.1
Outdegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average outdegree
strength in each of our time periods for the mechanical patent network, where rank
1 is the city with the highest outdegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
We see that in the beginning of our time period, New York City, Tokyo and Los
Angeles have the highest outdegree strength. However, by the end of our time
period we see that the Bay Area has the highest outdegree strength while Los
Angeles and New York City have second and third highest outdegree strengths
respectively. Tokyo is still ranked high and has the fourth highest outdegree
strength.
We show in Table 2.20 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
We see that some developing cities have gradually increased in terms of relative
outdegree strength in the network of mechanical patents. However, the increase is
less than what we saw in the network of ICT patents. Some developed cities such as
Dublin, Austin, Copenhagen and Sydney have also increased considerably in terms
of outdegree strength.
Table 2.21 shows the cities which have declined considerably in terms of their
outdegree strength in the mechanical network throughout our time period.
We see a lot of developed cities have decreased in terms of relative outdegree
strength in the mechanical network.
Table 2.20 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength in
the mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
53
50
51
26
20
17
18
Taipei
46
37
10
21
19
19
19
Dublin
55
55
40
52
53
43
35
Austin
31
28
30
22
21
18
17
Copenhagen
38
41
44
37
33
31
24
Singapore
56
56
50
53
47
42
43
Sydney
39
32
35
30
29
23
26
Guangzhou
61
56
60
60
57
51
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
39

2.10.2
Indegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree
strength in each of our time periods for the mechanical patent network, where rank
1 is the city with the highest indegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
In the beginning of our time period, we see that Tokyo, New York City and
Chicago have the highest indegree strength. The top three cities keep on changing
throughout our time period. At the end of our time period, the Bay Area, Boston
and Los Angeles are the top three cities with the highest indegree strength. This
shufﬂing indicates that the most central sources to the network of mechanical
networks changed by the end of our time period.
We show in Table 2.22 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
We see that a mix of developing and developed cities have increase in terms of
their indegree strength. Developing cities are ranked higher when it comes to
indegree strength compared to outdegree strength. This means that these cities are
more vital sources of technological knowledge for mechanical patents but are still
behind when it comes to the extent of trans-local connections their mechanical
patents have.
Table 2.21 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength in the
mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Birmingham
25
25
33
33
34
40
41
Manchester
30
33
47
42
43
44
45S
Frankfurt
41
38
49
44
45
51
54
Mexico City
47
49
32
55
58
60
60
Milan
26
27
27
29
31
35
39
Basel
37
36
46
41
44
47
49
Vienna
33
40
34
39
42
41
44
Zurich
19
22
22
25
27
30
30
Table 2.22 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength in
the mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
50
42
28
16
14
10
15
Guangzhou
59
55
59
55
35
28
Dublin
54
53
37
45
47
42
26
Shanghai
58
60
58
53
38
32
Singapore
56
52
50
42
26
31
31
Taipei
41
26
8
20
16
18
19
Copenhagen
42
41
43
32
34
30
25
Austin
28
28
22
18
19
19
12
Sydney
30
33
32
24
22
13
14
40
S. Zaman

Table 2.23 shows the cities which have declined considerably in terms of their
indegree strength in the mechanical network throughout our time period.
As expected, we see a lot of developed cities show a decline in their indegree
strength throughout our time period.
2.10.3
Eigenvector Centrality
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average eigen-
vector centrality in each of our time periods for the mechanical patent network,
where rank 1 is the city with the highest eigenvector centrality and 62 is the one
with the lowest.
The cities with the highest eigenvector centrality in the beginning of our time
period were New York City, Chicago and Tokyo. We see that throughout our time
period the cities with three highest eigenvector centrality keeps changing. At the end
of our time period, the cities with the highest eigenvector centrality are Seattle,
Houston and Boston. Even though Chicago had the second highest eigenvector
centrality in the beginning of our time period, it only had the sixth highest by the end.
We show in Table 2.24 the cities which have shown the greatest increase in rank
by the end of our time period.
Table 2.23 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength in the
mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Dusseldorf
13
15
20
22
24
29
33
Manchester
38
40
48
47
44
50
56
Vienna
32
35
40
43
46
51
50
Birmingham
27
29
39
34
38
40
44
Hamburg
29
32
41
38
39
41
46
Rome
44
46
27
53
57
59
60
Stockholm
23
25
23
25
28
33
39
Table 2.24 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
in the mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
51
49
39
22
20
19
9
Singapore
56
56
54
52
43
37
32
Austin
37
34
24
24
23
23
14
Taipei
42
36
17
21
19
17
21
Guangzhou
60
59
59
59
48
42
Seattle
16
17
15
13
12
9
1
Shanghai
58
57
58
57
49
43
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
41

We see a mix of developed and developing cities improving in terms of their
relative eigenvector centrality.
Table 2.25 shows the cities which showed the most decline in terms of their
relative eigenvector centrality throughout our time period.
The network of patents with Mechanical as their primary classiﬁcation is shown
in Fig. 2.4. The size of the node refers to the city’s eigenvector centrality.
Table 2.25 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality in the
mechanical network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Basel
36
40
40
43
45
47
51
Manchester
34
37
41
44
41
43
49
Brussels
43
45
48
47
52
53
57
Moscow
30
41
51
40
42
41
44
Birmingham
26
25
31
38
38
40
39
Frankfurt
40
42
42
46
46
54
53
Mexico City
48
52
53
56
58
60
60
Rome
45
44
37
49
50
57
56
Fig. 2.4 The network of patents classiﬁed as mechanical in the year 2014
42
S. Zaman

2.11
Data Analysis on the Network of Other Electrical
Equipment Patents
2.11.1
Outdegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average outdegree
strength in each of our time periods for the other electrical equipment patent net-
work, where rank 1 is the city with the highest outdegree strength and 62 is the one
with the lowest.
We see that Tokyo has the highest outdegree strength throughout our time
period. However, the cities with the second and third highest outdegree strength
keep changing throughout our time period. At period two, even an emerging city
like Taipei had the third highest outdegree strength. Other cities that in one period
or another have been amongst the highest three include the Bay Area, New York
City, Osaka and Boston.
We show in Table 2.26, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
In terms of outdegree strength, we see that developing cities have increased
considerably in their rank throughout our time period.
Table 2.27 contains cities which have shown the most decline in terms of their
outdegree strength though out our time period.
Table 2.26 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength in
the other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
54
47
25
11
11
7
8
Taipei
46
3
22
12
12
9
7
Guangzhou
62
51
32
26
Singapore
57
34
43
29
24
22
21
Shanghai
57
57
57
56
43
36
Beijing
58
58
51
53
48
43
Hong Kong
42
33
32
34
29
30
29
Bangalore
60
58
57
55
48
Table 2.27 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength in the
other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Brussels
32
41
47
47
48
47
53
Zurich
19
23
27
27
34
33
38
Frankfurt
37
43
44
45
47
56
55
Basel
39
42
46
44
45
54
56
Birmingham
26
32
35
35
38
40
41
Paris
10
12
10
15
15
18
24
Vienna
36
31
36
40
44
46
50
Manchester
34
38
39
38
40
42
46
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
43

As expected, we see that developed cities have declined considerably in terms of
their outdegree strength.
2.11.2
Indegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree
strength in each of our time periods for the other electrical equipment patent net-
work, where rank 1 is the city with the highest indegree strength and 62 is the one
with the lowest.
During the beginning of our time period, Tokyo had the highest indegree
strength. However, at the end of our time period, the Bay Area had the highest
indegree strength and Tokyo moved to the second place. Other cities that were
amongst the three highest cities with the most indegree strength at some period or
another include Boston, Taipei, Osaka and New York City.
We show in Table 2.28, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
As we can see, developing cities have shown considerable improvement in terms
of their indegree strength. Guangzhou has no patents classiﬁed as other electrical
equipment but ends our time period with the 15th highest indegree strength. Other
developing cities have also shown considerable improvement in indegree strength.
Table 2.29 shows the cities that have declined considerably in terms of indegree
strength throughout our time period.
We see that quite a few developed cities have shown considerable decrease in
their relative indegree strength during our time period. Since indegree strength
refers to the number of citations to a city, this implies that these cities are no longer
as vital a source of technological knowledge for other electrical equipment patents
as they were in the beginning of our time period.
2.11.3
Eigenvector Centrality
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average eigen-
vector centrality in each of our time periods for the other electrical equipment patent
Table 2.28 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength in
the other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Guangzhou
62
37
17
15
Seoul
48
28
11
6
7
6
6
Taipei
43
2
13
12
8
7
7
Shanghai
52
53
50
39
28
20
Singapore
49
34
33
21
14
14
17
Bangalore
58
59
40
40
30
Beijing
54
43
55
56
39
31
Vancouver
41
39
28
31
27
24
26
44
S. Zaman

network, where rank 1 is the city with the highest eigenvector centrality and 62 is
the one with the lowest.
Throughout our time period, either New York City or Tokyo had the highest
eigenvector centrality. Other cities which are amongst the top 3 cities at some
period or the other include Boston, the Bay Area, Los Angeles and Osaka.
We show in Table 2.30, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
We see that developing cities have increased considerably in terms of their
eigenvector centrality. This means that developing cities are gradually becoming
more central to the network than older developed cities.
Cities that showed the greatest decline in terms of eigenvector centrality are
given in Table 2.31.
We can see that developed cities have decreased in terms of eigenvector cen-
trality in the network of other electrical equipment patents.
Table 2.29 Cities whish showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength in the
other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
London
13
16
23
24
22
30
35
Rome
40
41
44
53
57
58
61
Manchester
34
45
45
37
43
54
53
Moscow
32
48
36
36
38
43
51
Paris
10
12
15
19
24
32
29
Lyon
31
38
35
38
50
53
49
Pittsburgh
9
11
17
17
21
29
27
Basel
42
49
54
56
51
61
57
Birmingham
30
37
40
40
47
49
45
Frankfurt
39
42
42
51
46
56
54
Stockholm
27
22
31
30
32
36
42
Table 2.30 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
in the other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
49
38
23
12
9
6
8
Guangzhou
62
45
34
25
Taipei
46
10
19
17
12
13
9
Singapore
50
32
36
34
33
24
22
Shanghai
56
55
55
49
38
30
Bangalore
59
59
51
43
37
Beijing
55
51
52
56
47
40
Hong Kong
42
35
32
33
30
28
27
Austin
27
22
17
15
14
11
13
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
45

The network of patents with other electrical equipment as their primary classi-
ﬁcation is shown in Fig. 2.5. The size of the node refers to the city’s eigenvector
centrality.
Table 2.31 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality in the
other electrical equipment network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Brussels
34
46
49
50
48
55
54
Manchester
33
41
38
37
41
50
52
Basel
39
47
47
53
52
59
57
Zurich
17
24
27
30
34
35
35
Birmingham
25
34
35
36
40
40
41
London
12
13
15
22
19
22
28
Stockholm
22
19
26
26
27
32
38
Moscow
31
39
42
41
39
46
46
Rome
43
45
45
49
50
57
58
Fig. 2.5 The network of patents classiﬁed as other electrical equipment in the year 2014
46
S. Zaman

2.12
Data Analysis on the Network of Transport Patents
2.12.1
Outdegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average outdegree
strength in each of our time periods for the transport patent network, where rank 1 is
the city with the highest outdegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
We observe that in the beginning of our time period, Nagoya, Tokyo and
Stuttgart have the three highest outdegree strength. However, even though Nagoya
and Tokyo maintain high rankings throughout our time period, Stuttgart decreases
in rank substantially. Other cities that were ranked in the top three at one period or
another include Los Angeles and New York City.
We show in the Table 2.32, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
We see that with that with the exception of Seoul, Taipei and Singapore the rest
of the cities that have risen in rank throughout our time period include developed
cities. In the transport network, we see that cities from emerging countries have not
risen in rank as much as in the other networks.
In Table 2.33, we show the cities that have shown the most decline in terms of
relative outdegree strength throughout our time period.
2.12.2
Indegree Strength
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average indegree
strength in each of our time periods for the transport patent network, where rank 1 is
the city with the highest indegree strength and 62 is the one with the lowest.
Table 2.32 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative outdegree strength in
the transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
56
49
42
27
24
20
20
Taipei
40
35
25
22
17
17
15
Grenoble
48
39
34
28
29
30
35
Singapore
57
54
45
56
56
46
45
Frankfurt
53
40
30
42
37
44
42
Atlanta
26
24
24
16
18
16
17
Austin
30
38
33
32
28
28
21
Miami
22
16
17
15
15
13
13
Sydney
45
32
39
35
34
32
36
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
47

Just as the with the indegree strength, Nagoya, Tokyo and Stuttgart have the
three highest indegree strength. However, even though Nagoya and Tokyo maintain
high rankings throughout our time period, Stuttgart decreases in rank substantially.
Other cities that were ranked in the top three at one period or another include
Osaka, Los Angeles and Boston.
We show in Table 2.34, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
Even though we did not see a lot of developing cities improving in terms of
outdegree strength, we see that is not the case with indegree strength. Cities like
Guangzhou and Bangalore also show considerable improvement in terms of inde-
gree strength. This means that even though patents classiﬁed as transport within
these cities may not use trans-local links as much as other cities, they still are
becoming important sources of technological knowledge in this network.
Table 2.35 shows the cities which have declined the most in terms of relative
indegree strength in the transport network.
As expected, we see a lot of previously developed cities decline in terms of
relative indegree strength.
Table 2.33 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative outdegree strength in the
transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Mexico City
39
52
54
55
57
53
60
Manchester
34
37
44
38
46
48
52
Vienna
17
17
18
31
32
35
32
Birmingham
14
15
22
23
23
27
28
Brussels
36
45
47
52
43
51
49
Barcelona
31
31
41
37
36
40
43
Lyon
25
25
26
34
35
37
37
Paris
7
9
11
12
14
15
19
London
11
12
14
19
21
22
22
Table 2.34 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative indegree strength in
the transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
48
36
27
18
18
16
9
Madrid
53
44
50
34
49
35
31
Guangzhou
58
60
40
36
38
Hong Kong
46
55
43
40
36
32
29
Bangalore
47
32
Berlin
49
47
48
36
32
29
34
Taipei
38
29
22
22
17
19
23
Sydney
42
34
36
32
28
24
28
48
S. Zaman

2.12.3
Eigenvector Centrality
We ranked each city according to how they rank in terms of their average eigen-
vector centrality in each of our time periods for the transport patent network, where
rank 1 is the city with the highest eigenvector centrality and 62 is the one with the
lowest.
We see that almost throughout our time period, Tokyo has the highest eigen-
vector centrality. However, at the very end of our time period, Los Angles has the
highest eigenvector centrality. Other cities that were amongst the top three at one
period or the other include New York City and Boston.
We show in Table 2.36, the cities which have shown the greatest increase in
rank by the end of our time period.
Surprisingly, we see that developing cities have risen substantially in terms of
eigenvector centrality in the transport network. This is despite the fact that Beijing,
Guangzhou and Bangalore did not rise considerably in terms of their outdegree
strength.
In Table 2.37, we display cities that show considerable decline in terms of
eigenvector centrality throughout our time period.
Table 2.35 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative indegree strength in the
transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Helsinki
32
41
41
48
39
44
61
Vienna
15
16
21
35
35
34
42
Birmingham
20
21
23
27
27
30
43
Rome
37
39
35
54
50
56
58
Barcelona
34
32
45
46
58
45
54
Lyon
25
30
31
39
43
41
44
Manchester
35
45
54
49
41
48
53
Moscow
41
56
46
33
33
55
56
London
12
14
20
21
20
23
26
Table 2.36 Cities which showed the most improvement in terms of relative eigenvector centrality
in the transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Seoul
51
40
33
23
23
16
13
Bangalore
62
37
Taipei
32
30
21
21
19
19
15
Guangzhou
57
61
54
42
41
Beijing
57
56
55
53
44
Hong Kong
44
51
46
37
39
33
32
Grenoble
46
33
34
30
33
32
36
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
49

As expected, we see a lot of developed cities declining considerably in terms of
relative eigenvector centrality throughout our time period.
A snapshot of what the network looked like in 2014 is shown in Fig. 2.6. The
size of the node represents the eigenvector centrality of the city.
Table 2.37 Cities which showed the most decline in terms of relative eigenvector centrality in the
transport network
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Period 5
Period 6
Period 7
Mexico City
38
48
56
57
57
58
60
Barcelona
36
38
41
38
47
39
52
Birmingham
16
22
22
24
26
27
31
Rome
39
44
38
44
48
54
54
London
11
12
16
20
16
22
20
Lyon
25
29
31
34
35
36
34
Manchester
40
35
49
40
41
49
49
Pittsburgh
12
18
17
19
20
21
21
Vienna
29
26
32
35
36
41
38
Fig. 2.6 The network of patents classiﬁed as mechanical in the year 2014
50
S. Zaman

We can see from the ﬁgure above that the network of patents classiﬁed as
transport is not as dense as the other networks displayed before.
2.13
Some Conclusions
Overall, we see that the technological knowledge network is getting denser and
more dispersed. Technological knowledge connections to already connected cities
are becoming stronger, i.e. more technological knowledge is being shared between
different cities than before. As expected, we see that this new information age is
characterized by more technological knowledge sharing than previous time periods.
At the same time, more locations are joining the technological knowledge net-
work. Some of these emerging locations have become strong sources as well as
receivers of knowledge. On the other hand, some cities that were once very central
to the network are gradually decreasing in centrality over our time period. This falls
in line with the observations from scholars who stated that even though for most of
the twentieth century, the United States housed most of the world’s innovative
regions with a few scattered in Europe and Japan, this is no longer true (Florida
2005). New innovative urban areas are starting to emerge, while some former rich,
middle sized cities are starting to decline (Storper and Manville 2006).
We see many developing cities showing considerable improvements in their
rankings in terms of outdegree strength, indegree strength and eigenvector cen-
trality. Some cities, such as Seoul and Taipei stand out from the rest of the
developing cities, because they show a tremendous increase in all three of our
measures. Singapore and Hong Kong also show a lot of improvement across the
board, but to a lesser extent. Some cities such as Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou and
Bangalore are also improving in their outdegree strength, indegree strength and
eigenvector centrality but not as much as Singapore and Hong Kong.
When we look at networks divided by specialization we see that cities like
Guangzhou, Beijing and Bangalore have shown the most improvement in all three
measurements in the network of ICT patents. In addition, Bangalore and
Guangzhou also shows consider improvement in the network of ‘other electrical
equipment’ patents. It is interesting to see that newer cities are more central to
networks of newer technologies rather than the old. This is expected since inno-
vation is cumulative (Pavitt 1987), and a location might get locked in with a
particular industrial pattern or conﬁguration. This pattern is only likely to change
gradually over time, and a quick shift to a sector in which technological opportu-
nities are rising most rapidly might not be easy to achieve (Cantwell 1991). In
contrast, newer emerging locations are able to develop new technologies quicker
(Awate and Mudambi 2017). These new technologies are also more central to the
network as compared to older technologies, therefore emerging cities are likely to
grow more central as well (Awate and Mudambi 2017).
There are cities which continue to remain central to the network throughout the
time period. These include The Bay Area, New York City and Tokyo. Therefore,
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
51

even though there is a lot of movement and shift in the importance of cities, some
cities have managed to stay important sources and recipients of technological
knowledge. Interestingly, when we separate the networks according to their tech-
nological knowledge classiﬁcation, we see that these cities have relatively high
centrality in all networks.
Even though a lot of emerging cities have gained in centrality during our time
period, some cities consistently rank low. These include Mexico City, Buenos
Aires, Moscow and Sao Paulo.
We also observe that there is more change in the cities in terms of indegree
strengths when compared to outdegree strengths. This indicates that emerging cities
are gradually becoming more important sources of knowledge, but they have not
started receiving technological knowledge at the same rate. This may be because
their innovative rates are over all low, and therefore they utilize their external
technological knowledge connections less than the developed cities.
References
Archibugi, D. (1992). Patenting as an indicator of technological innovation: A review. Science and
public policy, 19(6), 357–368.
Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (1996). R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and
production. The American Economic Review, 86(3), 630–640.
Awate, S., & Mudambi, R. (2017). On the geography of emerging industry technological
networks: The breadth and depth of patented innovations. Journal of Economic Geography, 18
(2), 391–419.
Bathelt, H. (2007). Buzz-and-Pipeline dynamics: Towards a knowledge-based multiplier model of
clusters. Geography Compass, 1(6), 1282–1298.
Bathelt, H., & Glückler, J. (2011). The relational economy: Geographies of knowing and learning.
Oxford University Press.
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A., & Maskell, P. (2004). Clusters and knowledge: Local buzz, global
pipelines and the process of knowledge creation. Progress in Human Geography, 28(1),
31–56.
Bathelt, H. (2001). Regional competence and economic recovery: Divergent growth paths in
Boston’s high technology economy. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 13(4),
287–314.
Bramanti, A., & Ratti, R. (1997). The multi-faced dimensions of local development. In R. Ratti, A.
Bramanti, & R. Gordon (Eds.), The dynamics of innovative regions: The GREMI approach
(pp. 3–45). Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Bresnahan, T., Gambardella, A., & Saxenian, A. (2001). ‘Old economy’ inputs for ‘new economy’
outcomes: Cluster formation in the New Silicon Valleys. Industrial and Corporate Change, 10
(4), 835–860.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition. Harvard university press.
Cairncross, F. (1997). The death of distance: How the communications revolution will change our
lives. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press.
Cantwell, J. A., & Kosmopoulou, E. (2002). What Determines the Internationalisation of
Corporate Technology? In M. Forsgren, H. Hakanson, & V. Havila (Eds.), Critical
perspectives on internationalisation, (pp. 305–334). Pergamon: Oxford.
Cantwell, J. A., & Iammarino, S. (2005). Multinational corporations and European regional
systems of innovation. London: Routledge.
52
S. Zaman

Cantwell, J. A., & Santangelo, G. (2002). The new geography of corporate research in information
and communications technology (ICT). Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 12(1), 163–197.
Cantwell, J. A., & Vertova, G. (2004). Historical Evolution of Technological Diversiﬁcation.
Research Policy, 33(3), 511–529.
Cantwell, J. A., & Zaman, S. (2018). Connecting global and technological knowledge sourcing.
Competitiveness Review, 28(3), 277–294.
Cantwell, J. A. (1991). Historical trends in international patterns of technological innovation.
In J. Foreman-Peck (Ed.), New perspectives on the late victorian economy: Essays in
quantitative economic history, 1860–1914 (pp. 37–72). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Cantwell, J. A. (2006). The economics of patents. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). The logic of open innovation: Managing intellectual property. California
Management Review, 45(3), 33–58.
Florida, R. (2005). The world is spiky globalization has changed the economic playing ﬁeld, but
hasn’t leveled it. Atlantic Monthly, 296(3), 48.
Florida, R. (2002). The Rise of the Creative Class. and how it’s Transforming Work, Leisure and
Everyday Life.
Forstall, R. L., & Fitzsimmons, J. D. (1993). Metropolitan growth and expansion in the 1980s. US
Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census.
Foss, N., & Pedersen, T. (2004). Organizing knowledge processes in the multinational corporation:
An introduction. Journal of International Business Studies, 35(5), 340–349.
Frey, W. H., & Alden Jr, S. (1988). Regional and metropolitan growth and decline in the US.
Russell Sage Foundation.
Friedman, T. L. (2005). The world is ﬂat: A brief history of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Macmillan.
Friedmann, J. (1995). Where we stand: A decade of world city research. World cities in a world
system: 21–47.
Friedmann, J. (1986). The world city hypothesis. Development and Change, 17(1), 69–83.
Gertler, M. S. (2001). Best practice? Geography, learning and the institutional limits to strong
convergence. Journal of Economic Geography, 1(1), 5–26.
Goerzen, A., Asmussen, C., & Nielson, B. (2013). Global cities and multinational enterprise
location strategy. Journal of International Business Studies, 44, 427–450.
Grabher, G. (2002). Cool projects, boring institutions: Temporary collaboration in social context.
Regional Studies, 36(3), 205–214.
Hall, P. (2001). Global city-regions in the twenty-ﬁrst century. In A. Scott (Ed.), Global city—
regions: Trends. Theory, policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hotz-Hart, B. (2000). Innovation networks, regions and globalization. In The Oxford handbook of
economic geography (PP. 432–450). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jacobs, J. (1969). The economy of cities. New York: Vintage.
Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge
spillovers as evidenced by patent citations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 577–598.
Jaffe, A. B. (1989). Real effects of academic research. The American Economic Review, 957–970.
Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (1999). International knowledge ﬂows: Evidence from patent
citations. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 8(1–2), 105–136.
Kern,
H.
(1996).
Vertrauensverlust
Und
Blindes
Vertrauen:
Integrationsprobleme
Im
Ökonomischen Handeln Handeln (Loss of Trust and Blind Conﬁdence in Economic
Action). SOFI Soziologisches Forschungsinstitut Göttingen, 24, 7–14.
Kim, J., & Lee, S. (2015). Patent databases for innovation studies: A comparative analysis of
USPTO, EPO, JPO and KIPO. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 92, 332–345.
Leamer, E. E., & Storper, M. (2001). The economic geography of the internet age. Journal of
International Business Studies, 32(4), 641–666.
Lorenz, E. (1999). Trust, contract and economic cooperation. Cambridge Journal of Economics,
23(3), 301–315.
Lucas, R. (1988). On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics,
22(1), 3–42.
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
53

Maillat, D. (1998). Interactions between urban systems and localized productive systems: An
approach to endogenous regional development in terms of innovative milieu. European
Planning Studies, 6(2), 117–129.
Malecki, E. J. (2000). Knowledge and regional competitiveness (Wissen Und Regionale
Wettbewerbsfähigkeit). Erdkunde, 334–351.
Malecki, E. J., & Oinas, P. (1999). Making connections: Technological learning and regional
economic change. Ashgate Publishing Company.
Malmgren, H. B. (1961). Information, expectations and the theory of the ﬁrm. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 75(3), 399–421.
Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of economics, 8th Edn (1920). London: Mcmillan.
Nonaka, I., Toyama, R., & Nagata, A. (2000). A ﬁrm as a knowledge-creating entity: A new
perspective on the theory of the ﬁrm. Industrial and Corporate Change, 9(1), 1–20.
Oinas, P. (1999). Activity-speciﬁcity in organizational learning: Implications for analysing the role
of proximity. GeoJournal, 49(4), 363–372.
Owen-Smith, J., & Powell, W. (2004). Knowledge networks as channels and conduits: The effects
of spillovers in the boston biotechnology community. Organization Science, 15(1), 5–21.
Pavitt, K. (1987). The objectives of technology policy. Science and Public Policy.
Pavitt, K. (1988). Uses and abuses of patent statistics. In Handbook of quantitative studies of
science and technology (PP. 509–536). Elsevier.
Robertson, P., & Langlois, R. (1995). Innovation, networks, and vertical integration. Research
Policy, 24(4), 543–562.
Sassen, S. (1991). The global city: New York, London and Tokyo. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Sassen, S. (1994). The urban complex in a world economy. International Social Science Journal,
46, 43–62.
Sassen, S. (2012). Cities: A window into larger and smaller worlds. European Educational
Research Journal, 11(1), 1–10.
Saxenian, A. (1994). Regional networks: Industrial adaptation in silicon valley and route 128.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Scott, A. (1998). Regions and the world economy: The coming shape of global production,
competition, and political order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scott, A. J. (2001). Industrial revitalization in the ABC municipalities, Sao Paulo: Diagnostic
analysis and strategic recommendations for a new economy and a new regionalism. Regional
Development Studies, 7(2001), 1–32.
Scott, A., & Storper, M. (2003). Regions, globalization, development. Regional Studies, 37(6–7),
579–593.
Singh, J. (2004). Multinational ﬁrms and knowledge diffusion: Evidence using patent citation data,
2004(1), 1543–8643.
Storper, M. (2013). Keys to the city: How economics, institutions, social interaction, and politics
shape development. Princeton University Press.
Storper, M., & Manville, M. (2006). Behaviour, preferences and cities: Urban theory and urban
resurgence. Urban Studies, 43(8), 1247–1274.
Storper, M., & Venables, A. J. (2004). Buzz: Face-to-face contact and the urban economy. Journal
of Economic Geography, 4(4), 351–370.
Summers, A. A., Cheshire, P. C., & Senn, L. (1993). Urban change in the United States and
Western Europe: Comparative analysis and policy. The Urban Insitute.
Turkina, E., & Van Assche, A. (2018). Global connectedness and local innovation in industrial
clusters. Journal of International Business Studies, 1–23.
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks: The paradox of
embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35–67.
Uzzi, B. (1996). The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance of
organizations: The network effect. American Sociological Review, 674–698.
Vatne, E. (2001). Local versus extra-local relations: The importance of ties to information and the
institutional and territorial structure of technological systems.
54
S. Zaman

Veltz, P. (1996). Mondialisation, Villes Et Territoires. In L’économie d’archipel. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Wall, R. S., & Van der Knaap, G. (2011). Sectoral differentiation and network structure within
contemporary worldwide corporate networks. Economic Geography, 87(3), 267–308.
Salma Zaman (Ph.D., Rutgers University) is Assistant Professor at the Lahore University of
Management Sciences (LUMS) in Lahore, Pakistan. She completed her Ph.D. in International
Business from Rutgers Business School in Newark, New Jersey under the supervision of Dr. John
Cantwell. Her previous degrees include an MBA and an undergraduate degree in Computer
Science. Her most recent work, entitled “Connecting local and global technological knowledge
sourcing” was published in Competitiveness Review in 2018. Her research interests include
exploring the changing patterns of technological knowledge ﬂows across cities and the possible
causes and implications of these changing patterns.
2
Paradigm Changes in Technological Knowledge Connections …
55

Chapter 3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research
and Development (R&D) Capabilities
Takabumi Hayashi and Atsuho Nakayama
Abstract This paper examines to what extent research and development (R&D)
capabilities have geographically disseminated and dispersed worldwide, analyzing
scientiﬁc papers and patents as R&D outputs. As a result, global dispersion was
revealed using Lorenz curve and Gini Coefﬁcient, in the main ﬁeld of scientiﬁc
journals from INSPEC; Physics, Electrical Engineering, Electronics, computer and
control engineering including Information Technology, and Mechanical engineer-
ing. In the case that we examine foreign invented US patents excluding domesti-
cally invented patents in the US, we can see geographical dispersion among
nationalities since 1990, among others, much more than all the US patents
including
domestically
invented
patents
in
the
US.
Herﬁndahl-Hirschman
(HH) indicator also shows the decline in the degree of the concentration ratio.
The results obtained in this paper is that the number of nationalities of authors’
afﬁliation and that of nationalities of afﬁliations of U.S. patent inventors have
increased and diversiﬁed. Especially, R&D capabilities measured by nationalities of
authors’ afﬁliation remarks that point, rather than by those of US patent inventors,
which means that more and more countries have improved R&D capabilities, “R”
in particular.
Keywords Research and development capability  Global dispersion of R&D
capabilities  Scientiﬁc paper  US patent  Lorenz curve  Gini coefﬁcient 
Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index
T. Hayashi (&)
Rikkyo University, Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: takabumi@rikkyo.ac.jp
A. Nakayama
Marketing Sience, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: atsuho@tmu.ac.jp
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_3
57

3.1
Introduction
3.1.1
Research Objectives
Since the end of 1980s, digital networking of industrial and social activities with the
advance in information technology has not only accelerated the speed of knowledge
transfer and dispersion with the cross-border human migration, but also helped
research and development (= R&D) capabilities disperse globally ever than before.
Globalization of multinational enterprises (MNEs)’ R&D activities has also given
impetus to this phenomenon.
It should be noted that some ﬁrms and nationalities which have strategically
adapted to global dispersion of R&D capabilities could leverage these dispersed
R&D resources.
R&D capability has captured much attention from various viewpoints. The paper
refers to “international technology and knowledge transfer” (Hayashi 1995; Komoda
1987; Jeremy 1991; Kotabe et al. 2007; Sorenson and Fleming 2004), “national
innovation system including R&D expenses, human resources in R&D, industrial
cluster” (Badaracco 1990; Lundvall 1992, 2007; Nelson 1993; Porter 1998;
Saxenian 1996, 2006; Akashi and Ueda 1995; Nonaka 1995; Gotoh and Kodama
2006; Hayashi and Komoda 1993), and “product life cycle model” (Vernon 1979;
Cantwell 1995). The globalization of MNEs’ R&D activities has also been discussed
since the 1970s. The question naturally arises, to what extent R&D capabilities are
decentralized if the globalization of R&D activities proceeds. Although it has been
analyzed by Freeman and Hagedoorn (1995), Patel and Pavitt (1998), Hayashi
(2004a, b), a focus on the recent trend since the 2000s has not been veriﬁed.
This paper, therefore, examines to what extent R&D capabilities have geo-
graphically disseminated and dispersed worldwide by the methodology discussed
below.
3.1.2
Methodology
In this paper, we examine global dispersion of R&D capabilities, analyzing scientiﬁc
papers and patents as R&D outputs, not inputs such as R&D expenses or human
resources in R&D. We collect data of papers from INSPEC. INSPEC offers infor-
mation referring to scientiﬁc papers in the ﬁelds of computer, control engineering, and
mechanical engineering including physics, electrical engineering, and information
technology, excluding chemistry, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology. Thus, this
paper analyzes, setting the target at these ﬁelds mentioned above. Also, in order to
reduce noise, we search scientiﬁc papers published in any of the United States,
Britain, and Netherlands where major scientiﬁc papers are published. In the paper, we
do not consider citation index, which assess the degree of importance. We validate the
trend of dispersion by looking across 45 year transition, to mitigate such noise.
58
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

As to technological capabilities, we examine US patents from open data source
of USPTO.
In order to measure how capabilities are decentralized, we scrutinized the
number of nationals of author’s afﬁliation of papers and the number of nationals of
inventor’s afﬁliation of US patents. Therefore, data we processed in this paper refers
to nationalities of the location of afﬁliation, not individual passport nationality.
Lorenz curve, Gini coefﬁcient, and Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index are used in this
paper as statistical methods.
How are research and development capabilities distinguished and interrelated?
In other words, in what ways should we make distinctions and interrelations
between each other? This paper elucidates how much scientiﬁc papers contribute to
the technological invention, considering technological development capabilities of
ﬁrms or industries from the perspective of patented technologies. It is recognized
that it gives an insight into the process in which scientiﬁc papers lead to invention
by construing cited references in the statement for patent application of newly
developed technologies (Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002; Nagaoka 2011).
In that case, to what degree scientiﬁc papers pertain to the invention of patented
technology? According to the US and Japanese inventor’s survey which contributed
to patent applications to the United States, Europe, and Japan as well as domestic
application (Nagaoka 2011), the ratio of respondent who answered that scientiﬁc
references gave important ideas is on average of US and Japan 31% in chemistry,
51% in pharmaceuticals, and 51% in biotechnology respectively. It is 15% each in
hardware and software of the computer, 17% in data storage, 19% in communi-
cation technology, 22% in semiconductor device. Scientiﬁc references affect pos-
itively invention processes in these ﬁelds. Furthermore, the same methodological
survey taken from 2013 through 2014 shows that 57.9 inventions were made,
including those not applied, and 12.2 papers were published on academic journals
on average by 823 respondents. That survey from 2003 to 2005 demonstrated that
56.2 inventions and 10.9 papers, respectively (Nagaoka and Yamauchi 2014, p. 8).
Essentially, which do engineers and researchers prioritize, publications of academic
papers or invention of patented technologies? As is obvious, private companies
require them to prioritize the invention of patented technologies because their
bosses might underscore the rights of exclusive use and commercialization, given
ROE or stock price. As above, the number of patents tends to exceed that of papers.
The point that should be paid attention is that inventors do not always accom-
plish their R&D activities with the help of cited papers. When they present or
publish newly developed technologies, they are adjured to ask for patent applica-
tions from their afﬁliations, especially on technologies which would bring strategic
beneﬁts to the ﬁrm. It means that a certain degree of their papers refers to their
patentable technological achievement. That is to say, engineers or researchers open
their technological result to the public after taking measures to prevent patent
infringement, while gaining an insight from some scientiﬁc documents. It is
denoted that the number of patents and that of papers will move in an interrelated
way each other. In other words, both of them as indicators of R&D capabilities
complementally change each other.
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
59

3.2
Global Dispersion of Research and Development
Capability
In this section, we examine the global trend of scientiﬁc and technological capa-
bilities since 1970s by looking across the nationalities of author’s afﬁliation of
papers from INSPEC database. INSPEC offers the ﬁeld of computer, control
engineering, and mechanical engineering including physics, electrical engineering,
and information technology, excluding chemistry, pharmaceuticals, and biotech-
nology. Thus, this paper analyzes, targeting at these ﬁelds mentioned above.
Table 3.1 shows the transition in the number of nationalities of authors’ afﬁli-
ation appeared on journals in the United States, Britain and Netherlands from 1970
to 2015, dividing into four layers; more than one, ten, a hundred, and a thousand.
In 1970, out of journals in INSPEC, 86 nationalities were involved on at least
one paper in journals published in these countries, 47 on more than ten, 20 on more
than a hundred, and 11 on more than a thousand. This ﬁgure has augmented and in
2015, 187 nationalities appeared on at least one paper, 131, 79, and 59 in that order.
Provided that more than one thousand papers, nationalities incremented by 48 from
1970 to 2015. Whereas online publication has become more and more common
thanks to the rapid evolution of digital technology, the number of nationalities of
authors’ afﬁliation has dramatically increased, considering that we limit the pub-
lication to main three nationalities. Inevitably, the ratio that the afﬁliation from G7
Table 3.1 The transition in the number of nationalities of authors’ afﬁliation
Number of papers/Year
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2015
Over 1 paper
86
110
124
136
176
187
Over 10 papers
47
56
72
87
114
131
Over 100 papers
20
36
43
52
73
79
Over 1,000 papers
11
16
27
35
50
59
Share of G7 nationalities
80.4%
72.0%
68.1%
62.1%
48.7%
39.7%
Share of top ten nationalities
90.8%
87.8%
83.3%
72.6%
66.7%
64.8%
Note
(1) Publication countries are limited to US, UK and Netherland
(2) G7 countries are Canada, France, Italy, Germany, Japan, UK, and US
(3) The number of authors whose names are appeared on papers is generally plural. In that case,
the number of nationalities of institutions to which authors belong is also plural. For example,
when the number of authors of the same paper is ﬁve, 1 Japanese, 2 Chinese, 2 US, the number of
nationalities are counted 1 for Japanese, 2 for Chinese, and 2 for US in Table 1. Accordingly, total
number of the paper is counted as 3. The total number of papers including overlapped ones is
42,036 in 1970, 98,822 in 1980, 133,517 in 1990, 169,625 in 2000, 339,243, in 2010, and 530,843
in 2015
(4) Percentage share of G7 is that of the total number of papers including overlapped ones
(5) Language which is used in papers published in three countries mentioned above is mainly
English, accounting for 99.98% as of 2015
Source Compiled from INSPEC search
60
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

nationalities account for in major journals, reaching 80% before 2000, has dwindled
even to less than 40% in 2015. It means that while the number of nationalities of
authors’ afﬁliation, having enough R&D capabilities to complete a certain level of
scientiﬁc papers, has increased in these 45 years, the number of human resources
and institutions which have acquired high standard of R&D capabilities, have
dispersed globally over these years.
As Lorenz curve, shown in Fig. 3.1, helps express the gap appeared on the data,
the extent to this curve, the degree of inequality is shown by how far the Lorenz
curve appears above or drops below the line of perfect equality. The Lorenz curve,
here, can usually be represented by a function L(F), where F, the cumulative portion
of the number of nationality, is represented by the horizontal axis, and L, the
cumulative portion of the total papers, is represented by the vertical axis. Lorentz
curve L(F) for continuous distribution can be deﬁned as follows by expressing the
expectation value of the entire group as l.
LðFÞ ¼
R F
0 x F0
ð
ÞdF0
l
As it got closer to the 1970 curve, the curve got closer to 1.00 apart from the
even distribution line, and the concentration in the higher ranked nationalities has
increased.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
cumulative share of papers
cumulative share of nationalities
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Fig. 3.1 Lorenz curve, showing the number of papers by nationalities of author’s afﬁliations.
Note (1) The way of counting the number of papers by nationalities is shown in the note 3 of
Table 3.1. (2) Each year is the average of every 5 years. For example, 1970 is the average of 1970
and 1975. Source Compiled from ISPEC database search
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
61

Conversely, as approaching the curve in 2015, it approaches the even distribu-
tion line and moves away from 1.00, and the degree of dispersion is increasing. As
the area between the Lorenz curve and diagonal gets larger, the Gini Coefﬁcient
rises to reﬂect greater inequality, deﬁned as follows. The higher the number, the
greater the degree of papers.
G ¼
P
n
i¼1
P
n
j¼1
Yi  Yj


2Yn2
In this formula, n means the number of papers, and Yi means the number of
nationalities, which are ranked i (i = 1 … n) ordered by nationalities of author’s
afﬁliation. Y is the average number of papers by nationalities. A Gini Coefﬁcient of
zero expresses perfect equality, and one, where all the nationalities’ paper is earned
by a single nationality. Thus, Gini Coefﬁcient for a Lorenz curve is deﬁned as the
ratio of the area between the Lorenz curve and the diagonal to the triangle below the
diagonal line.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the change in Gini Coefﬁcient during this research period.
As is shown, since 1970, Gini Coefﬁcient has decreased much with no exception. In
other words, the number of the nationalities of author’s afﬁliations who issue
scientiﬁc papers increases and the concentration ratio on speciﬁc nationalities
decreases in recent years, showing that the more dispersion has been accelerated,
the closer to 2015.
Next, we processed the data to reveal the tendency of dispersion using
Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index (= HHI). HHI is one of indices that show the degree
of the market concentration by companies in some industries. HHI is calculated by
the sum of the squares of market shares of each company belonging to the industry.
The maximum index score is 1 if the sum of the market shares is 1. The maximum
0.966
0.956
0.939
0.920
0.900
Fig. 3.2 The transitive change in Gini coefﬁcient. Note Each year is the average of every 5 years.
For example, 1970 is the average of 1970 and 1975. Source Compiled from INSPEC database
search
62
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

index score is 10,000 if we assume the sum of the market shares as percentage. It
shows the case of a monopoly. HHI is deﬁned as follows
HHI ¼
X
n
i¼1
S2
i
In this formula, n means the number of papers (and patents), and Si means the
ratio of nationality i.
The concentration ratio of papers by nationalities of authors’ afﬁliation can be
revealed by HHI obtained from the sum of the squares of the ratio of papers by
nationalities of authors’ afﬁliation.
Table 3.2 shows the changes in the concentration ratio of papers by nationalities
of authors’ afﬁliation. Even though the proportion which top nationality’s papers
accounts for is the same, HHI gets lower ﬁgure if the proportion which other
nationalities’ papers is fewer. That is, the more papers are dispersed, the smaller
HHI is and vice versa.
Even though the proportion which top nationality’s papers accounts for is the
same, HHI gets lower ﬁgure if the proportion which other nationalities’ papers is
fewer. That is, the more papers are dispersed, the smaller HHI is and vice versa.
Herein we recognize that HHI gets higher when the proportion of the top nation-
ality’s papers account for is larger than that of other nationalities, which implies that
it is not dispersed. As shown in the same table, the concentration ratio of the
number of scientiﬁc papers is decreasing consistently. In that sense, the tendency of
global dispersion cannot be denied. In other words, as long as we verify the number
of papers by nationalities of author’s afﬁliation, global dispersion on R&D capa-
bilities has steadily been advanced.
It should be noted that while the total share of G7 has declined by more than 40
points, that of top ten nationalities has not so much declined as G7. Let us look at
the transition of top ten nationalities by twenty years.
Table 3.3 discloses that the top ten nationalities have been replaced in these
45 years. As of 2015, China and India have been ranked. To conclude, geo-
graphically worldwide dispersion has proceeded during 45 years, seen from the
perspective of the ability to complete the concerned scientiﬁc papers. Also, the
Table 3.2 The changes in
the concentration ratio by
HHI
HHI
1970
2699.05
1980
2062.56
1990
1600.69
2000
1055.17
2010
716.92
Source Compiled from INSPEC database search
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
63

concentration ratio of top nationalities represented by top ten nationalities has been
decreasing, not so much as that of G7. What is notable here is that the composition
of top nationalities has been dramatically changed for 45 years, and emerging
nationalities such as China or India have rapidly risen.
The next section examines whether the ability of technological development
capabilities, the capabilities needed when research outcome is applied to techno-
logical development at the commercialization stage, has globally dispersed alike.
3.3
Global Dispersion of Technological Development
Capabilities
When it comes to comparing the technological development capabilities among
nationalities, the number of patents is widely used, which guarantee exclusive
license to use newly invented technology for ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, the nationality of
ﬁrms and individuals to whom patents were granted in the U.S. should be scruti-
nized, which has many ﬁrms with competitive R&D capabilities and a huge market.
Herein we examine the ratio of the number of U.S. patent granted to foreign ﬁrms or
individuals.
In 1965, the ratio of overseas patents other than the U.S. was 19.9%, but it
reached 40% in 1980s, and ﬁnally more than half in 2010s. Interestingly enough,
the number of nationalities of ﬁrms or individuals to whom US patents were
granted, has increased, to more than 100 after 2010, and 123 as of 2015 (See
Table 3.4 [3]). In more detail, the number in every range shows a tendency to
Table 3.3 The transition of top ten nationalities of authors’ afﬁliations
1970
1990
2010
2015
1
US
54.8
US
38.8
US
20.4
CN
17.7
2
GB
11.9
SU
10.9
CN
11.7
US
15.3
3
SU
6.5
JP
7.2
DE
6.0
DE
5.2
4
CA
4.1
GB
7.0
GB
5.7
GB
5.0
5
DE
3.0
DE
5.4
JP
5.2
IN
4.5
6
JP
2.7
FR
3.8
FR
4.8
FR
4.2
7
FR
2.5
CA
3.5
IT
3.5
JP
3.9
8
IN
2.4
CN
2.4
CA
3.2
IT
3.3
9
AU
1.5
IT
2.4
IN
3.2
KP
2.9
10
NL
1.5
IN
2.0
KP
3.1
CA
2.7
Total share of top ten
90.8
83.3
66.7
64.8
Note Nationality code is as follows: US (United States), GB (UK), SU (Soviet Union), CA
(Canada), DE (Germany), JP (Japan), FR (France), IN (India), AU (Australia), NL (Netherland),
CN (China), IT (Italy), KP (Korea)
Source Same to Fig. 3.1
64
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

increase. It means that more and more nationalities acquired U.S. patent by newly
invented technologies in these 50 years and improved technological capabilities.
The structure diagrammed in Fig. 3.3 is Lorenz curve, showing the number of
U.S. patents granted to each nationality of the residents of afﬁliations to which
ﬁrst-named assignee belong from 1965 to 2015, every ﬁve years. The ratio of US
patents, granted to ﬁrms and individuals in developing or emerging nationalities
where industrial infrastructure is not in place, is smaller than that of scientiﬁc
papers, since a large amount of expense is incurred to invent patented technology.
In contrast, as shown in Fig. 3.3, the number of patents, granted to U.S. ﬁrms or
individuals, exceed that of any other nationalities. It is because these patent
applications are regarded as domestic. As a result, the concentration ratio on U.S.
nationalities gets higher and that on top nationalities is on the rise.
The closer to the curve of 1965, the higher the degree of concentration to the
upper level is. However, the closer to the curve of 2015, the smaller the area
surrounded by the even distribution line and the Lorenz curve. To that extent, the
degree of decentralization is getting higher.
What is noteworthy is that, as already mentioned, the ratio of the top ten
nationalities (excluding the United States) also rises so that the ratio of overseas
nationality patents is rising sharply.
Table 3.4 The ratio and the number of US patents granted to foreign nationals
1965
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2015
[1]
Number of US patents
granted
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
[2]
Overseas patents: %
19.9
26.9
39.6
47.6
46.0
50.9
52.8
[3]
Number of nationalities other
than the US (over 1 patent)
66
71
69
72
100
102
123
(3-1)
Number of nationalities over
20
22
26
28
32
35
45
57
(3-2)
Number of nationalities over
100
12
15
16
21
27
30
35
(3-3)
Number of nationalities over
500
8
9
9
10
16
20
23
(3-4)
Number of nationalities over
1,000
3
6
6
7
11
16
19
Share of top ten nationalities
(%)
21.6
27.4
36.8
40.9
38.6
44.2
44.7
Note Country of patent origin by USPTO is determined by the residence of the ﬁrst-named patent
assignee
Source USPTO, Calendar Year Patent Statistics
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
65

However, the ratio of the top ten nationalities to the number of overseas
nationality patents tends to decrease gradually. In that sense, the dispersion of
technological capabilities to many other nationalities seems to proceed worldwide
(See Fig. 3.4).
Next, we again address Lorenz curve of the number of US patents of overseas
nationalities other than those of the U.S. nationalities (Fig. 3.5).
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative share of patents
cumulative share of nationalities
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Fig. 3.3 Lorenz curve of the number of UP patents of overseas nationalities (including US
nationalities). Source Same to Table 3.4
21.56
27.4
36.83
40.93
38.64
44.15
44.72
92.46
91.64
91.91
92.3
89.78
86.71
84.77
23.58
29.88
40.48
44.91
44.31
50.92
52.76
0
20
40
60
80
100
1965
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2015
Share of top ten to the total US patents
Share of top ten to the overseas US patents
Overeas US patent ratio
Fig. 3.4 The ratio of the top ten nationalities to the number of overseas nationality in US patents.
Note Top ten nationalities other than the US. Source Same to Table 3.4
66
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

As are shown in Figs. 3.4 and 3.5, it is difﬁcult to conclude that the dispersion
trend is going on unlike what Fig. 3.1 shows clearly. We draw a comparison with
the transition of Gini Coefﬁcient (G). In this formula, n means the number of U.S.
patents, and Yi means the number of nationalities, which are ranked i (i = 1 … n)
ordered by nationalities of inventor’s afﬁliation. Y is the average number of patents
by nationalities. A Gini Coefﬁcient of zero expresses perfect equality, and one,
where the gap is the largest. Thus, Gini Coefﬁcient for a Lorenz curve is deﬁned as
the ratio of the area between the Lorenz curve and the diagonal to the triangle below
the diagonal line. Table 3.5 shows that Gini Coefﬁcient of patents including whose
nationality is the U.S. is declining.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Cumulative share of US patents
Cumulative share of nationalities
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Fig. 3.5 Lorenz curve of the number of US patents of overseas nationalities (excluding US
nationalities). Source Same to Table 3.4
Table 3.5 Gini Coefﬁcient of US patents by the nationality of the residence of the ﬁrst-named
assignee
Gini coefﬁcient (including US)
Gini coefﬁcient (excluding US)
1970
0.980
0.958
1980
0.977
0.962
1990
0.976
0.964
2000
0.973
0.958
2010
0.965
0.949
Note Figure of each year is the average of every 5 years. For example, 1970 is the average of 1970
and 1975
Source Same to Table 3.4
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
67

In contrast, Gini Coefﬁcient of patents except whose nationality is the U.S., rose
until 1990 and turned into drops after that. In 2010, it fell down from the ﬁgure that
include all patents (0.965) to 0.949, the average between 2010 and 2015. In other
words, it means that the number of nationalities other than the U.S. has also been
globally dispersed, but not so much as that of scientiﬁc papers.
We scrutinized HHI like as the number of nationalities of papers. Table 3.6
shows the result. The ﬁgure has been consistently decreasing since 1970 when we
include patents of U.S. nationality, whereas the concentration ratio of patents other
than U.S. nationality, had increased until 1990, and dropped rapidly. The reason
why HHI increased after 1980s is as follows. In 1970s, while there was not so much
difference between the proportion of U.S. nationalities and that of other than the
U.S. In 1980s, the number of patents whose nationalities other than the U.S., which
was ranked top, increased and the deviation of the ratio occurred. The trend that
HHI has decreased from 2000s means that global dispersion is going on, because
the gap between the number of patents of top nationalities other than the U.S. and
other nationalities has shrunk. The top three nationalities from 1970s to 2010s
excluding the U.S. is Japan, Germany, and Great Britain, respectively. Each per-
centage share was 0.253, 0.211, 0.133 in 1970, 0.351, 0.221, 0.087 in 1980s, 0.466,
0.160, and 0.064 in 1990s. However, since 2000, other nationalities ranked below
Japan increased the number of patents. As a result, the gap of the number of patents
has been closer between upper and lower ranked nationalities towards the inter-
national diversiﬁcation and divergence of technological capabilities.
Next, we ascertain that which nationalities have been ranked to date. As is
shown in Table 3.7, while European nationalities such as Germany and Great
Britain, and Japan, which consist of G7 nationalities, accounted for a large portion
in 1965, Taiwan emerged in top ten in 1990s, and South Korea, Taiwan, China,
Israel and India ranked within top ten nationalities in 2015.
It implicates that conventional world system composed of nationalities repre-
sented by G7 which used to hold competitive R&D capabilities, has dramatically
changed and globally dispersed by the rise of emerging nationalities in the last ﬁfty
years.
Table 3.6 HHI: The trend of
concentration of US patents
by nationality
HHI (including US)
HHI (excluding US)
1970
4868.05
1460.38
1980
3665.98
1928.10
1990
3438.47
2559.02
2000
3304.75
2242.17
2010
2761.27
1684.92
Note Figure of each year is the average of every 5 years. For
example, 1970 is the average of 1970 and 1975
Source Same to Table 3.4
68
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

3.4
Conclusion
The basic research question in this chapter is as follows. Firms need now to explore
and exploit R&D resources globally in order to improve these capabilities that take
a fundamental role for new products or services, in line with the recent globalization
of business activities and innovation of information technologies. However, if ﬁrms
rely on overseas R&D resources excessively, their capabilities at home would
become hollowlose. At the same time, if ﬁrms construct a comprehensive system
that enables them to exploit overseas R&D resources effectively and create syn-
ergistic effects, R&D capabilities would be globally intensiﬁed. It means that global
dispersion and concentration on speciﬁc nationalities of R&D capabilities could
simultaneously progress in parallel.
Thus, this paper has tried to clarify the global trend of R&D capabilities from
1960s to 2015, examining scientiﬁc papers and US patents. As a result, global
dispersion was revealed using Lorenz curve and Gini Coefﬁcient, in the main ﬁeld
of scientiﬁc journals from INSPEC; Physics, Electrical Engineering, Electronics,
computer
and
control
engineering
including
Information
Technology,
and
Mechanical engineering.
In the case that we examine foreign invented US patents excluding US patents
invented in the US, we can see geographical dispersion among nationalities since
Table 3.7 Top ten overseas nationalities of US patents and the ratios to the total US patents
1965
1990
2015
US
80.1%
US
52.4%
US
47.2%
Other the US
19.9%
Other the US
47.6%
Other the US
52.8%
1
DE
(5.3)
JP
(21.6)
JP
(17.6)
2
UK
(4.1)
DE
(8.4)
KP
(6.0)
3
FR
(2.2)
UK
(3.1)
DE
(5.5)
4
JP
(1.5)
FR
(3.2)
TW
(3.9)
5
CH
(1.4)
CA
(2.1)
CN
(2.7)
6
CA
(1.4)
IT
(1.4)
CA
(2.3)
7
SW
(0.9)
CH
(1.4)
FR
(2.2)
8
IT
(0.7)
NL
(1.1)
UK
(2.2)
9
NL
(0.8)
SW
(0.8)
IS
(1.2)
10
BE
(0.3)
TW
(0.8)
IN
(1.1)
Share of top ten other
than US
21.6
40.9
44.7
Share of G7
95.5
92.2
77.0
Note Nationality code is as follows: US (United States), DE (Germany), FR (France), JP (Japan),
CH (Switzerland), CA (Canada), SW (Sweden), IT (Italy), IN (India), NL (Netherland), BE
(Belgium), TW (Taiwan), KP (Korea), CN (China), IS (Israel)
Source Same to Table 3.4
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
69

1990, much more than all the US patents including US patents invented in the US.
HHI indicator also shows the decline in the degree of the concentration ratio.
The results obtained in this paper is that the number of nationalities of authors’
afﬁliation and that of nationalities of afﬁliations of the ﬁrst-named U.S. patent
assignees have increased and diversiﬁed. Especially, R&D capabilities measured by
nationalities of authors’ afﬁliation remarks that point, rather than by those of US
patent inventors, which means that more and more countries have improved R&D
capabilities, “R” in particular.
A limitation of this study is that we cannot conclude whether and to what degree
research and development capabilities would complementarily progress in step with
each other or in parallel. We need further in-depth research study by speciﬁc
companies, industries and technologies.
References
Akashi, Y., & Ueda, H. (1995). Nihon kigyou no kenkyu-kaihatsu sisutemu (R&D system of
Japanese Companies), Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
Archibugi, D., & Michie, J. (Eds.). (1997). Technology, globalization and economic performance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Asakawa, K. (2011). Gurobaru R&D manejimento (global R&D management). Tokyo: Keio
University Press.
Badaracco, J, Jr. (1990). The knowledge link: How ﬁrms compete through strategic alliances.
Cantwell, J. A. (1995). The globalization of technology: What remains of the product cycle model?
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 19(1), 155–174.
Freeman, C., & Hagedoorn, J. (1995). Convergence and divergence in the internationalization of
technology. In J. Hagedoorn (Ed.), Technical change and the world economy (pp. 34–57).
Vermont: Edward Elgar.
Gotoh, A., & Kodama, T. (Eds.). (2006). Nihon no inobeishon sisutemu (Innovation system of
Japan). Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
Hayashi, T. (1995). Higashi Ajia ni okeru gijutsu chikuseki to nihongata gijutsu iten sisutemu,
(Technological accumulation in East Asia and the Japanese-style technology transfer system).
In B. Chin & T. Hayashi (Eds.), Ajia ni okeru gijutsu hatten to gijutsu iten (Technological
development and technology transfer in Asia), Chap. 2. Tokyo: Bunshindo.
Hayashi, T. (2004a). Globalization and networking of R&D activities by 19 electronics MNCs.
In M. Serapio & T. Hayashi (Eds.), Internationalization of research and development and the
emergence of global R&D networks (pp. 85–112). Oxford: Elesvier.
Hayashi, T. (2004b). Kenkyu kaihatsu nouryoku no kokusaiteki bunsanka to shuchuka
(International dispersion and concentration of R&D capabilities). Rikkyo Keizaigaku-Kenkyu,
57(3), 63–87.
Hayashi, T., & Komoda, F. (1993). Gendai No Sekaikeizai To Gijutsu Kakusshin (Contemporary
world economy and technological innovation). Minerva Shobo: Tokyo.
Jaffe, A., & Trajtenberg, M. (Eds.). (2002). Patents, citations, and innovations: A window on the
knowledge economy. In Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data. MIT.
Jeremy, D. J. (1991). International technology transfer. Edward Elgar: Aldershot.
Komoda, F. (1987). Kokusai gijutsu iten no riron (Theory of international technology transfer).
Yuhikaku: Tokyo.
Kotabe, M., et al. (2007). Determinants of cross-national knowledge transfer and its effect on ﬁrm
innovation. Journal of International Business Studies, 38, 259–282.
70
T. Hayashi and A. Nakayama

Lundvall, B.-A. (Ed.). (1992). National systems of innovation: Towards a theory of innovation and
interactive learning. London: Pinter.
Lundvall, B.-A. (2007). National innovation systems: analytical concept and development tool.
Industry and Innovation, 14(1), 95–119.
Nagaoka, S. (2011). Amerika to nihon no inobeishon purosesu (Innovation process of the US and
Japan). In S. Fujita, & S. Nagaoka (Eds.), Seisansei to inobeishon sisutemu (Productivity and
innovation system) (Chap. 4, pp. 147–190). Tokyo: Nippon Hyouronsha.
Nagaoka, S., & Yamauchi, Y. (2014). Hatsumei no kagakuteki gensen (Scientiﬁc sources of
inventions). In RIETI Discussion Paper Series 14-J-038 (pp. 1–74).
Nelson, R. (Ed.). (1993). National innovation systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nonaka, I. (1995). Nihon gata inobeishon sisutemu (Japanese style innovation system).
Hakutoshobo: Tokyo.
Patel, P., & Pavitt, K. (1998). Uneven technological accumulation among advanced countries.
In G. Dosi, D. J. Teece, & J. Chytry (Eds.), Technology, organization, and competitiveness
(pp. 289–317). NY: Oxford University Press.
Porter, M. E. (1998). The competitive advantage of nations. NY.: The Free Press.
Saxenian, A. (1996). Regional advantage: culture and competition in Silicon Valley and Route
128. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Saxenian, A. (2006). The new argonauts: regional advantage in a global economy. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Sorenson, O., & Fleming, L. (2004). Science and the diffusion of knowledge. Research Policy, 33,
1615–1634.
Vernon, R. (1979). The product cycle hypothesis in a new international environment. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 41(4), 255–267.
Takabumi Hayashi (Ph.D. in Economics, Rikkyo University) is Professor Emeritus of Rikkyo
University, Tokyo. He successively ﬁlled the position of senior lecturer at Fukuoka University,
associate professor and professor of International Business at Rikkyo University, and Professor at
Kokushikan University, Tokyo. His recent research arears are innovation systems and R&D
management, focusing on knowledge creation and diversity management. His works have been
widely published in books and journals. His book “Multinational Enterprises and Intellectual
Property Rights” (in Japanese; Moriyama Shoten, Tokyo, 1989.)” is widely cited, and
“Characteristics of Markets in Emerging Countries and New BOP Strategies” (in Japanese;
Bunshindo, Tokyo, 2016) received the award from Japan Scholarly Association of Asian
Management (JSAAM) in 2018. He has been sitting on the editorial board of several academic
journals.
Atsuho Nakayama (Ph.D. Rikkyo University) is Associate Professor of Marketing Science at
Graduate School of Management, Tokyo Metropolitan University. His recent research interests
include the visualization and reduction of large and complex data about consumer behavior.
A huge quantity of information is often available but standard statistical techniques are usually not
well suited to managing these kinds of data. He has studied image and text data analysis using
machine learning techniques and deep learning techniques. He plans to use consumers’ uploading
habits on the internet for marketing purposes. He has published many papers about behavior-
metrics and multivariate analysis.
3
World-Wide Dispersion of Research …
71

Chapter 4
International Standardization
of the New Technology Paradigm:
A Strategy for Royalty-Free
Intellectual Property
Yasuro Uchida
Abstract Since the establishment of the World Trade Organization in 1995,
international standardization of intellectual property (IP) has become more impor-
tant as multinational enterprise form their international competitive advantages.
This activity means “the internationalization of IP.” In addition, Internet of Things
(IoT) has become important in recent years, and the activities of related tech-
nologies are being aggressively promoted. What is important in IoT is the devel-
opment of an environment that can utilize this technology regardless of industry
type. In other words, it is “inter-industrialization of IP.” Today’s technological
development competition is inevitably the “inter-industrialization of IP” while at
the same time the “internationalization of IP.” Moreover, when internationalization
and inter-industrialization are promoted at the same time, it turns out that there is a
big change in the role of IP. In the past, one of the roles of IP was to generate a
source of revenues from royalties, but what is now increasing in IoT-related
business ﬁelds is actually royalty-free. Thus, a paradigm shift in IoT ﬁeld has
occurred. Now there are more cases where patent holders have made their IP
royalty-free. Consequently, it is royalty-free IP that holds the key to the paradigm
shift in the IoT ﬁeld. Why royalty-free cases are increasing is examined in detail
along with the phenomenon’s background in this chapter. Furthermore, this chapter
aims to clarify what kind of technology strategy is required for MNEs promoting
technology development in such a complex business environment. At the same
time, a new “viewpoint of inter-industrial business studies” is added to existing
international business studies.
Keywords Royalty-free  Intellectual property  International standard 
Inter-industrialization  International business
Y. Uchida (&)
Graduate School of Business, University of Hyogo, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan
e-mail: y-uchida@mba.u-hyogo.ac.jp
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_4
73

4.1
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to clarify the mechanism of royalty-free intellectual
property (IP) that can be recognized as a new trend of innovation. As companies
aim to innovate and spread new technology to the global market through interna-
tional standardization required by the World Trade Organization (WTO), at the
same time they hope to earn huge proﬁts through collecting royalties. However, in
recent years, although IP has been a consistent a source of such revenue, a
movement to make it free of charge is rapidly growing, particularly in new technical
ﬁelds as seen in the Internet of Things (IoT). This is different from the
consumer-driven free innovation that Hippel talks of (Hippel 2016)—is the phe-
nomenon that technology developers themselves are making products free of
charge.
What is common to these phenomena is they are occurring in a business ﬁeld
where internationalization and inter-industrialization progress simultaneously.
Indeed, the assertion that “international business” and “inter-industrial business” are
simultaneous can be conﬁrmed in today’s IoT business. In current research on
international business, what is developing is more than “synchronization between
internationalization and inter-industrialization”. In this environment and as this
phenomenon progresses, royalty-free IP will be the standard.
For example, Fig. 4.1 shows how Toyota Motor Corporation, one of Japan’s
leading companies, has progressed in development projects with other companies
since 1980. As shown in this ﬁgure, Toyota’s alliance strategy is classiﬁed into four
types from I to IV. Two points stand out markedly in the early 1990s. At this time,
the US political press was calling for the Japanese market to open up. In Japan,
domestic automobile manufacturers, including Toyota, had shown rapid interna-
tionalization of the domestic market through alliances with US automobile manu-
facturers. The second feature is that, as shown in type IV, Toyota has been
increasing its partnership with “different industry ﬁrms in other countries” since
2000. It has promoted alliances with leading overseas IT companies such as
Microsoft and Google, and companies involved with electric vehicle (EV) charging
technology. After 2010, “Type II” type trends also increase. This means that
internationalization and inter-industrialization were progressing at the same time.
Under such circumstances, in January 2015 Toyota announced that it would make
the technology related to fuel cell vehicles (FCV) royalty-free.
In traditional technology strategies, IP of key technologies has been utilized
signiﬁcantly in proprietary licenses in business activities, and ﬁrms gained licensing
income through spread of the technology. However, in a business environment
where internationalization and inter-industrialization are synchronized, the role of
IP has changed dramatically. It can be seen that the change of role of IP means that
the paradigm shift has been occurred. Why did such changes come emerge?
Here, the research question of this chapter is proposed: What is the strategic
meaning of IP that holds the key to “synchronization between internationalization
and inter-industrialization”? As mentioned above, in international business studies,
74
Y. Uchida

IP has been regarded as a source of overwhelming competitive advantage or as a
source of patent revenue income. The competitive advantages of the alliance
between Microsoft and Intel, once called “Wintel”, were captured in such a context.
Also, as ﬁrms group in consortia for technology development, the patent pool is
important in distributing income from patent fees to the participating companies.
However, in the current ﬁeld of technology development where international-
ization and inter-industrialization progress simultaneously, a different type of IP has
been emerging. In recent years, consortia to develop technology related to IoT to
spread the developed technology at once, and make essential patents royalty-free.
Cases like Toyota illustrated earlier are becoming the norm in IoT (Uchida 2016).
In this chapter, the next section examines the research question, positioned
against the background of previous research. Next, progress of royalty-free in the
IoT ﬁeld is conﬁrmed based on data of from Telecommunication Technology
Committee (TTC), an organization afﬁliated with the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and Communications of Japan, which is investigating the development of infor-
mation technology around the world. In a TTC survey published in 2017 (TTC
2017), about 60 organizations were listed as active in the IoT consortia. This
research reveals that in consortia founded after 2008, approximately 70% of the
consortia make their IP royalty-free. This chapter will discuss the trend and
background of that development to clarify the mechanism of the paradigm shift in
the IoT ﬁeld.
In addition, the third section introduces two kinds of cases regarding to above
argument. The ﬁrst one is the Open Connectivity Foundation (OCF), one of the
representative agencies among those consortia, and the activities of Qualcomm, the
core member of the OCF. Although patent revenue accounted for about one-third of
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2009
2010-2014
Cumulative frequency
Fig. 4.1 Type of Toyota’s alliance strategy (1980–2014). Notes This table shows following four
types of alliances by Toyota. I: the same industry enterprises in Japan. II: the same industry
enterprises in other countries. III: the different industry enterprises in Japan. IV: the different
industry enterprises in other countries. Source Nihon Keizai Shimbun (Nikkei), January 1, 1980–
December 31, 2014. Search words are “Toyota” and “Alliance”, 152 cases out of 3,304 cases.
Subsidiary cases are excluded. Duplicate articles were put together as one case
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
75

total sales, the OCF is helping ﬁrms make their technology free of royalties. The
meaning of the strategy will be explored. And the second one is the case of GS1
EPCglobal which is one of the biggest standard developing organization. Through
introducing the process of standardization, the meaning of royalty-free IP will be
discussed.
4.2
Transition of International Business Studies
Until the 1990s, much of the research related to innovation was limited to speciﬁed
industries. Discussion on innovation focused on ﬁrms seeking self-sufﬁciency
through internal resources and R&D systems. However, such “closed innovation”
had gradually begun to show limitations. Also, companies with existing businesses
could have an advantage when sustaining innovation, but it became clear that there
was a tendency to lag behind disruptive innovation (Christensen 1997).
Attention shifted to the importance of “open innovation” (Chesbrough 2003). It
became necessary for companies to transform their internal business model to
incorporate external resources and technologies (Chesbrough 2006). Thus, in the
2000s, the direction of research on innovation began to change, and as a result
many remarkable discoveries were made. Cantwell presented a new perspective on
traditional MNEs theory by combining research on corporate innovation manage-
ment with research on national innovation systems (Cantwell and Iammarino 2003;
Cantwell and Molero 2003; Armann and Cantwell 2012). In particular, it is worth
noting that ﬁrms in emerging countries did not limit innovation management to
speciﬁc areas (Armann and Cantwell 2012); innovation not only transcended
national boundaries, but also spread beyond industries and businesses, including
information and telecommunications, electric machinery, and even the automobile
industry (Armann and Cantwell 2012). In other words, the viewpoint of
inter-industrialization has been added. The phenomenon that such international-
ization and inter-industrialization are advancing is consistent with the trend of
Toyota as mentioned above.
Meanwhile, Chesbrough discussed the relationship between innovation man-
agement and the theory of dynamic capability (Chesbrough 2001). Dynamic
capability is the ability of a company to integrate, build, and reconﬁgure internal
and external resources and capabilities to deal with rapidly changing business
environments (Teece 2009). Armann and Cantwell (2012) also analyzed the evo-
lution mechanism of innovation management by companies in emerging markets,
introducing perspectives of dynamic capabilities and open innovation.
Cantwell also showed an important perspective, co-authoring with Dunning:
multinational enterprises respond to complex uncertainties by shifting to a ﬂexible
and open business network structure in order to adapt to the changes of the envi-
ronment. He pointed out that MNEs have come up with solutions to acquire
decentralized knowledge and recombine it. The cause was found in the transition to
an open business network structure (Cantwell et al. 2010). This means that
76
Y. Uchida

multinational enterprises must deal with inter-industrialization. MNEs are now
responding to the call of inter-industrialization, crossing boundaries across indus-
tries. For example, it is well known that GE is advancing service sales, leasing
power per hour, as well as manufacturing aircraft engines.
Today, as MNEs promote both internationalization and inter-industrialization,
we see that internationalization and inter-industrialization are part of the innovation
process. Next, previous research on the innovation process is outlined.
4.3
Changes in Research on Innovation Process
As the business activities of MNEs became inter-industrialized, innovation pro-
cesses became part of inter-industrialization. In the background, there has been an
increase in the inﬂuence of the WTO in inter-industrialization and innovation
processes.
4.3.1
Inﬂuence of WTO
Of the over 160 WTO member countries, 23 are advancing toward afﬁliation. Since
most major countries have joined the WTO, the organization’s rules have a note-
worthy inﬂuence on international business as a whole.
When the WTO was established in 1995, all of the WTO members agreed to
observe an agreement on technical barriers to trade (TBT). According to the TBT
agreement, in international business, when companies need new standards, the
WTO requires the members to base them on international standards, like those of
the
International
Standardization
Organization
(ISO),
the
International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), etc. already published in principle. As such,
using an original standard that obstructs free trade is forbidden. A duty to conform
to the standards that deﬁne international business, that is, the de jure standard, is
imposed.
Unfortunately, a company with its own deﬁned standard, unless it is the inter-
national standard, cannot export its products.
In the early 2000s, Japan’s cell phone manufacturers failed to export their
products because Japanese communication standards were not accepted as inter-
nationally standardized. At that time, a phenomenon known “Galapagos Syndrome”
occurred. This describes a situation in which a superior fails to spread globally and
is forced to continue its evolution in only the country it was created in. The term is
named after organisms living on the Galapagos Islands, i.e. organisms that evolve
independently in a closed environment.
It goes without saying that communication technology is of upmost importance
in the mobile phone industry. Currently, preparations are being made toward the
practical use of the ﬁfth generation mobile phone technology, however, originally
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
77

this industry had been promoted mainly in Europe. In particular, Nokia had played
the central role in this industry from the ﬁrst generation. Gower and Cusumano’s
investigation (2002) is helpful in elaborating on Nokia’s strategic behavior at the
time.
In the ﬁrst generation, Nokia actively promoted the development of Nordic
Mobile Telephone (NMT), which was a common communications system in
Northern Europe, where their company was located. However, in Europe, com-
munication standards had been mufﬂed because each country had constructed its
own communication system.
Nokia failed to disseminate the NMT system as each European country had its
own standards, like TACS in the UK, Radiocom 2000 in France, C-NET in
Germany and RTMI/RTMS in Italy. However, Nokia learned how important an
international standard in communication technology was through this experience.
This lesson was put to use in the second generation. Nokia promoted the devel-
opment of GSM (Global System for Mobile Telecommunications) with other
mobile phone manufacturers like Motorola. GSM is based on NMT, the system
actively promoted by Nokia. They proposed this communication system to the
European
standardization
body,
the
European
Conference
of
Postal
and
Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT), and since the European Commission
also supported the GSM, 18 European countries decided to adopt it in 1991. GSM
became an international standard in this way and it has been actively introduced in
other countries and regions.
In
contrast,
Japan
had
developed
its
own
communication
system
of
second-generation communication technology, called PDC (Personal Digital
Cellular). It was developed mainly by NTT DoCoMo. PDC became the standard in
Japan’s mobile phone industry, but it did not conform to GSM, which was being
advanced in most countries and regions of the world. Thus, the phenomenon of
distinctive evolution, the aforementioned “Galapagos Syndrome,” progressed.
PDC was standardized only in Japan, and thus was not considered an interna-
tional standard, even though the technical evaluation of PDC was very positive and
Japan fell behind in the international standardization process based in Europe. In the
end, as GSM had become the standard, a unique domestic industrial structure was
built up in Japan.
By this example, it is clear that international standardization is the key to the
spread of technology. International standardization has the possibility to create a
strategic position for standard-setting companies.
4.3.2
Changes in the Standardization Process
Naturally, WTO regulation is not the only reason behind international standards
becoming important in international business; it is also because international
standards directly connect to international competitive advantages. Since the
standardized products can be mass-produced for international standards regardless
78
Y. Uchida

of differences in regions and countries, it acts as a driving force for the manufac-
turing industry and produces great economic effects (Takeda 1998).
In addition, network externalities work with standards that are popular enough to
surpass competing standards in the market. Network externalities bring about a
phenomenon called “positive feedback” that makes the dominant standards stronger
and stronger, giving a standard an overwhelming competitive advantage (Arthur
1994, 1996; Schilling 2002; Burg and Kenney 2003; Suarez and Lanzolla 2005), if
it becomes the de facto standard. Therefore, the de facto standard also has a
remarkable meaning in global business (Katz and Shapiro 1985; Farrell and Saloner
1986; Christensen et al. 1998).
As a result of such competition, the “ex-ante standard”, which standardizes
before competition, has become general in recent years from the “ex-post standard”
where standardization advances.
The biggest reason for this is to avoid the risk of competition (Yamada 2004). As
mentioned above, companies with dominant standards have enough momentum to
monopolize the market based on their technology, and it is extremely difﬁcult for
inferior companies to reverse it. In areas where huge investments in development
are required, a company must avoid losing competition over standardization. For
this reason, ex-ante standards are selected to promote standardization, while ﬁrms
negotiate with companies that have competing standards before putting their
products on the market. In the past, for example, the “DVD Consortium”, formed in
1995 by companies with technology licenses, standardized DVDs before the
products were released to the market.
Therefore, in recent years, the process of forming a consortium before market
introduction, developing standardization within it, and submitting it to international
standardization organizations like the ISO and IEC has become generalized. DVDs
have also been certiﬁed by ISO/IEC in 1999 through the DVD Consortium (“DVD
Forum” since September 1997) through Ecma International (European Computer
Manufacturer Association).
In the case of the ex-ante standard, unlike the de facto standard, standard
development companies can avoid competition for standardization, but in order to
standardize, consensus must be obtained within the consortia. It is difﬁcult to agree
on standardization at the consortium level based on the coordination needed among
companies to reach a consensus.
Thus, the method with which to advance the standardization is clearly different
from the process of the ex-post standard in terms of whether competition in the
market is necessary, or adjustment to obtain an agreement in the consortium is
necessary (see Fig. 4.2). Recently, standards following these processes have come
to be called “Consensus-Based Standards”. Because these consensus-based stan-
dards cannot promote standardization with only one company, standardization must
be promoted in cooperation with other companies at a consortium. Therefore, it is
assumed that such standards should be shared with members of the consortium. So,
in the case of the standardization of such processes, a business model that promotes
both cooperation and competition is essential (Krechmer 2006; Shintaku and Eto
2008; Uchida 2008). Various veriﬁcations have been promoted from the
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
79

relationship between standards and IP in international business (Sakakibara 2005;
Sakakibara and Kayama 2006). For example, one a business model embeds IP in
the standard itself and thus obtains license revenue based on it.
Even if ﬁnished products become commoditized and lose their competitive
advantage, it is possible to anticipate IP income if the company’s technology is
adopted as a core technology of products that are spread globally. Currently, a
business model combining international standards and IP is seen as a powerful
strategy for the commoditization of innovation, when consensus-based standards
have become common.
In this way, although the standardization process has greatly differed from the
past, it can be conﬁrmed that the technology standard also plays an important role
for international business. International standards are becoming more meaningful as
part of a competitive strategy aimed at earnings based on IP.
4.3.3
Changes in Innovation Process
Figure 4.3 is a summary of the areas in which technology is utilized. The horizontal
axis shows the regional classiﬁcation where the developed technology is utilized. It
is a classiﬁcation according to whether technology is utilized only within a speciﬁc
country or region, or whether it is based on an international situation. For example,
when the technology utilized in “B” is also utilized in “C”, “international stan-
dardization of technology” will be pushed forward and as such, that strategy also
becomes necessary.
On the other hand, the vertical axis is categorized according to the business area
where the developed technology is utilized. This axis separates cases where tech-
nology is used only in a speciﬁc industries and cases where technology is used
beyond the industry. When the technology utilized in “B” is also utilized in another
industry, it is necessary to make an “inter-industrial standardization of technology.”
Companies’ business activities are, in general, similar. After the company’s
Spread in Market
Ex-post 
Standard
Ex-ante 
Standard
Spread in Market
Standardization in 
Consortium
Earning Profit
de facto Standard
Earning Profit
Fig. 4.2 Difference between Ex-ante Standard and Ex-post Standard
80
Y. Uchida

activities shift from B to C in this ﬁgure, international business studies will also
become active. In the 1960s, various innovation theories were published since
Hymer, which cited “removal of conﬂict” as a reason for companies to work across
borders. For example, an “internalization theory” describes a relationship between
overseas subsidiaries and headquarters, global competitive advantage, and open
innovation. However, most of these are theories which analyze the movement from
B to C or the activities in C from various perspectives. Until today, much of the
research focused on the existence of the border as a matter of course.
Research on technical standards is summarized as follows. Up to now, studies on
technical standards were often analyzed based on the situation of information
technology and the PC software industry that focused on economic effects, such as
network externality, the bandwagon effect, the lock-in effect, switching costs, etc.
(Farrell and Saloner 1986; Cargill 1989; Basen and Farrell 1994; Shapiro and
Varian 1998; Shapiro 2000; Jakobs 2000, 2005).
In addition, there have been many studies on competitive advantage that focused
on cost reduction due to economies of scale created by de facto standardization in
certain speciﬁc technologies and products (Yamada 1993; Shintaku et al. 2000; Doi
2001; Takeda Uchida Kajiura 2001; Gawer and Cusumano 2002). These are the
research contents included in “B” and “C” of Fig. 4.3 shown earlier.
Also, there was research on the strategic behavior of companies based on pro-
prietary technology (Wegberg 2006; Warne 2005; Ogawa 2009; Arai and Uchida
2012; Uchida 2015) and the appropriability of IP (Simcoe 2006; Kajiura 2010,
2012, 2013); these studies are based on the premise of a process in which the
business environment shifts from “B” to “C” in Fig. 4.3.
Meanwhile, since the latter half of the 2000s, research on consensus based
standards based on “inter-industrial alliances” promoted by speciﬁc countries and
Fig. 4.3 Application area of technology
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
81

regions had also appeared (Krechmer 2006; Shintaku and Eto 2008; Tatsumoto
2011, 2017; Kajiura 2013). This corresponds to “A” in Fig. 4.3.
Of course, technology crossing borders and being used beyond industries had
already existed (Yasumoro and Manabe 2017). However, as described above, in
previous research (in particular existing research on technical standards), the
viewpoint that new technology was developed in sync with “internationalization”
and “inter-industrialization” was inadequate. In this research, we focus on this part,
namely “D” in Fig. 4.3.
Next, the speciﬁc cases seen in each cell of Fig. 4.3 will be described.
4.4
Speciﬁc Cases in the Innovation Process of Each Cell
Here, cases seen in cells A to D are introduced. Through those cases, the cause of
royalty-free IP which has become conﬁrmed in Cell D will be discussed.
4.4.1
Innovation Process in Cell A
This area is not dealt with in international business, because it describes
cross-industry collaboration in the domestic ﬁeld. However, innovation also occurs
in these areas. For example, a domestic small company diversiﬁes to expand its
business opportunities.
In China, Alibaba, one of the leading e-commerce companies, is taking on the
challenge of a brick and mortar business as well. They have developed a shopping
mall called Hema. In Hema, customers can not only shop at real stores but also can
order on the Internet. Customers who come to the physical location can actually leave
with fresh vegetables and ﬁsh in hand, and eat at the dining area as well. To customers
who order on the Internet, Hema’s staff deploys services to deliver to customers’
houses within 60 min. In both cases, “Alipay” is used for payment. We can under-
stand Alibaba have spread their business from EC to different ﬁelds recent years.
These cases are by no means representative of international business. However,
such changes seen in Cell A have steadily increased in recent years.
4.4.2
Innovation Process in Cell B
This cell shows a pattern in which technology used in a speciﬁc industry is
developed within a speciﬁc country. General cases so far may be included in this
area.
For example, the case of home video cassettes is one which serves as a great
starting point. VHS, released in 1976, was developed by JVC in Japan. A year
82
Y. Uchida

before, Sony developed a standard called Betamax, but TV broadcasts could be
recorded only for one hour. However, VHS was able to record for up to two hours.
This meant VHS was advantageous for recording movies broadcast on TV, as
movies broadcast in Japan are often edited down to ﬁt two hours. In other words, it
was a technology developed by a company of a speciﬁc industry to adapt to special
circumstances of a speciﬁc country, Japan.
Later, this technology was internationalized and its use increased, but at the
beginning of development it was technology advanced in cell B.
This case also made companies around the world learn the advantages of de
facto standards. It demonstrated the possibility of bringing enormous proﬁts to
companies that succeeded in setting standards in speciﬁc industries (Takeda 1998).
One of the most trend-setting companies surely is Sony. After defeating the
competition with VHS technology, Sony developed a multitude of technologies that
became de facto standards. However, in the case of DVDs, Sony chose to col-
laborate with competitors in the same industry in order to avoid the risk of aiming at
a de facto standard with only one company, hence the DVD Consortium was
created in 1995. At the same time, however, Sony experienced difﬁculty in coor-
dination within the consortium. The consortium, created by 10 companies, con-
ﬂicted over the allocation method of patent fees and divided into two groups: one
led by Sony the other with Toshiba as a leader. The division has not yet been
resolved (Uchida 2007).
4.4.3
Innovation Process in Cell C
Here, it is assumed that internationalization of technology commonly used in a
speciﬁc industry is common. The QR code developed by DENSO Corporation is a
typical example. DENSO is a Japanese company that is one of the biggest suppliers
for automobile industry. They develop advanced automotive technologies, systems,
and components for major automakers. QR codes were generally utilized as auto-
matic identiﬁcation technology in production settings or physical distribution. The
codes incorporate the signboards Kanban used at auto manufacturing sites; they are
a piece of technology that can be read correctly and quickly. Since it has a feature
that can also recognize a 2-byte language, Chinese characters can also be recog-
nized. Therefore, it had greater utility compared to the somewhat similar barcode.
As a result, after starting in car production in Japan, it gradually permeated the
industry.
In fact, there was agreement on an international standardization of a similar
code, the “data matrix,” developed by ID Matrix in the US (see Fig. 4.4). Global
companies used the data matrix in international business, however, since this code
cannot effectively render Chinese characters, Japanese companies are not convinced
to use it. In addition, differences in codes used between Japanese ﬁrms and overseas
production subsidiaries have resulted in a deterioration of production efﬁciency.
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
83

As a result, DENSO decided to send QR code to the organization for stan-
dardization. This meant DENSO decided to aim at the international standardization
of QR codes. Having taken charge of international standards in automatic identi-
ﬁcation technology proposed to the Joint Technical Committee 1 (JTC1, a joint
committee of ISO and IEC), international standardization was formally carried out
in June 2000.
Now, we can understand that DENSO’s strategy lead to the creation of their
position. Formal standardization had been adapted for the customers’ accessibility,
especially with regard to global companies, abiding the rule of the WTO.
4.4.4
Innovation Process in Cell D
Here is the cell we want to pay attention to in this chapter; it describes a process that
advanceswhilesimultaneously aiming atinternationalizationandinter-industrialization.
Until
now,
there
have
been
cases
in
which
many
go
toward
inter-
industrialization through the process of internationalization. As the DVD and QR
code examples showed earlier, when the technologies were ﬁrst developed, the use
of the technology was initially speciﬁc to one industry.
However, in recent years, innovation on the premise of internationalization and
inter-industrialization has come to be seen from the beginning (Armann and
Cantwell 2012). In other words, innovation is advanced in sync with both inter-
nationalization and inter-industrialization. In satisfying this situation, in many cases
it is “Royalty-Free IP” which most appropriately ﬁts the bill. This is clearly different
from other innovation processes.
The development of RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) is a good example.
Initially, RFID standardization was advanced with a standardization organization
called EPCglobal, which was created as a subordinate to GS1. EPCglobal was
organized by collecting 550 companies from around the world centered on
Intermec, Wal-Mart, and the US Department of Defense, which made tags used in
RFID in 2003. Then, technology standardized by EPCglobal was proposed to JTC1.
QR code
Datamatrix 
Fig. 4.4 QR code and
datamatrix
84
Y. Uchida

For RFID technology, users requested correspondence not only from interna-
tionalization but also from inter-industrialization as well. In other words, rather than
inter-industrializing a technology speciﬁed for one industry, it was intended to be
utilized in various industries from the very beginning. In the process of standard-
ization, the basic policy for RFID was royalty-free, standardized technology. This
standardized technology means essential patents would be applied to many
industries.
At one time, Hitachi developed tags with technology superior to the technology
developed at EPCglobal, called the “Hibiki tag.” Hitachi aimed for international
standardization, arguing to JTC 1 that the Hibiki tag was superior to EPCglobal’s
tag in terms of security. If Hibiki tags became internationally standardized, they
would become popular both internationally and inter-industry, and eventually lead
to the possibility of obtaining huge royalty revenues.
However, the EPCglobal side fought back with ﬁerce opposition, and JTC1
supported the proposal by EPCglobal (who has many members) rather than
Hitachi’s proposal (proposed by only one company).
EPCglobal, and its upper organization GS1, had another reason it wanted to
advance royalty-free. In order to standardize more reliably, it needed an interna-
tional and inter-industrial consortium, and members could probably not be collected
without having essential patents royalty-free. Today, the standardization promoted
in GS1 is basically all royalty-free. They were promoting standardization in the
2000s according to these ideas.
According to Porter, a smart product is made up of the following three elements;
(1) physical elements such as mechanical parts and electrical parts, (2) smart ele-
ments such as sensors, data storage and software, and (3) connection functions such
as antennas, ports and protocols connected to the Internet (Porter 2014). These
functions are being utilized in many products, including home appliances.
In the case of such a product, it is extremely difﬁcult for one speciﬁc MNE to
develop technology corresponding to various uses. So today, innovation on IoT
technology is generalized and conducted within a consortium composed of com-
panies across borders and industry barriers. To further elaborate, the next section
discusses
the
process
of
innovation
by
which
internationalization
and
inter-industrialization progress at the same time.
4.4.5
Difference Between Each Cell
Figure 4.5 shows the difference between each cell. As this shows apparently, there
is a big difference between cell A to C and D. In the cell A to C, business activities
are being conducted within some boundaries. The boundaries are created by borders
or industrial barrier.
The other hand, cell D is completely different from them. In the cell D, the
situation which internationalization and inter-industrialization are progressed
simultaneously is the premise. Therefore, the direction of innovation is also
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
85

different from cell A to B. The important thing is to cover a wide range of user
needs. In order to this requirement, Wide Innovation, so to speak, is needed in cell
D from the beginning regardless to some boundaries. The consortium is often used
under that situation.
Now, how innovation process in the consortium is discussed in detail in the next
section.
4.5
Actual Situations of Royalty-Free IP
In this section, we pay attention to the consortia that are advancing the standard-
ization
of
technology,
while
considering
both
internationalization
and
inter-industrialization. The survey on the actual situations will be summarized.
4.5.1
Overview of IPR Survey
This study adopts a survey report of the Telecommunication Technology
Committee of Japan. The TTC is an external organization of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and Communications, an organization that promotes the standardization of
information and communication technology, which is engaged in surveys of con-
sortia around the world. Though there are few surveys of active situations, TTC’s
surveys are excellent.
The TTC published a list of actively operating consortia in 2017. Most of the
consortia are developing technologies that are compatible with the elements of
smart products, which Porter describes.
Based on that list, Table 4.1 shows the results of investigating how all consortia
deal with IP. Recently, to avoid conﬂicts over rights or license fees, IP Rights
(IPR) policy has been approached through the consortia.
Cell A
Cell B
Cell C
Cell D
Fig. 4.5 Difference between each cell
86
Y. Uchida

Table 4.1 IPR policy survey in IoT consortia
Consortium
Full name
Foundation
No. of
members
RF
RAND
1
TMForum
TMForum
1988
850
Closed
2
OMG
Object Management Group
1989
264
◎
3
ITS America
The Intelligent Transportation Society of America
1991
370
Closed
4
OASIS
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information
Standards
1993
279
◎
5
BBF
Broadband Forum
1994
153
◎
6
IMTC
International Multimedia Telecommunication Consortium
1994
30
◎
7
LONMARK
LonMark International
1994
118
◎
8
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium
1994
398
◎
9
FSAN
Full Service Access Network
1995
73
Closed
10
TOG
The Open Group
1996
521
○
○
11
ECHONET
ECHONET Consortium
1997
266
○
○
12
OIF
Optical Internetworking Forum
1998
99
○
○
13
Bluetooth.SIG
Bluetooth.SIG
1998
8000
◎
14
GCF
Global Certiﬁcation Forum
1999
284
Closed
15
FCIA
Fibre Channel Industry Association
1999
24
Closed
16
ITS Forum
ITS Info-communications Forum
1999
94
Closed
17
OSGi
OSGi Alliance
1999
144
◎
18
HPA
HomePlug Alliance
2000
39
Closed
19
SIP Forum
SIP Forum
2000
29
◎
20
MEF
Metro Ethernet Forum
2001
206
◎
21
IIC(ITS)
Internet ITS Consortium
2002
86
Closed
22
OMA
Open Mobile Alliance
2002
70
◎
(continued)
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
87

Table 4.1 (continued)
Consortium
Full name
Foundation
No. of
members
RF
RAND
23
ZigBee
ZigBee Alliance
2002
408
◎
24
DLNA
Digital Living Network Alliance
2003
175
Closed
25
EPC Global
EPC Global (GS1)
2003
1500
◎
26
MoCA
Multimedia over Coax Alliance
2004
45
◎
27
NFC Forum
Near Field Communication Forum
2004
167
○
○
28
Ethernet Alliance
Ethernet Alliance
2005
87
◎
29
Continua Health
Alliance
Continua Health Alliance
2006
Closed
Closed
30
NGMN
NGMN Alliance
2006
96
◎
31
OGF
Open Grid Forum
2006
19
○
○
32
Hadoop
Apache Hadoop Project
2008
57
◎
33
HbbTV
HbbTV Association
2008
82
◎
34
HomeGrid Forum
HomeGrid Forum
2008
58
◎
35
IPTVFJ
IPTV Forum Japan
2008
109
◎
36
Kantara
Kantara Initiative
2009
45
◎
37
SGIP
Smart Grid Interoperability Panel
2009
144
◎
38
JSCA
Japan Smart Community Alliance
2010
272
Closed
39
OpenADR
OpenADR Alliance
2010
127
◎
40
JSSEC
Japan Smartphone Security Association
2011
145
Closed
41
OCP
Open Compute Project
2011
97
◎
42
ONF
Open Networking Foundation
2011
141
◎
43
OPEN Alliance SIG
OPEN Alliance special Interest Group
2011
311
Closed
44
Wi-SUN
Wi-SUN Alliance
2012
91
◎
(continued)
88
Y. Uchida

Table 4.1 (continued)
Consortium
Full name
Foundation
No. of
members
RF
RAND
45
FIDO
Fast Identity Online alliance
2012
262
◎
46
OCC
Open Cloud Connect
2013
18
Closed
47
AllSeen
AllSeen Alliance
2013
169
◎
48
OpenDaylight
OpenDaylight Project
2013
50
◎
49
IIC
Industrial Internet Consortium
2014
238
◎
50
THREAD
THREAD GROUP
2014
216
◎
51
OPNFV
Open Platform for NFV
2014
58
◎
52
AOM
Alliaance for Open Media
2015
16
◎
53
UHD
UHD Alliance
2015
42
Closed
54
OpenFog
Open Fog Consortium
2015
32
◎
55
MulteFire
MulteFire Alliance
2015
17
Closed
56
LoRa
LoRa Alliance
2015
246
◎
57
WIoTF
Wireless IoT Forum
2015
6
Closed
58
Hyperledger
Hyperledger Project
2016
81
◎
59
OCF
Open Connectivity Foundation
2016
179
◎
○
60
TIP
Telecom Infra Project
2016
40
◎
61
DMTF
Distributed Management Task Force
Dissolution
162
○
○
Notes “◎” demonstrates a clear choice of either RF or RAND, and “○” means choice of both. Though OCF is permitted RAND as well, RF is highly
recommended in their IPR policy. Source Forum report of Telecommunication Technology Committee (2017)
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
89

It must be noted in this survey whether the consortia make licenses for standard
essential patents paid or free. In the event that a licensor seeks appropriate royalties,
the licensor grants patent use that is RAND (reasonable and non-discrimination) or
FRAND (fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory). IPR policy speciﬁes that patent
management be performed by RAND or FRAND. In the DVD Consortium example
shown earlier, FRAND is speciﬁed.
On the other hand, if the licensor has to give up royalties, it is speciﬁed as
royalty-free in the IPR policy.
4.5.2
The Actual Situation of IPR Policy
As shown in Table 4.1, the consortium surveyed consisted of 61 institutions.
Table 4.1 is organized in chronological order, according to the time when each
consortium was created. All IPR policies were subject to the survey. The consortia
are solicited through websites used to recruit members, and many consortia have
IPR policies on their websites to ensure the new members understand the policy
before joining.
In this survey, 44 institutions out of 61 institutions had released IPR policies. Of
those 44 institutions, in the case of obviously onerous contracts, or obviously
royalty-free, “◎” was attached. However, some consortia had accepted both
onerous contracts and royalty-free. In that case, “○” was included to distinguish it
from the previous. The Table 4.2 organized these contents.
What we can see from this table is that 31 institutions are royalty-free; that ﬁgure
is much greater than the seven institutions of RAND. More than half of the 44
organizations that publish IPR policies promote royalty-free.
This trend appears even stronger when limited to the last 10 years. The trend
since 2008 is particularly surprising. Since 2008, 20 of 23 organizations (about
87%) that publish IPR policies promote royalty-free.
In other words, we can understand that a paradigm shift of the innovation of IoT
related technology had been occurred in the early 2000s. Figure 4.6 shows that
there is a signiﬁcant difference between before 2007 and after 2008 in royalty-free
and RAND. This ﬁgure shows that royalty free has risen sharply, and the other hand
RAND has fallen instantly.
Today, at consortia that promote internationalization and industrialization at the
same time, we need to realize that RF is generalized in the innovation process.
Why have such phenomena increased? The cause is considered next.
Table 4.2 Comparison of
RF and RAND (1988–2016)
1988–2016
2008–
RF
31
70.50%
20
87.00%
RAND
7
15.90%
2
8.70%
RF or RAND
6
13.60%
1
4.30%
Total※
44
100.00%
23
100.00%
Notes The total number excluded N/A
90
Y. Uchida

4.6
Onerous Contract or Royalty Free?
It has long been understood that, as a part of a competitive strategy, companies earn
royalty income. In many cases, companies held IP included in the technology as a
proprietary license. Additionally, in strategies related to technology, great signiﬁ-
cance was found in licensing revenues, which increase with the spread of a tech-
nology. Therefore, in order to further such a spread, it is necessary to expand the
use of the technology and for the technology to be used in various ﬁelds. As DVDs
have been used for a variety of purposes, MNEs ﬁrst internationalized the tech-
nology and then chose a process to make it inter-industrialized.
However,
this
chapter
discusses
technological
development
in
simultaneously-realized internationalization and inter-industrialization. In other
words, rather than inter-industrializing a technology for a speciﬁed use, it is
assumed that it will be used by in various industries from the very beginning. In this
case, as aforementioned, it is extremely difﬁcult to develop technology for various
applications within one MNE. Therefore, standardization of such technology should
occur in consortia composed of companies across borders and industries.
The Fig. 4.7 is constructed based on the contents discussed above in this chapter.
It shows who led the initiative and how to lead the company in responding to the
synchronization of internationalization and inter-industrialization. In other words, it
can be said that this ﬁgure explains cell D in Fig. 4.3. The horizontal axis shows the
subject leading the standardization, and the vertical axis shows whether it is RAND/
FRAND or royalty-free.
Therefore, if the licensors do not renounce royalty income, it is positioned as
Type I. Type I, in which it is allowable to grant licenses with RAND/FRAND is the
most common so far.
From the IPR policy survey, the existence of Type II and III in this ﬁgure has
become known, the majority being TypeII. Interestingly, Type III can also be seen,
in part. In Type II, licensors play a leading role in the operation of a consortium;
50.0%
55.0%
60.0%
65.0%
70.0%
75.0%
80.0%
85.0%
90.0%
before 2007
after 2008
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
before 2007
after 2008
Royalty-free 
RAND
Fig. 4.6 Difference between before 2007 and after 2008
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
91

at the same time, they make essential patents royalty-free as part of their strategy. In
Type III, the licensee plays the role of actively managing the consortium. That is,
the licensor’s license is made royalty-free by the licensees. Since Type IV only
exists theoretically for the time being, it is not shown in this ﬁgure.
Thus, it is necessary to consider the backgrounds of Type I–Type III
innovations.
4.6.1
Type I
After 2008, only two consortia, Open ADR Alliance and Wi-SUN Alliance, are
classiﬁed as Type I. Both are consortia building a mechanism to optimally control
the balance of electricity supply and demand. IP management is based on RAND,
as members of these two consortia have to rely on the technology of licensors.
In the case of Type I, the most important feature is that the licensor secures the
appropriability of IP. In these consortia, it is recognized that standardization is
underway
on
the
premise
of
simultaneous
internationalization
and
inter-
industrialization but the scope of the technical application after standardization
will be limited.
Licensee
Licensor
RAND/FRAND
Royalty-free
Type 
ex.)DVD 
Type 
ex.)RFID
Type 
ex.)Alljoyn
Fig. 4.7 Typology of standardized process
92
Y. Uchida

4.6.2
Type II
In Type II, the licensor proactively advances royalty-free. This is different from the
pattern in which the licensor aims at royalty revenue through possession of IP. It is
also different from open innovation. Open innovation is a strategy to actively utilize
external technologies to revitalize internal technologies. Open innovation theory,
however, does not include the scope of utilization of the technology after
innovation.
In Type II, it is premised that standard, essential patents are utilized both
internationally and inter-industrially. For this reason, members of this type of
consortia are gathered from various countries and from various industries. That is
why many consortia are created in advance, recognizable as being open and wide in
innovation practices.
When considering such a situation, the recent case of Qualcomm serves as great
reference. That is because that Qualcomm has begun to choose a new strategy
which is different from before.
Qualcomm was founded in San Diego, California in 1985. In the latter half of
the 1980s, the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) entrusted technical
development of the mobile telecommunication system concept to Qualcomm and it
proposed the CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) method. Although this
concept ended up failing, Qualcomm promoted CDMA development for the mobile
phone system on the ground.
In the communication standard 3G, the W-CDMA system and the CDMA 2000
system coexisted. However, there was also a plan to integrate with W-CDMA in
3G. Qualcomm held essential patents of each method. Since CDMA 2000 was
compatible with CDMA One, if CDMA 2000 disappeared, it would have meant that
Qualcomm would lose these royalty revenues at the same time. Therefore,
Qualcomm insisted on the coexistence of both standards in 3G, and announced that
it would not license essential patents of their W-CDMA if they could not be
accepted. This was known as “Qualcomm shock” at the time.
In recent years, Qualcomm’s main product is its chip “Snapdragon” which is
included in most commercially available smartphones. As such, royalties from
smartphone makers have become a huge proﬁt source.
In January 2017, Apple ﬁled a lawsuit against Qualcomm because the royalties
were too expensive and stopped royalty payments to Qualcomm, a move that
became the subject of much discussion.
In this way, Qualcomm followed the business model that focused on earning
extensive proﬁts based on their IP. However, in recent years, Qualcomm has begun
to trend downward. In comparison with the previous year, it has had a continued
declining trend since 2011. The Fig. 4.8 shows this situation.
However, under such circumstances, Qualcomm is promoting another business
model for IoT business. With regard to IoT business, they have changed their core
technology to royalty-free. That core technology has created what is called
“AllJoyn” software. AllJoyn is a framework developed to make the IoT’s
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
93

environment more convenient. AllJoyn, which is currently in widespread use, was
announced in December 2016.
Increasing the number of devices that can be connected to the network is said to
beneﬁt IoT at home. However, on the other hand, an increase in IoT devices not
only brings convenience but also may cause confusion. When home appliances
such as a rice cookers, refrigerators, air conditioners, air puriﬁers, and water heaters
support IoT, people need to use different communication methods, operating sys-
tems, and types of application software.
In order to handle IoT devices, users must select and operate each one, each time
through special smartphone applications, PC software, or operation panels installed
at home. Due to the inherent confusion caused by having to remember such a range
of information, it is not easy for ordinary people to operate multiple pieces of IoT
equipment. On the other hand, there are also many speciﬁcations commonly
required for IoT devices in different devices.
With this in mind, Qualcomm has provided AllJoyn as an IoT framework to link
such common parts (see Fig. 4.9). Qualcomm prepared a library of functions
common to various devices, and licensees can develop IoT devices and applications
easily through a royalty-free license.
AllJoyn’s core technology was developed by Qualcomm. Qualcomm has made
this technology free and promoted standardization with a consortium called the
OCF (Open Connectivity Foundation). Board members of this consortium include
not only US companies like Qualcomm, Intel, Microsoft, and Cisco Systems, but
also Samsung, Electrolux, Haier, LG Electronics, and many others. Today, over
300 companies participate from all over the world. This consortium is made up of
the leading companies in various countries and industries. This consortium is
promoting both internationalization and inter-industrialization at the same time. To
tell the truth, the IPR policy of the OCF lists both royalty-free and RAND. There is
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Revenues
Year-Over-Year Change
Billions 
Fig. 4.8 Qualcomm’s revenue from ﬁscal year 2006 to 2018. Source Qualcomm’s annual report
94
Y. Uchida

freedom to admit RAND to a licensor, however, the OCF is basically proceeding
with royalty-free.
AllJoyn has three major features: (A) communication without going through the
cloud, (B) devices that connect to each other to provide functions, and (C) the
ability to connect everything regardless of manufacturer or product differences.
Since in general, IoT devices rely on speciﬁc clouds, operating systems, and
communication systems, the versatility of AllJoyn is revolutionary.
And AllJoyn is composed of three layers, the core of which is the “AllJoyn Core
Library.” Its function is to ﬁnd and connect equipment to realize the functionality of
AllJoyn, and provide functions such as access control and encryption as an API.
Above that layer, there is a function called “AllJoyn Service Framework,” which
provides AllJoyn’s functionality to the devices. Various companies belonging to the
Allseen Alliance have played a role in enhancing this service function1. Finally, the
top layer has a function called the “AllJoyn Application Layer,” which deﬁnes the
user interface (Fig. 4.10).
AllJoyn makes it easy to collaborate and connect AllJoyn compatible devices in
an average. It also is helping to disseminate domestic IoT devices as a mechanism
to provide services in cooperation with other IoT devices.
Products such as AllJoyn compatible TVs, air puriﬁers, wireless speakers, and
others are appearing one after another. All editions of Windows 10 already work
with AllJoyn. The possibility of widespread adoption seems to be all but inevitable.
Qualcomm also developed the “DragonBoard 410c” in 2016, as a tool to
develop IoT equipment that can cooperate with AllJoyn. This is an extension board
with Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 410 processor. With DragonBoard 410c, customers
can easily create an environment that supports AllJoyn. In addition, Qualcomm
started embedding Snapdragon, which had been included mostly in smartphones, in
various devices for AllJoyn.
This Snapdragon was not royalty-free, so the sale was directly linked to
Qualcomm’s revenue. In other words, Qualcomm made AllJoyn software
AllJoyn
AllJoyn
AllJoyn
Fig. 4.9 AllJoyn framework. Note This ﬁgure has been partially revised by author. Source “An
Open Source project building the framework for the Internet of Things”, AllSeen Alliance, https://
allseenalliance.org/sites/default/ﬁles/pages/ﬁles/intro_to_alliance_10.14.15_0.pdf
1AllJoyn was standardized at Allseen alliance at ﬁrst. Later, the consortium was absorbed by the
OCF.
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
95

royalty-free to make the IoT environment more convenient to develop international
and inter-international standards at the OCF consortium, but it also created a
business model to earn revenue from the Snapdragon hardware that was required
for the IoT environment. In short, since AllJoyn had been standardized widely,
Qualcomm can do their business beyond the border and the industrial barrier with
Snapdragon (Fig. 4.11).
AllJoyn Application Layer
AllJoyn Service Frameworks
AllJoyn Core Libs
OS 
Physical Layer (Wi-Fi, Thread, PLC, Ethernet, Bluetooth)
Discovery & 
Advertisement APIs
Connection
 APIs 
Interface APIs
Events & Actions APIs
Security APIs
AllJoyn Core Libs provides ability to find and connect to devices to do interesting things . 
Onboarding
Control Panel
Time
Home Appliance
Lighting
Notifications
Config
Location
Home Control
... 
Power
Connected Car
Base Services
Service Frameworks
Incubation
AllJoyn Devices and Apps
AllJoyn Service Frameworks interoperable, cross-platform modules for common IoT functionality. 
Application Layer defines the User experience. 
Fig. 4.10 AllJoyn Framework. Note This ﬁgure has been partially revised by author. Source “An
Open Source project building the framework for the Internet of Things”, AllSeen Alliance, https://
allseenalliance.org/sites/default/ﬁles/pages/ﬁles/intro_to_alliance_10.14.15_0.pdf
Standardization 
Process
Country 
A 
Country 
B 
Country 
C 
Country 
D 
Country 
E 
Industry 
O 
Industry 
P 
Industry 
Q 
Industry 
R 
AllJoyn
DragonBoard with 
Snapdragon
Fig. 4.11 Application Area of AllJoyn
96
Y. Uchida

This example with Qualcomm demonstrates just how important royalty-free IP
is. While royalty-free IP gathers companies from various countries and industries,
standardization is promoted at a speciﬁc consortium.
This phenomenon is not mentioned in conventional international business
studies. It is a new revelation that royalty-free IP can bring new business oppor-
tunities in IoT business.
4.6.3
Type III
Despite the fact that there are few Type III cases, in which technology is made
royalty-free by the licensee, they are surely increasing (Uchida 2012, 2013). The
most familiar example is the Internet communication protocol “http.” This was
standardized in a consortium called the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium)
created in 1994. Looking back at the aforementioned RFID—a newer case than
W3C—the standardization of RFID was done by a consortium called GS1 and
EPCglobal was once a subordinate organization of GS1. Subsequently, EPCglobal
was advancing standardization led by licensees. EPCglobal was created in 2003,
and it consisted of about 500 companies from around the world. It was an orga-
nization where both internationalization and inter-industrialization progressed
simultaneously. Intermec, a company with an important license, was one of the
members. Intermec was acquired by Honeywell in 2012.
EPCglobal had adopted an royalty-free policy with respect to essential patents
from its inception. Therefore, any member of WG who developed standardization
in EPCglobal was able to use the technology free of charge.
However, even if a company became a member of EPCglobal, not everyone could
become a member of the WG. In order to participate in the WG, a ﬁrm was required
to further sign a consent form related to the IPR policy2. EPCglobal’s most focused
standardization was the technology called “ISO/IEC 18000-6 Type C,” which was
internationally standardized in 2006, hereinafter referred to as an “EPC tag.”
Deliberation on the international standardization of RFID was advanced by ISO/
IEC JTC 1 SC 31 (Subcommittee 31). EPCglobal proposed the EPC tag to SC 31 in
December 2004. At the same time, Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade and
Industry aimed for international standardization of RFID based on Hitachi’s tech-
nology. Japan suggested Hibiki tags to SC 31 in March 2005, four months after the
proposal of the EPC tag. As a result, the Hibiki tag competed completely with the
EPC tag. Unfortunately for the Japanese side, members of SC 31 at that time
contained many EPCglobal board members.
2Although it was called “IP policy,” to be exact, it is consistent with the content described in the
W3C above and is referred to as “patent policy” here. Furthermore, now that it is “GS 1
EPCglobal,” agreement with GS 1 IP policy is required.
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
97

Moreover, because the deliberation of the EPC tag was already underway in SC
31, the reaction of the committee was extremely cold, as testiﬁed by a member who
proposed the Hibiki tag at that meeting. In the end, the Hibiki tags could not be
endorsed at this conference and never had its potential realized in the same way as
the EPC tags. Thus, the Hibiki tag project failed.
The standardization process in EPCglobal is shown in Fig. 4.12. All standard-
ization work is ﬁrst started with Discussion Groups (DG). These DGs are posi-
tioned as a place where volunteers from various industries, as potential future users,
gathered and called for standardization.
Interestingly, EPCglobal allows to seek standardization of the new technology as
a user, even though it is not a member at this stage. On the other hand, there is also
an agreement to exclude allegations from the licensor side at this point. Activities
aim at a developing a business model through future standardization, based on
existing technologies, has been regulated.
As a result of deliberations at a DG, after the request is approved by EPCglobal,
Industry Action Groups (IAG) are created. From this point, participants must be
ofﬁcial members of EPCglobal, but not yet required to sign an agreement of the IPR
policy. This is because the purpose of IAGs is to let users summarize the
requirement speciﬁcations approved by a DG. Therefore, work at the WG is not yet
advanced.
Until this stage, requirement speciﬁcations are summarized for each industry.
However, not many requirement speciﬁcations are very similar. Therefore, in the
Joint Requirement Groups (JRG), concrete discussion on speciﬁcations is advanced
so that they could be arranged and uniﬁed, and further utilized beyond industry.
Therefore, from the stage of JRG, members need to agree to IPR policy. After that,
Technical Action Groups (TAGs) develop the required speciﬁcations.
From this example of the standardization process at EPCglobal, we see that
many requests on the licensee side are adopted. In this sense, it closely resembles
Discussion Groups (DG) 
Industry Action Groups (IAG)
Joint Requirement Groups (JRG)
Technical Action Groups (TAG)
Fig. 4.12 Standardization process of GS1 EPCglobal. Note Based on the information provided by
EPCglobal and the contents of the interview survey
98
Y. Uchida

the W3C. When standard development activities proceed that reﬂect the licensee’s
requests, it can be conﬁrmed that it is a licensee-led standardization process
(Fig. 4.13).
4.7
How About Technology Areas for the Future?
In this section, we looked at consortia that have standardized technology based on
both internationalization and inter-industrialization.
At
consortia
that
promote
simultaneous
internationalization
and
inter-industrialization, it is found that royalty-free is overwhelmingly selected
instead of RAND/FRAND. Type II and Type III in the Fig. 4.7 correspond to this.
Regardless of which type is selected, in order to disseminate a standardized
technology, it is vital to acquire many adopters from a wide range of international
and inter-industrial environments. At ﬁrst, may be difﬁcult to specify where a
standardized technology will be utilized and how it will be utilized; therefore, a
royalty-free IP strategy is indispensable. For open and wide innovation, there are
many cases where IP is free.
In that sense, Type I is a different innovation process from Type II and III. This
is because the location and use of developed technology in Type I are within a
range assumed by the licensor beforehand.
Based on the above considerations, it is worth considering the business areas
where further expansion of the market is expected. One promising ﬁeld in the future
is the next generation of cars: currently, automatic driving technology is being
developed all over the world and companies are competing to realize the “CASE”
functions possessed by future cars. CASE stands for Connectivity, Autonomy,
Standardization 
Process
Country 
A 
Country 
B 
Country 
C 
Country 
D 
Country 
E 
Industry 
O 
Industry 
P 
Industry 
Q 
Industry 
R 
EPC tag
Increased accessibility 
for EPC tag users
Fig. 4.13 Application area of EPC tag
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
99

Shared, and Electric. This word itself was coined in the medium-term management
plan announced by Daimler’s CEO Dieter Zetsche at the 2016 Paris Motor Show.
In the development process of these standard essential patents for new ﬁelds of
the future, we cannot conﬁrm which will lead to royalty-free IP at the present time.
For example, a consortium called the CHAdeMO Council was created in 2010 to
set battery standard of electric vehicles (EVs), and it possesses technologies cer-
tiﬁed as international standards by IEC in 2014. This is one of the big consortia on
EVs composed of members from many countries and various industries and both
RAND and royalty-free are accepted in its IPR policy. If both RAND and
royalty-free are accepted, it is easy to imagine that few companies will choose
royalty-free. This indicates that the CHAdeMO Council is qualitatively different
from Type II and III innovators.
This type of collaboration applies to the automotive semiconductor market, as
well. In this market, Intel and NVIDIA are developing technologies, aiming at de
facto standards, but there is no movement to make their IP free. Even in the
development of a new technology, it depends on whether the post-development
technology will correspond to both internationalization and inter-industrialization.
Advanced technologies are being developed in next-generation automobiles at the
moment; however, the uses of these various technologies seem to be limited to the
automobile market. In other words, if the scope of the application range after
standardization is limited to some extent, it is difﬁcult to make IP free.
4.8
Conclusion
In IoT business strategy, there are clear differences among strategies related to
international business. In existing research, technical standards are recognized as a
strategic tool to establish a competitive advantage for a speciﬁed industry.
However, it turns out that a technology embedded in a standard should not be
exclusive; it should be utilized as technology that can used for any purpose in IoT
business.
Technology standards in the IoT ﬁeld have been positioned as ways to create
new markets. In order to create new markets for IoT, consortia to promote stan-
dardization have opened their entrance widely to deal with the myriad possibilities
and securely acquire users by guaranteeing royalty-free to members belonging to
the consortia.
Despite the fact that IP has been regarded as a powerful revenue source in the
past for international businesses, setting another revenue source, and aiming for an
international standard on IoT is increasingly occurring. In other words, instead of
aiming to earn from a particular technology, constructing a business model that
earns revenue in cooperation with a licensee is required (Ogawa 2015; Tatsumoto
2017). Such a strategy has been rapidly generated since the late 2000s. In this
chapter’s view, the paradigm shift of IoT ﬁeld was occurred at that time. And, in the
100
Y. Uchida

competition related to IoT, those strategies will become more widespread in the
future.
In particular, in the case of technology standards required for IoT, we need to
recognize the apparent difference in the innovation process between Type C and
Type D, as shown in Fig. 4.3 above. Although not a traditional international
business strategy, an international business consortium of inter-industrial business
will be required. The key to international business in the future is to recognize the
essence of inter-industrial business. Also, the most important factor for MNEs in the
near future is to deal with “inter-industrialization of international business”.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP17K03973,
JP18K01833, JP18K00883.
References
Arai, M., & Uchida, Y. (2012). Pitfall of the international standardization process: The
consensus-based standard in the Japanese manufacturing industry. International Journal of
Business Research, Academy of International Business and Economics, 12(2), 23–43.
Armann, E., & Cantwell, J. (Eds.). (2012). Innovative ﬁrms in emerging market countries. Oxford.
Oxford University Press.
Arthur, B. (1994). Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy. Ann Arbor.
University of Michigan Press.
Arthur, B. (1996, July–August). Increasing returns and the new world of business. Harvard
Business Review, 100–109.
Bartlett, C. A., & Ghoshal, S. (1989). Managing across borders: The transnational solution.
Harvard Business School Press.
Besen, S. M., & Farrell, J. (1994). Choosing how to compete: Strategies and tactics in
standardization. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(2), 117–131.
Burg, U., & Kenney, M. (2003). Sponsors, communities and standards: Ethernet vs. token ring in
the local area networking business. Industry and Innovation, 10(4), 351–374.
Cantwell, J., & Iammarino, S. (2003). Multinational corporations and european regional systems
of innovation. London. Routledge.
Cantwell, J., & Molero, J. (Eds.). (2003). Multinational enterprises, Innovative Strategies and
Systems of Innovation. Edward Elgar.
Cantwell, J., Dunning, J., & Lundan, S. (2010). An Evolutionary Approach to Understanding
International Business Activity: The Co-evolution of MNEs and the Institutional Environment,
Journal of International Business Studies, 41.
Cargill,
C.
F.
(1989).
Information
technology
standardization:
Theory, Process
and
Organizations. Digital Press Newton.
Chesbrough, H. (2001). Assembling The Elephant: A review of empirical studies on the impact of
technical change upon incumbent ﬁrm. In R. A. Burgelman & H. Chesbrough (Eds.),
Comparative studies of technological evolution. Emerald Publishing Limited.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and proﬁting from
technology. Boston. Harvard Business Press.
Chesbrough, H. (2006). Open business models. Boston. Harvard Business School Publishing
Corp.
Christensen, C. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to
Fail, Harvard Business Review Press.
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
101

Christensen, C., Suarez, F., & Utterback, M. (1998). Strategies for survival in fast-changing
industries. Management Science, 44(12-part-2), 207–220.
Doi,
N.
(2001)
Gijutsu
Hyojun
to
Kyoso
(Technology
Standard
and
Competition),
Nihonkeizaihyoronsya. (in Japanese).
Farrell, J., & Saloner, G. (1986). Standardization, compatibility, and innovation. RAND Journal of
Economics, 16, 70–83.
Gawer, A., & Cusumano, M. (2002). Platform leadership: How intel, microsoft, and cisco drive
industry innovation. Harvard Business School Press.
Hippel, E. V. (2016). Free Innovation, The MIT Press.
Jakobs, K. (Ed.). (2000). Information technology standards and standardization: A global
perspective. Idea Group Publishing.
Jakobs, K. (Ed.). (2005). Advanced topics in information technology standards and standard-
ization research (Vol. 1). Idea Group Publishing.
Kajiura, M. (2010). The strategic consortia movement in standardization. International Journal of
Manufacturing and Management, 21(3/4), 324–339.
Kajiura, M. (2012). Open innovation of consensus standard: cases of business model creation in
ICT. International Journal of Enterprise Network Management, 5(2), 126–143.
Kajiura, M. (2013). ICT Consensus based standard Bunshindo. (in Japanese).
Katz, M. L., & Shapiro, C. (1985). Network externalities, competition, and compatibility. The
American Economic Review, 75, 424–440.
Krechmer, K. (2006). Open standards requirements. In J. Kai (Ed.). Advanced topics in
information technology standards and standardization research, 27–48.
Ogawa, K. (2009). International & business strategy. Hakutosyobou. (in Japanese).
Ogawa, K. (2015). Open & close strategy. Shoueisya (in Japanese).
Porter, M., & Heppelmann, J. (2014, November). How smart, connected products are transforming
competition. Harvard Business Review, 92(11), 64–88.
Sakakibara, K. (2005). Innovation no Shuekika (Proﬁt Process of Innovation), Yuhikaku. (in
Japanese).
Sakakibara, K., & Koyama (Eds.). (2006). Innovation to Kyoso Yui (Innovation and Competitive
Advantage), NTT Shuppan. (in Japanese).
Shapiro, C., & Varian, H. R. (1998). Information rules: A strategic guide to the network economy.
Boston. Harvard Business School Press.
Shapiro,
C.
(2000).
Navigating
the
patent
thicket:
Cross
licenses,
patent
pools,
and
standard-setting. Working Paper No CPC00–11, University of California at Berkeley.
Schilling, M. A. (2002). Technology Success and Failure in Winner-Take-All Markets: The Impact
of Learning Orientation, Timing, and Network Externalities, Academy of Management Journal,
45. 387–398.
Shintaku, J., Konomi, Y., & Shibata, T. (Eds.). (2000). de facto standard no honshitsu (Nature of
de facto standard), Yuhikaku. (in Japanese).
Shintaku, J., & Eto, M. (Eds.). (2008). Consensus Hyojun senryaku (Consensus BassedStarategy),
Nihonkeizaishinbunsya.
Simcoe, T. S. (2006). Open standard and intellectual property rights. In H. Chesbrough, W.
Venheaverbeke, & J. West (Eds.), Open innovation, researching a new paradigm. Oxford
University Press.
Suarez, F., & Lanzolla, G. (2005). The half-truth of ﬁrst mover advantage. Harvard Business
Review, 83(4), 121–127.
Takeda, S. (1998). Takokusekikigyo to senryakuteikei (MNEs and Staretegic Alliance),
Bunshindo. (in Japanese).
Takeda, S., Uchida, Y., & Kajiura, M. (2001). Kokusaihyojun to senryakuteikei (International
Standard and Strategic Alliance), Chuokeizaisha. (in Japanese).
Tatsumoto, H. (2011). Global standard, consensus hyojunka to kokusai bungyo (Global standard,
consensus based standard and international division of labor). Kokusai Business Kenkyu, 3(2),
81–97. (in Japanese).
102
Y. Uchida

Tatsumoto, H. (2017). Platform kigyo no global senryaku (Global Strategy of Platform
Companies), Yuhikaku (in Japanese).
Teece, D.J.(2009). Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management: Organizing for Innovation
and Growth. Oxford. Oxford University Press.
TTC. (2017). Johotsushinkankei no forum katsudo ni kansuru chosahokokusyo (Survey report on
information and communication related forum activities). Telecommunication Technology
Committee. http://www.ttc.or.jp/ﬁles/8114/8592/9731/forum_report_v23_2017-1.pdf.
Uchida, Y. (2007). Hyojun no ruikeika to open policy ni motoduku Hyojunka no senryaku
(Standardization strategy based on open policy and typology of standard). In M. Kajiura (Eds.),
Kokusai Hyojun to Gijutsu Hyojun (pp. 52–93). (in Japanese).
Uchida, Y. (2008). de jure standard no tsuikyu to senryakuteki kadai (Investigation of de jure
standard and strategic issue). Sekai Keizai Hyoron, 52(8), 22–32 (in Japanese).
Uchida, Y. (2012). User shudo no hyoujunka process to royalty free: kokusai hyojunka ni muketa
aratana process ga motarasu senryakuteki imi (User-driven standardization process and royalty
free: Strategic implications of the new process towards international standardization). Kokusai
Business Kenkyu, 4(2), 99–113. (in Japanese).
Uchida, Y. (2013). The Process of International Standardization and Royalty Free. Journal of
International Business and Economics, Academy of International Business and Economics, 13
(2), 153–160.
Uchida, Y. (2015). The relationship between technology and diffusion process. International
Journal of Business and Economics, 15(2), 87–94.
Uchida, Y. (2016). IoT no Shintento Kokusai Business no Kankei ni tsuite: Gijutsu Hyojun no
Gyosaika eno torikumi wo chushin ni, Working Paper, 364, pp.1–13, University of Toyama.
(in Japanese).
Yamada, H. (1993). Kyoso Yui no Kikaku Senryaku (Competitive Advantage of de facto
standard), Daiamondsha. (in Japanese).
Yamada,
H.
(2004).
Gyakuten
no
Kyoso
Senryaku
(Reverse
Competitive
Strategy),
Seisanseishuppan. (in Japanese).
Yasumoto, M., & Manabe, S. (2017). Openka senryaku: Kyokai wo koeru Innovation (Open
Strategy: Innovation Across Boundaries), Yuhikaku. (in Japanese).
Warne, A. G. (2005). Block alliances and the formation of standards in the ITC industry. In J. Kai
(Ed.), Advanced topics in information technology standards and standardization research
(pp. 50–70). Idea Group Publishing.
Wegberg, M. V. (2006). Standardization and competing consortia: The trade-off between speed
and compatibility. Journal of IT Standards & Standardization Research, 2(2), 18–33.
Yasuro Uchida (Ph.D, Yokohama National University) is Professor of Strategic Management at
Graduate School of Business, University of Hyogo, Japan and Professor Emeritus of University of
Toyama. He was a member of technology standard council of Ministry of Economy, Trade and
Industry of Japan. His research interest is competitive strategy, and the international standard-
ization of technology. His book “International Standard and Strategic Alliance” (in Japanese;
Chuokeizaisha, Tokyo 2001) received the award from Japan Academy for International Trade and
Business (JAFTAB) in 2001.
4
International Standardization of the New Technology Paradigm …
103

Chapter 5
New Roles for Japanese Companies
at the Knowledge-Based Economy
Adaptation to Newly Emerging
Techno-Economic Paradigm
Fumio Komoda
Abstract Information technology (IT) lies at the heart of today’s techno-economic
paradigm. In the latter half of the twentieth century, Japanese companies succeeded
in achieving high international competitiveness in the home appliance and indus-
trial electronics markets by making technological progress in various hardware,
including microfabrication technologies. However, as symbolized by the emergence
of the term “knowledge-based economy,” the relative importance of software,
rather than hardware, in IT began to increase during the transition from the
twentieth to 21st century. Successful adaptation to this change in techno-economic
paradigm is essential to maintaining international competitiveness. However,
Japanese companies did not succeed in shifting their R&D focus to software. This
failure to adapt in a timely manner is considered one of the important reasons for
Japanese companies’ prolonged stagnation. This paper draws on patent and
magazine article data to verify that the core of techno-economic paradigm is
changing from hardware to software and that Japanese companies failed to ade-
quately adapt to this change.
Keywords Techno-economic paradigm  Software  Knowledge based economy 
Software driven economy  Japanese company
5.1
Introduction
Throughout history, technological innovation has served as the engine of economic
growth. The emergence of new technologies over the past 200 years, such as steam
engines, textile machinery, steel, inorganic chemistry, internal combustion engines,
power generation, communications, petrochemicals, semiconductors, and computers,
F. Komoda (&)
Honorary Professor, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan
e-mail: techtra@ae.auone-net.jp
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_5
105

has been a source of capitalism’s dynamism. Undeniably, the timing of occurrence of
technological innovations biased in time is related to the business cycle (long-term) as
well as a shift in the central country driving technological innovation and thus to a
change in hegemon countries in the world political economy. One of the most pow-
erful models explaining the relationship between the economy and technology is the
techno-economic paradigm (TEP) theory.
Information Technology (IT) has undoubtedly lain at the core of TEP since the
last quarter of the twentieth century. Its penetration into almost all businesses
activities, households, and social infrastructure offers a paradigm for economic
growth. For example, the US led the development of computer, electronics,
semiconductors, and other technologies and enjoyed a position at the center of the
world economy; similarly, Japanese companies that focused on developing these
technologies enjoyed favorable results.
IT has advanced rapidly, leading to ongoing changes to its nature. In particular,
the emergence and diffusion of distributed processing system called the Internet,
where computers are used to form and access networks rather than stand-alone
workstations, has dramatically changed the character of IT. Advances in IT are still
supported by progress in electronics technology as hardware, but as networks
evolve, the relative importance of software has increased. Moreover, the maturity of
industrialized countries’ economies has seen a leveling off of consumer expenditure
on products; the increasing emphasis on services rather than products will further
increase the importance of software in the future. These trends mean that software
now accounts for a larger share of IT than hardware, and technological progress in
software will be faster than in hardware. This has increased productivity of enter-
prises, created new customer needs, and offered a new source of economic growth.
Moreover, the country/region where this innovation occurs will be the hegemon of
the world’s political economy. The strong performance of US companies stemmed
from the fact that they successfully adapted to new realities spawned by the evo-
lution of IT technologies. Conversely, the sluggishness of Japanese companies is
largely attributable to their failure to grasp the importance of software.
This paper aims to discuss the process that placed IT, particularly software, at the
heart of today’s TEP. Also, the author will argue that insufﬁcient adaptation to this
new TEP was one cause of Japanese companies’ stagnation. For this purpose, a
variety of databases have been consulted.
5.2
Evolution of TEP Theory
5.2.1
TEP Theory
J. Schumpeter highlighted the link between technology and the economy, empha-
sizing that the development of new technology and its dissemination throughout
society will promote economic growth (Schumpeter 1912). Neo-Schumpeterians
106
F. Komoda

took a more elaborate view of the relationship between technology and economic
growth, introducing the concept of TEP, where uneven occurrence of technological
innovations appears both temporally and geographically.
TEP was proposed by Dosi (1982) and others, inspired by the “science paradigm”
proposed by Kuhn (1962). Kuhn stated that scientiﬁc progress is achieved within the
scientiﬁc research paradigm prevailing in each era (Kuhn 1962). Dosi also described
technology in the context of a dominant paradigm in each era, which he named the
“technological paradigm.” Generally, incremental innovation occurs along the
technological trajectory within a technological paradigm. In contrast, radical and
innovative technologies that are not within the frame of technological paradigm
emerge accidentally, resulting in a completely new technical paradigm. Thus, Dosi
argues that technological progress proceeds both continuously and discontinuously.
Many researchers adopted the technological paradigm concept, reﬁning it into
the concept of TEP. This reﬂects a perception that the dominant paradigm related to
innovation is also affected by various economic and social conditions.
Dosi’s pioneering argument was theoretical, not an empirical study on the
current TEP. In response, many researchers, including Dosi himself, sought to
elucidate the characteristics of today’s TEP. One such study was carried out by
Perez (1985), who argued that pattern of economic growth was transitioning from a
mass-production system based on low-cost oil to a ﬂexible production system based
on low-cost electronics and digital telecommunication. Thus, cheap microelectronic
chips can be said to have enabled the new TEP. Perez further argued that the IC
chips as hardware led to a shift from a small-range, high-volume production system
to an information-intensive, high-mix, low-volume production system.
Perez mainly focuses on IT hardware. Of course, Perez also refers to the
importance of software, describing how “in product engineering, there would be a
tendency to redesign existing goods to make them smaller, less energy consuming,
with less moving parts, more electronics and more software” (Perez 1985, p. 447),
but the main focus is on IC chips and digital communication systems as hardware.
This reﬂects the fact hardware was at the core of the technical system at that time.
5.2.2
Knowledge-Based Economy, Data-Driven Economy
As early papers including Dosi and Perez argue, there is no doubt that IT is at the
core of today’s TEP. In companies, factory automation started around 1960, fol-
lowed by automation of routine clerical work such as accounting. Computers have
continued to further penetrating work practices even in ofﬁce work including sales,
which is difﬁcult to computerize given its complicated and atypical nature.
Furthermore, “potential fusion between formerly unrelated technologies through
ICT” has begun to provide new opportunity for innovation (Cantwell and
Santangelo 2000, p. 132). Households also are ﬁlled with various electronics
products including televisions, audio equipment, refrigerators, and air conditioners.
The management of social infrastructure such as public transportation, electric
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
107

power, urban buildings etc., is also no longer possible without IT (Hayashi 1995,
2007). Many TEP theories appeared to reﬂect such changes (Drechsler et al. 2009;
Freeman 1987, 2009; Perez 2004).
However, the actual situation began to change from the twentieth to 21st cen-
tury, with software becoming increasingly important compared with hardware. This
is reﬂected in the emergence of new concepts such as “knowledge-based economy”
and “data-driven economy.”
The knowledge-based economy concept was developed by the OECD and other
researchers. A few such researches, such as those of D. Bell and A. Tofﬂer, which
stress the importance of new technologies and knowledge obtained from R&D
activities in economic growth, have already gained signiﬁcant inﬂuence. The
concept of a knowledge-based economy has emerged as an extension of this line of
research. For example, by claiming that “OECD economies are more strongly
dependent on the production, distribution, and use of knowledge than before” (p. 9),
OECD (1996) argues that technologies embodied in the human capital play an
important role in the economic growth of modern industrialized countries. As a
result, economic theory, which had formerly focused on capital and labor as factors
of production, is necessarily increasingly emphasizing the role played by technol-
ogy. Therefore, the OECD states that government’s policy should focus on
(1) enhancing knowledge diffusion, (2) upgrading human capital, and (3) promoting
organization change.
The knowledge-based economy concept emerged in part due to the economic
stagnation of European countries. The OECD came up with the recognition that the
slowdown in the European economy was caused by the slowdown in R&D.
However, the explosive expansion of the Internet since the beginning of the 21st
century is further changing the meaning of knowledge-based economy. The digiti-
zation of text, image, and audio data has created and accumulated an unprecedented
amount of data, known as “big data.” Analyzing these data makes it possible to obtain
valuable knowledge that could not be obtained previously. These new vast amounts
of data comprise the infrastructure of a knowledge-based economy. Reﬂecting such a
reality, new concepts such as “data-driven economy” and “data-driven innovation”
have emerged. For example, OECD (2014) emphasizes the critical importance of
data, stating that “in the current context of a weak global recovery, with lingering
high unemployment in major advanced economies, governments are looking for new
sources of growth to boost the productivity and competitiveness of their economies
and industries, to generate jobs and promote the well-being of their citizens” (p. 9).
The OECD further states that “techniques and technologies for processing and
analyzing large volumes of data, which are commonly known as “big data,” are
becoming an important resource that lead to new knowledge, drive value creation,
and foster new products, processes and markets” (p. 4).
In this way, the idea of a data-driven economy emphasizing the fact that big data
is creating the foundation for future economic development is beginning to be
widely accepted. For example, Cavanillas et al. (2016) assert that analyzing big data
will promote economic growth and competitiveness, arguing that “data has become
a new factor of production, in the same way as hard assets and human capital”
108
F. Komoda

(p. 4). Hardware serves as a sensor to gather this data in large quantities in real time
or non-real time. More important, however, to analyze and gain valuable knowl-
edge from these data, software is required. For example, according to Lyko et al.
(2016), the large amount of big data collected is analyzed by big data analytics
algorithms.
The fact that the center of TEP is shifting from hardware such as IC chips to
software is understood by looking at the top 10 global market capitalization. In
1992, GE, NTT, and AT & T essentially hardware-oriented ﬁrms, were among the
top 10. In 2006, the top 10 included GE, Microsoft, and AT & T. By 2017, the top
10 was mainly composed of software companies such as Apple, Alphabet,
Microsoft, Amazon, and FaceBook (the top 5), along with China’s Tencent and
Alibaba within the top ten. It can be seen that TEP has shifted from an energy- and
materials industry-led to a processing and assembly industry-led type, and has also
shifted to an IT-led type, with software companies emerging as leaders in IT.
This review has demonstrated how software has become an important, proﬁtable
growth area.
5.2.3
Increasing Importance of Software in Economic
Growth
The emergence of new concepts such as knowledge-based economy and
data-driven economy reﬂects the fact that the core of IT is shifting from hardware to
software.
Although the source of corporate proﬁts remains new knowledge and technol-
ogy, the relationship between knowledge/technology as the source of earnings and
products has gradually weakened. In the past, knowledge/technology were directly
connected with products, typically shown in quality and functional improvements.
For example, not only is the importance of knowledge in industries like ﬁnancial
services unrelated to the “monozukuri” (manufacturing) industry increasing, but
also the competitiveness of products/apparatuses is increasingly determined by
added value such as design, sensibility value, after-sales services, etc., which are
gained from knowledge rather than functions or quality. Consequently, as Fig. 5.1
shows, the growth of both companies and macro economies has become dependent
on whether or not the data generates knowledge and in turn harnessing that
knowledge to generate data.
Software plays an important role in this cycle. Not only data analysis software,
as shown in Fig. 5.1, but also software for data collection and communications can
be classiﬁed as software indispensable for goods circulation. This is attained by the
development of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) including machine learning.
This cycle requires sophisticated software to process vast amounts of data. AI
will further change the nature of the software-centered TEP and have a major
impact on the pattern of economic growth. It has frequently been predicted that AI
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
109

will spread. AI has generally considered to have experienced three booms. The ﬁrst
boom in the late 1950s and 1960s centered on the possibility of machine translation
based on the establishment of “search” and “inference” technologies, but petered
out due to the great difﬁculty in this task. The second boom in the 1980s stemmed
from advances in knowledge-based algorithms, but the difﬁculty in teaching
computers to understand human knowledge led to another downturn. The third
boom began in 2000, when the advent of “machine learning” created the possibility
that computers could generate knowledge themselves. In particular, in the 2010s,
the potential of “deep learning” technologies increased dramatically, and the boom
is further expanding now.
There are two conﬂicting views as to whether artiﬁcial intelligence will evolve
rapidly in the future, will permeate industrial activities, civic life, social infras-
tructure, medical care and the like, and will signiﬁcantly change society. In order to
understand the future trends of AI, the number of articles on Nikkei BP and patents
published by Japan Patent Ofﬁce that include the term “AI” has been examined.
These results are shown in Table 5.1. The fact that almost no such articles and
patents were found before 2000 is consistent with the fact the disappearance of the
ﬁrst and second booms, and the fact that they began to increase around 2000 is
consistent with the beginning of the third boom. Since then, the number of
Nikkei BP articles temporarily declined around 2010 before increasing again
around 2013. This is consistent with the fact that the signiﬁcance of deep learning
technology become widely known around that time, and AI began to have a
Fig. 5.1 The data value cycle Source OECD (2014), p. 23
110
F. Komoda

Table 5.1 Trends in the number of journal articles and patents on AI
Before
1990
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
2000
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Nikkei
BP
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26
48
28
26
29
39
21
12
15
16
10
18
21
67
99
303
772
555
Patent
1
9
17
20
11
4
6
7
8
12
19
22
29
22
29
31
37
26
22
17
9
14
10
23
25
45
55
28
Source Nikkei BP, Japan Patent Ofﬁce
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
111

full-ﬂedged impact on society. Moreover, the gradual increase in the number of
patents since around 2010 seems to indicate a technical backing for the third boom
toward the commercialization of AI.
The impact of AIs can largely be attributed to their versatility. According to
Cockburn et al. (2017), deep learning, which began to evolve rapidly around 2009,
differs from conventional intelligent software. Most conventional intelligent soft-
ware was developed and utilized for speciﬁc narrow applications such as industrial
robots. In contrast, deep learning can be used for a range of applications in a variety
of dynamic and evolving ﬁelds, including prediction of potential compounds for
new drugs and automated driving systems. That is, deep learning can be considered
“general-purpose technology.”
In order to understand the general-purpose nature of AI, companies that have
introduced AI in Japan are examined by industry. Of these, the “living-related
service industry/entertainment industry,” the industry that most commonly intro-
duced AI, accounts for 13.6%. This is followed by “ﬁnance and insurance” (7.9%),
“information and communications” (4.7%), “electricity, gas, heat supply and water”
(4.2%),
and
“manufacturing”
(3.5%)
(Center
for
Global
Communication,
International University of Japan 2018, p. 116). However, this only shows the
companies that had adopted the system at the time of the survey. Future trends in AI
and its impact on the economy as a whole need to be taken into account. Frequency
of publication in journals serves as one of the key indicators for understanding the
industry sectors in which AI is expected to be introduced in the future.
Accordingly, the full text of AI-related articles contained in Nikkei BP, a
database provided by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun (a Japanese ﬁnancial newspaper),
and AI-related patent gazettes contained in the patent database provided by Japan
Patent Ofﬁce are examined to ﬁnd industrial ﬁelds and applications introducing AI
using the appearance frequency of terms as a criterion. The results are shown in
Tables 5.2 and 5.3.
According to this survey of mentions, the number of robot-related mentions is
large in both tables. It can be seen that the robot business is regarded as the largest
application ﬁeld of AI. Automated driving is the second most common. In addition,
the term is often mentioned in relation to “energy” and “electricity” as social
infrastructure, “factory” as manufacturing, “electrical,” “home appliances” and
“information communication system” as IT, and “education.” Although many cases
concerning medical-related terms are found, these are characterized by a large
diversity of terms rather than that. This may show that multifaceted use in the
medical ﬁeld is expected.
Compared with Nikkei BP magazines, the difference in frequency of occurrence
between robotics and other ﬁelds of use is not large for patent publications. It is
interesting to note that Nikkei BP has a large number of “automatic driving” but not
many in the patent gazette, with only three in the latest 2011–2017. There is no
doubt that the rapid development of automated driving technology is proceeding,
but the analytical result the automatic operations are mentioned much more fre-
quently in the Nikkei BP seems to exaggerate reality.
112
F. Komoda

This survey of publication mentions further underscores that, AI can be con-
sidered a general-purpose technology that will further change the character of
today’s TEP.
5.2.4
Software Positioning in TEP
As shown above, software is becoming increasingly important in numerous spheres.
For example, as the term “bioinformatics” implies, progress in biotechnology has
become impossible without IT.
Table 5.2 Application of AI (Number of Cases in Nikkei BP)
Robot
Power saving 27
Clinical information 2
Robot
696
Manufacturing
Service
Industrial robot
90
Manufacturing
205
Information service
25
Humanoid robot
65
Factory
303
Big data
467
Care robot
11
Factory automation
3
Secretary
18
Service robot
25
Production line
71
Business efﬁciency
41
Communication robot
17
Electric, IT
Sales, market
Conversational robot
S
Consular electronics
189
Customer
566
Hospice robot
5
Information
telecommunication
23
Marketing
246
Self-supporting robot
1
Satellite communication
1
Needs
284
Automobile
Crowd
324
Customer needs
19
Automatic driving
376
Medical
Consumer needs
8
Driving assistance
59
Medical
213
Customer
satisfaction
3
Transportation, logistics
Diagnosis
81
Product
development
80
Transportation
19
Care
83
Education
Trafﬁc
76
Health
87
Education
164
Railway
48
Biological
19
Education industry
3
Logistics
81
Patient information
7
Finance
Electronic commerce
72
Clinical
13
FinTech
6
Warehouse
management
5
Regenerative medic
11
Securities
58
Social infrastructure
Medical equipment
55
Stock price
80
Social infrastructure
40
Electronic medical records
18
Mutual fund
24
Energy
134
Health care
13
Electricity
127
Medical image
8
Note Terms are translated from Japanese into English
Source Nikkei BP
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
113

Table 5.3 Application of AI (Number of cases in Japan Patent Ofﬁce)
1991–
2000
2001–
2010
2011–
2017
Total
1991–
2000
2001–
2010
2011–
2017
Total
Robot
Crowd
0
0
40
40
Robot
8
26
51
85
Medical
Industrial robot
0
4
1
5
Medical
5
20
25
50
Conversational
robot
0
0
3
3
Biological
1
19
17
37
Humanoid robot
0
1
1
2
Health
4
14
19
37
Automobile
Clinical
1
14
12
27
Automatic driving
1
3
3
7
Health
management
2
3
6
11
Driving assistance
4
0
1
5
Patient
information
1
2
5
8
Transportation, logistics
Medical
equipment
0
2
7
9
Transportation
3
12
6
21
Clinical
information
1
1
3
5
Trafﬁc
5
8
9
22
Care
0
2
5
7
Railway
3
2
2
7
Diagnosis
15
23
30
68
Logistics
1
2
0
3
Electronic
medical
records
0
0
9
9
Electronic
commerce
1
4
2
7
Service
Warehouse
management
0
0
1
1
Big data
0
0
9
9
Social infrastructure
Secretary
0
0
2
Social
infrastructure
0
1
2
3
Sales, market
Electricity
8
30
30
68
Customer
12
28
15
65
Energy
8
26
36
70
Marketing
1
5
3
9
Power saving
0
2
2
4
Advertising
4
19
14
37
Manufacturing
Needs
5
9
24
38
Manufacturing
0
2
0
2
Customer
needs
0
1
0
1
Factory
10
8
7
25
Education
Production line
2
0
1
3
Education
3
151
15
33
Electric, IT
Finance
Consumer
electronics
1
11
7
19
Securities
1
3
0
4
Information
telecommunication
6
26
19
51
Stock price
0
1
3
4
Satellite
communication
1
14
3
18
Mutual fund
0
0
7
7
Note Terms are translated from Japanese into English
Source Japan Patent Ofﬁce
114
F. Komoda

Needless to say, today’s technology architecture does not consist solely of IT.
New state-of-the-art technologies, such as biotechnology and nanotechnology, are
creating new industries and will support economic development in future.
Biotechnologies underpinned by constant advances in genomics including genome
editing are spreading in earnest into medicine, agriculture, and other industries.
Moreover, although IT does not unidirectionally support other technological
advances, advances in IT have been made possible by a number of technological
advances, including in material chemistry. For example, nano-level fabrication
technologies have enabled miniaturization of IC chips, enable quantum devices, and
pave the way for future quantum computers. Conversely, nano-level microfabri-
cation is impossible without computer control technology. Thus, it can be argued
that IT advances cannot be made without advances in nanotechnology.
These facts show that not all technologies exist in isolation from other tech-
nologies.
Rather,
all
technologies
are
interdependent
and
complementary.
Moreover, this fusion continues to evolve constantly. For example, using R&D
expenditure statistics, Kodama (1992) analyzed the actual state of fusion among
technologies, clarifying that all technologies are mutually complementary and their
mutual relationships are getting becoming increasingly closer.
Thus, technology is interrelated. However, IT plays the most important role in
connecting to all technical ﬁelds and in changing the technology architecture as a
whole. IT is at the center of technological linkages, and the importance of software
within IT is growing, while IT is at the heart of today’s TEP.
5.3
Position of Software in IT
5.3.1
Deﬁnitions of Software and IT Classiﬁcations
As described above, software is becoming increasingly important. However, it is
not easy to deﬁne exactly what software comprises. It is clear, however, that
hardware lies outside the software domain. However, even if software is viewed as
a non-physical intangible source code, it often appears as a physical tangible object
when used or bought or sold. Thus, source code is often viewed as hardware. In
fact, statistically, the sales value of software is often expressed as sales of devices
such as hard disks and servers. In addition, the CPU/MPU, commonly considered
as hardware, contains a sophisticated algorithm, and most of the value of a CPU/
MPU is attributed to this algorithm. Because of the difﬁculty in developing this
algorithm, Intel dominates the MPU market for PCs and Qualcom dominates the
MPU market for smart phones and other mobile devices. Therefore, CPU/MPUs
may not be simply viewed as hardware.
In addition, content such as music data is often discussed as software, but of
course is not included within the scope of software in the context of this article.
Also, in keeping with the increasingly “data-driven economy,” big data are
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
115

analyzed by software to generate tremendous amounts of knowledge and added
value. Data are subject to analysis by software, just like computer contents.
Nonetheless, it is also true that data are not separated from software because high
quantities of high-quality data are needed to obtain the necessary knowledge. In the
sense that program intelligence is made possible by repeating analysis of data,
software and data are inseparable. Furthermore, in today’s computer systems, which
are based on the principle of the Turing machine, programs are also designed as
data and so can be seen both data and program depending on point of view.
Thus, it is in fact difﬁcult to clearly distinguish between software and hardware,
and it is also difﬁcult to separate the software from the data. Therefore, as shown in
Fig. 5.1, this paper considers “data,” “narrowly deﬁned software (software in the
true meanings),” “technologies in fusion area of software and hardware,” and
“narrowly deﬁned hardware.” Komoda et al. (1996, 1997), Komoda (2000)
“Technologies in the fusion area of hardware and software” include technology
with strong software properties as well as technology with strong hardware prop-
erties. In general, when discussing software, “narrowly deﬁned software” is the
focus, and in many cases “technologies in the fusion area of hardware and soft-
ware” and “narrowly deﬁned hardware” are considered hardware. Narrowly deﬁned
software technology is represented by algorithms, which are deﬁned as procedures
for solving problems. To resolve a problem, the procedure must be unambiguous
and clearly deﬁned. Of course, there is not only one procedure, but a range, among
which the most efﬁcient one is adopted and serves as the source of corporate proﬁts.
These algorithms are depicted as programs. For this reason, programming lan-
guages have been created, and high-level languages such as C and JAVA have
appeared. Computer languages have become more sophisticated with the evolution
of computer programs and are expressed in a way that is intuitive to human
understanding. However, this has led to a greater distance from machine languages,
and these languages must therefore be translated into a machine language.
Therefore, an interpreter or an assembler is also included in software.
When looking at software in a hierarchical manner from the point of contact with
people, software can be divided into application software and OS. Furthermore,
computers have become networks instead of a stand-alone units. As a result,
software can be grasped as an application, OS, middleware, network OS, or the like.
This basic algorithm for modern computer systems was proposed by von
Neumann. Over the years, it has continually become more sophisticated, and
research on neuroalgorithms, parallel calculations, and so on has progressed. Today
a rapid pace of machine learning is exempliﬁed, for example, by the progress in
deep learning, a trend is leading to the further advancement of AI.
Narrowly deﬁned software is increasingly becoming to be associated with
devices, such as IC chips and hard disks. The core of technology in the fusion area
is a logic circuit as a physical medium for reading and processing machine lan-
guages. Logic circuits range from CPUs, MPUs, and ASICs, which account for a
large proportion of algorithms, to memories and dedicated processors with a rela-
tively small role of software. Although the role played by software differs in
116
F. Komoda

importance among circuits, logic circuits can be considered products in a fusion of
software and hardware in the sense that it has properties of both software and
hardware.
The IC chip reads a high-level language, which is translated into a machine
language processable by the machine. In ﬁrmware, the program translated into the
machine language is implemented as an unchangeable circuit in the IC chip. The
logic circuit includes an arithmetic circuit, a memory circuit, etc., and it is classiﬁed
into general-purpose CPU/MPU, specialized ASIC for special purpose, for
example.
A typical technique among narrowly deﬁned hardware is microfabrication
techniques, which enable improved performance of logic circuits. Sensors, which
can be narrowly deﬁned as hardware, are also important.
IT started with advances in hardware. The development of transistors by AT&T
in 1947, the development of IC manufacturing technologies by Fairchild and Intel
in the late 1950s, and the subsequent development of microfabrication technologies
that supported the advancement of IC to LSI and LSI to VLSI as indicated by
Moore’s Law has led to dramatic improvements in IT abilities. IT has increased its
information processing capability, and its application ﬁelds have been steadily
widening.
However, progress is beginning to hit physical limitations. Needless to say, new
technological developments are taking place, such as miniaturization of transistors,
crystal technology, exposure technology, and thin-ﬁlm manufacturing technology,
among others. However, such progress has been slower than before and its limits
are fast approaching. Promoting miniaturization of IC is not as easy as previously,
and there is little scope for signiﬁcant progress relative to software.
Advances in nanotechnology are widely expected to lead to (1) the creation of
quantum devices with new
operating
principles and (2)
the creation of
self-organizing chip. These developments will enable a major breakthrough but are
likely to take time.
In terms of data, relational databases have a high afﬁnity as a conventional
computer system. Today, however, new data, such as image data, text data, and
voice data, which have a low afﬁnity with a relational database, have been gen-
erated, creating big data. Cloud computing is indispensable for storing big data.
5.3.2
Advantages/Disadvantages of Hardware and Software
As mentioned in the previous section, IT advances born in the latter half of the
twentieth century occurred in hardware, software, and in their fusion, but until the
end of the twentieth century, technological advances in narrowly deﬁned hardware
and the fusion area of software and hardware had been ahead of developments in
software. In particular, miniaturization from ICs to LSIs and VLSIs has greatly
contributed to the improvement of information processing capabilities. Advances in
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
117

hardware technology mean that today’s personal computers have far more infor-
mation processing capabilities than the large computers from the 1970 and 1980s.
However, this progress has ﬁnally met the limitations of current technology. Of
course, even though the limit of miniaturization has been forecast many times,
miniaturization has managed to advance by overcoming these limits through var-
ious technical improvements. However, further miniaturization is not as easy today,
and the potential for technological progress is shrinking. To overcome this, new
architecture based on the latest advanced fabrication techniques such as quantum
devices will eventually be realized, but not for a long time.
In contrast, the potential of software has grown, supported by the introduction of
intelligent technology, and has begun to evolve even more rapidly in the 21st
century. As part of this, IT advances are changing from hardware-driven to
software-driven.
However, this shift in the core of IT from hardware to software cannot be
attributed only to the difference in the potential of technology. Economic and social
environmental changes also are factors, as can be seen by comparing the
advantages/disadvantages of hardware and software.
Software and hardware have their own advantages and disadvantages, respec-
tively, in information processing. Hardware’s advantage is its speed of information
processing. For example, comparing a dedicated processor specializing in image
processing and processing with software using a general-purpose processor, the
former is far faster than the latter. The general processor’s need to read the program
or data necessary for processing necessarily extends the processing time. Hardware
is therefore more suitable for repeatedly processing the same or similar types of data
in large quantities using the same program.
The disadvantage of hardware, on the other hand, is its high cost. Today, the cost
of building a new manufacturing plant for IC chips exceeds $10 billion. It is thus
also difﬁcult for hardware to respond to changing market needs because of the
substantial investment costs associated with frequent modiﬁcations in speciﬁca-
tions. In today’s consumer society, customer needs are characterized by uncer-
tainties, ﬂuctuations, and unpredictability. Responding to such changes in customer
needs via narrowly deﬁned hardware or technologies in the fusion area of software
and hardware is disadvantageous in terms of cost.
In addition, hardware technology has become more difﬁcult to monopolize and
keep proprietary. Even a latecomer is able to manufacture highly-qualiﬁed IC chips
that are not inferior to that of innovators simply by introducing the latest semi-
conductor manufacturing equipment. In other words, technology transfer to com-
petitors has become easier than before, meaning that innovators are ﬁndings it
increasingly difﬁcult to gain monopoly proﬁts based on R&D investment. If
semiconductor technology can easily be transferred from innovators to latecomers,
products would be put on the market in large quantities, prices would fall, and
innovator proﬁts would be lost.
The advantages and disadvantages of hardware are, conversely, the disadvan-
tages and advantages of software, respectively.
118
F. Komoda

Software speciﬁcations can be changed at low cost simply by rewriting the
program. Therefore, despite the slower speed, it is preferable to implement the same
function in software rather than in hardware when customer needs are constantly
changing and the future prospects are uncertain.
This also holds true for the advantages of microprocessors compared with
dedicated circuits. Microprocessors with computing and control circuits perform a
variety of functions by replacing narrowly deﬁned software. In other words,
because a range of information processing duties can be performed simply by
replacing programs unincorporated with the circuit on chips, the use of computers
has expanded. One of the reasons why PCs have become widely accepted is not
their ability to perform predetermined calculations, such as calculators, but ability
to perform a variety of data processing tasks simply by switching programs. Even a
single circuit speciﬁcation can be used as a system for a variety of different
applications by changing the computing program.
Software’s ﬂexibility and versatility makes it possible to respond quickly,
accurately, and cheaply to diversifying and ever-changing social needs. As a result,
diversiﬁcation of services and applications will become basic trends in modern
consumerism.
As can be seen from the above, technical and social factors both have con-
tributed to the shift in the technology at the heart of today’s TEP from hardware to
software. In other words, hardware microfabrication technology faces technical
limitations, and no dramatic progress can be expected. In addition, it is advanta-
geous to respond with software rather than hardware because of the ease of
responding to changing needs. For these reasons, software is becoming more
important.
5.4
Veriﬁcation of Transition to a Software-Driven
Economy by Number of Patents/Business Articles
As described in the previous section, the core of today’s TEP is becoming
software-centric and the importance of intelligent software is increasing. This
section examines this transformation based on changes in the number of patents and
business articles focused on these topics, respectively. The analysis starts by
extracting important technologies from the “narrowly deﬁned software,” “tech-
nologies in the fusion area of hardware and software,” and “narrowly deﬁned
hardware,” as shown in Table 5.4, and then looking at time-series changes in the
frequency of occurrence in terms, how the center of technological progress is
changing. For this purpose, patent publication ﬁled with Japan Patent Ofﬁce and EU
Patent Ofﬁce are analyzed.
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
119

Table 5.4 Classiﬁcation of IT
Classiﬁcation
Technology
emerging technology
Data
Data
big data
database
relational database,
cloud database
Narrowly deﬁned software
(software as a true meaning)
Software architecture
algorithm
neural computing
artiﬁcial intelligence,
machine learning,
deep learning,
ultra parallel processing,
non von Neumann algorithm
program (programming)
programming language
high-level language
interpreter, compiler, assembler
application software
middleware
operating system
network operating system
Technologies in fusion area
of software and hardware
Machine language
ﬁrmware
embedded software
microprogramming
circuit design
neural circuit, non linear circuit
tensor processing unit
ASIC, graphic processor
CPU, MPU
memory
Narrowly deﬁned hardware
Microfabrication technology
transistor,
crystal structure
thin ﬁlm technology
exposure technology
NP structure
sensor
nanotechnology
quantum device
superconducting devices,
molecular electronic devices
bio device
self-organizing material
Source Created by author
120
F. Komoda

5.4.1
Veriﬁcation Based on Japan Patent Ofﬁce Data
The Japan Patent Ofﬁce’s Digital Library contains most patents published since 1971.
The library also contains information on patents published by some overseas patent
ofﬁces, including the full text data from patents published by ﬁve ofﬁces (WIPO, US
Patent Ofﬁce, EU Patent Ofﬁce, Chinese Patent Ofﬁce, and Korea Patent Ofﬁce).
However, the technical reasons mean that all overseas patents are not included in the
Library’s database, and older patents in particular are more likely to be missing. As a
result, when looking further back in time, the more likely it is that patents obtained by
Japanese companies are over-represented in comparison with foreign ones, making it
impossible to infer the competitiveness of Japanese companies and foreigners based on
the time-series changein thenumber ofpatents publishedbythe Japan Patent Ofﬁceand
foreign patent ofﬁces. Nonetheless, careful analysis can provide important insights.
Naturally, Japanese patent data are written in Japanese, and overseas patents are
translated into Japanese using machine translation technology. Therefore, in this
paper, patent publications written in Japanese are mined, followed by the translating
Japanese into English. The results are shown in Table 5.5.
Paying attention ﬁrst to the number of cases including the terms “software” and
“hardware,” the number of cases with “software” is higher than that of “hardware.”
For example, in 2013–2017, 727,599 instances of “software” were found, compared
with 591,403 for “hardware.” However, from 1993–1997 to 2013–2017, the
number of mentions of “software” grew 2.3-fold, whereas mentions of “hardware”
increased 2.8-fold. This result is the opposite of the basic understanding that TEP is
shifting from hardware to software. This could possibly be attributed to the fact that
the terms “software” or “hardware” are used in a broader sense than in this article.
Accordingly, author extracts representative terms from Table 5.4 and considers
the number of occurrences. This table shows that occurrences of terms related to
“narrowly deﬁned hardware” is high, and terms related to “narrowly deﬁned soft-
ware” are mentioned the least often. In 1993–1997, terms related to “narrowly
deﬁned hardware” accounted for 60.4% of the total. On the other hand, terms
referring to “technologies in the fusion of software and hardware” accounted for
32.2%, whereas those related to “narrowly deﬁned software” accounted for only
7.5%. The high number of mentions of “narrowly deﬁned hardware” reﬂects the
frequent mentions of “sensors,” but the number of cases referring to “narrowly
deﬁned hardware” is the highest even with the exception of “sensor” mentions. Since
then, however, the percentage of “narrowly deﬁned hardware” has declined to 52.1%
in 2013–2017, while the percentage of “narrowly deﬁned software” has risen to
16.4% in 2013–2017. This demonstrates the growing importance of software in IT.
Of the patents referencing “narrowly deﬁned software,” a high number men-
tioned “algorithm,” at 409,373 cases, and “programming” at 163,760 cases, in
2013–2017. This is partly due to the fact that these terms are used to include
broadly meaningful concepts and consequently appear more frequently. However,
the growing importance of these technologies is undeniable, as shown in the fact
that rate also was considerably higher, 13.0 times and 11.8 times higher, respec-
tively in 1993–1997 and 2013–1917. Similarly, mentions of “operating system” and
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
121

Table 5.5 Patents by IT Field (1993–2017)
Year
(1) 1993–1997
(2) 1998–2002
(3) 2003–2007
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Software
63,226
4,703
93.1
1,21,231
42,766
73.9
1,80,272
2,23,136
44.7
Hardware
49,465
3,275
93.8
81,642
27,487
74.8
1,37,206
1,49,938
47.8
Software hard™
1. 3
1.5
1.4
Narrowly deﬁned
software
Application software
3,145
124
96.2
10,851
1,154
90.4
15,393
4,708
76.6
Neural network
4,409
272
94.2
3,322
828
80.0
4,367
3.222
57.5
Middleware
62
10
86.1
1.317
524
71.5
2,988
5,191
36.5
Operating system
10,876
751
93.5
27,891
4,989
84.8
41,108
21,936
65.2
Artiﬁcial intelligence
951
64
93.7
1,025
328
75.8
1,682
2,099
44.5
Neuro computer
436
12
97.3
88
10
89.8
60
18
76.9
Deep learning
0
0
0
0
0
1
0.0
Algorithm
34,396
3,136
91.6
54,628
23,992
69.5
75,253
119, 960
38.5
Programming
13,584
2,952
82.1
20,452
14,187
59.0
26,246
63,090
29.4
Compiler
2,082
331
86.3
3,380
1,607
67.8
3,528
6,905
33.8
Assembler
941
92
91.1
1,116
453
71.1
1,043
2,043
33.8
High-level language
695
42
94.3
712
144
83.2
795
1,700
31.9
C language
2,068
90
95.8
2.399
529
81.9
2,821
2,289
55.2
Sub total
73,645
7,876
90.3
1,27,181
48,745
72.3
1,75,284
2,33,162
42.9
7.50%
10.70%
12.80%
Technologies in fusion
areas of software
and hardware
Firmware
2.922
217
93.1
7,071
3,023
70.1
18,101
26,434
40.6
Machine language
66
9
88.0
172
36
82.7
226
225
50.1
Microprocessor
35,403
7,382
82.7
38,639
24,798
60.9
45,212
80,541
36.0
Central processing unit
6,904
137
98.1
9,566
602
94.1
13,825
2,185
86.4
Logic circuit
18,362
1,940
90.4
16,900
6,671
71.7
17,882
16,529
52.0
(continued)
122
F. Komoda

Table 5.5 (continued)
Year
(1) 1993–1997
(2) 1998–2002
(3) 2003–2007
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Japan
Others
Ratio
%
Orciit design
5,774
380
93.8
8,259
2,724
75.2
9, 552
14,627
39.5
Memory
2,42,172
20,226
92.3
3,00,208
1,02,257
74.6
3,89,190
3,83,394
50.4
Dedicated circuit
1.087
49
95.7
1,473
531
73.5
3,090
3,279
48.5
Mask pattern
7,829
270
96.7
10,302
2.634
79.6
13,723
13,045
51.3
Non linear circuit
416
20
95.4
264
113
70.0
182
239
43.2
Sub toal
3,20,935
30,630
91.3
3,92,854
1,43,389
73.3
5,10,983
5,40,498
48.6
32.2%
32.5%
33%
Narrowly deﬁned
hardware
Semiconductor
2,04,730
13,870
93.7
2,55,773
84,956
75.1
3,14,137
3,10,909
50.3
Exposure apparatus
15,593
300
98.1
2 3,602
2.659
89.9
32,483
12,020
73.0
Semiconductor thin
ﬁlm
3,069
103
96.8
3,565
957
78.8
3,904
3,952
49.7
Transistor
1,08,413
10,321
91.3
1,06,322
46,595
69.5
1,23,387
1,71,776
41.8
Quantum device
144
3
98.0
76
27
73.8
185
155
54.4
Superconductivity
device
748
31
96.0
299
73
80.4
372
236
61.2
Neuro device
74
1
98.7
17
2
89.5
11
1
91.7
Sensor
2,74,374
23,684
92.1
3,21,814
83,050
79.5
4,10,817
3,24,959
55.8
Optical sensor
4,043
406
90.9
5,056
1,956
72.1
8,290
8,338
49.9
Sub total
6,11,188
48,719
92.6
7,16,524
2,20,275
76.5
8,93,586
8,32,346
51.8
60.4%
56.8%
54.2%
Total
10,05,768
87,225
92.0
12,36,559
4,12,409
75.0
15,79,853
16,06,006
49.6
(continued)
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
123

Table 5.5 (continued)
Year
(4) 2008–2012
(5) 2011–2017
(5) (1)
(5) (3)
Japan
Others
Ratio%
Japan
Others
Ratio%
Software
1,89,483
3,85,487
33
2,19,536
727.599
23.2
13.9
2.3
Hardware
1,69,839
2,87,946
37.1
214.531
591.403
26.6
15.3
2.8
Software hard™
1.3
1.2
Narrowly deﬁned software
Application software
11.670
6,606
63.9
12.454
10.837
53.5
7.1
1.2
Neural network
3,983
6,797
36.9
4,194
18,407
18.6
4.8
3.0
Middleware
4,290
12,315
25.8
6,873
22,695
23.2
410.7
3.6
Operating system
38,082
37,263
50.5
39,770
62.210
39.0
8.8
1.6
Artiﬁcial intelligence
1,772
3,230
35.4
2,188
8.219
21.0
10.3
2.8
Neuro computer
58
22
72.5
16
20
44.4
0.1
0.5
Deep learning
0
5
0.0
523
363
59. 0
#DIV?0!
886
Algorithm
74,812
2,10,682
26.2
79,142
4,09,373
16.2
13.0
2.5
Programming
25,488
94,267
21.3
30,715
1,63,760
15.8
11.8
2.2
Compiler
3,732
13,021
22.3
4,319
27,357
13.6
13.1
3.0
Assembler
1,533
3,083
33.2
2,049
5,521
27.1
7.3
2.5
High-level language
1,007
6,576
13.3
1,235
16,545
6.9
24.1
7.1
C language
2.047
3,935
34.2
1,395
6,585
17.5
3.7
1.6
Sub total
1,68,474
3,97,802
29.8
1,84,873
7,51,892
19.7
11.5
2.3
14.3%
16.4%
Technologies in fusion area
of software and hardware
Firmware
28,302
54,442
34.2
40,327
1,13,776
26.2
49.1
3.5
Machine language
316
220
59.0
620
659
48.5
17.1
2.8
Microprocessor
47,874
1,15,856
29.2
57,467
2,11,455
21.4
6.3
2.1
Central processing unit
12,002
2,967
80.2
11,663
2,994
79.6
2.1
0.9
Logic circuit
17,936
19,028
48.5
21,758
36,694
37.2
2.9
1.7
Orciit design
7,133
24,614
22.5
4,866
39,059
11.1
7.1
1.8
Memory
3,72,333
5,25,141
41.5
3,61,619
8,60,159
29.6
4.7
1.6
(continued)
124
F. Komoda

Table 5.5 (continued)
Year
(4) 2008–2012
(5) 2011–2017
(5) (1)
(5) (3)
Japan
Others
Ratio%
Japan
Others
Ratio%
Dedicated circuit
5,186
5,584
48.2
6,948
7,596
47.8
12.8
2.3
Mask pattern
12,216
15,264
44.5
7,910
11,797
40.1
2.4
0.7
Non linear circuit
130
310
29.5
155
598
20.6
1.7
1.8
Sub toal
5,03,428
7,63,426
39.7
5,13,333
12,84,784
28.5
5.1
1.7
32%
31.5%
Narrowly deﬁned hardware
Semiconductor
2,90,248
3,91,895
42.5
2,53,031
4,93,841
33.9
3.4
1.2
Exposure apparatus
30,079
12,813
70.1
22,823
12,434
64.7
2.2
0.8
Semiconductor thin ﬁlm
4,072
5,851
41.0
3,291
5,819
36.1
2.9
1.2
Transistor
1,15,847
2,14,048
35.1
94,940
3,03,589
23.8
3.4
1.4
Quantum device
112
218
33.9
91
263
25.7
2.4
1.0
Superconductivity device
211
233
47.5
119
265
31.0
0.5
0.6
Neuro device
4
0
100.0
3
2
60
0.1
0.4
Sensor
4,15,197
6,17,042
40.2
4,27,958
13,28,205
24.4
5.9
2.4
Optical sensor
9,293
12,696
42.3
11,138
20,413
35.3
7.1
1.9
Sub total
8,65,063
12,54,796
40.8
8,13,394
21,64,831
27.3
4.5
1.7
53.6%
52.1%
Total
15,36,965
24,16,024
38.9
15,11,600
42,01,510
26.5
5.2
1.8
Source EU Patent Ofﬁce
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
125

“middleware” are high, which indicates the importance of building software plat-
forms and acquiring global standards.
“Memory” is the dominant term mentioned in the fusion area of software and
hardware (860,159 cases in 2013–2017). This reﬂects the necessity for larger
capacities in computer systems. However, from 2003–2007 to 2013–2017, the
growth rate of “memory” reduced 1.6-fold. This seems to reﬂect both the fact that
the importance of memory has decreased and microfabrication technology has
reached physical limits.
“Sensor” and “semiconductor” are the most common in narrowly deﬁned
hardware. Mentions of sensors also grew 2.4 times from 2003–2007 to 2013–2017.
Similarly, the growth rate of “optical sensors” is also high. As the Internet of Things
(IOT) era dawns, the importance of sensors is increasing.
Mentions of emerging technologies supporting future microfabrication tech-
nologies, such as “neuro device,” “quantum device,” and “supplier conductivity
device,” are extremely infrequent, and their growth rate also is low. This can be
interpreted as reﬂecting the current situation that research aiming at breakthroughs
in microfabrication technologies are unlikely for the time being.
As described above, the increasing importance of software in IT is demonstrated
by the trends in the number of patents. Of course, in absolute terms, this does not
mean that the importance of narrowly deﬁned hardware has shrank, only that it has
become smaller relative to software. For example, in the IOT age, it is still nec-
essary for hardware and software to evolve together, such that big data can be
collected by sensors for analysis using intelligent software.
5.4.2
Japan’s Adaptation to the Software-Centered TEP
Next, the author examines whether Japanese companies have properly responded to
the growing importance of software.
Table 5.6 shows the top 9 country codes for priority claim numbers for “ap-
plication software” and “computer architecture” as well as for two technologies in
Table 5.6 Ranking country code of priority claim numbers of patent by technology
Application
software
Computer
architecture
Firmware
Embedded
software
CN
3,539
US
562
US
4,987
CN
560
JP
2,066
WO
85
CN
3,604
US
143
US
1,740
CN
72
JP
2,208
KR
100
wo
450
JP
36
WO
1,229
WO
29
KR
330
EP
26
KR
906
JP
23
TW
252
DE
22
TW
665
TW
8
DE
103
AU
21
EP
189
EP
7
EP
100
FR
16
GB
175
GB
6
GB
85
CA
10
DE
149
FR
6
Source EU Patent Ofﬁce
126
F. Komoda

the fusion area of software and hardware (e.g., “ﬁrmware” and “embedded soft-
ware”) in the patents issued by the EU Patent Ofﬁce. The country code is used as an
approximation of the applicant’s nationality.
First of all, “computer architecture” is predominantly mentioned in the US (562
cases), compared with 85 mentions in Japan, only 15.1% of the mentions in the US.
“Application software” is most frequently mentioned in China, followed by Japan
and the US. Application software differs from computer architecture in that the
latter is a more basic and fundamental technology, and the former is an applied
technology that links the latter’s output to business. Firms in the US are conducting
radical researches that determine the basic nature of the software itself. In other
words, US-based research has primarily focused on advances that lead the evolution
of the nature of TEP. China and Japan, on the other hand, have accepted this
architecture as a basic technology and have used it to develop software tied to
business. In other words, Japanese companies are conducting research in accor-
dance with the technological trajectory established by the framework of
TEP. However, concentrating on the latter without duly considering the former,
which determines the nature of the TEP and the direction of progress with appli-
cation software, weakens a ﬁrm’s ability to adapt to a software-driven economy.
Thus, the inadequate study of basic principles such as computer architecture in
Japan is one of reasons for the country’s lack of adaptability to a software-driven
economy.
Regarding “ﬁrmware” and “embedded software” as technologies that belong to
the fusion area of hardware and software, “ﬁrmware” is mentioned 4,987 times in
US patents versus 2,208 instances in Japan. China ranked ﬁrst in mentions of
“embedded software” whereas the 23 mentions in Japan placed it in 5th place.
Table 5.5 contains patents published by the Japan Patent Ofﬁce as well as
patents published by overseas patent ofﬁces. However, as mentioned above,
because the Japan Patent Ofﬁce’s Digital Library recently began including overseas
patents, but not all overseas patents are available, it is impossible to derive the
correct meaning from time-series data for overseas patents using this database.
Nonetheless, by analyzing the ratio of patents obtained in Japan and overseas [i.e.,
number of domestic patents)/(number of domestic patents + the number of overseas
patents)] in each technology at a speciﬁc point in time, the R&D areas of focus
among Japanese companies can be determined.
The
average
of
(number
of
domestic
patents)/(number
of
domestic
patents + number of overseas patents) was 92.0% in 1993–1997, but declined
signiﬁcantly from 75.0% in 1998–002, 49.6% in 2003–2008, 38.9% in 2009–2012,
and 26.5% in 2013–2017. As mentioned earlier, this is attributable to the facts that
the percentage of missing overseas patents has decreased over the years, and that
the rate of increase in patents acquired by overseas companies exceeds the rate of
increase in patents acquired by Japanese companies.
Technologies where the ratio is larger than the average ratio for each year can be
interpreted as those to which Japan attaches importance, whereas and technologies
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
127

with a smaller ratio are considered less important. In other words, the former are
competitive technologies, and the latter are uncompetitive technologies. In the case
of 2003–2007, 49.6% of all patents were issued by Japan Patent Ofﬁce. In addition,
of the patents issued by the Japan Patent Ofﬁce, 51.8% of technologies belonged to
“narrowly deﬁned hardware,” 48.6% were “technologies in the fusion area of
hardware and software,” and only 42.9% belonged to “narrowly deﬁned software.”
The low ratio of “programming” and “algorithm” among the “narrowly deﬁned
software” patents suggests that Japanese companies have not been making sufﬁcient
investment in software and its fruits. On the other hand, among “narrowly deﬁned
hardware,” eight of the nine technologies exceeded the overall average, including
the extremely high mention rate of “exposure apparatus” at 70.3%.
This situation had not changed signiﬁcantly by 2013–2017, during which 26.5% of
all patents were issued by the Japan Patent Ofﬁce. In addition, 27.3% of “narrowly
deﬁned hardware” 28.5% of “technologies in the fusion area of hardware and software”
were patents issued by Japan Patent Ofﬁce, whereas only 19.7% of “narrowly deﬁned
software” were patents published by the Japan Patent Ofﬁce. The fact that the ratio of
“operating system” and “middleware” are larger than the average may reﬂect Japanese
companies’ positive attempts to adapt to the age of computer networking. However, the
low ratio of patents published by Japan Patent Ofﬁce for “algorithm,” “programming,”
and “high-level language” reveals the vulnerability of software development in Japan.
Next, the author extracts patents for automatic driving from those published by
EU Patent Ofﬁce and examines the emphasis on software by country. To this end,
2,107 patents were extracted that included the term “automatic driving” or “au-
tonomous driving” for 2007–2017. Looking at these data in chronological order, as
shown in Fig. 5.2, a rapidly since the beginning of the 2010s. This reﬂects the
current situation where automatic driving research is in full swing and practical
application is approaching.
Priority claim number ranked in 814 in CN (China), 502 in JP (Japan), 316 in
KO (South Korea), 183 in US (US), and 113 in DE (Germany). It can be seen that
China’s ability to develop automated driving technology is rapidly increasing, and
that Japan and South Korea are also seriously developing it. Patent numbers
undeniably reﬂect technological development capabilities to a certain extent.
However, it is well known that the US, which is ranks 4th in terms of patent
acquisitions in the world, is the most advanced in automatic driving technology.
This indicates that the correlation between the number of patents and technology
development ability should not be overestimated.
Next, in order to understand the extent to which software is emphasized in
Japan’s autonomous driving development compared with other countries, terms
appearing in the title/abstract of patents granted in three countries (Japan, the US,
and China) were extracted up to the top 1,000, and those terms included in the
upper rank are regarded as the technologies emphasized in each country. This
ranking was used because an evaluation based on the number of occurrences per se
tends to underestimate US investment in automated driving technology. Therefore,
128
F. Komoda

the top terms for each country are regarded as technologies emphasized in that
country. The ranking by mentions of technologies such as prediction, recognition,
position identiﬁcation, planning, monitoring, etc., that are decisive for achieving
automated driving are shown in Table 5.7, along with ranking and number of
occurrences of software necessary for autonomous driving.
First, “algorithm,” “program,” “software,” “architecture,” and “learning” were
chosen as terms embodying narrowly deﬁned software. Then, within the top 1,000
rankings, 10 terms (including program, algorithm, software, and computer program
product) are found in the US. In contrast, both Japan and China had only six terms
in the top 1,000. Of terms including “data” or “database,” which were selected to
embody the meaning of data analyzed by software, 11 terms are found within 1,000
rankings in the US, compared with only 6 in Japan and 5 in China. In addition, if
map information as a key technology related to autonomous driving is included in
the data, 16 terms are found in the US, compared with 12 in Japan and 6 in China.
This reveals that in the development of automatic driving technology, the emphasis
is placed on narrowly deﬁned software and data in the US.
Second, the results from including the term “device” as a technology of the
fusion area of hardware and software are as follows. The US had only 11 terms
compared with China’s14 but Japan had as many as 30 terms. It can thus be
concluded that Japan is developing more hardware-oriented technologies rather
than narrowly deﬁned software. In addition, in terms of the future basic industries
underlying autonomous driving, Japan’s software development capability is lower
than that of the US, while in this paper, author insisted on delay in the soft-
wareization of Japan.
Fig. 5.2 Number of patent related to automatic driving (EU Patent Ofﬁce) Source EU Patent
Ofﬁce
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
129

Table 5.7 Appearance ranking of technologies achieving automatic driving
1–50
51–100
101–500
501–1000
US
Device(41),
sensor(40),
data(38),
location(35),
map(18)
Program(7), sensor data(7), database(6),
algorithm(6), storage device(5), compute
device(5), plan(4), radar(4), location
information(4), perception(3), software(3),
localization(3). map database(3), object
localization(3), position data(3), process
device(3), mapping(2), prediction(2), map
information(2), reference data(2), user
interface device(2), sender device(2),
closure device(2), path plan(2), image data
(2), measurement data(2), communication
device(2), object map(2), object data(2),
perception system(2), trafﬁc control device
(2), computer program product(2),
Monitor(l), predictor(l). learning(l).
architecture(l), recognition(l), program
instruction(l), prediction result(l),
assistance device(l), point data(l), user
device(l), map building(l), management
compute device(l), radar detection
equipment(l), vehicle radar perception(l),
curvature estimation algorithm(l), driver
assistance device(l), path predictor(l),
mapping information(l), control console
device(l), prediction component(l), radar
system(l), user device display(l), present
user location(l), output device(l), data
ﬁtting algorithm(l). software program(l),
perception information(l), prediction
subsystem(l), plan view occupancy map(l),
radar perception information(l), navigation
plan(l), control device(l)
Japan
Device(264),
program(60),
sensor(53).
Data(38), control device(38),
support device(38), map(37),
plan(29), computer program
(28), recognition(22).
Location(19), drive device(18), vehicle
control device(18), drive control device
(16), monitor(14), assistance device(14),
prediction(ll), navigation device(11),
database(10), map information(10). travel
control device(10), display device(8),
communication device(6), vehicle device
(6), map data(6), illumination device(6),
learning(5), vehicle control program(5),
radar(4), image data(4), map database(4),
assist device(4)
Safety device(3), support control device(3),
vehicle sensor(3), notiﬁcation device(3),
road map data(3), operation device(3),
perception(2), control parameter setting
device(2), drive support device(2), learning
recording device(2), attitude adjustment
device(2), plan generation unit(2),
recording device(2), surround recognition
sensor(2), measurement device(2), ﬂow
passage device(2), map update
determination system(2). navigation ECU
(continued)
130
F. Komoda

Table 5.7 (continued)
1–50
51–100
101–500
501–1000
(2), object course prediction method(2),
power storage device(2), precision map
unit(2), information recognition unit(29),
control program(2), support program(2),
recognition information(2), storage device
(2), radar wave(2), prediction unit(2),
surround recognition sensor(2), output
comparison device approach(2), change
control device(2), map update
determination unit(2), map unit(2), brake
control device(2), vehicle operation device
(2). sensor data(2)
China
Device(372),
data(158),
sensor(139)
Drive device(51), moiiitor(47)
Map(40), radar(37), control device(34),
algorithm(33), plan(28), program(20),
location(20), sofhvare(20). recognition(19),
path plan(ll), database(10)
Power fraction device(9). learning(8),
perception(8), programming(7), power
drive device(7), computer program(7), state
control device(6), monitor device(6),
communication device(6), monitor system
(5), wing device(5), data information(5),
detection device(5), storage device(5),
prediction(4), alarm device(4),
transmission device(4), safety device(4)
Note () means appearance ranking
Source EU Patent Ofﬁce
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
131

5.5
Software Competitiveness in Japan
5.5.1
Actual Situation of Low Competitiveness in Japanese
Software Industry
Data on the number of patents and academic business articles examined in the
previous section has revealed the weakness of Japan’s software development
capabilities. This examines the current state of Japan’s software competitiveness
and the reasons behind this situation.
The most obvious indication of the low competitiveness of Japanese software is
the country’s software trade balance. As Fig. 5.3 shows, Japan’s software trade
balance deﬁcit is large. In 2001, software exports and imports were 0.1 trillion yen
and 0.3 trillion yen, respectively; by 2014; they were 0.2 trillion yen and 1.0 trillion
yen, respectively, indicating that the deﬁcit is growing.
The data also show Japan’s inferior level of R&D investment. For example, of
the 2,880 leading IT companies involved in the software business, only 1,006 were
conducting R&D in 2016, and their ratio of R&D expenses to sales were a mere
3.2% of sales.1
The inferiority of Japan’s software technology level has a negative impact on the
country’s macroeconomic growth. Figure 5.4 shows the impact of investment in
software on Japan’s GDP growth. According to this ﬁgure, software contributed
less than 0.1% to Japan’s GDP growth in 1985–2000, less than in the US and many
Fig. 5.3 Trade balance of software etc. Note Receipt and payment of copyright royalty including
software. Source Ministry of Economic, Trade and Industry (2015). p. 11
1Global ICT Strategy Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (2018), p. 24.
132
F. Komoda

other countries. By 2001–2007, its contribution exceeded that in the US, indicating
that the Japanese economy had begun to become software-led. In the 21st century,
however, software is becoming more intelligent. As described in the previous
section, software intelligence began rapidly advancing around 2012 as a result of
advances of emerging technology called deep learning.
In the future, it will be necessary to analyze the effect of AI’s introduction on
GDP growth. It is well known that Japan’s research on AIs has lagged far behind
that of other countries, especially the US. Table 5.8 compares the degree of pen-
etration of AI among Japanese and US companies. For this comparison, a ques-
tionnaire survey was conducted among 2,211 people in Japan and the United States
engaged in four job types with high possibility of mechanization: ((1) clerk,
(2) driver, (3) production/construction worker(4) ④restaurant staff), and four job
types with low mechanization possibilities ((1) doctor/pharmacist, (2) faculty staff,
(3) system engineer, (4) nursing/long-term care staff). According to the survey
results, the degree of penetration of AI in each group of four occupations was much
greater in US companies than in Japanese companies (Nomura Research Institute
2016, p. 26).
These ﬁndings offer further evidence that TEP’s core technology has been
shifting from hardware to software, as described repeatedly. Furthermore, intelli-
gent software is particularly becoming central. Today, the Japanese economy and
Japanese companies must undertake further adaptation to this new paradigm.
Average annual growth rates
Average annual growth rates
Fig. 5.4 Contribution of software investment to GDP growth. Source Lippoldt and Stryszowski
(2009), p. 9
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
133

5.5.2
Reasons for Weakness of Japanese Software
The Japanese economy was able to adapt well to the TEP in 20th century, a time
when hardware technologies such as microfabrication technologies in IT were of
great importance; the country was also able to enjoy the high international com-
petitiveness in the memory and home appliances markets. In the 21st century,
however, the networking of computer systems has continued to progress, and the
importance of software is increasing. Nevertheless, Japan’s software development
capacity and the widespread penetration of software into society have lagged, and
its competitiveness has been rapidly eroding. This paper will conclude with a
clariﬁcation of future challenges by considering the causes behind the delay in the
Japanese companies’ software responses.
First, the end of the Japanese bubble economy in 1991 and subsequent long-term
deterioration in business performance weakened Japanese companies’ investment
capacity. As Table 5.9 shows, the growth rate of IT investment in the 1990s was
not signiﬁcantly different from that in the US, but in the 2000s, the growth rate of
IT investment by Japanese companies stagnated compared with that of US com-
panies, a divergence that reﬂects the deterioration of Japanese ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial
condition in the 21st century due to performance deterioration, particularly among
electrical
equipment
manufacturers.
This
deterioration
is
symbolized
by
Panasonic’s large operating loss in 2001–2002 and Sony’s stock price crash in
2003.
Moreover, software accounts for a much smaller proportion of IT investment
than in the US. As shown in Table 5.9, in 1994, software received only 31.5% of IT
investment in Japan, compared with 42.9% in the United States.
One of the reasons why Japanese companies disregarded software was a failure
to recognize the shift in IT from hardware to software that occurred at the turn of
the century. One example is the television manufacturing industry. At the end of the
Table 5.8 Current status and planning situation of introduction of artiﬁcial intelligence into the
workplace
Japan
US
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Number of respondents
553
553
551
554
Introduced and used already
1.8
2.0
4.5
6.1
Introduced already, never used so far
2.9
3.3
7.8
8.8
Not introduced yet, but there are plans to be introduced in
the future
4.2
7.1
14.0
19.0
Not introduced yet, and there are no plans to be introduced in
the future
62.0
64.2
54.4
49.5
Unknown
29.1
23.5
19.2
16.6
Note (1) Occupation with high possibility of mechanization, (2) occupation with low possibility of
mechanization
Source Nomura Research Institute (2016), p. 26
134
F. Komoda

Table 5.9 IT Investment Trends in Japan and the US
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
US
Software
0.09
0.09
0.1
0.13
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.23
Hardware
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.17
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.2
0.17
0.17
0.18
Software + hardware
0.21
0.23
0.25
0.3
0.33
0.39
0.45
0.41
0.38
0.39
0.41
Ratio of software
42.9%
39.1%
40.0%
43.3%
45.5%
46.2%
46.7%
51.2%
55.3%
56.4%
56.1%
Japan
Software
4.6
4.7
5.4
6.1
7.1
7.6
8.2
9.2
9.7
9.7
9.9
Hardware
10
12
14.1
13.9
11.8
11.8
11.8
10.3
8.7
8.5
8.2
Software + hardware
4.6
4.7
5.4
6.1
7.1
7.6
8.2
9.2
9.7
9.7
9.9
Ratio of software
31.5%
28.1%
27.7%
30.5%
37.6%
39.2%
41.0%
47.2%
52.7%
53.3%
54.7%
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
US
Software
0.25
0.26
0.28
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.36
0.37
Hardware
0.18
0.19
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
Software + hardware
0.43
0.45
0.49
0.48
0.46
0.47
0.49
0.5
0.51
0.54
0.55
Ratio of software
58.1%
57.8%
57.1%
60.4%
63.0%
61.7%
63.3%
64.0%
64.7%
66.7%
67.3%
Japan
Software
10.1
10.2
10.2
10.4
9.6
9.5
9.2
9.7
10
10.1
10.5
Hardware
8.3
7.9
8.2
7.9
6.3
5.8
6.5
5.7
5.8
6.1
5.7
Software + hardware
10.1
10.2
10.2
10.4
9.6
9.5
9.2
9.7
0
10.1
10.5
Ratio of software
54.9%
56.4%
55.4%
56.8%
60.4%
62.1%
58.6%
63.0%
63.3%
62.3%
64.8%
Note US trillion dollar, Japan trillion yen
Source Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (2018), p. 30
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
135

twentieth century, the quality of television pictures was more determined by soft-
ware than by the quality of the CRTs or LCD panels. This shift was accelerated by
the digitization of television programming. However, Japanese companies contin-
ued to focus on improving the quality of their hardware. This focus was not limited
to televisions. Improvements in the functioning of many home appliances have
been determined by software. However, Japanese companies were less aware of the
importance of developing such software, which in turn contributed to the decline of
the Japanese consumer electronics industry.
In this way, the contraction of the Japanese market and deterioration of corporate
performance, as well as the misunderstanding of trends in technological progress,
deprived companies of incentives to invest in R&D or make capital investments in
software. As a result, although by the 2000s, the ratio of software investment to
total IT investment in Japan reached a level comparable to that in the US, the total
amount of IT investment did not increase. For that reason, software investment in
the US grew 1.8-fold between 2000 and 2015, compared with a 1.3-fold increase in
Japan. This hindered Japanese companies’ ability to adapt a software-driven
economy.
The second reason for the delay in Japanese companies’ adaptation to the new
TEP, i.e., the delay in software development, is their inability to understand that
global trends in software development were moving toward open architecture and
packaged software, which meant they failed to abandon the old system of
custom-made software development tailored to each customer’s needs. In 2016,
Japan’s custom software sales were 7,966.5 billion yen versus packaged software
sales of 1,093.0 billion yen; it is estimated that the market size of packaged software
was only 13.7% that of custom software.2 In 2016, custom and embedded software
accounted for 88.3% of total software sales in Japan, compared with the 11.7%
share of packaged software sales. In comparison, in 2016, the percentage of custom
software and packaged software in the US was 53.8% and 46.2%, respectively. It
can thus be seen that Japan is overly biased toward custom-made software.3
Certainly, compared to software development based on packaged software, an
integrated development system that develops new custom software for each cus-
tomer and controls such software from upstream to downstream enables
high-quality software. On the other hand, because the majority of software costs are
personnel costs, developing new software separately for each customer by a single
company inevitably greatly increases the total cost. This strategy thus weakened the
international competitiveness of the Japanese software industry. Even if packaged
software has inferior quality, it can signiﬁcantly reduce costs. The tendency to
emphasize packaged software is consistent with the fact that the global computer
industry has shifted from mainframes to personal computers as well as shifted from
stand-alone computers to an open network called the Internet.
2Global ICT Strategy Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (2018), p. 12.
3Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (2018), p. 30.
136
F. Komoda

In addition to under-investing in software and failing to recognize the trend
toward packaged software, Japanese companies face new challenges today. This is
because software intelligence has made advancements in the 21st century, with AI
spreading rapidly to industrial activities and civic life.
Deep learning as evolved from machine learning is the driving force behind the
current advances in AI technology. Deep learning, which ﬁrst spread rapidly around
2012, allows feature quantities to be detected without ﬁrst deﬁning those features.
This is possible because the neural network has a multilayered intermediate level
that increases the possible amount of information processing without increasing the
number of calculations required. This makes it possible to obtain a much richer and
more accurate knowledge than conventional machine learning.
In Sect. 5.2, AI was described as a general-purpose technique, which also holds
true for deep learning, which is widely used for automated driving, medical
imaging, speech recognition, and natural language processing, among others. The
accuracy of deep learning improves as more data are available. As shown in
Fig. 5.1, analysis of big data leads to a solution, with further data collected and
analyzed based on that solution. This iterative process makes it possible to increase
the accuracy of the found solutions.
5.6
Conclusion
In the era of a knowledge-based economy, software has become more important
than hardware, which means that R&D and other investments in software play a
greater role than ever in maintaining corporate international competitiveness and
producing macroeconomic growth. This shift to hardware was spurred by several
factors. First, there is a physical limit to the ability to further miniaturize the
linewidth of IC chips, which makes it impossible to improve the degree of inte-
gration, as done in the past. Second, limited customer needs for mass-produced,
mass-consumption products, and the uncertainty and variability of today’s newly
emerging customer needs give software an advantage in terms of ability to respond
both ﬂexibly and at low cost, compared with the high cost and time frame required
to change hardware speciﬁcations. Third, to identify customer needs that are dif-
ﬁcult to understand and predict, the intellectual software (AI) that accumulates and
analyzes large volumes of data has begun to evolve at a remarkable pace.
These factors have led to an increasing importance of software worldwide in
R&D and other investments. The analysis in this paper has demonstrated that the
inability of Japanese companies to adequately respond to this change was one factor
behind the prolonged stagnation of Japanese companies from the end of twentieth
century through to the 21st century. Today, AI is rapidly evolving and increasingly
penetrating a wide range of ﬁelds, including autonomous driving, robotics, social
infrastructure, and medical care. Within this context, there is no doubt that software
is becoming increasingly important, meaning that Japanese companies must take
new measures in the future to adapt to these ongoing changes and increasing
prominence of software.
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
137

References
Cantwell, J., & Santangelo, G. D. (2000). Capitalism, proﬁts and innovation in the new
techno-economic paradigm. Journal of Evolutionary Economic, 10(1). 131–157.
Cavanillas, J. M., Curry, W., & Wahlster, W. (2016). Big data value opportunity. In J. M.
Cavanillas, W. Curry, & W. Wahlster (Eds.), New horizons for a data-driven economy. Berlin:
Springer, 3–11.
Center for Global Communication, International University of Japan. (2018). Jinkou Chinou to
Nippon 2018 (Artiﬁcial intelligence and Japan 2018). Tokyo: Glocom, 1–157 (in Japanese).
Cockburn, I. M., Henderson, R., & Stern, S. (2017). The impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on
innovation. In Paper Prepared for the NBER Conference on Research Issues in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. 1–38.
Drechsler, W., Kattel, R., & Reinert, E. S. (Eds.), (2009) Techno-economic paradigms: Essays in
honour of Carlota Perez. London: Anthem Press, 1–420.
Freeman, C. (1987). Technology policy and economic performance: Lessons from Japan. London:
Pinter Pub Ltd, 1–150.
Freeman, C. (2009). Shumpeter’s business cycles and techno-economic paradigm. In W.
Drechsler, R. Kattel, & E. S. Reinert (Eds.), Techno-economic paradigms: Essays in honour of
Carlota Perez. London: Anthem Press, 125–144.
Global ICT Strategy Bureau. (2018). Ministry of internal affairs and communications. Results of
the basic survey on the information and communications industry, 2017. Tokyo: Ministry of
Internal Affairs and Communications, 1–74.
Hayashi, T. (1995). Amerika gijutsu taikei no henka to gijutsu kanren (Changing mechanism of the
American technologies and the inter-relationships of the technologies). Rikkyo Economic
Review, 49, 57–74 (in Japanese).
Hayashi, T. (2007). Shinseihin kaihatsu purosesu niokeru chishiki sozou to ibunka manejimento
(Knowledge creation and multi cultural management in the new product development process).
Rikkyo Business Review, 1, 16–32 (in Japanese).
Kodama, F. (1992). Technology fusion and the new R&D, Harvard Business Review, July-August
1992. 70–78.
Komoda, F., Nishiyama, K., & Hayashi, T. (1996). Jouhou tsuushin to gijutsu renkan bunseli
(Information telecommunication and technology linkage analysis). Tokyo: Chuo keizai, 1–203
(in Japanese).
Komoda, F., Nishiyama, K., & Hayashi, T. (1997). Gijutsu paradaimu no keizaigaku (Economics
of technology paradigm). Tokyo: Taga publishing, 1–260 (in Japanese).
Komoda, F. (2000). Kagaku gijutsu to kachi (Science/technology and value). Tokyo: Taga
publishing, 1–269 (in Japanese).
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolution. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1–210.
Lyko, K., Nitzschke, M., & Ngomo, A-C. N. (2016). Big data and acquisition. In J. M. Cavanillas,
W. Curry, & W. Wahlster (Eds.). New horizons for a data-driven economy. Berlin: Springer,
39–61.
Lippoldt, D., & Stryszowski, P. (2009). Innovation in the Software Sector. OECD, 1–88.
Ministry of Economic, Trade and Industry (2015). Tsusho hakusho: 2015 (White paper on
international trade: 2015), Tokyo: Ministry of Economic, Trade and Industry, 1–371 (in
Japanese).
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (2018). Information and communication in
Japan, White paper. Tokyo: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 1–380 (in
Japanese).
Nomura Research Institute (2016). ICT no shinka ga koyou to hatarakikata ni oyobosu eikyo ni
kansuru chousa kenkyu (Survey research on the impact of evolution of ICT on employment and
workplace). Tokyo: NRI, 1–72 (in Japanese).
OECD (1996). The knowledge-based economy. OECD, 1–26.
OECD (2014). Data-driven innovation for growth and well-being. OECD, 1–86.
138
F. Komoda

Perez, C. (1985). Microelectronics, long waves and world structural change: New perspectives for
developing countries. World Development, 13(3), 441–463.
Perez, C. (2004). Technological revolutions, paradigm shifts and socioinstitutional change. In E.
S. Reinert (Ed.), Globalization. Economic Development and Inequality. Cheltenham: Edward
Elga, 217–242.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1912). Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Verlag von Dunker
& Humblot, 1–548.
Dr. Fumio Komoda (Ph.D., Kyushu University) is Professor Emeritus of International Business at
the Faculty of Economics, Saitama University, Japan, and visiting professor of International
Business at the Faculty of Economics and Business Management, Saitama Gakuen University. His
main research interests is developing text mining methods that can contribute to building a
company’s technology strategy. He received his PhD in Economics from Kyushu University. He
has published widely works and academic papers in the domain of management of technology and
text mining.
5
New Roles for Japanese Companies …
139

Chapter 6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD
Industry and Japan’s Competitive
Position in East Asia
Kazuhiro Asakawa
Abstract This chapter analyzes Japan’s changing competitive position in the
TFT-LCD industry over the past several decades. Based on the analysis of multiple
factors that affected Japan’s decline, I identiﬁed paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD
industry that have directly or indirectly led to a change in Japan’s competitive
position. The chapter shows that declining competitiveness of a country and a ﬁrm
cannot be fully understood without closely relating it to the shifts in the paradigm of
the industry. In addition, this chapter shows how the paradigm shifts of the industry,
the changing competitive positions of a country and a ﬁrm, as well as the changing
locus of innovation for a company, i.e. domestic vs. international and in-house
versus collaborative, are aligned with one another.
Keywords Paradigm shifts  TFT-LCD industry  Japan  Competitive position 
Locus of innovation  East Asia
6.1
Introduction
In today’s transnational economy, national competitive advantage is becoming less
stable and sometimes ephemeral in many industries (Doz et al. 2001). Knowledge
and technology migrate from advanced to less advanced countries, meaning that
countries with less technological progress can catch up with those with more
advanced technologies through learning and imitation (Kim 1997; Lee 2005;
Mathews 2006). A nation’s competitive advantage may not be sustainable under
these circumstances. The latecomers outperform the incumbents by leveraging cost
advantage of less-developed countries.
We know that ﬁrms based in a declining home country have difﬁculty accepting
the reality and shifting the locus of innovation from being home country-driven to
K. Asakawa (&)
Graduate School of Business Administration, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: asakawa@kbs.keio.ac.jp
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_6
141

overseas-driven (Doz et al. 2001). This chapter is focused on such a change, with a
particular attention to ﬁrms struggling to cope with their home country’s decline in
industry competitiveness, by trying to change the locus of innovation from
domestic, in-house to international and open (Doz et al. 2001; Cantwell and
Mudambi 2005; Asakawa et al. 2018).
To elucidate such a shift in the competitiveness, I shed light on Japan’s thin-ﬁlm
transistor liquid crystal display (TFT-LCD) industry which has gone through a
series of major transformation in the past few decades. US initially enjoyed its
competitive advantage in the TFT-LCD industry in the 1970s since RCA developed
the ﬁrst ﬂat panel display in 1968 (Hu 2012). However, in spite of their supremacy
in R&D capability, US ﬁrms stopped pursuing innovation in this industry due to the
time-consuming nature of commercialization from the state-of-the-art technologies
at the time. In response, Japanese ﬁrms, i.e., Sharp, NEC and Seiko, absorbed
technologies from the US and nurtured the competencies throughout the 70 and 80s
(Murtha et al. 2001; Hu 2012; Johnstone 1999; Polgar 2003). Widely known as
“spiral management,” Sharp engaged in technology absorption and application over
several decades to develop a wide range of products using TFT-LCD technology.
Japan’s production volume of TFT-LCD panels reached over 90% of the worldwide
share in the 90s, when Japan became the world’s center for the TFT-LCD industry.
By then, US ﬁrms had lost interest in the industry with the exception of IBM which
formed a Joint Venure (JV) with Toshiba (DTI) for further joint development of
technologies and products. Applied Materials also formed a JV with Komatsu
(AKT), among a few US survivors in the industry. By then, Japan became the
leader in TFT-LCD industry (Murtha et al. 2001).
However, Japan’s dominance in TFT-LCD production share has weakened over
time, with Korea and Taiwan taking over the leading position. The success behind
Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms lies in the fact that they have learned knowledge from
Japan and adopted the global best-supplier policy for equipment and materials,
regardless of nationality (e.g., Samsung). Korea and Taiwan succeeded in rapid
technological catch-up through intensive learning from Japan, combined with the
ease of access to ﬁnancial capital in each country (Linden et al. 1998; Lee and Lim
2001; Lee and Mathews 2012). The 2000s was a decade of Korean and Taiwanese
dominance in the TFT-LCD industry, with each achieving approximately 40% of
worldwide share of production as Japan’s share plummeted rapidly (Asakawa
2007). Subsequently, the 2010s was a decade of further reshufﬂing in the com-
petitive arena in the industry, manifested by a rapid surge of China as a major threat
to Korean and Taiwanese rivals (IHS Markit 2018). Based on a powerful backup of
the Chinese government, Chinese ﬁrms aggressively invested in huge volume of
production lines in large size TFT-LCD panels, up to Generation (Gen) 10.5 which
is by far the largest as of April 2019 (HIS Markit 2018). Such aggressive large-scale
investments in fabrication facilities (fabs) have drastically lowered the price of the
panel, thus making the incumbent Korean and Taiwanese manufacturers less price
142
K. Asakawa

competitive. China also invests in small- to medium-size panel production for
mobile devise such as smartphones (HIS Markit 2018).
Fierce competition among the East Asian countries pushed Japan further down
in a marginal production share. While the catch-up of Korea and Taiwan has been
explained by the ﬂying geese model which explains how Japan contributed to the
development of other East Asian countries (Linden et al. 1998; Kojima 2000), such
a model lost its validity by the 2010s, as Japan, once the leader in TFT-LCD
industry in East Asia, has turned to a subordinate position by the end of the second
decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Japan’s TFT-LCD panel makers have stopped
investing in fabs beyond Gen 3.5 by the end of the 90s, and only Sharp has
continued to invest in large size TFT-LCD panels (Murtha et al. 2001). Hitachi,
Toshiba and Sony have merged their TFT-LCD divisions and set up Japan Display
Inc. (JDI) specializing in small- and medium-sized panel in 2012 funded by
Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ), the public-private fund (currently
INCJ Ltd.). Basically Sharp and JDI have been the only two major Japanese players
in TFT-LCD panels in the twenty-ﬁrst century. The 2010s marked a new era of
Japan’s TFT-LCD industry: these national players ended up falling under the
control of foreign actors. Sharp has been acquired by Foxconn in 2016 and has
become a subsidiary company under the control of Taiwanese ﬁrm. And JDI, a
national merger of Hitachi, Toshiba and Sony, is likely to fall under the control of a
group of investors from China and Taiwan according to the news as of early April
2019. Such a drastic decline in Japan’s presence can be analyzed along the shifting
paradigm in the industry over the past several decades.
The objective of this chapter is to interpret various factors behind the decline in
Japan’s share of TFT-LCD panel production over the past several decades from the
lens of paradigm shifts in innovation strategy. Looking back the history of industry
evolution in the past several decades, we identify changes at differing dimensions:
source of competitive advantage, the nature of technology, country leadership,
product, panel size, geographic scope, and the locus of innovation. What kinds of
paradigm shifts have taken place in the TFT-LCD industry in the past decades? This
chapter illustrates the paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry in the past several
decades and discusses how and why Japan’s competitive positioning has changed
so drastically.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: I ﬁrst analyze various factors that
have led to Japan’s decline in the TFT-LCD industry in two consecutive periods,
the ﬁrst and the second decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century (Sect. 6.2). Based on the
analysis of Japan’s decline in the TFT-LCD industry, I introduce a set of paradigm
changes in this industry and relate it to Japan’s decline in the industry (Sect. 6.3).
Then I summarize how such decline in Japan’s TFT-LCD industry has led Japan to
shift the locus of innovation from domestic/in-house to international/collaborative
(Sect. 6.4).
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
143

6.2
Evolution of Japan’s Competitive Position
in TFT-LCD Industry
6.2.1
Japan’s Leadership in TFT-LCD Industry
(Until the Mid-1990s)
Japan established its competitiveness in the TFT-LCD industry across the stages of
value chain (Murtha et al. 2001). During the golden decades of Japan’s electronics
and electric industry in the 1980s and the early 1990s, electronics manufacturers
enjoyed their dominant position in the global market by leveraging their superior
technology, corporate brand, capable and hardworking engineers, and loyal cus-
tomers of the Japanese products. Japan’s domestic economic growth lasted until the
bubble crashed in the early 90s. This economic boom encouraged Japanese consumer
electronics manufacturers to develop laptop PCs with TFT-LCD display panels.
Stable market demand allowed the Japanese ﬁrms to invest in R&D to enhance the
product quality appreciated by the Japanese consumers. Branding was successfully
done based on the high reputation of the Japanese product. TFT-LCD panel makers
initially supplied their panels to their own PC and TV product divisions to serve as
source of their own competitive advantage. The panel makers collaborated closely
with upstream equipment and material manufacturers within Japan based on
long-term trust (Murtha et al. 2001; Johnstone 1999; Nugamami 1999).
6.2.2
Decline of Japan’s Production Share in the TFT-LCD
Industry Since the 2000s
Japan’s decline in leadership in terms of production volume of TFT-LCD display
panels was inﬂuenced by various conditions.
Economic recession:
First and foremost, Japan’s economic recession altered the trajectory of Japan’s
TFT-LCD ﬁrms. Since the existing business model of Japanese’ TFT-LCD was
largely based on the assumption of a stable economy, a serious economic recession
generated concern for continuing investment in large-scale factories. In a way,
managers lost their nerve in the Asian ﬁnancial crisis due to the ﬁrms’ insufﬁcient
capital, and most Japanese companies refrained from taking a risk to invest in future
generation fabs beyond Gen 3 (Murtha et al. 2001). No Gen 3 fab investments were
made after Sharp and Display Technologies Incorporated (DTI), the IBM-Toshiba
manufacturing alliance, and then Hitachi’s Gen 3.5. Instead, they relocated their
manufacturing function to the lower-cost country, Taiwan. Such a move shows a
remarkable departure from the previous model in which Japanese TFT-LCD
companies created value within Japan through tight coordination across the value
chain (Asakawa 2007). While relocating part of the value chain would have been
144
K. Asakawa

avoided at all costs under the previous paradigm, the economic recession triggered
by Asian ﬁnancial crisis has changed the organizing principle of Japan’s TFT-LCD
industry.
Isomorphic approach to Taiwanese ﬁrms:
Japanese TFT-LCD companies’ isomorphic approach to Taiwanese ﬁrms was
intended to contain rapid expansion of Korean ﬁrms (Murtha et al. 2001; Shintaku
and Yoshimoto 2009; Tabata 2014). In 1999, everyone rushed to follow ADI. In the
wake of the Asian ﬁnancial crisis in 1998, mass-production of TFT-LCD panels by
Korean ﬁrms lowered the price substantially. Japanese ﬁrms’ market share in Taiwan
plummeted, and Japanese ﬁrms, including Mitsubishi, Toshiba, IBM Japan, Sharp,
and Matsushita, had to start producing TFT-LCD locally to lower the production
cost, and they ended up transferring technologies to Taiwanese partners. Korean
ﬁrms rapidly followed Sharp, DTI, and Hitachi in investing in large-scale panel fabs
when no other Japanese companies were doing so. They rapidly accumulated core
technological know-how by hiring Japanese engineers formally or informally over
the weekend (Murtha et al. 2001). Japanese TFT-LCD manufacturers saw this as a
major threat, and decided to transfer technology to Taiwanese ﬁrms to deter the
Korean move (Shintaku and Yoshimoto 2009; Asakawa 2007). ADI, a Mitsubishi
group member and a joint TFT-LCD panel-production venture between Asahi Glass
and Mitsubishi, was among the ﬁrst, in collaboration with Chung Hwa Picture Tubes
(CPT) (Murtha et al. 2001). This shows a remarkable departure from a previous
paradigm in Japan’s TFT-LCD industry, in which technology was retained within
Japan and collaboration with overseas partners was avoided.
Underestimating the value of old-generation knowledge transferred to Taiwan:
Another departure from the previous model in existence until the 90s concerns
the mobility of engineers and knowledge across national borders in a rather careless
manner. At the time of setting up older generation fabs in Taiwan, Japanese ﬁrms
underestimated the value of the knowhow which was shared to Taiwan ﬁrms that
launched the lagged generation factories. Since these Taiwanese companies were
starting from scratch, older generation knowledge was more useful and important
for them to catch up (Murtha et al. 2001; Suarez and Utterback 1995). Taiwanese
ﬁrms which introduced technologies from Japanese ﬁrms, including CPT from ADI
(Mitsubishi), ADT (established by Acer in 1996) from IBM Japan, Unipac from
Fujitsu (2000) MVA technology, and Unipac also from Matsushita, chose to adopt
the lagged 3 Gen technology while Japan had 3.5 Gen; Taiwanese engineers were
sent to Japan to learn Japan’s SOP (standard operating procedure), and Japanese
engineers also visited Taiwan to supervise the local operations. Japanese ﬁrms had
little concern for leaking core technologies, primarily because they were transfer-
ring old generation technologies. Although Taiwan ﬁrms preferred to lag, they did
not lag too much, to make sure they can learn and catch up quickly enough, by
maintaining the “fast follower strategy” (Mathews et al. 2011; Mathews 2005;
Shintaku et al. 2006; Mathews and Lim 2001). This phase of history in Japan’s
TFT-LCD industry shows a remarkable contrast with the previous stage until the
end of 90s, in terms of the mobility of knowledge-holders across borders. Japan was
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
145

obliged to engage in lower-cost manufacturing in Taiwan, thus technology transfer
through human interface was a necessary part of the process. However, Japan did
not ﬁnd technological leakage risky because the technology transferred was older
and no longer special in Japan (Asakawa 2007). Japan’s propensity for advanced
technology led them to underestimate the value of older generation knowledge
when the ﬁrms with lagged technological capacities could learn a great deal more
from the older generation technologies.
Japan’s risk-averse decision-making style:
In fact, what differentiated Japan’s aversion to continuing investment in
larger-size TFT-LCD panel manufacturing from Korea’s and Taiwan’s aggressive
investment relates to the traditional decision-making style of Japan’s large, diversi-
ﬁed electronics ﬁrms: Economic growth in the 80s facilitated business diversiﬁca-
tion, so that senior managers could not keep them abreast of the most recent situation
of all those businesses. Since top management was not necessarily updated on the
most recent situation of the TFT-LCD business, they avoided making a hasty deci-
sion to invest in future generation fabs during the period of high economic uncer-
tainty (Murtha et al. 2001). The Asian ﬁnancial crisis forced Japanese ﬁrms to delay
or stop such long-term investment in future generation fabs. In contrast, Taiwan and
Korean ﬁrms had better access to capital thanks to the abundant ﬁnancial support of
Korean Chaebolsand less strict Taiwanese equity markets (Mathews 2005).
Risk-taking investment by Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms:
The bold risk-taking strategy implemented by Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms
contributed to Japan’s decline: Taiwanese and Korean ﬁrms took a bold risk by
entering during industry downturns within the crystal cycle as resources become
available for challengers in the downturns (Mathews 2005; Lee and Mathews
2012). Such a strategy is only effective for the new entrants as downturns provided
them with a small “window of opportunity” for raising investment while the
incumbents could not do so (Mathews 2005). In contrast, Japanese ﬁrms, the
dominant incumbent players at the time, were risk-averse given the uncertainty in
their surrounding environment.
Mass production in China by new entrants:
The Japanese TFT-LCD industry had relied on stable growth in the downstream
market via TV set segment. However, new entrants in this business, both from
Japan and outside Japan, have expanded the market size signiﬁcantly and have
lowered the price of TV sets. These new entrants chose China as a location for
manufacturing TV sets. The massive entry of Chinese makers of TV sets con-
tributed to the declining price of TV set price by mid-2000s. And these latecomers
could accelerate the design of TFT-LCD TV sets by sourcing technology more
easily and quickly without accumulating their own proprietary technologies.
Digitalization and modularization of technologies in TFT-LCD TV sets allowed
them to source external technologies that are modularized, such as LSI. As Chinese
and other East Asian ﬁrms could draw on external modularized technologies rel-
atively easily, they could save time required to launch the large-scale production
146
K. Asakawa

and sales of their TV sets (Shintaku and Yoshimoto 2009). Consequently,
Japanese TV set makers lost their price competitiveness vis-à-vis other East Asian
competitors and fell out of competition. Such a decline in cost leadership of Japan’s
TFT-LCD TV products had a signiﬁcantly negative impact on Japan’s TFT-LCD
panel manufacturers in terms of the shrinking market share.
Japan’s equipment and material makers:
Japan’s decline in the share of TFT-LCD panel production was further precip-
itated by the independent moves by Japan’s equipment and materials makers which
were anxious to sell their products to wider overseas market when Japanese ﬁrms
stopped investing. Although equipment and materials embody substantially all of
the critical knowledge necessary to start up new fabs, the Japanese equipment and
materials makers tried to avoid knowledge leakage as much as possible by entering
the new East Asian markets through exporting or FDI (Murtha et al. 2001).
Nevertheless, export and FDI were never perfect for avoiding the erosion of the
proprietary knowledge of specialized advanced technologies (Asakawa 2007).
Equipment and materials by Korean ﬁrms:
Korean companies such as Samsung could not afford to rely on inefﬁcient
strategies for supplying equipment and materials from Japan. Samsung rapidly
internalized the manufacturing of materials and equipment for TFT-LCD and
substituted certain technologies so as not to rely exclusively on Japanese suppliers.
For example, Samsung already internalized most procurements of core materials
production within its group companies or its suppliers networks in the 2000s (Song
2006). Up to the Gen 5 line, Samsung Electronics (SEC) internalized glass sub-
strates, color ﬁlters, and driver IC. For the Gen 7 line, SEC internalized backlight
production. SEC also constructed glass substrate plant next to its own LCD plant.
For LG-Philips and CMO, polarizers can be procured from their own group
companies. The Korean and Taiwanese governments also tried to raise the per-
centage of internal procurement of material and equipment (Korea: 50% by 2005;
Taiwan: 70% by 2008) (Song 2006; Shintaku et al. 2006).
The role of the government:
The surge of Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms is not exclusively based on the
company-level efforts. The Korean and Taiwan governments played major roles,
including Taiwan’s government-owned Industrial Technology Research Institute
(ITRI), which developed multiyear plans to foster TFT-LCD industry and led to the
rapid growth of the industry. (Murtha et al. 2001). At the same time, spin-off of
ITRI staff to TFT-LCD industry also contributed to the rapid growth of the industry
(Akabane 2004; Shintaku et al. 2006). Spin-off projects from ITRI were signiﬁcant
and included CMO, UMC and TSMC (Shintaku et al. 2006; Tabata 2014); Topply
was also a spin-off of a national research institute.
Japan’s attachment to technological upgrading:
Japan’s tendency to prefer technological upgrading to large-scale investment in
manufacturing lost its advantage in the advent of intensive price competition in East
Asia. Nevertheless, Japanese ﬁrms continue to adhere to the technological
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
147

upgrading by putting priority on moving up to concentrate on new technologies
with higher-value added, such as LTPS. Japanese ﬁrms outsourced less sophisti-
cated manufacturing of TFT-LCD panels to Taiwanese suppliers (Akabane 2004).
Such a propensity to stick to advanced technology was consistent with the logic of
value chain disaggregation on the smile curve of the value chain (Mudambi 2007),
in which ﬁrms that control value-adding upstream R&D activities have strong
incentives to increase the efﬁciency and effectiveness of such activities by relo-
cating the standardized activities in the middle to emerging market economies
(Mudambi 2008). However, in the case of TFT-LCD industry, the middle of the
value chain, i.e., manufacturing of TFT-LCD panels, was a major source of com-
petitiveness for East Asian panel producers which concentrated on the large-volume
production of price-competitive panels.
6.2.3
Further Changes in Japan’s TFT-LCD Industry Since
2010—Present
The TFT-LCD industry manifested a series of further changes in the 2010s. Major
changes in the industry include the rapid growth of the small size panel market
triggered by the proliferation of the smartphone; a surge of organic light-emitting
diode (OLED) as a major competitor of TFT-LCD technology; the major growth of
China in the TFT-LCD industry, and the changing source of competitive advantage
from technological differentiation to cost and price reduction. Sharp was acquired
by the Taiwanese Foxconn in 2016, and JDI, a merger of Hitachi, Toshiba and Sony
since 2012, is on the verge of falling under the control of a group of investors from
China and Taiwan as of April 2019. These two incidents indicate a symbolic
decline of Japan’s TFT-LCD industry, in both large and small- to medium-size
panel categories.
The rise of the smartphone panel display market:
Due to the rapid growth of the smartphone market, small-size panels saw rising
shares as well. Japan Display Inc. (JDI), merged by display divisions of Sony,
Toshiba and Hitachi and sponsored by Innovation Network Corporation of Japan
(INCJ), the public-private fund (currently INCJ Ltd.) in 2012, focuses on small-size
TFT-LCD display panel for smart phone. JDI continues to emphasize on techno-
logical competencies in TFT-LCD (Nikkei Business 2016, 05.30), and it has
remained as a Japanese national team, despite ﬁerce price competition in Asia.
However, here, the strong presence of China is clear. Based on the shipping vol-
ume, Century is ranked number one (11.2%), followed by BOE (10.8%), Hannstar,
Samsung and Tianm (IHS Markit 2018). China’s aggressive investment in mass
production has lowered the price substantially, and made JDI far less price com-
petitive in the face of Chinese rivals. JDI continued to believe in the power of
technological competencies while overlooking the efﬁciency aspect of competi-
tiveness. Furthermore, its primary customer Apple’s decline in its iPhone sales has
148
K. Asakawa

severely damaged JDI’s shipment of the panels. Apple’s decision to adopt OLED
for iPhone’s screen has further damaged JDI which was not agile in shifting its
attention to OLED in spite of its increasing market share vis-à-vis the TFT-LCD
(IHS Markit 2018; Nikkei 2019a, 4.4., p. 15). Due to its administrative heritage of
being funded by the public sector, the company refrained from drastic restructuring
by closing down underperforming domestic fabs (Nikkei 2019b, 4.4., p. 15). As of
early April 2019, JDI is most likely to fall under the control of a group of investors
from China and Taiwan (Nikkei 2019b, 4.4., p. 1). This indicates the decline of
Japan’s TFT-LCD industry in the small- and medium-sized panels, along with the
decline in the large TFT-LCD display panel.
TFT-LCD rivalry:
PDP’s shipment share has declined since 2006 at its peak, and OLED continues
to grow. According to IHS Markit (2018), TFT LCD revenues are declining
whereas AMOLED revenues are growing. Apple’s move to adopt OLED for
iPhone’s display panel should affect such a trend much further. The OLED market
is virtually monopolized by Korean ﬁrms: Samsung Display for smartphone and
LG Display for TV. OLED TV manufactures source panels from LG Display,
including Sony and Panasonic. Since Gen 3 in TFT-LCD, Japanese ﬁrms have
refrained from investing aggressively in OLED-related R&D in the wake of the
Lehman shock in 2008. The OLED divisions of Japanese ﬁrms Sony and Panasonic
merged in 2015 as JOLED which developed its unique and innovative printed
OLED displays for the ﬁrst time in Japan in 2017 with a potential to realize a
simple, low cost manufacturing process. JOLED targets both large and small OLED
panels (JB Press 2018). Nevertheless, despite their superior technology, Japanese
ﬁrms lag behind Korea in the product development and manufacturing of the OLED
panels.
Surge of China’s presence:
The emergence of China in the TFT-LCD industry in the 2010s shows a
remarkable evolution of the industry since 2000s when Korea and Taiwan were the
two dominant giants. Today, China is a major threat to Korea and Taiwan which
enjoyed their dominant position in the 2000s. Japan cannot compete against China
in terms of cost advantage, and China’s technological standard has further threat-
ened other East Asian countries. According to HIS Markit (2018), by 2022, China
will have more than 19 TFT-LCD fabs in Gen 8.6 through 10.5 and 20 OLED fabs.
Gen 10.5 line is already in the ramp-up phase in BOE, or under construction by
China Star. Foxconn-Sharp is building its Gen 10.5 line in China as well, and China
has undoubtedly become the world center of large size panel production. China has
become a center of Gen 8 through Gen 10.5 investment. While most 65’’ are made
in Korea (Gen 8) and Taiwan (Gen 6), new entrants come from China (BOE and
China Star) and elsewhere in Gen 10.5 (IHS Markit 2018).
China also intends to internalize FPD’s equipment based on the initiative “Made
in China 2025,” in which China intends to create the entire value chain in FPD
locally. Such a move should present a major threat to Japan and Korea. (IHS Markit
2018).
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
149

6.3
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry
So far I have discussed how the TFT-LCD industry has evolved in the past several
decades, and have shed light on various factors that have led to Japan’s declining
position in the industry. Based on the discussion above, we can identify a number
of paradigm shifts in the industry that have directly or indirectly led to a change in
Japan’s competitive positioning over the past decades.
From technological advantage to cost advantage:
The source of competitive advantage has changed over time, from technological
differentiation capability to cost reduction capability. As discussed above, TFT-LCD
industry has been led by ﬁrms with superior technological capabilities. Innovation in
TFT-LCD panel manifested itself in the form of upgrading across generation (Gen),
which basically meant the war of enlarging substrate size and further enhancing the
high resolution of the screen. However, since Korea and Taiwan began to invest in
massive scale of panel production in the fabs since the 2000s, followed by China
since the 2010s, cost advantage has taken over as an alternative source of compet-
itive advantage for the manufacturing of ﬂat panel display. Japan has lost its industry
leadership because of its continuing attachment to high-spec technological sophis-
tication. Interestingly, today’s Korean ﬁrms, as represented by Samsung, are facing
the same challenge when pursuing their technological sophistication at the expense
of price competitiveness (Nikkei 2019c, 4.6., p. 10). The industry seems to have
reached a limit in size and the quality of the panels which consumers would expect.
Commoditization of TFT-LCD panel, which has taken place so rapidly (Nikkei
2019d, 3.31), has made the latecomers easier to learn from Japan and apply the
acquired knowledge much easier. While technological capability continues to be
necessary, it alone no longer serves as an absolute source of competitive advantage
given the high standard of technological sophistication of the existing products. The
Chinese latecomers are catching up in technological innovation and are outper-
forming the Japanese and other East Asian incumbents in cost advantage.
Modularization of TFT-LCD technology:
Traditionally, source of competitive advantage in this industry has adhered to the
tacit, human-embodied knowledge contained within a production site, for rapid size
war required the ﬁrms to keep investing in higher generation fabs, and there was no
codiﬁed knowledge available for rapidly and frequently upgrading higher Gen fabs
(Murtha et al. 2001). However, the size war seems to have reached its limit at Gen
10.5, and the required technology for operating panel production has been widely
shared among Korean, Taiwanese and Chinese ﬁrms. Furthermore, digitalization
facilitated the modularization of the TFT-LCD industry, and such a trend makes
Japan’s traditional integral approach in manufacturing less competitive. Japan’s
strength based on integral production architecture has begun to lose its competitive
edge in the TFT-LCD. (Nakagawa et al. 2016). While Japan’s technological
supremacy remains, the digital revolution has shifted the source of competitive
advantage away from Japan’s traditional manufacturing method pursuing high
150
K. Asakawa

quality improvement through long-term efforts to the cost advantages of leveraging
AI and robotics. Modularization of TFT-LCD technology opened a window of
opportunity for new entrants into the game without a long history of their own
internal technological development.
From exploiting the advanced TFT-LCD technologies to exploring the opportuni-
ties in OLED:
Evolution of the TFT-LCD industry can be summarized from the aspect of
technology and product category. TFT-LCD replaced the cathode-ray tube (CRT), a
dominant technology until the end of the twentieth century. The TFT-LCD industry
has grown in Japan since the early 90s with the use of LCD displays for laptop
computers and desktop monitors. Sharp engaged in the ﬁrst production of laptop
size TFTs (Linden et al. 1998). LCD revenues passed those of CRTs in 2002
(Semenza 2012), and the arrival of the twenty-ﬁrst century marked the beginning of
the large-size screen panel of LCD TVs. Plasma display (PDP) surged as an
alternative display for large ﬂat-panel TVs, with the symbolic introduction of a
42-inch PDP in 1997. However, after a period of rivalry with TFT-LCD, PDP lost
its momentum since hitting the peak of its revenues in 2006. The TFT-LCD panel
market continued to grow, with aggressive investment in higher Gen lines
throughout the 2000s, with Korea and Taiwan engaging in ﬁerce competition of
large size TFT-LCD panels. After a decade of the ﬁerce race of upgrading the fabs
among Korean, Taiwanese and Japanese (Sharp) ﬁrms, until the Gen 10.5 line, built
by Sharp in 2009, the 2010s marks a new era of even ﬁercer competition involving
China as a major competitor. In addition, another decade of manufacturing
high-performance displays for mobile applications has arrived across the 2010s
(Semenza 2012). In the meantime, OLED surged as a new competing technology,
although Kodak initially developed it in the 80s. Forecasting suggests that the
shares of TFT-LCD to those of OLED will change from 8:2 in 2018 to 6:4 in 2025
(IHS Markit 2018). In sum, a paradigm change in technology manifested itself as a
transition from small- and medium-sized TFT-LCD displays for laptop PCs in the
90s to a greater size of TFT-LCD panel displays for large TVs during the 2000s,
then to a surge of market for smaller screens for mobile handheld devices such as
smartphones and tablet PCs along with the continuing scale of large TVs since the
2010s (Semenza 2012). The surge of small screen display for mobile devices
requires different technological innovation distinct to smartphone use, and this
opens the windows of opportunity for further technological innovation and
competitions.
While TFT-LCD remains the dominant category, its relative share is declining
while the share of OLED is increasing since 2010s. According to a survey by IHS
Markit 2018, the proportion of TFT-LCD to OLED is likely to change from (HIS
8:2 in 2018 to 6:4 in year 2025 (HIS Markit 2018). Although Japan has done R&D
on OLED since early stage, its priority has been put on TFT-LCD for Sharp and
JDI, the only two main survivors of TFT-LCD manufacturers based in Japan. As
the share of TFT-LCD plummets, however, the panel makers are directly affected
negatively. Facing the ﬁerce rivalry against Chinese companies in the TFT-LCD
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
151

panel, Samsung has shifted its direction toward OLED by adopting OLED panel to
its own smartphone. In contrast, Sharp and JD were slow to react, and Sharp has
been acquired by Foxconn in 2012. JDI is likely to be acquired by a group of
investors from China and Taiwan so that mass production of OLED panel shall be
realized in China (Nikkei 2019d, 4.4., p. 15).
Evolving country leadership:
The evolution of the TFT-LCD industry can be summarized from the standpoint
of country leadership. As summarized above, the dominance of US and Europe
shifted to Japan throughout the 90s when the major electronics ﬁrms invested in up
to Gen 3 TFT-LCD fabs; then all but Sharp stopped after Gen 3.5 lines. Korean
dominance was a threat to Japanese ﬁrms, which tried to contain Korean expansion
by transferring technologies to Taiwan ﬁrms manufacturing panels in Taiwan. The
2000s was a decade of Korean and Taiwan dominance in the TFT-LCD industry in
terms of the production volume. Japanese ﬁrms specialized in advanced technology
and partnered with Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms for low-cost manufacturing, but
most Japanese ﬁrms eventually lost their market share in TFT-LCD display panels
and withdrew from the game. The Japanese ﬁrms specialized in new, alternative
LCD advanced technologies such as LTPS for small- to medium-sized product
displays, while Korean and Taiwanese latecomers focused on the more conven-
tional technologies used in ﬂexible LCD panels and LCD TVs (Hu 2012). As the
latecomers complemented Japan technologies by complementary knowledge to
technology leaders (Nekar 2003), East Asia’s technological range in TFT-LCD
industry has further expanded. Sharp continued to invest in the race of higher
generation TFT-LCD fabs to compete with Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms throughout
the 2000s, up to the Gen 10.5 line. Although Sharp was acquired by Foxconn in
2016, it is the only surviving player from Japan in the ﬁerce race of generational
upgrading of fabs. In the meantime, the rapid advancement of generations in
TFT-LCD fabs has reached a limit, currently at Gen 10.5 line.
In the meantime, during the 2010s, Chinese latecomers aggressively invested in
multiple fabs in TFT-LCD and OLED, thus China ended up having fab Gen 10.5
lines and a forecast says China will have 19 Gen 8- Gen 10.5 fabs in TFT-LCD and
OLED by 2022, and 19 Gen 5.5- Gen 6 fabs in a-Si, TPS, and Oxide by 2022 (HIS
Markit 2018). Since 2017, China has become the largest FPD manufacturer in the
world (HIS Markit 2018). China’s aggressive investment in fabs has expanded the
production lines and generated overcapacity in production. Taiwan and Korea
slowed down investments, and some of the ﬁrms (especially Korean) were obliged
to close down the older generation fabs while concentrating on newer generation
lines. Obviously Foxconn Sharp was not big enough to deter Chinese inﬂuence.
With TFT-LCD technology becoming more modular, technological learning has
become less challenging for the latecomers like China (Shintaku and Yoshimoto
2009).
China has also become a center of production of TFT-LCD panels for other
Asian companies: Japanese, Korean and Taiwanese companies operate factories in
152
K. Asakawa

China. However, China has not reached a stage of advanced technologies in
equipment and materials which are still dominated by Japanese ﬁrms.
The competition in both large and small panel display markets:
While the main competition in the past has been exclusively around the
enlarging size of the substrate, today’s competition occurs both in the large size
screen for the TV sets and the small size screen for the smartphone. The war of
substrate size in the 2010s has reached the Gen 10.5, and the 2010s is characterized
by the competition in both the large and the small- to medium-size panels. For
example, even among the major Korean ﬁrms, LG display focuses on large panel
for TV sets, while Samsung shifted its focus onto the small panel for the smart-
phone. Japan’s JDI focuses on small size panel for mobile applications (Nikkei
2019d, 4.4). Indeed, in the 2010s the smartphone market has rapidly grown, but so
are the growing number of competitors in this sector. And the demand of the small
screen panel depends on Apple’s sales as well as its decision to adopt OLED screen
for the iPhone. (HIS Markit 2018).
From national to regional innovation:
The TFT-LCD industry has initially been tied to a national innovation system, in
which Japan, Korea and Taiwan has manifested differing patterns of industry
development. Japanese electronics companies have kept the core knowledge within
Japan throughout the 90s. Sharp’s black box strategy represents this approach, by
shutting out non-Japanese players from its production facility in Japan. However,
since Japan transferred technology to Taiwan to start local production, the industry
has become more regional. Japanese companies, as once represented by
Sony-Samsung, started collaborating with Korean and Taiwanese companies to
lower production cost, secure stable manufacturing, and supply panel for their
products. Furthermore, the 2010s marked a new stage of Japanese Sharp being
acquired by Taiwanese Foxconn. Current negotiation indicates a likelihood of JDI
being acquired by a group of investors from China and Taiwan, as of April 2019.
This is a symbolic transformation of the industry from national to regional. Such
evolution of industry indicates a clear shift in paradigm from nation-based inno-
vation to region-based innovation, in which no single country can fulﬁll the entire
value chain activities satisfactorily (Cantwell and Iammarino 2003). Japan put
priority on the left end of the smiling curve (Mudambi 2007; Everatt et al. 1999)
focusing on R&D, design, etc. while leaving the middle of the value chain, i.e.
low-cost manufacturing etc., to other East Asian countries (Mudambi 2008). The
smile dynamic explanation (Mudambi 2018) ﬁts the situation of the regional nature
of TFT-LCD innovation, in which Korea and Taiwan in the 2000s and China in the
2010s have been on a catch-up mode, targeting at the left end of the smiling curve
from the middle of the value chain; Japan situated in the left end of the smiling
curve has incentives to relocate the less value-creating tasks that can be modular-
ized in the middle of the value chain, i.e. low-cost manufacturing, to other East
Asian locations (Mudambi 2018). Japan, despite its declining position in the
mass-manufacturing of TFT-LCD display, remains dominant in the upstream
equipment and materials sector. Thus East Asia covers a full range of tasks on the
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
153

smiling curve of the value chain (Mudambi 2017), with each country playing a
differentiated role on its strength.
Table 6.1 summarizes the paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry and how
Japanese ﬁrms have changed their competitive positions.
Table 6.1 Paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry
Old paradigm
New paradigm
Period
Until the 1990s
Since the 2000s
Paradigm
shifts in
the
TFT-LCD
industry
Source of
competitive
advantage
Technological advantage;
ﬁrm-speciﬁc technological
capability and tacit
knowledge
Cost advantage as for
panel manufacturing;
Technological advantage
as for equipment and
materials
Production
architecture:
Modularization of
TFT-LCD
technology
Closed Integral
(trans-generational
upgrading of fabs required
tacit human-embodied
knowledge)
From closed integral to
open modular (as for mass
production of panel)
Exploitation and
exploration of
technology
From CRT to TFT-LCD
and PDP;
Exploitation of existing
TFT-LCD technology
TFT-LCD and
OLED; PDP declines;
Exploration of emerging
opportunity in OLED
Evolving country
leadership
Japan as the leading
country for technology,
production and branding
East Asian region
(Aggressive production
expansion of Korea and
Taiwan during the 2000s;
rise of China since the
2010s; Japan for upstream
advanced technologies)
Final product and
panel size
First for laptop PC; then
for large LCD TV sets
For large LCD TV sets
competing with large
PDP TV sets until the
mid-2000s; Racing over
generations (larger
substrate size) until the end
2000s; For small mobile
(smartphone) display panel
since the 2010s
Geographic scope
of innovation
National innovation
Regional innovation
Paradigm
shifts in
Japan
Japan’s position
Dominant
Declining
Locus of
innovation for
Japanese ﬁrms
“Domestic &
in-house”;
Vertical integration or
collaboration across value
chain stages within a
business group in Japan
“International &
collaborative”;
Collaboration across a
business group across
borders
154
K. Asakawa

6.4
Transition in the Locus of Innovation for Japanese
TFT-LCD Firms: From Domestic/In-House
to International/Collaborative
So far this chapter shows that Japan’s declining competitiveness is associated with
the shifts in paradigm in the TFT-LCD industry. Paradigm shifts have made certain
sources of competitive advantage for Japanese ﬁrms obsolete while opening a
window of opportunity for new entrants like China to establish their competitive
position. In this section, I show how the locus of innovation, i.e. domestic versus
international and in-house versus collaborative, also shifts along the changing
competitiveness of a country and a ﬁrm and a changing paradigm in the industry. In
other words, I show how the paradigm shifts of the industry, the changing com-
petitive positions of a country and a ﬁrm, as well as the changing locus of inno-
vation are aligned with one other. For example, a shift from the domestic/in-house
approach to the international/collaborative one is strongly related to the declining
competitive position of a country and a ﬁrm, which is tightly linked to the shifts of
paradigms in the industry.
This section focuses on the changing locus of innovation in the TFT-LCD
industry for Japanese TFT-LCD ﬁrms, with a particular attention to the following
dimensions: geographic scope and organizational boundary. The former refers to
the locus of value-added activities to be conducted in a single country vis-à-vis
across national borders. The latter refers to the extent of collaboration with external
parties in conducting value-added activities.
Geographic scope depends on the
home-country’s
industry
competitiveness,
whereas
organizational
boundary
depends on ﬁrms’ competitiveness.
Four categories can be composed based on
these dimensions: domestic/in-house, domestic/collaborative, international/in-
house, and international/collaborative, respectively.1
The following logic can be drawn, as presented in Fig. 6.1: First, if both home
country advantage and company-speciﬁc advantage exist, the company is likely to
adopt the domestic/in-house approach. Second, if home country advantage resides
in the home country’s industry but no company-speciﬁc advantage exists, the
company is likely to adopt the domestic/collaborative approach. Third, if
company-speciﬁc advantage exists but no home country advantage resides in the
home country’s industry, the company is likely to adopt the international/in-house
approach. Forth, if neither home country advantage nor company-speciﬁc advan-
tage exists, the company is likely to adopt the international/collaborative approach.
In Fig. 6.2, I show that Japanese companies depart from domestic/in-house
approach to either domestic/collaborative or international/collaborative approach.
As the country’s presence declines facing the low-cost mass production of
1This two-dimensional framework is consistent with Mudambi (2018) which classiﬁed strategic
choice by geographic location (i.e. concentrated or dispersed) and control (i.e. vertical integration
or specialization).
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
155

TFT-LCD panels in China, Taiwan and Korea, Japanese companies shifted their
locus of innovation toward international/collaborative approach.
Domestic/In-house:
Japanese TFT-LCD companies enjoyed dominance in the industry, with the
market share as high as over 90% in the early 1990s. Japanese ﬁrms such as Sharp
can be plotted in the lower-left quadrant, where both the home country advantage
and company-speciﬁc advantage were strong. However, due to the erosion of rel-
ative technological strengths vis-a-vis Korea and the lack of cost advantage vis-à-
vis Taiwan, the validity and sustainability of the black box approach has been
questioned.
When both home country advantage and company-speciﬁc advantage were
strong and sustainable, as represented by the upper-right quadrant, the ﬁrms could
Low
High
High
Domestic/
Collaborative
International/
collaborative
International/
In-house
Domestic/
In-house
Country’s
Competitiveness
Firm’s Competitiveness
Low
Fig. 6.1 The locus of
innovation in the TFT-LCD
industry
Domestic                   International
Collaborative
In-house
: 
Old 
paradigm
New 
paradigm
Fig. 6.2 Change in the locus
of innovation of Japanese
ﬁrms
156
K. Asakawa

internalize advanced learning through vertical integration, known as the“black box”
approach. Alternatively, they could engage in advanced learning through
arms-length collaboration with domestic suppliers. In reality, pure vertical inte-
gration was rare, even for Sharp which tried to extend their “black box” approach to
the supplier relations in its Kameyama plant (Nakata 2007). In fact, Japanese ﬁrms
in the TFT-LCD industry manifested less vertical integration than Korea (Lehmberg
2017). As the companies’ competitiveness eroded, however, the black box
approach through vertical integration became less effective.
Domestic/Collaborative:
Domestic/collaborative is more appropriate when the competitive advantage of
the home country and industry remain strong but that of the company becomes
weak. Japanese TFT-LCD panel makers other than Sharp stopped investing beyond
4 Gen in the 1990s due to the economic recession and ﬁnancial crisis in Japan. As
runners-up to Sharp, they chose to collaborate themselves, given the remaining
competitive advantage of Japan’s TFT-LCD industry, at least in the high end of the
spectrum. For example, when Matsushita and Toshiba announced that they would
integrate their TFT-LCD business in October, 2001, they were both suffering from
low-price competition by Korean ﬁrms, and found it reasonable to integrate their
TFT-LCD business to cope with the Korean rivalry (Asakawa and Kim 2007).2
Another case was the foundation of IPS Alpha Technology, Ltd.,3 a joint venture
among Hitachi, Matsushita and Toshiba, along with Hitachi Displays Ltd., founded
in January 1, 2005. This new company sought to develop, manufacture, and sell
amorphous TFT-LCD panels larger than a 23” TV, with increased production
capacity and reduced cost (Asakawa and Kim 2007). These companies fell behind
major players in TFT-LCD industry such as Sharp and Samsung Electronics in
terms of the generation-upgrading race. Other examples include Sharp-Toshiba
alliance in 2017, with Sharp’s technology in TFT-LCD matched with Toshiba’
system LSI for TV in a complementary way (Nakata 2009). Furthermore,
Sharp-Sony alliance in 2018, with Sharp supplying its TFT-LCD panel to Sony’s
TV with stability and continuity. Sony can beneﬁt from the alliance by also stably
procuring panel from Samsung and Sharp for its TV sets (Nakata 2009).
Although they found sophisticated technological niches, they were threatened by
low-cost pressure by Korean rivals. Thus, they chose to form domestic alliances to
compete against Korean catch-up. For example, to deter market expansions of
Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms, Sharp acquired the LCD business unit from Fujitsu,
which represented Japan’s strong technology in ﬂexible panel displays technologies
(Hu 2012). However, as the gap in national industrial competencies between Japan
2TMD (Toshiba Matsushita Display Technology Ltd.) was founded on April 1, 2002, with 60%
Toshiba and 40% Matsushita, in charge of development, manufacturing, and sales of TFT-LCD,
STN-LCD, and OLED for small-medium size panels, aiming at cost-breakthrough by economies
of scale (Asakawa and Kim 2007).
3“IPS” stands for “In-Plane-Switching,” the technology for widening the view angle originally
developed by Hitachi (Nikkei Newspaper, November 1, 2004; Asakawa and Kim 2007).
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
157

and Korea/Taiwan became narrower, pure domestic collaboration did not make
sense. In reality, pure domestic collaboration among material and equipment
makers, panel makers, and the end producers has been uncommon in the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Along the decline in national and company competitiveness,
ﬁrms even use cooperative arrangement as a way to reduce commitment and to
facilitate exit from the industry (Lehmberg 2017).
International/In-house:
In theory, this approach is most effective when a company tries to buffer the core
technology internationally for the company from competitors. However, in reality,
companies chose to partner with foreign ﬁrms outside of their technological core, as
seen in Sharp’s business alliance with Quanta in Taiwan to cope with low-cost
competition (Asakawa and Kim 2007; Asakawa 2007). This mode is consistent
with the logic of the smile curve of value creation (Mudambi 2007) in which ﬁrms
that control the upstream end of value chain choose to relocate the standardized
activities at the middle of the smile curve to less developed countries to enhance
efﬁciency and effectiveness of high value-added activities (Mudambi 2008). While
core technological knowledge is contained within the ﬁrm and within Japan,
peripheral or older-generation production technologies that can be standardized are
shared with its Asian operations4 mainly to cope with low-cost production pressure.
Therefore, the international vertical integration is has not been commonly chosen
and implemented by Japanese TFT-LCD ﬁrms.
International/Collaborative:
International/collaborative also became common for Japanese electric and elec-
tronics ﬁrms which were hesitant to remain in a ﬁerce competition over the low-cost
production of TFT-LCD panel. Our conceptual framework predicts that ﬁrms are
likely to adopt this mode when the competitive advantages of a country’s industry
and company-speciﬁc advantage are gradually eroding. Sony, despite its competi-
tiveness as a company, had been focused on CRT and thus lagged in TFT-LCD
technologies. It was relatively easy for Sony to look for international collaboration in
this case, because of the obvious technological shift from CRT to TFT-LCD, and
because of the obvious recognition that the company lagged behind Sharp in this
technology. Sony formed S-LCD, the joint venture company established with
Samsung Electronics in 2003, to secure a stable supply of large TFT-LCD panels
beyond Generation 7 which was believed to be much more cost-efﬁcient than in the
earlier generations (Asakawa 2007; Asakawa and Kim 2007: 14). Sony took
advantage of its collaboration with Samsung to overcome its weakness in the stable
supply of large panels and in cost efﬁciency, until S-LCS dissolved in 2011. In fact,
many Japanese panel makers engaged in much looser inter ﬁrm collaboration than
vertical integration or joint venture arrangements. Typical examples include Japan’s
TFT-LCD makers that transferred technology to Taiwanese ﬁrms for OEM
4This includes OEM from Taiwan, LCD module and LCD TV assembly in China, Malaysia,
Mexico, and Poland, as for Sharp (Nakata 2007).
158
K. Asakawa

manufacturing with cost advantage to deter fast-growing Korean makers. The case of
technology transfer includes the following: from ADI (Mitsubishi Electrics) to CPT;
from IBM Japan to ADT (founded by Acer); from Toshiba to Hannstar; from Sharp to
Quanta Display (QDI); from Matsushita to Unipac (Akabane 2004). For China,
Sharp agreed on the ﬁrst Chinese-Japanese joint TFT-LCD fab in Nanjing in Gen 8
by licensing its advanced technologies to China Electronics Corp. (CEC), which is
the parent ﬁrm of CEC-Panda (Hsieh 2013; Negishi 2013).
More recently, the Foxconn/Sharp takeover deal came when the TFT-LCD
industry was under ﬁerce competition from Korean, Taiwanese and Chinese ﬁrms,
when the industry was facing the challenge of overcapacity and the need for product
diversiﬁcation. The Foxconn-Sharp deal was intended to make both companies
become a powerhouse in TFT-LCD industry (Hsieh 2016).
On the upstream front, materials and equipment companies, no matter how
competent they may be, cannot survive without collaborating with the panel makers
as buyers. Therefore, pure in-house approach does not make sense. At the same
time, equipment and material makers cannot afford to ignore their overseas cus-
tomers in Korea and Taiwan, although the government wishes to protect the core
technologies from leaking to Korea and Taiwan (Murtha et al. 2001). Many ﬁrms
engage in collaboration with Korean makers. The international-collaborative
strategy is the high-risk, high-return approach, because it may run into intellectual
property right (IPR) risks. Nevertheless, Japan’s equipment makers are inclined to
collaborate with Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms due to their large volume of pro-
duction. For example, 70% of CMO’s R&D was conducted jointly with Japan’s
materials and equipment makers, whereas 30% with Taiwan’s universities, gov-
ernment, and/or within CMO in Taiwan (Shintaku et al. 2006).
6.5
Conclusions
Japan’s dominance in the TFT-LCD industry in the 1990s has been replaced by
Korea and Taiwan in the 2000s, and then by China in the 2010s. This chapter was
intended to present various factors behind the decline in Japan’s leading position in
the TFT-LCD industry from the lens of paradigm shifts in innovation strategy.
Looking back the history of industry evolution in the past several decades,
Isummarized multiple changes in Japan’s TFT-LCD industry from the 1990s to the
2000s and the 2010s in light of Japan’s declining position in the industry. Based on
this analysis, I then identiﬁed paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry that have
directly or indirectly led to a decline in Japan’s competitive position: changing
source of competitive advantage, modularization of TFT-LCD technology, evolv-
ing country leadership, product and panel size, and geographic scope of innovation.
This chapter illustrates the paradigm shifts in the TFT-LCD industry in the past
several decades and discusses how and why Japan’s competitive positioning has
changed so drastically.
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
159

The contributions of this chapter include the following. First, this chapter shows
that Japan’s declining competitiveness is associated with the shifts in paradigm in
the TFT-LCD industry. In other words, the chapter shows that declining compet-
itiveness of a country and a ﬁrm cannot be fully understood without closely relating
it to the shifts in the paradigm of the industry. Paradigm shifts have made certain
sources of competitive advantage for Japanese ﬁrms obsolete while opening a
window of opportunity for new entrants like China to establish their competitive
position.
Second, this chapter show the locus of innovation for a ﬁrm, i.e. domestic vs.
international and in-house versus collaborative, also shifts along the changing
competitiveness of a country and a ﬁrm and a changing paradigm in the industry. In
other words, I showed how the paradigm shifts of the industry, the changing
competitive positions of a country and a ﬁrm, as well as the changing locus of
innovation are aligned with one other. For example, a shift from the domestic/
in-house approach to the international/collaborative one for a Japanese ﬁrm is
strongly related to the declining competitive position of Japan and the ﬁrm, which is
tightly associated with the paradigm shifts in the industry.
In this chapter, the competitive position of Japan and the Japanese ﬁrms has been
examined. Future study can broaden the scope by covering the competitive position
and the locus of innovation of ﬁrms from other East Asian countries.
Acknowledgements I would like to thank Stefanie Lenway and Thomas Murtha for their insights
into the early stage of this research through our collaboration at Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Industry Studies Project. I thank RIETI for its generous support to conduct the early stage of this
research. I also thank Keio Business School’s Mitsubishi Chairship Fund and the JSPS
Grant-in-Aid (B) No. 15H03384 for the ﬁnancial support.
References
Akabane, J. (2004). The Taiwanese TFT-LCD industry: The role of Japanese companies and the
Taiwanese government in the development process. Asian Studies, 50(4), 1–19 (in Japanese).
Asakawa, K. (2007). Metanational learning in TFT-LCD industry: An organizing framework,
RIETI Discussion Paper (07-E-029). Tokyo, Japan: Research Institute of Economy, Trade and
Industry.
Asakawa, K., & K. Kim (2007). Japan’s TFT-LCD Display Industry. Keio BusinessSchool Case
#90-06-5225 (in Japanese).
Asakawa, K., Park, Y., Song, J., & Kim, S. (2018). Internal embeddedness, geographic distance,
and global knowledge sourcing by overseas subsidiaries. Journal of International Business
Studies, 49(6), 743–752.
Cantwell, J., & Immarino, S. (2003). Multinational corporations and european regional systems of
innovation. Oxfordshire: Routledge.
Cantwell, J., & Mudambi, R. (2005). MNE competence-creating subsidiary mandates. Strategic
Management Journal, 26(12), 1109–1128.
Doz, Y., Santos, J., & Williamson, P. (2001). From global to metanational. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press.
160
K. Asakawa

Everatt, D., Tsi, T., & Cheng, B. (1999). The Acer Group’s China manufacturing decision.
Version A. Ivey Case Series #9 A99M009. Richard Ivey School of Business, University of
Western Ontario.
Hsieh, D. (2013, July 1). Sharp and CEC-Panda: The ﬁrst Chinese-Japanese joint TFT LCD fab,
rAVe Publications, online.
Hsieh, D. (2016, March 31). HIS: Foxconn-sharp deal creates TFt-LCD production powerhouse,
News Freedom, news online.
Hu, M.-C. (2012). Technological innovation capabilities in the thin ﬁlm transistor-liquid crystal
display industries of Japan, Korea, and Taiwan. Research Policy, 41, 541–555.
IHS Markit. (2018). Display market outlook for 2019, presentation by D. Hsieh at the Display
Innovation China 2018, Beijing Summit.
JB Press. (2018). Japanese ﬁrms are ﬁghting a last-ditch battle in OLED falling behind the Korean
(Kankokuzei ga senkousuru yuki-EL de nihonkigyou ga toru haisuinojin), in Japanese.
Nikoniko News, 20180911, 06:00. JB press.
Johnstone, B. (1999). We are buring: Japanese entrepreneurs and the forging of the electronic
age. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Kim, L. (1997). Immitation to innovation: The dynamics of korea’s technologial learning. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Kojima, K. (2000). The “ﬂying geese” model of Asian economic development: Origin, theoretical
extensions, and regional policy implications. Journal of Asian Economics, 11(4), 375–401.
Lee, K. (2005). Making a technological catch-up: Opportunities and barriers. Asian Journal of
Technology Innovation, 13(2), 97–131.
Lee, K., & Lim, C. (2001). Technological regimes, catching-up and leapfrogging: Findings from
the Korean industries. Research Policy, 30(3), 459–483.
Lee, K., & Mathews, J. A. (2012). South Korea and Taiwan. In E. Amann & J. Cantwell (Eds.),
Innovative ﬁrms in emerging market countries (pp. 223–245). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lehmberg, D. (2017). The process of industry exit in the Japanese context: Evidence from the ﬂat
panel display industry. Journal of Management & Organization, 23(1), 92–115.
Linden, G., Hart, J., Lenway, S., & Murtha, T. (1998). Flying geese as moving targets: Are Korea
and Taiwan catching up with Japan in advanced displays? Industry and Innovation, 5(1),
11–34.
Mathews, J. A. (2005). Strategy and the crystal cycle. California Management Review, 47(2),
6–32.
Mathews, J. A. (2006). Catch-up strategies and the latecomer effect in industrial development. New
Political Economy, 11(3), 313–336.
Mathews, J. A., & Lim, C. (2001). Technological regimes, catching-up and leapfrogging: Findings
from the Korean industries. Research Policy, 30(3), 459–483.
Mathews, J. A., Hu, M. -C., & Wu, C. Y. (2011). Fast-follower industrial dynamics: The case of
Taiwan’s emergent solar photovoltaic industry. Industry and Innovation, 18(2), 177–202.
Mudambi, R. (2017). Offshoring: Economic geography and the multinational ﬁrm. Journal of
International Business Studies, 38(1), 206.
Mudambi, R. (2018). Location, control and innovation in knowledge-intensive industries. Journal
of Economic Geography, 8, 699–725.
Murtha, T., Lenway, S., & Hart, J. (2001). Managing new industry creation. Stanford University
Press.
Nakagawa, T., Kutsukake, T., & Nakashima, T. (2016). Materials industry under the radically
changing
competitive
environment,
(Kyosokankyou
ga
gekihensuru
sozaisangyo),
Chitekishisansouzou (Intellectual Asset Creation) February 2016), in Jpanese: 38–53.
Nakata, Y. (2007). Japan’s competitiveness in TFT-LCD industry: Analysis on the decline and a
proposal for core national management. RIETI DP (in Japanese).
Nakata, Y. (2009). Inter-organizational knowledge creation from the aspect of industrial
architecture:
The
analysis
of
competitive
strategies
from
the
cases
of
TFT-LCD,
6
Paradigm Shifts in the TFT-LCD Industry …
161

semiconductor, solar cells, and automobile industries. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Graduate School of Technology Management, Ritsumeikan University.
Negishi, M. (2013). Sharp licenses advanced LD technology to its Chinese partner: The Japanese
electronics maker will take a stake in a Nanjing factory. Wall Street Journal, June 27, 2013,
7:12 a.m. E.T.
Nekar, A. (2003). Old is gold? The value of temporal exploration in the creation of new
knowledge. Management Science, 49(2), 211–229.
Nikkei Shimbun. (2019a). The JDI negotiation reaching the ﬁnale (JDI Shien kosho odume), in
Japanese. 3.31.
Nikkei Shimbun. (2019b). JDI falling under the umbrella of the Chinese-Taiwanese group: The
national TFT-LCD initiative came to a deadlock (JDI taichuzei sanka ni: hinomaruekishou ga
tonza), in Japanese .4.4, p. 1.
Nikkei Shimbun. (2019c). JDI falling under the umbrella of the Chinese-Taiwanese group:
Complacency in TFT-LCD caused delay in its engagement in OLED (JDI taichuzei sanka ni:
ekisho kashin yuki el deokure: ekishokashi yuki el dokure), in Japanese, April 4, p. 15.
Nikkei Shimbun. (2019d, April 6). Samsung losing proﬁt: Dark clouds looming over its
counterattack (Samsung geneki: haakou ni kage), in Japanese, p. 10.
Nikkei Business. (2016). Beyond the smile curve (sumairu kabu wo koero), in Japanese, Nikkei
Business. 5.30: 38–39.
Numagami, T. (1999). History of technological innovation in TFT-LCD display. In Japanese.
Tokyo: Hakuto.
Polgar, L. G. (2003). Flat panel displays. Business Economics, 38(4), 62–68.
Shintaku, J., Kyo, K., & So, S. (2006). Development of Taiwanese TFT-LCD industry and
corporate strategy. MMRC-J-84, Discussion Paper, The University of Tokyo.
Shintaku, J., & Yoshimoto, T. (2009). TFT-LCD TV and panel industry: International division of
labor. In J. Shintaku & H. Amano (Eds.), Global strategy of manufacturing management:
Industrial geography in Asia (pp. 83–110). Tokyo: Yuhikaku.
Semenza, P. (2012). The display industry: Fast to grow, slow to change. Information Display, 5&6
(12), 18–21.
Song, J. (2006). Samsung and Korea’s Flat Panel Display industry, presentation at RIETI seminar,
July 2006.
Suarez, F., & Utterback, J. (1995). Dominant designs and the survival of ﬁrms. Strategic
Management Journal, 16(6), 415–430.
Tabata, M. (2014). The rose of Taiwan in the TFT-LCD industry. Journal of Technology
Management in China, 9(2), 190–205.
Kazuhiro Asakawa (Ph.D., INSEAD) is Professor of Global Innovation Management at
Graduate School of Business Administration, Keio University, Japan. He received his Ph.D. and
M.Sc. from INSEAD and his MBA from Harvard Business School. His research interest lies in the
areas of global innovation and R&D management, global knowledge sourcing, global open
innovation and frugal innovation. He is a Fellow of the Academy of International Business (AIB).
His research appeared in major international journals such as Journal of International Business
Studies, Global Strategy Journal, Journal of World Business, Research Policy, and Journal of
Product Innovation Management. He has served as an Associate Editor for Global Strategy
Journal and Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management; is an Advisory Editor for Research Policy, and
sits on the editorial board of Journal of International Business Studies, Journal of World Business,
Journal of International Management, and Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management, among others. He
was president of Japan Academy of Multinational Enterprises, has served as Japan Chapter Chair
of the AIB, and was a representative-at-large in Global Strategy at Strategic Management Society.
162
K. Asakawa

Chapter 7
Business-University Collaboration
in a Developing Country in the Industry
4.0 Era—The Case of Hungary
Annamaria Inzelt
Abstract Emerging economies, as well as Hungary in Europe, are frequently host
countries to multinational companies. For both parties it is a great challenge to build
relevant knowledge- generating capacities which are attractive in respect of col-
laboration. In such collaborations those countries on the receiving end of foreign
direct investment have the ambition to become more than mere pools of knowledge
assets for multinational companies. An insight into Hungarian attempts to achieve
this aim under difﬁcult circumstances might be useful for other countries in similar
situations. In recent years the majority of Hungarian business research and devel-
opment expenditure has come from companies wholly-, or majority-owned by for-
eign interests. This high proportion indicates the signiﬁcant role of foreign
companies in the Hungarian research agenda and in business-university collabora-
tion. This chapter focuses on how foreign companies are shaping business-university
collaboration in research and experimental development and touches upon the role of
government as facilitator. The subjects of research and development contracts and
collaboration depend on the environment and on both potential partners—that is to
say, by the types of demand generated by companies, and by how relevant are the
competences and capabilities of universities in meeting these demands. Are they
moving towards the cutting edge agendas inherent in Industry 4.0 and globalisation?
Method of research: analysis of available data; information from websites and
interviews with key actors who are partners in collaboration. The chapter also
summarizes a few lessons which may be relevant for other economies too.
Keywords Business—university collaboration  Research and development
episodes  Host-country of multinational companies
A. Inzelt (&)
IKU Innovation Research Centre, Financial Research Co., Budapest, Hungary
e-mail: inzelt.annamaria@penzugykutato.hu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_7
163

List of Abbreviations
BME
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
BUC
Business-university collaboration
BERD
Business R&D expenditure
CWUR
Centre for World University Rankings
EIT
European Institute of Innovation and Technology
ELTE
Eötvös Loránd University
EPO
European Patent Ofﬁce
EU
European Union
FDI
Foreign direct investment
FIEK
Higher Education and Industry Cooperation Centres
GDP
Gross domestic product
HCSO
Hungarian Central Statistical Ofﬁce
HE
Higher Education
HEIs
Higher Education Institutes
HERD
Higher education R&D
HQ
Head quarter
HUF
Hungarian Forint (currency)
Industry 4.0
Fourth Industrial Revolution
IPRs
Intellectual Property Rights
MSTI
Main Science and Technology Indicators
MNC
Multinational Company
NIS
National innovation system
NKFIH
National Research, Development and Innovation Ofﬁce
OECD
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
R&D
Research and development
RDI
Research, development and innovation
S&T
Science and technology
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
TTO
Technology Transfer Ofﬁce
TH
Triple Helix
7.1
Introduction
The globalization of innovation brings both new opportunities and challenges to all
countries. Europe is one of the leaders in this trend, with its European research and
innovation programmes (such as Horizon 2020). The other major research, devel-
opment and innovation (RDI) spenders, multinational companies from many dif-
ferent countries, are also searching for ambitious ideas and partners.
Companies are increasingly opening up their organizational boundaries to tap
into external sources of knowledge and to strive for better innovative performance
(Berchicci 2013). Multinational companies (MNCs) have substantially expanded
164
A. Inzelt

their global innovation networks, and their aim to collaborate with universities
located abroad has been identiﬁed as one of the main drivers of the international-
ization of their research and development (R&D) centres.
Although the internationalisation of R&D through FDI is not a new phe-
nomenon, its rapid growth and scope have changed dramatically (Raymond and
Taggart 1998; Cantwell and Molero 2003; Narula 2014; Foray 2006). The purchase
or outsourcing of R&D (whether domestically or internationally) is now a serious
complement to in-house R&D as a part of corporate innovation strategy (OECD
2008a; EU 2005).
The globalisation of R&D affects more the R&D intensive sectors which are key
players in disruptive technologies such as artiﬁcial intelligence, big data,
block-chains, genome editing, robotics, drones, 3D printing, the Internet of Things,
and autonomous vehicles (OECD 2017). The new era of disruptive technologies
often named as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) is still in its infancy,
but its effects are already having an impact on the nature of competition and
corporate strategies in many industries. Industry 4.0, as well as upgrading inter-
nationalisation,
is
pushing
the
actors
of
the
national
innovation
system
(NIS) towards self-transformation and collaboration to capture new opportunities.1
Collaborative research involving businesses and universities has a long history,
although its intensity, character and the types of business partner are changing in
the twenty-ﬁrst century. There is no single model of interaction between industry
and science. The formal and informal channels of collaboration differ by country
and time (Bonaccorsi and Piccaluga 1994; Inzelt 2004). Some countries pay more
attention to one particular channel than do others.
In collaboration the role of MNCs differs in line with the home- or
host-country’s perspective. The main drivers of the internationalization of R&D
from a home-country’s perspective are the opportunities for global sourcing and
pooling, which may increase the capacity of scientiﬁc excellence, optimize the
innovation process and ﬁnd effective solutions to global changes.2 Traditional
cross-border R&D sought to adapt products and services to the needs of the host
countries and to support the foreign investors’ local operations. In this case,
host-countries can beneﬁt from the presence of foreign-owned ﬁrms in their
research, development and innovation (RDI) activities. The MNCs which are
burdening their markets may contribute to increase R&D expenditure and knowl-
edge spill-overs in host countries. However they hardly broaden R&D opportunities
for domestic universities for collaboration with industry.
1From the actors in innovation system we focus on two kinds of organisation: universities and
businesses. In Hungary the term ‘university’ covers so-called science universities, applied science
universities and colleges, each of which may be public or private, although the latter may follow a
different ﬁnancial regime. In Hungary business organisations belong to different size categories,
similar to other countries, and they may be owned by foreigners, private and public domestic
owners and a mixture of these.
2In Europe a crucial principle is non-discrimination between domestic and foreign-owned ﬁrms.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
165

Contemporary multinational companies seek the opportunities to generate new
knowledge in other countries. They need more and more access to highly skilled
scientiﬁc personnel and to tap into worldwide centres of knowledge (Edler 2008;
Inzelt 2008; Taggart 1998).
MNCs have increasingly moved R&D activity across borders within their global
value chain and rely on outside inventions for new products and processes. Large
companies (mostly MNCs) increasingly adopt innovation networks which link
networks of people, institutions (universities, government agencies and other
companies) in different countries to solve problems and produce ideas (Cook
2005),3 and so collaboration with local universities is becoming more and more
important for MNCs. In host countries this process is generating FDI-led R&D.
In our epoch it is increasingly important for all universities to attract more
business investment in R&D from all over the world. The rising level of interna-
tionalisation in business R&D beneﬁts and strengthens the host countries capabil-
ities in science and technology (S&T).
Hungary is mainly a host-country to MNCs, and so the internationalisation of
R&D, the business-university collaboration (BUC) is very important. The inter-
national BUCs are great challenges to developing countries—as we know from
many sources (such as Dachs et al. 2013). Business-university linkages are stronger
among more advanced EU countries than between them and moderately or mod-
estly innovative countries (e.g. Hungary). Beyond many positive effects foreign
presence may also have negative impacts on the host countries if the foreign
companies are simply pooling knowledge (such as relocating top researchers or
regularly commercialize inventions in other countries). It is a delicate issue for
policy-making to back up potential positive effects and minimize any threatening
negative effects.
This chapter investigates business and universities R&D collaboration, devoting
special attention to multinational companies as partners with universities in the
Industry 4.0 era from a host-country perspective. The next section sets the topic in
the context of its literature, and we then clarify the methodology. Section 7.4 deals
with external and internal inﬂuencing factors, whilst. Section 7.5 looks at
Hungarian BUC in the European mirror. Section 7.6 examines R&D collaboration
with universities, following which we offer some conclusions and a few lessons for
other host countries of MNCs.
7.2
The Literature Context
This topic is linked to various branches of literature. Due to size limitations, we do
not give a detailed overview of the literature, but merely systems highlight the
interdisciplinary nature of the topic.
3These two paragraphs were published in Inzelt (2010).
166
A. Inzelt

The main literature framework is the innovation systems approach (Freeman
1988; Lundvall and Johnson 1994; Nelson 1993; Edquist 1997).
Investigating the development of BUC over time, however, may support
approaches from different standpoints:
– The literature on the Third Mission of Universities extends the traditional
Missions of Teaching (1st) and Research (2nd), exhibiting a vice versa impact
on both (Mollas-Gallart et al. 2002; Pinheiro et al. 2015). The Third Mission’s
approach focuses on collaboration from a university perspective not only on
economic utilisation but on other dimensions of university collaboration with
society. It devotes attention to economic and social impacts and economic and
social relevance and investigates the development of universities’ economic and
social relationships. The Third Mission is multifaceted, as it may have both
economic and social dimensions, such as technology transfer, the transfer of
competences through new graduates to industry, contracts with industry and
public bodies which contribute to regional development and involvement in
social and cultural life (Govind and Kütim 2016; Gulbrandsen and Slipersaeter
2007; Inzelt et al. 2006; Laredo 2007; Nedeva 2008; Perkmann et al. 2013;
Shimoda 2008).
– The
Triple
Helix
(TH)
model
concentrates
very
speciﬁcally
on
university-industry-government relationships, a few of the factors which inﬂu-
ence innovation processes. Among these it devotes special attention to univer-
sities and their restructuring as organisations (Technology Transfer Ofﬁces/
TTOs/, spin-offs, entrepreneurial universities, regulations, governance) and
governmental rules (such as regulating Intellectual Property Rights/IPRs/
originated from publicly ﬁnanced research), policy instruments (tax incentives,
innovative public procurement, public risk capital, and programs) (Etzkowitz
and Leydesdorff 1997, 1998; Etzkowitz 2008; Inzelt 2004; Ranga and Etzkowitz
2013). Development of the TH idea led to a concept of entrepreneurial uni-
versities (Clark 2015; Etzkowitz 2004, 2008) which are particularly active in the
USA where the environment was especially supportive in strengthening the
commercialization of knowledge and of moving towards the business-like
operation of Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) such as by patenting, licensing
and spin-off entrepreneurship.
Farinha and Ferreira (2013) give a good summary of different generations of TH
models from the state-centric to the model in which different institutional spheres
take the role of others and hybrid organisations emerge.
– Innovation literature takes into account universities as one of the sources of
innovation and partners in innovation processes (Koschatzky and Stahlecker
2010; Wen and Kobayashi 2001). In the business innovation-related literature
there is an emphasis on linkages within the R&D and innovation processes.
There are three different types of industrial R&D: exploratory, exploitative, and
imitative. Each type has the potential to create or drive competitive advantage,
albeit with varying degrees of novelty, depending on the company’s capabilities
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
167

and business strategy. The characteristics of collaboration according to the type
of industrial R&D have a strong impact on possible industry-university linkages.
Collaborations are more important for exploratory and exploitative research than
for others.
The central idea behind open innovation (Chesbrough 2003; Chesbrough et al.
2006) is that, in a world of widely disseminated knowledge, companies cannot
afford to rely entirely on their own research, but should instead buy or license
processes or inventions from other players, either from other ﬁrms or from uni-
versities, research organisations. Although the ﬁrms have many different partners
beyond knowledge producing organisations in the innovation process, we are
dealing only one of them: the universities. The Open Innovation idea looks on
universities as one of the knowledgeable partners, for companies or for innovation
alliances (Chesbrough 2003), although it should be kept in mind that R&D col-
laboration is a means and not an end (Mowery 1998). The end is innovation, that
“takes place when the invention or new idea is exploited”, (Swann 2014, p. 213)
either in commercial or in non-commercial spheres.
Common in these approaches are how they broaden the relationships among the
actors (Literature review in Perkmann et al. 2013; Ankrah and Al-Tabbaa 2015).
The internationalization of collaboration has some speciﬁcity to national collabo-
ration (Caloghirou et al. 2001). The literature is revealed the linkages when
approaching collaboration from the perspective of internationalisation and multi-
national companies.
The role of cross-border interdependence in the innovation process, as well as
interdependence between home and host countries ﬁrms and scientiﬁc organisations
are discussed in the literature that examines the interdependence of globalization
and technological innovation exploring knowledge elsewhere (Archibugi and
Lundvall 2002; Archibugi and Filippetti 2015; Cantwell 2017; Guimón and Narula
2017; Inzelt 1999, 2000, 2010; Leydesdorff and Sun 2009; Narula 2003; Pinherio
et al. 2015; Singh 2007).
Globalisation is bringing the dramatic new challenges in a world where com-
petition is becoming increasingly knowledge-based and global. Innovation and
internationalisation have become interconnected—that is, leading more and more
open international innovation systems. The internationalisation of business R&D is
a relatively new phenomenon compared to the internationalisation of manufactur-
ing. The geographic dispersion of R&D gives access the companies to diverse pools
of knowledge (Cantwell 1989; Cantwell and Molero 2003; Cantwell and Piscitello
2007; Dunning 1988, 1992).
International business networks and subsidiaries of MNCs are important actors
to engage in interaction with the local universities, so accessing local knowledge
capabilities in host countries. Knowledge demand created by foreign actors
encourages the potential industrial R&D partners of universities collaborate. This
additional business R&D demand is important for developing countries with good
scientiﬁc capabilities in some ﬁelds but with a shortage of innovative local business.
168
A. Inzelt

However, this raises the issue of how can these collaborations contribute to
upgrading local innovativeness beyond their contribution to global value chains.
Govind and Küttim (2016) provide a systematic literature review of international
knowledge transfer from university to industry. How business-university coopera-
tion emerges and develops into international relations was described by Sorensen
and Hu (2014), Mégnigbéto (2015).
7.3
Methodological Notes
This chapter uses interview research conducted at two research universities—the
Eötvös Loránd University (ELTE) and the Budapest University of Technology and
Economics (BME)—and with two MNCs, which are cited as MNC-1 and MNC-2
because of their requests. Both MNCs are collaborating with two interviewed
universities and with other Hungarian universities in education and R&D. It also
relies on university websites and reports of companies which contain information
on the type, length, inputs and outputs of collaboration.
It employs also several one-off surveys on Hungarian BUCs at country level
which are mainly available from international sources.
Statistics on inputs and outcomes on BUCs scarcely exist, either in ofﬁcial
Hungarian statistics at national level, or in university archives. Data on collabo-
rative projects and contracts exist in universities’ databank but such information is
not summarized either at faculty or university level. There is no access to basic data
for research purpose, and so we have limited hard information for analysis.
A combination of all available information, in which interviews (anecdotal
evidence) played a major role) helped to improve our understanding of
business-university collaboration.
7.4
Inﬂuencing Factors of Business-University
Collaboration
There are many external and internal factors inﬂuencing university-industry inter-
action, their type, frequency and level of intensity.
7.4.1
External Factors
Important external factors are governmental policy, programs and initiatives to
stimulate BUC in R&D. Governments can facilitate the process of BUC: to provide
direct and indirect incentives for innovation and to remove obstacles to
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
169

collaboration. In addition is the provision of consultancy services relevant to
innovation processes, e.g. technology transfer, commercial information and legal
advice (Edquist 2018).
Here we highlight only a few elements of legislation, governmental programs
and supporting schemes for BUC in Hungary. Some of these directly forced
changes at university level to prepare them for mutually fruitful collaboration with
industry. Let us take a brief look at them.
7.4.1.1
Stop-Go Legislation
The legislation process which signiﬁcantly widened the gateway for BUCs
appeared in 2004/05 (Law on Innovation, 2004 and Law on Higher Education
2005) (Overviews on STI legislation see in: OECD 2008b; EU 2016a). These laws
stated that HEIs have to set up technology transfer ofﬁces, introducing them into
university management. The function of TTOs, as in other countries, is to support
the exploitation of university research results through patenting, licensing, other
kinds of transfer to industrial ﬁrms, or launching start-ups.
Early modern laws (2004/05) introduced Bayh-Dole type regulation4 (put into
practice in 2007). By this law, the HEIs should reregulate the intellectual property
of research ﬁndings (following Bayh-Dole principles) and introduce norms for
sharing income within a university derived from patents and inventions. The 2004/
05 laws were modiﬁed several times in a Stop-Start process. There was a step
backwards to the old regulation of intellectual property in 2014 (Amendment 2014).
Intellectual property (patents) belonged again to the state if a publicly ﬁnanced
university or R&D organisation was involved, and these entities can only exercise
rights in the name of the state.5
This modiﬁcation became a serious obstacle to taking universities by companies
as co-owners of patents. Companies became very reluctant in respect of
co-patenting if they ﬁnanced only a part of the research.
At the end of 2018 the law has changed once more and follows again the
Bayh-Dole type regulation which improved the opportunities for co-patenting with
business organisations. However the impact may be seen only in future years as it
takes time for actors to trust the durability of legislation.
4The Bayh-Dole Act originates from the US (1980, amended in 1986). It rationalized and sim-
pliﬁed federal policy toward the patenting and licensing by non-proﬁt institutions of the results of
publicly funded research. Since 1980 many countries have followed this form of regulation.
5This is not unrelated to how universities’ autonomy ﬂuctuates: non-autonomy through
semi-autonomy to full autonomy over time.
170
A. Inzelt

7.4.1.2
Government Programs
Various governmental programs have been launched to support, set up and con-
tinue collaboration. The programs had many advantages to support the nurturing of
BUCs. The common aims of these governmental programs are: to upgrade uni-
versities research capabilities, to make them more attractive for cutting edge
business partners and to accelerate the commercialization of new technologies
transferring research results from universities to industry and supporting the cre-
ation of a common technological “vision” that can guide R&D and related
investments by public and private entities. The programs and incentives are also
encouraging business actors to collaborate with universities taking into account the
international race among universities to attract cutting-edge industrial partners
whether domestic or foreign-owned companies. The companies must also compete
for the best researchers world-wide (These programs are detailed by Inzelt and
Csonka 2016).
In contrast to the advantages of the programs, there were a few shortcomings.
The length of the program period was too short for each side: they could start
something together but could not reach the self-ﬁnancing stage. The frequent
changes in programs (without evaluation) and the structure of program management
—whether university-led or business-led—were far from working well (EU 2016a;
Inzelt and Csonka 2016).
Here we mention two still running programs that have an important role in BUC
with MNCs (Some elements of these programs are also important for collaborating
small and medium enterprises /SMEs/).
The government launched a new, better institutionalized program in 2015,
building on the accumulated experience of previous programs and reﬂecting new
challenges (Industry 4.0, digitalization, sustainable development), known as
‘Research
infrastructure
development
of
Higher
Education
and
Industry
Cooperation Centres ‘(Hungarian abbreviation FIEK). This program has targeted
upgrading the infrastructure of universities for BUC as well as for the First and
Second Missions of Universities, and making the consortium durable. Members of
the consortium must be 1 university and a maximum of 4 business partners. Among
the consortium members there are domestic ﬁrms and foreign, mainly multinational
companies. The Consortium is closed by the contract but the FIEK organisational
units that were created by universities are open to other organisations also. The aims
of the program are to optimise links between university and industrial R&D within
a new institutional approach, and to speed up the transfer of scientiﬁc results into
practice. The FIEK centres could continue working after state support ends (It also
enables education to come closer to industrial needs and contribute to the vocational
training of industrial staff). FIEK organisations are single window solutions long
desired by collaborating companies.
An additional program was launched in 2017 (Program for Excellence HEIs)
with the aims: to improve research conditions in HEIs for increasing their research
capacities (such as strengthening research and innovation consciousness within
HEIs; to improve the conditions for young talents; to increase scientiﬁc outputs).
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
171

Both universities investigated are among the winners and focusing on basic
research in the ﬁelds of science relating to disruptive technologies. This program
supports the capabilities for BUC.
Beyond national programs the European transnational initiatives launched by
European Union have been playing an important role in networking in several
industries and universities. Since the beginning of the participation scheme,
Hungarian universities have been inducted into the BUC concept. Without going
into detail, we have to mention that in previous years multilateral projects offered
good opportunities to universities for studying workable BUC, even if Hungarian
universities were not in direct contact with participating businesses.
7.4.1.3
Tax Incentives
Tax incentives are important factors to encourage generally business R&D expen-
diture and especially collaboration with HE and other research organisations.6
There are several tax incentives which indirectly support BUC. These incentives
have been modiﬁed over time, with effects on BUC.
In the case of BUC contracts for outsourcing or collaborating on R&D, there are
three types of tax and their related allowances: (1) corporate tax, (2) local operation
tax, (3) innovation contribution.
To be legally entitled to any of them, the R&D has to belong to the economic
activity of a tax-paying company (except for so-called supporting contracts).
Merely to avoid any penalties for misrepresenting activities as R&D, the com-
panies can apply to the National Ofﬁce of Intellectual Property to ask expert opinion
as to whether the activity may be classiﬁed as R&D and be entitled to tax reduction.
(1) Corporate tax
– The tax base may be reduced by 3 times the direct cost of R&D minus
state support for the jointly performed R&D contract with academic
organisations, and this reduction may be up to a total of HUF 50 m.
– A Development Tax reduction is possible if a company invests HUF
100 m into R&D equipment. In this case the maximum value of the
reduction is 80% of the annual corporate tax. However the following years
may also reduce the tax.
– The company can also enjoy a 50% tax base advantage if it has supporting
contract with HEIs. This support may have many different purposes from
scholarships to students, purchasing books, laboratory equipment or uni-
versity R&D activity. The R&D does not have to relate to the economic
activity of the tax-paying company.
6http://www.nav.gov.hu/magyar_oldalak/nav/ado/tarsasagi/kf_20120319.html (03/19 2012).
172
A. Inzelt

(2) Local operation tax base may be reduced by the direct cost of R&D in the
given year. The companies also could reduce their local tax base if collabo-
rating with universities or public research organisations.
(3) Innovation contribution is a form of levy which has existed since 2003 and
feeds the Innovation Fund. The basis for calculating the innovation contri-
bution is the local operation tax.
By the original law (2003) only medium and large companies had to pay the
innovation contribution. Companies could reduce the innovation contribution by
the cost of relevant R&D expenditure if the company has collaborated with uni-
versities or public research organisations or is merely contracting out R&D without
participation. These opportunities for reduction were cancelled by the new law
(2014) which took effect in 2015. The reason was the frequent misuse of this part of
the contribution. The rule for reducing the innovation contribution by the cost of
in-house R&D expenditure and of R&D contracted with universities was also
withdrawn. The promise was to replace this lost ﬁnancial resource for R&D with
higher allocated public sources for R&D bids.
Another change occurred at the beginning of 2019 when a group of small
companies also had to pay this levy who were small in themselves but, when
counting them together with their partners or linking companies, reach the
medium-size category (such as subsidiaries of MNCs, members of a domestic group
of companies).
The modiﬁcations of the rule for Innovation Contribution have had a visible
impact on contracting and collaborative R&D as companies must pay the R&D
costs from their own income. They are more reluctant to invest in high-risk basic
research—and even in applied research. MNCs as potential partners for universities
were affected in two ways: they cannot cover the cost of R&D for using a part of
their Innovation Contribution for their own research purposes. Several groups of
MNCs (small ﬁrm category) were obliged to pay the contribution.
7.4.1.4
Business R&D Investment
From the point of view of a university, an important external factor is the presence
of innovation-hungry and R&D-involved business organisations. International data
tracked by OECD shows 42 per cent of global R&D is performed by just 200
multinational companies in the 2010s (2018).
In Hungary the rate of business R&D expenditure (BERD) to GDP has increased
dynamically, since 2004 (when Hungary joined the EU) from 0.32% to 0.71% by
2017, but the rate is still low.7 The majority of Hungarian BERD comes from
multinational companies, similar to the worldwide phenomenon. According to
available Hungarian statistics, the foreign and majorly foreign-owned business
organisation provide more than two-thirds of business R&D expenditure and so
7Source: HCSO, www.ksh.hu/htm/1/indi1_3_1.html.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
173

they might play an important role in BUC.8 Foreign-owned businesses mostly fund
their research activities from their own funds. It should also be noted that business
funds are very important for universities as public support for higher education
R&D (HERD) has declined in relative and absolute term in 2010s.
7.4.1.5
Attention to Innovation
If we investigate how hungry are Hungarian enterprises for innovation, we can see
that the country is far behind the European innovation leaders and strong innovators
(EU 2016b). The highest proportions of innovative enterprises during the period
2012–2014 exceeded 60% of all enterprises in Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium,
Ireland and the United Kingdom, whilst in Hungary the ﬁgure was little more than
25% of all enterprises—slightly ahead of Poland, Latvia, Bulgaria, and Romania.
Although the Hungarian innovation performance has improved a little (0.4%)
between 2008 and 2015 the country’s performance relative to the EU average has
declined.
In Hungary, as in other EU countries, a higher proportion of large enterprises
have introduced innovations compared to SMEs (EU average: 77%, Hungary 56%).
The large companies are the main R&D investors and their higher level of par-
ticipation in must also mean more potential innovative partners for R&D collabo-
ration with universities than for SMEs.
There are four sectors in Hungary where the proportion of innovative enterprises
is at least 50%: pharmaceutical-, information and communication-, oil manufac-
turing- and computer, electronic and optical products. Most of them belong to the
Industry 4.0 sector (NKFIH 2019). However, one or two Industry4.0 related sectors
are missing (Fig. 7.1).
Not all forms of innovation are based on R&D results. ‘New to the market”
product innovations usually employ R&D results whilst ‘new to company’ product
innovations need only limited R&D services—if any. Novelty is a matter for R&D
contracts. According to Eurostat data (Science, technology and digital society,
Eurostat, online data code: inn_cis9_prod) Hungarian innovative performance is far
below the EU average by the proportion of enterprises which have either new to the
market products or only new to the enterprise products. ‘New to market’ product
innovations mean a higher level of novelty than others. In this ﬁeld Hungary
reaches little more than 50% of the EU average, which is a sign of a limited number
of innovative companies which are hungry for new R&D results. This limited
innovative performance of business does not create a high demand for any kind of
research: it means that Hungarian business can create little impulsive demand for
R&D collaboration with universities.
8The proportion of BERD’s foreign funding was more than one ﬁfth at fully or majority
foreign-owned companies, whilst that proportion was only 5% in all other companies in 2017.
(HCSO 2017).
174
A. Inzelt

7.4.2
Internal Factors
From the standpoint of collaboration, two topics are brieﬂy highlighted here: the
institutionalisation of technology transfer within universities and intellectual
property issues.
7.4.2.1
Changing University Management: Institutionalize Technology
Transfer Function
Key mission of TTOs is moving their universities towards an entrepreneurial cul-
ture. A fully-ﬂedged TTO assists researchers in the patent application process,
licensing agreements, obtaining licence fees and royalties, in their search for
partners and funding resources, and for training and supporting faculty members
and students in the creation of university-based spin-offs (Correa and Zuñiga 2013;
Schaeffer and Matt 2016). Management of university with TTOs has a dual role:
supporting the exploitation of scientiﬁc results and making the universities attrac-
tive for future research investment.
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
%
average
Fig. 7.1 Ranking of Hungarian innovative sectors, 2017 (The proportion of innovative businesses
by economic activity) Note Figure 7.1 contains only those economic activities where the share of
innovative business at least 30%. Most of them belong to manufacturing sectors.
Key to signs 1. Pharmaceutical products; 2. Information and communication; 3. Coke and reﬁned
petroleum products; 4. Computer, electronic and optical porducts; 5. Chemicals and chemical
products; 6. Financial and insurance activities; 7. Electrical equipment; 8. Motor vehicle; 9.
Beverages; 10. Paper products; 11. Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply; 12. Rubber
and plastic products; 13. Basic metals; 14. Machinery and equipment.
Source NKFIH, Hungary 2019 based on HCSO
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
175

Launching effective TTOs is a time-consuming process. First of all it requires
changes in university management to ﬁnd the proper place for a new organisation in
the university structure and set up the rules and procedures for collaborations with
inside (faculties, departments, teams, researchers) and outside (business) actors.
Also the new organisation needs ﬁnancial resources.
In the early phase, TTOs were burdened by several factors: hardly any changes
in university management (TTOs existed at a low level of the university manage-
ment hierarchy), a lack of managerial capabilities, slow acceptance by university
staff, and old, surviving routines even at universities with accumulated experience
in BUC. During this early period the ofﬁcers of TTOs have to overcome on cultural
and linguistic barriers of both faculty members and business actors. For example it
is not easy to have accepted with researchers some restrictions in the dissemination
of foreground results (publication, conference presentation, discussion with col-
leagues from other organizations) if the sensitivity of the application, or interest of
ﬁnancing/buying business need secrecy for the shorter or longer term.
Not surprisingly, it took almost two decades for TTOs to become a widespread
institutional mechanism.
The position of Hungarian TTOs started to change in the university hierarchy
following a much debated legal change in 2014 which introduced the chancellor-
ship into university management.9 The chancellor is responsible for property
management in universities including managing and utilising intellectual products.
This changed the position of TTOs who now belong to the highest management
level (the Rectorate) in the majority of universities, and the organisations are linked
to the chancellor.10 Universities are now approaching the single gateway model
which simpliﬁes the procedure for companies. The changes in the hierarchical
position of TTOs give much better opportunities to negotiate with companies if the
company needs a solution which requires collaboration by different disciplines or
departments within a university. Each HEI deals with technology transfer in its own
way, but following government strategy.
TTO staff is not very large at HEIs, and those fully devoted to technology
transfer activities number from 2–10 in different universities (Bene et al. 2018;
p. 44).
TTOs still have several problems, such as faculty members being reluctant to
accept TTOs as supporters in commercialization; a shortage of competent experts
for different technology transfer tasks; uncertain ﬁnancial conditions for organisa-
tion.11 TTO staff have to have good knowledge of research assets and forthcoming
9The Amendment (2014) to Higher education law 2011 aimed to facilitate the professionalization
of institution management sharing the previous tasks of rectors between rectors and chancellors.
10At several universities chancellors are political appointees rather than professionals—which may
lead to the somewhat fragmented functioning of TTOs.
11The early staff members of TTOs were naturally inexperienced. There were many changes in
their ranks due to poor conditions for TTOs, and the reluctance of faculty members to collaborate
caused chaos at several TTOs. Financial conditions for TTOs were linked to projects and this
damaged their stability, further eroding the staff.
176
A. Inzelt

inventions at the organisations and have to be familiar with intellectual property,
licensing, business development, and other TT related legal matters. Marketing
capabilities are also crucial, but the cyclically available resources make it difﬁcult to
keep trained staff, to build good relationships within a university and with col-
laborating business.
Nowadays ﬁnancial conditions are improving for TTOs, and this has generated
some stability in relation to increasingly knowledgeable staff.
7.4.2.2
Intellectual Property Issues
The Hungarian law deals with intellectual property within universities in a variety
of ways and, as mentioned earlier, it has a turbulent history from ﬁrst introduction
of Bayh-Dole-type regulation in 2004/05. Since the law has changed twice
regarding the ownership of inventions originating in universities, the regulations on
treating intellectual property is also changing—including approved forms of con-
tract with businesses. One more or less stable element from 2004/05 is worth
mentioning here: if a company wishes to sign a tight contract with a university
which excludes the names of the inventors from the patent application, this can be
blocked by the university. This is an important change from previous practice.
If companies contract for R&D activities, they prefer to become the owners of all
R&D outputs. In the case of government-/EU program- based BUC, a university
has some possibility to be a co-owner. The involvement of the Innovation Centre of
ELTE from the stage of the draft contract can upgrade the chances for university to
become the co-owner of the patent. However the majority share still remains at the
company. If the consortium agreement excludes the university from patenting the
Centre does not have further role in that collaboration (Interview at ELTE
Innovation Centre).
An MNC collaborating with two universities has expressed its intention to be
100% owner of all research ﬁndings. They have not shared any fully or partly
university-based inventions in patent applications, but this company is co-patenting
from time to time with universities in its home country (Interview at MNC-2).
Now HEIs are revising their own regulations following the changes at the end of
2018, and we do not record the details of their internal rules since these are again
under review.
Income from patented BUC-related inventions is usually treated in a standard
way at MNCs. They offer the University the same fee for inventions as to an
employee of the company for his/her (ofﬁcial working time) invention. The uni-
versity may then share this sum according to its own rules.
A common aim of HEIs is to encourage faculty members and students to be
interested in the valorisation of their inventions and increase their patenting con-
sciousness. The sharing of income from the commercialization of research results
either through licensing or assigning is a delicate issue within universities. One
thing, however, has been established: the inventor(s) is entitled to a pre-deﬁned
share of the income rather than to some post-negotiated, ad hoc bonus. This income
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
177

sharing varies among Hungarian universities and the proportions differ by amount
of income, type of intellectual property and type of utilising organisation (matured
companies, university supported spin-offs, or other start-ups). Two main types of
sharing model can be identiﬁed: (1) Sharing the income simply between inventor
and university; (2) Sharing the income among various actors who may have an
indirect impact on inventions. In this latter model the largest proportion goes to the
inventors, and then some proportion may go to the faculty, another fraction to the
organisation to which the inventors belong (department, institute or group) and to
the university as a whole. A clear system of sharing income is crucial to make
university staff interested in commercialization and limits neglected commercial-
ization or the leaking of intellectual assets from a university.
The rules are concern not only to faculty member but project-based researchers,
foreign guest researchers and students. Students don not have to share their income
from inventions if their patentable results were created outside subject duties and
they did not use the infrastructure of university.
Annual patent applications and patents granted usually show together the science
producing capabilities, the interest in intellectual property protection and the
awareness of HEIs. As universities are competing for business’s demand for R&D
contracts and acquiring intellectual property, this indicator is important. However
this application-based patent indicator is usually lower than inventor-based ones in
mostly the host-countries of MNCs (Inzelt 2014). In Hungary there was an addi-
tional factor between 2014 and 2018: a legal step-back reduced the chances of
universities co-patenting with business, if the latter was co-ﬁnancing the research or
had bought the research ﬁndings.
7.4.2.3
Capacities of Hungarian Universities
By the number of students and number of faculty members, Hungarian universities
belong to the small-to-medium HEI size group. Size is an issue for collaboration in
several ways. As smaller universities have a smaller quantity of brains than the
larger ones, they may not be able to mobilize research capacity at other than below
the critical mass.
Over the last few years expenditure on higher education R&D (HERD) has
declined. From 2010 to 2016 the public expenditure fell by 29% and business
expenditure for HE by 45%. The increases may be seen from foreign sources (41%)
and in the small category of sources: non-proﬁt (30%). Because of these changes
the HERD to GDP ratio, which was around 0.23% between 2007 and 2012 has
fallen to 0.13% by 2016, and slightly increasing in 2017 (0.18%) but it is still far
below the 2012 level. Not surprisingly, in this period R&D personnel decreased by
7% in HE.
Comparing the HERD to GDP ratio in several OECD countries and in some
Asian countries which feature in OECD statistics, we can observe opposing ten-
dencies: most of the selected countries have increased their relative (and absolute)
178
A. Inzelt

expenditures except Israel, Japan, Ireland and Hungary. The drop was largest in
Hungary from a lower level than two of these countries (Fig. 7.2).
From the standpoint of a BUC, another performance indicator is the HERD
ﬁnanced by the business sector. The business proportion has grown in several
countries because they are more innovative than others or because business
investment changed more slowly than other sources which cut their R&D expen-
diture in HE (Fig. 7.2).
The funding gap between the world’s or Europe’s top universities and Hungary’s
has a great inﬂuence on the gap in performance between front and rear runners. In
Hungary there are some good research universities, but they are not world-class
universities. They have good accumulated capabilities and produce excellent
research in some ﬁelds, but not in all ﬁelds.
According to various world rankings, 6 or 7 Hungarian universities out of 27 are
among the second half of ‘The 1000 World’s Best HEIs’ since the quality of
Hungarian universities is mixed.
The Centre for World University Rankings (CWUR) selected the ﬁrst thousand
for the 2018/19 ranking from 18 thousand HEIs. CWUR employs seven ranking
criteria. These are: (1) Quality of Education, (2) Alumni Employment, (3) Quality
of Faculty, (4) Research Output, (5) Quality Publications, (6) Inﬂuence, and
(7) Citations.
By the overall rankings, 6 Hungarian universities are on the list, but not by all
criteria. Our two universities interviewed have good positions: ELTE are among the
Top 1000 by 6 criteria from 7 and BME by 5 criteria.
Looking at the position of well performing Hungarian universities, all 6 are
among the best 1000 in respect of “inﬂuence” and “citation” (namely: ELTE, the
Semmelweis University, Debrecen University, Szeged University, BME and the
University of Pécs). Except for Pécs, the others are also in the Top 1000 for
“research outputs” and “quality of publications”. Two universities are in the Top
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
OECD
 Total
EU28
NED ISR CZE JPN KOR IRL HUN
SNG TAP CHN
2005
2015
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
OECD
Total
EU28
NED ISR CZE JPN KOR IRL HUN
SNG TAP CHN
2005
2015
(a) HERD to GDP
(b) Proportion of HERD financed 
by the business sector
Fig. 7.2 Changes in ﬁnancing HERD, 2005 and 2015 (or nearest year) in some countries (%)
Source ECD (2018), Main Science and Technology Indicators: Volume 2018/1
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
179

1000 for “quality of education” (ELTE and BME) and two by “quality of faculty”
(ELTE, University of Szeged). None of them is among the Top 1000 for “alumni
employment” (CWUR 2018).
From the perspective of BUC, an important performance criterion is not included
in the CWUR, namely invention activities of universities measured by patents.
Limited data are available directly on patentable performance but not for all R&D
related Hungarian universities. Table 7.1 shows a university’s patent applications
(The lack of a university’s data does not mean that performance is lacking).
As can be seen, the number of applications is very limited at data- providing
universities. The number of patents does not accurately reﬂect the invention per-
formance of a university. Discrepancies exist between performance in patentable
invention of universities and their owned patents, as may be seen clearly if we
compare applicant-based and inventor-based data. There is a remarkable difference
between two data-sets. In 2006 the Hungarian performance was 44% higher by
inventor indicator than by applicant by EPO data. At the same time the EU average
was 2% less by inventor address than applicant address (Inzelt 2014). More than a
decade later the difference between the location of a patent’s inventors and appli-
cants (ownership) was larger: –63% in Hungary whilst it was only –40% for the
Czech Republics, –36% in Poland, –15% in Portugal, –1% in Denmark, and they
were remarkably higher by applicant than inventor-based data—for example, in
Ireland +13%, in Finland +14%, and in Sweden +19% (Hernández et al. 2018).
Among the reasons, the headquarters factor is signiﬁcant, but the external and
internal regulation of intellectual property’s ownership is also an important reason
—at least in Hungary.
The utilisation of intellectual products is broader than patenting. Table 7.2
shows the income of some universities from utilization.
The income from utilization (commercialization) of intellectual products ﬂuc-
tuated between 2014 and 2017. In 2017 the sum was larger than in 2014.
Table 7.1 Number of patent applications and primary patent applications
Name of
Universities
2014
2015
2016
2017
All
Primary
All
Primary
All
Primary
All
Primary
Applications
Univ. of Szeged
16
9
11
5
13
1
4
4
Univ. of Pécs
12
5
6
5
3
1
12
1
ELTE
3
1
1
1
2
0
6
1
Semmelweis
Univ.
3
2
3
2
6
3
3
1
Univ. of
Debrecen
14
4
16
15
4
3
8
10
Note ‘All’ means invention disclosure, IP disclosure that was provided to TTO by researchers.
Source Bene et al. (2018), p. 44
180
A. Inzelt

7.5
Hungarian BUC in the European Mirror
Scientiﬁc capabilities and performance by Hungarian universities put the country on
the map of foreign ﬁrms for R&D, even if the quantity of relevant human capital is
limited. So Hungarian universities can beneﬁt from these opportunities, but many
burdening factors still exist.
Comparing the main types of Hungarian BUC to the EU average by a recent
European Commission-ﬁnanced study, we can see that the types are far less
developed in Hungary than the EU average.12 Looking at the importance of dif-
ferent types of collaborative activity, Hungarian businesses mostly engage in col-
laboration in R&D, student mobility and several forms of education. This is similar
to our European counterparts, but the valorisation of R&D results in any form is
below the European average. Not surprisingly, Hungarian BUCs are much less
developed than their European counterparts (Orazbayeva et al. 2018).
Even if some crucial legal and ﬁnancial barriers are eliminated and the gov-
ernment facilitate collaboration, there are still some de-motivating factors on the
university side—which hardly supports collaboration.
Table 7.3 puts together the main barriers according to the responses from col-
laborating and non-collaborating academics and from business actors.
Table 7.3 shows that there are some commonly agreed barriers by three different
types of actor, even if the ranking orders are slightly different. A group of frequently
mentioned barriers relates to funding. It is an important motivator for universities to
obtain funding from business for conducting research at their institution. A shortage
of funding is a burdening factor for SMEs, but ﬁnancial issues are not a great barrier
Table 7.2 Incomes of universities from utilization intellectual products (HUF)
Name of universities
2014
2015
2016
2017
Univ. of Szeged
2 882 352
4 599 436
3 963 111
3 794 733
ELTE
749 326
2 197 815
9 206 845
4 717 821
Semmelweis Univ.
1 869 708
256 194
1 390 968
20 160 000
Univ. of Debrecen
n.a.
9 000 000
27 734 200
n.a.
Source Bene et al. 2018, p. 44
12A recent EU-ﬁnanced study focused on BUC in 33 European countries. From Hungary 620
academics, 120 representatives of HEI and 42 business representatives (among whom 21% were
MNCs) responded to the on-line surveys. (Orazbayeva et al. 2018, www.uni-engagement.com)
These surveys focused on European trends and devoted less attention to national pictures. Most
Hungarian organisations responded to fewer questions than organisations from advanced coun-
tries, and so the comparison between Hungary and the European average may be rough. That study
dealt with the second most important engagement—‘student mobility’—whilst, according to
interviews, collaboration in education is most important and student mobility is only a part of BUC
in education.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
181

for MNCs. However, if funding barriers are removed, they do not necessarily create
BUC; rather it makes the collaboration possible (Orazbayeva et al. 2018).
Another group of barriers relates to the divergent focus (and time-horizon) of
university and business and to differing motivation/values between them. If the
motivations for collaborations are not sufﬁcient, cooperation is unlikely to occur.
Even if some important managerial changes (TTOs, regulation of intellectual
property and sharing the income from licensing) have happened at universities, the
academics’ job description and evaluation system have not changed yet. BUC
activities do not belong to an academics’ job description, although an important
declared aim for universities and faculty members is to work in close collaboration
with business. There is no reduction in academic duties in order to explore entre-
preneurial opportunities, the insufﬁcient working time allocated for academics’
BUC activities. Some other problems are well-known: business’s lack of awareness
of university research activities and a strong business focus on producing practical
results. The opposing needs of business (conﬁdentiality) and the academics (pub-
lication, open access) are not easy to harmonize. Unchanged evaluation systems
Table 7.3 Top 5 barriers for I-U cooperation as viewed by various actors
Factors
Academics
Businesses
Collaborating
with business
Not collaborating with
business
Financial
factors
①Lack of university funding for BUC
②Lack of
government
funding for BUC
①Lack of government
funding for BUC
④Limited
resources of
SMEs
Motivational
factors
②Differing motivation/values between university and
business
③The focus on
practical results by
business
③The focus on producing
scientiﬁc outcomes (e.g.
papers) by universities
④Differing time horizons
between universities and
business
⑤Insufﬁcient work time allocated by the
university for academics’ BUC activities
Managerial
factors
③Bureaucracy
related to BUC
(in university)
⑤Bureaucracy related to
BUC in universities
Others
④Difﬁculty in
ﬁnding the appropriate
collaboration partner
Note Numbers show the rank of barrier by type of respondents
Source Author compilation on the base of Orazbayeva et al. (2018)
182
A. Inzelt

used by academics and universities which do not include BUC-related perfor-
mances among output and outcome indicators cannot help the development of
BUC. It is not easy task to revise the existing evaluation system based on aca-
demically acceptable, but the task is no longer to be overlooked.13
Apart from their European counterparts, Hungarian businesses are much less
motivated to obtain new discoveries at an early stage from universities. It is no
accident but another sign that the Hungarian inventions produced by the universities
are still less accessible and less appealing from the business perspective. There have
been some initiatives to make them more visible (such as universities’ science days,
innovation days, exhibitions, publishing on websites and TTOs efforts for
dissemination).
We may add to the survey results the main motivators for MNCs in Hungary to
collaborate in various forms of education are related to access to qualiﬁed gradu-
ates. There is a world-wide competition among high-tech industries for the best,
fresh brains—which is why education, including student mobility is so important.
Collaborative and business supported education give better access to bright stu-
dents. Some kinds of involvement in education leads to company related Ph.D.
programs and education of best talents through research exercises, mentoring for
nurturing talents can provide an excellent workforce to companies and these fresh
graduates’ knowledge better ﬁts company needs. Much BUC means only collab-
oration in education and its related activities (The estimated proportion of com-
panies collaborating only in education is around 30%. At some (non-research)
universities this proportion may reach 80% of total collaborators).
Beyond qualiﬁed students and graduates many companies are interested in new
technologies and knowledge. These R&D collaborating MNCs are usually partners
in education too. Their multi-faceted collaboration might strengthen and modernize
the First Mission of universities and upgrade the quality and employability of new
graduates. The R&D collaborations are contributing to the Second Mission of
universities bringing new insights into research topics and better conditions for
R&D. Those academics who are cooperating with business are motivated to obtain
ﬁnancial resources to continue their research and, by the beneﬁts for their own
research, such as in advancing their scientiﬁc knowledge, improving their teaching
activities with real life examples and also in graduate employability (Interview at
MNC-1 and 2 and BME).
According to the survey and interviews, Hungarian academics as well as busi-
nesses which have already relationships show very strong commitment to continue
the collaboration, although the circle of R&D collaborating MNCs is not very wide
and very slowly broadening. Some BUC active MNCs are usually collaborating
with more than one university, whilst some locally R&D conducting companies
have no university-related collaboration in Hungary. It is an open question if the
circle of businesses collaborating with universities will broaden. However it is a
13European arguments also favour the inclusion of BUC activities in evaluation, but Hungary has
introduced none of these notions.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
183

positive sign that partnerships are usually durable. Next we focus on R&D col-
laboration with MNCs.
7.6
Collaboration in R&D
Business-university R&D collaboration is still limited if we look at the level of
business R&D expenditure in HE. According to the OECD data (MSTI 2018/4)
business share was 15.5% in 2009 and from this pick it has dropped to 8% to
2015.14 The drop may somehow explain by a slow recovery from the 2008 eco-
nomic crisis. However the real drop might be lower in business ﬁnanced R&D since
mass is missing in measuring BERD to HE.
Statistics cannot yet cover the contracts which are not subject to a university
budget. The reason for budget avoidance is simple: both business and university
actors would be very unhappy with processes such as hugely time consuming
public procurement. Some contracts with business are handled by university-linked
non-proﬁt organisations to circumvent the burdening factors of cooperation caused
by the legal status (publicly ﬁnanced institutions) of universities. The participation
of an intermediary organisation allowed them to avoid the strict public procurement
system and to speed up the purchase of new research equipment, professional
software, and research material. It is also important to pay regularly (monthly) the
hired experts, PhDs and Master graduates on the projects. Both businesses and
universities are interested in much faster processes to make procurement and R&D
activities less time-consuming—and so to improve the competitive positions for
BUC actors.
This avoiding technique may be used if state grants are not involved to the BUC
project. Leading researchers at universities consider this technique workable
(Consultation with several faculty members at various universities).15 We do not
know the total size of the missing mass, but we recognise its presence.
Generally, MNCs are involving local universities within host-countries in their
R&D agenda through their afﬁliations.16 Traditionally, subsidiaries near to their
manufacturing site have used local HEIs or other available organisations (such as
Technology Support Institutes) to adapt existing products and processes to local
circumstances.17 The collaboration might be a simple extension of the volume of
R&D capacities.
14It is difﬁcult to compare internationally as the Hungarian deﬁnition differs from that of most
OECD countries.
15Of course this avoiding technique has not only advantages but disadvantages also.
16BUC is important in education and training also, as mentioned earlier, but this short chapter
focuses only on R&D.
17Most R&D collaboration targets the adapting of products new to the local company and to
different types of customer. Adaptation-related activities are also important but are less relevant for
research universities. Their investigation goes beyond the scope of this chapter.
184
A. Inzelt

In a globally open world MNCs more frequently use local universities to solve
R&D tasks to their economic activities. The competence-creating sub-units with
their own R&D facilities are candidates for local inter-organisational collaboration.
They become engaged in greater knowledge-based interactions with the local
universities, since the development of new or improved products and processes
require more active collaboration. The local subsidiaries may be outsourcing R&D
or involving universities in joint R&D activities. Collaboration for inventions and
innovation has evolved over time. The demand may be focused much more on
experimental development-related issues (testing, prototyping) than on research.
Another level of MNC collaboration across countries relates to acquiring com-
petences from any location. If the local scientiﬁc capabilities are strong, the MNCs
may involve universities in their key research agenda either through subsidiary or
contracting directly from head quarter (HQ) or one of the node-companies.
Universities and departments with good intellectual capacity (and infrastructure)
may attract foreign business partners in R&D in the ﬁelds of Industry 4.0 from all
over the world.
In Hungary the extension of the volume of R&D capacities of MNCs goes
parallel with acquiring additional competences from this location. The advantage of
these parallel purposes is 70–80% of running R&D collaborations belong to dis-
ruptive technologies (Estimation of the interviewee from MNC-1). According to
ELTE’s experience, MNCs are approaching universities in such ﬁelds of disruptive
technologies (e.g. big data, artiﬁcial intelligence) where the company has only
limited capacities and they are very reluctant to invest in in-house R&D laboratory
because of high risks.
One of the European initiatives we mention here as match-makers among
Hungarian scientiﬁc and business organisations and foreign universities as well as
HQs or nodes of MNCs is the European Institute of Innovation and Technology
(EIT) that located in Budapest. EIT has launched BUC type projects in three
important ﬁelds: EIT-Digital, EIT-Health and EIT-Climate.18 Both universities
investigated are active in EIT initiated projects. Table 7.4 gives some examples on
EIT-Digital networks.19
As examples show, MNCs from their home countries participate in such col-
laboration under the umbrella of a European Joint Research Centre, EIT.
The signiﬁcant presence of BUC collaborations in the ﬁeld of disruptive tech-
nologies may be considered a positive evaluation of universities’ capabilities and
the openness of companies to embed Hungary’s leading universities into
cutting-edge technology-related R&D activities.
18EIT is one of the European Joint Research Centre. www.eitdigital.eu.
19The EIT Digital Budapest is a Pan-European Organisation which is located in the Central and
Eastern European region. The consortium includes 2 leading universities (ELTE and BME) 1
research centre of HAS and 8 leading IT companies (4 corporates: Ericsson, T-Com, OTP bank,
Nokia, 3 SMEs and 1 start-up). EIT Digital is networking with leading European ICT institutions:
42 universities, 26 research institutes and 74 industrial partners, involving the CEE region into EIT
Digital’s efforts to leverage European digital innovation.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
185

7.7
Are MNC-University Collaborations Redeploying
the Structure of R&D Episodes?
Although there is no clear separation between different episodes of R&D, the fact is
that collaboration in “R” raises different issues and poses different challenges than
collaboration does in “D” or in R&D. One of the delicate issues is how the MNCs
inﬂuence the share of R&D activities by episode.
Description of three types of R&D base in the Frascati Manual (OECD 2015):
Basic research is the most risky episode. It is undertaken primarily to acquire
new knowledge without any particular application or use in view. The outcome is
uncertain and not very frequently ﬁnanced by business (Public funding is important
here). The time horizon of basic research is usually longer than companies’ interests
in collaboration. Basic research is not the main issue for BUC—even in most
innovative countries with world class universities.
Applied research is also original investigation undertaken to acquire new
knowledge, but it is directed primarily towards a speciﬁc, practical aim or objec-
tive. It is usually less time consuming than basic research and it has a medium or
short-term perspective and is more closely oriented to application. Naturally,
companies are much more interested to collaborate with universities for applied
research than basic.
Both kinds of research may lead to inventions.
Table 7.4 Examples of BUC in the frame of EIT-digital
Program
Collaborating partners
Smart Content delivery and Storage
• Open source library for deterministic source
coding for efﬁcient content distribution in
mobile environments. Trafﬁc management for
ISPs and network coding for improved
handover of media-streams
Trento University, KTH, TU Berlin,
Orange, Institute Mines, ELTE and BME
FITTIING
• IoT facility—resource browsing, cross
testbed measurement and data repository and
extended federation
Institute Télécom, UPMC Paris, Fraunhofer,
INRIA, TU Berlin, Trento ELTE and BME
eBIZ
• eBIZ (Business Information Zone) introduces
a new, disruptive, non-traditional banking
service by OTP Bank Plc. ﬁrst in Hungary,
later in the CEE region for SMEs & start-ups
to safely and efﬁciently perform ﬁnancial and
administrative tasks anywhere, anytime to
focus on business opportunities
OTP Bank Plc. ELTE, SMEs
Medical CPS Environments
• Data Mining Application
Siemens, TUM, DFKI, Trento Rise and
ELTE
Source Várhalmi, Zs presentation, EIT Digital @ELTE, Budapest, 16/10/2018
186
A. Inzelt

Experimental development is systematic work using knowledge gained from
research and practical experience and producing additional knowledge, which is
directed to producing new products or processes or to improving them. So ‘D’ leads
to application (innovation) or decisions on further research or aborting any further
related
activities.
Experimental
development
is
frequently
fed
by
testing
pre-pre-production development.
Statistical information on the proportion by R&D episode of business-ﬁnanced
activities is not available either for the total HE sector or for the disaggregated
level,20 although this would be an important indicator of how and why university’s
knowledge capabilities are used.
As mentioned earlier, some companies—including MNCs—sponsor universities
and a part of this sum goes to R&D. This sum is usually not very large but
sponsorship provides support for research and for the development of university
teams and faculties whilst focusing on non-targeted (basic) research. From the
standpoint of carrying out basic research, sponsorship is a more frequent (but still
limited) source than R&D contracts.
Fields of science differ in terms of the strength, weakness or total absence of a
clear-cut border between basic and applied research and experimental development.
Connections between knowledge generation and the solution of problems may be
faster or slower among the three, inﬂuenced by the particular features of the sci-
entiﬁc ﬁelds. In some emerging ﬁelds such as artiﬁcial intelligence or biotechnol-
ogy the borderline between basic and applied research is almost eliminated.
According to some experts, not only are basic and applied research but experi-
mental development is also interwoven in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence.
However, this does not lead to BUC contracts to cover all episodes at university.
The company may decide to outsource applied research and experimental devel-
opment, only the latter or a few elements of the experimental development. The
episodes of R&D partnership and its importance differ by sector (high or low tech)
and by age of companies (start-ups, matured) and ﬁelds of science at universities.
Some types of testing might be a challenging task that can lead to important
feedback for further research. MNCs may contract out to universities only just make
BUC to test for further developments of the novel pre-product or pre-process based
on company’s in-house research ﬁndings.21
At BME-FIEK the collaboration topics are closely linked to industrial projects,
such as high-speed wireless communication for Nokia; increased energy efﬁciency
for hybrid drives for Siemens; balanced integration of green energy into energy
20The administrative data on contracts would be a good basis for information on BUC and its
details. The universities are reluctant to process them for research purposes.
21Without going into more detail on deﬁnition problems, we would like to emphasise here that not
all types of testing belong to experimental development. Some are derived from R&D activities,
although universities usually count them as R&D activities.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
187

distribution networks for MVM; and improving the stability and curative effect of
medicines for Richter Gedeon Pharmaceuticals.22 These are hot R&D topics today.
However according to head of FIEK there is no basic research in these collab-
orations and 50–50% goes for applied research (research documentation, trials of
proof concepts) and experimental development (prototyping, testing). Testing might
be 30% of total projects (Here we used how university classiﬁed the types). Several
companies—either members of consortium or others—are using the university labs
only for testing or validation. Most of the testing process are knowledge
demanding, sometimes 3–4 departments have to collaborate to perform the tasks.
BME as well as ELTE has one or two collaborations with MNCs outside FIEK
in disruptive technologies and other ﬁelds. New technological solutions and
effective methods, proven by the university’s laboratory experiments, can be uti-
lized by the industry to accelerate development.
In the estimation of a senior ﬁgurer at BME, a breakdown of all BUC related
R&D by research type shows roughly 20% basic research, 40% applied research
and 40% experimental development (BME collaborates with more than 200 com-
panies—both domestic and, MNCs).
From the fragmented information from ELTE we may assume that the propor-
tion of basic research is higher in BUC related R&D—not unrelated to the different
structure of main scientiﬁc ﬁelds of two universities (Natural science is one of the
key ﬁelds in ELTE, while engineering science is the main ﬁeld in BME).
The interviews at the leading Hungarian universities may help us to obtain a
‘fuzzy’ picture of collaboration by R&D episode. According to oral information
from faculty members, TTOs and from project websites, there are only a few
examples of business-ﬁnanced basic research. There are many more examples when
Hungarian universities carry out applied research with or for business in the frame
of collaboration. Experimental development (such as prototyping, testing) is very
frequent. Some MNCs contract out to universities only for testing. There are
numerous reasons why companies collaborate with universities only in “D” and
why universities are ready to be involved in “R” marginally in a host country.
Testing can contribute to the better exploitation of up-to-date valuable capacities
and
bring
in
income
for
the
further
development
of
capabilities.
Knowledge-demanding testing could be a good entry point for deeper R&D col-
laboration. However it is important to know why there are some changes in busi-
ness decisions by episode in BUC.
– In several ﬁelds the signiﬁcantly upgraded research infrastructure made the
universities more attractive for different kinds of experimental development
22BME-FIEK program includes 5 university-laboratories that are working on collaborative pro-
jects. The laboratories belong to the faculties for their long-term sustainability. They participate in
education (First Mission), academic research (Second Mission) and collaborative R&D with
companies (Third Mission).
BME-FIEK function is joining forces in R&D, serving the demand of consortium member
businesses (Richter, Siemens, Nokia, MVM Group) and manages the demand of new business
clients, connecting them with researchers. FIEK encourages synergies between different areas.
188
A. Inzelt

(Same instruments, equipment may serve different purposes: education,
research, testing).
– Structural changes in the Hungarian economy—growth of the automotive
industry—create more and more demand for experimental development for
BUC.
– BUC-related government programs are also encouraging to move toward those
R&D activities which are closer to application.
– Changing regulations for Innovation Contribution made companies less willing
to pay for risky basic or applied research. New regulations do not allow the
companies to allocate ‘soft money’ to university since 2015. They have to pay
the full compulsory contribution into the Innovation Fund. Previously they
could share the compulsory sum between the Innovation Fund and University
R&D.
“The company had large R&D contracts with BME that used to include basic research too.
Since this reduction is not available anymore, the company is contracting only for R&D
projects that are leading to results in the short term, less risky and are closer to introducing
as innovation.” (Interview at MNC-1)
– Time matters in companies’ R&D investment. Several managers clearly
expressed their need for such kinds of R&D tasks which generate knowledge for
utilization within 1–3 years.
The level of R&D by episodes is a crucial matter for universities. They have to
keep or develop a good balance among the episodes of R&D, using BUC for
mutual learning. The supply of HE R&D has to meet not only the current but future
demand—especially in the ﬁeld of disruptive technology and Industry 4.0. The
companies always wish to solve their actual shortage of R&D personnel for
experimental development under the pressure of competition.23 However much
technology can be totally different within 5–10 years and a university has to be
capable of doing relevant R&D in the long term.
7.7.1
Linkages Between BUC and Domestic Innovation
Activities
One of the purposes of governments when they are encouraging BUC in R&D is to
improve the innovative performance of business actors and the country as a whole.
The various collaborations may have different effects on R&D within universities
and on the innovation performance of the country, and it is worth devoting attention
to the relationship between BUC in R&D which targets innovation and drives
innovation at the businesses involved.
23Just to illustrate the impact of the shortage of R&D personnel as a strong motivation for BUC,
we may mention that MNC-1 is recruiting Ph.D. degree holders from abroad.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
189

In Hungary the majority of R&D contracts are feeding innovation in the sub-
sidiaries, improving innovative performance in the country on both a larger and a
smaller scale. Subsidiaries are the main contractors and they are interested in R&D
topics relating directly to their own business interests (Interviews at MNC-1 and
MNC-2). Beyond these are BUC in R&D which may not feed the innovation
activities in Hungary. Three different types can be identiﬁed:
(a) Even if the subsidiary is active but has outsourced research to a university, the
R&D based innovation will be introduced in other locations of the MNC where
the knowledge absorption or production capabilities are better/cheaper for
innovation. This behaviour means that the MNC is searching for the optimal
solution for itself.
(b) The HQ or a node of a company may contract with HEIs in the host country for
R&D work directly—even if a local subsidiary exists in the country. These
types of contract usually do not relate to the activities of the local subsidiary.
The MNC is merely using locally available R&D capacity as an additional
resource to broaden its knowledge base. This is a positive evaluation of uni-
versity’s capabilities and might be a sign a less advanced presence in manu-
facturing or in service than in other countries.
(c) Some foreign companies without local activities are making R&D contracts
with universities where the knowledge organisation has special, excellent
capabilities. These departments of universities can contribute to developing
cutting-edge technologies. It gives a positive feedback on a university’s R&D.
From the standpoint of innovation, however, BUCs may only have their effect
in the distant future.
In Hungary those types of BUC in R&D (a–c) are marginal compared to total
collaborations. The majority of MNC and university R&D collaboration lead to
innovation in the country but there are some exceptions. Type (a) might represent a
criticism of the new knowledge absorption capabilities of local subsidiaries or may
be a sign of cheaper innovation capabilities in competing countries. Types (b) and
(c) do not intend to introduce innovation in the country. What can be deduced from
this is that their R&D at their presence signiﬁes a very positive evaluation of the
R&D capabilities of scientiﬁc organisations.
7.8
Conclusions
The R&D-intensive multinational ﬁrms have strong effects on domestic and
international BUCs. In Hungary the bulk of MNCs (with or without production
lines or services) has been involved in R&D collaboration with universities. This
means that there is a demand for BUC. However, their demand differs from their
European counterparts. Businesses are much less motivated to acquire new dis-
coveries at an early stage from universities in Hungary. It is a sign that the
190
A. Inzelt

Hungarian inventions produced by the universities are still less accessible and less
appealing from a business perspective. Greater exploitation of universities’ intel-
lectual products was hampered by legislation from 2014 until the end of 2018—
which
made
companies
very
reluctant
to
co-patent
with
universities.
University-based inventions have become wholly owned by companies, even if the
company has covered only part of the research costs. The absence of universities as
applicants has reduced the visibility of universities’ capabilities and performance.
Recent legal changes (December, 2018) have removed this burdening factor but it
will take time to recognise its impact.
The signiﬁcant presence of collaboration in the ﬁeld of disruptive technologies is
a good sign of university capabilities and the openness of companies to embed them
into R&D relating to cutting edge technologies.
It is no coincidence that collaboration hardly exists in basic research, more
frequently in applied research and most frequently in experimental development.
This observation should draw the government’s attention to the tasks of RDI policy
and incentive system, to keep a healthy balance among R&D episodes serving not
only short- and medium-term business interests but the long-term interests of the
economy and society also.
To date neither the Hungarian authorities nor HEIs have devoted enough
attention to the problems of the evaluation system—which is another burdening
factor in BUC. The evaluation system of academics and universities still follows old
practices which do not yet include BUC-related performance indicators. It is not
easy to revise the existing evaluation system, but the task can be delayed no longer
to support the involvement of academics into BUC activities.
To make BUC mutually more fruitful for business and university actors, it is
important to improve the information system. Both sides, as well as the govern-
ment, need a clear up-to-date picture of how BUC involves the actors in disruptive
technologies, Industry 4.0 and how collaboration helps universities to keep and
upgrade their intellectual and physical capabilities.
The main lessons to be learnt from Hungary’s experience for other economies
are that Business-University-Collaboration has many advantages for the innova-
tiveness and competitiveness of economies. However all actors—companies, uni-
versities and governments—must work hard to create both the appropriate
conditions and capabilities, and to build trust for effective collaboration.
The internationalisation of business R&D is a relatively new phenomenon when
compared to that of manufacturing. The geographical distribution of R&D enables
companies
to
disperse
pools
of
knowledge
assets,
and
international
knowledge-hungry MNCs are broadening their potential ﬁeld of university partners
for collaboration. Upgrading the BUC factor is a challenge for both developed and
developing countries. Typically, multinational enterprises, which dominate the
manufacturing and assembly industries, restrict their R&D activities to their home
countries (plus a possible handful of locations globally). For host countries of
MNCs it is a challenge to build relevant capacities in their universities—to become
partners in R&D collaboration. As this process develops, every country has to
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
191

upgrade the level of internationalisation of their HEIs, strengthening international
academic collaboration to make themselves more attractive to companies.
Hungarian experience has demonstrated that trust-building is a long-term pro-
cess between businesses and universities, and both types of actor need to work
seriously at it. Mutual understanding between different cultures and the interests of
business and HEIs are the ﬁrst step in this process, but if the academic culture and
the technological innovation infrastructure are inadequate for the task, they will
hamper all collaboration.
Governments have their part to play in upgrading the home country as well as
international BUC: they can facilitate and encourage national as well as interna-
tional BUCs in many ways. Promoted by investment in universities, intellectual
capabilities can contribute to reaching the critical mass of research which is one of
the key issues in collaboration, whilst a reward system for best collaborators should
encourage the building of relationships. The critical mass of university laboratory
facilities can make them competitive in attracting foreign business organizations to
collaboration. An evaluation system both within universities and of faculty mem-
bers should reward collaboration with business. Policy-making is always a delicate
issue, and the Hungarian example has shown clearly how government can stimulate
or hinder the collaboration process.
In Hungary as well as, in a bulk of other countries it will be worth launching
social science research projects to identify nation-speciﬁc burdening factors of
BUCs to
support policy-making; this will lead to broader
and stronger
industry-science collaboration in an age of disruptive technologies, and Industry 4.0.
References
Ankrah, S., & Al-Tabbaa, O. (2015). Universities-industry collaboration: A literature review.
Scandinavian Journal of Management, 31, 387–408.
Archibugi, D., & Lundvall, B. -Å. (Eds.) (2002). The globalizing learning economy. Oxford
University Press, 328.
Archibugi, D., & Filippetti, A. (Eds.). (2015). The handbook of global science, technology and
innovation (p. 603). Ltd: John Wiley & Sons.
Bene, T., Liber, N., & Németh, G. (2018). Szellemitulajdon kezelés és a kutatási eredmények
hasznosítása a közﬁnanszírozású kutatóhelyeken. Összehasonlító elemzés és gyakorlati
javaslatok, (Handling intellectual property and utilization of research ﬁndings at publicly
ﬁnanced research organisation, Comparative analysis and practical suggestions). Hungarian
Intellectual Property Ofﬁce, Budapest, p. 47.
Berchicci, L. (2013). Towards an open R&D system: Internal R&D investment, external
knowledge acquisition and innovative performance. Research Policy, 42(1), 117–127.
Bonaccorsi, A., & Piccaluga, A. (1994). A theoretical framework for the evaluation of university—
industry relationships. R&D Management, 24, 154–169.
Caloghirou, Y., Tsakanikas, A., & Vonortas, N. S. N. (2001). University-industry cooperation in
the context of the European framework programmes. Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1),
153–161.
192
A. Inzelt

Cantwell, J. A. (1989). Technological innovation and multinational corporations. Oxford: Basic
Blackwell.
Cantwell, J. (2017). Innovation and international business. Industry and Innovation, 24(1), 41–60.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2016.1257422.
Cantwell, J., & Molero, J. (Eds.) (2003). Multinational enterprises innovative strategies and
systems of innovation (pp. 234–268). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Cantwell, J., & Piscitello, L. (2007). Attraction and deterrence in the location of foreign-owned
r&d activities—The role of positive and negative spillovers. International Journal of
Technological Learning, Innovation and Development, 1(1), 83–111.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003). The Era of open innovation. Sloan Management Review, 44, 3
(Spring), 35–41.
Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W., & West, J. (Eds.). (2006). Open innovation: Researching a
new paradigm. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, P. (2005). Regionally Asymmetric knowledge capabilities and open innovation. Research
Policy, 34, 1128–1149.
Correa, P., & Zuñiga, P. (2013). Public policies to foster knowledge transfer from public research
organizations. Innovation, technology, and entrepreneurship global practice, public policy
brief, World Bank. Washington DC.
Clark, B. (2015). The character of the entrepreneurial university. International Higher Education
(38).
CWUR. (2018). CWUR World University Rankings 2018–2019, https://cwur.org/2018-19.php,
downloaded: 4/12/2018.
Dachs, B., Kampik, F., Scherngell, T., Zahradnik, G., Hanzl-Weiss, D., Hunya, G., et al. (2013).
Internationalisation of business investments in R&D and analysis of their economic impact.
Innovation Union Competitiveness papers, issue 2013/1 European Commission.
Dunning, J. H. (1988). The eclectic paradigm of international production: A restatement and some
possible extensions. Journal of International Business Studies, 19(1), 1–31. https://www.jstor.
org/stable/154984.
Dunning, J. H. (1992). Multinational enterprises and the global economy. Addison Wokingham:
Wesley.
Edler, J. (2008). Creative internationalization: Widening the perspectives on analysis and policy
regarding international R&D activities. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 33(4).
Edquist, C. (1997). Systems of innovation technologies, institutions and organizations. Routledge,
London and New York (p. 432).
Edquist, C. (2018). Towards a holistic innovation policy: Can the Swedish national innovation
council serve as a role model. CIRCLE, Lund University, Papers in Innovation Studies, Paper
no. 2018/02.
Etzkowitz, H. (2004). The evolution of the entrepreneurial university. International Journal of
Technology and Globalisation, 1(1), 64–77.
Etzkowitz, H. (2008). The Triple Helix: University-industry-government innovation in action
(p. 161). London p: Routledge.
Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (1997). Introduction to special issue on science policy
dimensions of the Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations. Beech Tree
Publishing.
Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (1998). The endless transition: A ‘Triple Helix’ of university
industry government relations. Minerva, 36(3), 203–208.
EU. (2005). The handbook on responsible partnering—Joining forces in a world of open
innovation. A guide to better practices for collaborative research and knowledge transfer
between science and industry. EUA, ProTon Europe, EARTO and EIRMA. Retrieved from
http://www.responsible-partnering.org/library/rp-2005-v1.pdf.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
193

EU. (2016a). Peer Review of the hungarian research and innovation system. Horizon 2020 Policy
Support Facility, EU, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, Luxembourg:
Publications
Ofﬁce
of
the
European
Union.
https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/en/ﬁle/10007/
download?token=82l5lFpl.
EU. (2016b). The European innovation scoreboard 2016, European Union.
Farinha, L., & Ferreira, J. J. (2013). Triangulation of the Triple Helix: A conceptual framework.
https://www.triplehelixassociation.org/working-papers/triangulation-of-the-triple-helix-a-
conceptual-framework.
Foray, D. (2006). the economics of knowledge. The MIT Press.
Freeman, C. (1988). Japan: A new national innovation system. Technology and economy theory.
Pinter, London (pp. 331–348).
Govind, M., & Küttim, M. (2016). International knowledge transfer from university to industry: A
systematic literature review. Research economics and business: Central and Eastern Europe, 8
(2), 21.
Guimón, J., & Narula, R. (2017). When developing countries meet transnational universities:
Searching for complementarity not substitution. Discussion Paper, Number: JHD2017-01.
www.henley.ac.uk/dunning.
Gulbrandsen,M., & Slipersaeter, S.(2007). The third mission and the entrepreneurial universitymodel,
in Universities and strategic knowledge creation. Specialization and Performance in Europe. In A.
Bonaccorsi & C. Dario, PRIME Series, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. (pp. 112–143).
Hernández, H., Grassano, N., Tübke, A., Potters, L., Gkotsis, P., & Vezzani, A. (2018). The 2018
EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard; EUR 29450 EN; Publications Ofﬁce of the
European Union, Luxembourg. https://doi.org/10.2760/131813, JRC113807.
Inzelt, A. (1999). Transformation role of FDI in R&D: analysis based on a databank. In David
Dyker & Slavo Radosevic (Eds./szerk), Innovation and structural change in post-socialist
countries: A quantitative approach (pp. 185–201), The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publisher.
Inzelt, A. (2000). Foreign direct investment in R&D: Skin-deep and soul-deep co-operation.
Science and Public Policy, August, 4, 241–251.
Inzelt, A. (2004). The evolution of university-industry-government relationships during transition.
Research Policy, 33(6–7), 975–995.
Inzelt, A. (2008). The inﬂow of highly skilled workers into Hungary: A by-product of FDI.
Journal of Technology Transfer, 33, 422–438.
Inzelt, A. (2010). Collaborations in the open Innovation Era. In Ndubuisi Ekekwe (Ed.),
Nanotechnology and microelectronic (pp. 61–86). USA: IGI Global.
Inzelt, A. (2014). Embeddedness level in central and Eastern European countries as revealed by
patent-related indicators. Prometheus, 32(4), 385–401.
Inzelt, A., Laredo, P., Sanchez, P., Marian, M., Vigano, F., & Carayol, N. (2006). 3rd mission. In
Methodological Guide, PRIME, Network of Excellence, Lugano, 125–168. http://www.prime-
noe.org.
Inzelt, A., & Csonka, L. (2016). Public-private interaction under ﬂuctuating public support
program in: Public-private partnerships in research and innovation: Trends and international
perspectives. In K. Koschatzky & T. Stachlecker (Eds.), Fraunhofer Verlag, Karlsruhe,
pp. 129–158.
Koschatzky, K., & Stahlecker, T. (2010). New forms of strategic research collaboration between
ﬁrms and universities in the German research system. International Journal of Technology
Transfer and Commercialization, 9, 94–110.
Laredo, P. (2007). Revisiting the third mission of universities: Toward a renewed categorisation of
university activities? Higher Education Policy, Springer, 20(4), 46–59.
Leydesdorff, L., & Sun, Y. (2009). National and international dimensions of the Triple Helix in
Japan: University—industry—government versus international co-authorship relations. Journal
of the Association for Information Science and Technology Association, 60(4), 778–788.
194
A. Inzelt

Lundvall, B. Å., & Johnson, B. (1994). The learning economy. Journal of industry studies, 1(2),
23–42.
Mégnigbéto, E. (2015). Effect of international collaboration on knowledge ﬂow within an
innovation system: A Triple Helix approach. Triple Helix Journal, 2(16), 21. open access
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40604-015-0027-0.
Mollas-Gallart, J., Salter, A., Patel, P., Scott, A., & Duran, X. (2002). Measuring third stream
activities. SPRU: Report to the Russel group Universities, Brighton.
Mowery, D. C. (1998). Collaborative R&D: How Effective Is It? Issues in Science and
Technology, 15(1).
Narula, R. (2003). Globalization and technology: Interdependence, innovation systems and
industrial Policy. John Wiley & Sons, 264 pages (reprinted: 2015).
Narula, R. (2014). Exploring the paradox of competence-creating subsidiaries: Balancing
bandwidth and dispersion in MNEs. Long Range Planning, 47(1–2), 4–15.
Nedeva, M. (2008). New tricks and old dogs? The ‘third mission’ and the re-production of the
university. In The World Yearbook of education 2008: Geographies of Knowledge/Geometries
of Power: Framing the Future of Higher Education (pp. 85–105). New York: Routledge.
Nelson, R. (1993). National innovation systems. New York: Oxford University Press.
NKFIH. (2019). Kutatás-Fejlesztés és Innováció Magyarországon, (Research, Development and
Innovation in Hungary) Budapest, p. 30.
OECD. (2008a). Open innovation in global networks. Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2008b). OECD reviews of innovation policy: Hungary (p. 228). Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2015). Frascati Manual 2015, Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research
and Experimental Development, The Measurement of Scientiﬁc, Technological and Innovation
Activities, OECD Publishing, Paris DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264239012-en.
OECD. (2017). The next production revolution: Implication for governments and business. OECD
Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264271036-en.
Orazbayeva, B., Davey, T., Prónay, S., Meerman, A., Muros, G. V., & Melonari, M. (2018). The
state of Hungarian university-business cooperation: The university and the business
perspective. Study on the cooperation between higher education institutions and public and
private organisations, European Commission. www.uni-engagement.com.
Perkmann, M., Tartari, V., McKelvey, M., Autioa, E., Broströmc, A., D’Este, P., et al. (2013).
Academic engagement and commercialisation: A review of the literature on university—
industry relations. Research Policy, 42, 423–442.
Pinheiro, R., Langa, P. V., & Pausits, A. (2015). The institutionalization of universities’ third
mission: Introduction to the special issue. European Journal of Higher Education, 5(3), 227–232.
Ranga, M., & Etzkowitz, H. (2013). Triple Helix systems: An analytical framework for innovation
policy and practice in the Knowledge Society. Industry & Higher Education, 27(3), 237–262.
Raymond, S., & Taggart, J. H. (1998). Strategy shifts in MNC subsidiaries. Strategic Management
Journal, 19(7), 663–681.
Schaeffer, V., & Matt, M. (2016). Development of academic entrepreneurship in a non-mature
context: The role of the university as a hub-organisation. Entrepreneurship & Regional
Development.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08985626.2016.1247915,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
08985626.2016.1247915.
Shimoda, R. (2008). Reform of university research system in Japan: Where do they stand?
National academy of Sciences, 40–56.
Singh, J. (2007). Asymmetry of knowledge spillovers between MNCs and host country ﬁrms.
Journal of International Business Studies, 38(5), 764–786.
Sorensen, O. J., & Hu, Y. (2014). Triple Helix going abroad? A case of Danish experiences in
China. European Journal of Innovation Management, 17(3), 254–271.
Swann, P. (2014). Common innovation: How we create the wealth of nations. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
7
Business-University Collaboration in a Developing …
195

Taggart, J. H. (1998). Determinants of increasing R&D complexity in afﬁliates of manufacturing
multinational corporations in the UK. R&D Management, 28(2), 101–110.
Wen, J., & Kobayashi, S. (2001). Exploring collaborative R&D network: Some new evidence in
Japan. Research Policy, 30(8), October 2001, pp. 1309–1319.
Dr. Annamria Inzelt is Founding Director of IKU Innovation Research Centre. She is honourable
professor at University of Szeged. Her main research interests are systems of innovations, the
innovative capabilities and performance of the different actors, business organisations and
universities, the role of internationalisation in technology upgrading. She has been the ﬁrst
Hungarian representative in the OECD Working group of the National Experts of Science and
Technology Indicators (NESTI) for 11 years, and is an expert of UNESCO on science and
technology indicators. She was also involved in OECD collaboration with transition economies.
She has been member of the National Committee for Technological Development, the Committee
for Industrial Economics at Hungarian Academy of Sciences. She was an editor of several
Hungarian
professional
journals
and
member
of
advisory
editors
to
Research
Policy,
Technological Forecasting and Social Change and still active at Triple Helix Journal. She has
published in various international journals, author and editor of books published in Hungarian or
English.
196
A. Inzelt

Chapter 8
Text Mining Method for Building New
Business Strategies
Focusing on the Neurosurgical Robot
Fumio Komoda, Yoshihiro Muragaki and Ken Masamune
Abstract In any time, it has been essential to acquire knowledge of customer needs
and global trends of technological progress for proper selection and concentration
strategy planning, which is decisive for long-term growth of the company.
However, with the change in innovation paradigm, the methods used for its
acquisition have also changed. With the era of big data, text mining that gains
knowledge necessary for this planning from unstructured natural language with
weak afﬁnity with relational databases has attracted attention recently. However, in
order to obtain highly accurate and reliable knowledge that can contribute to
company decision-making, the current natural language processing algorithm is not
sufﬁcient. Current text mining method, which is limited to bird’s eye viewing type
aimed at capturing the entire text data roughly, is unsuitable for ﬁnding out
important knowledge written only in a very small part of the text data. Therefore,
this paper presents the virtual case of a company planning a new neurosurgical
robot project and applies pinpoint focus type text mining technique to acquiring
technological knowledge from high-impact peer-reviewed academic journals.
Keywords Text mining  Pinpoint focus type text mining  Innovation paradigm 
Text data  Business strategy  Neurosurgical robot
8.1
Introduction
Modern management theories, such as positioning theory (Porter 1980), destructive
innovation theory (Christensen 1997), open innovation theory (Chesbrough 2003),
and so on, are closely related to the fact that investment in core competence is
F. Komoda (&)
Honorary Professor, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan
e-mail: techtra@ae.auone-net.jp
Y. Muragaki  K. Masamune
Institute of Advanced Bio-Medical Engineering and Science,
Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_8
197

critical to the growth of company earnings. The long-term stagnation in Japanese
companies since the end of the twentieth century can be attributed to a considerable
extent to failures in selection and concentration strategies. Typical examples include
Sharp’s excessive investment in LCD panels, where overproduction was expected
to cause low cost competition, and Toshiba, which had succeeded in developing
ﬂash memories with promising markets, but lagged behind Samsung in its
commercialization.
One reason for the failure of Japanese companies with respect to selection and
concentration strategies is that their decision-making depends largely on subjective
judgments originated in managers’ intuition, their successful experiences in the
past, and so on. In other words, when it came to knowledge creation, Japanese
companies were more dependent on “tacit” than “explicit” knowledge (Nonaka
1991). Today, however, as globalization and introduction of IT transforms pro-
duction architecture from integral to modular forms, it has become necessary to
integrate a variety of technologies indispensable for developing new products
owned
dispersively
by
many
companies
in
the
world
(Fujimoto
2007).
Decision-making under such circumstances requires not only accumulated propri-
etary knowledge but also actively utilizing objective data created by broadly
observing the trends of society as a whole (Veugelers et al. 2010). The innovation
paradigm is undergoing major change. As the result, big data, including text data, is
becoming to play a crucial role in R&D. Japanese companies seem not to be
adapting to this paradigm change ﬂexibly and successfully at present.
One source of objective data is a technology roadmap, which is produced for the
purpose of identifying the trajectories of important technologies, and for the pur-
pose of discovering promising business with proﬁtability as company R&D strat-
egy, with priority as government technology policy (Japan Patent Ofﬁce, home
page). A technology road map is produced by combining a variety of knowledge
from multiple experts in each area, or by reviewing patent data. However, the
roadmap produced in this way is often insufﬁcient to forecast technological pro-
gress and business trends across the world. The reason for this is that if knowledge
with deep and speciﬁc thought possessed by many experts is integrated, it ulti-
mately results in an ordinary conclusion without “personality.” In addition, the
metadata in patent publications contain insufﬁcient knowledge for planning a
business strategy.
Another source of objective data useful for building strategies for selection and
concentration is various kinds of text data. Text data may include newspaper
articles, industry reports, call center logs, patent bulletins, and research papers.
These unstructured natural languages contain much more knowledge than struc-
tured relational databases. Therefore, by mining these data, it becomes possible to
predict the future potential of the project based on understanding customers’ needs,
business proﬁtability, and trends of technological progress across the world, etc.
Thus, text mining studies have attracted attention in recent years with numerous
papers published.
Text mining has often been examined in terms of strategy planning,
decision-making, and marketing activities, including ﬁnding customer needs.
198
F. Komoda et al.

(Netzer et al. 2012). However, text mining can be applied to more than discovering
customer needs. Companies need to know what technologies are necessary to
develop new products that satisfy customer needs and what kinds of ideas are
necessary to overcome bottlenecks to developing that technology. Nevertheless, as
Kim and Bae (2016) states, there are only a few studies that apply text mining to
forecast technologies, discover promising technologies, or solve technical chal-
lenges compared with research that applies data mining to discover promising
products/markets. One reason for this is that it is more difﬁcult to apply text mining
to acquiring technical knowledge compared with its application to marketing due to
differences between the nature of knowledge about marketing and that about
technology.
Knowledge that is generally well-known across the world is insufﬁcient for
planning corporate strategy and decision-making. The reason is that “known” or
“common” knowledge cannot be the source of monopolistic proﬁt. Knowledge with
potential that is unknown to anyone, or that is only known to some extent, enables
companies to gain monopolistic proﬁts. In this regard, either marketing or technical
knowledge remains in the same.
The difference in knowledge about marketing and technology is as follows.
Marketing knowledge is often expressed in the language of daily life; therefore, in
many cases, it is easy for analysts to understand the results of mining as they
already have accumulated personal knowledge. On the other hand, knowledge
about technology is expressed by esoteric technical terms, and thus to understand
that, analysts are required for background knowledge about current technical trends.
For example, exploring concepts such as “weight reduction of camera” or “ex-
pansion of refrigerator capacity” is enabled by data analysts’ common knowledge.
On the other hand, technological knowledge is based on expert knowledge, jargon,
and equations, which are impossible to understand solely based on common
knowledge; therefore, the text mining results are required to provide a high degree
of speciﬁcity and accuracy. For example, in studying glycosylation, an important
metabolic theme in biology, in order to clarify the mechanism of glucose conver-
sion from the mining results, it is essential that data analysts have prior relevant
expertise such as glycosylated molecule, glycosylated position, catalytic enzyme
and so on (Rzhetsky et al. 2008). In other words, in the case of the customer needs
context, rough and ambiguous text mining results are enough to understand the
meanings. In the same way, text mining results in the technical context require the
analyst to have a sophisticated level of knowledge in order to deliver meaningful
information.
For the above reasons, the methodology used in text mining differs according to
the nature of the required knowledge. Categories extracted in mining aimed at
understanding widespread phenomena in the context of marketing activities are
generally broad, like “shades related preference” in fashion, i.e., relative preference
to light colors against dark colors, and to cold against warm color. This requires a
“bird’s-eye-view” type text mining. On the other hand, a “pinpoint focus” type text
method is often required in the case of mining for engineering purposes, where
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
199

engineers want to ﬁnd ways to overcome technical obstacles and to discover useful
technical ideas.
Most text mining research aims to analyze enormous volumes of text and to
present a bird’s-eye-view showing the overall trends. In other words, using statis-
tical analysis methods, such as multivariate analysis, the overall image or pattern is
grasped in general.
On the contrary, technological knowledge, for example, ideas for overcoming
technical bottlenecks, is not widely shared and well-known in society but for a
limited number of individuals. In addition, it is usual that such knowledge is
described only in a small part of the text. Therefore, detailed technical knowledge is
necessary for pinpointing the related parts of all the text data and link them together,
i.e., a pinpoint focus type text mining method.
There are various techniques used for text mining, for example: (1) information
extraction; (2) topic tracking; (3) summarization; (4) categorization; (5) clustering;
(6) concept linkage; (7) information visualization; (8) sequestration-assisted min-
ing; and (9) association rule mining (Gupta and Lehal 2009; Patel and Soni 2012).
Among them, topic tracking, clustering, concept linkage, etc. are aimed at ﬁnding
the overall tendency based on a bird’s-eye-view of the whole. Information
extraction plays a role in searching necessary parts; however, from our experiences,
it is understood that information extraction cannot provide sufﬁcient detail.
Therefore, it is required to start with a bird’s-eye-view of the whole through
combining pinpoint focus types text mining methods and then to gradually extract
necessary parts accurately, and ﬁnally to connect them. As above, text mining is
classiﬁed into two types: (1) bird’s-eye-view and (2) pinpoint focus. The pinpoint
focus type is a mining method aimed at acquiring more precise knowledge by
limiting the analysis target narrowly as compared with the bird’s-eye-view type.
Therefore, this paper presents the virtual case of a company planning a new
neurosurgical robot project and applies text mining to acquiring technological
knowledge from high-impact peer-reviewed academic journals. To succeed in the
surgical robot business, this company is required to have a pinpoint focus approach
to extract text data that can reveal developing trends in the surgical robot industry
and the kinds of technology useful for solving technological bottlenecks.
8.2
Methodology
8.2.1
Co-occurrence Relationship Analysis Based on Text
Blocks
Taking as an example medical research involving surgical robots, we survey pre-
vious research aimed at distinguishing the two text mining methods.
Typical examples of bird’s-eye-view type text mining are often found in studies
that describe research trends as a whole (Kurata and Takigawa 2010). Pinpoint
200
F. Komoda et al.

focus text mining is applied to studies, for example, to discover relationships
between genotype and disease (Koike 2007), or to determine the toxicity and
efﬁcacy of candidate compounds in the early stages of R&D projects in the
high-risk drug discovery (Kaneko and Ootake 2010). Studies that ﬁnd the rela-
tionship between treatment and prognosis also apply pinpoint focus type text
mining (Abe et al. 2005; Kushima et al. 2012).
One of the difﬁculties in applying pinpoint focus text mining method is the need
to cleanse a huge amount of data in order to extract the data of interest for a detailed
analysis. In addition, because these critical parts are scattered throughout the data, it
is not easy to combine them together and discover their meaning.1
In this paper, in order to overcome these difﬁculties, the author divides all of the
acquired text into small blocks. A “text block” (TB) is created by applying the
N-gram approach, proposed by Shannon, to sentences instead of words. This is
illustrated in Fig. 8.1.
The reasons for dividing all text into TBs is that most of the data include
scientiﬁc papers, industry reports, and patent bulletins, which range from a few
pages to tens of pages; however, only a few portions contain the required knowl-
edge. Mining such large texts presents difﬁculties in ﬁnding the critical information.
In addition, if using each article as a mining unit, co-occurrence relations of words
are analyzed, and thus two contextually unrelated words are considered as
co-occurring, leading to misunderstanding the meaning of the text. It is considered
that “clumps of meaning are discovered within 5–10-sentences (Mima 2006). It is,
therefore, appropriate to analyze co-occurrence on the basis of TBs consisting of
about ﬁve sentences in order to meaningful co-occurrence relationships without
omission.
Fig. 8.1 Text Block
Consisting of 5 Sentences.
Note S = Sentence
Source Created by author
1A typical example of knowledge obtained in this way is the discovery of speciﬁc leukemia
therapies using IBM’s Watson Genomic Analytics.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
201

Needless to say, TBs containing the knowledge being sought can be found in a
variety of texts including patent publications, trade journals, and technical journals.
Thus, by combining these TBs correctly, more in-depth knowledge can be retrieved
(Fig. 8.2).
8.2.2
The Dataset
This section describes the data of interest in the pursuit of the technical knowledge
necessary to develop and commercialize new neurosurgical robots.
In general, text data used to understand R&D trends are patents, academic
research papers, etc. In this study, the data are composed exclusively of academic
research papers instead of patents.
In general, text data suitable for acquiring a bird’s-eye-view of R&D trends
come from patent bulletins, patent applications, academic research papers, etc. The
ﬁrst reason why patent data are insufﬁcient is that most R&D results for surgical
robots fail to reach the stage of patent application or commercialization; thus, it is
impossible to gain an in-depth understanding of the current state of technological
progress and to forecast its future by only looking at patents. The second reason is
that in comparison with academic journals, the descriptions written in patent
publications are often insufﬁcient to describe the fundamental direction of the R&D
or to express customer needs or technical functions achieved.
This study analyzes six academic journals: three journals that cover the neuro-
surgery ﬁeld in general and three that are related to the development of surgical
Fig. 8.2 Linked text blocks. Source Same to Fig. 8.1
202
F. Komoda et al.

robots, including computer and endoscopic techniques, which are establishing the
technological foundation of surgical robots.
The two categories are represented as follows:
(A) Neurosurgery in general
“Neurosurgical Focus” (JI) 3,194 full texts 1996–2015
“Neurologia Medico-Chirgica” (J2) 5,451 abstracts 1964–2014
“Journal of Neurosurgery” (J3) 20,333 abstracts 1950–2014
(B) Surgery using a surgical robot or computer
“The International Journal of Medical Robotics + Computer Assisted Surgery”
(J4) abstracts 547 2004–2014
“Computer Aided Surgery” (J5) 534 abstracts 1997–2014
“International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery” (J6) 479
abstracts 2009–2014
Neurosurgical Focus is obtained from home page of American Association of
Neurosurgical Surgeon. Other ﬁve theses are obtained from JDream3, which is
scientiﬁc paper database provided by G-Search.2
The trend of number of theses by year in each journal is shown in Fig. 8.3.
Surgery using robots and computers is a new research ﬁeld, thus, the creation of
Fig. 8.3 Number of theses by year. Source J1 = Neurosurgical Focus, J2–6 = JDream3
2https://www.aans.org/en/Publications/The-Journal-of-Neurosurgery.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
203

scientiﬁc societies and launching the publication of J4–J6 was delayed compared
with J1–J3.
There are some limitations to this approach. First, the full text is analyzed only in
J1 among the six journals, whereas only the abstracts are analyzed in the other ﬁve
journals. The reason is that obtaining data in full text is very expensive. Second, for
J1, where the full text is analyzed, pdf ﬁles and HTML ﬁles were converted to text
data ﬁles. It is inevitable that errors such as garbled characters occur in the process
of this conversion work as well as technical mistakes occurring during the pro-
cessing of line feed codes and so on. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to obtain data that
completely match the original text. Furthermore, for J1, the author selects only
academic theses among all articles contained in the journals; thus, it is inevitable
that arbitrariness enters into this selection. It is considered that these limitations
have no signiﬁcant effect on this analysis and its results.
8.3
Current State of Development of Surgical Robots
Surgical robots, like industrial and various service robots, rarely fall under the
current accepted deﬁnition of “robot.” The basic criterion to be considered a robot is
“autonomy” (Chinzei 2015). Autonomy is the ability to recognize and avoid
obstacles in the patient’s body independently and without human intervention.
However, a precise deﬁnition of a surgical robot in this way would mean that there
are very few surgical robots currently available, including the most widely used
surgical robot, “da Vinci.” Therefore, in this article, surgical robots are viewed in
the broad sense; thus, tools with primitive autonomy, such as some endoscopes, a
portion of computer control systems, and so on that provide a technical basis for
acquiring true autonomy in future, are included. Hence, the term “robot” and a
portion of both “endoscope” and “computer” appearing in J1–L6 are viewed as
robots because these apparatuses represent a technological base toward autonomy
in future.
Surgical robotics is expected to be a promising new industry. The reasons are as
follows:
(1) Advances in image diagnostic technology have been seen based on deep
learning since about 2012 and signs of increasing the number of new drugs
approved by the FDA since around 2010 are beginning to be seen, but tech-
nological breakthrough for improving medical technology is not still fully
available, as shown in the fact that the application of genetic engineering to
clinical practice has not advanced much. Under such circumstances, medical
robots, especially robots used in surgery, can be expected to contribute to
improvements in medical technology.
204
F. Komoda et al.

(2) With rapid advances incomputer and control technologies, there isa possibility that
various elemental technologies developed in robotic R&D activities can be trans-
lated to the medical ﬁeld also, where robotization has been slow but is increasing.
However, it is not easy for a company to bring surgical robotics into a proﬁtable
business. The da Vinci Surgical System, which was approved by the US FDA in
2000 and is widely accepted throughout the world, is one of the few successful
examples. NeuroMate, launched by Integrated Surgical Systems in 1987 to support
stereotaxic surgery, is continuing to evolve and is still used in many hospitals as
described below. However, most of the currently popular surgical robots have not
developed the level of autonomy required to be considered a true “robot.”In
addition, powered suits as cyborg type robot are expected to be utilized in reha-
bilitation after illness, but it will take time to disseminate it.
The reasons why surgical robots have not achieved sufﬁcient results are as follows.
(1) Industrial robots only process objects of uniform shape and material by repe-
ated operation and their operation is not required to be fail-safe. On the other
hand, in the case of surgical robots, the object to be processed is the human
body, with different shapes and materials (i.e., organs); thus, standardization of
the robot’s actions is not possible. In addition, surgical robots also require high
reliability without mistakes. Therefore, the computer and control technology
used must be far more reliable than for industrial robots.
(2) In general, developing technologies requires matching technical seeds with
needs; thus, collaboration between developers familiar with elemental tech-
nology and surgeons as users familiar with the functions required for surgical
robots is indispensable. However, it is difﬁcult for engineering researchers
engaged in robotic technologies to understand highly specialized and unique
surgical procedures (Iseki et al. 2009).
To overcome these difﬁculties, it is required to grasp the global trends in surgical
robotics, clarify the technologies required for practical applications, and discover
ideas that lead to a technological breakthrough. For this purpose, pinpoint focus text
mining is expected to play an important role.
8.4
Perspective of Surgical Robot Technology
8.4.1
Bird’s-Eye-View Based on Time Series Data
As noted above, when mining for detailed knowledge, it is necessary to begin
extracting the necessary parts from the text data as a whole, guided by the work of
grossly catching the whole of the text. Then, analysts gradually narrow down the
important points to focus on the deeper knowledge. This is described below.
One indicator as to how robotics interacts with surgery and neurosurgery is the
time series change in the number of theses.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
205

Figure 8.1 shows the number of theses published in three surgical robotics
journals (J4, J5, and J6). Almost all theses in these journals appear to be directly or
indirectly related to surgical robotics, with J4 being dedicated to this ﬁeld. All three
journals were launched in the 1990 and 2000s, suggesting that robots for surgery
increased in their availability during the early 2000s. For each of the three neu-
rosurgery journals (J1–J3), the following data are collected: (1) the number of
papers containing the term “robot” in full text or abstract, (2) the number of theses
containing the term “computer” that were related to robotization and promoted it,
and (3) the number of theses containing the term “endoscope,” which is considered
the technical foundation of surgical robotics technology (Fig. 8.4).
Of the papers in J1, 30–50 theses contain the term “robot,” “computer,” or “en-
doscope,” or the like since around 2000, which represents 7–9% of all theses pub-
lished in the journal. In the 1990s, there were no theses containing the term “robot”;
Fig. 8.4 Number of thesis related to surgical robot by year. Source J1 = Neurosurgical Focus, J2–
3 = JDream3
206
F. Komoda et al.

however, the proportion of theses containing “robot” had been greatly ﬂuctuating
between 1 and 8% in the 2000s. Although robotics research for neurosurgery has been
active since around 2000, the clinical adoption of these technologies has been limited.
This seems to be consistent with the fact that although movement toward the devel-
opment and practical application of surgical robots was found, such as the da Vinci
Surgical System in the 2000s, their uptake has not been strong. Moreover, the number
of theses containing the term “computer” is not increasing and the number containing
the term “endoscope” is increasing only slightly.
8.4.2
Change in Numbers of Theses by Disease
in Neurosurgery
Next, we examine time series changes in the appearance of disease terms exclusive
to neurosurgery to understand what kinds of diseases are being studied.
Figure 8.5 shows the changes in the names of major diseases in J1 by four
periods (1996–2002, 2003–2007, 2008–2012, and 2013–2017). According to the
ﬁgure, the largest number of cases is cerebrovascular disorders such as “cerebral
stroke” and “brain infarction.” Among them, cerebral stroke has a large increase in
Fig. 8.5 Number of occurrence of disease words in neurosurgery (J1). Source Neurosurgical Focus
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
207

the number of cases while “subarachnoid hemorrhage” has not increased. The
increased rate of brain infarction is also remarkable; thus, it can be concluded that
cerebral infarction is the most important research topic in neurosurgery. The
number of articles concerning “hydrocephalus” makes it the second most research
topic after cerebrovascular disorder, although the number of studies has been
decreasing, whereas “epilepsy,” with only a few cases, shows an increasing trend.
There are fewer theses on brain tumor-related diseases compared with cere-
brovascular disorders. While there is an increase in the term “glioma,” the terms
“brain tumor” and “schwannoma” do not show a marked increase.
The term “brain injury” has few cases and it has not increased.
These ﬁndings indicate the types of surgical robots that are most required by
surgeons and, therefore, should be candidates for core competence in robotics
companies.
8.4.3
Bird’s-Eye-View Based on a Sketch of Technology
and Function
To move from a bird’s-eye-view type to a pinpoint focus type text mining, it is
necessary to extract essential parts from the texts based on an overall understanding.
For this purpose, it is necessary to add new terms that are indispensable for dis-
covering knowledge. However, because truly important terms can be obscured in a
huge group of terms, appropriate guidelines or sketches suitable for the knowledge
to be found must be set in advance to remove unnecessary terms (“noise”) and
make important terms easier to discover. This article aims to discover the techno-
logical trends and the functions necessary for surgical robots; therefore, we will
systematize the knowledge in advance, which will lead to the discovery of
important terms, as shown in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1 Overall picture of neurosurgical robot technology
(1) Systems/devices
endoscope, master-slave surgical robot, intelligent surgical robot, intelligent operating room
(2) Parts/element technologies
arm, manipulator (multi-joint), navigation technology, image processing (three dimensional
image recognition), sensors (image sensors, tactile sensors, speed sensors), intelligent control
(feedback control, feedforward control, decision support)
(3) Required functions
minimally invasive, autonomous, accurate, miniaturized, automated, complex and ﬂexible
movement of arm, improvement of degree of freedom, expansion of motion range, rotation,
articulation, speed control, movement that human ﬁngers can’t do, ﬁrm grasping of organs,
image processing (image recognition of wide range including hidden organs, sharp image
recognition, real-time image recognition), sterilization, ease of maintenance, low cost, cost
performance improvement
Source Same to Fig. 8.1
208
F. Komoda et al.

First, from the viewpoint of the total system, the surgical robot starts with a
surgical endoscope as its precursor device and evolves into a master–slave robot;
ultimately, it is expected to evolve into a robot with higher intelligence. Next, from
the viewpoint of elemental technologies, navigation technology, image processing
technology, sensors, etc. are necessary.
Among the required functions, technologies that contribute to minimally inva-
sive surgery are required. For that purpose, miniaturizing systems and components
are required for both image recognition and navigation technologies in order to
reach accurately the physical target of the operation. In addition, it is required to
ﬂexibly perform complicated movements by speed control and feedback control of
multiarticular arms. Furthermore, a mechanism necessary for ﬁrmly gripping
without damaging organs or tissues is required. Therefore, various elements tech-
nologies, such as a navigation method for moving the arm/manipulator, image
recognition technology, and a pressure sensor are required.
In addition, it is also required to overcome the current situation where the
equipment must be maintained and repaired for each operation, and the integrity of
the sterilization procedures must be ensured. Cost reduction is also a crucial
requirement.
8.4.4
Basic Trends in Surgical Robotics Technology
With reference to Table 8.1, nouns/compound words with high frequency of
occurrence are extracted from J4 and J6, in which a lot of various detailed terms
related to robots appear. This makes it possible to view the entire surgical robotics
technology in more detail. The results are shown in Table 8.2.
What is understood from Table 8.2 is as follows.
First, the number of occurrences of terms relating to imaging techniques is
overwhelmingly large. There are 132 cases of “image” contained in J4 in 11 years,
88 cases of other compound terms including “image,” and similarly in J6. This
“image” may include many technologies, such as MRI, which is not directly related
to the surgical robot; however, even taking this into consideration, the fact that this
number is large is undeniable. It is understood that image processing technology is
the most important and it is inferred that the signiﬁcance of rendering objects as
three-dimensional
graphics
in
particular
is
great.
In
J4,
the
number
of
“three-dimensional visualizations” remains one, whereas in J6 “11” in “3-D” and
“3-D model.” Although the meaning of this number must be evaluated carefully,
there is no doubt that one of the major trends in technological progress of surgical
robots is image processing technologies.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
209

Table 8.2 Number of Occurrences of Surgical Robot Words (J4, J6)
J6
Number of
occurrence
J4
Number of
occurrence
invasive surgery
22
invasive surgery
101
minimization
5
minimization
3
shift minimization objective
function
2
miniaturization
6
speed performance
5
conﬂict minimization
1
ﬂexibility
4
miniature robotics
6
decision making
12
automation
6
automation
7
automatic technology
13
automatic segmentation
21
decision-making process
2
automatic method
7
feedback
46
automatic detection
7
slave minipulator
5
automatic image
23
freedom
26
freedom
13
free motion
2
degrees of freedom
9
degrees of freedom
10
computational complexity
11
ﬂexibility
3
navigation
60
ﬂexible endoscope
5
neuronavigation
1
feedback system
4
arm
25
feedforward
1
arm system
11
feedforward scheme
1
manipulation
18
complexity
10
microgripping manipulator
system
13
navigation
86
joint
7
neuronavigation
4
multiple joint
10
navigation system
45
roll
0
neuronavigation sysrem
3
sensor
24
intraoperative navigation
3
position sensor
3
arm
42
tracking sensor
3
robot arm
12
image
274
articulating arm
1
video
16
manipulator
51
picture
4
telemanipulator
7
video Image
10
micromanipulation
0
endoscopic video
3
micromanipulation
application
3
image processing
56
telemanipulator system
6
endoscopic Image
7
joint
10
(continued)
210
F. Komoda et al.

Table 8.2 (continued)
J6
Number of
occurrence
J4
Number of
occurrence
other compound words
including “image”
253
joint mechanism
16
3-D
7
articulating joint
1
3-D model
4
distal rolling
1
microgripping
1
speed
16
gripper
1
velocity
8
force feedback
4
speed control
9
touch
7
velocity pattern
5
gripping force
1
sensor
41
slippery environment
1
biosensor
3
tactile sensor
1
multisensor
1
force sensor
2
neurosensor
1
biosensor
2
other sensor
15
video
12
image
132
image guidance
10
MRI, CT imaging, X-ray
imaging
23
oreoperative imaging
mordalities
3
intraoperative ultrasound
imaging
1
real time image
1
force impulse imaging
technique
1
other compound words
including “image”
88
3-D
5
three-dimensional model
2
three-dimensional
visualization
3
other three-dimensional
9
visual feedback
10
gripper
3
slippage
1
gripping end
1
touch
6
touch signal
2
touch feedback
1
(continued)
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
211

Second, it is noticeable that the cases of “navigation,” “navigation system,”
“arm,” and “manipulator” is large compared with image-related technologies. This
is an inevitable result as it is an essential function of the surgical robot for its arm to
be controlled optimally.
In addition, navigation technology is aimed at ﬂexible operation with multi-joint
arm and control software. The relatively high frequency of “degree(s) of freedom,”
“joint,” and “feedback” in Table 8.3 can be interpreted to correlate with this fact.3
Third, in order to make use of image processing and navigation control tech-
nology with high importance as described above, various sensors for acquiring a lot
of information, including those related to image, position, speed, and the like are
indispensable. Various sensors are one of the most important core technologies of
surgical robots.
Fourth, “automation” and “automatic technology,” which are terms that embody
the automation technology related to research on surgical robots, are also frequent
in appearance.
Fifth, a technique to grip organs ﬁrmly without damaging them is essential.
However, the terms “gripper” and “gripping end” contained in J4 are only 3 and 1,
respectively. “Touch,” “touch signal,” and “touch feedback” are 6 cases, 2 cases,
and 1 case, respectively. The occurrence of “slippage,” which is related to sliding
when grasping organs, is only one. However, as for sensors, “force sensor” and
“tactile sensor” are 12 cases in total. It is understood that the tactile sensing is one
of the most important research ﬁelds studied intensively, although not as much as
image processing and navigation technology. In particular, “force feedback”
appears more frequently, accounting for 12 cases. It can be found that tactile
information is beginning to be used for feedback control of intelligent surgical
robots. Intelligent techniques for controlling such mechanical forces are essential
Table 8.2 (continued)
J6
Number of
occurrence
J4
Number of
occurrence
tactile feedback
4
force feedback
12
force sensor
11
tactile sensor
4
haptic feedback
10
Note Each term contains related analogous words. For example, “navigation” includes “navigator”,
“neuron navigator”, etc., and “manipulation” includes “micromanipulation” and the like.
J4 = 2004–2014, J6 = 2009–2014.
Source JDream3
3For the importance of a highly ﬂexible manipulator, see Kobayashi et al. (2005).
212
F. Komoda et al.

Table 8.3 Number of occurrences of neurosurgical robot words (J1)
Total
Endoscope
Robot
Year
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
noninvasive
method
30
40
35
40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
noninvasively
55
50
80
60
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
minimal
invasiveness
20
20
25
20
10
3
0
2
0
0
0
0
neurovascular
326
771
786
733
40
22
57
51
0
0
0
12
ﬂexible endoscope
58
45
45
21
21
23
24
10
0
0
0
0
master slave
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
intelligence
143
130
209
73
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
intelligent
15
15
15
80
0
0
0
4
5
10
0
21
microsurgery
260
428
590
285
44
37
85
29
0
0
0
5
miniaturization
5
25
15
23
5
0
5
0
0
0
0
3
navigation
499
376
671
2195
18
64
31
76
0
0
11
116
neuronavigation
241
314
901
1029
30
34
86
62
0
0
38
16
robot arm
0
5
0
38
0
0
0
11
0
0
0
16
manipulation
1035
476
1001
730
50
10
58
36
0
4
0
9
joint
1064
2131
1064
1100
42
11
4
3
0
4
0
21
speed
203
202
357
285
11
0
9
10
0
0
0
19
velocity
1072
378
466
147
2
0
2
0
0
0
4
6
ﬂexibility
141
366
198
175
10
0
9
0
0
0
3
1
complexity
279
390
333
716
15
4
0
10
0
4
0
8
feedback
223
226
451
410
8
3
2
7
0
10
0
3
(continued)
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
213

Table 8.3 (continued)
Total
Endoscope
Robot
Year
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
tactile feedback
5
35
30
25
5
5
11
0
0
0
0
5
feedforward
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
automation
10
10
15
16
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
15
adhesion
321
320
276
342
5
0
4
1
0
0
0
0
anastomosis
427
338
719
153
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
5
microanastomosis
0
10
31
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ﬁxation
2430
2031
1622
2804
18
26
28
29
0
7
9
28
precise location
51
30
33
40
10
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
precise
localization
20
49
90
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
precise
mechanism
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
removal
4614
3646
4408
3407
259
152
300
143
0
0
0
21
microsurgical
removal
55
30
55
55
6
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
endoscopic
removal
89
15
31
5
33
4
6
4
0
0
0
0
clipping
326
40
388
390
10
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
precision
50
110
70
103
0
0
1
0
0
5
5
9
coil placement
25
193
50
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
accuracy
956
888
1419
2782
33
30
20
12
15
22
18
376
accurate
localization
20
50
50
20
0
5
0
5
0
0
0
0
(continued)
214
F. Komoda et al.

Table 8.3 (continued)
Total
Endoscope
Robot
Year
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
accurate
placement
29
25
41
88
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
roll
91
78
60
60
91
78
60
60
0
0
0
0
high-speed drill
239
122
176
169
15
3
8
25
0
0
0
0
tactile
35
70
95
55
0
0
7
10
0
0
0
2
touch
95
184
167
147
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
grasp
35
65
15
40
5
3
5
0
0
0
0
0
grasper
35
0
20
21
25
0
10
8
0
0
0
0
grasping force
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
grip
45
20
33
61
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
grip strength
96
15
15
5
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
slippage
319
87
40
55
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
tremor
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
2
sensor
116
66
83
66
0
0
5
15
0
0
2
2
force sensor
0
10
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
image
4081
2521
3786
4300
186
117
104
142
12
19
18
120
video
859
665
841
929
164
121
46
68
0
0
0
18
3-D
513
0
0
0
57
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
three dimensional
609
343
149
56
44
29
0
3
5
0
0
0
image-guidance
85
30
34
41
0
0
0
4
0
0
5
0
decision making
150
237
440
771
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
force feedback
5
24
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(continued)
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
215

Table 8.3 (continued)
Total
Endoscope
Robot
Year
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
1996–
2012
2003–
2007
2008–
2012
2013–
2017
tactile feedback
5
35
30
25
5
5
11
0
0
0
0
5
visual feedback
0
0
25
15
0
0
5
0
0
0
5
0
haptic feedback
0
0
5
31
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
cost
815
416
1372
3212
27
12
12
9
0
2
0
39
low cost
10
25
55
65
5
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
cost effectiveness
63
25
73
62
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Source Neurosurgical Focus
216
F. Komoda et al.

for the introduction of robots into surgical operation and further promotion of this
technique is considered to be necessary.4
Sixth, surgical robotics aims for higher intelligence robots of the master–slave
type as symbolized in the term “feedback” appearing as many as 46 times in J4. In
J6, “feedback” is rare, but “decision-making” is common as well as terms such as
“automation,” “automatic method,” and “automatic detection,” which represent
automation.
It has also been pointed out that the intelligence of surgical robots should not be
used as a robot alone, but it should be targeted to ensure that the entire operating
room is intelligent as a system, including sterilization and the placement of
equipment (Iseki et al. 2003). However, there seem to be few occurrences of terms
showing such signs.
Seventh, the number of occurrences of terms related to speed such as “speed,”
“velocity,” and “speed control” are not small. This can be interpreted as reﬂecting
the fact that it is necessary to precisely perform grasping, resectioning, peeling,
anastomosis, and the like by controlling the motion speed of the manipulator and
the arm.
8.4.5
Time Series Data Analysis Based on a Sketch
of a Neurosurgical Robot
Next, this section focuses on neurosurgery rather than surgery in general and
clariﬁes the robotic techniques and functions required in neurosurgery in particular
compared with surgery.
In general, the following functions and techniques are considered inherent in
neurosurgical procedures.
First, neurosurgical surgery requires techniques for exfoliating, resecting, and
anastomosing ﬁnely, accurately and precisely. The brain is the most complex organ,
with innumerable neurons; thus, a precise control technology is needed. The
miniaturization of equipment is also required. At the same time, the robot must be
supple and tough against external forces.
Second, minimally invasive techniques are required in brain neurosurgery more
than other organs. One of the functions required for neurosurgery is that the surgical
tools are placed in deep positions in the brain. It is necessary to reach the surgical
target position without damaging the normal tissue. For that reason, the space
available to reach the target is narrowed, thus, extremely precise procedures are
required. The damaging to tissue greatly affects the prognostic quality of life of the
4The importance of tactile techniques for promoting minimally invasive procedures is mentioned
in Onishi (2009), Kobayashi et al. (2015).
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
217

patient. For example, it is necessary to develop a system in which the endoscope
itself is soft, but with a tip that is sufﬁciently rigid (Tanaka et al., home page). It is
also necessary to increase the range of motion. For that purpose, improvement in
the degrees of freedom of arm rotation, multi-articulation, etc. are required.
Third, for precise surgery, a system to prevent the operator’s hand trembling is
needed. This is achieved, for example, by a incorporating a support for the oper-
ator’s arms (Goto 2014).
Fourth, devices used in neurosurgical procedures often require maintenance for
each operation. Therefore, a mechanism to facilitate maintenance is necessary.
8.4.6
Research Topics Found from Neurosurgery Theses
Table 8.3 shows the number of occurrences of terms that represent treatment
methods for disease in the four articles in J1. These terms are extracted based on a
sketch of functions and elemental technologies required for neurosurgery as
described in the previous section.
About 10 pages of theses published in J1 are mined in full text. Therefore, the
“number of occurrences” shown in Table 8.3 is not the “number of theses” but
rather the total number of times a term appears. The more occurrences of a term in a
single thesis the greater the importance of the term; therefore, “number of occur-
rences” can be considered to be a better indicator than “number of theses.”
However, the following precautions must be taken. Table 8.3 shows not only the
total appearance cases of a certain term but also the co-occurrence relationship
between a certain term and “endoscopy” or “robot” in a TB. The reason for using
TB to analyze the co-occurrence relation is as follows. The analysis of one thesis as
a mining unit results in extracting many co-occurrence relationships between a term
and other terms unrelated to the former, which are only noise for the mining
purpose. On the other hand, if co-occurrence relations are discovered on a
sentence-by-sentence basis, then a lot of co-occurrence relations between a term
and other terms with important semantic associations are lost. About ﬁve sentences
are considered to be the most appropriate mining unit to discover co-occurrence
relationships. However, as with this result, the following attention is necessary.
That is, the appearance frequency of one term is increased ﬁve times compared with
the original text data. In addition, the closer the distance in the texts between two
co-occurring terms the more the co-occurrence frequency of terms and terms is
increased in comparison with the original text data.
First, we examine the terms related to surgery in general.
Surgical robots continue to evolve from the master–slave type and are oriented
toward system intelligence; however, as seen in Table 8.3, there were no cases of
“master–slave.” “Intelligence” occurs more than 500 times among all theses over
the entire period. However, when these are limited to articles related to surgical
robots, only 10–20 cases of “intelligence” or “intelligent” appear.
218
F. Komoda et al.

Focusing on feedback techniques that embody the speciﬁc content of intelli-
gence, the number of occurrences of “feedback” is very high and has further
increased since 2008; however, the number of co-occurrences with “robot” has not
increased. In addition, “decision-making” also has a large number of occurrences
but few co-occurrences with “robot.” This fact may indicate that the intelligence of
surgical robots has not progressed smoothly. In particular, “feedforward” only
appeared in 15 cases during 1996–2002 and has not appeared since then. Acquiring
higher intelligence capability, such as feedforward, does not seem to be straight-
forward. Therefore, for example, it may be correct that navigating actions should
not be hastily targeted for full automation; instead, a step-by-step approach to
developing intelligent automation should be taken (Masamune et al. 1999).
Noninvasive or minimally invasive surgery is ideal. However, an increasing
trend for these terms is not found; i.e., the numbers of occurrences of “noninvasive
method” are 30, 40, 35, and 40, respectively, during the period under study. To
determine whether endoscopes and robots contribute to noninvasive surgery, we
examine the relationship of “noninvasive method,” “noninvasively,” and “minimal
invasive” to “endoscope” and “robot” and ﬁnd that the number of co-occurrences is
not large. Especially the former’s relationship with “robot” can be seen. There is no
indication that surgical robots are being developed for noninvasive procedures.
Regarding the basic procedures of surgery such as removal, exfoliation, ﬁxation,
dissection, anastomosis, and clipping, “removal” is the most frequent in 16,075
cases during the years under review, “ﬁxation” appears in 8,887 cases, and
“anastomosis” in 1,637 cases. There are 1,259 occurrences of “adhesions,” similar
to “exfoliation,” and 1,144 occurrences of “clipping.” In addition, the terms
“grasp,” “tactile,” and “touch,” which embody the meanings of the procedure of
touching and grasping the target organs, are about 150–550 cases, which is not
large compared with other terms, but it is undeniable that these are important
research themes. As can be understood that its number of cases is large and its
number of co-occurrences with “robot” increased from 0 before 2012 to 21 in
2013–2017, “removal” among these procedures is the most relevant to endoscopes
and robots. It turns out that the robotization of neurosurgery is progressing in a
direction that emphasizes the resection function.
“Anastomosis” has ﬁve co-occurrence relationships with “endoscope” in 2008 to
2012 and ﬁve co-occurrence relationships with “robot” in 2013–2017. From this
fact, it is suggested that anastomosis has begun to be a major movement in
endoscopic and robotic surgery. That surgical robots, in general, have been used for
anastomosis as seen in the previous section, suggest it to be valid in neurosurgery as
well. For example, the surgical robot MM1 aims to anastomose the deepest
microvessels in the brain, which is a technically difﬁcult surgery.5
No co-occurrence is shown between “ﬁxation” and “robot” or “endoscope,” and
no co-occurrence is shown between “clipping” and “robot” or “endoscope” also
except for “1996 to 2012.”
5http://plaza.umin.ac.jp/*ikourenk/department/project_06/index.html.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
219

In addition, it is essential for surgeons to grasp and securely ﬁx the target
position (e.g., organ) so that it does not slip. From the fact that the co-occurrence
relationship between “grasp” and “endoscope” is shown, and that the co-occurrence
relationship between “tactile” or “touch” and “endoscope” or “robot” appears since
2008, it can be concluded that tactile sense is an important research theme for the
introduction of endoscopes and robots.
Furthermore, comparing “clipping” with “coil placement,” the latter has
decreased signiﬁcantly while the former is increasing, indicating that clipping is
more important than coil embolization for the treatment of cerebral arteries.
Next, in surgery, it is required for surgeons to perform complicated tasks ﬂexibly
and quickly; therefore, “ﬂexibility,” “speed,” “velocity,” and “complexity,” terms
related to these tasks, are often found. This may mean that the importance of
dealing with complexity is increasing more than speed for surgery.
However, paying attention to the co-occurrence relationship between these terms
and “robot,” the co-occurrence between “speed” or “velocity” and “robot” is
stronger than “complexity” or “ﬂexibility” and “robot” since 2008. In spite that
ﬂexibility is an important function for a surgical robot, it may be understood that a
key theme of a surgical robotics development is speed improvement. This may
indicate that it is not easy for surgical robots to achieve the ﬂexible and complex
movements required for surgery. Indeed, although the NeuroMate robot, with a
multi-articulated arm to enable six degrees of freedom and used for brain stereo-
tactic surgery, is capable of performing highly ﬂexible movements (Kajita et al.
2013). This research seems not to be sufﬁcient yet.
In addition, there were no cases of co-occurrence between “microanastomosis”
and “endoscopes” or “robot,” indicating that mechanization has not contributed to
precise anastomosis.
Next, we examine “accuracy,” “precise location,” etc. as terms that embody the
accuracy of mechanical motion, the most important function for surgery.
Signiﬁcantly, “accuracy” is extremely large, with 6,045 cases in total. Moreover, as
can be seen from the fact that the growth rate has increased by nearly three times
from period 1 to period 4, it is understood that its importance is increasingly being
emphasized. The number of occurrences of “precision,” “accurate localization,” and
“accurate placement” is also not small, and the numbers of “precise location” and
“precise localization” also are the same. In particular, the number of “precise
localization” occurrences was markedly increased by about four times. Accuracy is
the most important requirement for surgery, especially neurosurgery.
Furthermore, when limiting the search to co-occurrences with endoscopes or
robots, “accuracy” is most strongly related to “endoscope” and “robot.” In partic-
ular, in 2013–2017 “robot” co-occurred extremely strongly with “accuracy” (376
cases) and “robot” co-occurred in nine cases with “accurate placement.” It turns out
that accuracy is one of the most important research themes of surgical robotics. In
contrast, the relationship between “precise location” or “precise localization” and
“robot” is not strong. This meaning will be described later.
Interestingly, the occurrence of “tactile feedback” is relatively large (95 in total)
and “force feedback” appeared considerably in 2003–2007. In addition, the
220
F. Komoda et al.

co-occurrence of “tactile feedback” and “robot” has become visible since 2013 (5
cases). These data may suggest that work to skillfully touch and grasp the target
organs is important, and so is the effectiveness of introducing feedback control
system for this purpose.
One of the most important core technologies for surgical robots is navigation.
The number of occurrences of “navigation,” “neuronavigation,” “robot arm,” and
“manipulation” as terms related to navigation, as well as the number of
co-occurrences between these terms and “endoscope” or “robot,” has increased
from 1996 to 2005.
Another interesting fact is the remarkable increase in occurrences of “cost,”
showing a big change from 815 cases to 416 cases, 1372 cases, and 3212 cases,
respectively, over a four-period period. Similarly, occurrences of “low cost”
increased from 10 to 25, 55, 65 cases, and that of “cost effectiveness” increased
from 53 to 25, 73, and 62 cases in the same period. The co-occurrence of “cost” and
“robot” remarkably increased to 39 cases in the 4th period, although it was nil in the
third period. This may reﬂect a tendency for the introduction of surgical robots to
lead to high-cost medical care or it could reﬂect conﬂicting demands for reduced
medical costs common to developed countries. This can be interpreted as reﬂecting
the reality of increasing medical costs in order to enhance the functioning of sur-
gical robots and to achieve low invasiveness and high accuracy.6
The above analyses show that the technological development of surgical and
neurosurgical robots has focused on advances in image-related technologies, and
that tactile sensation, accuracy, and ﬂexible processing of complex movements also
are important issues. However, it was also proven that this development and
popularization is not advancing smoothly enough yet. Therefore, it is required to
know more about the techniques needed to facilitate the development and diffusion
of surgical robots. To do this, the pinpoint focus type text mining technique, in
which a narrow-range of technology, such as imaging and tactile sensing are
extracted and focused on in detail instead of describing the overall picture of the
surgical robot, is required. This technique is considered below.
8.5
Pinpoint Focus Type Text Mining Method
8.5.1
Discovery of Key Words Based on Co-occurrence
Relationship
One of the difﬁculties in narrowing down to a speciﬁc topic from all the text data is
that the texts are enormous and contain mostly “noise” that is unrelated to the topic
6It has been reported that the cost of endoscopic forceps sets is 10 times higher than that of
conventional forceps sets and thatthe cost of surgical robots is 30 times higher than that of
conventional forceps sets (Inaki 2008).
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
221

to be analyzed. For this reason, the terms that are essential for discovering the
meaning of the topic are buried in an enormous amount of noise, making it difﬁcult
to extract speciﬁc topics and analyze them using pinpoint methods.
In many cases, gaining insight into the meaning of a term is made possible by
terms with a low frequency of occurrence rather than words a high frequency of
occurrence. This is because terms with a low frequency of appearance may express
a prediction of the future and embody innovative, promising, and emerging tech-
nologies. Discovering these terms makes it possible to know future proﬁtable
business for the company and to obtain useful technological ideas necessary for
developing new products. Rather, it is not unusual that valuable technical infor-
mation that is only known to a few people due to its novelty also appears at a low
frequency in texts. Thus, even a single occurrence of a term may represent a very
important technique to do so and so it is imperative to search for important terms
with a low frequency.
One approach to overcoming the difﬁculty of ﬁnding these key terms with low
frequencies of occurrence is using association rule analysis. This paper uses the
“correlation value” in the IBM Watson Explorer, in which association rule analysis
has been introduced. In this tool, the correlation value is deﬁned as (A \ B/A)/(B/
D), where A and B are two document sets including the terms a and b, respectively,
and D is the whole document set. Furthermore, when the number of cases is small,
the correlation value tends to be higher than the actual condition; thus, the corre-
lation value of words with few cases may be corrected to be lower. Therefore, by
paying attention to terms with a large correlation value, it becomes possible to ﬁnd
a key term b that is strongly related to the word a despite word b being incon-
spicuous due to a small number of occurrences.
As an example of ﬁnding important terms with a small number of occurrences
based on the correlation value, the author extracts terms that are strongly co-related
to “robot” or “endoscope” in J5. The results are shown in Table 8.4.
According to Table 8.4, the terms having a large correlation value since 2008
and having a value larger than the correlation value before 2007 are “CyberKnife
Robotic Radiosurgery system,” “da Vinci,” “complete elimination,” and the like. In
addition, image-related terms, such as “visual acuity,” “visual navigation,” “pre-
operational imaging,” and “video feedback,” which are not found in the top rank
before 2007, ﬁrst appeared in the top rank since 2008, suggesting that imaging
technology has become an important research issue. In addition, although its
number of occurrences is only one, the occurrence of “oriﬁce procedures” since
2008 may be a sign of increasing research focusing on minimally invasive endo-
scopy and robotics. This may show that in order to promote minimally invasive
surgery, advanced control systems, where the arm is manipulated using both hands,
and feedback control technology enabling complicated manipulation are imple-
mented, etc. in addition to the extension of the existing technology of laparoscopic
technology, have become important since around 2010.
Furthermore, although not shown in Table 8.4, there are 23 types of
navigation-related technologies before 2007, including “navigation system,” “hy-
brid navigation,” and “neuronavigation” and their correlation was 0.29 at
222
F. Komoda et al.

maximum. On the other hand, since 2008, the number of term types has decreased
to 14 and their correlation values have also decreased to 0.03 at the maximum. This
may reﬂect the fact that neuro-techniques are not being adopted smoothly in arm
navigation techniques as one of core technologies for surgical robots.
Table 8.4 Words co-occurring with “robot” or “endoscope” (J5)
Before 2007
After 2008
Word
Number
Correlation
value
Word
Number
Correlation
value
robot system
6
3.95
CyberKnife Robotic
Radiosurgery system
2
2.77
robotic system
7
2.64
surgical robotic
2
2.77
virtual
endoscopy
2
2.07
visual acuity
2
2.77
neuroendoscopic
procedure
2
2.07
bimanual robot
2
2.77
endoscope tip
2
2.07
surgical robotics
2
2.77
endonasal sinus
surgery
2
2.07
surgical robot
3
2.55
Endonasal sinus
surgery
2
2.07
da Vinci
2
1.78
endoscopic lens
2
2.07
invasive surgery
4
1.49
position
measurement
system
2
2.07
robotic assistance
2
1.31
robotic device
3
1.36
video Feedback
1
1.15
endoscopic
procedure
2
1.33
existing laparoscopy
1
1.15
endoscopic
image
2
1.33
oriﬁce procedure
1
1.15
needle tip
3
1.07
complete elimination
1
1.15
real time
7
1.16
peritoneal cavity
1
1.15
metal ball target
1
1.15
navigational software
1
1.15
visual navigation
1
1.15
joint movement
1
1.15
photometric calibration
method
1
1.15
preoperative imaging
1
1.15
laparoscopic procedure
2
1.04
Source JDream3
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
223

8.5.2
New Prediction of Surgical Robot Technology Viewed
from Less Frequent Terms
The same points as in the previous section will be analyzed in this section using J4.
Although the results cannot be listed in tabular form, “robot” correlates well with
“operational time” (correlation value 1.27) and “blood loss” (1.21). However, the
two terms are often used (50 and 36 cases, respectively), indicating that they are
important skills even if not viewing the correlation value.
Despite the lack of signiﬁcance due to the small number of events, the following
are noteworthy terms with high correlation values.
First, although the occurrence frequency of “capsule endoscope” and “wireless
power” are only 4 and 3, respectively, the correlation values between these two
terms and “endoscope” are 4.60 and 3.22, and in the top 2nd and 3rd places,
respectively,. This can be interpreted as a precursor both to the widespread use of
capsule-type endoscopes and the increased importance of a wireless power supply
technology capable of doing so. It should be interpreted that these technologies be
considered for long-term availability, even if not applicable in the short-term to
surgical robotic technology development.
Second, in terms of “anastomosis,” there were 14 cases of co-occurrence with
“robot” (correlation value 0.80) while there was only one case (0.01) of
co-occurrence with “endoscope.” It is presumed that the evolution from the
endoscope to the robot has been effective for anastomosis. The co-occurrence
between “adhesion” and “robot” was 4 cases (0.37), suggesting that the surgical
robot is about to be mainly used for anastomoses rather than for the dissection of
adhesions.
8.6
Neurosurgery Robot
8.6.1
Evolution of the Neurosurgery Robot and Its Future:
The Capsule Endoscope
In the preceding paragraph, it was described that using association rule analysis
raises the likelihood of extracting meaningful terms for a speciﬁc topic. However,
as in the previous section, based on only the height of the correlation value between
“robot” and “endoscope,” it is impossible to ﬁnd sufﬁciently important key terms.
For example, “SpineAssist miniature robotic device,” “optimal miniaturization,”
“effective miniaturization,” “functional miniature,” and “device miniaturization” are
important technologies that will make it possible to miniaturize surgical robots.
However, because the correlation value (0.02 or less) as well as the number of cases
is small, it is hard to ﬁnd. To discover such key terms, it is necessary to continue
searching for other important terms having a low appearance frequency, starting
from already discovered important terms.
224
F. Komoda et al.

Several examples will be described below. For that purpose, the three important
surgical robot technologies discussed in the previous paragraph will be described in
detail: the capsule endoscope, accuracy, and tactile sensing.
First, the correlation values between “capsule endoscope” or “wireless power”
and “endoscope” are large. Thus, mining other terms co-occurring with these two
words reveals that “wireless power” is correlated strongly with “locomotion”
(5.72). Thus, when searching for terms co-occurring with “locomotion,” it can be
found that it co-occurs with both endoscope-related technologies, such as “capsule
endoscope” and “endoscope,” and robot-related technologies such as “robotic
endoscope,” “mobile robot,” “wireless robotics,” “robot,” etc. Further, searching for
terms that coincide with “robotic endoscopes” or “wireless robotics”, “capsule
performance” and “surgery” can be found. This is illustrated in Fig. 8.6. It can be
understood that capsule endoscope technology and robot technology are linked
together by “locomotion,” which is located in the hub. Indeed, incorporating a
compact actuator is expected to enable the capsule endoscope to self-propel in the
body and allow various tasks. Even though capsule endoscopy is unlikely to be
applied as a surgical robot in the near future, it will become available in the
relatively far future (Moglia et al. 2007) and, therefore, may be interpreted as an
important current research theme.
As is widely known, many excellent algorithms for natural language processing
have already been developed and research results have been obtained as a way of
networking multiple nodes (Mima 2012; Kushima et al. 2017). In this article,
however, the author adopts the technique of stretching links of nodes and creating a
Fig. 8.6 Network of “capsule endoscope”. Note Numbers are frequency of occurrence. Numbers
in parentheses are correlation values.
Source Neurosurgical Focus
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
225

network of terms by appropriately ﬁltering individual terms of interest by using
analysts’ knowledge (part of background knowledge) rather than simply using the
algorithm-dependent approach. The reason is that by making both nodes and links
only based on the algorithm, a lot of meaningless terms (noise) are extracted,
important key terms are eliminated, and it is often difﬁcult to express the correct
meaning. In other words, to focus on the terms of greatest importance with less
frequent occurrence, it is difﬁcult to rely solely on computer algorithms.
8.6.2
Evolution of the Neurosurgery Robot and Its Future:
Accuracy and Precision
One of functions especially required in neurosurgery robots is accurate movement.
As stated in the previous section, two different meanings are contained in the phrase
“accurate movement”: accuracy, which means the closeness between the value
measured by the sensor and the true value, and precision, which means the variation
in robot movement when the same operation is repeated. Surgical robots should aim
to improve the precision of repetitive movements based on improved sensingac-
curacy. For example, it is a prerequisite in surgery that the precision of the
repetitive operations of the master–slave system is high; for this reason, further
improvement on the sensing accuracy is required. As seen in Table 8.3, the less
frequent the occurrence of terms, e.g., “precision” compared with “accuracy” may
indicate the current evolutionary direction of master–slave surgical robots.
Figure 8.6 shows the network of terms originating from “accuracy” and “pre-
cision,” clarifying the research trend of surgical robotics. There are 56 theses that
contain both “accuracy” and “precision.” When searching for terms with large
correlation values with these 56 cases, “feedback” is discovered in 13 cases. This
may indicate that the feedback mechanism plays an important role in achieving both
sensing accuracy and operation precision. Therefore, when searching for terms with
large correlation values for these 13 theses including all three terms (“accuracy,”
“precision,” and “feedback”), the most prominent terms are “fuzzy logic” and
“robotics.” It can be inferred that surgical robotics research is promoted with an
emphasis on realizing accuracy and precision by introducing the new advanced
algorithm. Of interest is that all 13 papers including all three terms also contain a
large number of terms embodying real-time characteristics such as “real-time
imaging,,” “real-time,” “real-time radiography,” and “real-time target.” From this, it
can be inferred that speeding up the information processing is essential for realizing
both accuracy and precision.
Furthermore, “accuracy” and “precision” co-occur directly or indirectly with
“tactile feedback,” and both “real-time imaging” and “image quality” co-occur with
“force feedback.” This fact may indicate that cooperation between image processing
technology and tactile processing technology is indispensable for achieving sensing
accuracy and operation precision. Moreover, the fact that “tactile feedback” and
226
F. Komoda et al.

“visual feedback” co-occurred with “parallel” or “parallel structure” may imply the
importance of parallel processing technology.
While improving real-time performance may be achieved in a variety of direc-
tions, such as improved information processing/communication speed and the
evolution of sensor technology, the evolution of algorithms seems to be one of the
most important innovations.
8.6.3
Evolution of the Neurosurgery Robot and Its Future:
Tactile Sensing and Imaging
As described above, it is necessary for a surgical robot to grip and ﬁx various
organs without injuring them; thus, tactile sensing technology is expected to play an
extremely important role for surgical robots. However, tactile technology is still in
an immature phase and, thus, relies heavily on image processing technology.
Therefore, in this section, the relationship between tactile-related technology and
image processing-related technology will be clariﬁed.
Figure 8.8 shows how image and tactile technologies are related to the evolution
of surgical robots. Searching for image/visual- and tactile-related technologies
co-occurring directly or indirectly with “endoscope” or “robot,” as shown in
Table 8.4, reveals an overwhelmingly large number of occurrences of image-related
technology and many types of image-related terms. However, as shown by the fact
that “tactile feedback” co-occurs with many types of terms related to many images,
it is not sufﬁcient to manipulate the surgical robot with image data alone: it is also
necessary to combine tactile data with image data. In particular, the co-occurrence
relationship between “tactile feedback” and “removal” or “anastomosis” suggests
that research aimed at linking image information with tactile information is being
conducted more for resection than for anastomosis. It can be interpreted further that
this coincides with the co-occurrence of “force feedback” and “view-only software”
(one case). This implies that it is difﬁcult to manipulate only with image processing
data and that image data has to be used in combination with pressure data to control
a surgical robot.
To grip and ﬁx various organs without hurting them, it is essential to prevent
hand trembling by the surgeon operating the surgical robot as much as possible.
However, unlike tactile sense, it was difﬁcult to extract terms for hands movement.
The reason for this is that the surgeon’s hand movement is expressed by terms such
as “tremor,” “tremble,” “handshaking,” “movement,” etc., most of which are used
for tremors of the body due to the disease in the thesis; thus, it is not possible to be
distinguish their meaning. Therefore, these terms are not included in Fig. 8.8.
Interestingly, “force feedback” co-occurred with “rigid body” (correlation value
17.38) and “tactile feedback” co-occurred with “rigid instrument” (0.38). This
indicates that rigid materials for robot arms are required to increase accuracy and
precision because the surgeon’s hand tremble is ampliﬁed by the arm of the device.
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
227

Tactile-related terms co-occur with “angle,” “angle sensing,” “screw,” and
“screw insertion.” This may indicate that robots that prevent the surgeon’s hand
tremble movements to control correctly the insertion angle are required. For that
reason, a mechanism to feedback tactile information for controlling the drill angle is
an extremely important research issue (Masamune et al. 2003). This can be seen in
the fact that the terms “angle” and “screw” are included in Fig. 8.8.
Furthermore, “tactile feedback” is strongly correlated with “learning curve”
(correlation value 2.81). It cannot be understood from Fig. 8.5 whether this implies
the necessity for feedback mechanisms or the necessity for surgeons to acquire
endoscope and robot operation skills. Or it may have both meanings.
8.7
Sophistication of Knowledge by Linking TBs
8.7.1
Linking TBs Based on Key Terms
As seen in the previous section, we can obtain deeply detailed knowledge in nar-
rowly focused ﬁelds by discovering important terms with less frequent key terms
and discovering the network of these terms using association rule analysis. In other
words, it is possible to approach pinpoint focus type text mining from a bird’-
s-eye-view type by doing so. However, in order for companies to know the prof-
itability of their business in future and to select a business among a lot of candidates
vying for limited management resources, it is necessary to acquire more deeply
detailed knowledge about what technology is required for a new project and how to
overcome technical bottlenecks. For that purpose, it is essential to understand
meaning based on linking TBs by similarity and relevance of context rather than
simply being bound by term co-occurrence relationships.
Figures 8.6, 8.7, 8.8 show the relationships among terms discovered by asso-
ciation rule analysis. The important meanings are understood as follows. For
example, the high correlation between “tactile feedback” and “needle tip” or “ideal
position” shown in Fig. 8.6 suggests that the technique of processing tactile
information with the feedback system plays an important role in guiding and
securing the needle tip in the correct position. However, it is not known whether
this is the correct interpretation; even if it is true, it is impossible to obtain a detailed
knowledge about tactile feedback techniques from Fig. 8.6. In order to know this, it
is necessary to discover relevant TBs and link them together to understand their
meaning.
Therefore, this section describes a method for exploring and extracting TBs
containing required knowledge and linking the TBs together accurately. However,
it is not easy to acquire this method because given the current level of natural
language processing it is impossible to understand the meaning and context of
sentences correctly. Until natural language processing technology can understand
the context correctly in the future, there is no choice but to satisfy with using
228
F. Komoda et al.

Fig. 8.7 Network of “accuracy” and “precise”. Note Numbers are frequency of occurrence.
Numbers in parentheses are correlation values.
Source Neurosurgical Focus
Fig. 8.8 Network of “tactile” and “image”. Note Numbers are frequency of occurrence. Numbers
in parentheses are correlation values.
Source Neurosurgical Focus
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
229

insufﬁcient techniques as elaborately as possible and approaching the truth little by
little. For this purpose, this section illustrates how TB can be linked using two
criteria: (1) the commonality of terms and (2) the similarity in the context of TBs.
In this section, the procedure of linking TBs on the basis of the commonality of
the terms contained in TBs will be considered. Taking an example of the strong
co-occurrence between “tactile feedback” and terms related to image information,
such as “ﬂuoroscopic image,” which are found in Fig. 8.8.
It is presumed that TBs that contain both terms related to tactile sensing and to
images are more likely to have a narrative of knowledge about the connection
between touch and image. Therefore, TBs containing “tactile feedback” and “im-
age” are extracted. As a result, 14 TBs are extracted. Among them are the following
TBs (Table 8.5).
Table 8.5 TBs including both “tactile feedback” and “image”
<Text Block 109743> “3,9 Evaluation requires imaging. Intraoperative imaging during the
revision surgery is important for accurate localization of instrumentation and its relationship
to vital neurovascular structures, the achievement of adequate decompression, and
maintaining structural integrity within the spinal column. Currently, many centers routinely
use the C-arm (ﬂuoroscopy); however, ﬂuoroscopy is limited in resolution and depth of ﬁeld.
Improved CT-IGS navigational functions of systems like the O-arm provide 2D and 3D
resolution of structures in real time to ensure proper instrument placement and alignment.
11 Neuronavigation reduces the risk that tactile feedback cues from previously violated or
weakened bone or dense scarring will mislead the surgeon, and also provides the option of
acquiring an intraoperative postinstrumentation CT image to conﬁrm correct placement of
screws.”
<Text Block 109,746> “… Our retrospective study found that CT-IGS provided safe screw
placement in both revision (98.6%) and primary (98.7%) spine surgeries.”
<Text Block 350,816> “It was more difﬁcult to locate the curved ventral margin of the
sacrum than the anterior cortex of a vertebral body with lateral ﬂuoroscopy. … Another key
difference is that the cancellous bone in the sacrum is much softer and less dense than in a
vertebral body, resulting in limited tactile feed-back to the surgeon during cannula placement.
Balloon pressures were generally low, and there was very little resistance to PMMA injection.
The combination of difﬁculty with ﬂuoroscopic imaging and reduced tactile feedback made it
hard to tell whether PMMA might be extruding into the soft tissues of the buttock or pelvis
during injection.”
<Text Block 350,820> “… For these reasons, we elected to use BrainLAB image guidance
for the third patient, and found that this modality signiﬁcantly improved the accuracy of
cannula placement and PMMA delivery. With the BrainLAB system, it was possible to
navigate instruments and inject PMMA directly into the fractures identiﬁed on the
preoperative CT scan. Although further work will be needed, BrainLAB image guidance may
offer some advantages over conventional ﬂuoroscopy with respect to instrument placement
and PMMA delivery to the fracture site. A potential concern with any method of sacral
augmentation is medial migration of cement, which would compromise the exiting sacral
nerve roots and sacral spinal canal.”
Note Numbers in parentheses following TB are ranked with similarity of context in height.
Source Neurosurgical Focus
230
F. Komoda et al.

First, from TB 109,743, the more detailed knowledge that CT-IGS navigation
systems like O-arms using tactile feedback makes it possible to accurately position
the screw of the endoscope, reducing the risk of injuring the organs, is obtained.
Further linking this TB with TB 109,746 provides further sophisticated knowledge
that its safety is 98.6–98.7%.
It is also stated in TB 350,816 that acquiring tactile information from soft tissues,
such as cancellous bone, are not easy and the difﬁculty in establishing a drainage
tube during surgery increases. Thus, the need for progress in tactile technology is
understood. By linking this TB with TB 350,820, knowledge that using the
Brain LAB image guidance image diagnostic system enables accurate induction of
PMMA delivery into soft tissue, although conventional ﬂuoroscopy and tactile
feedback have technological limits, is obtained. In this way, it will be possible to
gain valuable knowledge to help solving the technical bottleneck.
As can be understood from the above, by evolving a method to extract
co-occurring relationships among terms obtained by association analysis into the
method of linking TBs, it is possible to acquire precise knowledge at a pinpoint
level.
8.7.2
Linking TBs Based on Deep Learning
However, as described in the previous section, searching based on term com-
monality alone would miss many of the important TBs because natural languages
often have the same meaning and context even when they are written in different
terms; conversely, when they are used in the same terms they often have completely
different contexts. The ideal method for ﬁnding the necessary TBs is based on the
context similarity and not on the commonality of the appearing terms.
Methods for ﬁnding similarities in the meanings of sentences include potential
semantic analysis, K-means method, etc. and based on machine learning algorithm
and deep learning techniques such as Doc2vec, which has been drawing much
attention recently. However, despite such excellent ambitious attempts, extremely
ambiguous and polysemantic natural language is impossible to be understood with
computer algorithms alone. Therefore, it is indispensable that the reader has
background knowledge in order to understand the correct meaning. The necessity
for background knowledge is especially signiﬁcant in the case of technical docu-
ments described in technical jargon. Moreover, most of these approaches are aimed
at clustering myriad documents and few discuss similarities between two extracted
documents. However, for the pinpoint focus type text mining method, it is neces-
sary to discover similarities between two documents rather than roughly clustering
all of the documents. Doc2vec can elucidate the ranking of similarities between two
documents and so this is used here.
Of course, Doc2vec, like other tools, is far from fully appreciating correctly the
similarity between documents. Documents that are not quite similar are often
regarded as similar. However, from documents that are too enormous for humans to
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
231

read, it is often possible to ﬁnd closely related documents that would otherwise not
have been discovered. Thus, by accepting the technological limitations of the
current state of deep learning methods, valuable documents are expected to be
found. Moreover, the potential for the future development of deep learning tech-
nologies is undeniably large and the signiﬁcance of using them is expected to
increase.
To learn more about how to use tactile techniques and imaging information to
achieve accurate device guidance by using Doc2vec, it is useful to search for TBs
with a context similar to the TB described for this technique. Therefore, from all the
TBs (511,449 cases in total), the top 300 TBs with high similarity to TB 179,043
are extracted. In doing so, 14 TBs that can be regarded as having similarity to TB
179,043 in the meaning that a system for guiding devices using tactile information
and imaging information is described in those TBs are found. This is shown in
Table 8.6.
Table 8.6 TBs, context of which is similar to that of TB179,043 (Doc2vec)
<TB202,422> (97) “… Functional MR imaging, for example, is capable of revealing the
locations of lower CN nuclei.31 The complementary technique of diffuser tensor imaging
may resolve the positions of axonal tracts within the brainstem and can be used to guide the
surgical approach to a CM.28,59 While the highly conserved nature of brainstem anatomy
across individuals usually renders more exhaustive neuroimaging in any particular case
unnecessary, these diagnostic studies might be useful because of their potential to reveal the
true positions of structures displaced by larger lesions; knowing whether a motor tract is
displaced medially or laterally by a lesion in the medulla, for example, could help determine
the most advantageous pial point of entry. The integration of these imaging techniques with
intraoperative neuronavigation technologies will likely improve safety during the resection of
CMs juxtaposed to white matter tracts and nuclei.”
<TB258,124> (2) “… Neuronavigation Image-guided neuronavigation uses preoperative,
intra-operative, or real-time imaging to allow the surgeon to understand spatial relationships
within the brain that are not visible by line-of-sight. … Similarly, intraoperative CT or MR
imaging can be used in this fashion to shorten the temporal relationship between obtain-ing
and utilizing the imaging information, as well as to obtain updated information at speciﬁc
time points during the case. Lastly, intraoperative ultrasonography and ﬂuoroscopy can
actually provide real-time imaging and hence eliminate inaccuracy due to the movement of
structures following image acquisition.”
<TB418,353> (66) “Although the selection of reference points in cases of anterior spinal
surgery is limited by the relative lack of prominent bone landmarks on the anterior aspect of
the spinal clumn, the degree of accuracy required is less than that needed in most posterior
screw ﬁxation procedures. This degree of accuracy, termed “clinically relevant accuracy,”
will change according to the procedure being performed. …For example, insertion of a C1-2
transarticular screw demands a higher degree of clinically relevant accuracy than placing an
anterior ﬁxation screw across a large thoracic or lumbar vertebral body. In both cases
image-guided navigation provides clinically relevant accuracy more consistently than
ﬂuoroscopy alone.”
<TB45,834> (44) “The beneﬁt of navigated pedicle screw placement is particularly apparent
in cases where there is deformed anatomy and anatomical landmark-based freehand screw
placement is challenging. Jin et al. used ﬂuoroscopic cone-beam navigation to facilitate
(continued)
232
F. Komoda et al.

The term “tactile” rarely appears in the 14 TBs. Most of the terms that appear are
related to “image,” such as “ﬂuoroscopy.” This fact may show that imaging
information seems to be more important than tactile information for device navi-
gation in surgical robots. The number of occurrences of “accuracy,” “intraopera-
tive,” “real-time (real time),” and “neuronavigation” in 14 TBs are 7, 5, 2, and 5,
respectively. This suggests that it is important to properly guide the device in
real-time during surgery and that the neuro technique may be effective for doing so.
Therefore, it will be necessary to acquire from these 14 TBs more detailed and
speciﬁc knowledge about the technique and solution methods for accurately guiding
the equipment in real-time by using image information.
Because it was found that the use of image information is common for the
guidance of equipment as mentioned above, further detailed knowledge about
image information processing technology is required next. Reading the TB 202,422
(rank 97) for this purpose shows that the introduction of the complex technique of
diffuser tensor imaging can increase the resolution of the position of axial tracts
with the brain stem. In doing so, one candidate of the technology used for the image
processing technology improvement is discovered.
In addition, technical solution methods for improving the image processing
technology are required. Reading TB 258,124 (rank 2) makes it possible to ﬁnd that
using ultrasonography and ﬂuoroscopy together is also effective.
In particular, it can be understood from TB 202,422 that the safety of surgery can
be
enhanced
by
combining
navigation
and
image
processing
techniques.
Reading TB 418,353 (rank 66), the more concrete example showing the effec-
tiveness of the integration of navigation technology and image information pro-
cessing technology will be obtained not only using ﬂuoroscopy alone, but also
combining it with image-guided navigation to improve the quality of positioning
and ﬁxing the screw. From TB 45,834 (rank 44), it is possible to obtain knowledge
Table 8.6 (continued)
placement of pedicle screws in patients with dystrophic neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1-associated
scoliosis and reported 79% accuracy compared with 67% in the freehand
group. Intraoperative use of cone-beam ﬂuoroscopy may be especially valuable in helping to
localize lesions on the thoracic spine, where localization can be notoriously difﬁcult with
conventional ﬂuoroscopy.…”
<TB325,222> (21) “…These systems can allow precision to within millimeters; 10 however,
they have some drawbacks. The visualization of the anat-omy is conﬁned to the state it was in
when the radiographic images were obtained; most neuronavigation systems cannot yet
compensate for changes in this anatomy.”
<TB462,954> (71) “The quality of the eventual 3-D reconstruction depends on the mode and
resolution of image acquisition. Both slice thickness and image matrix size are basic
determinants of ﬁnal resolution. In soft-tissue imaging of the head, neck, and spine, MR
imaging has been and likely will continue to be the imaging modality of choice. Continuing
reﬁnements in MR imaging sequence protocols, ﬁeld strength, and gradient coil design have
been important in the improvement of ﬁnal image quality.…”
Note Numbers in parentheses following TB are ranked with similarity of context in height.
Source Neurosurgical Focus
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
233

that using ﬂuoroscopic cone-beam navigation rather than conventional ﬂuoroscopy
makes possible more accurate positioning and ﬁxation of the pedicle screws. By
linking similar TBs together in this way, we can learn a number of examples of
techniques useful for the evolution of image information processing, allowing us to
reﬁne and deepen our knowledge.
The signiﬁcance of introducing neuro technology into the navigation of equip-
ment also is understood from reading TB 258,124.
It should be noted, however, that the introduction of neuro technology into
surgical robots is not easy as understood from the description in TB 325,222 (rank
21). Indeed, as described in Sect. 8.5.1, the introduction of neuro technology into
robotics navigation seems to have been unsteady.
Furthermore, as seen in TB 109,746 in the previous section, it is difﬁcult to
obtain tactile information of soft tissue. According to TB 462,954 (Rank 71), MR
imaging is used for image diagnosis of soft tissues such as heads, necks, and spines;
thus, it is understood that (1) MR imaging sequence protocols, (2) ﬁeld strengths,
and (3) gradient coil designs play important roles in improving this quality.
Thus, by using a ﬁve-sentence TB as the mining unit, it is possible to locate
important information from the enormous amount of the technical documents
written in esoteric jargon and to extract precise and detailed knowledge from them.
Of course, such a method is not yet satisfactory, and many insufﬁciencies remain
to be solved in future. For example, the size of the TB is also controversial, such as,
whether ﬁve-sentence or ten-sentence TBs are preferable. Algorithms for ﬁnding
similarities between TBs are also still not sufﬁcient. Overcoming these issues is a
future task.
8.8
Conclusions
It is essential for companies to know the global trends in technological advances
and acquire the ideas needed for overcoming bottlenecks to technological advances
in order to accurately design business and R&D strategies. To do so successfully, it
is insufﬁcient to rely solely on knowledge stocks that managers and engineers have
accumulated through past experiences. In the era of newly emerging innovation
paradigm characterized by big data, dramatic improvements in computerized
information processing speed and the digitization of text data through the dis-
semination on the Internet have led to the creation of text mining techniques for
obtaining knowledge from unstructured natural languages, and it has begun to be
used for corporate strategy planning as well.
However, conventional text mining has a major focus on grasping the overall
tendency, taking a crude bird’s-eye-view of enormous texts as a whole. Such a
method may be effective for obtaining knowledge expressed in daily language,
including market needs. This is because the analyst has a certain amount of relevant
background knowledge as common sense in advance, so the correct solution is
relatively easy to obtain by combining the results of analysis with the analyst’s
234
F. Komoda et al.

background knowledge. On the other hand, because knowledge concerning tech-
nology is generally less commonly possessed by analysts, it is required that the
results of analysis themselves are highly accurate. This requires a pinpointing where
knowledge is written by using a pinpoint focus type text mining method.
As mentioned in this article, detailed knowledge can be provided by creating
TBs consisting of ﬁve sentences, reaching a point where the desired solution may be
described, and further linking TBs with similar contexts.
This article takes the example of neurosurgical robots to describe how text
mining methods, especially the pinpoint focus method of text mining, contribute to
reasonable decision-making on projects where companies intend to input their
limited management resources and plan an effective R&D strategy. It is expected
that text mining will be increasingly used for planning corporate strategy.
References
Abe, H., Hirano, S., & Tsumoto, S. (2005). Byojo keika chisiki chushutsu no tameno tekisuto
mainingu (Text mining for extraction of pathology knowledge). The 19th Annual Conference
of the Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 2005: 1–2 (in Japanese).
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open innovation (p. 227). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Chinzei, K. (2015). Iryo kiki kokusai kikaku no saikin no doukou (Recent trend of international
standard of medical equipment). The Japan Journal of Medical Instrumantation, 85(5), 530–
534. (in Japanese).
Christensen, C. (1997). The innovator’s dilemma (p. 253). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Fujimoto, T. (2007). Architecture-based comparative advantage: A design information view of
manufacturing. Evolutionary and Institutional Economics Review, 4(1), 55–112.
Goto, T., Hongo, K., Yako, T., Hara, Y., Okamoto, J., Toyoda, K., et al. (2013). The concept and
feasibility of EXPERT: Intelligent armrest using robotics technology. Neurosurgery, 72, A39–
A42, 2013/01: 39–42.
Goto, T. (2014). Nou shinkei geka ryoiki ni okeru robotto shujutsu no genjou (Current status of
robotic surgery in the ﬁeld of neurosurgery). The Shinshu Medical Journal, 62(1), 68–69. (in
Japanese).
Gupta, V., & Lehal, G. S. (2009). A survey of text mining techniques and applications. Journal of
Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence, 1(1), 60–76.
Inaki, N. (2008). Atarashii mekanizumu no tajiyuudo kanshi “radius surgical system” wo mochiita
naishikyou geka shujutsu (Newly designed mechanical manual manipulator-radius surgical
system-for endoscope surgery). Journal of Japan Society for Endoscopic Surgery, 13(6), 723–
728. (in Japanese).
Iseki, H., Muragaki, Y., Nakamura, R., Hori, T., Takakura, K., Sugiura, M., et al. (2003).
Interijento opeshitsu MRI yudo shujutsu taiou shisutemu (Intelligent operating theater and
MR-compatible operating system). MEDIX, 39, 11–17. (in Japanese).
Iseki, H., Muragaki, Y., Maruyama, T., Suzuki, T., Ikuta, S., & Akimoto, J. (2009). Iryo kiki
kaihatsu to iryo kiki no ishi shudo chiken (Medical device development and medical device
doctor-initiated clinical trial). The Journal of Japan Society for Laser Surgery and Medicine,
30(1), 64–67. (in Japanese).
Japan Patent Ofﬁce, home page, https://www.jpo.go.jp/shiryou/gidou-houkoku.htm.
Japan Patent Ofﬁce. (2014). Tokkyo shutugan gijutu doukou chosahoukokusho—robotto—(Patent
application technology trend survey report—robotics—), Japan Patent Ofﬁce: 1–341 (in
Japanese).
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
235

Japan Patent Ofﬁce. (2015). Tokkyo shutugan gijutu doukou chosahoukokusho—naishikyo—
(Patent application technology trend survey report—endoscope—), Japan Patent Ofﬁce: 1–561
(in Japanese).
Kajita, Y., Mori, K., Hayashi, Y., Wakabayashi, T., & Yoshifa, J. (2013). Nabigeshon noushinkei
geka shujutsu no genjo to tenbo (The current status and perspective of navigation
neurosurgery). Japanese Journal of Neurosurgery, 22(7), 510–518. (in Japanese).
Kaneko, S., & Ootake, H. (2010). Raifu saiensu jisho kara kurinikaru infomatikusu e (From a life
science dictionary to clinical informatics: Toward the knowledge ﬁnding from medical texts).
Journal of Information Processing and Management, 53(9), 473–479. (in Japanese).
Kataoka, H., Masamune, K., Sakuma, I., & Dohi, T. (1999). Nou moderu no chosei ni yoru jutsu
chu nou henkei no henkei keijou suitei (Shape estimation of brain shift by model adjustment).
Journal of Japan Society of Computer Assisted Surgery, 22(1), 30–38. (in Japanese).
Kim, G., & Bae, J. (2016). A novel approach to forecast promising technology through patent
analysis. Technology Forecasting and Social Change, 117(April), 228–237.
Kobayashi, N., Miyamoto, U., & Ooyama, K. (2005). Teishinshu shujutsu shien sisutemu
“Navoit” nokaihatsu (Development of Naviot for minimally invasive surgery). Journal of the
Robotics Society of Japan, 23(2), 22–25. (in Japanese).
Kobayashi, E., Mitsushima, I., & Oonishi, K. (2015). Shujutsu robotto wa hito no bisaina
rikishokkaku jouhou wo saigen dekiruka (Can a surgical robot reproduce human’s ﬁne tactile
information). Medical Torch, 11(1), 28–33. (in Japanese).
Koike, A. (2007). Tekisuto mainingu ni okeru senzaiteki chisiki no hakken shien (Support for
potential knowledge ﬁnding based on text mining). Journal of Information Processing, 48(8),
824–829. (in Japanese).
Komoda, F. (2011). Tango setto no sakusei to shinka ni motozuku tekisuto mainingu shuho (Text
mining technique based on creation and evolution of ‘word set’). Information and
Documentation, 54(9), 568–578. (in Japanese).
Kurata, M., & Takigawa, K. (2010). Nihon no igaku ronbun ni okeru seitai kan-ishoku no hatten
katei (Development process of living liver transplantation in Japanese medical papers). Journal
of Nursing, Shiga University of Medical Science, 8(1), 26–29. (in Japanese).
Kushima, M., Araki, K., Suzuki, S., Araki, S., & Nikama, T. (2012). Denshi karute nyuuin kanja
kiroku no tekisuto mainingu (Text data mining of in-patient nursing records within electronic
medical records). The 26th Conference of the Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence; 2012,
2–1, 3K2-NFC-3-1: 1–2 (in Japanese).
Kushima, M., Araki, K., Yamazaki, T., Araki, S., Ogawa, T., & Sonehara, N. (2017). Text data
mining of care life log by the level of care required using keygraph. In Proceedings of the
International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists (Vol. I). http://www.
iaeng.org/publication/IMECS2017/IMECS2017_pp327–331.pdf.
Masamune, K., Nakamura, R., Kobayashi, E., Sakuma, I., Dohi, T., Iseki, H., et al. (1999). Kudou
bunrigata teiinou shujutsu shien manipyureta sisutemu (Development of sterilizable manip-
ulator for neurosurgery with separated drive mechanism). Japan Society of Computer and
Surgery, 1(1), 24–29. (in Japanese).
Masamune, K., Ooshima, K., Nagano, H., Kuribayashi, S., & Nakajima, S. (2003). Teishinshuu
sekitsui geke shujutsu no tameno nabigeta robotto sisutemu oyobi sousa intafeisu no kenkyu
(Study on user interface system of the navigation robot for minimally invasive spine surgery).
Annual Report, Research Institute for Technology, Tokyo Denki University, 23: 119–124 (in
Japanese).
Mima, H. (2006). Shizen gengo shori niokeru tan-i no settei (Word unit setting in natural language
processing). Gekkan Gengo (Monthly Language), 35(10), 56–64. (in Japanese).
Mima, H. (2012). Kindai bunken no dejitaru akaibu to tekisuto mainingu (Digital archiving and
text mining of modern-style japanese literatures using iwanami shoten’s journal “shisou”
(thoughts)). IPSJ SIG Technical Report, 2012-CH-95-4: 1–8 (in Japanese).
Moglia, A., Menciassi, A., Schurr, M. O., & Dario, P. (2007). Wireless capsule endoscopy: From
diagnostic devices to multipurpose robotic systems. Biomedical Microdevices, 9, 235–243.
236
F. Komoda et al.

Nakatsuji, T., & Y. Hashijume, M. (2008). Gekai no motomeru robotto hando (The robot hand
required by the surgeon). Journal of the Society of Biomechanisms, 32(3), 125–129 (in
Japanese).
Muragaki, Y., Iseki, H., et al. (2000). Opun MRI wo mochiita “real-time” navigation no kaihatsu
(Development of “Real-Time” navigation system updated with intraoperative MR imaging for
total removal of glioma). Japan Society of Computer and Surgery, 2(3), 213–214. (in
Japanese).
Netzer, O., Feldman, R., Goldenberg, J., & Fresko, M. (2012). Mine your own business:
Market-structure surveillance through text mining. Marketing Science, 31(3), 521–543.
Nishiyama, R., Takeuchi, H., Watanabe, H., & Nasukawa, T. (2009). Shin gijutsu ga motsu
tokucho ni chumoku sita gijutsu chosa shien tsuru (Technology survey assistance tool focusing
on their advantages). Journal of the Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 24(6), 541–
548. (in Japanese).
Nonaka, I. (1991). The knowledge creating company. Harvard Business Review, 69(6), 96–104.
Onishi, K. (2009). Teishinshu geka shujutsu robotto no rikishokkaku ﬁidobakku (Force haptic
feedback of minimally invasive surgical robot). Journal of Japan Society of Computer Aided
Surgery, 11(2), 57. (in Japanese).
Onishi, K. (2015). Iryou-you rikishokkaku tsuki kanshi (Forceps with medical force tactile sense).
Medical Torch, 11(1), 30–32. (in Japanese).
Ozawa, S. (2006). Chansu hakken no deta bunseki (Data analysis for chance discovery) (pp. 1–
273). Tokyo: Denki University Press (in Japanese).
Ozawa, S. (2009). Shujutsu shien robotto no kenkyu-kaihatsu to shorai tenbo (Research and
development of surgical robots and perspective). Journal of the Robotic Society of Japan, 27
(3), 284–286. (in Japanese).
Patel, F. N., & Soni, N. R. (2012). Text mining: A brief survey. International Journal of Advanced
Computer Research, 2(4), 234–239.
Porter, M. E. (1980). Competitive strategy: Techniques for analyzing industries and competitors
(pp. 1–396). New York: Free Press.
Rzhetsky, A., Seringhaus, M., & Gerstein, M. (2008). Seeking a new biology through text mining.
Cell, 134(1), 9–13.
Tanaka, K., Watanabe, T., & Yoneyama, T. (home page). Iryou kiki no hensei sutoresu hyouka
(Denaturing stress evaluation of small medical devices”. http://www.altairhyperworks.jp/html/
ja-JP/PDF/AOP/1509_kanazawa.pdf (in Japanese).
The Japan Research Institute, Robotic Society of Japan, The Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, & Japan Ergonomics Society. (2008). Robotto bunya ni okeru akademi
rohdo-mappu houkokusho (Academy road map in robot). Ministry of Economy and
Industry: 1–35 (in Japanese).
Veugelers, M., Bury, J., & Viaene, S. (2010). Linking technology intelligence to open innovation.
Technology Forecasting & Social Change, 77, 335–343.
Dr. Fumio Komoda (Ph.D., Kyushu University) is Professor Emeritus of International Business
at the Faculty of Economics, Saitama University, Japan, and visiting professor of International
Business at the Faculty of Economics and Business Management, Saitama Gakuen University. His
main research interests is developing text mining methods that can contribute to building a
company’s technology strategy. He received his PhD in Economics from Kyushu University. He
has published widely works and academic papers in the domain of management of technology and
text mining.
Dr. Yoshihiro Muragaki (Ph.D., TWMU) is Professor of Faculty of Advanced Techno Surgery
(FATS) at Tokyo Women’s Medical University (TWMU). He is also a professor of Department of
8
Text Mining Method for Building New Business Strategies
237

Neurosurgery of TWMU and he has been conducting brain glioma surgeries including awake
craniotomy, and achieved excellent performance. Recent his work is developing the intelligent
operating room named SCOT and as a leader he is gaining global attention. He graduated from
Kobe University, received his PhD in Medicine from TWMU, and also in Biomedical Science
from Waseda University, Tokyo.
Dr. Ken Masamune (Ph.D., University of Tokyo) is Professor of Cooperative Major in
Advanced Biomedical Sciences, Joint Graduate School of Tokyo Women’s Medical University
and Waseda University. He is an excellent computer science and robotics researcher. His main
research interests is developing intelligent surgical robot with artiﬁcial intelligence. He received
his PhD in Engineering from the University of Tokyo.
238
F. Komoda et al.

Chapter 9
Paradigm Change in the History
of the Pharmaceutical Industry
Sarah Edris
Abstract The history of the pharmaceutical industry is told within three major
paradigms, each of which arises through a continuous interaction between science,
technology, business organizations, national institutions, and the wider growth of
economic and social developments. The ﬁrst paradigm begins in the mid-19th
century, when the inﬂuence of chemistry on medicinal research had reached a
degree of maturity, and ends with the outbreak of WWII. The second paradigm
requires a better understanding of organizational features that differ from the
old-line pharmaceutical companies that emerged in the 19th century. These com-
panies were largely inﬂuenced by new institutions, restrictive environments, and
turbulent decades. The third paradigm reﬂects geographic shifts of specialization in
pharmaceuticals and changes in the composition of organizations involved; its
setting is more collaborative and networked than previous paradigms. The shift
between paradigms in this industry is therefore associated with the character of
international business efforts and the context for which these efforts occur, with
implication for ﬁrm responses to new developments in science and technology, and
theories in international business, strategy, innovation, and economic geography.
9.1
Introduction
The history of the pharmaceutical industry as told in this chapter is focused on the
limits to growth of the sciences upon which the industry relies on, the changes in
the nature and structure of the largest companies active in the industry, and the
knowledge networks between those companies and various organizations. It also
tries to make the connection between organization-level developments and
macroeconomic trends as well as with the institutional structure that affect or
encourage linkages between the major companies and universities, hospitals,
research institutes, government organizations, even companies in other industries.
S. Edris (&)
Rutgers Business School, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
e-mail: sarah.edris@rutgers.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_9
239

In doing so, I maintain that paradigm change can only arise through a continuous
interaction between science, technology, business organizations, national institu-
tions, and the wider growth of economic and social developments. I demonstrate
that the technological progress in pharmaceuticals cannot be fully understood where
any of these are taken in isolation.
I build on several strands of research to identify and conceptualize paradigm
change in the pharmaceutical industry. The ﬁrst parallels the historical development
theorized by Freeman and Louca (2001). This work has directed attention to the
interdependencies of economic and social movements, which include technological
and scientiﬁc innovations, within the framework of institutional settings. It does so
without assigning primacy in causal relationships. The second adopts the three
epochs, or major paradigms suggested by Henderson et al. (1990), and implicitly
recognized in the specialist literature on pharmaceuticals. The third builds upon the
systemic perspective suggested by Cantwell et al. (2010), who proposed that
international business co-evolves with its institutional environment. The objective
is to connect the three major paradigms in the history of the pharmaceutical industry
to global developments, since in the evolutionary process of substantial change that
has characterized this sector, ﬁrm behavior and institutions related to both science
and public policy have strongly interacted with one another.
Indeed, the pharmaceutical industry is driven by advances made in science, high
research and development (R&D) investments and long development cycles. It has
produced the majority of new medicine, and in many ways, changed the character
of the medical community. The evolution of the industry has also been signiﬁcantly
shaped by the environment for which it has taken part. To understand the contin-
uous historical transformation of the industry, I therefore analyze the leading area of
interaction with the external environment, differentiating contexts within which
different views about modes of organizing business activity have taken place.
However, in studying the emergence and evolution of the pharmaceutical industry,
the relationship between science and technology are central, and central to this
chapter.
While theoretical and empirical studies have paid attention to the structure of the
health care system, the institutional arrangements surrounding health-related
research, and the role of intellectual property protection in affecting the processes
of innovation, scant attention has been paid to the interaction between the shift in
the technological paradigm in this industry from chemistry to the life sciences, the
changes in organizational composition over time, as well as the context within
which the interactions between various organizations have taken place. I examine
the changes in corporate structure which reﬂect paradigm change in the industry,
the varying types of investments, and increasing cooperation of the major com-
panies with various types of organizations, and within the wider context of shifting
paradigms. The history that lies behind the term ‘paradigm change’ in the industry
under study is therefore an intriguing mix of accounts of science, technology,
institutions, political and social trends, and conceptions of chance and history.
The chapter is structured as follows. First, in Sect. 9.2, I conceptualize the nature
of paradigm change as a shift from preceding patterns of commercializing
240
S. Edris

pharmaceutical technologies by relating scientiﬁc advances to organization-level
developments as well as macroeconomic trends. This provides the analytical
structure for which the histories of the pharmaceutical industry are told in Sect. 9.3:
Paradigm 1 (1850 to 1939), Paradigm 2 (1940 to 1989), and Paradigm 3 (1990 to
date). Section 9.4 interprets the process of paradigm change in the history of the
pharmaceutical industry, and summarizes the major developments in science,
technology, types of business organization, national institutions, and political and
economic trends since the mid-19th century. It also predicts potential challenges
and opportunities major pharmaceutical ﬁrms will confront in the near future.
Section 9.5 suggests future research directions and potential sources of data to
investigate proposed questions. A listing of consolidated companies can be found at
the end of this chapter. Section 9.6 concludes.
9.2
Understanding the Nature of Paradigm Change
in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Paradigm change in the pharmaceutical industry can be perceived broadly, dating
back to Ancient Egyptian prescription records, or narrowly, to the ﬁrst specialized
pharmaceutical plant in Germany. Put differently, a broad lens would include all
efforts of drug discoveries over time, much of which took place in isolated societies
that progressed at much slower speed with simpler forms of technology. Paradigm
change in the pharmaceutical industry as seen through a narrow lens focuses on
activities that necessarily entail a strong interaction between technological efforts
and scientiﬁc advances, each of which have been inﬂuenced by the tighter and more
complex form of interdependencies of recent history. From this dichotomy, industry
specialists, business historians, as well as scientists in the ﬁeld of biology, have
taken a narrow perspective of development in the pharmaceutical industry, where
the science and technology linkages are central. Within such narrow perspective,
the relative autonomy of evolutionary developments in science and technology
justiﬁes independent consideration.
Over the last few decades, economists have paid attention to Schumpeter’s
claims, particularly that technological innovation revolutionizes the economic
structure from within, destroying old formations of markets and incumbent
advantages (Christensen 1993; Tripsas 1997), allowing for new entrants unen-
cumbered by ﬁrm history; though the modern evolutionary literature on techno-
logical change has tended to follow the Penrosean tradition (Cantwell 2002), which
accounts for the cumulative nature of corporate learning (Helfat and Raubitschek
2000; Zollo and Winter 2002), i.e. deeply entrenched capabilities that accumulate
and coevolve with products and markets, as well as the complexities that arise in
different institutional contexts.
The parallel observation made in technology holds for science; the most dis-
cussed account of scientiﬁc revolutions is Thomas Kuhn’s. In his work, scientiﬁc
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
241

paradigms displace the old, and are so radically different that they can no longer be
compared with the preceding paradigms in guiding future research. Nelson and
Winter (1977, 1982) had drew attention to the relative autonomy of developments
along a technological trajectory, and the possibility of noncumulative, conceptual
and practical changes in subsequent epochs. Dosi (1982) further developed this
work by drawing analogies to Kuhn’s paradigms in science for technology; though,
unlike Kuhn, Dosi’s ideas didn’t speak to a particular community, and for this
reason, can be seen cited in the wider social sciences (Tunzelmann et al. 2008), as
well as higher levels of analysis, such as the evolution of an industry. Nonetheless,
there is evidence that suggests, as the sciences upon which technological knowl-
edge relies on shifts, so does the locational specialization of the technological
knowledge; and though science and technology may have their paradigms, more
needs to be understood about the extent to which patterns of science have affected
technological developments, and the limits to growth science has to offer for
commercializing new drugs.
Put differently, while developments in technology and science can be seen as
relatively independent, as is reﬂected in their social reorganization, methodological
standards, content and goals, it is essential to take into account their interdepen-
dencies, and their reliance on institutional and economic developments for the
purpose of understanding paradigm change, emergence, and evolution in the
pharmaceutical industry. Freeman and Louca (2001) have suggested a coevolution
of social subsystems (science, technology, politics, economics, culture) to provide
insight into the process of paradigmatic shifts. This work builds on earlier theo-
rizing by Derek De Solla Price (1984), Nathan Rosenberg (1969, 1974, 1976,
1982a, b), Keith Pavitt (1995), which demonstrated the way in which systemic
features of scientiﬁc and technological developments have interacted, and with the
wider economic and institutional environment. Recent traditions in management
and economic geography already reﬂect the perspective of technological change as
an evolutionary process, and take into account the wide range of institutions that
coevolve with technology at the micro-level of the ﬁrm. A long discussion in the
international business literature has, in many ways, rethought what is meant by
‘evolutionary’ processes, drawing attention to sociological, wider ranged approa-
ches of technological accumulation, the interaction between production, institu-
tions, and governance structures, as well as the inﬂuences the expansion of the ﬁrm
has itself had in helping to stimulate change in the environment (Cantwell et al.
2010). There is also work in the strategy and organizational theory literature, which
has also begun to suggest that organizational analysis should be more about how
individuals aggregate to the collective level, capturing a more complex social
interaction and interdependence with institutional entities.
In what follows, I assume the deﬁnition of paradigm change as put forth by Dosi
(1982): discontinuous change is associated with the emergence of a new techno-
logical paradigm, deﬁned as a pattern of solutions selected and established by the
interplay between scientiﬁc advances, various economic and institutional variables.
Once a technological paradigm has been selected among new, competing para-
digms, in relation to the long-run patterns of social development, the path selected
242
S. Edris

and established shows a momentum of its own (Nelson and Winter 1982;
Rosenberg 1969), which is consistent with classical theories of social evolution,
most notably Hegel and his contemporaries. Furthermore, technological knowledge
is cumulatively developed (Cantwell 1989), and new technologies rely on novel
combinations of prior knowledge, product portfolios and adaptive organizational
capabilities (Arthur 2009; Zott and Amit 2008; Helfat and Raubitschek 2000; Teece
et al. 1997). In this way, while a discontinuity reﬂects a break with the past, the past
is necessarily synthesized in subsequent paradigms. To be sure, a trajectory is
deﬁned as the direction of advance within the boundaries of an established para-
digm (Dosi 1982), whereas the existence and nature of paradigm change is induced
at the crossing between science, technology, institutions, political and economic
trends, and for this reason, needs to be explained historically.
As previously mentioned, I also parallel the co-evolutionary developments
presented in Freeman and Louça (2001) with adjustments to the subsystems as
would be applicable to the process of paradigmatic shifts in the context of the
pharmaceutical industry. Revised deﬁnitions of these subsystems are the following.
In particular, I’ve replaced culture with institutions, since I regard culture as a
partial feature of what is meant by institutions in the relevant literature, (Cantwell
et al. 2010; North 2005) and is consistent with prior work on institutional change
and social and physical technologies (North 2005; Nelson and Sampat 2001).
Furthermore, developments which occur within each paradigm require under-
standing and reviewing the feature of subsystems which, taken together, are pro-
foundly different in subsequent paradigms.
(1) Science is the generalizable and replicable knowledge of nature, usually
resulting from basic research and represented by refereed and published papers.
The science involved in drug discovery, through which potential new
medicines are identiﬁed, include biology, chemistry, and pharmacology.
(2) Technology is a collective capability or knowledge of production (products,
processes and services), which is not easily replicable. The technologies
involved in drug discovery in the current paradigm include various computa-
tional tools.
(3) Business organization is a form within which application of science to pro-
duction and practitioner knowledge of technology take place in pursuit of
commercial interest. Firms in the pharmaceutical industry were historically
integrated. The industry now relies on networked based structures.
(4) National institutions are such things as laws, scientiﬁc regulations, educational
institutions, national innovation policies, culture, etc., which mold and differ-
entiate the nature of innovative activity across countries.
(5) Economic, political, and social trends reﬂect the wider economic and social
growth and demand, political developments, or industry-related crises.
In summary, although each of these subsystems have distinctive features and
have their own paradigms, their interdependencies and interaction express the
process of paradigmatic shifts of the industry. First, for a coherent paradigm to take
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
243

hold, each of the aforementioned subsystems need to be harmoniously connected.
Thus: a paradigm is a social system with interconnected parts. Changing one part
cannot be done without changing others. There may be paradigms within each of
the sub-systems identiﬁed: e.g. as argued by Kuhn for science. However, in a
science-based industry where the developments of science and technology are well
connected, the reciprocal inﬂuence of the developments that occur within each of
the aforementioned subsystems need to be taken into account (de Solla Price 1984;
Rosenberg 1969, 1974, 1976, 1982a, b; Pavitt 1995). Moreover, while the emer-
gence of a new paradigm causes conﬂict with older paradigms, as reﬂected in the
nature of linkages between scientiﬁc, business and government institutions, old
paradigms can be seen as retained and embedded in a subsequent paradigm. Put
differently, science and technologies are cumulatively developed, new institutions
embody old formations, and political, economic and social contradictions are
ultimately resolved and integrated in practice.
9.3
Histories of the Pharmaceutical Industry
The history of the pharmaceutical industry is told within the three major paradigms
implicitly recognized in the specialist literature, and explicitly, though roughly
divided in Henderson et al. (1990), due to its’ usefulness for examining the evo-
lution of the modern pharmaceutical industry. The shift between each paradigm is
due to a number of key features that are so profoundly different and merit
descriptions. The ﬁrst paradigm receives a longer period of time through which
prescriptions were customized and formulated at local laboratories in various
societies. It begins in the mid-19th century, when the inﬂuence of dye chemistry
and analytical chemistry on medicinal research had reached a degree of maturity,
and ends with the outbreak of WWII. The second paradigm requires a better
understanding of organizational features that differ from the old-line pharmaceutical
companies that emerged in the 19th century. These companies were largely inﬂu-
enced by new institutions, restrictive environments, and turbulent decades. The
third paradigm reﬂects geographic shifts of specialization in pharmaceuticals and
changes in the composition of organizations involved; its’ setting is more collab-
orative and networked than previous paradigms. Needless to say, the ability to link
the research concerns of markets, and the interaction with the emergence of external
research institutes as well as connection to university science and engineering for
background knowledge and training has been critical, and so much of the focus will
therefore be on the current paradigm.
244
S. Edris

9.3.1
First Paradigm (1850 to 1939)
In the mid-19th century, the science of chemistry was providing new learning and
generating new product opportunities. During this time, Germany and Switzerland
were leaders in the science of chemistry and in the synthetic dye industry. It was
thus initially Swiss and German chemical producing enterprises, such as Roche,
Ciba, Sandoz, BASF, Bayer, and Hoechst that exploited their technical compe-
tencies and knowledge accumulated in organic chemicals and dyestuff to com-
mercialize drugs based on synthetic dyes. A number of British and American ﬁrms,
such as Wyeth (later, American Home Products), Eli Lilly, Squibb, Upjohn, Pﬁzer,
Merck, Abbott, SmithKline, Warner-Lambert, and Brothers-Wellcome emerged as
specialized in pharmaceuticals in the later part of the 19th century. These ﬁrms
would eventually become old line pharmaceutical companies which grew internally
then via merger and acquisitions to overcome barriers to entry, and pioneer tech-
nical capabilities needed to produce and market prescription drugs for national and
international markets.
To be sure, in the US, the industry evolved largely in response to the advent of
modern transportation and communication (Chandler 2009). The major US core
companies were rather wholesaler/producer enterprises with strong marketing
capabilities and distribution channels—e.g. use of new radio networks to reach
mass markets—operating in commercial cities (Liebenau 1987). They relied on
German and Swiss ﬁrms to supply new prescription drugs based on revolutionary
organic chemical technologies, and merely processed, packaged, and marketed a
variety of existing over-the-counter drugs derived from natural resources. In gen-
eral, large ﬁrms tended to grow in the most technologically advanced and dynamic
centers, and so the new transport and communication technologies of the 19th
century was a precondition for the administrative coordination of production
decisions, and were therefore regulated by the potential for economies of scale and
scope. In fact, up until the end of the second paradigm, scale and scope were closely
linked. Achieving scale depended upon bringing together the production of related
products and common distribution networks.
However, strategies of diversiﬁcation and internationalization required an evo-
lution in the organizational structure that would later support the new sciences, and
capture returns on new technologies. First, an evolution from the hierarchical to a
managerial structure (Chandler 1986) was required to provide the institutional
support for in-house corporate R&D, which would become essential for large ﬁrm
survival in the second paradigm. This evolution can be traced back to the early
years of the 20th century, when three major German companies had begun to
integrate upstream into the production of essential raw materials, expanding into
other areas of chemistry, pharmaceuticals, nitrogenous fertilizers, plastics, photo-
graphic products and synthetic materials (ﬁbers), by extension from organic
chemistry (Cantwell 2004). Following the formation of IG Farben in 1925, inten-
siﬁcation of research was in the hands of professional managers than it was
inﬂuenced by top-level decision-makers, thus becoming the “world’s ﬁrst truly
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
245

managerial industrial enterprise (Chandler)”. Likewise, corporate R&D needed to
be divisionalized, with a central facility that commanded a strategic overview
function led by technically trained managers. It was therefore the central labs which
were likely to incorporate some basic research activities with the more localized
support of divisions, which had their own R&D facilities. In this way, the ﬁrm was
not only narrowly focused on the demands and narrowing research agendas of each
division, but with the wider ﬁrm and industry within which these demands belong.
Second, the more restricted environment that took hold toward the end of the
ﬁrst paradigm and through to the second paradigm obliged ﬁrms to jump barriers by
investing in markets abroad. Thus, German chemical ﬁrms, such as Merck and
Schering, established subsidiaries in the US, whereas ﬁrms whose innovative dif-
fusion of home markets led them to replicate their activities abroad included
companies like Roche, which would later become a world leader in genetic engi-
neering. The openness which characterized the ﬁrst paradigm allowed American
ﬁrms to effectively incorporate European, largely Swiss and German, development
capabilities, and build research laboratories to create the necessary production
facilities, and commercialize new prescription drugs on their own. This cumulative
experience would have great implications for large ﬁrm survival in subsequent
paradigms.
However, the science of chemistry began to peter out by the early 20th century,
as the science of biology created new learning and opportunities for commercial-
ization. In addition, the institutions that supported the efforts that were driven by
chemistry did not represent suitable platforms for the newly emerging drug research
that had become increasingly guided by pharmacology and clinical sciences.
During this time, the US was relatively specialized in biology, becoming more
sensitive and aware to public health concerns, and the need the contents and sale of
pharmaceutical products (the history of the FDA requires a chapter in its own right).
But it wasn’t until the US ceased importing German products during WWI that
American ﬁrms began to investigate throughout the interwar years how to develop
the technical capabilities needed to commercialize prescription drugs based on
newer pharmaceutical technologies. After the discovery of penicillin and other
antibiotics, pharmaceutical companies either established departments of microbi-
ology and fermentation units, or exploited their microbiological capabilities to ﬁnd
drugs.
9.3.2
Second Paradigm (1940 to 1989)
The institutions created for drug research and development in the second paradigm,
which has its’ roots during WWII, led to the formation of the pharmaceutical
industry as we know it, where mass production required greater linkages with
universities, medical schools, hospitals, research institutes, and/or national labora-
tories, depending on the way in which funding is administered nationally, and the
nature of the linkages between research and practice locally. In the US,
246
S. Edris

government-sponsored crash programs provided the ﬁnancing required to build
research labs and the necessary production facilities focused on commercial pro-
duction techniques and chemical structure analysis. The increasing dialogue
between microbiologists, biochemists, pharmacologists, and chemists resulted in
substantial advances in physiology, pharmacology, enzymology, and cell biology,
as well as a revolution in prescription drugs, in antibiotic drugs and then in other
therapeutic areas. In addition, the industry’s transition to an R&D intensive busi-
ness increased the likelihood of large ﬁrm survival by increasing the capacity to
learn and adapt to changing environments. Though not all German ﬁrms adopted
the managerial form structure, they did have centralized science based strategies,
beneﬁted from research institutes, and pioneered industry-university cooperative
relationships, which would later become critical in the third paradigm.
With the outbreak of the second world war, pharmaceutical companies were
faced with a “target rich” environment, but had very little detailed knowledge about
the causes, much less of the biological underpinnings of speciﬁc diseases. These
companies relied on what has become known as “random screening”, a method for
ﬁnding new drugs, by which the speciﬁc biochemical and molecular roots of many
diseases were not well understood. The advances made in traditional biology
(physiology, pharmacology, enzymology, and microbiology) and use of enzyme
systems as screens led to enormous progress in the medical understanding of both,
the chemical reactions of existing drugs, as well as diseases for which no drug
therapy existed (Gambardella 1995; Henderson 1994). Several companies in the
US, UK, and Switzerland were among the ﬁrst to design signiﬁcantly more
sophisticated and sensitive screens to screen a wider range of compounds that were
previously available in either small quantities or difﬁcult to evaluate due to the
complex mixture of reactions in living animals (Henderson and Cockburn 1994;
Scannell et al. 2012; Lipinski and Hopkins 2004). French, Italian, other European,
and Japanese ﬁrms were slower in absorbing the concepts introduced by bio-
chemistry, such as enzymes and receptors. This is partially due to a number of
factors, including a comparative weakness in scientiﬁc research functions in
addition to absence from the global industry (with the exception of Takeda). These
differences would have signiﬁcant implications for ﬁrm response to the advent of
molecular biology as well as the technological specialization of countries in
pharmaceuticals.
To be sure, the introduction of genomic sciences, rapid DNA sequencing,
combinatorial chemistry in the 1970s required specially trained scientists, innova-
tive approaches to drug discoveries, and a fresh set of ingredients and services—
that is to say, the institutional and organizational support that distinguishes the US
environment and explains the success of biotech in the US. First, the Diamond
versus Chakrabarty Supreme Court patent decision, allowing the patenting of novel
living organisms and their DNA in 1980, removed barriers to biotechnology.
Second, a federal statute enacted in 1983, known as the Orphan Drug Act, gave tax
beneﬁts and granted a 7-year monopoly to enterprises that commercialized drugs to
treat relatively uncommon life threatening conditions, which would otherwise be
uneconomic to discover and bring to market. Major pharmaceutical ﬁrms had been
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
247

investing their efforts on best-selling drugs (with sales of $1 billion or more), and
neglected marketing efforts behind smaller, existing products, many of which could
have become best sellers, and beneﬁt a wider array of patients than originally
anticipated (as was the case with AIDs, asthma, etc.). Third, changed social rela-
tionships within universities attracted the entrepreneurial interest of numerous
professors who knew how to use advances made in genetic engineering to enhance
the productivity of discovery in addition to beneﬁting from niche drugs large
pharmaceutical ﬁrms neglected in favor for those in demand. Inevitably, a number
of startups emerged in the late 1980s, quickly built integrated learning bases, and
created from scratch the functional capabilities needed to, and succeed in com-
mercializing products from new technology based on the new discipline of
molecular biology (Chandler 2009). Together, the new startups created the infras-
tructure of a new industry—biotechnology, that marked the transition to the third
paradigm.
However, the evolution of biotechnology, and ultimate success of the biotech
industry was unclear for some time, so the use of molecular biology hadn’t yet been
adopted as a research tool until the third paradigm. Moreover, the 1970s was an
instable decade, characterized by stagnation, recession and high unemployment, in
addition to high prices, decreasing rate of successful new product introduction, and
the breakdown of the postwar system of international monetary exchange (Chandler
2009). During this period, pharmaceutical companies were merely investigating the
transition to guided discovery, and what it would take to incorporate the new
technical knowledge and procedures with the advent of molecular biology.
However, no momentum appeared in light of the new technology and no successful
biotech ﬁrm emerged until the late 80s, with the exception of Genentech, founded
in 1976, now a subsidiary of Roche as of 2009.
Following the chemical crisis between 1979 and 1982, chemical ﬁrms had also
begun to redeﬁne product lines to commercialize, mostly by buying and selling
business units from one another (Chandler 2009). The coming of new pharma-
ceutical technologies based on a new science (molecular genetics) presented a
dramatically different pattern of growth to which pharmaceutical ﬁrms had no
inherent advantage over chemical ﬁrms (Kenney 1986). To increase proﬁts, there
was a trend among US pharmaceutical companies to diversify into related consumer
chemicals (household and personal goods), food and drink, as well as medical
instruments and devices—an industry related in terms of markets, but not tech-
nology. However, these ﬁrms quickly realized that the less diversiﬁed their com-
pany the better their ﬁnancial performance, and the stronger positioned they were to
recognize the importance of biotech in addition to exploiting the new learning in
traditional biology, especially microbiology.
In the meantime, chemical companies began a large-scale restructuring of their
product portfolios, ﬁrst by strengthening their core competencies followed by the
drive into pharmaceuticals—that is, developing products based on the new science
of biology than chemistry. For example, Monsanto was the ﬁrst to successfully
grow capabilities in traditional biology and biotechnology, and in trying to com-
mercialize chemically based and genetically engineered agricultural products.
248
S. Edris

However, not all chemical ﬁrms were particularly successful. Du Pont’s response to
the crisis was to diversify into pharmaceuticals by acquiring a small drug company,
Endo, then by forming a joint venture with Merck, through which Du Pont would
learn how to develop the necessary functional capabilities. Unable to compete with
industry rivals, Du Point sold its’ pharmaceutical division to Bristol-Meyers Squibb
in 2001. Dow had also quickly failed, abandoning its attempt to enter through
acquisitions, including its’ 1989 Marion Laboratories, which it later sold to Hoechst
5 years later. While these companies had strong marketing capabilities, they failed
to build ties with startups, universities, and research institutes, which would later
become especially important in the third paradigm. European chemical ﬁrms were
more successful in shifting their focus from chemicals to pharmaceuticals by
quickly selling or spinning off their chemical businesses: e.g. following the merger
of Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz in 1995 that formed Novartis, the ﬁrm quickly sold off
its’ chemical businesses to focus on pharmaceuticals; Hoechst merger with
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer to form Aventis, led the ﬁrm to spin off its chemical busi-
nesses; Britain’s ICI spun off its’ pharmaceutical division as a separate enterprise
(Zeneca).
In sum, large pharmaceutical ﬁrms were fully integrated from drug discovery
through clinical development, regulations, manufacturing, and marketing. Within
this
paradigm,
these
ﬁrms
produced a
range
of drugs,
prescription
and
over-the-counter, relying on a few best sellers, each with annual sales in excess of
$1
billion.
Drug
discovery
had
been
conducted
in-house,
where
large
random-screening programs were used with, as mentioned earlier, limited knowl-
edge about the underlying physiological processes. However, this in-house capacity
had begun to rely upon collaborations with other organizations, including univer-
sities, research institutes, and government-funded institutes.
9.3.3
Third Paradigm (1990 to Date)
The advent of molecular biology attracted a number of ﬁrms from different tech-
nological traditions, and had a great impact on a number of other ﬁelds, including
chemicals, diagnostics and agriculture. Needless to say, the new science had its
greatest impact on human therapeutics, and the organizational structure of the
pharmaceutical industry. First, the potential to understand disease processes at the
molecular (genetic) level and to determine optimal molecular targets for drug
intervention presented new concepts of drug discovery. In the current paradigm, the
search for a new drug begins with a therapeutic area of interest, and analysis of
existing drugs and patents. Scientists mine the scientiﬁc literature to identify a drug
target—a protein (e.g. enzymes, receptors) or nucleic acid (e.g. DNA, RNA)
involved in a disease to which a drug is directed to change its’ behavior or function.
With information on drug targets, genes, and the biological mechanisms responsible
for the disease, medicinal chemists comb through a what is known as a “chemical
space” to design and synthesize compounds that can bind to the target. Leading
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
249

candidate compounds are then selected for advancement into clinical trials. This
approach to drug discovery is known as reverse pharmacology or target-based drug
discovery (Drews 2000).
By the mid-1990s, ﬁrms were quick to adopt a novel technique called “com-
binatorial chemistry” and replaced synthetic and medicinal chemists with powerful
computation tools. These tools lowered the cost per molecule achieved, by allowing
chemists to create millions of related compounds in a single step, and model
3-dimensional structures of gene targets with those chemical structures. Around the
same time, the ﬁrst draft of the human genome was introduced by the Human
Genome Project, which enhanced coordinated search efforts in drug discovery by
providing a clearer picture of the target landscape. In other words, the availability of
the human genome map was a complementary innovation for target-based drug
discovery (Hoang and Rothaermel 2010); the map was therefore mainly beneﬁcial
to ﬁrms experienced in target-based strategies, which were either large, diversiﬁed,
and research intensive ﬁrms or smaller specialized biotech ﬁrms with unique
intellectual properties (Zucker et al. 1994).
To be sure, the challenge for long-established core pharmaceutical companies—
which had continued to rely on the support of the existing nexus that had been so
enlarged by the post-WWII therapeutic revolution (Chandler 2009)—was to
incorporate new technical knowledge and procedures and transition to the “drug
discovery by design” (from a process of trial and error). In addition, these com-
panies had to maintain the new sub disciplines of biology (including microbiology,
enzymology, and biochemistry). Pharmaceutical companies were the ﬁrst to shift
towards the biotech model for R&D, and therefore develop strong ties to various
scientiﬁc institutions (universities and government research laboratories) which
were heavily supported by governments with funding for research in the new
science that could aid the private sector’s R&D. Countries therefore sought to create
the optimal ﬁnancial arrangements for public-private partnerships. In the US, funds
are administered through the government-owned National Institute of Health (NIH),
funding more than one-third of biomedical research. The Foundation of the NIH
(FNIH) was an additional government agency that supported research and educa-
tional programs as well as foster collaborative relationships between the NIH, ﬁrms
active in pharmaceuticals, universities, and non-proﬁt organizations. The nature of
these collaborations were speciﬁed in formal contracts (including cost sharing and
rights to patents). In the UK, biomedical research is funded by the Department of
Health, the Medical Research Council, and private foundations such as the
Wellcome Trust (UK); France and Germany, biomedical research is performed
directly in government research laboratories, such as CNRS, INSERM, Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Max Plank Gesellschaft.
Pharmaceutical companies therefore gained advantage in becoming the ﬁrst
industrial group to learn and recognize the importance of molecular biology, rDNA,
and biotech through a number of intangible beneﬁts, including membership to
scientiﬁc networks, where interactions improve the learning activities of partici-
pants, i.e. company scientists (Kenney 1986; Pavitt 1991). And so were also the
ﬁrst to redeﬁne their strategic boundaries and acquire the research tools and
250
S. Edris

production technology the new sciences had to offer. However, the maturing of
biotechnology as a research and manufacturing technique brought an increasing
number of MNCs into the industry and increased competition. As discussed pre-
viously, chemical ﬁrms sought to reverse stagnation, using the products of biotech
as a tool to create new products for agriculture.
The synergies between the skills developed in applications of biotech to agri-
culture and medicine meant that pharmaceutical companies had no inherent
advantages over chemical ﬁrms in producing drugs (Kenney 1986), and so the
technical barriers between chemical and pharmaceuticals, both producers and
marketers of molecules, eroded. Put differently, the use of molecular biology as a
production tool was a competence destroying innovation (Henderson et al. 1999),
particularly for ﬁrms that had little experience with target-based strategies. While
pharmaceutical companies had the advantage in becoming the ﬁrst industrial group
to recognize the importance of biotech, and take the lead in their investments,
chemical ﬁrms were larger ﬁnancial entities and increasingly research-oriented
(Kenney 1986). Thus, chemical executives saw pharmaceuticals as an ideal area to
expand into, given the technical similarities (e.g. strong screening programs), and
especially due to the relative importance of owning propriety rights to molecules in
the new era; whereas pharmaceutical companies met the competitive entry of the
leading chemical companies, resulting in a decade of international mergers. The
purpose of these mergers was to enter markets where the barriers to entry were too
high due to an increase in patenting new disease related genes. The only way to
combine strengths in different geographical markets, capture economies of scale
and scope, and expand potential products in the pipeline was through a merger
(Chandler 2009).
By the 1990s, every large chemical and pharmaceutical ﬁrm had adopted more
than one strategy to ensure a strong position in the bio-revolution. Investments have
ranged from the development of in-house research capacity, linkages with uni-
versities to compensate internal resources and infrastructure for conducting R&D,
capital investments in biotech start-ups, to a combination of strategies in accordance
with the particular market position of the ﬁrms. Prior investments in R&D (i.e.
genome technologies, combinatorial chemistry tools and speciﬁc diseases) have
shown to inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s exploratory search efforts and ability to absorb new
scientiﬁc knowledge (Rosenberg 1990). This ‘preadaptation’ to exploit the
opportunities (Cattani 2005) provided by the new science also explains the uneven
distribution of exploratory search efforts across ﬁrms located near universities.
To be sure, whereas the world’s largest industrial ﬁrms account for 60% of total
patenting across all ﬁelds, large ﬁrms active in the pharmaceutical sector only
account for 37% of pharmaceutical patents. This is likely due to the fact that there
are other important actors in the industry, including smaller and specialized biotech
ﬁrms, universities, hospitals, research institutes, and government agencies and
national laboratories. For such smaller actors, particularly smaller pharmaceutical
ﬁrms, and where biotech ﬁrms emerged, knowledge ﬂows tend to be geographically
localized. Indeed, according to one line of research, the economic beneﬁts of basic
research are not really widely and freely available (D’Este Guy and Iammarino
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
251

2013; D’Este and Iammarino 2010; Jaffe et al. 1993). For the most part, these
beneﬁts are geographically (and linguistically) localized, since they are embodied in
institutions
and
individuals,
and
transmitted
principally
through
personal
face-to-face contacts. However, it has also been shown, though not as subject to
empirical testing, that large pharmaceutical ﬁrms search globally for the best uni-
versity science-based knowledge (de Solla Price 1965).
The international business literature in particular has highlighted the role of
cross-border external knowledge acquisition for innovation strategy (Monteiro
2015; Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017; Cano-Kollmann et al. 2016; Cantwell 2017),
and the relative signiﬁcance of local versus global knowledge sourcing in tech-
nological development. The establishment of common social communities across
the subunits of the international MNE network (Kogut and Zander 1993), the
collaboration between those subunits (Berry et al. 2014; Cantwell and Piscitello
2015), and deliberate effort of the MNE to coordinate the activities performed by
those subunits, particularly those which develop a knowledge embeddedness within
the MNE group (Asakawa et al. 2018; Cantwell and Piscitello 2014) and search for
excellence within their core domain globally (Turkina and Van Assche 2018;
Scalera et al. 2018), has been shown to be critical for the development of new
combinations of knowledge around the core business expertise of the corporate
group. Moreover, because the context of the pharmaceutical industry involves a
community of ﬁrms from different technological traditions, large ﬁrms are
increasingly motivated by cooperation in learning processes across locationally
dispersed centers (Sachwald 1998; Mowery et al. 1998; Rosenberg 1982a, b). This
is due to (1) the growing signiﬁcance of basic science within technological
knowledge, (2) rising technological interrelatedness and technology fusion,
(3) emergence of broader technological systems, and (4) rising costs of R&D.
The ability of large ﬁrms to develop new knowledge by combining their internal
(specialized) knowledge base with complementary areas of knowledge developed
by other actors, such as ﬁrms in the same industry, as well as those in a different
industry, and especially universities and research institutes (which provide basic
science), and hospitals (which undertake basic and applied research), has therefore
been critical for a successful innovation strategy (Veugelers and Cassiman 1999;
Cohen and Levinthal 1990). Together, internal research, collaborations with sci-
entiﬁc institutes, in-licensing, etc., increase absorptive capacities (Cockburn and
Henderson 1998; Gittelman and Kogut 2003). As shown in the context of biotech,
inter-ﬁrm agreements for technology exchange result in a more focused proﬁle of
technological specialization, which varies depending on whether agreements extend
to cooperative learning or restricted to a simple exchange of knowledge (Hagedoorn
1990; Hagedoorn and Schakenraad 1992). Cooperative research ventures can
therefore be seen as a compliment to in-house development whereby the ﬁrm’s own
problem-solving and learning sets the agenda for what is usefully searched when
monitoring the external environment.
In summary, the environment within which the major pharmaceutical, biotech,
and chemical ﬁrms operate in the current paradigm has become more focused and
business networked, where various organizations interact more directly, and within
252
S. Edris

which the gap between academia and large pharmaceutical companies has bridged
and strengthened. “Networking has become more essential than ever in scientiﬁc
and technical activities, as can be demonstrated by the rapid growth of collaborative
research, joint ventures, consultancy, various types of licensing and know-how
agreements, joint data banks, and, of course, innumerable forms of tacit informal
collaboration (Freeman and Louca 2001, p. 327).”
9.4
Interpreting the Process of Paradigm Change
in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
The received structure of the pharmaceutical industry is best represented in sum-
mary of the three paradigms. Table 9.1 summarizes the major developments in
science, technology, types of business organization, national institutions, and
political and economic trends since the mid-19th century.
The predominant drug discovery strategy in the earlier paradigm was non-target
based, or phenotypic drug discovery (Scannell et al. 2012; Lipinski and Hopkins
2004), a method of modifying bioactive compounds without a clear understanding
of the drug target or underlying disease, and testing them for efﬁcacy in animals.
This method is also known as non-target based, or trial and error learning approach,
which had been long established in pharmaceutical ﬁrms (Gittelman 2016).
Target-based strategies were resource intensive and required deep background
knowledge of gene targets, and the adoption of computational tools and screening
capabilities. The historical coincidence between World War II crash programs, the
introduction of new organizational routines, and the relative strength of American
and British positions in the science of biology differentiated the pattern of devel-
opment of pharmaceutical activities in the English-speaking world. These countries
witnessed the birth of specialized pharmaceutical producers who leveraged on the
technical experience and organizational capabilities accumulated through wartime
efforts to develop antibiotic drugs. By contrast, German and Swiss companies,
which had previously dominated the world’s prescription drug markets, as well as
French producers, were preoccupied with wartime pressures. The advent of
molecular biology in the 1970s and entry of chemical ﬁrms following the crisis in
the chemical industry created many challenges and increased competition.
Economic, political and social trends in the second paradigm continued to disturb
the environment for which long-time pharmaceutical producers operated.
Drug discovery in the current paradigm is an inter-disciplinary endeavor
(Fleming and Sorenson 2004); it involves the recombination of new and existing
component technologies (Henderson and Clark 1990; Fleming and Sorenson 2001)
as well as scientiﬁc knowledge to explore the technological landscape and work
with smaller sets of possible combinations without full experimentation. In addi-
tion, the organization of drug discovery involves more actors and requires new ﬁrm
capabilities (genomics, combinatorial chemistry, computational sciences), and so
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
253

the setting of the third paradigm is more collaborative and networked than previous
paradigms. The strong university-industry interactions in the US, for example,
speciﬁcally the openness of American universities to entrepreneurial activity on the
part of their researchers (Mazzoleni and Neslon 2007), further encouraged the
developments that opened up a new route for the American pharmaceutical
industry, and in gaining a leading position in the new biotech sector. With several
thousand biotech ﬁrms launching by the end of the second to the beginning of the
third paradigm, drug discovery became more science-intensive, and the importance
of ﬁrm-university relations, and relations with publicly funded institutes increased.
Finding, characterizing, and developing medicines has become so complex that
new technical and institutional instruments are being generated to apply new sci-
entiﬁc advances to the solution of societal problems. While areas like cancer have
beneﬁted from strong academic and corporate research (several anti-cancer drugs
Table 9.1 Major developments in the history of the pharmaceutical industry
Paradigm 1 (1850–1939)
Paradigm 2 (1940–1989)
Paradigm 3 (1990–date)
Science
• Chemistry
• Pharmacology
• Physiology
• Enzymology
• Microbiology
• Molecular biology
• Genetics
Technology
• Chemical synthesis
• Fermentation
• Transition from
phenotypic to
target-based discovery
• Combinatorial
chemistry and
computational tools
Business
organization
• Hierarchical
organizations/
functional
specialization
• Scale and scope/vertical
integration
• International expansion
• Managerial structure
organizations
• In-House R&D
• Fully integrated
• Diversiﬁcation via
mergers
• Network organizations
• Equity/Research
contracts; JVs;
Licensing
• Divestures; Mergers/
Acquisitions
Institutional
environment
• Germany/Switzerland:
Strong university
training in chemistry
• No connections with
science
• Food and Drug Act
• Diamond versus
Chakrabarty Supreme
Court patent decision
• Bay-Dohle Act, and
similar national
policies
• Orphan Drug Act
• Loose connections with
science
• US: Venture capital;
Entrepreneurial
interest of Professors
• Scientiﬁc maps
• Worldwide: intimate
connections with
science
Political and
economic
trends
• International networks
(including cartels)
• New transport/
communication
technologies
• Energy intensity (oil
based)
• Centralization/
metropolitan centers
• Nationalistic policies,
world agreements and
confrontation
• Wartime investments
• Crisis in the chemical
industry
• Global and local
connectivity
• Information intensity
(ICT)
• External versus
Internal cooperation
(clusters)
Source Author’s own analysis
254
S. Edris

achieved blockbuster status by the early 2000s, including MabThera, Gilvec,
Eloxatine, Gemzar, Casodex, Taxotere and Zometa), other areas, like neurology and
neuroscience have not beneﬁted from target-based research to the same extent.
Health issues in less developed countries have also received less attention than the
US, Western Europe and Japan, which consumed most of the world’s total pro-
duction of pharmaceuticals. Advances made in technology, artiﬁcial intelligence in
particular, is continuing to change drug discovery science, and appropriate strate-
gies, i.e. developing optimal research relationships across countries.
The paradigms identiﬁed herein therefore exhibit a change that is subsequently
synthesized in light of new interconnections between scientiﬁc, business and
government institutions. As argued in Sect. 9.2, old paradigms can be seen as
retained and embedded in subsequent paradigms due to the cumulative nature of its
subsystems. Science and technology are cumulatively developed, new institutions
embody old formations, and political, economic and social contradictions are
ultimately resolved and integrated in practice. The implication for large pharma-
ceutical companies developing new strategies to deal with new challenges and
opportunities is to take into consideration various differences between countries,
long governmental approval processes, R&D projects and collaborative research
efforts, and participation in supporting a biotech sector that appears to be in
ﬁnancial disarray. Various new technologies, including AI, also seem to be
changing patterns of drug discovery science, and so pharmaceutical companies will
need to adopt the new developments in technologies.
9.5
Future Research and Potential Uses of Data
This chapter has assessed changes over time in the drivers of paradigm change in
the pharmaceutical industry, including the effects of scientiﬁc and technological
innovation, business organization and governance structures, and background
economic and social developments. The histories told herein do not provide a
complete synthesis of events, but rather highlight the major developments that
explain shifts between each paradigm, emphasizing a systemic interpretation, not
just the developments of its’ parts per se. The chapter relies on a general framework
that draws attention to issues that relate science, technology, business organization,
institutions, national boundaries, and the interconnectedness of the global economy.
Consequently, the chapter can be used as a starting point for understanding when
new paradigms emerge, and how, in terms of the processes discussed herein. The
discussions also help facilitate a more in-depth analysis of the shifts in
science-technology relationships in the course of paradigm change. In fact, a series
of questions have been raised in the course of this research, and which are worth
noting for future research.
First, what is the structure of the knowledge networks on which a population of
ﬁrms in the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and chemical ﬁrms have relied inter-
nationally? What are the preferred sources of knowledge in the pharmaceutical
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
255

industry in leading countries for innovation? Second, when organized by nation-
ality, how does the structure of knowledge networks compare to the structure of
knowledge sources on which ﬁrms rely in their research elsewhere in the world? In
particular, what is the organizational and geographic composition, and the rela-
tionship between localized geographic proximity and global excellence at a dis-
tance? How should internal and external knowledge sources be combined, how
important are hospitals compared to universities as knowledge sources for the
industry, and to what extent are these relationships geographically localized? Third,
what are the implications of technological change as a corporate learning process
for technology-based alliances? What is the relative signiﬁcance of public and
private linkages? Fourth, what are the pressures that seem to lead pharmaceutical
ﬁrms to relocate their activities from one city to another within countries? How does
the composition of innovation, and the linkages between science and technology in
particular be responsible for an evolution in the geographic proﬁle and nature of
investments? Finally, what is the role of cross-border networks in the transmission
of knowledge within the ﬁrm? What are the implications for managers and public
policy?
Given the difﬁculty and secrecy involved in obtaining ﬁrm R&D investments,
patents of large ﬁrms and corporate groups active in the pharmaceutical industry
provide an interesting empirical setting for future research to examine these
questions. A patent is a legal document and a set of exclusionary rights granted by
an authorized governmental agency (Griliches 1990). The right embedded in the
patent can be assigned by the inventor to somebody else, usually a corporation, and/
or sold to or licensed for use by somebody else. In the past, inventors contracted
with ﬁrms. But in view of changing organizational structure, this relationship
became adapted within the ﬁrm, as speciﬁed in the employment contract, where the
inventor is an employee of a ﬁrm, and assigns the invention to a ﬁrm, if such was
invented in a corporate lab. In this way, the patent is granted to the inventor
(inventor-team). And at the time of grant, the inventor then assigns the patent to an
organization. The dimensions covered for the use of patent statistics include: (i) the
year of grant and application; (ii) type of technological activity, derived from
historically consistent patent class system; (iii) city or town and country of the
inventor’s residence (host country); (iv) the organization to which patent has been
assigned. In turn, the assignee organization can be identiﬁed with an owner, such as
a corporate group (corporate consolidation requires an extensive search into the
history of those ﬁrms), along with its’ sectoral and home country code (derived
from external sources), as well as the nature of the background context; (v) cita-
tions, essentially knowledge building, because of the dependence on earlier (in-
terdependent) increments of knowledge.
In ﬁelds like chemicals and pharmaceuticals, a large part of the inventions is
codiﬁed in patent applications, because they provide ﬁrms with key, inimitable
resource (Gambardella 1992), the ability to “patent block” their rivals from entering
product markets or disease areas, as well as forcing rivals those rivals into nego-
tiations (Cohen et al. 2000; Ziedonis 2004; McGrath and Nerkar 2004). Table 9.2
provides a listing of the top patenting corporate groups and private companies in
256
S. Edris

pharmaceutical technologies. Future research can examine the ownership structure
and identify the subsidiaries of each ﬁrm and corporate group involved in phar-
maceutical research through an extensive search into their history (including merger
and acquisition activity, sectoral and home country codes) using the D&B Who
Owns Whom directories, Bloomberg, public announcements made by those com-
panies, company websites, and via informal interviews with contacts employed at
those companies. It can then extract from the USPTO websites all patents granted to
those ﬁrms. US data offer a disaggregation by cross-country, cross-ﬁrm, structural
and historical dimensions on a scale that is not achievable through other sources.
Together, ﬁrms reported in Table 9.2 account for about 37% of pharma
patenting in the US between 1976 and 2016, implying there are other important
actors in the industry, such as smaller and specialized biotech ﬁrms, universities,
hospitals, research institutes, and government agencies and national laboratories.
Table 9.2 Listing of major companies
Company
Nationality
Current product lines
Date of foundation
Abbvie
US
Pharmaceuticals and biologics
2013
Abbott Labs
US
Pharmaceuticals, diagnostics,
Medical devices
1888
Bristol Myers
Squibb
US
Pharmaceuticals and biologics
1887, merged with Squibb
in 1989
Eli Lilly
US
Pharmaceuticals
1876
Johnson &
Johnson
US
Pharmaceuticals, medical
devices, consumer health
1886
Merck & Co.
US
Pharmaceuticals
1891 as subsidiary of
Merck; 1917 as independent
Pﬁzer
US
Pharmaceuticals
1849
Valeant
Pharmaceuticals
CA
Pharmaceuticals
1859
AstraZeneca
UK
Pharmaceuticals and biologics
1999 by merger of
Astra & Zeneca
GlaxoSmithKline
UK
Pharmaceuticals, vaccines,
healthcare
2000 by merger of
Glaxo & Smith Kline
Allergan
IE
Pharmaceuticals
2013
SanoﬁAventis
FR
Pharmaceuticals and biologics
2004 by merger of
Sanoﬁ& Aventis
Bayer
DE
Pharmaceuticals, diagnostics,
women health, plant
biotechnology
1863
Merck Group
DE
Biologics
1668
Hoffman-La
Roche
CH
Pharmaceuticals, diagnostics
1896
(continued)
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
257

Table 9.2 (continued)
Company
Nationality
Current product lines
Date of foundation
Novartis
CH
Pharmaceuticals, consumer
Health, animal health
1996 by merger of
Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz
Novo Nordisk
DK
Pharmaceuticals
1923
Teva
Pharmaceuticals
IL
Pharmaceuticals
1901
Astellas Pharma
JP
Pharmaceuticals
2005 by merger of
Yamanouchi & Fujisawa
Daiichi Sankyo
Co. Ltd
JP
Pharmaceuticals, medical
equipment
2005 by merger of
Daiichi & Sankyo
Ono
Pharmaceuticals
JP
Pharmaceuticals, diagnostics
1717
Otsuka
Pharmaceuticals
JP
Pharmaceuticals
1964
Shionogi
JP
Pharmaceuticals, diagnostics,
medical devices
1878
Takeda Chemical
Industries
JP
Pharmaceuticals
1781
Amgen
US
Biologics
1980
Biogen
US
Biologics
1978, by merger
Celgene
US
Biologics
1986, spinoff of Celanese
Gilead Sciences
US
Biologics
1987
Immunomedics
US
Biologics
1982
Incyte
Pharmaceuticals
US
Biologics
1991
Ionis
Pharmaceuticals
US
Biologics
1989
Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals
US
Biologics
1988
Rigel
Pharmaceuticals
US
Biologics
1996
Vertex
Pharmaceuticals
US
Biologics
1989
Colgate
Palmolive
US
Household and personal,
healthcare supplies
1806
Dow Chemical
US
Chemicals, plastics, paints,
agrochemicals, gas and oil
1897
Du Pont
US
Chemicals, plastics, paints,
agrochemicals, gas and oil
1802
Monsanto
US
Agrochemicals
1901 until 2018, acquired by
Bayer
Procter &
Gamble
US
Personal health/consumer care
1837
(continued)
258
S. Edris

These ﬁrms also reﬂect recent consolidation, including Pﬁzer’s acquisition of
Pharmacia, the merger of Sanoﬁand Aventis to form Sanoﬁ-Aventis, and so on.
Network analysis can complement traditional empirical methodologies to under-
stand the innovation landscape using patent citations, which, by constructing nodes
(organizations) from the patents and the links between them using citations, reveals
the social structure of the network, identifying actors and their connections. From
this perspective, the focus of attention is the wider system or the structure of
knowledge ﬂows, not the individual actors per se. To examine the organizational
character of the ﬁrm’s knowledge network (using SNA methods), the patents cited
by the top corporate groups can also be extracted from the USPTO. Further con-
solidation of the knowledge sources (the organizations being cited by those ﬁrms,
e.g. universities, hospitals, research institutes, ﬁrms outside of the industry, etc.) is
then required. All pairs of citing and cited patents identiﬁed can be grouped
according
to
whether
the
implied
knowledge
ﬂow
was
intra-
versus
inter-organizational, and whether it was localized versus global, etc., depending on
the research question.
9.6
Conclusion
In this chapter, I tell the history of the pharmaceutical industry by focusing on the
relationship between science and technology, the changes in the nature and struc-
ture of the largest companies active in the industry, the connection between orga-
nizational level developments and macroeconomic trends, and the institutional
structure that affect the organizational and locational character of the industry’s
knowledge network. I conceptualize the nature of paradigm change as a shift from
preceding patterns of commercializing pharmaceutical technologies by relating
scientiﬁc advances to organization-level developments as well as macroeconomic
Table 9.2 (continued)
Company
Nationality
Current product lines
Date of foundation
Reckitt
Benckiser
UK
Household and personal care,
healthcare, pharmaceuticals
1999, merger of Reckitt &
Colman and Benckiser
Syngenta
CH
Agrochemicals
2000
BASF
DE
Chemicals, plastics, paints,
agrochemicals, gas and oil
1865
Novozymes
DK
Biologics
2000
AkzoNobel
NL
Chemicals, paints
1994, merger of Akzo and
Nobel
Mitsubishi
Chemical
Holdings
JP
Chemicals
2005, merger of Mitsubishi
Chemical and Mitsubishi
Pharma
Source Authors’ own analysis
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
259

trends. This provides the analytical structure for which the histories of the phar-
maceutical industry are told: Paradigm 1 (1850 to 1939), Paradigm 2 (1940 to
1989), and Paradigm 3 (1990 to date), within which the reciprocal inﬂuence of the
developments that occur within each of the aforementioned subsystems are har-
moniously connected.
However, this chapter is not without its limits. The accounts of the three para-
digms told herein, and the shifts between them, are brief, as it was not my immediate
intention to synthesize all events for event sake. I merely distinguish three paradigms
to conceptualize the way in which path-dependent and mainly incremental changes to
previous patterns of development led to a qualitative transformation that induced a
movement from one epoch to another. I therefore hope this chapter can be used as a
starting point for researchers interested in the industry, and able to provoke an interest
in the questions proposed herein or inspire new questions to be explored, through
which tentative predictions about ﬁrm and knowledge networks, and the evolution of
the industry and geographic setting can be made.
As previously noted, while various studies have paid attention to the structure of
the health care system, the institutional arrangements surrounding health-related
research, and the role of intellectual property protection in affecting the processes of
innovation, scant attention has been paid to the interaction between the shift in the
technological paradigm in this industry from chemistry to the life sciences, the
changes in organizational composition over time, as well as the context within which
the interactions between various organizations have taken place. As maintained
herein, the process of paradigm change in the pharmaceutical industry cannot be fully
understood where any of these developments are treated in isolation of one another.
References
Arthur, W. B. (2009). The nature of technology: What it is, and how it evolves. New York: Free
Press.
Asakawa, K., Park, Y., Song, J., & Kim, S.-J. (2018). Internal embeddedness, geographic distance,
and global knowledge sourcing by overseas subsidiaries. Journal of International Business
Studies, 49(6), 743–752.
Berry, H., Guillé, M. F., & Zhou, N. (2014). Is there convergence across countries? A spatial
approach. Journal of International Business Studies, 45(4), 387–404.
Cano-Kollmann, M., Cantwell, J. A., Hannigan, T. J., Mudambi, R., & Song, J. (2016).
Knowledge connectivity: An agenda for innovation research in international business. Journal
of International Business Studies, 47(3), 255–262.
Cantwell, J. A. (1989). Technological innovation and multinational corporations. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Cantwell, J. (2002). Innovation, Proﬁts and Growth: Penrose and Schumpeter. In Pitelis, The
growth of the ﬁrm: the legacy of Edith Penros (pp. 215–248). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cantwell, J. A. (2004). An historical change in the nature of corporate technological
diversiﬁcation, chapter 10. In J.A. Cantwell, A. Gambardella & O. Granstrand (Eds.), The
economics and management of technological diversiﬁcation. New York: Routledge.
Cantwell, J. A. (2017). Innovation and international business. Industry and Innovation, 24(1), 41–60.
260
S. Edris

Cantwell, J., Dunning, J. H., & Sarianna, M. L. (2010). An evolutionary approach to
understanding international business activity: The co-evolution of MNEs and the institutional
environment. Journal of International Business Studies, 41, 567–586.
Cantwell, J. A., & Piscitello, L. (2014). Historical changes in the determinants of the composition
of innovative activity in MNC subunits. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23(3), 633–660.
Cantwell, J. A., & Piscitello, L. (2015). New competence creation in multinational company
subunits: The role of international knowledge. World Economy, 38(2), 231–254.
Cattani, G. (2005). Preadaptation, ﬁrm heterogeneity, and technological performance: A study on
the evolution of ﬁber optics, 1970–1995. Organization Science, 16(6), 563–580.
Chandler, A. D. (1986). Technological and organizational underpinnings of modern industrial
multinational enterprise: The dynamics of competitive advantage, chapter 2 in A. Teichova, M.
Lévy-Leboyer and H. Nussbaum (Eds.), Multinational enterprise in historical perspective,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chandler, Jr., A. D. (2009). Shaping the industrial century: The remarkable story of the evolution
of the modern chemical and pharmaceutical industries. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Christensen, C. M. (1993). The rigid disk drive industry: A history of commercial and
technological turbulence. Business History Review, 67(4), 531–588.
Cockburn, I., & Henderson, R. M. (1998). Absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the
organization of research in drug discovery. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 157–
182.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
Appropriability conditions and why U.S. manufacturing ﬁrms patent (or not). National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper No.7552.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly: 128–152.
D’Este, P., Guy, F., & Iammarino, S. (2013). Shaping the formation of university-industry research
collaborations: What type of proximity does really matter? Journal of Economic Geography,
13(4), 537–558.
D’Este, P., & Iammarino, S. (2010). The spatial proﬁle of university-business research
partnerships. Papers in Regional Science, 89(2), 335–350.
de Solla Price, D. (1965). Is technology historically independent of science? A study in statistical
historiography. Technology and Culture, 6, 553–568.
de Solla Price, D. (1984). The science-technology relationship. Research Policy, 13(1), 3–20.
Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories. Research Policy, 11(3),
147–162.
Drews, J. (2000). Drug discovery: A historical perspective. Science, 287(5460), 1960–1964.
Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2001). Technology as a complex adaptive system: Evidence from
patent data. Research Policy, 30(7), 1019–1039.
Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2004). Science as a map in technological search. Strategic
Management Journal, 25, 909–928.
Freeman, C., & Louca, F. (2001). As Time goes by: From the industrial revolutions to the
information revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gambardella, A. (1992). Competitive advantages from in-house scientiﬁc research: The US
pharmaceutical industry in the 1980s. Research Policy, 21(5), 391–407.
Gambardella, A. (1995). Science and innovation in the US pharmaceutical industry. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gittelman, M. (2016). The revolution re-visited: Clinical and genetics research paradigms and the
productivity paradox in drug discovery. Research Policy.
Gittelman, M., & Kogut, B. (2003). Does good science lead to valuable knowledge?
Biotechnology ﬁrms and the evolutionary logic of citation patterns. Management Science,
49(4), 366–382.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. Journal of Economic
Literature., 28(4), 1661–1707.
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
261

Hagedoorn, J. (1990). Organizational modes of inter-ﬁrm cooperation and technology transfer.
Technovation, 10, 17–30.
Hagedoorn, J., & Schakenraad, J. (1992). Leading companies and networks of strategic alliances in
information technologies. Research Policy, 21, 163–191.
Helfat, C., & Raubitschek, R. (2000). Product sequencing: Co-evolution of knowledge,
capabilities and products. Strategic Management Journal, 21(10–11), 961–979.
Henderson, R. (1994). The evolution of integrative competence: Innovation in cardiovascular drug
discovery. Industrial and Corporate Change, 3(3), 607–630.
Henderson, R. M., & Clark, K. B. (1990). Architectural innovation: The reconﬁguration of existing
product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 9–30.
Henderson, R., & Cockburn, I. (1994) Measuring competence? Exploring ﬁrm effects in
pharmaceutical research. Strategic Management Journal, 15, 63–84. Winter special issue.
Henderson, R., Orsenigo, L., & Pisano, G. P. (1999). The pharmaceutical industry and the
revolution in molecular biology: interactions among scientiﬁc, institutional, and organizational
change. In D. C. Mowery & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), Sources of industrial leadership (pp. 267–
311). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hoang, H., & Rothaermel, F. T. (2010). Leveraging internal and external experience: Exploration,
exploitation, and R&D project performance. Strategic Management Journal, 31, 734–758.
Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographical localization of knowledge
spillovers, as evidenced by patent citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 58(3), 577–598.
Kenney, M. (1986). Biotechnology: The university-industrial complex. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1993). Knowledge of the ﬁrm and the evolutionary theory of the
multinational corporation. Journal of International Business Studies, 24(4), 625–645.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Liebenau, J. (1987). Medical science and medical industry: The formation of the americal
pharmaceutical industry. Macmillan Press.
Lipinski, C., & Hopkins, A. (2004). Navigating chemical space for biology and medicine. Nature,
432(7019), 855–861.
Mazzoleni, R., & Neslon, R. R. (2007). Public research institutions and economic catch-up.
Research Policy, 36, 1512–1528.
McGrath, R. G., & Nerkar, A. (2004). Real options reasoning and a new look at the R&D
investment strategies of pharmaceutical ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal, 25(1), 1–21.
Monteiro, L. F. (2015). Selective attention and the initiation of the global knowledge-sourcing
process in multinational corporations. Journal of International Business Studies, 46(5), 505–527.
Monteiro, L. F., & Birkinshaw, J. (2017). The external knowledge sourcing process in
multinational corporations. Strategic Management Journal, 38(2), 342–362.
Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E., & Silverman, B. S. (1998). Technological overlap and interﬁrm
cooperation: Implications for the resource-basedview ofthe ﬁrm. ResearchPolicy,27(5),507–523.
Nelson, R. R., & Sampat, B. N. (2001). Making sense of institutions as a factor shaping economic
performance. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 31–54.
Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1982). An evolutionary theory of economic change. Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Neslon, R., & Winter, S. G. (1977). In search of a useful theory of innovation. Research Policy, 6
(1), 36–76.
North, D. C. (2005). Understanding the process of economic change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Pavitt, K. L. R. (1991). What makes basic research economically useful? Research Policy, 20(2),
20–109.
Pavitt, K. (1995). Academic research and technical change. In J. Krige & D. Pestre (Eds.), Science
in the 20th Century (pp. 58–143). Amsterdam: Harwood Academic.
Rosenberg, N. (1969). Directions of technological change: inducement mechanisms and focusing
devices. Economic Developments and Cultural Change, 18, 1–24.
262
S. Edris

Rosenberg, N. (1974). Science, inventions and economic growth. Economic Journal, 100, 725–
729.
Rosenberg, N. (1976). Perspectives on technology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1982a). Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1982b). Technological interdependence in the American economy, chapter 3 in
Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1990). Why do ﬁrms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy,
19, 165–174.
Rosenberg, N., & Nelson, R. R. (1994). American universities and technical advance in industry.
Research Policy, 23(3), 323–348.
Sachwald, F. (1998). Cooperative agreements and the theory of the ﬁrm: Focusing on barriers to
change. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 35(2), 203–228.
Scalera, V. G., Perri, A., & Hannigan, T. J. (2018). Knowledge connectedness within and across
home country borders: Spatial heterogeneity and the technological scope of ﬁrm innovations.
Journal of International Business Studies, 49(8), 990–1009.
Scannell, J. W., et al. (2012). Diagnosing the decline in pharmaceutical R&D efﬁciency. Nature
reviews. Drug Discovery 11(3) (pp. 191–200). Tripp, Simon, and Martin Grueber.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management.
Strategic Management Journal, 509–533.
Tripsas, M. (1997). Unraveling the process of creative destruction: Complementary assets and
incumbent survival in the typesetter industry. Strategic Management Journal, 119–142.
Tunzelmann, N., Malerba, F., Nightingale, P., & Metcalfe, S. (2008). Technological paradigms:
past, present and future. Industrial and Corporate Change, 17, 467–484.
Turkina, E., & Van Assche, A. (2018). Global connectedness and local innovation in industrial
clusters. Journal of International Business Studies, 49(6), 706–728.
Veugelers, R., & Cassiman, B. (1999). Make and buy in innovation strategies: Evidence from
Belgian manufacturing ﬁrms. Research Policy, 28(1), 63–80.
Ziedonis, R. H. (2004). Don’t fence me in: Fragmented markets for technology and the patent
acquisition strategies of ﬁrms. Management Science. 50(6) 804–820.
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities.
Organization Science, 13, 339–351.
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2008). The ﬁt between product market strategy and business model:
implications for ﬁrm performance. Strategic Management Journal, 29(1), 1–26.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R & Brewer, M. B. (1994). Intellectual capital and the birth of US
biotechnology enterprises. No. w4653. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sarah Edris is a Ph.D. Candidate at Rutgers University. She is interested in the evolution of MNE
networks and the changing geographical distribution of pharmaceutical innovation. Speciﬁcally,
she is interested in how the structure of knowledge sources evolve over time, within and between
ﬁrms, universities, and other organizations; and across geographical space, and technological
ﬁelds. She is also interested in understanding the institutional rationale that shapes organizational
search, and learning from failure. Prior to joining Rutgers, she attended CUNY, where she earned a
B.Sc. in management and ﬁnance; her second major was in philosophy.
9
Paradigm Change in the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry
263

Chapter 10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation
Systems: Perspectives on Corporate
Socialization Mechanisms and Human
Resource Management
Tamiko Kasahara
Abstract This study explores the role played by corporate socialization mecha-
nisms (CSMs) and human resource management (HRM) practices in inter- and
intra-unit knowledge ﬂows and creation systems in multinational corporations
(MNCs), especially focusing on professional service ﬁrms (PSFs). Drawing on a
longitudinal case study of Cambridge Technology Partners (CTP), which was
established during a paradigm shift in the consulting industry arising from the
advancement of information technology (IT), the ﬁndings of this study suggest that
CSMs are incorporated into HRM practices. When CTP was a global consulting
company, CSMs worked as an infrastructure for transferring knowledge from the
headquarters (HQs) to a focal subsidiary. HRM practices were designed to enhance
and practice the HQs’ goals of achieving global competitiveness. Speciﬁcally,
training and development practices played a role in transferring knowledge from the
HQs to a focal subsidiary at the corporate level, while tacit and explicit knowledge
were transferred from senior to junior consultants at the individual level. At present,
sharing the corporate philosophy within CTP has generated a high project success
rate in Japan and laid the foundation for further knowledge creation for CTP. HRM
practices are designed to enhance CTP’s business model, methodology, and cor-
porate culture and to create new knowledge. Training and development practices
enhance the creation of new knowledge within the company. Additionally, per-
formance appraisals and incentive practices are designed to encourage consultants
to create new knowledge.
Keywords Corporate socialization mechanism  Human resource management 
Knowledge transfer  Knowledge creation system  Cambridge Technology
Partners
T. Kasahara (&)
School of Information and Management, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan
e-mail: kasahara@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_10
265

10.1
Introduction
Research in the area of strategy and management indicates that the primary source
of competitive advantages for multinational corporations (MNCs) lies in their
ability to create and transfer knowledge within their intra-organizational networks
(Ghoshal and Bartlett 1990; Birkinshaw and Hood 1998). An MNC is a globally
distributed and integrated network in which knowledge is created in various units
and transferred within the MNC (Hedlund 1986; Bartlett and Ghoshal 1989). This
perspective has triggered research on the factors that inﬂuence inter-unit knowledge
creation and transfer within a differentiated network (Zander and Kogut 1995;
Szulanski 1996; Gupta and Govindarajan 2000).
Previous research has argued that human resource management (HRM) practices
have a signiﬁcant impact on knowledge transfer in MNCs (Minbaeva et al. 2003,
2014; Kaše et al. 2009; Mäkelä and Brewster 2009; Yamao et al. 2009; Peltokorpi
and Vaara 2014). Since human resources-embodied knowledge is viewed as the
foundation of a ﬁrm’s core capabilities (Grant 1996; Argote and Ingram 2000), the
resource-based view (RBV) argued that managing knowledge stock such as human
resources, can be the source of a ﬁrm’s value creation (Kang et al. 2007). Recent
research has examined how HRM architecture can manage knowledge stocks and
ﬂows within various employee groups (Lepak and Snell 1999, 2002; Kang et al.
2007); how human resource management (HRM) practices and organizational
governance mechanisms, such as corporate socialization mechanisms (CSMs),
affect inter-unit knowledge transfer (Björkman et al. 2004; Minvaeba 2005; Kaše
et al. 2009); and how HRM practices contribute to facilitating or hindering the
absorptive capacity within MNCs (Minbaeva et al. 2003).
Research has also indicated the existence of barriers to knowledge transfer due to
lack of knowledge of the source’s motivation and the recipient’s absorptive
capacity (Szulanski 1996). To overcome these barriers, researchers have addressed
the role of CSMs (Bartlett and Ghoshal 1989; Gupta and Govindarajan 2000;
Björkman et al. 2004) and HRM practices, which can enhance inter-unit knowledge
transfers and facilitate the absorptive capacity between the knowledge sender and
receiver (Gupta and Singhal 1993; Minvaeba 2005).
HRM practices and knowledge transfer are associated concepts, but their link
does not explain the underlying mechanisms at play. The theoretical work focusing
on the causal connections between HRM and knowledge processes needs qualita-
tive research for inductive inquiry and theory development (Minvaeba 2005). In
this chapter, I explore the role played by CSMs and HRM practices in inter-unit
knowledge ﬂows and creation systems in MNCs. In particular, I focus on profes-
sional service ﬁrms (PSFs) because knowledge is a crucial source of competitive
advantage for PSFs and their business and business models have changed from
traditional operations to offering software and advisory services to promote busi-
ness using IT, given the paradigm shift driven by IT advancement.
Although the interaction between coworkers and the transfer and internal cre-
ation of knowledge have been shown to be pivotal (Collins and Smith 2006;
266
T. Kasahara

Reed et al. 2006), PSFs have received much less research attention in the literature
than manufacturing MNCs.
10.2
Knowledge Transfer Within MNCs
MNCs are integrated network organizations that generate knowledge across dif-
ferentiated units to achieve a global competitive advantage. This view of MNCs
indicates the existence of inter-unit knowledge transfer within their organizations,
and researchers have investigated how MNCs manage this process (Hedlund 1986;
Bartlett and Ghoshal 1989; Szulanski 1996; Gupta and Govindarajan 2000).
Knowledge transfer is seen as “an unfolding process of dyadic exchange of orga-
nizational knowledge between a source and a recipient unit consisting of four
stages: initiation, implementation, ramp-up, and integration” (Szulanski 1996,
p. 28). The initiation and implementation stages comprise all events that lead to the
knowledge transfer decision and resource ﬂows between the recipient and the
source. The ramp-up and integration stages comprise a phase in which the recipient
starts using the transferred knowledge and a stage in which the recipient obtains
satisfactory results from the transferred knowledge, which gradually becomes
routinized. Recipients need to acquire useful knowledge from a source and utilize it
in their units by adapting the new knowledge to their business circumstances
(Minbaeva et al. 2014). Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) depicted knowledge creation
as the result of different modes of knowledge conversion: socialization, external-
ization, combination, and internalization. Socialization refers to the process in
which tacit knowledge is transferred through social contact, such as communication
and interaction through discussions and sharing experience among organizational
members. Externalization is deﬁned as the process in which tacit knowledge is
converted into explicit knowledge in the form of concepts, metaphors, hypothesis,
descriptions, and models. Combination is a process wherein knowledge is trans-
formed from explicit knowledge to more complex, explicit knowledge by merging,
categorizing, reclassifying, and synthesizing existing explicit knowledge using a
database. The internalization process focuses on transforming explicit knowledge
into tacit knowledge through application and practice and is shared across the
organization. Nonaka and Takeuchi indicated that knowledge can be created and,
then, shared, improved, and justiﬁed through social (collaborative) and individual
cognitive processes in an organization.
Although inter-unit knowledge transfer has been considered a source of com-
petitive advantage for MNCs, previous studies showed the difﬁculties of knowledge
transfer within MNCs. One complication is related to the characteristics of certain
types of knowledge, such as idiosyncratic, tacit, and non-codiﬁed knowledge.
These types of knowledge are difﬁcult to formalize in the absence of direct social
interaction (Nonaka 1994; Zander and Kogut 1995; Hansen et al. 1999). Moreover,
making a clear distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge can also be difﬁcult
due to their interrelatedness (Tsoukas 1996). When transferred knowledge has tacit
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
267

components, these require the sender and recipient units to have intimate rela-
tionships (Szulanski 2000). Other issues are related to the knowledge sender’s
motivation, the knowledge recipient’s absorptive capacity, and relationships
between source and recipient units. Knowledge senders’ motivation problems arise
when a sender does not feel adequately rewarded for sharing knowledge and fears
losing ownership or a position of privilege by sharing crucial knowledge with
others (Szulanski 1996). Björkman et al. (2004) showed a positive relationship of
inter-unit knowledge transfer with the criteria used to evaluate subsidiary perfor-
mance in terms of agency theory.
Absorptive capacity is deﬁned as the “ability to recognize the value of new
external information, assimilate it, and apply it to commercial ends” (Cohen and
Levinthal 1990, p. 128). In addition, absorptive capacity has four dimensions:
acquisition, assimilation, transformation, and exploitation (Zahra and George
2002). These characteristics differ across recipients depending on prior related
knowledge and the extent of inter-unit homophily between recipient and sender
units (Gupta and Govindarajan 2000). If recipient units do not possess the same
relative absorptive capacity as senders, the knowledge transfer between them is not
successful. In particular, when a sender’s knowledge is created through relations
with external organizations and internal development work, recipient units are
required to engage the same experts and facilities to receive the shared knowledge
(Björkman et al. 2004). Organizational knowledge creation requires an organiza-
tional mechanism and strategy, which facilitates learning, communication, trust,
and motivation for its members (Senge 1990; Watkins and Marsick 1993; Nonaka
and Takeuchi 1995). Research suggested that CSMs, which promote a higher
degree of knowledge transfer between the sender and recipient in inter- and
intra-organizational contexts, may act as facilitators.
10.2.1
Corporate Socialization
CSMs are shared goals, values, and beliefs (Nohria and Ghoshal 1994) for building
interpersonal homophily, trust, and close interpersonal networks in an MNC.
Corporate socialization is achieved through interpersonal interaction, such as
transfers of executive managers between the HQs and a subsidiary, and joint-work
in team task forces and committees (Ghoshal and Bartlett 1988). The more various
distinct units socialize while being part of the MNC’s goals and vision, the more
likely they are to achieve open and dense communication, increase the number and
quality of the communication channels, and enhance resource and knowledge
exchange and trust relationships within MNCs (Ghoshal and Bartlett 1988;
Szulanski 1996, 2000; Gupta and Govindarajan 2000; Björkman et al. 2004).
Empirical research on knowledge transfer and sharing pointed out that close
interpersonal networks have a positive impact on the creation, adoption, and dif-
fusion of knowledge within MNCs. For example, Ghoshal and Bartlett (1988)
showed that normative integration through corporate socialization is positively
268
T. Kasahara

related to an MNC subsidiary’s knowledge creation, adaption, and diffusion. Their
results also indicate that dense intra-inter unit communication is at least partially
positively related to knowledge creation, adoption, and diffusion by MNCs’ sub-
sidiaries. Similarly, Szulanski (1996) showed that the arduousness of the relation-
ship, which characterizes the ease of communication and the intimacy of the
relationship between the source and recipient units, facilitates knowledge transfer
within the ﬁrm. From the social capital perspective, Tsai and Ghoshal (1998)
showed that social interaction ties between the knowledge sender and recipient have
a positive impact on building trust and resource exchange while the existence of a
shared vision has a positive impact on building trust. Tsai (2001) argued that
intra-unit knowledge transfer, including learning practices, occurs in a shared social
context in which different units are linked to one another. They also suggested that
business units have a central network position in terms of intra-organization and
absorptive capacity, thus showing that knowledge transfer positively affects their
innovation capability. Gupta and Govindarajan (2000) examined the relationship
between knowledge outﬂows from and knowledge inﬂows into the subsidiary as
well as the existence and richness of the transmission channel, which comprises
formal integration mechanisms such as task forces and permanent committees.
They also addressed lateral socialization mechanisms including job transfers to peer
subsidiaries, participation in multi-subsidiary executive programs, job transfers to
the HQs, and participation in corporate mentoring programs. Their results showed
that formal integration and socialization mechanisms are positively related to
knowledge outﬂows from focal to peer subsidiaries, while only formal integration
mechanisms are positively related to knowledge outﬂows from focal subsidiaries to
the HQs. Knowledge inﬂows from peer subsidiaries into focal subsidiaries and from
the HQs into focal subsidiaries are positively related to formal integrative mecha-
nisms as well as lateral socialization mechanisms. Björkman et al. (2004) found that
CSMs, such as inter-unit trips and visits, international committees, teams, task
forces, and training involving participants from multiple units are positively related
to outward knowledge transfer from focal subsidiaries.
As seen above, CSMs are believed to facilitate the development of interpersonal
ties in MNCs, which, in turn, support knowledge transfer between the parties. HRM
practices such as recruitment, training and development, performance appraisal,
career development, and retention contribute to building and maintaining the ﬁrm’s
knowledge stocks (Lepak and Snell 1999; Minbaeva et al. 2003; Hatch and Dyer
2004; Cabrera and Cabrera 2005), thus facilitating knowledge ﬂow, acquisition,
transfer, and integration within companies.
10.3
Human Capital, Social Capital, and HRM Practices
HRM targets human capital, which is considered the foundation of a ﬁrm’s core
competencies. The role of HRM practices in knowledge transfer and sharing within
inter- and intra-organizational networks has been explained through human capital
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
269

and social capital perspectives. In terms of RBV, human capital, one of the three
subcomponents of intellectual capital (together with social and organizational
capital), refers to the aggregate set of skills and expertise possessed by employees
and is presumed to contribute to sustainable competitive advantage. Human capital
is, in fact, unique and ﬁrm-speciﬁc (Boxall 1996; Hatch and Dyer 2004). The
premise of human capital theory is that the more employees acquire ﬁrm-speciﬁc
knowledge through learning and training and development, the more they become
unique and irreplaceable, thus enhancing ﬁrm performance (Lepak and Snell 1999;
Hatch and Dyer 2004; Youndt et al. 2004). Although knowledge within ﬁrms may
exist in various forms and functions, knowledge and skills are embodied in people
(Grant 1996). Human capital is viewed as both a codiﬁed and tacit knowledge
repository (Lado and Willson 1994). While codiﬁed knowledge mostly consists of
explicit types of knowledge stored in documents and databases within ﬁrms and is
at risk of imitation by rival companies, tacit knowledge resides in the understanding
and skills of people and in the company’s routines and relationships, and is acquired
through repetition and experience. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for competitors to imitate
it. However, ﬁrms often risk losing employees who possess crucial and speciﬁc
knowledge because companies cannot own human capital. Therefore, human cap-
ital theory argues that human resources are an asset that ﬁrms should invest in, and
ﬁrm-speciﬁc human capital is essential for building knowledge stocks through
learning and HRM practices (Lepak and Snell 1999; Hatch and Dyer 2004; Youndt
et al. 2004; Kang et al. 2007).
Human capital theory argues that ﬁrms can increase their human capital through
the following HRM practices: by acquiring highly talented individuals from the
external labor market (“buying individuals”), through recruitment and selection
practices, or by internally developing individuals through training and career
development practices (“making individuals”) (Lepak and Snell 1999; Youndt et al.
2004). Furthermore, ﬁrms need to consider how to retain individuals who possess
ﬁrm-speciﬁc knowledge and skills through retention programs. Lepak and Snell
(1999) proposed an HR architecture based on employment modes, employment
relationships, and HR conﬁguration (the bundle of HRM practices). This archi-
tecture was built by using two dimensions, namely the uniqueness and value of
human capital, to show how ﬁrms manage different types of human capital that
contribute in different ways to the ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. The suitable HR
conﬁguration depends on the human capital type. For example, core employees,
who possess highly valuable and unique (ﬁrm-speciﬁc) knowledge and, are a source
of core knowledge for the ﬁrm, may be addressed by high-performance work
systems, such as extensive training by commitment and team-based or skill-based
pay for information sharing or learning. Hatch and Dyer (2004) found that selec-
tion, training and development, and deployment practices signiﬁcantly enhance
learning, which, in turn, improves ﬁrm performance. Therefore, HRM practices can
be viewed as antecedents of human capital, as they contribute to increasing human
capital characterized by ﬁrm speciﬁcity and decreasing imitability from rivals.
Along with human, and social capital, another subcomponent of intellectual
capital is the resource embedded within, available through, and derived from a
270
T. Kasahara

network of relationships (Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998). All these elements con-
tribute to creating a sustainable competitive advantage for ﬁrms since parties out-
side these relationships cannot access this knowledge network (Adler and Kwon
2002; Kostova and Ross 2003). According to Lengnick-Hall and Lengnick-Hall
(2003), social capital has several beneﬁts, such as improving cohesion within a
group, facilitating inter-unit resource exchanges between parties, and reducing
dysfunctional turnover when individuals have strong positive social connections
with their colleagues. A relationship can be built within a particular group (rela-
tionships among employees within a ﬁrm) and with external stakeholders (rela-
tionships between a ﬁrm and external parties). In this study, I focus on the social
capital embedded in MNC inter-units. At the individual level, employees can build
social capital through teamwork with the ﬁrm’s encouragement to learn from their
colleagues and/or external stakeholders. At the organization level, companies can
encourage employees to create a wide range of relationships by nurturing corporate
culture (Lengnick-Hall and Lengnick-Hall 2003) through opportunities for
employees to join inter-unit meetings, project groups, and cross-border teams for
increased interaction (Mäkelä, and Brewster 2009). The concept of social capital is
used to explain how ﬁrms manage CSMs to exchange knowledge in inter- and
intra-organizational networks. As I mentioned earlier, this is done both at the
individual level (Mäkelä and Brewster 2009) and at the organizational level
(Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998; Tsai and Ghoshal 1998; Björkman et al. 2004; Yamao
et al. 2009).
Social capital and human capital are complementary (e.g., Coleman 1988; Burt
1992, 1997). For example, training and development programs may not only increase
individuals’ knowledge (human capital) but also help individuals build relationships
with their colleagues (Youndt et al. 2004) and boost knowledge exchange, diffusion,
and sharing within and outside ﬁrms, which may require the physical aspect of
interpersonal connection, trust and norms, and shared interpretations and codes. Some
scholars proposed three interrelated dimensions of social capital: (1) a structural
dimension (i.e., the physical aspect of interpersonal connections), (2) a relational
(affective) dimension, which comprises trust, norms, obligations, and expectations,
and (3) a cognitive dimension, which refers to shared codes, understanding, and
interpretations, including shared narratives and linguistic codes (Nahapiet and
Ghoshal 1998; Tsai and Ghoshal 1998; Kang et al. 2007). Nahapiet and Ghoshal
(1998) and Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) showed that the relationship between social
capital and knowledge or resource exchange/combination between interacting parties
enhances a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage and value creation.
In the context of HRM, Kang et al. (2007) suggested HR conﬁgurations for
managing relational archetypes. These comprise a cooperative archetype involving
relationships between a ﬁrm’s core employees and internal partners (colleagues and
the like), and an entrepreneurial archetype for relations between a ﬁrm’s core
employees and external partners. Both of these archetypes enhance knowledge
sharing between parties. The cooperative archetype, the interaction relationships
within ﬁrms, is characterized by more structurally dense relationships based on
generalized trust, organizational norms, and common architectural knowledge
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
271

among employees. It is supported by HRM practices that include the following: job
rotation for interdependent work structures, as a structural dimension; shared goals
and values and team-based appraisal systems for engendering generalized trust, as a
relational dimension; and selection based on organizational ﬁt, training and
development with socialization programs, and mentoring for broader skill devel-
opment, as a cognitive dimension. In terms of affective and cognitive social capital,
Mäkelä and Brewster (2009) showed that the four types of inter-unit interactions in
MNCs have different consequences for knowledge sharing, thereby outlining a
mediating role for social capital between inter-unit interactions and knowledge
sharing. These were inter-unit meetings, project groups, cross-border teams, and
expatriate and repatriate interactions.
Yamao et al. (2009) examined the association between subsidiary HRM prac-
tices (HR conﬁgurations), knowledge stocks (human capital and social capital), and
subsidiary-to-HQs knowledge transfer. They showed that a developmental con-
ﬁguration that emphasizes training and development and related practices, such as
incentive and performance appraisal (which encourage employees to develop their
skills) have a positive impact on the development of human capital. Collaboration
conﬁguration, including a set of HRM practices that encourage teamwork, such as
selection based on candidates’ ability to collaborate with others, international
training and development, performance appraisal, and incentives, has a positive
impact on the development of social capital. As discussed above, HRM practices
can be viewed as antecedents of social capital, as well as human capital. By using
data from knowledge-intensive ﬁrms including PSFs, Kaše et al. (2009) examined
the relationship between HRM practices, interpersonal relations, and intra-ﬁrm
knowledge transfer. Their results indicate that HRM practices, work design (such as
teamwork and project-based work for enhancing interaction with coworkers), and
training and development for establishing and maintaining personal relationships
among coworkers have a positive impact on interpersonal relations. They also
showed that interpersonal relations mediated the relationship between HRM prac-
tices and intra-ﬁrm knowledge transfer.
Previous studies focused on CSMs and the role of HRM practices in knowledge
transfer and sharing within MNCs in terms of human capital and social capital. To
facilitate inter-unit knowledge transfer and sharing, social interaction ties are
obtained through project groups, inter-unit meetings, and cross-border teams
(Mäkelä and Brewster 2009). To this end, participation in international training,
corporate programs, and corporate mentoring programs (Björkman et al. 2004; Tsai
and Ghoshal 1998) is fundamental for MNCs. Although the content of HR con-
ﬁgurations for enhancing social interaction differs across studies, training and
development practices with related HRM practices, such as performance appraisal,
incentives, and career development for encouraging employees to develop their
knowledge and interpersonal network with colleagues, are identiﬁed as key drivers
for MNCs (Kang et al. 2007; Kaše et al. 2009; Yamao et al. 2009). Based on the
insights of previous studies, I introduce the relationship between social mechanisms
and HRM practices for knowledge transfer and creation using a longitudinal case
study that focuses on one PSF.
272
T. Kasahara

10.4
Method
Although the role of HRM practices and socialization mechanisms in knowledge
transfer and sharing has often been examined using quantitative methods (e.g.,
Minbaeva et al. 2003; Minvaeba 2005; Kaše et al. 2009; Mäkelä and Brewster
2009; Yamao et al. 2009), in this study, I adopt a qualitative approach in the form of
a longitudinal case study because theoretical work focusing on the causal con-
nections between HRM and knowledge processes needs qualitative research for
inductive inquiry and theory development (Minvaeba 2005). A qualitative approach
has many advantages that derive from its ability to achieve in-depth and holistic
understanding, thus mirroring the complexity of social life. Qualitative research has
made a substantial contribution to interpreting relationships between variables and
to explaining the factors underlying the broad relationships that are established
(Punch 2005). By focusing on the historical perspective, a longitudinal case study
may allow the researcher to consider the role played by HRM practices in
enhancing social interaction among employees for inter-unit knowledge transfer
and sharing in MNCs through a combination of retrospective and real-time analysis
(Pettigrew 1990). Case studies on knowledge creation have been conducted with
PSFs, such as McKinsey, a global consulting ﬁrm (Bartlett and Ghoshal 1989).
To this end, I selected Cambridge Technology Partners (CTP) for the case study.
CTP was founded in 1991 in Cambridge, Massachusetts, as an IT consulting ﬁrm
that provided comprehensive IT services. Two years after its founding, CTP was
listed on NASDAQ. It attracted signiﬁcant attention from academics and practi-
tioners because of its rapid expansion in national and global operations. Until its
takeover by Novell, Inc., CTP operated 55 ofﬁces in 19 countries and employed
4,300 individuals. CTP Japan, which was founded in 1997, carried on its operations
with the brand after CTP was taken over by Novell. Eventually, Novell’s mergers
and acquisitions (M&A) strategy was unsuccessful, and the company formerly
known as CTP virtually disappeared. Since 2006, CTP Japan has been operating
independently as the “new-born” CTP afﬁliated with Nihon Unisys, Ltd. This study
seeks to clarify how HRM practices enhance socialization among employees, as
well as their role in knowledge transfer between the HQ and subsidiaries, and
knowledge creation in a subsidiary. To this end, the proposed case study is framed
in terms of three phases of CTP’s development: the ﬁrst phase (1991–2000) is
referred to as the age of Global-CTP. The second phase (2001–2005) is referred to
as the age of Novell-CTP; and the third phase (2006–Present) is referred to as
Present-CTP. The reason for treating CTP and CTP Japan as a single case study is
that they represent a rare instance in which the generation, development, extinction,
and reemergence of a global company can be observed. Since Global-CTP and
Novell-CTP no longer exist, I can openly investigate HRM practices, corporate
socialization, and knowledge transfer and creation at CTP, as well as disclose the
name of the company. Therefore, CTP is an optimal case for determining the
relationships among HRM practices, corporate socialization, and knowledge
transfer and creation over an extended period of time.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
273

Data used in this study were obtained from multiple sources. Primary data were
collected through semi-structured interviews with Mr. Tsutomu Suzuki (the current
president of CTP Japan, and vice president of Novell in 2004), Mr. Masaru
Shirakawa (the current vice president of CTP Japan), and Mr. Masami Saito
(marketing director of Novell-CTP Japan at the time). A total of 15 interviews were
conducted from 2004 to 2019, by me along with a colleague who has a connection
with CTP. The interviews, which lasted 90 min each, on average, were recorded
and transcribed word for word. At a later date, the author asked further questions by
email to clarify unclear points. Secondary data were obtained from each company’s
website (and past versions of their website via Internet archives), press releases of
Novell, and the CTP case study proposed by Harvard Business School (Ambile
et al. 1995; Gompers and Catherine 1997a, b). In the case study, I address the
transition of the HRM practices and socialization mechanisms at CTP, which uti-
lized the same concepts and practices adopted within the group over its three
development phases, although Present-CTP has not yet globalized its business. The
company believes that these concepts and practices allow them to achieve a sub-
stantial competitive advantage. Before introducing the relationships between HRM
practices, socialization mechanisms, and knowledge transfer/creation system at
CTP, I will describe CTP’s business model. Global-CTP was one of the pioneers in
ICT-based consulting and helped create a paradigm shift in the consulting industry
by introducing a novel business model. In addition, CTP globalized its business by
using the same business model over three distinct phases; HRM practices and
socialization mechanisms were used for guaranteeing the completion of projects on
time and on budget and facilitating collaborations within the group.
10.4.1
Paradigm Shift in the Consulting Industry
and the CTP Business Model1
PSFs
are
known
as
organizations
that
offer
sophisticated
knowledge
or
knowledge-based products (Alvesson 2004). In the past, the business of PSFs has
been positioned as a local industry since these companies have primarily provided
customized services for local clients’ needs (Maister 2003; Lødendahl 2005).
However, some PSFs, such as management consulting and ICT consulting, glob-
alized their operations to address the needs of their multinational clients.
Competitive advantages arose from the knowledge generated through global
business experiences and collaborations within the group that led to their global
1In the case study, I use Global-CTP to explain the business situation in the Global-CTP era,
while I use CTP for explaining the role of the HQs of Global-CTP and/or business activities,
including
the
business
model
and
the
Cambridge
Culture
that
Present-CTP
inherited
from the Global-CTP era. In addition, I use Global-CTP Japan as well as Novell-CTP Japan
when
explaining
the
Japanese
subsidiary’s
business
activities
during
the
Global-CTP
and Novell-CTP eras.
274
T. Kasahara

presence. A number of factors triggered the paradigm shift in the consulting
industry, including the demand for integrated and “one-stop” professional service
ﬁrms and the advancement of IT (Kubr 2002). Traditionally, consultants have been
viewed as advisors who do not take responsibility for decisions concerning a cli-
ent’s business. Consultant remuneration reﬂected the time spent in providing
advice. However, since the late 1990s, the advancement of IT led management
consulting ﬁrms, IT consultancies, and certain manufacturing ﬁrms, such as IBM, to
begin expanding their business into e-business consulting, offering software and
advisory services for business promotion using IT. This sectoral restructuring made
the distinction between traditional management consulting and IT consulting
somewhat blurry. Clients began requiring integrated, one-stop services, including
management consulting and the execution of services in combination with expe-
rience and know-how regarding the latest technologies. Although the e-business
consulting boom peaked at the end of 2000, it created new business models and
new ways of consulting in the industry. As a result, nowadays, consulting ﬁrms
need to carefully consider the performance they promise to their clients.
Consultants are now viewed as assistants, and their remuneration tends to be
increasingly related to results.
CTP was born during this paradigm shift. It was a global consulting ﬁrm that
helped clients achieve competitive advantage by implementing high-impact,
technology-enabled business solutions in unprecedented time frames and provided
consulting services in a consistent and systematic manner (both upstream and
downstream). CTP originated in the Cambridge Technology Group, founded in
1984, which was an IT education seminar company that provided training services
for UNIX. The group successfully developed the rapid prototyping of applications
on UNIX and began providing applications development and system integration
services. In 1991, CTP spun off from the group as a company offering consulting
and software development services. The company focused on realizing a short cycle
time for system installation (shorter than business cycle time). Therefore, CTP
pursued a strategy of providing quick services through the implementation of
optimal solutions for clients.
CTP’s business model made maximum use of its distinctive consulting
methodology, collectively called CTP’s Rapid Application Development (CTP
RAD), which could guarantee a unique business model based on a “Fixed Time/
Fixed Price approach” to CTP’s clients on a global basis. CTP pioneered both the
Fixed Time/Fixed Price approach and RAD, which is a software development
methodology adopted for projects based on tight timelines. RAD uses prototyping
and combines high-level development tools and techniques (Martin 1991). Many
competitors used RAD but struggled with increasing the success rate of their
projects. Using the RAD methodology does not necessarily lead to a higher success
rate on projects. Initially, CTP RAD was one of the custom development
methodologies for open operating systems; however, the system evolved CTP
developed through the M&A of related companies (Table 10.1).
The Fixed Time/Fixed Price approach means that CTP guaranteed that projects
would be completed on time and on budget as contracted with its clients. This
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
275

Table 10.1 History of CTP
Year
Events
1984
• Two MIT professors founded Cambridge Technology Group (CT Group), which
provided training services for UNIX
1986
• CT Group succeeded in rapid prototyping for UNIX applications, which provided
consulting services for applications development
1991
• Cambridge Technology Partners (CTP) was founded in Cambridge, Massachusetts as
an independent consulting division spun out of CT Group
1993
• CTP went public on the NASDAQ. The number of employees was expanded to more
than 300 people. CTP received high recognition from the market due to “Fixed Time/
Fixed Price” delivery. In addition, CTP successfully developed Rapid Application
Development (RAD)
• CTP implemented rapid expansion of branches all over the US, such as Atlanta,
Chicago, Dallas, New York, and Seattle
1994
• CTP set up operations overseas (in 1995, accounting for 22% of the European area)
including in North Europe: Sweden; West Europe: UK, Ireland; and Central Europe:
Holland and Germany
1995
• CTP acquired The Systems Consulting Group, Inc., Miami and Axiom Management
Consulting, Inc., in San Francisco, which added expertise in package software
evaluation, implementation, and business process redesign
1996
• CTP continued to drive geographic expansion to Latin America and Oceania.
• CTP merged with Ramos & Associates, Inc., a recognized leader in deploying
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions including ﬁnancial and
manufacturing/distribution applications
1997
• CTP Japan was founded in Tokyo, which started to provide services of ERP,
Customer Relationship Management (CRM), and E-business
• New ofﬁces were opened in Australia and India
1998
• CTP’s strength in developing innovative, state-of-the-art electronic commerce
solutions was recognized by Forrester Research (a large and independent technology
and market research company in the US)
1999
• Fortune selected CTP as a top e-consulting ﬁrm (e 50)
2000
• CTP (UK) won Computing magazine’s IT Service Company of the Year award
2001
• Novell acquired CTP. CTP became a Novell subsidiary retaining its name
• Novell-CTP Japan began to provide identity management services
2004
• Novell-CTP Japan began to provide change management services
2005
• Novell-CTP Japan began to provide meeting transformation services and published a
book “How to Create an Efﬁcient Meeting” (ASA Publishing co., LTD.) (in
Japanese)
2006
• Novell-CTP Japan afﬁliated with Nihon Unisys, Ltd., retaining its brand and
autonomy
2007
• Novell-CTP Switzerland and Hungary spun off Novell as an independent company
2008
• Present-CTP began to provide training programs for project facilitators
2016
• Present-CTP won the best company award from Great Place to Work® Institute
2017
• Present-CTP won the best company award from Great Place to Work® Institute
2018
• Present-CTP won the best company award from Great Place to Work® Institute
Source global-CTP’s website (http://web.archive.org/web/20000815074522/ http://www.ctp.com/
inv/ar/), present-CTP website (https://www.ctp.co.jp/company/), and interviews with the CEO of
Present-CTP
276
T. Kasahara

contrasted with many competitors who used per diem fees and tended to tack on
fees for the implementation of their services in the case of a project delay. The
project success rate2 was approximately 90% during the Global-CTP era (1998–
2000), compared with a success rate of 26% for IT projects in the US.3 The success
rate at CTP-Japan is 95.6% (as of June 2008, at an achievement value of 529
projects in Japan).4 This success rate is staggering compared to the 52.8%5 success
rate of domestic IT projects in Japan. CTP operated its Fixed Time/Fixed Price
business model by building and utilizing CTP RAD faster than its competitors. By
2000, CTP had earned high recognition from IT industries, as well as several
awards from research ﬁrms and business magazines, such as Forrester Research,
Fortune, and Computing. CTP achieved rapid growth and global expansion by
executing its unique and reproducible business model. The company executed an
identical business model on a global scale under the slogan “Building the New
Economy,” aiming to expand its business by focusing on offering advanced solu-
tions, such as eBusiness, eCRM (customer relationship management), and eERM
(enterprise risk management). This generated global competitive advantages for
CTP. Local competitive advantages were also obtained by leveraging and maxi-
mizing the use of CTP RAD to expand in local markets. CTP Japan customized
CTP RAD to Japanese market circumstances. Although CTP Japan contributed to
sharing the solution development for the Japanese market within the group,
Global-CTP’s solutions were developed at the initiative of the HQs, which secured
the degree of completion of each solution. During the Global-CTP era, a subsidiary
was authorized to expand its business at its own will, but the HQs and other
subsidiaries provided generous support.
In 2001, the second phase of CTP began (Novell-CTP: 2001–2005). CTP was
acquired by Novell and became one of Novell’s service divisions but retained its
name, market presence, and independence to recommend best-of-breed solutions.
Novell was the leading provider of the Net services software, which delivers ser-
vices to secure and power all types of networks, including the Internet, intranets,
and extranets.6 The purpose of the acquisition was to expand Novell’s ability to
deliver consulting support to customers and other IT service companies. Novell
thought of this acquisition as an opportunity to make a transition from a software
development model to a solution business model, which was symbolized by
the replacement of its top management. Although Novell acquired CTP, Jack
Messman, the president and chief executive ofﬁcer of CTP, was nominated
2“Project success” means that the project is completed on time and on budget, with all features and
functions as originally speciﬁed (CHAOS: A Recipe for Success-Software and Systems
Engineering:http://www4.informatik.tu-muenchen.de/lehre/vorlesungen/vse/WS2004/1999_Standish_
Chaos.pdf).
3CHAOS: A Recipe for Success-Software and Systems Engineering (http://www4.informatik.tu-
muenchen.de/lehre/vorlesungen/vse/WS2004/1999_Standish_Chaos.pdf).
4CTP website (https://www.ctp.co.jp/press/pr_20080707_01/).
5NIKKEI XTECH: Survey of IT projects 2018, 2018 March (1): 26–27.
6http://www.novell.com/news/press/2001/3/novell-to-acquire-cambridge-technology-partners.html.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
277

president and CEO of Novell. Eric Schmidt (a former CEO of Google), formerly the
company’s CEO, continued to provide strategic counsel as chairman of the Novell
board of directors.7 Novell-CTP utilized the same business model used by the
company in the age of Global-CTP. Joint projects between Novell and CTP Japan
were carried out. In this phase, CTP had signiﬁcant opportunities to share feedback
about products and services within the Novell-CTP group, excluding CTP’s con-
sulting methodology. However, this acquisition caused confusion, which eventually
undermined CTP’s culture thereby leading to high turnover of industry-ready
consultants. As a result, from approximately 100 consultants of Novell-CTP Japan
in 2001, the companies retained about 40 consultants in 2005. Within ﬁve years, the
relationship between Novell and CTP faced a crisis due to the difﬁculties of inte-
grating Novell and CTP’s business models and absorbing CTP RAD, which was
grounded in the “Cambridge Culture” (Nishii 2013).
In 2006, the third phase of CTP (Present-CTP: 2006–Present) began. CTP Japan
spun off from Novell and was afﬁliated with Nihon Unisys while retaining its brand
name and continuing to provide original consulting services. Similarly, in 2008,
some European subsidiaries, such as Switzerland and Hungary, decided to spin off
from Novell to set up independent companies. While Present-CTP is no longer a
global company, it is the only ﬁrm with unique characteristics inherited from the
former Global-CTP, and it has transformed facilitation-driven consulting into an
idiosyncratic consulting “methodology” and developed a comprehensive business
model to beneﬁt from its distinctive strengths. In particular, Present-CTP began to
provide training and development programs for project facilitators and workshops
on its methodology.
10.5
Results
10.5.1
Cambridge Culture as a Corporate Socialization
Mechanism
Since the founding of Global-CTP, its members have emphasized its culture as the
basis for executing CTP RAD. The “Cambridge Culture” features six core values,
the code of conduct for Cambridge consultants, (i.e., FROGBB), and Cambridge
Magic as the ground rule of project teams to globally apply CTP’s consulting
methodology, Cambridge RAD. This culture works as a CSM for enhancing col-
laborations within inter-intra-organizations and has been the foundation of CTP’s
business model over the three phases mentioned above. HRM practices were
instituted in order to achieve CTP’s business model based on its culture. Six core
values lie at the basis of consultants’ behavior and are the prerequisites for project
7http://www.novell.com/news/press/2001/7/novell-completes-acquisition-of-cambridge-technotech-
partners-jack-messman-becomes-president-and-ceo-.html.
278
T. Kasahara

success. Project team members can work together towards a common goal,
sometimes in difﬁcult conditions, because all Cambridge consultants share the same
core values (Table 10.2).
Table 10.2 shows the outline of the six core values. Global-CTP deﬁned the
code of conduct for their consultants—the FROGBB—based on these values. In
line with the Cambridge Culture, which aims at achieving Fixed Time/Fixed Price
quick services, CTP believed that project success is not achieved by a consulting
methodology, but rather by the consultants who execute the methodology. The term
“FROGBB” was created by combining the ﬁrst letter of the words Fast, Right,
Open, Guaranteed, Business Case, and Behavioral Focus (Table 10.3).
Table 10.3 shows the contents of the FROGBB. The essence of the FROGBB
was embodied in the company culture and was based on facilitation-driven con-
sulting services. The CTP consultants were required to dutifully practice the
FROGBB in order to support the clients’ proﬁts and the success of their business.
The six core values and the FROGBB were shared within the group. These sup-
ported the company in the pursuit of their business model by encouraging coop-
eration among consultants in inter/-intra-organizations and their clients. Compared
to traditional consulting ﬁrms, Global-CTP emphasized collaboration with their
Table 10.2 Six core values of CTP
Take initiative
Understand what to ask
Understand how uncertain matters should be handled
Clarify and manage problems
Proactively seek opportunities
Explore to deliver performance better than expected
Dedication
Do a better job to complete projects
Meet your commitments to issues
Willingly take on work if it is good for the company
Demonstrate an enthusiastic attitude toward others
Flexibility/openness
Help other people’ in problem-solving
Learn new things positively
Cope with ambiguous and indeterminate matters
Adapt to new circumstances quickly
Respect
Build rapport
Be willing to make compromises
Encourage yourself to learn from experienced persons
Tune in with others who do not have experience and knowledge
Honesty
Face difﬁculties courageously
Ask someone what he/she wants directly
Share good and bad information
Criticize constructively
Share information openly
Trust
Keep a conﬁdent outlook
Accept responsibility and accomplish tasks to the end
Build a trust relationship with clients and team members
Source Present-CTP website (https://www.ctp.co.jp/company/) and interviews with the CEO of
Present-CTP
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
279

clients. In other words, facilitation-driven consulting services were provided to help
their clients learn the skills needed to achieve corporate changes within their
companies. This consulting approach allowed the company to differentiate from its
competitors. To make maximum use of the CTP RAD, the six core values,
FROGBB, and Cambridge Magic were essential elements for CTP. The six core
values and FROGBB also worked as an engine for cooperation within the group
across borders and were the sources of global competitive advantages for
Global-CTP. These unique cultural features helped the company expand their
business in the global market. Based on this culture, a new discipline of consulting,
Cambridge Magic was created (Table 10.4).
Cambridge Magic was the ground rule for any project team, which aimed to
resolve the issues of the client companies. The members of a project team were the
project managers and business consultants of Global-CTP and clients who expe-
rienced issues in their companies. When starting a project, all members agreed on
the goal of the project, project procedure, and conﬁrmed the role of each project
member. Then, project members practiced the discipline of Cambridge Magic
regardless of their speciﬁc role in the project to achieve a successful outcome. By
construing a shared culture within the group, Cambridge Magic was practiced by
project members in day-to-day tasks. This practice generated imitable advantages
for Global-CTP, and the company transferred its business model and culture to all
operations through HRM practices designed to enhance global competitiveness.
Table 10.3 The FROGBB code of conduct for Cambridge consultants
Fast
We consider the time frames to be important. With our methodology, tightly
integrated services, and developmental efﬁciencies, we can deliver results in
unprecedented time frames
Right
To ensure that clients use the solutions we deliver to their full potential, we
focus on more than their technological components—we also address people,
behavioral, and organizational issues. We build consensus on objectives and
functionality and gain buy-in from all parties—up front—to ensure that
everyone is “on the same page” and committed to the project’s success
Open
We commit to openness with our clients
Guaranteed
We commit to the success of our deployments with ﬁxed time/ﬁxed price
contracts. Integrating technology-based solutions can be risky—many clients
have been burned by “runaway” projects with signiﬁcant time and cost
overruns. Our approach lessens the risk to our clients and imposes a discipline
to deliver projects on time and on budget
Business
Case
We craft technology solutions that support our clients’ business strategies and
prioritize functionality to ensure that every component of the application
creates business value. This strategy prevents clients from lengthening
projects with “nice to have” features that will not create strategic advantage. It
also enables us to deliver the return on investment promised at the outset of
the project
Behavioral
Focus
We act with integrity. We cultivate trust with customers
Source Present-CTP website (https://www.ctp.co.jp/company/) and interviews with the CEO of
Present-CTP
280
T. Kasahara

10.5.2
HRM Practices and Knowledge Transfer from CTP
HQs to the Japanese Subsidiary8
CTP utilized a job grading system and competency management as a standardized
HRM system for all operations. HRM practices developed at the HQs were adopted
by Novell-CTP Japan and Present-CTP. During the second phase, Novell and
Novell-CTP Japan used different HRM practices due to differences between their
business models, and CTP had a unique culture based on mutual and comple-
mentary ties.
10.5.2.1
Training and Development
Global-CTP had two types of training and development programs. The ﬁrst was the
New Employee Orientation Program conducted at the HQs in the U.S. The purpose
of this program was to help employees grasp CTP’s core business values and
methodologies by providing focused training on their respective service lines or
functional areas. By conducting a monthly “boot camp” at the HQs, Global-CTP
assured the consistency of candidates’ vision, corporate culture, and methodology.9
New consultants could not start their career at CTP until they were familiarized with
the Cambridge Culture and CTP RAD. The second type of training consisted of
programs for existing executive consultants, such as the CTP RAD, consulting,
leadership, and project management trainings. The consulting training and courses
Table 10.4 The Cambridge magic
1. Don’t sell bad business
11. Don’t be afraid to stretch
2. Leadership is the most valued skill
12. Listen to your colleagues
3. We all succeed or fail together
13. Know how to call a “time out”
4. Raise a yellow ﬂag before it’s too late
14. Be cautious of “rat-holes”
5. Never go into a client meeting unprepared
15. See the forest for the trees
6. Get it or get out
16. Think outside the box
7. Don’t make excuses
17. Under-commit and over-deliver
8. Be ﬂexible
18. Work smart not hard
9. Learn by doing, not by thinking
19. Have fun doing the work
10. Give immediate feedback
Source Present-CTP website (https://www.ctp.co.jp/company/) and interviews with the CEO of
Present-CTP
8The descriptions of HRM practices at Global-CTP are based on interviews with the CEO
of Present-CTP and are referenced from past versions of the website accessed via Internet archive:
http://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.ctp.com.
9When Global-CTP acquired other companies, it also conducted an on-site “jumpstart” program
that featured extensive service, methodology, and cultural training.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
281

covered topics such as facilitating consensus and were aimed at enhancing
employees’ ability to work with clients and project teams to craft world-class
solutions. Consultants were also required to learn various topics ranging from risk
management to scheduling and cost control to ensure on-time delivery and
on-budget projects. CTP ensured the quality of its consultants through these
training and development programs, which helped support the business model
within the group and build interrelations with consultants from other operations.
With the launch of the Japanese overseas subsidiary in 1997, the start-up
members of CTP Japan attended a one-month training program at the HQs. The
purpose of the program was to put CTP’s culture and methodology into practice at
the Japanese ofﬁce. This required cultivating Japanese trainers capable of practicing
the culture and business model for facilitation-driven consulting, which was a
low-proﬁle consulting methodology in Japan, in the same way as practiced at the
HQs of Global-CTP in the U.S. After the completion of the programs, the start-up
members worked at the HQs for one year to understand and embody the company’s
culture and business model. These training and development programs not only
helped enhance project success rate and ensure consultants’ quality globally but
also transferred the HQs’ business model and culture, which were well-integrated
into the Japanese ofﬁce. Although the start-up members of CTP Japan received
training at the HQs, when CTP Japan was founded, consultants from other sub-
sidiaries supported the operation of CTP Japan’s business to replicate the HQs’
culture and business model.
As I noted earlier, the HQs took the initiative to develop consulting solutions and
transferred them to their subsidiaries even though different solutions were required
for subsidiaries’ business environments to secure the completion of each solution
service. For example, most projects for which CTP Japan took the initiative
advanced through cooperation with other subsidiaries, which had already developed
careers and knowledge in the CRM consulting area. When CTP Japan began
offering new solution services and consulting methodologies in Japan, it requested
the dispatch of training coaches. A subsidiary that requested the dispatch of con-
sultants and training coaches from other subsidiaries and afﬁliates absorbed the
charges as part of its inter-company transactions. The CTP group had an enterprise
service line management team that operated the knowledge management cycle and
controlled consultants’ information at each subsidiary. These support systems
facilitated cooperation within the group and knowledge transfer among inter- and
intra-organizations because all CTP consultants shared the company’s culture
through training and development programs.
10.5.2.2
Career Development
The careers of CTP’s consultants were developed in accordance with job grading
and competency levels, especially for new employees who were expected to
experience every career track, including engagement, project management, business
analysis, creative/cognitive, technologist, and architect. Each track comprised
282
T. Kasahara

various levels. For example, in the engagement track, consultants were trained in
sales that emphasized the ability to build client relationships; in the creative track,
consultants were trained as advertising experts; and in the cognitive track, they were
trained as experts who designed user interfaces in terms of cognitive psychology.
After experiencing each career track, new consultants developed their career in line
with their interests. The HQs rigidly managed the job grades and competency
requirements worldwide until 2006. After 2006, CTP Japan revised the job grades
and competency requirements in simpler forms because the number of employees
had decreased. However, Present-CTP has not changed the essence of the career
development or job grades and competency management that were used at
Global-CTP.
CTP had a program to support each consultant’s career development, called the
“Resource Manager Program.” Each consultant was assigned a resource manager
(currently called a resource advisor) who helped the employee achieve their career
goals. The resource manager took responsibility for the junior consultant’s project
assignments, career planning, mentoring, and performance appraisal. This unique
program trained consultants into professionals with a deep understanding of
Global-CTP’s culture, and helped secure consultants’ quality on a global basis. It
also worked as a way to transfer tacit and explicit knowledge from senior to junior
consultants through on-the-job training and collaborative work.
10.5.2.3
Performance Appraisal
Performance appraisal was designed to improve consultants’ performance and
encourage them to continue developing their career and collaborate with colleagues
by engaging in team work. Global-CTP basically evaluated its consultants’ per-
formance and competency in terms of common competencies across all career
tracks and competencies by each career track.
CTP had two types of review: a project review and an annual review. Project
members received feedback every day from their project members. The project
review served as on-the-job training and contributed to enhancing consultants’
facilitation competency. After project completion, project managers evaluated the
performance of each project member in terms of teamwork, job knowledge,
judgment, problem-solving, and ﬂexibility, which were core competencies across
all career tracks. In addition, each consultant was reviewed in terms of the speciﬁc
competencies that were required in each career track. Based on the results of the
project review, executives at each local ofﬁce evaluated each consultant’s perfor-
mance. As I mentioned above, resource managers were assigned to each mentored
consultant, and they played a signiﬁcant role in submitting an objective recom-
mendation regarding consultant’s promotion and salary raise to the executives at
each local subsidiary. By using a system in which resource managers took complete
responsibility for their junior consultants’ development, CTP executed a unique
business model group-wide.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
283

To keep the turnover rate below the industry average, CTP hired bright, ener-
getic people and assigned them challenging work in an environment where their
efforts were rewarded. Equity was shared with employees through stock options
and an employee stock purchase plan that distributed year-end bonuses based on the
company’s overall performance. As a result, employees recognized a direct cor-
relation between their performance and the company’s achievements and were
committed to CTP’s success. This contributed to satisfying clients and led to cli-
ents’ success.
As described above, HRM practices were designed not only to secure the degree
of completion of CTP’s business model but also to integrate it with its culture and
assure the compatibility between these components.
10.5.3
HRM Practices and Knowledge Creation
in Present-CTP
Present-CTP was founded after the IT bubble burst and was afﬁliated with Nihon
Unisys in 2006. At the time, some subsidiaries spun off from Novell-CTP, and the
former CEO of Novell-CTP Japan and many talented consultants left the company.
Only 32 employees remained at Present-CTP. These start-up members had an
off-site meeting aimed at rebuilding CTP. They decided that the Cambridge Culture
would be retained in Present-CTP because all members shared and recognized the
company’s culture as its primary source of competitiveness. However, while their
mission and vision were set by the HQs during the IT bubble, the start-up members
set original objectives that reﬂected the Japanese market. Their mission consisted of
two policies: facilitating fast corporate transformation toward the client’s goal and
doing the right thing for clients. Their vision consisted of changing the general
expectation in the IT industry by achieving a high project success rate, enlarging the
base of supporters by making an excellent impression on clients, and enjoying team
work by providing many signiﬁcant opportunities to grow. In addition, the start-up
members achieved consensus on building and providing opportunities to learn
consulting knowledge and skills since this was one reason for the loss of talented
consultants at Novell-CTP Japan. Through the off-site meeting, the start-up mem-
bers of Present-CTP decided that the facilitation-driven consulting approach, which
was built at and enhanced the competitiveness of Global-CTP Japan, would evolve
into one consulting service area that would carry on analysis/proposal and solution
services. The main clients of Present-CTP are business companies, but the ﬁrm also
delivers facilitation-driven consultancy to non-proﬁt organizations to support
regional innovation. In addition, by using the consultancy, Present-CTP provides
workshops for promoting work-style reforms led by the Japanese government to
remedy the long hours of work in 2016. This indicates that the scope of
Present-CTP goes beyond the application of accumulated knowledge on the
facilitation-driven approach of Global-CTP. The uniqueness of Present-CTP lies in
284
T. Kasahara

pursuing fast corporate transformation by facilitation-driven consulting “with cli-
ents.” Present-CTP places utmost priority on helping clients become self-sustaining,
and the company is willing to turn down a job offer from a client who lacks the
motivation to transform and be self-sustaining. To offer facilitation-driven con-
sulting, Present-CTP enhanced the HRM practices inherited from Global-CTP and
built a new knowledge creation system. In 2018, it won the best company award
from Great Place to Work® Institute in the mid-size company category (number of
employees from 100 to 999) as a result of the knowledge creation activities sup-
ported by its HRM practices.10
10.5.3.1
Training and Development
Present-CTP uses training programs inherited from Global-CTP but which are
customized to the Japanese business context. The company developed these pro-
grams through its own projects, which generated know-how in facilitation-driven
consulting. Until 2006, Present-CTP used training programs that were developed at
the U.S. HQs by translating them into Japanese. However, some training programs
did not ﬁt the Japanese situation; hence, Present-CTP developed original programs,
which now number over 250, ranging from fundamentals to advanced levels. These
are all geared toward sharing know-how with its consultants and clients.
Present-CTP uses unique training programs for in-house training. All CTP con-
sultants, including the CEO, are required to participate in training courses that are
provided as standard programs. These courses appear on employee boards with red,
yellow, and white pins to enhance participants’ awareness of the features of the
courses and trainers. Consultants with red pins have already taught the program,
while a yellow pin means that consultants can teach the program but have not yet
done so. A white pin means that consultants have completed the program.
Present-CTP offers semi-monthly training programs. However, consultants can
acquire knowledge and skills on their project by directly contacting the trainer
thanks to the company’s project-based work style. Present-CTP intends to improve
its methodology through this training system because consultants also need to
realize the theory by practicing and teaching. This method is taught to clients
through a workshop. Moreover, Present-CTP provides 200,000 yen per person as a
self-improvement subsidy for all consultants to enhance their knowledge.
Consultants can use the subsidy for external training.
The company developed knowledge creation systems through training and
development practice, such as workshops, networking with its clients, and off-site
meetings. The Cambridge Project Facilitation Association (CPFA) is a semi-annual
workshop held by CTP’s consultants and clients. In the workshop, consultants
provide training programs requested by their clients and share their know-how on
10Great
Place
to
Work®
Institute
Japan
website
(https://hatarakigai.info/ranking/japan/).
Present-CTP has been nominated for the best company award thrice times in the past.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
285

facilitation-driven consulting, while clients introduce their business cases and
experiences to CTP consultants. This is not only the place for consultants to acquire
new knowledge but also for clients to learn the know-how and tacit knowledge that
CTP possesses. The clients and Present-CTP create training programs together
through mutual learning, as one team, and the team offer workshops for training and
development to other CTP clients. Likewise, CTP holds networking events to share
its know-how on facilitation methods with its clients, while clients share their
business agendas with CTP. This is an opportunity for CTP to acquire new
knowledge and develop long-term relationships with its clients. Another knowledge
creation system requires CTP to hold off-site meetings within the company every
year. For start-up members of Present-CTP, the off-site meeting was the place to
begin building the new CTP in 2006. As of 2019, CTP features over 100 consul-
tants, but still holds this meeting as an annual brain-storming session on how to
improve the company with the help of all consultants. The organizer is selected
through an open allocation system and can decide the topic of the off-site meeting
for that year. For example, the Cambridge Grand Prix (the so-called C-1 Grand
Prix) was held in 2016. The topic of the meeting was making No. 1 products that
CTP can be proud of. CTP consultants published books on facilitation methods for
meetings and developing project leaders, and released mobile applications related to
their business. This meeting is where new knowledge and business is generated for
Present-CTP.
10.5.3.2
Performance Appraisal
Present-CTP customized the performance assessment criteria based on the concepts
inherited from the Global-CTP era because the old system was unﬁt for
Present-CTP’s business size. A resource advisor is assigned to each junior con-
sultant, similar to the practice in Global-CTP, and its roles have been retained. The
company carries out a two-phase performance appraisal process: project review and
annual review, as in the Global-CTP era. Consultants receive feedback on their
daily project business every day from their project members. This is on-the-job
training for project facilitation management. The result of the daily feedback is
reﬂected in the project review. Present-CTP devotes plenty of time to close com-
munication with project members and leaders to cultivate consultants who can
embody its culture and business model. More concretely, consultants are reviewed
by a performance evaluation (comprehensive evaluation of quality, productivity,
behavior, and training experience) and competency evaluation (logical thinking,
delivery, project management, and task domain and IT knowledge). A project
review is conducted four times a year. Based on the results of the project review, the
management executives of the company discuss each consultant’s performance
until they reach an agreement. The annual review is used to assess the results of the
project reviews and the “Plus One Activity” (more on this later). In this manner,
Present-CTP spends 84 days providing feedback to each employee in order to
enhance each consultant’s abilities.
286
T. Kasahara

10.5.3.3
Incentives
Global-CTP had a culture in which people’s efforts, ideas, and achievements were
recognized. CTP offered a variety of recognition programs such as the Recognize
and Value Everyone (RAVE) cards, Employee Appreciation Day (EAD), and
awards that recognized the contributions of individuals and teams. Present-CTP
honors exceptional individuals as most valuable person (MVP) and teams (MVT).
Moreover, the company encourages consultants to carry out “Plus One Activity” to
contribute to the company. For example, Present-CTP began a workout activity in
2017 as a plus one activity. In this activity, top executives make decisions and take
quick actions with budgets for ideas proposed by consultants for improving
CTP. A bonus is paid for individual performance and proﬁt share. In the assessment
of the bonus, the company reviews each consultant’s “Plus One Activity,” which
includes contributions for the improvement of CTP’s brand (e.g., system devel-
opment within the company). For example, one consultant’s individual perfor-
mance result was 309%. He had developed hands-on training programs on technical
skills for junior consultants and a knowledge creation server through which con-
sultants could conduct their search not only on the knowledge server but also on the
intranet, emails, and social networking service (SNS) chats. His contribution was to
integrate the knowledge server and other media within the company.
The knowledge creation system at Present-CTP may be summarized by using the
socialization, externalization, combination, and internalization (SECI) model as
follows (Fig. 10.1).
Figure 10.1 shows the knowledge creation system at Present-CTP. Regarding
the process of socialization, the company uses a resource manager or advisor
program to train consultants as professionals with a deep understanding of its
culture and business model. It also works as a way to transfer tacit knowledge from
senior to junior consultants through on-the-job training and collaborative work.
This program also contributes to externalizing tacit knowledge into explicit
knowledge. The externalization process works by conceptualizing and describing
the culture and business model of the company into the code of conduct for con-
sultations; however, in order to embody them, CTP has a resource manager pro-
gram and has developed 250 training programs to transfer tacit and explicit
knowledge from senior to junior consultants. Regarding the combination process,
Present-CTP adapts the idiosyncratic facilitation-driven consulting methodology to
provide services for non-proﬁt organizations and training programs for project
facilitators to its clients. In addition, the company elevated its knowledge server by
integrating the server and other media within the company to enable searches for
internal knowledge in a broad context. With regard to the internalization process,
the company holds CPFA and networking activities with its clients. Moreover, the
company works aggressively to create new knowledge through plus one activities
including workout activities and off-site meetings within the company. As such, it
thoroughly manages its knowledge creation system.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
287

Present-CTP plans to globalize its business. The company primarily offers
facilitation-driven consulting services to Japanese MNCs in Japan but its global
clients have requested services for their overseas operations. In addition,
Present-CTP would like to attract talented new university graduates as candidates,
but is struggling to do so because many are interested in working abroad. As a ﬁrst
step toward globalizing its business, the company is building collaborative net-
works with companies in North America, Southeast Asia, and China. It is using
these networks to deliver services to Japanese MNCs in foreign countries with the
aim of setting up its local operations.
Moreover, Present-CTP offers project-based consulting services at the client’s
company.
As
I
noted
earlier,
the
company
published
books
on
their
facilitation-driven methodology as its original services developed by evolving
Global-CTP’s methodology. CTP offers learning and training for facilitation-driven
consulting with its clients (e.g., the CPFA), but it also began providing training and
education in facilitation consulting services to meet its clients’ growing demand.
This service is employed to build courses at corporate universities now.
Socialization
•
Career development (Resource Manager or Advisor Program)
Externalization
•
Methodology of CTP RAD and facilitation-driven consulting
•
Career development (Resource Manager or Advisor Program)
•
Over 250 training programs
Internalization
•
CPFA and networking activities with CTP’s clients
•
Plus one activity, including workout activity and off-site 
meeting within the CTP
Combination
•
Adaptation of facilitation-driven consulting methodology for 
new services
•
Knowledge server
Tacit
Tacit
Tacit
Explicit
Explicit
Explicit
Explicit
Tacit
Fig. 10.1 Knowledge creation system at present-CTP. Source Author-made, based on Nonaka
and Takeuchi’s (1995) SECI model
288
T. Kasahara

10.6
Concluding Remarks
This study explored the role played by CSMs and HRM practices in inter- and
intra-unit knowledge ﬂows and creation systems in MNCs. Previous studies on
MNC knowledge transfer and the role of HRM practices showed that MNCs should
use CSMs to eliminate barriers to knowledge transfer and sharing among inter- and
intra-organizations and to develop interpersonal networks to enhance communi-
cation and smooth knowledge transfer within the group. In the context of HRM,
human capital theory shows that the value of corporate human capital can be
increased through HRM practices. Research on social capital theory emphasizes
that ﬁrms should encourage employees to learn with their colleagues and build
social ties through shared corporate philosophy, project groups, and participation in
international training and corporate programs. These two approaches indicate the
importance of HR conﬁgurations and training and development, along with the
related HRM practices such as performance appraisal, incentives, and career
development, for encouraging employees to develop knowledge and social ties with
colleagues. The relationships between knowledge transfer, socialization mecha-
nisms, and HRM practices have been primarily addressed via a quantitative
approach. However, to interpret these relationships, a qualitative approach is
appropriate and has many advantages. Therefore, in this study, I adopted a quali-
tative approach and a longitudinal case study focusing on one PSF.
The results of the case study suggest the following implications. CTP was
established with an unprecedented business model during a paradigm shift in the
consulting industry driven by the advancement of IT. At Global-CTP, sharing the
corporate philosophy within the group served as an infrastructure for transferring
knowledge such as their unique business model, Fixed Time/Fixed Price based on
the CTP RAD, and HRM practices, from the HQs to the Japanese subsidiary.
Global-CTP globalized its business by replicating the business model for all
operations. Moreover, the CSM played a role in facilitating collaborations among
operations. These results accord with previous studies (Ghoshal and Bartlett 1988;
Tsai and Ghoshal 1998; Lengnick-Hall and Lengnick-Hall 2003; Björkman et al.
2004). The distinctiveness of Global-CTP was that its business model and con-
sulting methodology could be assimilated with its corporate culture. This was the
main reason Novell-CTP Japan spun off from the Novell group. HRM practices
were designed for practicing this idiosyncratic business model. In particular,
training programs played a key role in transferring Global-CTP’s competitiveness
to the Japanese subsidiary. In these programs, understanding, sharing, and culti-
vating the HQs’ culture and business model were emphasized to deliver
high-quality services in each country. This allowed for collaboration between other
subsidiaries’ consultants and the Japanese subsidiary to support its business and to
transfer the knowledge and technology that the Japanese subsidiary did not possess.
Moreover, Global-CTP had a resource manager program that enhanced tacit and
explicit
knowledge
transfer
from
senior
to
junior
consultants
within
the
group. Career development was designed to develop “Cambridge Consultants.”
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
289

Performance appraisal was designed for the generation of high project success rates,
which involved giving feedback to consultants on their projects in order to evaluate
and develop consulting abilities for business model delivery. This practice also
encouraged consultants to collaborate with colleagues by engaging in team work.
These practices were based on mutual and complementary relationships in line with
previous studies (Tsai and Ghoshal 1998; Björkman et al. 2004; Kang et al. 2007;
Kaše et al. 2009; Yamao et al. 2009).
Present-CTP
evolved
the
facilitation-driven
consulting
approach
into
a
methodology. This approach can be interpreted as knowledge creation at
Present-CTP. Although the proposed approach differentiated the company from its
competitors in Japan during the Global-CTP era, Present-CTP now offers a new
service on facilitation consulting for training and education along with standard
consulting services. Based on this methodology, the company enlarged its client
base to non-proﬁt organizations. HRM practices are designed for creating new
knowledge and enhancing the CTP business model and methodology. As I
explained earlier, Present-CTP has a well-integrated knowledge creation system
that may be explained by the SECI model. New knowledge is created through
workshops and by networking with Present-CTP’s clients through training pro-
grams that are assimilated with its culture and business model. These activities aim
to acquire new outside knowledge. In addition, new knowledge is created through
HRM practices inherited from Global-CTP and those developed at Present-CTP to
encourage employees to create knowledge through the off-site meeting and Plus
One Activity at Present-CTP as part of training and development. Likewise, per-
formance appraisal is designed to enhance consultants’ project knowledge and
knowledge creation by giving feedback on their projects on an average of 84 days
per employee. Incentive schemes have also been designed to encourage consultants
to create new knowledge.
One of the contributions of this study is that it shows the processes through
which one PSF has implemented corporate socialization within the company and
how it has gone about creating new knowledge in practice in terms of the rela-
tionships between knowledge transfer and creation, and HRM. The ﬁndings from
this case study are in line with previous studies on the relationships between
knowledge transfer and HRM.
This study has several limitations. First, it has biased research objectives in the
longitudinal case study. The study’s objectives are limited to Japan because
Global-CTP and Novell-CTP are no longer in business. I was therefore unable to
access anyone who worked at the HQs of Global-CTP and Novell-CTP. Moreover,
I cannot show inter-unit knowledge transfer and sharing at Present-CTP because the
company has not globalized its business yet. Second, this study’s external validity
could be enhanced by conducting comparative case studies involving both foreign
and Japanese PSFs, as well as PSFs and manufacturing MNCs, to clarify the
uniqueness and commonalities of knowledge transfer and creation, socialization
mechanisms, and HRM practices. These are future research agendas that should be
pursued.
290
T. Kasahara

References
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S.-W. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. The Academy of
Management Review, 27(1), 17–40.
Alvesson, M. (2004). Knowledge work and knowledge-intensive ﬁrms. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ambile, T. M., Baker, G. P., & Beer, M. (1995) Cambridge technology partners (A), HBS case
9-496-005 (Rev. April 11, 1996). Harvard Business School.
Argote, L., & Ingram, P. (2000). Knowledge transfer: A basis for competitive advantage in ﬁrms.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 82(1), 150–169.
Bartlett, C. A., & Ghoshal, S. (1989). Managing across borders: The transnational solution.
Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press.
Birkinshaw, J., & Hood, N. (1998). Multinational subsidiary evolution: Capability and character
change in foreign-owned subsidiary companies. Academy of Management Review, 23(4), 773–
795.
Björkman, I., Barner-Rasmussen, W., & Li, L. (2004). Managing knowledge transfer in MNCs:
The impact of headquarters control mechanisms. Journal of International Business Studies, 35
(5), 443–455.
Boxall, P. (1996). The strategic HRM debate and the resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Human
Resource Management Journal, 6(3), 59–75.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press.
Burt, R. S. (1997). The contingent value of social capital. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(2),
339–365.
Cabrera, E. F., & Cabrera, A. (2005). Fostering knowledge sharing through people management
practices. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 16(5), 720–735.
Cohen, W., & Levinthal, D. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128–152.
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. The American Journal of
Sociology, 94, 95–120.
Collins, C. J., & Smith, K. G. (2006). Knowledge exchange and combination; The role of human
resource practices in the performance of high technology ﬁrms. Academy of Management
Journal, 49(3), 544–560.
Ghoshal, S., & Bartlett, C. A. (1988). Creation, adoption, and diffusion of innovations by
subsidiaries of multinational corporations. Journal of International Business Studies, 19(3),
365–388.
Ghoshal, S., & Bartlett, C. A. (1990). The multinational corporation as an interorganizational
network. Academy of Management, 15(4), 603–625.
Gompers, P., & Catherine, C. (1997a). Cambridge technology partners: 1991 start up. HBS
case9-298-044 (Rev. November 23, 1998). Harvard Business School.
Gompers, P., & Catherine, C. (1997b). Cambridge technology partners: Corporate venturing.
HBS case9-297-033 (Rev. January 8, 1999). Harvard Business School.
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal, 17(Issue S2), 109–122.
Gupta, A. K., & Govindarajan, V. (2000). Knowledge ﬂows within multinational corporations.
Strategic Management Journal, 21(4), 473–496.
Gupta, A. K., & Singhal, A. (1993). Managing human resources for innovation and creativity.
Research Technology Management, 36(3), 41–48.
Hansen, M. T., Nohria, N., & Tierney, T. (1999). What’s your strategy for making knowledge?
Harvard Business Review, 72(2), 106–116.
Hatch, N. W., & Dyer, J. H. (2004). Human capital and learning as a source of sustainable
competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 25(12), 1155–1178.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
291

Hedlund, G. (1986). The hypermodern MNC: A heterarchy? Human Resource Management, 25
(1), 9–35.
Kang, S.-C., Morris, S. S., & Snell, S. A. (2007). Relational archetypes, organizational learning,
and value creation: Extending the human resource architecture. Academy of Management
Review, 32(1), 236–256.
Kaše, R., Paauwe, J., & Zupan, N. (2009). HR practices, interpersonal relations, and intraﬁrm
knowledge transfer in knowledge-intensive ﬁrms: A social network perspective. Human
Resource Management, 48(4), 615–639.
Kostova, T., & Ross, K. (2003). Social capital in multinational corporations and a micro-macro
model of its formation. Academy of Management Review, 28(2), 297–317.
Kubr, M. (2002). Management consulting: A guide to the profession (4th ed.). Geneva:
International Labour Ofﬁce.
Lado, A. A., & Wilson, M. C. (1994). Human resource systems and sustained competitive
advantage: A competency-based perspective. Academy of Management Review, 19(4), 699–
727.
Lengnick-Hall, M. L., & Lengnick-Hall, C. A. (2003). HR’s role in building relationship networks.
Academy of Management Executive, 17(4), 53–63.
Lepak, D. P., & Snell, S. A. (1999). The human resource architecture: Toward a theory of human
capital allocation and development. The Academy of Management Review, 24(1), 31–48.
Lepak, D. P., & Snell, S. A. (2002). Examining the human resource architecture: The relationship
among human capital, employment, and human resource conﬁgurations. Journal of
Management, 28(4), 517–543.
Lødendahl, B. R. (2005). Strategic management of professional service ﬁrms (3rd ed.).
Copenhagen, DK: Copenhagen Business School Press.
Maister, D. H. (2003). Managing the professional service ﬁrm. New York: Free Press.
Mäkelä, K., & Brewster, C. (2009). Interunit interaction contexts, interpersonal social capital, and
the differing levels of knowledge sharing. Human Resource Management, 48(4), 591–613.
Martin, J. (1991). Rapid application development. New York: Mcmillan Publishing.
Minbaeva, D., Pedersen, T., Bjorkman, I., Fey, C., & Park, H. (2003). MNC knowledge transfer,
subsidiary absorptive capacity and HRM. Journal of International Business Studies, 34(6),
586–599.
Minvaeba, D., Pedersen, T., Björkman, I., Fey, C. F., & Park, H. J. (2014). MNC knowledge
transfer, subsidiary absorptive capacity and HRM. Journal of International Business Studies,
45(1), 38–51.
Minvaeba, D. B. (2005). HRM practices and MNC knowledge transfer. Personnel Review, 34(1),
125–144.
Nahapiet, J., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational
advantage. Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 242–266.
Nishii, S. (2013). Chishiki shuuyaku gata kigyo no global senryaku to business model (Global
strategy and business model in KIFs: The generation, development, and evolution in the
management consulting ﬁrms). Doyukan Publishing Company (in Japanese).
Nohria, N., & Ghoshal, S. (1994). Differentiated ﬁt and shared values: Alternatives for managing
headquarters-subsidiary relations. Strategic Management Journal, 15(6), 491–502.
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science,
5(1), 14–37.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese companies
create the dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Peltokorpi, V., & Vaara, E. (2014). Knowledge transfer in multinational corporations: Productive
and counterproductive effects of language-sensitive recruitment. Journal of International
Business Studies, 45(5), 600–622.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1990). Longitudinal ﬁeld research on change: Theory and practice. Organization
Science, 1(3), 267–292.
Punch, K. F. (2005). Introduction to social research: Quantitative and qualitative approaches
(2nd ed.). London: Sage.
292
T. Kasahara

Reed, K. K., Lubatkin, M., & Srinivasa, N. (2006). Proposing and testing an intellectual
capital-based view of the ﬁrm. Journal of Management Studies, 43(4), 867–893.
Senge, P. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline: The art and practice of the learning organization. New
York: Doubleday/Currency.
Szulanski, G. (1996). Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice
within the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17(Winter Special Issue), 27–43.
Szulanski, G. (2000). The process of knowledge transfer: A diachronic analysis of stickiness.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 82(1), 9–27.
Tsai, W. (2001). Knowledge transfer in intraorganizational networks: Effects of network position
and absorptive capacity on business unit innovation and performance. The Academy of
Management Journal, 44(5), 996–1004.
Tsai, W., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital and value creation: The role of intraﬁrm networks.
Academy of Management Journal, 41(Issue 4), 464–476.
Tsoukas, H. (1996). The ﬁrm as a distributed knowledge system: A constructionist approach.
Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2), 11–25.
Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (1993). Sculpting the learning organization: Lessons in the art
and science of systemic change. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Yamao, S., De Cieri, H., & Hutchings, K. (2009). Transferring subsidiary knowledge to global
headquarters: Subsidiary senior executives’ perceptions of the role of HR conﬁgurations in the
development of knowledge stocks. Human Resource Management, 48(4), 531–554.
Youndt, M. A., Subrammaniam, M., & Snell, S. A. (2004). Intellectual capital proﬁles: An
examination of investments and returns. Journal of Management Studies, 41(2), 335–361.
Zahra, S., & George, G. (2002). Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and
extension. Academy of Management, 27(2), 185–203.
Zander, U., & Kogut, B. (1995). Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of
organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organization Science, 6(1), 76–92.
Tamiko Kasahara (Ph.D., Kobe University of Commerce) is lecturer in International Business
at School of Management and Information, University of Shizuoka, Japan. She received her Ph.D.
and M.S. From Kobe University of Commerce which was integrated into University of Hyogo in
2004. Her primary research interest is in the area of global talent management at multinational
corporations, recently focusing on professional service ﬁrms. Her book “Global Human Resource
Management in Japanese Multinational Corporations (in Japanese, Hakuto Shobo, Tokyo, 2014)”
won the Best Book Award for Young Researchers from Japan Academy of Multinational
Enterprises (JAME), 8th Annual Conference in 2015. She is a board member of JAME.
10
Knowledge Transfer and Creation Systems: Perspectives …
293

Chapter 11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization
of R&D Activities: How Far Have
the Firms’ R&D Members of US
and Japanese Companies Been
Diversiﬁed?
Takabumi Hayashi
Abstract This paper examines that the role played by foreign researchers and
engineers engaged in R&D activities in the US and the overseas R&D activities of
US multinational corporations are no longer negligible. This paper focuses on the
fact that foreign scientists and engineers residing in the US make considerable
contributions as inventors of US patents, and it examines the extent to which the
internationalization of R&D by US companies would result if the outcomes of their
activities in the US were included in the internationalization of R&D. Speciﬁcally,
the level of internationalization of R&D is veriﬁed by studying the nationality of the
inventor’s institution (i.e., IBM), which has consistently been the top US patent
collector from 1993 to 2017. Additionally, looking at Canon Inc., which has been
exceptionally ranked in the top ﬁve from 1985 to 2017 in both the US and Japan,
this paper examines the inventors and the nationalities of the organizations to which
the inventors work, thereby conﬁrming the internationalization of the company’s
R&D in the same way. Finally, we examine how much the internationalization of
R&D activities differs between IBM and Canon.
Keywords Internationalization of R&D  US Patents  Japanese Patents  IBM
Corp. Canon Inc.  Nationality of the Inventor’s Afﬁliation  Foreign Researchers
in the US
T. Hayashi (&)
Rikkyo University, Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: takabumi@rikkyo.ac.jp
Tokyo Fuji University, Tokyo, Japan
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019
J. Cantwell and T. Hayashi (eds.), Paradigm Shift in Technologies and Innovation
Systems, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9350-2_11
295

11.1
Introduction
With new digital technology innovations, information and knowledge is now
mobilized and shared across time and space more than ever before. This has not
only created a technological foundation for promoting the international and geo-
graphical divergence of scientiﬁc and technological knowledge and knowledge
production capability, it also has contributed to the concentration of research and
development (R&D) capabilities in speciﬁc enterprises. These changes in the
technological environment and the globalization of the market have led to the
internationalization of production activities by companies in each country and the
internationalization and transformation of R&D activities. Under these circum-
stances, conventional internationalization of R&D has been vigorously discussed,
as companies, particularly multinational enterprises, have become more inclined to
build R&D centers overseas.
Discussion of internationalization of R&D in the 1970–1980s involved empirical
research on overseas R&D activities, mainly by US multinational corporations
(Mansﬁeld and Romeo et al. 1979, 1984; Mansﬁeld and Teece et al. 1979; Creamer
1976; Behrman and Fischer 1980). However, much debate over international R&D
activities during this period focused on the improvement of R&D capability abroad
from technology transfer from multinational headquarters to overseas afﬁliations
(Hirota 1985, 1986; Komoda 1987; Hayashi 1987, 1989). However, it was also
learned that IBM Corp., for instance, had already established an international R&D
system and that reverse technology transfers of new knowledge from overseas R&D
operations in developed countries to their home countries were taking place (Leroy
1978; Mansﬁeld and Romeo et al. 1984; Shanrokhi 1984; Hayashi 1989).
Since the 1990s, there have been many studies on R&D activities at overseas
R&D centers by US and European-based multinational corporations (Patel and
Pavit 1991; Pearce and Singh 1992; Cantwell 1995). More detailed research on
overseas R&D activities by Japanese companies has also been published as a book
(Iwata 1994, 2007; Takahashi 2000; Nakahara 2001). Moreover, these issues have
been increasingly referred to as “R&D linkage” or “R&D networks,” having been
formed as a result of the interactive ﬂow of technological knowledge between the
headquarters and oversea R&D centers and among overseas R&D sites (Asakawa
1996, 2001; Medcof 2001; Roberts 2001; Serapio and Hayashi 2004; Hayashi and
Serapio 2006).
As the creation and transfer of scientiﬁc and technological knowledge pro-
gressed through the movement of people, the geographical divergence of R&D
capabilities has advanced not only among developed countries but also on a global
scale, including emerging countries. In particular, the issue of “brain circulation
from brain drain” from the emerging countries has drawn attention (Saxenian 2005;
Hayashi 2007).
296
T. Hayashi

As of 2010, the total R&D expenditures of US multinationals was $252.0B, of
which R&D expenditures by overseas majority-owned subsidiaries was $39.5B.
Consequently, R&D expenditures at the overseas subsidiaries accounted for about
16% of the total (NSB and S&E Indicators 2014). The same term for 1985 was 6%
(NSB 1996). As reﬂected in the increase of about 10 points in overseas R&D
expenditures by US multinational corporations in the last 25 yrs, from the input
perspective, it can be said that the internationalization of R&D activities has
strengthened. This trend is particularly evident in countries that are more dependent
on foreign markets than on domestic markets, such as Switzerland with 130%
overseas R&D ratio to the total R&D expenses, Sweden with more than 40%, and
Germany with more than 20% as of 2007 (European Commission 2012).
The research on the relationship between the utilization of overseas R&D
capabilities of major Japanese companies in Europe and the US and the R&D
capabilities in Japan has also reﬂected the trend of major Japanese companies
establishing overseas R&D departments as global R&D centers (Asakawa 2001;
Song et al. 2011).
In the 2010s, discussions emerged concerning the internationalization of R&D
activities and the improvement of R&D capabilities of multinational companies’
(MNC) overseas subsidiaries (Iguchi 2011; Cantwell and Mudambi 2005).
However, despite the ongoing international development of such R&D activities,
the international development of R&D activities by Japanese overseas subsidiaries
has not progressed much. R&D activities by these companies have been limited to
joint research within afﬁliated companies in Japan (Cantwell and Zhang 2006).
Similarly, factors, such as scale and scope economies, coordination costs asso-
ciated with overseas R&D activities, and the degree of protection of intellectual
property rights have been deﬁned as factors that cannot be ignored when R&D
activities are biased in the home country (Belderbos et al. 2013). Analysis of US
pharmaceutical companies has also indicated that ﬁrms transferring knowledge
from select locations may be able to achieve the necessary foci and internal
resources to successfully integrate new knowledge gained from these resources for
innovation (Kotabe et al. 2007, p. 275).
Conventional research on the internationalization of R&D activities has pre-
dominantly focused on inputs, such as R&D expenditures, the number of R&D
personnel involved in R&D activities, outputs as results, the quality level of R&D
activities based on ﬁeld surveys, and management and organization of knowledge
creation. However, with these viewpoints, it is important to note that the
advancement of internet search engines has enabled the transfer and creation of
knowledge beyond time and space. Simultaneously, the importance of software in
the technological architecture of industrial infrastructure has increased. Thus, the
paradigm shift in technological structures and systems are a factor that decentralizes
the geographic transfer and creation of knowledge. However, it is also a factor that
concentrates R&D capabilities of speciﬁc companies and countries using it strate-
gically (Hayashi 2018).
This paper examines, based on the above points, that the role played by foreign
researchers and engineers engaged in R&D activities in the US and the overseas
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
297

R&D activities of US multinational corporations is no longer negligible. If scien-
tists and engineers from overseas continue to stay in the US after studying in the
home country of an MNC (i.e., US) and continue to engage in R&D activities as
highly skilled professionals in the ﬁeld of natural sciences, the need for US MNCs
to set up and strengthen R&D facilities overseas beyond their borders in search of
superior overseas R&D personnel is reduced.
This paper focuses on the fact that foreign scientists and engineers residing in the
US make considerable contributions as inventors of US patents, and it examines the
extent to which the internationalization of R&D by US companies would result if
the outcomes of their activities in the US were included in the internationalization
of R&D.
Speciﬁcally, the level of internationalization of R&D is veriﬁed by studying the
nationality of the inventor’s institution (i.e., IBM), which has consistently been the
top US patent collector for 24 yrs (1993–2017). Additionally, looking at Canon,
Inc., which has been ranked in the top ﬁve for 32 yrs (1985–2017) in both the US
and Japan, this paper examines the inventors and the nationalities of the organi-
zations to which the inventors work, thereby conﬁrming the internationalization of
the company’s R&D in the same way. Finally, we examine how much the inter-
nationalization of R&D activities differs between IBM and Canon.
11.2
Methodology
As a method of quantitatively examining the degree of internationalization of R&D
activities by enterprises, there have been many viewpoints provided about expen-
ditures, numbers of R&D staff, etc., of speciﬁc enterprises and industries overseas
and from outputs, such as S&T papers and patents. This paper examines the latter
from the perspective of output. For patent data, this paper focuses on data from the
US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) and the USPATFUL database.
Additionally, as a new attempt to examine the internationalization of R&D by US
companies, various datasets regarding foreign scientists and engineers residing in
the US is relied upon for S&E indicators of the National Science Board.
The primary purpose of examining patent data is to identify the nationality of the
institutions to which inventors belong from the patent speciﬁcation. Nationality is
therefore indicated not by the passport nationality of these inventors but by the
nationality of their institutions. However, via this method, if a researcher or engi-
neer belonging to an overseas R&D department of a US MNC is the only subject of
R&D internationalization, and if a foreign researcher or engineer belonging to an
R&D facility in the US is the inventor, it is treated as an R&D activity in the US.
Thus, these R&D activities are excluded from the scope of globalization.
In this paper, we examine the degree of internationalization of R&D for IBM
when considering the number of foreign scientists and engineers engaged in R&D
activities at US facilities. Similarly, we compare the degree of internationalization
of R&D of IBM with Canon by examining patents obtained in the US and Japan.
298
T. Hayashi

11.3
Redeﬁnition of Internationalization of R&D
Activities by US Companies
11.3.1
Nationalities of Organizational Afﬁliations
and Passport Nationalities of Foreign Scientists
and Engineers in the US
How many foreign scientists and engineers are engaged in R&D institutions in the
US? Around 2,000, more than one-third of Silicon Valley’s highly skilled engineers,
were mainly Asian foreign nationals (Saxenian 2005). According to the research by
Sana (2010), of the number of employed scientists and engineers in US, foreign born
accounted for 13.3% in 1994, and 23.4% in 2006 (Sana 2010, 805–806).
When estimating the number of foreign scientists and engineers engaged in
advanced R&D work, the number of students studying natural sciences at US
universities, especially graduate schools, from overseas can be used as a reference,
because they tend to stay in the US after obtaining degrees, especially doctorates, in
these sciences. For example, 70% of the 31,600 persons who received a doctorate in
science and engineering (S&E) in 2005 continued to reside in the US in 2015,
10 yrs later. In particular, 90% of the 10,700 Chinese doctoral degree recipients,
85% of the 3,500 Indians, and 56% of the 3,000 South Koreans stayed in the
country 10 yrs longer, engaged in related work (NSB and S&E Indicators 2018).
When they still want to keep residing in the US, after ﬁnishing master or doctorate
course, they apply H1-B visa. The number of H1-B visa approved in the US has
been around 200–300 thousands after 20001.
The percentage of those born overseas among those engaged in S&E related work
in the US in 2015 was 21.1% for bachelor’s degrees, 38.2% for master’s degrees, and
45.3% for doctoral degrees. The higher the degree, the more likely it is they will stay in
the US and engage in S&E related jobs (see Table 11.1). Moreover, the ratio is
gradually increasing, as shown in Table 11.1. It can be assumed that non-negligible
number of authors of scientiﬁc papers and inventors of patented technologies pub-
lished in the names of research institutions of US universities and companies were
accounted for by researchers and engineers born outside the US.
In the case of computer and mathematics ﬁelds in business/industrial sectors, the
percentage of persons with master’s and doctoral degrees engaged in research and
engineering work born overseas was about 50.4 and 58.2%, respectively, as of 2013
(Table 11.2).
Therefore, if approximately 30,000 foreign students in the US receive a degree
in natural sciences every year, and about 70% continue to stay for 10 + yrs to
engage in R&D work as highly skilled professionals in the ﬁeld of natural sciences,
the ratio will probably increase further (NSB 2018).
1The number of H1-B visa approved includes that from overseas applicants, of which India
accounts for about 71% in 2015 (USCIS 2017).
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
299

11.3.2
Nationalities of Institutions to Which Inventors
Belong and Their Passport Nationalities
Since 2007, there have been between 180,000 and 350,000 US approvals (about
197,000 in 2017) (US Citizenship and Immigration Services 2018) for H1-B visas
issued to highly skilled foreign workers, including those who continue to work in
R&D-related institutions, including US companies, as postdoctoral fellows. The
degree of internationalization of R&D differs considerably depending on the
method of how to quantify nationalities of the inventors of patented technologies
who engage in R&D-related work as highly skilled professionals under H1-B visas.
Even if the passport nationality of an inventor at a US company is other than US,
it is indicated by the nationality of the organization to which the inventor belongs.
This means two things. First, the need for cross-border R&D is lower for US
companies than for companies in countries having few foreign scientists or engi-
neers. The second point is that, if the number of US patents claimed by foreign
researchers and engineers belonging to US companies in the US are included in the
ratio of internationalization of R&D, the ratios of US companies increase
considerably.
Table 11.1 Foreign-born workers in science and engineering occupations in the US by education
level (percent)
1993
2003
2015
SESTAT
SESTAT
ACS
NSSCG
ACS
Total college graduates
15.8
22.6
25.2
30.0
28.8
(Bachelor’s degrees)
11.4
16.4
18.7
21.2
21.1
(Master’s degrees)
20.7
29.4
32.0
40.6
38.2
(Ph.D.s)
26.8
36.4
38.7
42.3
45.3
Note Data are cited from the Scientist and Engineers Statistical Data (SESTST), National Sur-vey
of College Graduates (NSCG), and American Community Survey (ACS)
Source NSB, Science & Engineering Indicators (2018)
Table 11.2 Percentage share of non native-born* employed scientists and engineers in the US by
education level in business/industrial sectors and computer/mathematical scientists of these
sectors: 2013
Business/industry
(Computer/mathematical)
All college graduates
25.8
30.7
Bachelor’s
17.9
21.7
Master’s
38.2
50.4
Doctorate
46.5
58.2
Note *Non-native born means naturalized US S&Es and non-US S&Es residing in the US.
Source NSF, Scientists and Engineers Statistics Data System Surveys, Survey (2013)
300
T. Hayashi

In the next section, we examine the degree of internationalization of R&D, based
on the ratio of the US inventions of the top 35 US patenting companies, and the
degree of internationalization of R&D, based on the abovementioned number of
foreign researchers and engineers in the US, focusing on the case of IBM.
11.4
Internationalization of R&D Activities by the Top 35
US Patenting Companies and IBM
11.4.1
Degree of Internationalization of R&D of Top 35 US
Companies with the Largest Number of US Patents
We examine trends in the ratio of overseas inventions by 35 US companies with the
largest number of US patents. Figure 11.1 shows the average ratio of inventions
outside the US for the top 35 US patenting companies and the same ratio of
inventions for major information technology (IT) companies.
As shown in Fig. 11.1, the average ratio of inventions outside the US for the top
35 US companies rose from 15.2% in 2011 to 17.0% in 2015. Similarly, the ratio of
IT-related companies, which account for a large portion of top companies, has risen
at the 2015 level from the 2011 level, with the exception of GE. As described in the
caption, the USPTO deﬁnition of the ratio of inventions outside the US is as
follows; for each patent, the number of listed inventors who are identiﬁed as
residing outside of the United States at the time of grant are divided by the total
number of inventors for that patent to determine the foreign inventor share for that
(one) patent.
The ratio of the overseas inventions of the top 35 US companies, shown in
Fig. 11.1, rose from 15.2% of the 2011 average to 17.0% in 2015, whereas the ratio
of domestic inventions declined from 84.8% in 2011 to 83.0%. If 38.2–46.5% of
researchers and engineers with master’s degrees or higher were foreign scientists
and engineers in the US, these ratios corresponded to 31.7–38.6% of patents.
When accepting the deﬁnition of R&D internationalization is “born outside the
US.”, around 48.7 to 55.6%, adding 17.0 to 31.7 and 38.6%, in a broader sense, was
the ratio of internationalized R&D in 2015. Additionally, the overseas invention
ratio of the top nine IT-related US companies, excluding GM (8th place) shown in
Fig. 11.1, increased from 12.1% in 2011 to 17.5% in 2015. In the case of
foreign-born workers engaged in R&D at IT-related companies in the ﬁelds of
computers and mathematics, the percentage of master’s and doctoral degree holders
was approximately 50.4 and 58.2%, respectively, as of 2013. In a broad sense, the
ratio of internationalization of R&D in the same calculation method was around
54.0–59.7%, adding 17.5% to 36.5–42.2%.
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
301

When we look at the trends in the overseas invention ratio of IBM, which ranks
the top in the number of patents, the company’s ratio of inventions outside the US
rose from 20.5% in 2011 to 29.6% in 2015. In the next section, we examine in more
detail how the degree of internationalization of R&D of IBM changes when the
nationality of institutions to which joint inventors belong and foreign scientists and
engineers in the US are taken into account.
11.4.2
Internationalization of R&D of IBM
In this section, we examine how the internationalization of R&D activities changes
when looking at US patents when researchers and engineers belonging to the
company are described as inventors. We consider the percentage of foreign
researchers and engineers in the US and the nationalities of the institutions to which
the ﬁrst-named inventors and other co-inventors belong.
Table 11.3 shows the number of patents that the company applied for and
obtained from the USPTO between 1980 and 2015, classiﬁed according to the
20.5%
29.6%
8.8%
12.9%
7.6%
16.0%
16.5%
23.7%
11.5%
12.0%
3.4%
11.2%
17.4%
25.1%
3.6%
8.2%
19.2%
19.1%
15.2%
17.0%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
IBM(1)
QUALCOMM(2)
GOOGLE(3)
INTEL(4)
MICROSOFT (5)
APPLE(6)
HP(9)
AMAZON(10)
General Electric(7)
(Top 35. Avg.)
Fig. 11.1 Trends in the ratio of inventions outside the US by the top 35 US patenting companies
and major information technology (IT) companies Note 1 The USPTO deﬁnition of overseas
invention outside the US is “for each patent, the number of listed inventors who are identiﬁed as
residing outside of the United States at the time of grant are divided by the total number of
inventors for that patent to determine the foreign inventor share for that (one) patent”.
Note 2 Each numerical value attached to the company indicates the ranking order in terms of the
number of US patents in 2015. Eighth is GM Global Technology.
Source USPTO
302
T. Hayashi

nationality of the institution to which all the inventors belong, and it shows the ratio
by year of publication.
In 1980, 89.5% of the company’s US patents were based solely on the nation-
ality of the US inventor, and the remaining 10.5% were from overseas (non-US)
inventors. Of the 10.5% patents associated with this foreign inventor, 10.3% were
patents issued by overseas sole inventors, and the remaining 0.5% (see Note[5])
were joint patents between US and overseas IBM. Of the company’s US patents,
the ratio of US IBM’s sole inventions has declined steadily since then, reaching
64.1% in 2015. Conversely, as mentioned earlier, the ratio of patents by inventors
belonging to overseas institutions, including joint inventors, to the number of US
patents increased from 10.5% in 1980 to 35.9% in 2015.
Conversely, the ratio of patents by inventors belonging to overseas institutions,
including joint inventors, to the number of US patents increased from 10.5% in
1980 to 35.9% in 2015. Particular attention should be paid to the fact that the
number of nationalities of institutions to which inventors belong, including the US,
listed in the lower column (7) of the same table, has gradually increased from 7
countries in 1980 to 57 countries in 2015. Looking at these trends in the company’s
international R&D activities from the perspective of output, it nearly agrees with
Table 11.3 Internationalization of R&D of IBM
1980
1990
2000
2005
2010
2015
1=(2+3)
Number of US patents
399
(100.0)
649
(100.0)
2958
(100.0)
6852
(100.0)
7704
(100.0)
10411
(100.0)
2 
Sole invention in the US:
(2)/(1)
357
89.5%
545
84.0%
2492
84.3%
5534
80.8%
5550
72.0%
6671
64.1%
3=
(4+5+6)
Overseas invention/ Total 
US patents: (3)/(1)
10.5%
16.0%
15.7%
19.2%
28.0%
35.9%
4 
Overseas Sole invention:
(4)/(1)
10.3%
12.5%
9.5%
12.0%
17.2%
19.0%
5 
Joint invention between US 
and overseas: (5)/(1)
0.5%
2.6%
5.2%
7.0%
10.9%
16.3%
6 
Joint invention between 
overseas: (6)/(1)
0%
0.9%
0.9%
1.6%
1.7%
3.9%
7 
Number of nationality of 
overseas sole invention
5 
8 
12
18
24
26
Total number of national-
ity of overseas sole and 
joint invention, including 
US.
7 
11
25
32
38
57
8 
Note 1: The deﬁnition of Internationalization of R&D is the ratio of the number of patents which
overseas inventors are listed, to the total number of patents.
Note 2: Total share of (4) (overseas sole invention), (5) (joint invention between US and overseas),
and (6) (joint invention between overseas and overseas) is 39.2%, which is bigger than (3) (joint
invention between US and overseas) in 2015. This is because the number of nationalities involving
joint inventions is more than three afﬁliations’ nationalities. For example, in the case of the joint
invention by one US, one German, and one Israeli, the number is counted as one between US and
Germany, one between US and Israel, and one between Germany and Israel. Accordingly,
(5) (joint invention between US and overseas) is doubly counted. These overlapped numbers reach
nearly 340.
Source Calculated from data by USPATFULL searching
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
303

the increasing trend of diversiﬁcation and divergence of R&D capabilities examined
in Chap. 4. Thus, IBM has strengthened its R&D capabilities by taking advantage
of its superior brainpower, by diversifying its R&D, and by strengthening its joint
international R&D system with other domestic and overseas institutions, centered
on its intra-ﬁrm international R&D systems.
When the deﬁnition of internationalization of R&D is the ratio of foreign
inventors of the total number of inventors, the internationalization of R&D was
29.6% (see Fig. 11.1). When the number of patents which are solely or jointly
invented by overseas of the total number of patents, the ratio was 35.9%. The point
to be kept in mind is that the number of nationalities of overseas IBM excluding the
US to which foreign inventors belong increased from 6 in 1980 to 56 in 2015. As is
revealed in Fig. 11.2, IBM has strengthened its R&D capabilities, leveraging
globally dispersed and diversiﬁed R&D capabilities, centering on India and Israel
among others.
Furthermore, when the number of US-patented inventions by foreign scientists
and engineers belonging to US domestic institutions is included, we seek another
degree of internationalization of R&D. As we have seen, approximately 50 and 58%
20.72
11.82
30.95
9.78
8.61
0
0
7.63
26.39
7.39
33.33
6.24
5.95
4.14
0
0
3.83
26.19
3.29
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1980
1990
2000
2005
2010
2015
IBM India
Number of patents invented by foreign inventors
IBM Israel
IBM Germany
IBM Canada
IBM China
IBM Japan
IBM UK
IBM Switzerland
IBM Ireland
IBM Australia
IBM France
Fig. 11.2 The ratio of the number of US patent obtained by each major overseas IBM to the total
number of US patents obtained by all overseas IBM Note Also refer to Notes of Table 11.2.
Source Calculated from data by USPATFULL searching
304
T. Hayashi

of master’s and doctoral degree recipients, respectively, in the US, specializing in
computing and mathematics were born overseas, as of 2013 (NSF 2018). Therefore,
assuming this ratio corresponds to the number of researchers and engineers involved
in IBM’s R&D department in the US, the company’s 2015 US patents owned by
foreign scientists and engineers belonging to their US R&D department were
respectively 50–58% or 32.1–37.2% of the 64.1%. If the results of R&D activities by
foreign researchers and engineers engaged in R&D in the US are counted as the
internationalization of R&D activities, the internationalization of IBM’s R&D
activities by US-patented inventions was approximately 68–73%, comprising 35.9%
of R&D activities outside the US and 32.1–37.2% of R&D activities of foreign
researchers and engineers in the US. If this ﬁgure reﬂects the actual situation, the ratio
of internationalization of R&D, based on the ratio of overseas inventions of IBM, as
published by the USPTO, is signiﬁcantly underestimated.
11.5
Internationalization of R&D Activities by Top 35
Japanese Patenting Companies and Canon Inc
11.5.1
Degree of Internationalization of R&D by Top 35
Japanese Companies with US Patents
Figure 11.3 shows trends in the ratio of inventions in the US to the average number
of US patents held by the top 35 Japanese companies, those of major electronics
companies, and those of the electrical equipment Japanese manufacturer, Hitachi,
Ltd. However, the ratio of inventions in the US to the number of US patents of these
Japanese companies accounts for a part of the ratio in foreign countries, excluding
Japan. Therefore, the former value is smaller than the latter. However, considering
that the US R&D department of these companies tends to occupy a more important
position among Japanese overseas R&D departments and that they make patent
applications in the US, the difference between the US invention ratio and the
overseas invention ratio among Japanese companies’ US patents may not be sig-
niﬁcant. This point will be examined in the case of Canon, described later.
Importantly, the average US invention ratio of 35 Japanese companies has not
risen from 3.7% since 2011. It declined slightly to 3.3% in 2015. Among the top 35
Japanese companies, the company with the highest US invention ratio was Honda,
ranked 12th in the US patent number by Japanese companies in 2015, at 16.4%.
However, the ratio of Honda has declined from 20.9%, reached in 2011. Of the nine
major Japanese electronics and electronics companies shown in Fig. 11.2, Sony
Corp. showed the highest US invention ratio. The same ratio in 2015 was the same
at the 9.1% level. Furthermore, it cannot be said that the ratio has been on an
upward trend since 2011. Fujitsu is the only Japanese company in the electronics
ﬁeld that continuously increased its ratio of inventions in the US from 4.0% in 2011
to 8.3% in 2015. However, the ratio is still below 10%.
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
305

Therefore, the ratio of inventions in the US by the top eight Japanese electrical
and electronics companies was clearly lower than that of the eight US IT companies
shown in Fig. 11.1, where the ratio of inventions overseas was 10% or more.
In 2015, Canon was the top Japanese company in terms of the number of US
patents granted. However, the company’s US invention ratio by the deﬁnition of
USPTO, was only 1.4%. Furthermore, it has not risen from 1.3%, reached in 2011.
In the next section, we analyze in more detail the degree of internationalization of
R&D by considering the number of patents solely or jointly invented by foreign
inventors in the case of Canon Inc., which ranks at the top for the number of patents
granted as a Japanese company both in Japan and the US.
The ratio of the number of patents solely or jointly invented by overseas
inventors to the number of patents granted to Japanese companies in Japan was
even lower than the ratio of the number of overseas inventions, excluding Japan, to
the number of US patents granted them. The number of patent applications ﬁled
overseas, not just by Japanese companies, tended to be limited to innovative
technologies with more strategic signiﬁcance, mainly stipulated in the costs of
applications, registration, renewal, etc.
1.2%
1.4%
9.3%
10.2%
9.1%
2.9%
5.7%
4.0%
8.3%
1.2%
6.2%
7.6%
4.7%
2.3%
(3.3%)
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
CANON (1)
SONY (3)
TOSHIBA(2)
PANASONIC CORPO.+Panasonic I.P.M(4)
FUJITSU LIMITED(8)
SEIKO EPSON (5)
(3.7%)
Fig. 11.3 Trends in the ratio of internationalization of R&D by the 35 top Japanese companies in
the number of US patents Note 1: The deﬁnition of the ratio of US inventions includes the
nationality of afﬁliations to which ﬁrst-named inventors belong is US.
Note 2: Each number attached to the company is a ranking order in terms of the number of US
patents in 2015. The ratio of Toyota, 7th place, was 0.9% in 2015. Brother Industries was 9th place
at 0%, and Semiconductor Energy Institutes was 10th place, also at 0%.
Source: Calculated from the USPTO database
306
T. Hayashi

With the lower cost of domestic patents in Japan, the number of patents for
defense and domestic applications includes those with an uncertain future,
regarding whether or not they will be used. Thus, the number of applications for
patents overseas tends to decrease relative to the number of domestic patents.
Therefore, the ratio of the number of patents invented outside the US to the number
of US domestic patents brought by US companies was lower than that of patents
ﬁled outside the US to the number of patents applied for in the US to major
overseas countries.
Therefore, when comparing the ratios of Figs. 11.1 and 11.2 on the same basis, it
is necessary to calculate and compare the number of US patents applied to the US
by the Japan based companies to be analyzed, including US inventions and all
foreign invention patents from outside Japan. It is also necessary to calculate and
verify the ratio of the number of foreign invention patents to the number of Japanese
patents applied for and granted to the companies in Japan. This paper examines
these necessities for Canon in 2015.
11.5.2
Internationalization of R&D Activities by Canon Inc
Comparing the number of patents granted in the US in Figs. 11.1 and 11.3, we
examine patents invented outside the US, excluding inventions in Japan, for patents
granted to Canon in the US in 2015.
11.5.2.1
The Number of Overseas Inventions and the Ratio of Canon’s
US Patents
As shown in Fig. 11.3, only 1.4% of Canon’s US patents were invented in the US.
Thus, the number of overseas inventions (other than Japan) and their ratio were
calculated focusing on the nationality of the organization to which the overseas
inventor belonged, based on the USPTO deﬁnition. Table 11.4 shows the number
and the ratio of US patents granted to the company in 2015 by nationality of the
organization to which the inventor belonged.
Of the 3,470 patents Canon obtained in the US in 2015, 3,298 were invented
solely in Japan. Therefore, 95.0% of the company’s US patents were sole inven-
tions of Japan. The company’s overseas R&D operations contributed to 126
patents. The largest number of overseas sole inventions was made in the US with 59
patents, followed by France with 32, Australia with 26, China with 3, Germany
with 2, India with 1, the Netherlands with 1, Taiwan with 1, and the UK with 1.
Therefore, the ratio of overseas sole inventions to the number of patents published
in the same year was 3.6%. Additionally, there were 41 patents for joint inventions
between Japanese institutions and overseas institutions in 10 countries. There were
21 patents with the US, 8 with Taiwan, 2 with the UK, 2 with Poland, 2 with India,
2 with France, 1 with Germany, 1 with China, 1 with Austria, and 1 with Australia.
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
307

Among the company’s overseas R&D institutions, the US was the only country
with joint inventions with overseas partners, and there were ﬁve joint inventions
with each of four countries: Australia, France, Canada, and India. Therefore, 41
jointly invented patents between Japanese and foreign
inventors accounted for
1.2% of the total. Therefore, the ratio of patents for inventions belonging to
overseas institutions to the number of US patents (3,470 patents), including joint
inventions with overseas institutions, was 5.0%.
As with IBM’s US domestic patents, we next examine the number and ratio of
overseas inventions among patents ﬁled in Japan by Canon and published in 2015.
11.5.2.2
Overseas Inventions as a Percentage Share of Canon’s
Japanese Patents
Canon obtained a total of 13,039 patents in Japan in 2015. The total number of
Japanese patents by overseas inventions, including joint inventions with Japan, was
57, as shown in Tables 11.5 and 11.6. Of these, 33 were inventions in the US, of
which 26 were sole, and 7 were joint with Japan. Out of 15 in Australia, 14 were
sole, and 1 was joint with Japan. There were 4 in France, 2 in Poland and China,
and 1 in Italy.
As shown in the same table, the ratio of overseas inventions to the number of
patents granted to Canon in Japan, including the number of joint inventions with
Japan, was only 0.4%.
The ratio of internationalization of R&D of Canon Inc. in terms of the number of
patents published in Japan was only 0.4%. Conversely, the ratio of inventions in the
home country was 99.6%.
As shown in Table 11.6, of Canon’s Japanese patents in 2015, 57 were by
overseas inventions, whereas 172 of their Canon’s US patents were by overseas
inventions, as shown in Table 11.4. These included sole and joint inventions. Thus,
Table 11.4 The number and ratio of US patent inventions by nationality of institutional
afﬁliations of inventors in Japan and overseas by Canon Inc. (2015 US patents)
N
%
Sole Invention in Japan
3,298
95.0
Overseas Invention (1 + 2 + 3)
172
5.0
1: Overseas Sole*
(126)
(3.6)
2: Joint between Japan and Overseas**
(41)
(1.2)
3: Joint between overseas***
(5)
(0.1)
Total
3,470
100.00
Note*: The number of US patents by overseas sole inventions: AUS, 26; FRA, 32; US, 59; CHN,
3; DEU, 2; IND, 1; NLD, 1; TWN, 1; UK, 1
Note**: Joint between Japan and overseas: JPN–US, 21; JPN–TWN, 8; JPN–FRA, 2; JPN–IND,
2; JPN–POL, 2; JPN–UK, 2; JPN–AUS, 1; JPN–AUT, 1; JPN–CHN, 1; JPN–DEU, 1
Note***: Joint between overseas: US–AUS, 2; US–CAN, 1; US–FRA, 1; US–IND, 1
Source calculated from USPATFUL search
308
T. Hayashi

Table 11.5 Number of Japanese patents by nationality of afﬁliated institutions of inventors of
Japanese Canon Inc. (2015 Japanese patent: ratio to the number of duplications in parentheses)
CANON
(13,039)
US
AUT
FRA
POL
CHN
ITA
JPN
Total
US
26
(0.0020)
0
0
0
0
0
7
(0.0005)
33
(0.0025)
Australia
(AUT)
14
(0.0011)
0
0
0
0
1
(0.0001)
15
(0.0011)
France
(FRA)
4
(0.0003)
0
0
0
0
4
(0.0003)
Poland
(POL)
2
(0.0002)
0
0
0
2
(0.0002)
China
(CHN)
2
(0.0002)
0
0
2
(0.0002)
Italy
(ITA)
0
1
(0.0001)
1
(0.0001)
Japan
(JPN)
12,991
(0.9949)
13,000
(0.9956)
Total
13,048
(1.0000)
Note (1) Each number indicates the number of Japanese patents per sole and joint inventions. For
ex ample, the total 33 of the US indicates 26 sole inventions by the US and 7 joint inventions
between the US and Japan. The ﬁrst-named inventors of six out of seven joint inventions are
Japanese. The ﬁrst-named inventor of one joint invention by Australian and Japanese was also
Japanese. Therefore, the number of overseas sole inventions by the ﬁrst-named inventor was 48
out of 57 overseas, including joint Japanese
(2) There were 20 Japanese patents invented by foreign researchers or engineers residing in Japan,
of which 18 were jointly invented with Japanese, and 2 were invented solely. The nationalities of
these two sole inventions were Korean and Chinese
(3) 13,048 total number of patents excludes 9 duplicated number of patents
Source Calculated from Japanese published patent search
Table 11.6 Number and ratio of patents by nationalities of institutions to which inventors belong:
Japanese Patents of CANON Inc. in 2015
N
%
Inventions in Japan
1,2991
99.6
Overseas Inventions (1 + 2 + 3)
57
0.4
1: Overseas Sole Inventions*
(48)
(0.4)
2: Joint Inventions (Japan + Overseas)**
(9)
–
3: Joint Invention (Between Overseas)
(0)
–
Total
1,3048
100.0(100.0)
Note 1: Overseas Sole*: US, 26; AUT, 14; FRA, 4; POL, 2; CHN, 2
2: Joint Inventions (JPN + Overseas)**: JPN-US, 7; JPN-AUS, 1; JPN-ITA, 1
Source Calculated from Japanese published patent search
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
309

foreign inventions, particularly US inventions, contributed more to US patents than
to Japan’s.
The ratio of internationalization of R&D of Canon Inc. in terms of the number of
patents published in Japan was only 0.4%. Conversely, the ratio of inventions in the
home country was 99.6%.
Of the 57 patents in Japan involving overseas inventions, 48 were made solely
by researchers and engineers belonging to the company’s overseas R&D depart-
ment. Only nine were jointly invented by R&D departments in Japan and overseas,
and no joint inventions were found between overseas R&D departments.
As described in the footnotes to the table, there were only 20 patents invented
solely or jointly by inventors who are considered foreign nationals, regarding the
passport nationality of the inventors belonging to the company’s Japanese institu-
tion. Therefore, 77 total patents, comprising 20 invented by foreign inventors
residing in Japan and 57 at overseas inventions, accounted for only 0.6% (=77/
13048), in terms of the ratio to the number of Japanese patents published.
11.6
Discussion and Conclusion
The degree of internationalization of R&D activities by IBM Corp. and CANON Inc,
most typical US and Japanese patenting companies has been examined by consid-
ering the overseas sole invention rate, and joint invention rate with overseas. The
paper has also examined research output of foreign scientists and engineers residing
in the US and Japan, where there is a greater degree of difference than in conven-
tional output paradigms. We reconﬁrm this point using Tables 11.7 and 11.8.
Table 11.7 Ratio of internationalization of R&D in terms of foreign patent inventors of IBM and
Canon (in 2015) (each ratio in parentheses shows that of Japanese patents: %)
IBM Corp.
CANON
Inc.
Overseas invention ratio by the USPTO deﬁnition(1)
29.6
1.4
Overseas invention ratio based on the number of patents by
foreign inventors(2)
35.9 (68.2)
5.0 (0.4)
Overseas invention ratio including inventions by foreign
researchers and engineers in the US(3) and Japan(4)
68.0–73.1
(84.1–86.6)
−(0.6)
Note Nationalities are classiﬁed by those of institutions to which inventors belong.
(1) Refer to the attached note1 of Fig. 11.1
(2) Other ratios beside the USPTO deﬁnition are based on the deﬁnition in terms of the number of
patents by foreign inventors (refer to the attached note of Table 11.1)
(3) Overseas invention ratio, including US inventions by foreign researchers and engineers
residing in the US by IBM is the estimated value based on NSF, Scientist and Engineers Statistical
Data (2013), which is shown in Table 11.2
(4) In the case of CANON, each ratio is calculated from 13,057 published CANON patents at the
Japanese patent ofﬁce
Source Calculated from the USPATFUL database and Japanese published patents
310
T. Hayashi

As shown in Table 11.7, the ratio of inventions by overseas researchers and
engineers to the number of US patents granted to IBM and Canon in 2015 was
estimated to be 29.6 and 1.4% respectively based on the USPTO deﬁnition. The
ratios based on the deﬁnition 2 are 35.9 and 5.0%. The ratios of the number of
overseas invented patents to the number of Japanese patents are 68.2% and 0.4%
respectively, and between 68–73% and 84–87% when considering inventions by
foreign researchers and engineers residing in the US.
Compared with IBM’s US patents, Canon’s overseas inventions accounted for
0.4% of the total Japanese patents. Their patent inventions of foreign nationalities
residing in Japan accounted for 0.6%. All of them were below 1%.
Additionally, as was shown in Table 11.3, the number of IBM’s US patent
inventors’ institutional nationality comprised 26 countries in the case of overseas
sole, and it comprised 56 countries in the case of joint inventions with overseas. On
the other hand, in the case of Canon, as was indicated of Notes of Tables 11.4 and
11.6, the former was 9 countries, and the latter was 12, both at IBM’s 34.6% level
and 21.4% level, respectively. Comparing the numbers of inventions by foreign
researchers and engineers, as is revealed in Table 11.8, Canon’s numbers were only
4.6%, 25.8%, and 0.5–0.6% to IBM’s, respectively.
On the basis of these results, the following three points can be made to account
for the differences in contributions found in patented inventions by foreign scien-
tists and engineers between Japanese and US companies.
First, if the output of foreign scientists and engineers in the US is included in the
concept of R&D internationalization, the degree of internationalization of R&D by
US companies will increase signiﬁcantly. Second, the ability of foreign R&D
personnel who enjoyed advanced research and educational opportunities in the US
to be utilized in the US greatly reduces negative factors, such as coordination costs
with foreign researchers and engineers in a cross-cultural environment associated
with the cross-border R&D (Asakawa 2001; Belderbos et al. 2013). Third, in the
case of Japanese companies, output by cross-border internationalization of R&D in
Table 11.8 Comparison of the number of patents invented by overseas and foreign nationals of
IBM and Canon in US & Japanese patents
IBM(A)
Canon(B)
(B)/(A)
Overseas invention (of US patent)
3737
172
0.046
Overseas invention (of Japanese patent)
221
57
0.258
Invented by foreign researchers and engineers
in the US(1) or Japan(2)
3,335–3,869(3)
20(4)
0.005–0.006
Note (1): Overseas invention ratio, including US inventions by foreign researchers and engineers
residing in the US by IBM is the estimated value based on NSB (2018)
(2): In the case of CANON, each ratio is calculated from 13,057 published CANON Japanese
patents issued by the Japanese patent ofﬁce
(3): and (4) Refer to Note (1) & (2) of Table 11.5.
The numbers of US patents in 2015 by IBM and CANON are 10,411 and 3,468 respectively, and
those of Japanese patents by these companies are 362 and 13,039 respectively
Source Calculated from USPATFUL database and Japanese published patent data
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
311

terms of patent inventions was extremely low, as is shown in the case of Canon,
which has been in the top position in terms of the number of patents. The coor-
dination costs associated with the utilization of cross-border R&D personnel
becomes signiﬁcantly higher owing to the signiﬁcant limitation of opportunities for
foreign scientists and engineers in Japan. Therefore, the greater the opportunities for
US companies to leverage foreign scientists and engineers at home, the less the
need for them to build cross-border R&D systems. In the case of Japanese com-
panies, on the other hand, the necessity is greater than US companies to a con-
siderable extent.
When R&D activities are examined from the perspective of the output of patent
inventions, we must conclude that the R&D system of Japanese companies is a
closed innovation system in the sense that it lacks an extremely international
character, as was examined in the case of Canon Inc., a Japanese top patenting
company.
As the business environment becomes turbulent with innovations in IT and
digital technologies and as the value chain assumes an international character
through collaborations, alliances, and outsourcing among enterprises and busi-
nesses that can ﬂexibly utilize the superior business resources of other institutions,
the negative elements embedded in those closed R&D systems seem to have an
even greater weight in the age of world-wide dispersed R&D capabilities.
References
Asakawa, K. (2001). Organizational tension in international R&D management: The case of
Japanese ﬁrms. Research Policy, 30(5), 735–757.
Behrman, J. N., & Fischer, W. A. (1980). Overseas R&D activities of transnational companies.
Cambridge: Oelgesclagert, Gunn & Hain.
Belderbos, R., Lete, B., & Suzuki, S. (2013). How global is R&D? Firm-level determinants of
home-country bias in R&D. Journal of International Business Studies, 44, 765–786.
Cantwell, J. (1995). The globalization of technology: What remains of the product cycle model?
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 19(1), 155–174.
Cantwell, J. A., & Mudambi, R. (2005). MNE competence–creating subsidiary mandates.
Strategic Management Journal, 26(12), 1109–1128.
Cantwell, J. A., & Zhang, Y. (2006). Why is Internationalization in Japanese ﬁrms so low? A path
—dependent explanation. Asian Business and Management, 5, 249–269.
Creamer, D. B. (1976). Overseas Research and development by the US multinationals, 1966–
1975; Estimates of expenditures and a statistical proﬁle, New York, The Conference Board.
Hayashi, T. (1989). Takokuseki kigyo to chiteki shoyuken (Multinational enterprise and
intellectual property rights). Tokyo: Moriyamashoten.
Hayashi, T. (2004). Globalization and networking of R&D activities by 19 electronics MNCs.
In M. Serapio & T. Hayashi (Eds.), Internationalization of research and development and the
emergence of global R&D networks (pp. 85–112). Oxford: Elesvier.
Hayashi, T. (2007). Higashi ajia ni okeru kokkyo wo koeta komyuniti to chishiki kyoso no
mekanizumu (Transnational community in East Asia and the knowledge co-creating
mechanism). In T. Sakuma, T. Hayashi, & Y. Kaku (Eds.), Idousuru ajia (Moving Asia)
(pp. 18–47, Chap. 1). Tokyo: Akashishoten.
312
T. Hayashi

Hayashi, T. (2018). Kenkyu Kaihatsu Nouryoku No Kokusaiteki Saihensei: IBM No Keisu Wo
Chusintosite (International Reorganization of R&D System: Focusing on the Case of IBM
Corp.). Keieironso, 8(1), 85–108.
Hayashi, T., & Serapio, M. (2006). Cross-border linkages in research and development: Evidence
from 22 US Asian and European MNCs. Asian Business & Management, 5, 271–298.
Hirota, T. (1985). Beikoku kigyou no kenkyu kaihatsu Kkatsudo to senryaku (R&D Activities and
strategies of US companies). Kansai University Shougakuronshu, 30(4–5), 1–42.
Hirota, T. (1986). Nihon to beikoku kigyou no gijutsu kaihatsu (Technology development of
Japanese and US companies). Kansai Univ. Shougauronshu, 30(6), 1–67.
Iguchi, C. (2011). Globalisation of R&D by TNC subsidiaries: The case of South-East Asian
countries. Asian Business & Management, 11(1), 79–100.
Iwata, T. (1994). Kenkyu kaihatsu no gurobaruka (Globalization of research and development).
Tokyo: Bunshindo.
Iwata, T. (2007). Gurobaru inobeishon manejimento (Management of global innovation). Tokyo:
Chuoukeizaisha.
Komoda, F. (1987). Kokusai gijutsu iten no riron (Theory of international technology transfer).
Tokyo: Yuhikaku.
Kotabe, M., et al. (2007). Determinants of cross-national knowledge transfer and its effect on ﬁrm
innovation. Journal of International Business Studies, 38, 259–282.
Leroy, G. P. (1978). Transfers of technology within the multinational enterprise. In M. Gehrtman
& J. Leontiades (Eds.), European research in international business. Amsterdam: North
Holland Publishing.
Mansﬁeld, E., Romeo, A., et al. (1979). Foreign trade and US research and development. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 61(1), 49–57.
Mansﬁeld, E., Romeo, A., et al. (1984). Reverse transfers of technology from overseas subsidiaries
to American ﬁrms. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, EM (31)3, 122–127.
Mansﬁeld, E., Teece, D., et al. (1979). Overseas research and development by US based ﬁrms.
Economica, 46, 187–196.
Medcof, J. (2001). Resource-based strategy and managerial power in networks of internationally
dispersed technology units. Strategic Management Journal, 22(11), 999–1012.
National Science Board, Science & Engineering Indicators. (2018).
Patel, P., & Pavitt, K (1998). Uneven technological accumulation among advanced countries. In G.
Dosi, D. J. Teece, & J. Chytry (Eds.), Technology, organization, and competitiveness (pp. 289–
317). Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press.
Pearce, R., & Singh, S. (1992). Globalizing research and development. London: MacMillan.
Roberts, E. (2001). Benchmarking global strategic management of technology. Research
Technology Management, 44(2), 2536.
Sana, M. (2010). Immigration and natives in US science and engineering occupations, 1994–2006.
Demography, 47(3), 801–820.
Saxenian, A. (2005). From brain drain to brain circulation: Transnational communities and
regional upgrading in India and China. Studies in Comparative International Development, 42
(2), 35–61.
Shanrokhi, M. (1984). Reverse licensing. Santa Barbara: Praeger.
Song, J., Aasakawa, K., & Chu, Y. (2011). What determines knowledge sourcing from host
locations of overseas R&D operations? A study of global R&D activities of Japanese
multinationals. Research Policy, 40(3), 380–390.
Takahashi. (2000). Gurobaru R&D Nettowahk (Global Network of R&D). Tokyo: Bunshndo.
Takabumi Hayashi (Ph.D. in Economics, Rikkyo University) is Professor Emeritus of Rikkyo
University, Tokyo. He successively ﬁlled the position of senior lecturer at Fukuoka University,
associate professor and professor of International Business at Rikkyo University, and Professor at
Kokushikan University, Tokyo. His recent research arears are innovation systems and R&D
11
Redeﬁning the Internationalization of R&D Activities …
313

management, focusing on knowledge creation and diversity management. His works have been
widely published in books and journals. His book “Multinational Enterprises and Intellectual
Property Rights” (in Japanese; Moriyama Shoten, Tokyo, 1989.)” is widely cited, and
“Characteristics of Markets in Emerging Countries and New BOP Strategies” (in Japanese;
Bunshindo, Tokyo, 2016) received the award from Japan Scholarly Association of Asian
Management (JSAAM) in 2018. He has been sitting on the editorial board of several academic
journals.
314
T. Hayashi

