
Paul Virilio 
From Modernism to Hypermodemism and Beyond 
Edited by 
JohnArmitage 
® 
SAGE Publications 
London • Thousand Oaks • New Delhi 

ISBN 0-7619-5901-7 (hbk) 
ISBN 0-7619-5902-5 (pbk) 
© Theory, Culture & Society 2000 
First published 2000 
Paul Virilio is simultaneously published as Volume 16, Numbers 5-6 
of Theory, Culture & Society 
Published in association with Theory, Culture & Society, Nottingham 
Trent University 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, 
or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act, 1988, this publication may be reproduced, stored or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means, only with the pnor permission 
in writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction, 
in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright 
Licensing Agency. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside those 
terms should be sent to the publishers. 
<§ 
SAGE Publications Ltd 
1 Oliver's Yard, 
55 City Road 
London EC1Y ISP 
SAGE Publications Inc 
2455 Teller Road 
Thousand Oaks, 
California 91320 
SAGE Publications India Pvt Ltd 
B-42 Panchsheel Enclave 
PO Box 4109 
New Delhi 110017 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Printed digitally and bound in Great Britain by 
Lightning Source UK Ltd., Milton Keynes, Bedfordshire 

Contents 
John Armitage 
John Armitage 
Paul Virilio 
Neil Leach 
Mike Gone 
Douglas Kellner 
Sean Cubitt 
Scott McQuire 
Patrick Crogan 
Introduction 
From Modernism to Hypermodernism 
and Beyond: An Interview with Paul Virilio 
'Indirect Light', Extracted from Polar Inertia 
Virilio and Architecture 
Paul Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 
Virilio, War and Technology: 
Some Critical Reflections 
Virilio and New Media 
Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
The Tendency, the Accident and the Untimely: 
1 
25 
57 
71 
85 
103 
127 
143 
Nicholas Zurbrugg 
Verena Andermatt 
Conley 
James Der Derian 
Bibliography 
John Armitage 
Index 
Paul Virilio's Engagement with the Future 
161 
Virilio, Stelarc and Terminal' Technoculture 
177 
The Passenger: Paul Virilio and Feminism 
201 
The Conceptual Cosmology of Paul Virilio 
215 
Paul Virilio: A Select Bibliography 
229 
241 

This book is dedicated to 
Barbara and Jeffrey Armitage, 
my mother and father 

Paul Virilio 
An Introduction 
John Armitage 
This is a war universe. War all the time. That is its nature. There may be other 
universes based on all sorts of other principles, but ours seems to be based on 
war 
(Burroughs, 1991: 95) 
People often tell me: you reason in a political way, like the Ancients. It's true. 
I don't believe in sociology. It's a mask. Sociology was invented in order to 
forget politics. For me, all that is social, sociology, doesn't interest me. I 
prefer politics and war. 
(Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 17) 
S
ELF-PROFESSED 'urbanist', political thinker and 'critic of the art of 
technology', Paul Virilio is one of the most significant and stimulating 
French cultural theorists writing today. Increasingly hailed as the 
inventor of military, spatial, political and 'technocultural' concepts such as 
the 'oblique function', 'dromology', or the 'science' of speed, the 'aesthetics 
of disappearance' and 'endo-colonization', Virilio is noted for his procla-
mation that the logic of ever increasing speed lies at the heart of the 
organization and transformation of the contemporary world. 
Challenging accepted modern and postmodern theories of war, archi-
tecture, politics and technoculture, Virilio's phenomenological critique of 
speed draws on the continental philosophy of Husserl (1964) and Merleau-
Ponty (1962), together with the gestalt psychology of forms. Partially 
converging with the poststructuralist theories of Foucault (1977) and 
Deleuze and Guattari (1987), Virilio's writings are particularly influenced 
by war, strategy and spatial planning. Sharing common ground with other 
contemporary 'hypermodem' cultural theorists like Wark (1994), Kittler 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 1-23 
[0263-2764(199910712)16:5-6;l-23;009956] 

2 
Theory, Culture & Society 
(1997), and Kroker and Kroker (1997), Virilio rejects the 'catastrophe' of 
postmodernism, describing his own main texts such as Speed & Politics: An 
Essay on Dromology (1986), War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception 
(1989) and, most recently, Politics of the Very Worst (Virilio and Petit, 
1999), as a modest contribution to the 'archeology of the future'. 
But who is Paul Virilio? What is the significance of military space, the 
organization territory, dromology, disappearance, the 'logistics of percep-
tion', 'polar inertia', the 'transplant revolution' and 'technological funda-
mentalism'? What are the principal architectural, political and aesthetic 
themes and contributions of Virilio's important dromological and hyper-
modern writings on the archeology of the future? In this Introduction to Paul 
Virilio: From Modernism to Hypermodernism and Beyond, such questions 
are briefly addressed in the first two sections through the provision of 
Virilio's biographical details, theoretical development and contributions to 
cultural theory. In the following three sections, an outline of Virilio's 
hypermodernism, the 'war machine', the 'flesh machine', and a short 
evaluation of the salient propositions and controversies surrounding Vir-
ilio's work will be provided prior to the conclusion and, finally, an overview 
of the contents of this collection. 
Military Space and the Organization of Territory 
Born in Paris of a French mother and an Italian father in 1932, Virilio was 
evacuated to the port of Nantes in Brittany in 1939 where he was trauma-
tized by the drama of the Blitzkrieg during the Second World War. After the 
war, he attended L'Ecole des Metiers d'Art in Paris before becoming a 
craftsman in stained glass and working in churches alongside artists such as 
Matisse. In 1950, Virilio converted to Christianity in the fraternity of 
'worker-priests' - radical clerics who shun religious dress, take an indus-
trial job and live among the workers. Later, after being conscripted into the 
colonial army during the Algerian war of independence (1954-62), Virilio 
began campaigning with Abbe* Pierre, the post-war patron of the homeless. 
In the late 1950s Virilio studied phenomenology with Merleau-Ponty at the 
Sorbonne before turning to existential, political and aesthetic questions 
involving the architecture of war from the radical political standpoint of an 
'anarcho-Christian'. With the architect Claude Parent, he instituted the 
Architecture Principe group and the review of the same name in 1963. 
However, as Virilio relates to Armitage in the interview in this collection -
hereafter, 'the hypermodern interview' - an irreversible split with Parent 
ensued after Virilio's anarchist- and situationist-inspired political activities 
during the e^ve'nements of May 1968. In 1969, Virilio was nominated Pro-
fessor at the Ecole Speciale d' Architecture in Paris, becoming its Director 
in 1975 and its President in 1990. An experienced organizer of exhibitions 
on the themes of war, architecture, media and democracy, Virilio has also 
been a member of the editorial board and a contributor to a variety of 
influential periodicals, including Critique, Traverses, Cahiers du Cinema 
and Le Monde Diplomatique. Awarded the coveted 'National Award for 

Armitage — Paul Virilio: An Introduction 3 
Criticism' in 1987, Virilio's political activities currently involve, among 
others, active participation in various associations concerned with the 
housing of the homeless in Paris. 
According to Virilio, in a culture overshadowed by war, the military is 
of critical significance in questions concerning the construction of urban 
and political space and the technological organization of social existence. 
As he amply demonstrates in Speed & Politics (1986) and in his contribution 
to this collection, Virilio presents a convincing 'war model' of the evolution 
of the modern city and the development of cultural and social life using such 
proposals. The fortified city of the feudal era, for example, was a stationary 
and largely impregnable war machine connected in Virilio's understanding 
to an effort to regulate the flow and the speed of the movements of the urban 
population. Consequently, the fortified city was a political space of habi-
tation, the political form, and the material foundation of feudalism. How-
ever, for Virilio, the fortified city of feudalism disappeared because of the 
arrival of exceptionally mobile and high-speed weapons systems. Such 
developments not only 'exposed' the city and turned siege warfare into a 
war of movement but also destroyed the attempts to regulate the population 
and thus ushered in the free movement of the urban masses. Virilio there-
fore conceives of the transition from feudalism to capitalism not in economic 
but in military, spatial, political and technological terms. It is, in short, the 
military conception of history. 
Beginning in 1958 with a critical analysis of military space and the 
organization of territory, particularly regarding the 'Atlantic Wall' - the 
15,000 German bunkers constructed during the Second World War along 
the coastline of France to prevent an Allied invasion - Virilio developed his 
research within the Architecture Principe group review and through a 
phenomenologically and gestalt-based theory of the oblique function - a 
theory that resulted in the erection of a 'bunker church' in Nevers in 1966 
and the Thomson-Houston aerospace research centre in Villacoubly in 
1969. In the 1970s, Virilio argued that the militarization of urban space 
was leading to the 'deterritorialization' of the modern city under the sign of 
speed, or 'chronopolitics'. Outlining the alarming 'dromological' conse-
quences of the technological revolution in transportation and information 
transmission, Virilio set out to examine the possibilities for 'revolutionary 
resistance' to 'pure power' and began investigating the relationship between 
military technologies, the organization of space, culture and society. As a 
result, throughout the 1980s, Virilio developed the next major phase of his 
work via aesthetically based conceptions of 'disappearance', 'fractalization', 
'pure war', urban space, cinema, logistics, automation, and what I shall call 
'pure perception'. Nevertheless, since the early 1990s, Virilio has reflected 
upon the revolutionary socio-cultural consequences of the deployment of 
remote-controlled and cybernetic technologies in the city, the Persian Gulf 
War, and the new information and communications media of hypermodern 
societies. Focusing on polar inertia, the transplant revolution, tech-
noscience and cybernetic performance art, his post-Einsteinian cultural 

4 Theory, Culture & Society 
theory is presently concerned with the invasion of the human body by 
hypermodern technoscience, or endo-colonization, 'cyberfeminism' and 
what Virilio calls 'technological fundamentalism'. 
The Dromocratic Condition: A Report on Speed 
As the articles by Leach on Virilio's architecture and Gane on Virilio's 
'bunker theory' in this collection indicate, Virilio's early essays on the 
oblique function - a proposed new urban order based on 'the end of the 
vertical as an axis of elevation, the end of the horizontal as permanent plane, 
in favour of the oblique axis and the inclined plane' - were published in the 
mid-1960s in Architecture Principe (Johnson, 19%; Virilio and Parent, 
1996: v). They foreshadowed his military and political critiques of deterri-
torialization that surfaced in Bunker Archeology (1994a) and Ulnse'curite' du 
territoire (1976). Virilio's phenomenology, like Merleau-Ponty's, was not so 
much influenced by the philosophies of structuralism, poststructuralism and 
postmodernism but, rather, merged with them at various points. In conse-
quence, Merleau-Ponty's emphasis on the corporeal dimensions of human 
existence in terms of the 'situated' 'body-subject' and 'expressive' 'inter-
subjectivity' encouraged Virilio to declare 'the total reinvention of architec-
tural vocabulary', and the 'third spatial possibility of architecture' (Virilio 
and Parent, 1996: v). 
Virilio's scepticism concerning the political economy of wealth is 
sustained by his 'dromocratic' conception of politics, revolution and histori-
cal progress in 'dromocratic society'. Nonetheless, his writings on chron-
opolitics have also been decisively swayed by Sun Tzu's (1993) theory of 
war and Virilio's long-running debate with himself about the 'positive' 
(Fascist) and 'negative' (anti-Fascist) political and technological aspects of 
Marinetti's artistic theory of Futurism (see e.g. Tisdall and Bozzolla, 1977; 
Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 45). For Sun Tzu and Marinetti, political 
economy cannot be subsumed under the political economy of wealth, with 
an understanding of the management of the economy of the state being its 
general aim. On the contrary, the histories of socio-political institutions like 
the military, and cultural movements such as Futurism, demonstrate that 
war and the need for speed rather than commerce and the urge for wealth 
were the foundation stones of the city, culture and society. In the present 
period, then, Virilio insists that politics must be presumed to have a 
relationship to speed that is equal in importance to its relationship to 
wealth. The hypermodern city airport is a typical research topic in Virilio's 
political economy of speed. Here, the terrestrial city is described by him as 
a mere concentration of 'passengers in transit'. The airport is characterized 
as signifying the archeology of some future society; a society 'concentrated 
in the vector of transportation'. Henceforth, '[t]he new capital is no longer a 
spatial capital like New York ... but a city at the intersection of practic-
abilities of time, in other words of speed' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 67). 
It is important to state that Virilio is not arguing that the political 
economy of wealth has been superseded by the political economy of speed, 

Armitage — Paul Virilio: An Introduction 5 
rather, he suggests that 'in addition to the political economy of wealth, there 
has to be a political economy of speed': 
The physiocrats who provided the basic studies of political economy worked 
in the tradition of Hume, they were men of perceptions, men of precepts. And 
when I discuss an economy of speed I'm doing the same sort of work, with the 
difference that my research examines the comparable power of speed and its 
influence on morals, on politics, strategies and so on. 
My epoch is the epoch of the Blitzkriegl I'm a physiocrat of speed and 
not of wealth. So I'm working in the context of very old traditions and 
absolutely open situations. At present we still don't really know what a 
political economy of speed really means. It's research which still awaits 
subsequent realization. (Virilio, 1998a: 10-11) 
Even so, in La Dromoscopies ou la lumidre de la vitesse (1978), Speed & 
Polities (1986) and Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles (1990), Virilio 
approaches these and related issues while also developing the breadth of his 
dromological inquiry to include considerations on pure power - the enforce-
ment of surrender without engagement — and revolutionary resistance, an 
imaginative case against the militarization of urban space. In later works, as 
Kellner discusses in his article in this collection, Virilio argues that it is 
vital to focus on the merciless logic of Pure War (Virilio and Lotringer, 
1997: 167-85) — the undeclared war of militarized technoscience on the 
civilian population. The 'rationale' of pure war might be encapsulated as the 
logic of technoscience in the era of 'cyber-', or, 'Info-' war, an era in which 
'terrorists' and other (often unspecified) 'enemies' are invoked by the state in 
order to justify increased spending on 'the third age of military weaponry'. 
Moreover, as Cubitt suggests in his piece in this collection, for Virilio, the 
concept of pure war also incorporates the 'weaponry' of new information and 
communications technologies, interactivity and the Internet. Why? 
Because, ultimately, it is the weapons of the military industrial complex 
that are responsible for 'integral accidents' like the 1987 world stock market 
crash brought about by the failure of automated programme trading. Thus, 
for Virilio (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 184): '[s]cience itself has become 
pure war, and it no longer needs enemies. It has invented its own goal.' 
In texts such as The Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a) and The Lost 
Dimension (1991b), Virilio, now supporting Mandelbrot (1977) and the 
geometry of fractals, aims to demonstrate that cultural theory must take 
account of interruptions in the rhythm of human consciousness and 
'morphological irruptions' in the notion of the physical dimension. Utilizing 
the concept of 'picnolepsy' (frequent interruption) and scientific ideas 
drawn from Einstein's relativity theory, he argues that hypermodem vision 
and the hypermodem city are both the products of military power and time-
based cinematic technologies of disappearance. Furthermore, although 
there are political and cinematic aspects to our visual consciousness of the 
cityscape, what is indispensable to them is their ability to designate the 

6 
Theory, Culture & Society 
technological disappearance of the grand aesthetic and spatial narratives 
and the advent of micro-narratives. In Virilio's terms, Mandelbrot's ge-
ometry of fractals reveals the appearance of the cinematic, or 'overexposed' 
city - as when the morphological irruption 'between space and its form-
image and between time and its technical de-realization' splinters into a 
countless number of visual interpretations, 'open conflict with the regime of 
telecommunication' and 'the crisis of whole dimensions' (1991b: 9—28, 
59-68). Significant here is that Virilio's concerns about the aesthetics of 
disappearance and the crisis of the physical dimension are not exercised by 
the textual construction of totalizing or developmental intellectual 'explana-
tions' and 'systems', but with the strategic positioning of productive inter-
ruptions, suggestions, jumps and the creative dynamics of what he, 
following Churchill, calls the 'tendency', or the 'change of level' (1989: 80; 
Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 44). As McQuire and Crogan argue in their 
individual contributions to this collection, the rule in Virilio's fully fledged 
dromocratic society is the disappearance of aesthetics and whole dimen-
sions into a militarized and cinematographic field of retinal persistence, 
interruption and 'technological space-time'. In other words, the screen 
becomes the new 'city square' and 'the crossroads of all mass media', the 
'phantom landscape' of all those driven blind by the speed of light (Virilio, 
1991b: 25-7). 
Virilio's chief ambition, therefore, is to raise the critical question of 
perpetually increasing speed, or dromology. For him, the relentless logic of 
speed plays a crucial part in the militarization of urban space, the organiz-
ation of territory and the transformation of social, political and cultural life. 
Dromology is an essential component of urban space, the politics of 
transportation and information transmission, and the aesthetics of techno-
logically generated perception. Pursuing the accelerating and organiza-
tional logic of the political economy of speed and drawing on the ancient 
military texts of Sun Tzu, the artistic work of Marinetti, and the scientific 
writings of Mandelbrot and Einstein, Virilio accordingly rejects the notion 
that the political economy of wealth is the sole driving force of cultural and 
social life. Instead, it is the tyranny of eternally intensifying acceleration 
that makes history progress 'at the speed of its weapons systems' (Virilio, 
1986: 68). 
From Modernism to Hypermodernism and Beyond 
Virilio's exegesis of speed in terms of military space, the organization of 
territory, dromology and the aesthetics of disappearance is an important 
contribution to the fields of critical cultural and social theory because it 
diverges from the increasingly sterile current debate over the differentiation 
of modernism and postmodernism. It is, for instance, quite wrong of critical 
cultural and social theorists such as Harvey (1989: 351), Waite (1996:116), 
Gibbins and Reimer (1999: 143) and various others like the positivist 
physicists Sokal and Bricmont (1998: 159-66) to characterize Virilio's 
cultural theory as either postmodern or poststructuralist cultural theory. In 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 7 
fact, such characterizations are so far wide of the mark it is difficult to know 
where to begin. I will explain. 
First, although the concept of postmodernism, like Virilio himself, 
originally came to prominence in architectural criticism in the 1950s and 
1960s, Virilio's cultural theory is neither an overt reaction against the 
International Style nor a reaction against the concept and culture of 
modernism in general. The concept of postmodernism, Virilio proposes in 
the hypermodern interview, has been a catastrophe in architecture and has 
nothing to do with his phenomenological critique of speed. In reality, like 
Deleuze's, Virilio's cultural theory draws extensively on the modernist 
tradition in the arts and sciences. In it, Virilio constantly references 
modernist writers such as Kafka and Aldous Huxley, and modernist artists 
like Marinetti and Duchamp. His most consistent philosophical reference 
points are Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, phenomenologists and modernists. 
Furthermore, Virilio's later writings regularly cite Einstein's works on 
relativity theory and quantum mechanics. Here, then, are clear instances 
of Virilio's broad commitment to the philosophy of scientific modernism 
established in the early part of the 20th century. 
Second, as Virilio points out in the hypermodern interview, he sees no 
connection between his cultural theory and that of deconstructionists like 
Derrida. Additionally, there are only a small number of associated links 
between Virilio's work and poststructuralism. For instance, Virilio has 
never shown any interest in de Saussure's structural linguistics, preferring 
instead to remain to this day within the orbit of phenomenology and 
existentialism. As an anti-Marxist (and anti-Sartrean), committed anarchist 
and cultural theorist who has 'absolutely no confidence in psychoanalysis', 
he has little in common with many of the pioneers of structuralism such as 
the semiologist Barthes, the Marxist philosopher Althusser, the psycho-
analyst Lacan and the anthropologist L6vi-Strauss (Virilio and Lotringer, 
1997: 39). As a number of contributors to this collection suggest, Virilio's 
theoretical connections with Foucault's (1977) Discipline and Punish and 
Deleuze and Guattari's (1987) A Thousand Plateaus also need to be treated 
with care. This is because, unlike most postmodern or poststructuralist 
cultural theorists, Virilio is a humanist and a practising Christian. He is, as 
he insists unequivocally in the hypermodern interview, completely opposed 
to the viewpoint of anti-humanism and to the philosophy of Foucault's and 
Deleuze's messiah, Nietzsche. Interestingly, Guattari always denied that he 
was a Nietzschean, not that anyone seems to have taken any notice (e.g. 
1996: 23). There are, as a result, only indeterminate and convergent 
relationships between Virilio's cultural theory and Foucault and Deleuze's 
poststructuralist cultural theories. This is also something that Virilio has 
pointed out on a number of occasions (e.g. Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 
44-5). For Virilio, the crucial pointers on all his work on dromology and 
related topics have been the Second World War, military strategy and 
spatial planning. 
Third, in contrast to many postmodern cultural theorists, Virilio does 

8 
Theory, Culture & Society 
not provide a blanket condemnation of modernity. Rather, as he argues in 
the hypermodern interview, he views his cultural theory as a 'critical 
analysis of modernity, but through a perception of technology which is 
largely... catastrophic, not catastrophic'. Arguing that 'we are not out of 
modernity yet, by far', it is, then, 'the drama of total war' that lies at the core 
of Virilio's cultural theory. Choosing to concentrate his thought on the 
fluctuating rhythms and varying speeds of modernity, Virilio's texts thus 
concern themselves with its key characteristics such as science, rationality, 
surveillance, urbanism, democracy and, above all, alienation. In addition, 
and despite his reputation as a technological Cassandra, Virilio often insists 
that his conception of modernity, as distinct from the philosophers of 
postmodernism, is essentially optimistic. As he recently suggested to 
Zurbrugg: 
Many people only seem to notice the pessimistic side of my writing. They 
don't realize that it's the global dimensions of the twentieth century that 
interest me - both the absolute speed and power of the twentieth century's 
telecommunications, nuclear energy and so on, and at the same time the 
absolute catastrophe of this same energy! We're living with both of these 
things! (Virilio, 1998a: 2) 
Furthermore, Virilio is not wholly antipathetic to reason as such, even 
if he is critical of some aspects of the 'Enlightenment project'. But, like 
Deleuze, he certainly is inimical to Hegelian and Marxist theories of know-
ledge and ideology, including, on occasion, those proposed by 'messianic' 
Marxists and critical theorists like Benjamin (see e.g. Virilio, 1991b: 72). 
To some extent, therefore, as Kellner proposes in this collection, Virilio can 
be considered as a kind of 'left Heideggerian'. In brief, Virilio's critical 
relationship to modernity is far more complex and removed from the 
caricatured description of it given by many modern and postmodern cultural 
theorists. 
Fourth, as Virilio argues in the hypermodern interview and elsewhere, 
his writings have very little to do with those of the advocates of postmodern-
ism like Lyotard (1984) and, arguably, Baudrillard (1983, 1994). Unlike 
Lyotard's work, for example, Virilio's work remains true to the principle of 
hope with regard to making sense of history. Actually, one could make a 
good case for suggesting that nearly the entirety of Virilio's cultural theory is 
a sustained attempt to make sense of his own history and, through it, ours 
too. Still less does Virilio accept the demise of all the 'metanarratives', 
insisting in the hypermodern interview, for instance, 'that the narrative of 
justice is beyond deconstruction'. Likewise, Virilio's general hostility to 
Marxism, semiotics and Nietzschean 'nihilism' largely explains his antagon-
ism toward Baudrillard's concept of simulation. Again, unlike many post-
modern cultural theorists, Virilio does not share Baudrillard's admiration 
for McLuhan's (1994) 'drooling' (Virilio, 1995: 10) over new media tech-
nologies. Similarly, Virilio's writings are less concerned with Baudrillard's 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
9 
'hyperreality' and 'irony' and more concerned with social reality, the cel-
ebration of ordinary people and the poor in particular. 
For these reasons, it is very difficult to characterize Virilio's cultural 
theory as either postmodern or poststructuralist cultural theory. It is also 
why - in my view - it is preferable to interpret it as the work of a cultural 
theorist whose thinking addresses what might be termed the question of 
hypermodernism, or, perhaps alternatively, 'the cultural logic of late mili-
tarism'. Consequently, in Virilio's hypermodern world, it is time 'to face the 
facts: today, speed is war, the last war' (1986: 139). 
From the War Machine to the Flesh Machine 
Since the publication of War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception (1989) 
and UHorizon negatif (1985) in France in the mid-1980s, Virilio has 
periodically applied the concept of 'substitution' when touching on the 
different classes of reality that have unravelled since the origin of time. It 
must be said that this concept bears a remarkable likeness to Baudrillard's 
(1983, 1994) concepts of 'simulation' and 'simulacra'. For all that, in War 
and Cinema in particular, Virilio does not so much explain his idea of 
substitution as introduce and demonstrate its growing cultural significance. 
Writing on the cinema in the 1930s, for example, he notes that 'it was 
already clear that film was superimposing itself as a geostrategy which for a 
century or more had inexorably been leading to the direct substitution, and 
thus sooner or later the disintegration, of things and places' (1989: 47). 
Virilio's primary concern, however, is with the link between cinematic and 
geostrategic substitution, the disintegration of things and places, and what 
he calls the logistics of perception. The logistics of perception is perhaps 
less complicated than one might imagine and simply denotes the supplying 
of cinematic images and information on film to the front-line. The idea of the 
logistics of perception arises because, in the context of hypermodern wars 
like the Persian Gulf War of 1991 or NATO's war in 1999 against 
Milosovic's Serbia, not only do settled topographical features disappear in 
the midst of battle but so too does the architecture of war. For the military 
high command entombs itself in subterranean bunkers with the chief aim of 
evading what one of Coppola's helicopters in the film Apocalypse Now 
announced as 'Death from Above'. Consequently, and in a similar manner 
to Baudrillard's (1983: 2-3) conceptualization of simulation, hyperreality, 
and the 'precession of simulacra', Virilio (1989: 66) conceptualizes a 
logistics of perception where 'the world disappears in war, and war as a 
phenomenon disappears from the eyes of the world'. 
Thus, at the forefront of Virilio's interests in texts such as Ultcran du 
desert: chroniques de guerre (1991c) is the relationship between war, substi-
tution, human and synthetic perception. Such interests are fuelled by the 
fact that, for Virilio, military perception in warfare is comparable to civilian 
perception and, specifically, to the art of film-making; in brief, both groups 
are increasingly concerned with directing images. According to Virilio, 
therefore, the notion of substitution eventually results in a 'war of images', a 

10 Theory, Culture & Society 
sort of Video game', cyber-, or, more commonly, Infowar. Yet Virilio's war of 
images is not a traditional war, where the images produced are images of 
actual battles. Instead, for him, the disparity between the images of battles 
and the actual battles is currently being 'derealized'. As Virilio puts it: 
'People used to die for a coat of arms, an image on a pennant or flag; now 
they [die] to improve the sharpness of a film. War has finally become the 
third dimension of cinema' (1989: 85). Of course, like Baudrillard's (1995) 
infamous claim that the Gulf War did not take place, Virilio's assertion that 
war and cinema are virtually indistinguishable is open to dispute. Conrad, 
for example, reviewing War and Cinema, claimed that 'Virilio is himself the 
victim of the 'interpretation mania' which he maniacally discovers in the 
impediments of war' (1989: 939). Virilio, though, remains unimpressed by 
such criticisms. One reason for this is that his stance on the appearance of 
Infowar is also consistent with his view that the only way to match cultural 
and social developments in the war machine is to adopt a radical and 
critical theoretical position with regard to the various parallels that exist 
between war, military weaponry, eyesight, photography and cinema. In 'A 
Travelling Shot Over Eighty Years', the final chapter of War and Cinema, 
Virilio vividly describes such parallels as the 'conjunction between the 
power of the modern war machine, the aeroplane, and the new technical 
performance of the observation machine' (1989: 71, original emphases). 
Virilio's work on the relentless automation of the war machine and related 
cinematic topics published in the late 1980s, together with his deepening 
preoccupation with remote-controlled technologies, accordingly betokens 
his vehement critiques of The Vision Machine (1994b) and Polar Inertia 
(1999a) that were to appear over the next few years. 
In Virilio's hypermodern epoch, then, when people 'no longer believe 
their eyes, when their faith in perception became slave to the faith in the 
technical sightline\ contemporary cultural and social substitution has 
reduced the 'visual field' to the 'line of a sighting device' (1994b: 13, 
original emphases). Seen from this perspective, The Vision Machine 
(1994b) is a survey of what I call pure perception. For, although substitution 
has been revealing different categories of cultural and social reality over the 
entirety of human history, in the contemporary era, ominous technological 
substitutions and potentialities such as Virtual Reality, the Internet and 
cyberspace have been developed by the military industrial complex. In 
Virilio's terms, and returning to earlier themes, 'the main aim' of pure 
perception is 'to register the waning of reality9. Indeed, for him, 'an aesthetic 
of disappearance' has 'arisen from the unprecedented limits imposed on 
subjective vision by the instrumental splitting of modes of perception and 
representation' (1994b: 49, original emphases). Hence, as in the case of 
NATO's Cruise missiles 'disappearing' over the horizon and filming their 
own and civilian destruction in the cities of the Balkans, Virilio conceives of 
vision machines as the accelerated products of 'sightless vision9; a vision that 
'is itself merely the reproduction of an intense blindness that will become 
the latest and last form of industrialization: the industrialization of the 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 11 
non-gaze' (1994b: 73, original emphases). Even so, the far-reaching cultural 
and social relationships between vision, remote-controlled technologies, 
pure perception, post-industrial production and human stasis are illustrated 
in their most complex form by Virilio in Polar Inertia (1999a). 
In this text, Virilio considers various kinds of pure perception, speed 
and inertia. For instance, in his contribution to this collection, 'Indirect 
Light', Virilio examines the difference between the new synthetic video 
screens adopted by the Paris Metro system and traditional or 'real' percep-
tual objects such as mirrors, from a theoretical standpoint that broadly 
conforms to what Foucault (1977) labelled 'surveillance societies' and 
Deleuze (1995) later called 'control societies'. In contrast, in 'The Last 
Vehicle', Virilio notes the discrepancy between technologically generated 
inertia and biologically induced human movement in the context of a 
discussion about the introduction of 'wave machines' in Japanese swimming 
pools. 'Kinematic Optics' relates the effacement of a variety of 'local times' 
around the world and their gradual replacement by a single 'global time', 
while 'Environmental Control' contemplates the disparity between 'classical 
optical communication' and 'electro-optical commutation'. In the era of 
substitution and pure perception, though, Virilio argues that it is not the 
creation of relative speeds, acceleration and deceleration that becomes 
important but the creation of 'Polar Inertia'. 
Polar inertia? Here, Virilio proposes that in the early modern era of 
mobility, in his terms the era of emancipation, inertia did not exist. The 
concept of polar inertia thus excludes what would have been alternate 
aspects of the speed equation - simple acceleration or deceleration - in 
the industrial age. But, today, as Virilio suggests in the hypermodern 
interview, in the post-industrial age of the absolute speed of light, 'it is no 
longer necessary' for anyone to 'make any journey' since 'one has already 
arrived'. As he tells Lotringer in Pure War: 
We're heading towards a situation in which every city will be in the same 
place — in time. There will be a kind of coexistence, and probably not a very 
peaceful one, between these cities which have kept their distance in space, 
but which will be telescoped in time. When we can go to the antipodes in a 
second or a minute, what will remain of the city? What will remain of us? The 
difference of sedentariness in geographical space will continue but real life 
will be led in a polar inertia. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 64) 
In such circumstances, then, the geographical difference between 
'here' and 'there' is obliterated by the speed of light. Additionally, in its 
terminal mode, as exemplified by reclusive billionaires such as the late 
Howard Hughes, polar inertia becomes a kind of Foucauldian incarceration. 
Holed up in a single room in the Desert Inn hotel in Las Vegas for 15 years, 
endlessly watching Sturges' Ice Station Zebra, Hughes, Virilio's 'technolo-
gical monk', was not only polar inertia incarnate but, more importantly, the 
first inhabitant of an increasingly 'mass situation, the quest for the progress 

12 Theory, Culture & Society 
of speed without the knowledge of the engine's exterminating character' 
(Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 77, original emphasis). So, at the broadest 
level, Virilio's writings on vision machines and polar inertia seek to show 
that artistic practices and physical geographical spaces no longer have 
significant human content. As a result, it is not too surprising to find that, in 
the contemporary era and in works such as The Art of the Motor (1995), 
Virilio has turned his attention to the transplant revolution, technoscience, 
cybernetic performance art, endo-colonization and technological funda-
mentalism. 
On the eve of the 21st century, therefore, Virilio's cultural theory is 
predominantly concerned with how various forms of technological substi-
tution have begun to permeate the totality of dromocratic society. For him, 
one of the most important cultural developments in this field is what he calls 
the transplant revolution - the almost total collapse of the distinction 
between technology and the human body. Intimately linked to the 
technological enhancement and substitution of body-parts through the 
miniaturization of technological objects, dynamic inserts and cardiac simu-
lators, the third revolution is a revolution conducted by technoscience 
against the human body through the promotion of what the Critical Art 
Ensemble (CAE) (1998: 118-37) calls 'second wave eugenics' to the 
wealthy. As Zurbrugg reveals in his contribution to this collection, such 
disturbing developments are also the foundations of Virilio's (1995: 109-
12, 1998a: 3) scathing criticisms of the 'psycho' and cybernetic, or 'ter-
minal' convictions of Stelarc, the 'Antonin Artaud of technology' and Aus-
tralian performance artist (see e.g. Stelarc, 1997). However, it should be 
stressed that Virilio's criticisms of the transplant, or 'third revolution', in 
concert with his critique of artists such as Stelarc, are also closely linked to 
the development of his notion of endo-colonization - what takes place when 
a political power like the state turns against its own people or, as in the case 
of technoscience, the human body. As Virilio argues in the hypermodern 
interview, 'there is no colonization' of territory 'without control of the body. 
One has, for example, 'only to watch those nerdy "internaut" types to see to 
what extent their behaviour is already being shaped by technology'. 
Virilio's criticisms of the transplant revolution, in conjunction with 
those of 'neo-eugenics', Stelarc and the technocultural endo-colonization of 
the human body thus demonstrate how, in the contemporary era, the 
dromocratic regime is conceivably a 'pancapitalist' system that involves 
'the coming of age of the flesh machine', the development of 'cyborgs', 
'designer babies' and a 'new eugenic consciousness' (CAE, 1998). For these 
reasons, in Open Sky (1997a: 116-17) and other recent works such as La 
Bombe informatique (1998b) and Politics of the Very Worst (Virilio and Petit, 
1999), Virilio has elaborated a critique of cyberfeminism that Plant (1997), 
following Haraway's (1985) 'manifesto for cyborgs' and the declarations of 
Australian artists such as VNS Matrix, speaks of as a kind of revolution on 
the part of cybernetic technology and feminists against the rule of 
patriarchy. Cyberfeminism thus endeavours to delete what might be termed 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
13 
the difftranee between technology and women, or, as Plant puts it, '"if 
machines, even the machines of theory, can arouse themselves, why not 
women?'" (1997: 59). 
Plant's question relates to issues of technology, cyber cultural theory, 
cybersexuality and the politics of cyberspace. But, as Conley makes clear in 
her contribution to this collection, Virilio has little time for notions such as 
cyberfeminism and 'cybersex'; notions that in the hypermodern interview he 
criticizes, likening cybersex, for instance, to the technological replacement 
of the emotions. For Virilio, it is imperative to reject cybernetic sexuality, 
refocus theoretical attention on the human subject, and resist the domina-
tion of both men and women by technology. He sums up his current political 
position well in the closing pages of La Bombe informatique, announcing, 
'Homo est clausura mirabilium deV — Man is the end point of the marvels of 
the universe (1998b: 152, original emphasis). In the world according to 
Virilio, then, cyberfeminism is merely one more form of 'technological 
fundamentalism9 — the religion of all those who believe in the absolute 
power of technology (Virilio and Kittler, 1999, forthcoming). In brief, in the 
realm of what he labels Hechnoculte totalitaire\ the lure of cyberspace is 
terminal because, through it, human subjects allow themselves to be domi-
nated by cybernetic and technological objects (1998b: 48). Consequently, 
cyberfeminists and numerous other groups, lacking any awareness of 
'cyberesistance', are characterized by Virilio as 'collaborators' with the 
'Occupation' forces of multimedia 'generals' such as Microsoft's CEO, Bill 
Gates (1999b: 1—3). Having departed from the religious sensibility required 
in order to understand the ubiquity, instantaneity and immediacy of new 
information and communications technologies, cyberfeminists, like the 
Heaven's Gate sect that performed mass self-destruction recently in the 
USA in order to migrate to the stars, have now capitulated to the raptures of 
cyberspace (Virilio, 1998b: 51). In Virilio's terms, cyberfeminists are 
moving inexorably towards a technologically fundamentalist political pos-
ition with regard to new information and communications technologies such 
as the Internet; a position he recently denounced in the following apocalyp-
tic style: 
No longer the monotheism of the Written Word, of the Koran, of the Bible, of 
the New Testament, but a monotheism of information in the widest sense of 
the term. And this information monotheism has come into being not simply in 
a totally independent manner but also free from controversy. It is the outcome 
of an intelligence without reflection or past. And with information monothe-
ism comes what I think of as the greatest danger of all, the slide into a future 
without humanity. (Virilio and Kittler, 1999, forthcoming) 
A Brief Sortie into the War Zone 
As the previous sections, and the final article in this collection by Der 
Derian, clearly suggest, Virilio's numerous activities and 'conceptual cos-
mology' have courted controversy since the 1960s. For example, when 

14 Theory, Culture & Society 
Virilio and Parent wrote their articles in the Architecture Principe review, 
they claimed that the world should abandon horizontal planes and organize 
itself on inclined planes instead. Nonetheless, as Parent recalls: 'We might 
have been forgiven if we had just called the things "slopes". As it was we 
encountered absolute opposition. The magazine was our counter-attack' 
(Johnson, 1996: 54). Similarly, Virilio's later conceptions of the 'suicidal 
state' (1998c: 29-45), the 'state of emergency' (1986: 133-51), technology 
and speed have also been subject to considerable critique. In the 1980s, for 
instance, Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 351-423, 559) attempted what 
Crogan (1999, forthcoming) calls a problematic effort to 'subsume' Virilio's 
investigations into their own poststructuralist approach to the state, tech-
nology and speed. Even so, as Crogan argues in his article, Deleuze and 
Guattari's 'static, ahistorical model' of the state and technology cannot 
easily be combined with Virilio's ideas without undoing 'its own coherency 
in the process'. In turn, Virilio's The Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a) has 
outraged the neo-Marxian geographer Harvey (1989: 293,299 and 351). For 
Harvey, Virilio's 'response' to what the former calls 'time-space com-
pression' 'has been to try and ride the tiger of time-space compression 
through construction of a language and an imagery that can mirror and 
hopefully command it'. Harvey places the 'frenetic writings' of Virilio (and 
Baudrillard) in this category because 'they seem hell-bent on fusing with 
time-space compression and replicating it in their own flamboyant rhetoric'. 
Harvey, of course, has 'seen this response before, most specifically in 
Nietzsche's extraordinary evocations in The Will To Power'. Yet, in The 
Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a), Virilio's unfolding and wholly inten-
tional reactions to the emergence of the dromocratic condition are actually 
concerned with 'the importance of interruption, of accident, of things that 
are stopped as productive' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 44, original empha-
sis). As he told Lotringer: 'It's entirely different from what Gilles Deleuze 
does in Mille Plateaux. He progresses by snatches, whereas I handle breaks 
and absences. The fact of stopping and saying "let's go somewhere else" is 
very important for me' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 45). What Virilio's 
'frenetic writings' actually substantiate throughout the 1980s are the ma-
terial and, crucially, the immaterial consequences of dromological changes 
in aesthetics, military power, space, cinema, politics and technology. In an 
era increasingly eclipsed by the technologically produced disappearance of 
socio-cultural life, war, matter and human perception, this is a very signifi-
cant achievement. In the 1990s, though, the limitations of Virilio's cultural 
theory are likely to rest not - as Harvey suggests - with his similarities but 
with his differences from Nietzsche. As Waite, quoting the American per-
formance artist Laurie Anderson, and others have argued: 
Virilio still desperately holds on to a modicum of modernist critique of 
postmodern military tactics, strategies, and technologies, whereas Nietzsche 
basically would have been impatient with mere critique, moving quickly to 
appropriate them for his own use, at least conceptually and rhetorically, as 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
15 
metaphors and techniques of persuasion to preserve power for elites over 
corpses - 'now that the living outnumber the dead'. (Waite, 1996: 381-2, 
original emphases) 
Conclusion 
Although there are many controversial features and vexing questions con-
nected to Virilio's cultural theory, there is also little doubt that his 
hypermodern critique of military tactics, strategies and technologies is 
presently colliding with the work of a rising number of other cultural 
theorists like the Krokers. Naturally, the main reason why such collisions 
are taking place is that Virilio's latest texts, such as Politics of the Very 
Worst (Virilio and Petit, 1999), address head on some of the most alarming 
and significant contemporary cultural and social developments of our time; 
developments often designed to preserve the power of the increasingly 
virtual global elites over the creation of actual local corpses. As I write this 
conclusion in June 1999, for example, the living are rapidly increasing the 
numbers of the dead in Kosovo, Angola, southern Mexico, East Timor and 
almost anywhere else on the planet one cares to look. As Burroughs 
maintained, this is a war universe. War all the time. A child of Hitler's 
Blitzkrieg, Virilio has theorized the cultural logic of late militarism and the 
organization of territory, the central theme and the most important aspect of 
his work. Revealing the probable dromological and political conditions of 
the 21st century, Virilio interprets modernity in terms of a military concep-
tion of history and the endo-colonization of the human body by teeh-
noscience. As the title of this collection indicates, the concept of 
hypermodernism needs to be uppermost in any understanding of Virilio's 
particular contribution to cultural theory. 
Virilio is, therefore, one of the most important and thought-provoking 
cultural theorists on the contemporary intellectual battlefield. He is, as 
Brugger argues, an 'areheologist' who 'examines the technological inven-
tions of our time in order to find the signs that indicate where the accelera-
tion of speed will be seen in the future' and, in addition, 'tries to point out 
the possible negative effects' of the dialectic of speed and disappearance 
(1997: 17, original emphasis). However, unlike Lyotard's or Baudrillard's 
postmodernism, Virilio's hypermodernism does not articulate itself as a 
divergence from modernism and modernity but as a critical analysis of 
modernism and modernity through a catastrophic perception of technology. 
Indeed, Virilio put his general position forward recently and succinctly in 
the context of a discussion about technology: 
When someone says to me I don't understand your position, my response is, 
I'll explain it to you: I am a critic of the art of technology. Fair enough? That's 
all. If they still don't understand, then I say: just look at what an art critic is to 
traditional art, and then substitute technology for traditional art, and you 
have my position. It's that simple. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 172) 

16 Theory, Culture & Society 
Virilio's theoretical position, current trajectory and cultural sensi-
bilities concerning technology thus remain almost beyond the realm of even 
the critical social sciences. He simply does not depend on intellectual 
'explanations', 'constructing clear systems', or writing 'machines that work 
well' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 44). Rather, he relies on 'suggestion' and 
'the obvious quality of the implicit'. On the one hand, then, it is possible to 
describe a critic of the art of technology like Virilio as a cultural and a 
political theorist who movingly considers the tendencies of the present 
period. On the other, it makes little sense to describe someone who utterly 
rejects the many 'masks' that sociology wears 'in order to forget politics' as a 
typical social theorist. 
As a result, and as several contributions to this collection suggest, it is 
still open to debate as to how much there is to be gained from the growing 
army of social theorists currently attempting to establish the 'truth' or 
otherwise of Virilio's cultural and political theory. Such projects might be 
questioned from the outset because, to a considerable extent, Virilio's 
critical responses to the military, speed politics, cinema, art and technology 
are, basically, ethical, artistic and emotional responses to the arrival of 
technological culture. In his words: 
I'm so involved in the world of painting and the world of art that I don't speak 
about it much in my books because I live it! I'm a painter who writes, you 
know! Surely you feel that my books are very visual - they're very, very, 
visual books! They're not words, they're visions! (1998a: 9) 
Moreover, Virilio is well aware that his work is 'often dismissed in 
terms of scandalous charges!' As he recently pointed out, in France '(t)here's 
no tolerance' for 'irony, for wordplay, for argument that takes things to the 
limit and to excess' (1998a: 12). Consequently, to raise the question of the 
advantages and disadvantages of Virilio's cultural theory is also to raise the 
critical question of whether, outside France, his work should be dismissed 
in terms of scandalous charges, received in terms suffused with praise, or a 
mixture of both? In other words, it is to raise the question of how much 
tolerance there is in the English-speaking world for irony, for wordplay, for 
argument that takes things to the limit and to excess? For these and other 
reasons, Virilio's hypermodern cultural theory looks set to continue eliciting 
theoretical argument, cultural and social debate well into the next millen-
nium. 
The Contents 
To my knowledge, Wark's 'On Technological Time' was the first critical 
evaluation of Virilio's work in English. Investigating 'Virilio's Overexposed 
City', Wark advocated reading Virilio 'as something of an accidental mouth-
piece for certain observations' (1988: 87, original emphasis). Today, in view 
of the expanding influence of Virilio's writings on a growing number of other 
cultural theorists in the English-speaking world, the time has surely come 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 17 
for a re-evaluation of many of his ideas. For one thing, as I have tried to show 
in the previous sections, the developing critical literature on Virilio pre-
sently encompasses much more than his critical reflections on the over-
exposed city. For another, many readings of Virilio's work are intentional 
and unintentional agents for a variety of inaccurate, hostile and often 
superficial pronouncements. In contrast, the contributions to this collection 
engage in an assortment of fact-finding, broadly sympathetic and detailed 
explorations of Virilio's cultural theory from the perspectives of the critical 
social sciences and the humanities. 
As a consequence, while some contributors scrutinize Virilio's bio-
graphical and intellectual development, others present supportive assess-
ments of the central themes and conceptual significance of his work. In his 
hypermodern interview with Armitage, Virilio discusses aspects of his life 
and explains the main impetus behind his theoretical efforts to 
strengthen our comprehension of modern and hypermodern culture. Virilio's 
'Indirect Light', meanwhile, criticizes contemporary developments in video 
surveillance and miniaturization. Challenging the relentless illumination of 
the urban environment, Virilio outlines the likely consequences of cultural 
life lived under conditions of real time. 
Virilio's own particular offering, though, sits alongside studies that 
present somewhat critical readings of his theoretical claims regarding 
architecture, war and other issues of current concern such as technology 
and new media. Leach demonstrates how Virilio and Parent's theory of the 
oblique can elucidate the spaces of architecture and typology. Examining 
the contributions of Virilio's writings on dromology, 'post-architecture', 
cultural space and the body, Leach points to various questions surrounding 
Virilio's 'aestheticization' of the political. In turn, Gane analyses Virilio's 
work on bunker archeology and compares his visions of the desert and 
ecological struggle with those of Baudrillard. Kellner reflects on Virilio's 
'flawed' contribution to a militarized and politicized cultural theory of war 
and technology, an undertaking developed through Virilio's later writings 
on pure perception and disappearance. Similarly, Cubitt provides a critical 
overview of Virilio's 'liberal individualism' in the context of a discussion 
about his understanding of picnolepsia, 'big optics', war, politics, art and 
technology. 
Further contributors, however, provide a more sympathetic response to 
Virilio's cultural theory in terms of speed, the tendency, and the integral 
accident. McQuire examines Virilio's analyses of mechanical and media 
'vehicles', specifically with reference to their capability to change space and 
time within the frame of human interaction. Supporting Virilio's theory of 
speed, Crogan incorporates the writings of Hottois and Derrida, suggesting 
that Virilio's concept of dromology is useful in explaining the accident, the 
tendency and the 'untimely'. 
In his piece, Zurbrugg appraises Virilio's writings and judgments on 
the Australian performance artist, Stelarc, arguing that Virilio's artistic 
concerns are, to some degree, resolved in the technocultural practices of 

18 Theory, Culture & Society 
artists and composers such as Viola and Holtzmann. Showing how Virilio's 
and Stelarc's work fuses at a number of places, Zurbrugg suggests that both 
Virilio and Stelarc are best understood as artists in the manner of Duchamp. 
Although Virilio's writings have had an impact on a number of female artists 
such as Louise K. Wilson (Virilio, 1997b: 41-8) and, arguably, the preva-
lent elaboration of technocultural practices, his work has not so far seriously 
affected the development of feminist or cyberfeminist theory. In her contri-
bution, Conley considers whether it might be conceivable to clear a space 
for feminism in Virilio's oeuvre or, more precisely, whether it may be 
possible to accompany Virilio into the time and space of cyberfeminism. 
In a lively article discussing Virilio's conceptual cosmology, Der 
Derian highlights the importance of Virilio's prolific conceptual production 
in a post-Einsteinian world of instant information, chronopolitics and virtual 
disappearance. Finally, the collection is drawn to a close by Armitage's 
select bibliography of Virilio's main published works, articles, interviews 
and studies of Virilio in French and English. 
Thus, the 12 contributions to this collection denote the significant 
areas in which Virilio's cultural theory and important concepts have drawn 
on the work of others, while also demonstrating how his concepts can be 
applied in the present period by theorists in the cultural and social fields. 
Virilio is a decidedly contentious cultural theorist whose 'calculation', as 
Baudrillard puts it, 'is to push the military to a kind of extreme absolute of 
power, which can only ultimately cause its own downfall, place it before the 
judgment of God and absorb it into the society it destroys' (1987:109). Such 
extreme calculations about the role of the military in the realm of chron-
opolitics, not to mention the apocalyptic and religious tones in which Virilio 
delivers such forecasts, arouse immoderate and censorious reactions from 
critical and positivist theorists alike. As noted, Virilio is well aware that, in 
France and elsewhere, his work is often dismissed as excessive. Hence, it is 
crucial to emphasise that Paul Virilio: From Modernism to Hypermodernism 
and Beyond, like the broader project of Theory, Culture & Society, attempts 
to provide a genuinely critical exploration of Virilio's cultural theory within 
the framework of the social sciences and the humanities. 
Notes 
1. Gestalt psychology originated in Germany in the early part of this century. Its 
founders were Wertheiraer, Kohler and Koffka. For gestalt psychologists, mental 
phenomena are extended 'events', or gestalts. According to Gestalt theory, cogni-
tive processes cannot be understood in terms of their individual components. 
Rather, when some new piece of information is acquired, an individual's entire 
perceptual field has been altered. However, as Virilio makes clear in the interview 
in this collection, his own particular influence is Guillaume (1937). 
2. First, although Virilio does not use the concept of hypermodernism to describe 
his work, as he clearly indicates in the interview in this collection, he certainly 
agrees with this interpretation of it. Broadly, and following the pioneering work of 
Arthur and Marilouise Kroker (see e.g. Kroker, 1992; Kroker and Kroker, 1997), I 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
19 
will define hypermodemism as a tentative term and embryonic tendency in the 
contemporary critical social sciences and the humanities that seeks to move away 
from the polarized assumptions of modernism and postmodernism and toward a 
deeper theoretical understanding of the 'excessive' intensities and displacements 
inherent within cultural and social thought about the modern world and how it is 
represented. In the critical social sciences and the humanities the term might be 
put to use in the near future to describe the amalgam of styles employed by 
architects such as Virilio, Nouvel (1996), political theorists like the Krokers, 
'sociologists' such as Bataille (Botting and Wilson, 1997), 'amodern' philosophers 
and political activists like Deleuze and Guattari (1987), and artists and cultural 
theorists such as Stelarc (1997), Critical Art Ensemble (1998) and Golding (1997). 
It is perhaps worth stressing that, as editor, I have not sought to establish any 
consensus on the concept of hypermodemism among the collection's contributors. 
Second, since I have already compiled and contributed a detailed biography 
of yirilio's main works to this collection, in this Introduction I shall only refer to 
Virilio's most important texts and make use of the English translations of such 
works. For more detailed references, the reader is referred to 'Paul Virilio: A Select 
Bibliography' in this volume. 
3. In this Introduction my aim is merely to introduce Virilio's cultural theory to 
those unfamiliar with it. The limitations of Virilio's work are only briefly con-
sidered. This is owing to the fact that the 12 other pieces in this collection provide a 
wealth of detail and a whole variety of critical evaluations and assessments of the 
impact of Virilio's cultural theory. Additionally, I have borrowed the concept of the 
'flesh machine' from the innovative work of the Critical Art Ensemble (1998). 
4. Abbe* Pierre began campaigning on behalf of the French homeless in the winter 
of 1954 and quickly became an icon. So much so that one of the numerous 
'mythologies' contained in Barthes' (1993: 47-9) famous work of the same name is 
entitled The Iconography of the Abbe* Pierre'. However, in May 1996, Abbe* Pierre 
fell rapidly from his esteemed position after supporting the former communist 
philosopher Roger Garaudy's self-published and 'revisionist' explanation of the 
Holocaust, The Founding Myths of Israeli Politics. Abbe* Pierre has since retired to 
an Italian monastery. 
5. For an excellent, detailed, and considered 'Virilian' assessment of the world 
stock market crash of 1987, see Wark's 'Site # 4, Wall Street, New York City, 
Planet of Noise', in his Virtual Geography (1994: 165-228). 
6. A broad allegiance to the concept and culture of modernism is a crucial but so 
far little remarked upon link between Deleuze's work and that of Virilio. As Marks 
observes of Deleuze's aesthetics: 'It is striking that the objects of Deleuze's interest 
are frequently taken from the canon of high modernism. He favours writers such as 
Kafka, film-makers such as Godard and Antonioni, and painters such as Francis 
Bacon' (1998: 27). Much the same could be said of Virilio. 
7. Virilio is, of course, not the only apocalyptic or catastrophe theorist and adher-
ent of modernity to emerge from post-war French continental philosophy. Deleuze, 
for example, has also written on the apocalypse in relation to the writings of D.H. 
Lawrence. Moreover, in the article cited, he also references Virilio's work (Deleuze, 
1998: 36-52). Williams has written on the theme of 'catastrophism' in Deleuze's 
writings (1997: 233-46). Meanwhile, and in the same volume, Ansell Pearson 
argues — correctly in my view — that Deleuze's philosophy 'needs to be situated 

20 
Theory, Culture & Society 
within the general problematic of modernity' (1997: 180-1). For a review of the 
latter volume, see McLure (1998). 
8. However, it is worth pointing out that although Virilio frequently criticizes 
Baudrillard's work quite sharply in interviews, such criticisms are rarely returned 
by Baudrillard, who is more often than not complimentary about Virilio's cultural 
theory (see e.g. Baudrillard, 1987: 109). 
9. Apart from the obvious contemporary relevance of the conflict in former Yugo-
slavia, I mention it in this context because Virilio is currently in the process of 
writing a book on what he recently called the 'final conflict of the twentieth century'. 
The book will be published in France towards the end of 1999 (personal communi-
cation, 30 May 1999). 
10. Many of Virilio's most important texts from the 1980s can be found in his Un 
paysage d'e've'nements (1996). 
11. Even though I disagree with Waite's description of Virilio as a Nietzschean 
thinker, I certainly do agree with his critique of Virilio in this instance. In fact, I 
have made a very similar criticism in another article (see Armitage, 1997: 206). 
12. This collection emerged from a chance meeting between Mike Featherstone 
and myself at the Time and Value' conference, held at the University of Lancaster 
in the UK in April 1997. I am very much indebted to Mike for his patient support 
over the past two years. However, the work on this project was made easier than it 
might have been by financial and administrative research assistance from the 
Division of Government & Politics at the University of Northumbria at Newcastle, 
the TCS Centre in Nottingham and Sage Publications. Credit is therefore respect-
fully due to Ken Harrop, John Fenwick, Neal Curtis, Chris Rojek, and Robert 
Rojek. I would also like to thank all the contributors to this collection who not only 
responded to the challenge of the enterprise so magnificently but furnished me with 
- by now - hundreds of (mostly!) friendly e-mails, letters, reader's reports and other 
exchanges. Finally, I am grateful once more to Joanne Roberts who endured far too 
many lengthy monologues about this venture over countless breakfasts, lunches 
and dinners. It is enough to say that Joanne can now reluctantly add the life and 
works of Paul Virilio to her many other specialisms. 
References 
Ansell Pearson, Keith (1997) 'Viroid Life: On Machines, Technics, and Evolution', 
pp. 180-210 in K. Ansell Pearson (ed.) Deleuze and Philosophy: The Difference 
Engineer. London: Routledge. 
Armitage, John (1997) 'Accelerated Aesthetics: Paul Virilio's The Vision Machine', 
Angelaki 2(3): Intellectuals and Global Culture: 199-209. 
Barthes, Roland (1993) The Iconography of the Abbe" Pierre', pp. 47-9 in R. 
Barthes Mythologies, trans. Annie Lavers. London: Vintage. 
Baudrillard, Jean (1983) Simulations, trans. Paul Foss, Paul Patton and Philip 
Beitchman. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Baudrillard, Jean (1987) 'Forget Baudrillard: An Interview With Sylvere Lotringer', 
pp. 65-137 in J. Baudrillard Forget Foucault, trans. Philip Beitchman, Lee 
Hildreth and Mark Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Baudrillard, Jean (1994) Simulacra and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 

Armitage — Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
21 
Baudrillard, Jean (1995) The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, trans. Paul Patton. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. 
Botting, Fred and Scott Wilson (eds) (1997) The Bataille Reader. Oxford: Black-
well. 
Brugger, Niels (1997) 'Connecting Themes in the Work of Paul Virilio', unpub-
lished seminar paper, presented at 'Paul Virilio, Technoscience and Society'. 
Convened by Mark Elam at the University of Copenhagen. 
Burroughs, William S. (1991) The War Universe' (Interviews with Raymond Foye), 
Grand Street 37: 92-108. 
Conrad, Peter (1989) 'Screen Spectaculars', Times Literary Supplement 4509: 939. 
Critical Art Ensemble (1998) Flesh Machine: Cyborgs, Designer Babies, and New 
Eugenic Consciousness. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Crogan, Patrick (1999, forthcoming) Theory of State: Deleuze, Guattari, and Virilio 
on the State, Technology, and Speed', Angelaki 4(2). Special Issue. Machinic 
Modulations: New Cultural Theory & Technopolitics. 
Deleuze, Gilles (1995) 'Postscript on Control Societies', pp. 177-82 in G. Deleuze 
Negotiations: 1972-1990, 
trans. Martin Joughin. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Deleuze, Gilles (1998) 'Nietzsche and Saint Paul, Lawrence and John of Patmos', 
pp. 36-52 in G. Deleuze Essays Critical and Clinical, trans. Daniel W. Smith and 
Michael A. Greco. London: Verso. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari (1987) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Foucault, Michel (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan 
Sheridan. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Gibbins, John R. and Bo Reimer (1999) The Politics of Postmodernity: An Introduc-
tion to Contemporary Politics and Culture. London: Sage. 
Golding, Sue (1997) The Eight Technologies of Otherness. London: Routledge. 
Guattari, Felix (1996) 'Desire is Power, Power is Desire: Answers to the Schizo-
Culture Conference', pp. 15-23 in F. Guattari Soft Subversions, trans. David L. 
Sweet. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Guillaume, Paul (1937) La Psychologic de la forme. Paris: Flammarion. 
Haraway, Donna (1985) 'A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and 
Socialist Feminism in the 1980s', Socialist Review 80(2): 65-108. 
Harvey, David (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins 
of Cultural Change. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Husserl, Edmund (1964) The Idea of Phenomenology, trans. W. Alston and G. 
Nakhnian. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Johnson, Pauline (ed.) (1996) The Function of the Oblique: The Architecture of 
Claude Parent and Paul Virilio, trans. Pauline Johnson. London: Architectural 
Association. 
Kittler, Friedrich A. (1997) Essays: literature, Media, Information Systems, edited 
and introduced by John Johnston. Amsterdam: G & B Arts. 
Kroker, Arthur (1992) The Possessed Individual: Technology and Postmodernity. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan. 

22 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Kroker, Arthur and Marilouise Kroker (eds) (1997) Digital Delirium. Montreal: 
New World Perspectives. 
Lyotard, Jean-Francois (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, 
trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis and Manchester: Minne-
sota University Press and Manchester University Press. 
McClure, Bruce (1998) 'Machinic Philosophy', Theory, Culture & Society 15(2): 
175-35. 
McLuhan, Marshall (1994) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Mandelbrot, Beniot (1977) The Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: Freeman. 
Marks, John (1998) Gilles Deleuze: Vitalism and Multiplicity. London: Pluto Press. 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1962) The Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith. 
London: Routledge. 
Nouvel, Jean (19%) 'Once the Morning Mist has Cleared', pp. 160-9 in P. Virilio 
and C. Parent (eds) Architecture Principe 1966 et 1996, trans. George Collins. 
Besangon: LTmprimeur. 
Plant, Sadie (1997) Zeros + Ones: Digital Women + The New Technoculture. 
London: Fourth Estate. 
Sokal, Alan and Bricmont, Jean (1998) 'Paul Virilio', pp. 159-66 in A. Sokal and J. 
Bricmont Intellectual Impostures: Postmodern Philosophers' Abuse of Science. 
London: Profile Books. 
Stelarc (1997) 'From Psycho to Cyber Strategies: Prosthetics, Robotics, and Remote 
Existence', Cultural Values 1(2): 241-9. 
Tisdall, Caroline and Bozzolla, Angelo (1977) Futurism. London: Thames and 
Hudson. 
Tzu, Sun (1993) The Art of War, trans. Yuan Shibing. Hertfordshire: Wordsworth 
Editions. 
Virilio, Paul (1976) UIns4curit6 du territoire. Paris: Stock. 
Virilio, Paul (1978) La Dromoscopies ou la lumi&re de la vitesse. Paris: Minuit. 
Virilio, Paul (1985) L'Horizon negatif. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1986) Speed & Politics: An Essay on Dromology, trans. Mark 
Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1989) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. Patrick 
Camiller. London and New York: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1990) Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles, trans. Mark Polizzotti. 
New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991a) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. Philip Beitchman. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991b) The Lost Dimension, trans. Daniel Moshenberg. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991c) L9£cran du desert: chroniques de guerre. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1994a) Bunker Archeology, trans. George Collins. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton Architectural Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1994b) The Vision Machine, trans. Julie Rose. Bloomington and 
London: Indiana University Press and British Film Institute. 

Armitage - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
23 
Virilio, Paul (1995) The Art of the Motor, trans. Julie Rose. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1996) Unpaysage (Tenements. 
Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1997a) Open Sky, trans. Julie Rose. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1997b) 'Cyberwar, God, and Television: An Interview with Paul 
Virilio', (interview with Louise K. Wilson), pp. 41-8 in A. Kroker and M. Kroker 
(eds) Digital Delirium, trans. Louise K. Wilson, Magali Fowler and Rania Stesan. 
Montreal: New World Perspectives. 
Virilio, Paul (1998a) 'Not Words but Visions!', (unpublished interview with 
Nicholas Zurbrugg), trans. Nicholas Zurbrugg. Paris. 
Virilio, Paul (1998b) La Bombe informatique. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1998c) The Suicidal State', pp. 29-45 in J. Der Derian (ed.) The 
Virilio Reader, trans. Michael Degener, Lauren Osepchuk and James Der Derian. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Virilio, Paul (1999a) Polar Inertia, trans. Patrick Camiller. London: Sage. 
Virilio, Paul (1999b) 'Virilio - Cyberesistance Fighter: An Interview with Paul 
Virilio' (interview with David Dufresne), trans. Jacques Houis. Apr4s Coup. 
Archived at: http://www. apres-coup. org/archives/articles/virilio. html 
Virilio, Paul and Friedrich A. Kittler (1999, forthcoming) 'The Information Bomb: 
Paul Virilio and Friedrich Kittler in Conversation', Angelaki 4(2). Special Issue. 
Machinic Modulations: New Cultural Theory & Technopolitics, trans. Patrice Rie-
mens. (Edited and Introduced by John Armitage). 
Virilio, Paul and Sylvere Lotringer (1997) Pure War, rev. edn, trans. Mark 
Polizzotti, Postscript translated by Brian O'Keeffe. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul and Claude Parent (1996) Architecture Principe, 1996 et 1966, trans. 
George Collins. Besancon: LTmprimeur. 
Virilio, Paul and Philippe Petit (1999) Politics of the Very Worst, trans. Michael 
Cavaliere, ed. Sylvere Lotringer. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Waite, Geoff (1996) Nietzsche's Corps/e: Aesthetics, Politics, Prophecy, or, the Spec-
tacular Technoculture of Everyday Life. Durham, NC and London: Duke University 
Press. 
Wark, McKenzie (1988) 'On Technological Time: Virilio's Overexposed City', 
Arena 83: 82-100. 
Wark, McKenzie (1994) Virtual Geography: Living With Global Media Events. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. 
Williams, John (1997) 'Deleuze on J.M.W. Turner: Catastrophism in Philosophy?', 
pp. 233-46 in K. Ansell Pearson (ed.) Deleuze and Philosophy: The Difference 
Engineer. London: Routledge. 
John Armitage teaches at the Division of Government & Politics, Uni-
versity of Northumbria, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Currently working on 
Virilio Live: Selected Interviews, he recently edited Machinic 
Modulations: 
New Cultural 
Theory & Technopolitics, 
a special issue of Angelaki, 
the 
journal of the theoretical humanities. 


From Modernism to 
Hypermodernism and Beyond 
An Interview with Paul Virilio 
John Armitage 
Postmodernism and Hypermodernism 
JA: Professor Virilio, I would like to begin by charting your place within the 
contemporary intellectual landscape. For instance, your work is closely 
associated with the cultural movement known as postmodernism. Certainly, 
your most recently translated study Open Sky (1997 [1995]) is being 
received as such in the English-speaking world. 
However, you have 
always been sceptical of the idea of postmodernism. Could you explain the 
basis of your critique of this concept? 
PV: Postmodernism is a notion that makes sense in architecture, through the 
work of [Robert] Venturi (Venturi et al., 1977) and so on. Since I am 
teaching architecture, to me, postmodernism is a 'suitcase' word, a syncret-
ism. In architecture it is a clear-cut phenomenon: styles are mixed up, 
history is ignored, one goes for a 'melting pot' of approaches. But as far as 
thought is concerned, thought as developed in the years 1970-80,1 simply 
cannot understand why people are talking about postmodernism. Post-
structuralism? Yes, OK. Postmodernism? It doesn't make any sense to me. 
Hence, I do not feel linked at all with postmodernity. Moreover, as a teacher 
in a college of architecture, I believe postmodernism was a catastrophe in 
the history of modern architecture. Therefore there is no linkage between 
me and postmodernism. I know that many people tend to associate post-
modernism with relativism, especially with cognitive relativism. Well, this 
is a new polemic that is cropping up, especially here in France, and which 
does not concern, let alone interest me in the slightest measure. Another 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 25-55 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;25-55;009957] 

26 Theory, Culture & Society 
thing is that I am a very marginal thinker, I do not relate to any established 
school of thought. Of course, I am a phenomenologist. When young, I was a 
pupil of [Maurice] Merleau-Ponty, I loved [Edmund] Husserl. You could 
call me a 'Gestaltist', I was enthusiastic about the psychology of form, Paul 
Guillaume, and the Berlin school: these are my intellectual origins.3 I have 
been associated with the end phase of structuralism, with [Michel] Foucault, 
of course, and [Gilles] Deleuze. But I am essentially a marginal figure. The 
main influence in my work has been the Second World War, that is, strategy, 
spatial planning, and this body of thinking about total war of which I was 
victim in my youth. 
JA: It seems to me that your work, which is primarily concerned with 
technological, urban and socio-cultural change, is the work of someone 
whose thinking addresses the problem of what might be called 'super' or 
'hypermodernism'? I say this because your theoretical interventions appear 
to be aimed not only at intensifying but also at displacing traditional forms 
of thought about the modern world and the way it is represented. How do you 
respond to this interpretation? 
PV: I totally agree. As a so-called 'war baby', I have been deeply marked by 
the accident, the catastrophe, and thus by sudden changes, and upheavals. I 
am a child of the Blitzkrieg, the 'lightning war', I am a child of history's 
acceleration, as Daniel Hal6vy put it in 1947. Hence, it is clear that my 
work is a critical analysis of modernity, but through a perception of tech-
nology which is largely, I might say, catastrophic. I say catastrophic, not 
caiastrophist. This is because I have witnessed the drama of total war 
myself, I have lived through it, the millions of deaths, the cities razed to 
the ground, all that. As far as 'hyper' or 'super' modernism is concerned, I 
think we are not out of modernity yet, by far. I think that modernity will only 
come to a halt within the ambit of what I call the 'integral accident' (Virilio, 
1989b [1986], 1997). I believe that technical modernity, modernity taken as 
the outcome of technical inventions over the past two centuries, can only be 
stopped by an integral ecological accident, which, in a certain way, I am 
forecasting. Each and every invention of a technical object has also been the 
innovation of a particular accident. From the sum total of the technos-
ciences does arise, and will arise a 'generalized accident' (1997). And this 
will be modernism's end. 
JA: Do you consider yourself a modernist author? Your writing style, for 
example, seems to many people to replace traditional narrative and struc-
ture with the 'stream of consciousness' technique... 
PV: Yes, I do. Well, let me put it this way: to be concerned with speed, like 
I am, means to be involved in music. For 20 years now I have been working 
on 'dromology', that is, on the importance of speed in history, and thus of 
acceleration (Virilio, 1986 [1977]). Now, if there is a realm where speed is 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 27 
really an important element, it is music, rhythm, tempo. And thus my writing 
is a dynamic, cinematic process. Moreover, and I state this as modestly as 
possible, it is my belief that philosophy is a mere subdivision of literature. 
To me, Shakespeare is really a great philosopher, perhaps above Kant and a 
few others. 
Relativity 
JA: Open Sky (1997 [1995]) brings to the fore one of the most under-
appreciated themes of your writings, namely, your interest in Albert 
Einstein's theory of relativity. This scientific concept is also occasionally 
viewed as a facet of modernism. How does the theory of relativity relate to 
your current projects? 
PV: Well, frankly, this is quite simple. There is no way one could study the 
phenomenon of acceleration in all these domains, whether that is in the 
realm of transportation, or in the realm of information, that is, in the transfer 
of information, without stepping full scale into the issue of relativity. It is 
unavoidable. Ours are cinematic societies. They are not only societies of 
movement, but of the acceleration of that very movement. And hence, of the 
shortening of distances in terms of time, but, I would also add, of the relation 
to reality. It is thus simply impossible to ignore the theory of relativity. 
We're all going through the gates of relativity. It is well known that the 
theory of relativity is very poorly popularized, it is not at all well-understood 
by the general public. One cannot skip the theory of relativity for the mere 
reason that it is difficult to understand. Why so? Because we live it. We live 
it through mobile phones, through live' programmes on TV, through the 
telecommunications media, through Virtual Reality (VR), through cyber-
space, through video-conferencing, through supersonic air travel and so on. 
Thus, as we live it, we interpret it, in the musical sense of the word. Like one 
says, 'to interpret a musical score', we, all of us, interpret the theory of 
relativity through our own lived lives. We do that through our calendar, 
through our time planning, our relationships, our involvement in love affairs 
even. We do that through the telephone, for instance, we do that through 
education, and through 'tele-learning'. We have become deterritorialized. 
Our embedding in our native soil, that element of hie et nunc (here and now), 
'in situ', that embedding belongs, now, in a certain way, to the past. It has 
been overtaken by the acceleration of history, - by the acceleration of 
reality itself - by 'real time', and by the 'live', all of which are in a stage 
beyond the hie et nunc, 'in situ' condition. Caught as we are between this 
territory-based embedding, which is of a geographic, geophysical nature, or 
even of a geostrategic nature in the case of the military, and total deterritor-
ialization, what remains in order to interpret our world? Nothing but 
relativity! Not the physicists' relativity, but our relativity, the relativity of 
our own lived lives, for which we are responsible, and of which we are the 
victims, at the same time. Relativity is no longer the exclusive domain of 

28 Theory, Culture & Society 
(natural) scientists, it has become the property of all those who live in the 
modern world. 
Phenomenology and Marxism 
JA: Before we move on to discuss your relationship to deconstruction 
(Derrida, 1973 [1967], 1976 [1967]) and post-structuralism, I would like to 
ask one or two questions about your own intellectual formation. For ex-
ample, one of the leading philosophies in France and elsewhere in the 
immediate aftermath of the Second World War was structuralism.. * 
PV: Yes, indeed, absolutely so. And certainly not existentialism... 
JA: Even so, your own philosophical background developed through an 
engagement with Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception (1962 
[1945]). What would you say you learnt most from Merleau-Ponty's work 
and how has it influenced your own? 
PV: First of all, I was a pupil of Merleau-Ponty, of Jean Wahl and of 
Vladimir Jankelevitch, to name three French philosophers who were teach-
ing at the Sorbonne at that time. The one to which I felt most attracted was 
quite naturally Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and his Phenomenology of Percep-
tion. Why? Because I am so totally involved with perception myself, through 
my childhood, through painting. Yes, I painted, I even worked with famous 
painters such as [Henri] Matisse and [Georges] Braque when I was young. I 
am a man of perception, a man of the gaze, I am a man of the visual school of 
thought. Therefore, Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception appeared 
to me to form a crossroads with the psychology of form, with Gestalt and the 
whole Berlin School. And thus it is at this crossroads of the psychology of 
form, Gestalt theory and the Phenomenology of Perception that I position 
myself. And to that one of course has to add the reading of Einstein, of the 
big scientific names of the time, [Paul] Dirac, [Werner] Heisenberg and yes, 
of course, [Henri] Bergson. So you have a crossroads there, and it's where I 
stand, at the intersection. 
JA: Merleau-Ponty was, for a large part of his life, associated with the 
philosophy of humanist Marxism. One thing that has always surprised me 
about your writings, particularly within the intellectual context of postwar 
France, is the absence of any reference to Marx. What is your relationship, if 
any, to Marxism? 
PV: I am no Marxist, nor have I ever been one. But my father was a 
communist. We'll come back to that later. You see, my mother was a 
Breton, and my father Italian. Like every young boy (laughs) I had to 
choose between my mother and my father. So, although I have a lot of 
respect for my father, I totally reject his political views. I absolutely cannot 
be a communist. I might well feel at home as a 'communard', as in the Paris 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 29 
Commune, or as an anarcho-syndicalist, these would suit me. But Marxism, 
no! Take it as a reaction against my father. 
JA: Are you saying that your reasons for rejecting the Marxism of your 
intellectual contemporaries like Merleau-Ponty were autobiographical 
rather than theoretical? 
PV: Yes, you're right, my intellectual contemporaries were communist to a 
man. I was not. But my reasons were theoretical also. This is because, when 
I was young, I converted to Christianity. I converted when I was 18, as an 
adult. The war had just ended then, and I had seen terrible things, and that 
was also one of the reasons for my conversion to Christianity. But then, you 
must know that I converted in the company of 'worker-priests'. Worker-
priests are, in France, those priests who take an industrial job and go to live 
with the factory workers. They do not display their pastoral cross. I chose to 
convert with a worker-priest because I wanted something real, not some 
religious show with a guy in a costume. It is since that time that I have 
worked with Abb6 Pierre. 
JA: Would it be correct, then, to suggest that you have no theoretical 
objections against socialism, against the left as a body of thought? 
PV: No, of course not, I have nothing against socialism. I belong to the left, 
that is quite clear... 
JA: Nevertheless, in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, 
many of your friends were not merely on the left but also committed 
Marxists... 
PV: True... 
JA: Can you recall why you felt it necessary to develop your own political 
perspective at that time? ... 
PV: I feel that many of my contemporaries have totally blacked out the war 
from their minds. Many of them never experienced totalitarianism. I lived 
through that experience. With a communist father, who was Italian to boot, 
we had to make our escape from totalitarianism, from Nazism and so on. It 
was no joke to be both communist and Italian during the Second World War 
(in occupied France). This meant that I never could get involved in some-
thing that appeared to me, right from the beginning, to be a totalitarian 
phenomenon. Yet I have always remained interested in the leftist dimension 
within Marxism. 

30 Theory, Culture & Society 
'Anarcho-Christianity' 
JA: You spoke earlier of your conversion to Christianity. What role does it 
play in your work? Do you see yourself, for example, as part of a French 
Catholic moral tradition that might include other Christian and existential-
ist critics of technology like Gabriel Marcel or Jacques Ellul?8 
PV: Yes, I do see linkages, especially with Jacques Ellul, rather than with 
Gabriel Marcel, who is from an earlier generation. But I cannot really place 
myself within what you call a Catholic tradition. The reason is that I have 
always been utterly unable to write about my faith. I do not have the gift for 
that. I have always considered that my life as a follower of Christ was 
something happening through my everyday life, not through my theoretical 
writings. It is not that I refuse to do it, I would gladly write a book about it, 
but I simply do not have the gift for it. You see, I do not have much of a 
theological culture. My conversion was an affair of the heart, a love affair 
you may say, more than an intellectual one. Speaking of religion, I feel much 
more at ease with an ordinary, poor person. When I am writing, I am 
somewhere else. 
JA: In the late 1950s and throughout most of the 1960s the philosophy of 
structuralism began to challenge Christian existentialism, phenomenology 
and humanist Marxism. Structuralism was, of course, profoundly anti-
humanist. Could your own theoretical approach be described as anti-
humanist? 
PV: Oh, not at all. I am an anarcho-Christian. It sounds quite paradoxical, 
but to me the definition of man is subsumed, and I quote it often, in a saying 
by someone I have come to like very much, Hildegarde of Bingen. St 
Hildegarde wrote, composed music, played harp, and was many other 
things at once. The saying is: 'Homo Est Clausura Mirabilium Dei9: 'Man is 
the closing point of the marvels of the universe' (i.e. God). Thus, for me, Man 
is not the centre of the universe, he is the end of the universe, the end of the 
world. This has nothing to do with ideas like 'transcendental ego' or 
'egocentrism'. For me, there is nothing beyond man. Forget about tech-
nology, eugenism, robotics, prostheses. Forget also about [Friedrich 
Nietzsche's] 'UebermenscK [Overman]. I do not believe these ideas are at 
all humanist. I think they're far worse. This is a very important point for me, 
because I am absolutely against this newfangled form of totalitarianism 
which I call technoscience and its cult. I see there a yet unheard-of eugenics 
programme, eugenics written very large, far beyond [Sir Francis] Galton's. 
The idea behind this new brand of eugenicism being to perfect man, to make 
a better man. Well, there is no such thing as the possibility of 'improving' 
man, of tinkering man into something better. No way. Never. 
JA: You would say that such a programme would not be a desirable aim? 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 31 
PV: No indeed, I believe it is not. Yet it is exactly the programme of 
technoscience. Take, for instance, 'Dolly' [the recently cloned sheep], take 
neo-eugenicism, clones, take all new technologies. We see now a eugenic 
desire running amok. 
From Military Space to Cyberspace 
JA: The initial significance of your theoretical work flows from your archi-
tectural and photographic enquiries, documented in Bunker Archeology [sic] 
(1994a [1975]), into the 'Atlantic Wall' - those 1500 German bunkers 
constructed during the Second World War along the French coastline to 
prevent an Allied invasion... 
PV: There were in fact 15,000 of them, one zero more! And they stretched 
along the West European coast all the way up to Denmark. But about me: I 
spent my youth in the town of Nantes. Nantes lies at the mouth of the Loire, 
just before the Atlantic Ocean. Its true oceanic harbour is St Nazaire, where 
there was a German submarine base, and in fact an Allied landing took 
place there at some stage. Thus I spent the war time as a boy, with the sea 
just one hour away, yet without ever being able to go and see it: the seashore 
was a forbidden zone. So when liberation finally came, I rushed to the sea, to 
the beaches, like everybody else did. And there I encountered structures 
which were littering the beaches: the bunkers of the Atlantic Wall. And thus 
at the same time as I saw the sea for the first time, I also discovered these 
mysterious, enigmatic architectural structures. To me, they were like the 
statues on Easter Island. And so, for ten years, I went on a quest after these 
structures. I sketched and photographed these bunkers in order to come to 
grips with the totalitarian dimension of the war. My first snapshots were 
taken in 1957, the last ones in 1965. 
JA: What was the connection between this discovery and your thinking on 
military space? 
PV: First, it was an emotional discovery, which you might compare with 
Victor Segalen's first encounter with Chinese sculpture. You can also call it 
an archaeological experience, and a shocking one. Another element, aside 
from this encounter with military space, and which led me to write Bunker 
Archeology, was that I wanted to get involved in the study of urban phen-
omena, in the city and its technique. I switched over to urbanism, to 
architecture and thus to the study of the technique's impact on the space of 
the city, and the way it alters the urban landscape. And at this point, you of 
course meet Gestalt theory, the psychology of forms. Military space is an 
organized form of perception. When I was a conscript - I served in the 
artillery — I was a gunner. Part of my military service was in Germany, in the 
French occupation zone. I was stationed in Freiburg, at the HQ of the First 
French Army. I ended up as a cartographic officer in the staff of Field 
Marshall Juin. In this function I made a good number of military surveys in 

32 Theory, Culture & Society 
the Black Forest region, to be used in manoeuvres taking place in the 
occupied zone. So everything is linked up. There is an aesthetic kind of 
involvement with bunkers, and an urbanistic one in the field of regional 
planning. Over thousands of kilometres, the coast was organized in such a 
way as to be controlled by sight. It is that logic that made me understand to 
what extent the war had been a total one. War had not only conditioned the 
people through manslaughter, Auschwitz and wholesale executions, it had 
also reorganized the territory, just like the Great Chinese Wall had done. 
One could say that military architecture was the first incarnation of Land 
Art. In fact, minimalist and Land artists like Robert Morris came to me later 
to reflect on my book, and said they had found it most interesting.10 
JA: In The Function of the Oblique (Johnston, 1996) you, along with the 
architect Claude Parent, outline your efforts in the 'Architecture Principe' 
group of the early 1960s to initiate an urban regime based on the theory of 
the 'oblique function', which, while founded on uneven planes and bodily 
disorientation, nevertheless resulted in the construction of several major 
works. Looking back, what do you think were the major achievements and 
disappointments of Architecture Principe and the theory of the oblique 
function? 
PV: Architecture Principe was the name of a group. That period lasted five 
years in all (1963-8). You must know that this was at a time when many 
artists, philosophers and the like would come together to do things. For 
instance, we did quite a few things together with 'Archigram'. You also had 
Paulo Soleri in the United States, and there was also the 'Metabolic' group in 
Japan. 
And so, Claude Parent and myself decided to start a research group 
together, and the main thing I contributed to was a church. That was the St 
Bernadette church in Nevers, and that church is a so-called 'Bunker 
church'. Why? Because I wanted to 'Christianize' the bunker. Of course, at 
the time, the prevailing myth was that of the crypt - the atomic shelter. One 
was then living under the permanent threat of the atomic bomb, and hence 
the atomic shelter. And so, you get a cross-point between the theme of St 
Bernadette of Lourdes, and that of the bunker. In Lourdes, the Virgin Mary 
appeared to St Bernadette in a grotto. Now, both the grotto and the bunker 
are crypts, hidden places, as in the English word, cryptic. And thus there 
was an opportunity to make a cross-over happen between that monolithic 
branch of architecture and a religious building. There is another reason: I 
had frequently been to Germany, to look at bunkers, and there I had seen a 
lot of so-called iLuftschutzraum\ air-shelters and, in Dusseldorf, I suddenly 
saw Luftschutzraums which had been converted into Protestant or Catholic 
churches. And a correspondence dawned on me as between these places of 
shelter from danger, and places of worship, which are also places of 
salvation. We had another big project, a factory, and we also designed a 
number of private homes with inclined planes. Now if you want me to 
explain the concept of the oblique function as succinctly as possible it is 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 33 
this: simply to have people inhabit places with inclined, not horizontal, 
planes... 
JA: And the disappointments? 
PV: We published things. But, basically, this was a typical 'youth group'. 
And it broke up with the 'events' of May 1968. I was myself very much 
involved in those events, whereas Claude Parent was against the whole 
thing. So our ways parted, I went to the left, and he went to the right. 
JA: Much of your work in the late 1960s and early 1970s is overtly 
concerned with the idea of 'critical space'. Could you elaborate on this 
concept? 
PV: Critical space is indeed a very important concept. You must see it as 
the direct outcome of me joining the ficole Sp£ciale d'Architecture, in 1968, 
at the formal request of the students there. And then, I immediately realized 
that the prima materia of the architect is not matter, bricks, stones and 
concrete, but space. And that it is necessary to construct space first before 
you can build up matter, with materials. Now, about the critical aspect of 
space: this means that space finds itself in a critical situation, just like one 
would speak of critical times, or of a critical situation. Space is under threat. 
Not only matter is threatened, space too is being destroyed. But it is being 
rebuilt at the same time. This is what I started to feel in the 1960s, and it 
was by then that I got the foreboding of cyberspace! I got the foreboding of 
virtual space, through Benoit Mandelbrot and the new geometry of frac-
tals. 
I came to see that the unity of space, which served as a basis for Le 
Corbusier, for the Archigram group, for all of us in sense, is in the process of 
being broken up. And the curious thing is that I published The Lost 
Dimension (1991b [1984]) in the same year as William Gibson published 
Neuromancer (1984). So here you have someone who writes on virtual space, 
on cyberspace, and someone who works on critical space. And both 
approaches will come to mesh into each other. To me, the reason why 
space is critical is because it is on the verge of becoming virtual space. Let 
me give you another example: whole dimensions no longer exist. For the 
modern architect, there exist the three dimensions, and time on top of them. 
This is what you might call 'ancient space'. It's modern space too, but it is 
conventional. From Mandelbrot onwards, dimensions are no longer whole, 
they are broken up. Space is fractured too. Nothing remains whole, as space, 
from approximately the 1970s onwards. And, to me, this is a great joy, since 
I am an anti-totalitarian. Newtonian absolute space disappears with the 
break up brought about by fractals, and by Einsteinian relativity in the first 
place, of course. The entire unity of space, which was the basis of architec-
ture, modern architecture included, is deconstructed, fractionalized. This is 
what I call an 'accident'. It is a far better situation than that of totalitarian 
space. Geometry has now encountered its accident in fractalization. 

34 Theory, Culture & Society 
JA: In The Lost Dimension and elsewhere, you present critical analyses of 
the nature of electronic space and the spread of new information and 
communications technologies. Why is it necessary to criticize, say, the 
Internet and cyberspace? 
PV: I do not criticize the Internet and cyberspace as such. What I criticize 
is the propaganda unleashed by Bill Gates and everything that goes with it. 
What I loathe are the monopolies of Microsoft, of Time Warner, etc. I cannot 
stand those! I am an Apple fan, I am for Apple's convivial approach. I am 
not fretting against technology per se, but against the logic behind it. But 
first and foremost I'd like to position myself as an art critic of technology. 
Everybody is familiar with the conventional art critic, the musicologist. But 
art criticism of technology is a taboo. 'Yes and Amen' is the only allowed 
position. Well, not for me, thanks! 
Nietzsche, Derrida, Power 
JA: Although you were working on critical space in the late 1960s and early 
1970s, it was also in that period when both structuralism and Marxism came 
under attack. Deconstructionists and post-structuralist philosophers like 
Jacques Derrida, for example, looked to Nietzsche rather than Marx for 
inspiration. Would it be correct to say that Nietzsche's philosophy is close to 
your own? 
PV: It is true that I always have felt close to Deleuze and Derrida, who were 
very intimate friends, and Derrida still is, but I must confess that I have 
never been convinced by their 'Nietzscheanism'. I love 'Nietzschean music'. 
But, to me, Nietzsche is a man of the grand opera! His linkage with Wagner 
is not at all fortuitous. And I really admire the operatic part of Nietzsche. 
But his underlying philosophy? I'm sorry, I cannot stand it! It's physically 
repulsive! All that crap about the 'Uebermensch', and 'the Will to Power'! I 
do, though, profoundly admire the dramatic, the literary dimension, in 
Nietzsche. But I cannot assign any philosophical value to that brand of 
thinking. Here we encounter Shakespeare again. It is clear that I prefer 
Shakespeare to Nietzsche, by far. When I link Nietzsche's writings to the 
opera, it is because, to me, philosophy is spread out over the arts. Take 
Marcel Duchamp: for me, he is a philosopher who happens to paint. Shake-
speare is a philosopher who writes plays. Kant is a philosopher who writes 
philosophical treatises. But philosophy transcends all this. When reading 
Nietzsche, I admire the literary music, the 'heroization' of concepts. As half 
Italian, I admire! I clap my hands! I love theatre! To me, Nietzsche is like 
Verdi. I applaud. But at the same time, I cannot, simply cannot, accept his 
philosophy. You see, I remain an art critic. 
JA: Do you see any points of contact between your work and that of 
Derrida? Derrida (1984, 1996 [1995]) has, for instance, not only written on 
Nietzsche but also on speed and technoscience... 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 35 
PV: No. The fact is that I do appreciate Derrida very much, but I do not 
encounter him. There are parallels in our work, but we do not share common 
ground. I cannot formulate it better. We are friends, but there are no points 
of contact in our writings. 
JA: Earlier, you rejected the Nietzschean conception of power. How would 
you define power? 
PV: This is a rather difficult type of question to respond to. The question of 
power is a long and vexed one. The ancient Chinese had an extraordinary 
phrase for it. When a representative of the Emperor would meet some local 
or regional power holder, his first words would be: Tremble and Obey!' To 
me, this is the best definition of power. Fear! That is, to instil fear, to 
frighten. The first thing power is about is fear, and from that compliance 
follows. Fear is of course also about emotions, about astonishment. And 
speed frightens. There is an awful lot more to say, naturally. 
The Political Economy of Speed 
JA: Power and speed are central to perhaps what is your best known book, 
Speed & Politics: An Essay on Dromology (1986 [1977]). Could you explain 
the nature and significance of dromology? 
PV: Dromology originates from the Greek word, dromos. Hence, dromology 
is the science of the ride, the journey, the drive, the way. To me, this means 
that speed and riches are totally linked concepts. And that the history of the 
world is not only about the political economy of riches, that is, wealth, 
money, capital, but also about the political economy of speed. If time is 
money, as they say, then speed is power. You see it with the velocity of the 
predators, of the cavalry, of railways, of ships and maritime power. But it is 
also possible to see it with the velocity of dispatching information. So all my 
work has been about attempting to trace the dromocratic dimension of 
societies from ancient Greek society right up to our present-day societies. 
This work is of course about unrelenting acceleration, but it is mostly about 
the fact that all societies are pyramidal in nature: the higher speeds belong 
to the upper reaches of society, the slower to the bottom. The wealth 
pyramid is the replica of the velocity pyramid. Examples are easy to find: it 
was true in ancient societies, through maritime power and cavalry, and 
through their ways of dispatching messages, and it holds true in our modern 
societies, through the transport revolution, and through the current revol-
ution in data transport and information processing. Thus my work is all 
about stating that it is of paramount importance to analyse acceleration as a 
major political phenomenon, a phenomenon without which no understand-
ing of history, and especially history-that-is-in-the-making since the 18th 
century is possible. 

36 Theory, Culture & Society 
JA: In Speed & Politics you also suggest that successive waves of accelera-
tion imply both the 'disappearance' of physical geographical space and a 
new politics of real time. What, for you, is the most important aspect of the 
relationship between the physical dimension and the political space of real 
time? 
PV: Well, the old politics of acceleration were mainly about transport. That 
is, the possibilities inherent in moving goods from one place to another, or, 
perhaps equally importantly, moving troops from one point to another. This 
means that acceleration bore next to no relationship to information. You had 
pigeons, and other methods of despatching, but through the ages there was 
hardly any acceleration of information transmission. But today, that is, since 
the beginning of the 20th century, acceleration is mainly about the increas-
ing speed of information transmission. Sure, transportation has been con-
stantly speeded up too, but, today, the major development is the increasing 
speed of information transmission, and the quest for the attainment of real 
time. Information transmission is thus no longer concerned with the bring-
ing about of a relative gain in velocity, as was the case with railway transport 
compared to horse power, or jet aircraft compared to trains, but about the 
absolute velocity of electromagnetic waves. 
Pure War and the Politics of Everyday Life 
JA: Your concerns about what might be called 'the dromocratic condition' 
led, in the late 1970s, to the publication of your Popular Defense & 
Ecological Struggles (1990 [1978]). This seems to me to be one of the few 
books of yours which, while discussing the theoretical concept of 'Pure 
War', also makes a practical political case for 'Revolutionary Resistance' 
against the tyranny of speed politics and, in particular, the military-
industrial complex. Could you elaborate upon these concepts? Are they 
still relevant today? 
PV: Here, one must state that the book might also have been titled Pure 
War (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997 [1983]) since that is the heading of the 
Introduction.1 That was the time when we were living with the unadulter-
ated balance of terror. What I mean is that one cannot understand the 
concept of pure war outside of the atomic bomb, the weapon of the 
apocalypse. At that time, and this has been somewhat forgotten, we were 
living with the potentiality of a pure war, which, nevertheless, failed to 
materialize. What is pure war? It is a war of a single utterance: Fear! Fear! 
Fear! Nuclear deterrence can be conceived of as pure war for the simple 
reason that nuclear war never took place. However, such deterrence did 
spawn a technoscientific explosion, inclusive of the Internet, and other 
satellite technologies. And so one saw that the history of warfare, of siege 
war, of the war of movement, of total war, of world war, all somehow merged 
into pure war. That is, into a blockade, into nuclear deterrence. What had 
been reached was the dimension of the integral accident, the moment of the 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 37 
total destruction of the world. And there it stopped. Thus, at that stage, the 
whole concept of resistance to war became a new phenomenon. It was no 
longer about resisting an invader, German or other, but about resisting the 
military-scientific and industrial complex. Take my generation: during the 
Second World War you had resistance, combat against the Germans who 
invaded France. During the 1960s and 1970s there was resistance, among 
others by me, not against an invader, but against the military-industrial 
complex, that is against the invention of ever crazier sorts of weapons, like 
the neutron bomb, and 'Doomsday machines', something that we saw, for 
instance, in Stanley Kubrick's film, Dr Strangelove. Thus resistance to pure 
war is of another nature than resistance to an oppressor, to an invader. It is 
resistance against science: that is extraordinary, unheard of! 
JA: At this point, I would like to ask a question on behalf of my students. 
For when I give a lecture on your work there is one question that comes up 
over and over again at the end of the session. It usually runs something like 
this: 'While I find Paul Virilio's analyses of pure war, and revolutionary 
resistance against the military-industrial complex extremely thought-
provoking, I'm not quite sure what he is suggesting I actually do about 
these issues at the political level, at the level of the everyday?' What, in 
your view, should one tell them? 
PV: Well, tell them the following. I was a militant against the atomic bomb. 
I joined leftist movements during the events of May 1968. But I must say 
that I became very disappointed about political struggles, since they appear 
to me to lag very much behind developments both within the post-industrial 
revolution and technoscience. Thus I am, and many people with me, out of 
phase with real existing political movements. I feel henceforth margin-
alized, and the only action I can partake in takes place within the urban 
realm, with homeless people, with travellers, with people whose lives are 
being destroyed by the revolution brought about by the end of salaried work, 
by automation, by delocalization. You may call it street-corner work in a 
sense. For instance, together with Abb£ Pierre, I was member of the High 
Committee for the Housing of Destitute People that was instituted by 
President [Francois] Mitterand and [Jacques] Chirac. I was on that Com-
mittee for three years. That work has stopped now, but, for the last 15 years, 
I have been a member of private associations which work together with 
homeless people. These are Christian associations for the most part, and 
there lie my political activities these days. I am a disappointed man of the 
left. By the way, this is no fun because at the same time there is the rise of 
extremist political parties like [Jean-Marie] Le Pen's Front National, and so 
on. 
Modernity and 'Globalitarianism' 
JA: If we can broadly define modernity as an attempt to understand the 
present period by contrasting it with the recent past, what key features, other 

38 Theory, Culture & Society 
than speed, would you point to in the contemporary era as being of most 
political significance? 
PV: Clobalitarianism! This is what transcends totalitarianism. Let's take an 
example, and excuse the neologism, but I cannot find another word. 
Totalitarianism covered my life, through the Second World War and through 
the period of nuclear deterrence, so you may say through Nazism first and 
then Stalinism. Totalitarianism was thus a central issue at that time. But 
now, through the single market, through globalization, through the conver-
gence of time towards a single time, a world time, a time which comes to 
dominate local time, and the stuff of history, what emerges - through 
cyberspace, through the big telecommunications conglomerates, is a new 
totalitarianism, a totalitarianism of totalitarianism, and that is what I call 
globalitarianism. It is the totalitarianism of all totalities. Globalization, in 
this sense, is a truly important event. But, when people say to me, 'We'll 
become world citizens!', I reply, 'Forget it'. I was a world citizen long before 
globalization. After the war, I met Gary Davis, I went to meetings which took 
place in the Pere Lachaise neighbourhood of Paris. I was 16-17-18 at that 
time. I was half Italian, I felt a world citizen. But when people say that Bill 
Gates, cyberspace and VR are the stuff of world citizenship, I say, no way! 
Globalitarianism is social cybernetics. And that's something infinitely dan-
gerous, more dangerous even, perhaps, than the Nazi or communist brands 
of totalitarianism. It is difficult to explain globalitarianism but it is simple 
enough in itself. Totalitarianisms were singular and localized. Occupied 
Europe, for example, was one, the Soviet empire another, or China. That's 
clear. The rest of the world was not under totalitarianism. Now, with the 
advent of globalization, it is everywhere that one can be under control and 
surveillance. The world market is globalitarian. It is on purpose that I use 
the doublet total/totalitarian, and global/globalitarian. I consider this 
phenomenon a grave menace. It is manifest that Time Warner and the 
large conglomerates like Westinghouse, MCIWorldCom and all the other 
gigantic companies are not the exact equivalent of Hitler or Stalin. Yet, bad 
things are possible... 
JA: Undoubtedly, I believe that one of the leading microelectronics con-
glomerates has even adopted 'One World, One Operating System' as its 
corporate logo... 
PV: Yes. I can't stand it. Let me remind you of a sentence by Saint Just, one 
of the main protagonists of the French Revolution who got guillotined in the 
end, and who said once: There's this new idea in Europe: happiness.' Well, 
his other phrase, which I like very much is: 'If the people can be oppressed, 
even if they are not actually oppressed, then they are oppressed already.' It 
is a very interesting statement, because it says that the possibility is already 
the reality. Even if you are unaware of it, it has already happened. Hence 
the menace in the present period. 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 39 
Lyotard 
JA: Shortly after the publication of Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles, 
Jean-Francois Lyotard published his seminal book The Postmodern Con-
dition (1984 [1979]). Does this book's renowned scepticism about the 
possibility of historical understanding, along with its rejection of the 'grand 
narratives' of progress, have any significance for you? 
PV: Well, yes. We see here the fractalization of history, and Lyotard 
expressed - at an early stage - the end of the grand ideological narratives. 
But then, there was a question put by a Jewish friend of mine, Gerard 
Rabinowich — it was just after the book's publication, and we had gathered 
among friends in St Germain des Pr6s. My friend asked: 'Well, Lyotard, 
what do you have to say about that grand narrative called justice? Is that too 
a grand narrative belonging to the past?' A fine point indeed! Needless to 
say, Lyotard was at a loss for an answer. And indeed, to me, even if I accept 
the demise of the grand historical and ideological narratives in favour of the 
small narratives, the narrative of justice is beyond deconstruction. If that 
was the case, I would not be a Christian. You cannot deconstruct the 
absolute necessity of justice. Hence that issue remains intact. Justice 
cannot be divided up, be fractalized, on pain of descent into barbarism. 
We have reached a limit there. 
Speed and Inertia 
JA: While some cultural theorists are sympathetic to your critique of speed, 
few of them appear to appreciate the stress you place on the relationship 
between absolute speed and its 'Other' - inertia? Indeed, you have written a 
book about speed and the environmental crisis entitled Polar Inertia (1999 
[1990]). Why is speed inextricably bound up with inertia? 
PV: That is quite simple. When what is being put to work are relative 
speeds, no inertia obtains, but acceleration or deceleration. We are then in 
the realm of mobility and emancipation. But when absolute speed, that is 
the speed of light, is put to work, then one hits a wall, a barrier, which is the 
barrier of light. Let me remind you that there exist three recognized barriers: 
the sound barrier, which was passed in 1947 by Chuck Jaeger, the barrier of 
heat, which was crossed in the 1960s with rockets, at what is called 'escape 
velocity' and, finally, the speed of light, which is the effectuation of the 'live' 
in almost all realms of human activity. That is, the possibility to transfer 
over distance sight, sound, smell and tactile feeling. Only gustation, taste, 
seems to be left out of it. From that moment onwards, it is no longer 
necessary to make any journey: one has already arrived. The consequence 
of staying in the same place is a sort of Foucauldian imprisonment, but this 
new type of imprisonment is the ultimate form because it means that the 
world has been reduced to nothing. The world is reduced, both in terms of 
surface and extension, to nothing, and this results in a kind of incarceration, 

40 Theory, Culture & Society 
in a stasis, which means that it is no longer necessary to go towards the 
world, to journey, to stand up, to depart, to go to things. Everything is 
already there. This is, again, an effect of relativity. Why? Because the earth 
is so small. In the cosmos, absolute speed amounts to little, but at that scale, 
it is earth which amounts to nothing. This is the meaning of inertia. There is 
a definite relationship between inertia and absolute speed which is based on 
the stasis which results from absolute speed. Absolute stasis leads -
potentially - to absolute stasis. The world, then, remains 'at home' [in 
English], already there, given. I repeat: this is a possibility, a potentiality, 
but here we are back to what I said before: when the people are in a situation 
of possible inertia, they are already inert. 
The Integral Accident 
JA: You said before that 'modernity will only come to a halt within the 
ambit of the integral accident'... 
PV: Indeed, the accident has always fascinated me. In fact, I am currently 
preparing my end-of-the-century book, the one for the year 2000, which will 
be on the integral accident, although I am writing another book before that. 
The integral accident is the one that integrates all others. 
JA: Could you elaborate on the concept of the integral, or, generalized 
accident, a little further? 
PV: Let me put it this way: every time a technology is invented, take 
shipping for instance, an accident is invented together with it, in this case, 
the shipwreck, which is exactly contemporaneous with the invention of the 
ship. The invention of the railway meant, perforce, the invention of the 
railway disaster. The invention of the aeroplane brought the air crash in its 
wake. Now, the three accidents I have just mentioned are specific and 
localized accidents. The Titanic sank at a given location. A train de-rails at 
another location and a plane crashes, again, somewhere else. This is a 
fundamental point, because people tend to focus on the vehicle, the 
invention itself, but not on the accident, which is its consequence. As an 
art critic of technology, I always try to emphasize both the invention and the 
accident. But the occurrence of the accident is being denied. This is the 
result of the hype which always goes together with technical objects, as with 
Bill Gates and cyberspace, for instance. The hype in favour of technology 
dismisses its negative aspects. It is a positive thing to have electricity, it is a 
wonderful device, but at the same time it is based on nuclear energy. Thus 
what these three types of accidents have in common is that they are 
localized, and this is because they are about relative velocities, the trans-
port velocities of ships, trains and planes. But from the moment that the 
absolute velocity of electromagnetic waves is put to use, the potential of the 
accident is no longer local, but general. It is no longer a particular accident, 
hence the possibility arises of a generalized accident. Let me stress the 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 41 
point by giving you two examples: the collapse of the stock exchange and 
radioactivity as result of a nuclear conflict. These examples mean that when 
an event takes place somewhere today, the possibility arises that it might 
destroy everything. A virus in an electronic network, an atomic leakage in 
Chernobyl - and that was not much, compared to a massive nuclear strike. 
Today's collapse of the stock exchange is a nice icon for the integral 
accident, in the sense that a very small occurrence changes everything, as 
the speed of quotations and programmed trading spreads and enhances any 
trend instantaneously. What happened a few weeks ago in [South East] Asia 
is an integral accident, well, almost an integral accident. 
The Aesthetics of Disappearance 
JA: In works such as The Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a [1980]) you 
argue that modern culture is not simply characterized by speed but also by 
what you call the 'aesthetics of disappearance'. What is the relationship 
between speed and the aesthetics of disappearance? 
PV: These are the cinematic effects, which are characteristic of the con-
temporary arts, and stem from film, television, video, etc. Let me explain: in 
ancient societies you had an aesthetic of appearance, which means that 
there was an enduring material support to the image: wood or canvas in the 
case of paintings; marble, in the case of sculptures, etc. Save for music, most 
aesthetics-related phenomena were phenomena of appearance, of emer-
gence. Painting enabled the emergence of a figure on the canvas, which was 
subsequently 'fixed' with a varnish, for example, Leonardo's Mona Lisa, The 
image had appeared, as it were, through the medium of the canvas. The 
same could be said of Michelangelo, shaping Moses out of a block of marble, 
and that block of marble, suddenly becoming Moses. Persistence had a 
material basis. But with the invention of photography, of the photogramme, 
that is of instant photography, and of cinematography, from that moment 
onwards, one enters into an aesthetic of disappearance. At that stage, 
persistence is no longer material but cognitive, it is in the eye of the 
beholder. Things owe their existence to the fact that they disappear, like 
they do on a screen for instance. They are there, they appear, and are in 
motion, because they vanish afterwards. Quite different, therefore, from 
frescoes, paintings, etc. It is a sequential phenomenon. In the first phase, 
there was a cinematic effect of painting: if you take snapshots of an artist at 
work, you see that the painting develops in stages. But this is a very slow 
cinematic phenomenon as opposed to the film where we are talking about 24 
frames per second — even up to 60 frames per second with special effects. 
So, this is the aesthetics of disappearance, it means that most of the art has 
vanished. Hence, by the way, the current crisis in contemporary art. Hence, 
too, 'the art of the motor'. When I write about The Art of the Motor (1995 
[1993]), I mean that there has been a motorization of art. And, by 'motor', I 
mean the French cinematographic word imoteur\ for 'action'! This motoriza-
tion of art is a very important phenomenon, and you cannot come to grips 

42 Theory, Culture & Society 
with the current crisis in the contemporary arts - I am thinking of 
documenta in Kassel, among others - without it (Joly, 1996). All branches 
of the arts are involved in this motorization, that is, in acceleration. 
JA: So, you are arguing that the crisis in the contemporary arts is the direct 
outcome of motorization?... 
PV: Yes, it is the result of the motorization of images. Let's take ships, for 
instance, and compare the grace of a sail-boat with a motor vessel: you're 
not talking about the same kind of marine vessel any longer. The same holds 
true for figurative images: whether they are from paintings, or from photo 
stills, or the cinema, or video: it's not the same. You must see that. Mean-
while, photography and cinema have influenced painting. They have also 
influenced the theatre, and other realms too. Motorization has exerted its 
influence over art in general. Every time there is a gain, there is a loss too. 
By losing the slow pace of the revelation of things, we have lost one sense of 
time in favour of another. Let me give you another example: the moment we 
acquired the mechanical lift, we lost the staircase. It became the service or 
emergency staircase, and was no longer the magnificent grand staircase of 
old. But we gained in speed - as is always the case. When transatlantic air 
services were invented, we incurred the loss of the ocean liners. This holds 
true in all possible realms. 
Foucault and Baudrillard 
JA: Much of your recent work is concerned with cyberspace and imaging 
technologies of various kinds such as VR. However, it appears to be less 
influenced by Jean Baudrillard's writings on the nature and impact of 
Simulations (1983) and 'hyperreality,' and more by Foucault's work on 
surveillance in Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (1977 
[1975]). Why is this? 
PV: Discipline and Punish is the source, obviously. Let me remind you that 
when Foucault published Discipline and Punish, one of his collaborators -
he had quite a few of them at the time - was Jacques Donzelot. And Jacques 
Donzelot happened to sit on the examination board of one of my students 
who was doing research on prisons. We were working on prisons together, on 
the panopticon and so on, as part of the college curriculum at the time, and 
that was before Discipline and Punish came out. The proof of that is that the 
illustrations provided in Foucault's book can be directly traced to rny 
student's thesis! His name, incidentally, is Carthoux, and his thesis - for 
the Ecole Sp6ciale d'Architecture - was entitled The Place of Detention'. 
So, whether there is mutual influence or not, there are, again, clear 
parallels. Another link is of course my work about war and its particular 
field of perception. 
Now, as far as Baudrillard is concerned, there is for sure something 
about his work that I have never liked at all, and that is his concept of 

Armitage — Interview with Virilio 43 
simulation. I do not believe in simulation. To me, what takes place is 
substitution. Seminars have already been convened on this theme. The 
reason why is that I believe that different categories of reality have unfolded 
since the beginning of time, from the Neolithic Age to the present day. This 
means that reality is never given, but is the outcome of a culture. And thus 
we have a category of 'class I reality', and then there is a simulation of that 
reality, through a new technology, such as photography, or some other thing, 
or VR, for instance, and then you have a fresh substitution, a second reality. 
Hence simulation is a mere intermediary phase, without import. What is 
important is substitution; how a class I reality is substituted by a 'class II 
reality', and so on, up to the 'nth' reality. 
JA: For you, then, one class of reality is continually substituted by other 
realities? 
PV: Well, reality is produced by a society's culture, it is not given. A reality 
that has been produced by one society will be taken over, and changed by 
another, younger society, producing a fresh reality. This happens first by 
mimicry, then by substitution, and the original reality will, by that time, be 
totally forgotten. Take, for instance, the reality of the ancient Egyptians, of 
the Chinese of thousands of years ago: we cannot make any sense out of it, 
we are clueless about what it looked like, about what it sounded like. 
JA: You talked before of the 'disappearance aesthetic'. At the same time, 
Baudrillard suggests that the advent of simulation and hyperreality have led 
to the 'disappearance of the social'. Isn't there some kind of connection 
between your work and his? 
PV: Absolutely none whatsoever. As I have said and repeated often: there is 
a nihilistic dimension in Baudrillard's writings which I cannot accept. It is 
quite clear to me that Baudrillard has totally lost faith in the social. To me, 
this is sheer nihilism. I have not at all lost faith in the social. First of all, I 
believe that the social eludes the so-called social sciences, and always has — 
that's why I am not a sociologist! So I am disappointed, and very much so, 
about politics, but I am not disappointed by the social. You need only to go 
into the streets, and meet the poor: they're extraordinary, superior people. 
The social drama leaves the stunts of the political class far behind. The 
power and resilience of individual people in the streets puts the intelligence 
of today's political leaders to shame. And as far as the social scientists are 
concerned, the less said the better! 
Technological Culture 
JA: Would you say that your work on the aesthetics of disappearance is 
characterized by a disenchantment with the modern world? Do you advocate 
a return to some kind of religious sensibility, one that might place limits, for 
instance, on the social effects of cinematic disappearance? 

44 Theory, Culture & Society 
PV: I believe that, without some religious culture, it doesn't matter which, 
one will never be able to understand technological culture and cinematics. I 
believe that a society, a society which has moved to such an extent into 
virtuality, will not be able to advance further, without an appreciation of 
moral virtues, that is, of mystical thought. I mean by that all that has been 
contributed by philosophers and theologians, of all religions, not only 
Christianity. The new technologies bring into effect the three traditional 
characteristics of the Divine: ubiquity, instantaneity and immediacy. 
Without some cultural familiarity with these themes, mediated by Chris-
tianity, Protestantism, Buddhism, Judaism, Islam, etc., they remain incom-
prehensible. One cannot come to grips with the phenomenon of cyberspace 
without some inkling of, or some respect for, metaphysical intelligence! 
That does not mean that you have to be converted. I believe that the new 
technologies demand from those who are interested in them that they have a 
substantial measure of religious culture - not merely some religious 
opinion. I may emphasize that all this has nothing to do whatsoever with 
'New Age', and the like... 
JA: Don't you think that some people invest technology with a mystical 
dimension already? 
PV: Yes, of course. Transhumans', New Age types, cyberpunks and the 
like. There are plenty of them in the United States, you need only to read 
Mark Dery's book. 
I think this is a scary development, leading up to the 
Heaven's Gate sect, whose members committed suicide in order to depart 
for the stars. But this is not the sort of thing I am talking about. My point is 
simply that without a knowledge of the history and philosophy of religions, 
one cannot come to grips with what I have termed 'technological funda-
mentalism'. Which is the possibility of a Dew ex Machina. Just like there is 
a Jewish fundamentalism, or an Islamic or Christian one, you have also now 
got a technological fundamentalism. It is the religion of those who believe in 
the absolute power of technology, a ubiquitous, instantaneous and immedi-
ate technology. I think a balance is needed to remain free vis-a-vis tech-
nology, a balance which consists of a knowledge of religion, even if this 
entails the risks of fundamentalism and intolerance. Without this knowledge 
one is without balance, and one cannot face the threats of technological 
fundamentalism, of cyberspace and of the extreme lunacy of social cyber-
netics. 
The War Model 
JA: To many people, your work in Bunker Archeology and later is associated 
with what has come to be known as 'the war model'. Could you explain this 
model? 
PV: Well, as a child of the Second World War, a 'war baby', you may say 
that the war was my university. I learned to know the world through the fear 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 45 
brought about by war. So for me the archetypal war was the Second World 
War, which lasted from 1939 to 1945. This war produced both Auschwitz 
and Hiroshima - in fact I keep a stone from Hiroshima on my desk. The war 
model is a method of total control over a territory and of a population. The 
aim is to have total control of the population, to bring a whole region or a 
continent into subjection, through radio, telephone, and a combination of 
both of these was already very much there during the Second World War. 
Hence my work is about defining total war as a conflict model, in all realms, 
not only in the realm of the military, but also in the realm of the social, and 
in what I would call 'colonization'. Colonization is already a model of total 
war. To quote [Jules] Michelet, the 19th-century French historian: 'Without 
a powerful navy, there are no colonies.' It is the power of technology which 
makes colonization possible; maritime power is one. Later, other forms of 
colonial power followed. Thus it is clear that my writings on the war model 
are linked to the history of the colonial empires, that is, to the times of 
colonial imperialism and ideological totalitarianism. 
JA: Does the notion of the war model flow only from the Second World War? 
Or, is it linked in some way to your resistance to the Algerian war? Or both? 
PV: What is for sure is that, as far as my approach to war is concerned, I 
have passed through three stages in my life: I suffered from the Second 
World War as a child; I was called into military service during the Algerian 
War and served six months in Algeria - in the Aures, the mountainous 
region south of Constantine. And I opposed nuclear war, that is, the total war 
par excellence. So the three wars that have moulded me, we could say, are 
the Second World War, the Algerian war and the epoch of nuclear deter-
rence. These wars, of course, carry the seeds of their followers, especially 
the Malvinas War and the Persian Gulf War. 
The War of Images 
JA: In the early 1980s you produced one of your most well-known books, 
War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception (1989a; [1984]). In this book 
you discuss the use by the military of cinematic technologies of perception. 
Why is the analysis of the relationship between war and the cinema so 
important for you? 
PV: Because images have turned into ammunition. Logistics deals in the 
first place with the supply to the front-line of ammunition, energy and so on. 
The front-line is constantly being replenished with ammunition, energy and 
foodstuffs. Now, from the end of the First World War onwards, but es-
pecially with the Second World War, the front-line is also being fed with 
images and information. That means that a 'logistics of perception' will be 
put in place, just as there is a logistics of fuel supplies, of explosives and 
shells. For instance, one can observe that the First World War was fought on 
the basis of maps. Maps were being drawn, lines were sketched on them and 

46 Theory, Culture & Society 
height-lines established, whereupon the artillery was told where to fire. But 
at the close of the war, maps were being displaced by aerial photography, 
shot by planes and then assembled on tables like mosaics - 1 did that kind of 
job myself, when I was a HQ staffer. How did that come about? Well, 
because the destructive power of artillery is such that the ordinary topo-
graphical landmarks simply disappear - here, again, the aesthetics of 
disappearance at work! Only film or photography keep the memory of the 
landscape as it was, and as it is constantly being reshaped. The film 
substitutes for the ordnance survey and, at the same time, architecture 
goes underground. It buries itself in the soil, in bunkers, in order to escape 
control from the skies. If you look at the Second World War, there was no 
bombing without photographs of the planned bomb site being taken back, 
being scrutinized with specialized equipment. Images thus become a prod-
uct of extraordinary strategic importance. And if we switch to contemporary 
military conflicts, what you get are video missiles, unmanned miniature 
planes or 'drones', observation satellites and more wondrous things. War has 
morphed into images, into the eyes... 
JA: According to you, war is now a war of images? 
PV: Absolutely. It is impossible to imagine war without images. And, if 
possible, 'live' images. 
Cyberwar in the Persian Gulf 
JA: Your reflections on the so-called 'cyberwar' in the Persian Gulf were 
published as U£cran du desert (1991c). What, for you, are the qualitative 
differences between conventional warfare and cyberwar? 
PV: First, about the book's title. It is very important because there were 
three phases in the Gulf War. Two are well-documented, and the third has 
been named by myself: 'Desert Shield', 'Desert Storm' and then, 'Desert 
Screen? - the latter is my invention. You may say the title is 'War TV. The 
Gulf War was truly a war of images. This is because it was fought out, on the 
one hand, with drones, that is, with flying cameras on unmanned planes. On 
the other hand, one also saw Cruise missiles, which were making surveys all 
the time about where they were flying, with televised bombs which were 
streaming into Saddam's bunkers, with video missiles. A jet fighter pilot 
turns on his screen, fires a missile equipped with a camera, and the missile 
lights up what is on the horizon, while the pilot sees beyond the horizon. 
And, as soon as he sees an adversary, he directs the missile towards him. 
We have, therefore, now entered a type of war which is about directing 
images, hence the invention of C I - a type of war management which means 
command, control, communication and intelligence — a kind of (film) 
director's way of running a war, with images and information coming up 
from everywhere at once. One observes that in the very first armed conflict 
after the Cold War, the image is right in the middle of the mechanism. The 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 47 
war is being directed straight from the USA, through communication 
satellites which are guiding the Patriot missiles. There is a kind of video-
game war going on. This perfectly illustrates what I wrote seven years before 
in War and Cinema. In fact, quite a few friends told me that they couldn't 
make anything out of my book in 1984 but now, after the Gulf War, they tell 
me that they have got the message — seven years too late. So when there is 
talk today about the 'new war', the 'info war', the war of information, well, 
now we are in quite an uncharted territory. 
It is quite clear that the USA is 
currently entering a period of great upheaval in military affairs. This means 
that the command of 'globalitarian', or total information, by the last remain-
ing Big Power, leads to a repositioning of its powers. What we now see 
happening in its relations with Iraq goes a long way to show the limitations 
of this war of information, as far as the 'how-far-to-go', 'what-to-do', issues 
are concerned. It is very difficult to make pronouncements about these 
developments, save to say that 'cyberwar' manoeuvres have already taken 
place in Germany, and have been witnessed by my friend James Der 
Derian. 
Here we enter a realm of electronic gamesmanship of which very 
little can be said. It's still quite tricky, and confidential. I am presently 
working on that, of course, but there is simply not very much open infor-
mation about this war of information. What is certain is that the locale of war 
is no longer the 'geosphere', military geography, the realm of geostrategy, 
but the 'infosphere', cyberspace. We have entered a new world. 
The War Machine: Deleuze and Guattari 
JA: Before we leave the subject of war, could I ask you about your relation-
ship to Deleuze and Guattari's philosophy and politics of desire? Their 
'Treatise on Nomadology: The War Machine', in A Thousand Plateaus: 
Capitalism and Schizophrenia (1987 [1980]) is obviously influenced by 
your writings about pure war, military space, speed and power. But what, if 
anything, have you learnt from their writings and how has it influenced your 
thinking? 
PV: I do not think there is influence here but, rather, convergence. If you 
care to look in A Thousand Plateaus, I believe there are 27 references to my 
work. That's not nothing. Now, I am not stating this in order to claim as my 
own the qualities of Deleuze and Guattari, whom I have loved very much, 
but to emphasize that, here again, there were parallels at work. However, I 
felt rather closer to Deleuze than to Guattari because I am totally devoid of 
any psychoanalytic background or culture. Guattari and I were, though, on 
extremely friendly terms, and we did things together. You see, Deleuze was, 
like me, a man of 'the event', someone who not only worked with the concept 
of the event but who also rose to the occasion when an event occurred and 
who reacted with feeling, as befits a phenomenologist. Hence, to me, the 
interest of A Thousand Plateaus lies chiefly in its liberating effect from a 
certain kind of academic discourse, one which belonged to the end phase of 
structuralism. I am not talking about Foucault here. I am referring to 

48 Theory, Culture & Society 
[Claude] L£vi-Strauss, to [Louis] Althusser and so on. Here, again, liber-
ation took on a kind of musical hue. For me, A Thousand Plateaus is also a 
form of, shall we say, 'ritorneHo9 (a recurring couplet or refrain in a folk 
song), as they called it themselves. So what I like about Deleuze and 
Guattari is their poetic language, a language which enables them to convey 
meanings which cannot be conveyed otherwise... 
JA: Do you mean that Deleuze and Guattari have a poetic understanding of 
the world, as opposed to a prosaic or an analytical one? 
PV: Yes, but even better, a 'nomadological' understanding of the world -
they have that word of their own after all - stemming from the fact that the 
world is constantly on the move. Today's world no longer has any kind of 
stability; it is shifting, straddling, gliding away all the time. Hence their 
ideas about superimposition, strata, layers and cross-currents. Ours is a 
world that is shifting, like the polar ice-cap, or 'Continental Drift'.18 
Nomadology is thus an idea which is in total accordance with what I feel 
with regard to speed and deterritorialization. So, it is hardly surprising that 
we clearly agree on the theme of deterritorialization. 
The Gaze of the Machine 
JA: Your interest in the acceleration and automation of perception was 
further developed in The Vision Machine (1994b [1988]). What was your 
central aim in that book? ... 
PV: There was, for me, this crucial development, of which nobody, once 
again, seemed aware of. Everybody was talking about Orwellian remote 
control and surveillance, with cameras all over the place, scanning the city. 
I agree, it is scary, the Orwell scenario, police cameras everywhere. But 
there is something worse, which gives its title to The Vision Machine: a 
device to see with. For it means that an inanimate object now can see for 
itself. A remote camera, for example, is for the use of a policeman or a 
security guard. There is someone behind it who does the viewing. Nothing 
special about that and nothing to worry about. But behind the vision 
machine there is nobody. There is only a micro-receiver, and a computer. 
A door can 'recognize' me, as it were. This set up without a human spectator 
means that there is now vision without a gaze. And let me remind you that 
the research on the vision machine - that is its official name, I did not invent 
it - was for the Cruise missile! Cruise missiles were equipped with detection 
radar and built-in mapping systems. They had maps charting their course 
towards Teheran or Leningrad. The device was constantly surveying the 
ground with radar and checking it against the map to make sure the missile 
was on course. No need for a vision machine here, the radar does the work. 
But, at the final approach stage, a vision machine is necessary, in order to 
film the target and choose the window to enter the building or the door to the 
bunker. These vision machines are an improvement on what are called 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 49 
'shape recognition devices'. They are like those industrial machines that 
punch holes in metal sheets. They come equipped with a microchip that 
enables them to recognize the shape of the sheet they're supposed to punch 
holes in. This is termed contour recognition, which is not fully fledged vision 
yet. A further development has led to the devising of highly sophisticated 
vision machines for Cruise missiles. This means that Cruise missiles are 
endowed with a gaze even though it is an automatic one... 
JA: But all this is not being carried out for the machines themselves. It is 
being carried out by, or at least on behalf of, human beings, even if none are 
directly involved? ... 
PV: No, nobody is there. Well, ultimately, yes, of course, but when you've 
got a camera, you make a film, and then you view it. Here the object is 
looking for itself, the Cruise missile looks for itself. To me, something like 
this is an unheard of event. Imagine this table we are sitting around starting 
to look for itself! 
The Transplant Revolution 
JA: In The Art of the Motor (1995 [1993]) another shift seems to take place 
in your thinking. For, in that work, you focus on the invasion of the human 
body by technoscience. Could you explain your interest in what you call 'the 
transplant revolution'? 
PV: Oh yes, this is the Third Revolution'. In the realm of speed, the first 
revolution was that of transportation, the invention of the steam engine, the 
combustion engine, the electrical motor, the jet engine and the rocket. The 
second revolution is the revolution of transmission, and it is happening right 
now in electronics, but it began with Marconi, radio and television. The 
third revolution, which is intimately linked to the minaturization of objects, 
is the transplantation revolution. By this term I mean that technology is 
becoming something physically assimilable, it is a kind of nourishment for 
the human race, through dynamic inserts, implants and so on. Here, I am not 
talking about implants such as silicon breasts, but dynamic implants like 
additional memory storage. What we see here is that science and technology 
aim for miniaturization in order to invade the human body. This is already 
true of the cardiac stimulator, a device I am especially interested in, since 
much of my work is about rhythms and speed, and the cardiac stimulator is 
what gives the rhythm to the life of a human patient. I am writing about that 
in my next book, and about the case of those twin sisters, which were 
prematurely born, and who had a cardiac stimulator implanted in them 
practically from birth: their life-rhythm, thus, is that of a machine, a 
stimulator. Here is an icon of the transplant revolution, of the human body 
being eaten up, being possessed by technology. Technology no longer 
spreads over the body of the territory, as with railways, motorways, bridges 
and large factories, but now enters the innards of the human body... 

50 Theory, Culture & Society 
JA: And, in your view, this is a negative development? 
PV: It is absolutely scary. It means that the machine enters into the human. 
It is no longer a prosthesis, it is a new eugenicism in fact... 
JA: Nonetheless, this is a difficult position to maintain with someone whose 
life may depend upon the insertion of a cardiac stimulator? 
PV: Well, here again you see how the indisputable is always put forward in 
order to foster extremely dubious measures. It all starts by saying how great 
those things are for people who need them, and then comes the day when it 
is being forced upon people who don't need or want them. There lies the 
problem. 
JA: Is this the basis of your criticisms, in The Art of the Motor, (1995 [1993]) 
of the Australian performance artist Stelarc? 
PV: Yes. This is because Stelarc has opted for 'eugenic suicide'. Instead of 
committing plain suicide, he does so by grafting himself into various gizmos, 
so that in the end, there will be no Stelarc left, pffuuut!, gone! Only a pure 
automaton will remain. That being said, his work is absolutely fascinating. 
JA: How does the transplant revolution relate to your concept of 'endo-
colonization'? 
PV: First, endo-colonization happens when a political power turns against 
its own people. I have lived through this during the Second World War. 
Totalitarian societies colonize their own people. You cannot understand 
Nazi Germany without accounting for the fact that it had been deprived of 
colonies and embarked on a programme of colonization at home. So 
Germany's colonization was a programme of colonizing the East (ostkoloni-
zatiori), inclusive of Poland, Russia and France for that matter. But, by 
necessity, Germany's colonization was also a logic of endo-colonization, that 
is, to force upon its own population the fate that the British - or the French -
had forced upon the Aboriginals in Australia or the blacks in South Africa, 
or, in other words, brute force. And, in the case of the transplant revolution, 
what takes place is an endo-colonization of the human body by technology. 
The human body is eaten up, invaded and controlled by technology... 
JA: Are you suggesting that the idea of the transplant revolution is identical 
to the concept of endo-colonization? 
PV: Yes, it is, but on the person, on the human body. There is no coloniz-
ation without control of the body. We are here back to Foucault, evidently. 
Every time a country is being colonized, bodies are colonized. The body of 
the Negro, of the slave, of the deportee, of the inmate of the labour camp, is a 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 51 
colonized body. Thus technology colonizes the world, through globalitarian-
ism, as we have seen earlier, but it also colonizes bodies, their attitudes and 
behaviours. You need only to watch all those nerdy 'internaut' types to see to 
what extent their behaviour is already being shaped by technology. So we 
have this technology of absorption, or as the Futurists used to say: man will 
be fed by technology, and technology will colonize human behaviour, just as 
television and the computer are doing, but this last form of colonization is a 
much more intimate, and a much more irresistible form. This is scary! It is 
neo-eugenicism, endo-technological eugenicism! 
Cyberfeminism 
JA: In Open Sky (1997 [1995]) you make reference to 'cyberfeminism', a 
movement which some see as one of the most important theoretical and 
political developments in the past decade with regard to our understanding 
of the human body, technology and subjectivity. Could you describe your 
response to these developments? 
PV: Well, I have become very interested in the notion of 'cybersexuality'. 
Even if it is still at the gimmick stage, it is a well-known fact that research is 
very advanced in the field of 'tele', 'remote' or cybersexuality, especially in 
Japan. And thus, I am quite baffled to see feminists - far from opposing, like 
I do, the conditioning of the female body, or the male body for that matter -
projecting themselves as followers of cybersexuality. I cannot understand it. 
I cannot understand why opposing machismo does not also imply opposing 
cybersexuality. Do the cyberfeminists really believe that cybersexuality is 
going to liberate them? Come on. ... Give me a break! 
JA: Are you arguing that feminists have much more to lose than they have to 
gain by embracing cybernetic technologies? 
PV: I believe that the question of technology is predicated upon the ques-
tion of sexuality, be it male or female. If cyberfeminists do not want to 
understand the replacement of emotions by electrical impulses — because 
that is what we are talking about - the replacement of emotional involve-
ment by electrical impulses, it is clear that they will never be liberated. 
Instead, they will become the servants of a new type of sexual control. 
Remote or tele-sexuality is by definition machine-controlled sexuality. 
JA: The American cyberfeminist, Donna Haraway (1985) has stated that 
she 'would rather be a cyborg than a goddess'. What is your reaction to such 
claims? 
PV: (laughs - out loud) I want to be neither a God nor a cyborg! I want to be 
man. It suffices to be a man - or a woman. As I said before, 'Man is the 
endpoint of the wonders of the universe'! 

52 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Georgio Agamben 
JA: One final question. Are there any other cultural theorists writing today 
whose work you admire? 
PV: Hm, this is a difficult question to answer, but, yes, there is one book 
which I've just reviewed, and liked very, very much. It is Giorgio Agam-
ben's Homo Sacer: le pouvoir souverain et la vie nue (1997). In ancient 
Roman law Homo Sacer means a human being whose life is considered 
worthless, meaning someone whom one could kill without committing 
homicide, and who is also unfit for sacrificial purposes. Such a man stands 
condemned to summary execution. Killing him is no worse than squashing 
an insect. I must say I have a boundless admiration for Agamben. I was 
asked by several papers to give my choice of the best books of the year and 
I mentioned Homo Sacer. It is a remarkable book, and one with which I 
could not agree more. 
Translated by Patrice 
Riemens 
Notes 
1. This interview was conducted on 27 November 1997 at the Ecole Sp6ciale 
d'Architecture in Paris. I would like to thank Mike Featherstone for his encourage-
ment, Ken Harrop for personal and institutional support, and Mark Little for 
practical help in setting up the interview. However, I am also heavily indebted to 
Magali Fowler for interpretation and to Rob Turner and Patrice Riemens for 
translating numerous letters, tapes and texts. Lastly, I am especially grateful to 
Paul Virilio for giving his time and energy so freely to this project. 
2. See, for example, Kerrigan (1997: 14-15). 
3. Gestalt psychology is a body of thought which springs from the experimental 
studies conducted by German psychologists like Max Wertheimer and Kurt Koffka 
around 1910. Briefly, the Gestaltists argued that philosophical, artistic, scientific, 
perceptual and aesthetic configurations endowed with qualities as a whole could 
not be characterized simply as the totality of their parts. 
4. 'Hypermodernism' is a term I reserve for a forthcoming book on Virilio. 
5. Here, Virilio is referring to Daniel Hal6vy (1872-1962). Hal6vy was an anti-
clerical radical French historian and well-known 'Dreyfusard'. 
6. Paul Dirac and Werner Heisenberg were both instrumental in developing 
Einstein's theory of relativity and quantum mechanics in the early part of this 
century. For a recent and accessible introduction to this fascinating but complex 
field see Milburn (1996). Henri Bergson (1859-1941) founded a philosophy based 
on 'creative evolution' and, like Virilio, was much preoccupied with questions 
relating to the nature of knowledge, time and religion. See, for instance, Bergson 
(1910). 
7. Abb6 Pierre is a figure held in high regard in France for his championing of the 
poor. 
8. See, inter alia, Marcel (1950) and Ellul (1965). 

Armitage — Interview with Virilio 
53 
9. Sir Francis Galton coined the term eugenics in 1883. Eugenics is, of course, the 
'science' which purports to 'improve' humanity through the application of genetic 
policies. 
10. Robert Morris (1931- ) is an American minimalist sculptor and Land artist. 
However, in recent years he has turned increasingly to figurative painting. For a 
general overview that includes Morris' work, see, for example, Lucie-Smith (1995: 
74-133). 
11. Archigram is the name of an English Utopian architectural group, founded in 
1960 by Peter Cook (1974). It disbanded in 1975. Paulo Soleri (1919-) is an Italian 
architect who, since the 1950s, has worked in the USA on alternative planning 
schemes at the Cosanti Foundation in Scottsdale, Arizona (see Wall, 1971). The 
science fiction inspired Metabolic Group in Japan was initiated by Kenzo Tange 
(see Kurokawa, 1972). 
12. For a somewhat different explanation of the break up of Architecture Principe 
see, I. Scalbert and M. Mostafavi, 'Interview with Claude Parent', in Johnston 
(1996: 49-58). 
13. See, for instance, Mandelbrot (1977). 
14. As indicated in the references below, Pure War (1997) is the title of a recently 
revised book-length interview with Virilio conducted by Sylvere Lotringer. The 
English edition of Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles (1990 [1978]) does not 
contain an Introduction. 
15. Virilio is referring to Dery (1996). 
16. 'Info War' is the title of the Postscript in the new edition of Pure War (Virilio 
and Lotringer, 1997: 165-86). 
17. See, for example, Der Derian (1992). 
18. 'Continental Drift' is the title of a chapter in Open Sky (1997 [1995]). 
References 
Agamben, G. (1997) Homo Sacer: lepouvoir souverain et la vie nue. Paris: Seuil. 
Baudrillard, J. (1983) Simulations, trans. P. Foss, P. Patton and P. Beitchman. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 
Bergson, H. (1910 [1889]) Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness, trans. F.L. Pogson. London: George Allen and Unwin. 
Cook, P. (1974) Archigram. London: Klotz. 
Deleuze, G. and F. Guattari (1987 [1980]) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, trans. B. Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Der Derian, J. (1992) Antidiplomacy: Spies, Terror, Speed, and War. Oxford: Black-
well. 
Derrida, J. (1973 [1967]) Speech and Phenomena, and Other Essays on HusserVs 
Theory of Signs, trans. D.B. Allison. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
Derrida, J. (1976 [1967]) Of Grammatology, trans. G. Spivak. Baltimore, MD and 
London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Derrida, J. (1984) 'No Apocalypse, Not Now (Full Speed Ahead, Seven Missiles, 
Seven Missives)', trans. C. Porter and P. Lewis, Diacritics 14 (summer): 20-31. 
Derrida, J. (1996 [1995]) Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression, trans. E. Prenowitz. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

54 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Dery, M. (1996) Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the End of the Century. New York: 
Grove Press. 
Ellul, J. (1965) The Technological Society. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Foucault, M. (1977 [1975]) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. A. 
Sheridan. London: Penguin. 
Gibson, W. (1984) Neuromancer. London: Victor Gollancz. 
Haraway, D. (1985) 'A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist 
Feminism in the 1980s', Socialist Review 80(2): 65-108. 
Johnston, P. (ed.) (1996) The Function of the Oblique: The Architecture of Claude 
Parent and Paul Virilio: 1963—1969, trans. P. Johnston. London: Architectural 
Association. 
Joly, F. (ed.) (19%) documenta. documents 1. Stuttgart: Cantz Verlag. 
Kerrigan, J. (1997) 'When Eyesight is Fully Industrialised9, London Review of Books 
19(20): 14-15. 
Kurokawa, K. (1972) The Concept of Metabolism. Tokyo: Architectural Foundation. 
Lucie-Smith, E. (1995) Art Today. London: Phaidon Press. 
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984 [1979]) The Postmodern Condition, trans. G. Bennington and 
B. Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Mandelbrot, B. (1977) The Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: Freeman. 
Marcel, G. (1950 [1949]) The Mystery of Being, vol. 1: Reflection and Mystery, trans. 
G.S. Fraser. London and Chicago: Harvill Press. 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962 [1945]) Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith. 
London: Routledge. 
Milburn, G. (1996) Quantum Technology. St Leonards: Allen and Unwin. 
Venturi, R., D. Scott Brown and S. Izenour (1977) Learning From Las Vegas. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Virilio, P. (1986 [1977]) Speed & Politics: An Essay on Dromology, trans. M. 
Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1989a [1984]) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. P. 
Camiller. London: Verso. 
Virilio, P. (1989b [1986]) The Museum of Accidents', trans. Y. Leonard. Public 2: 
The Lunatic of One Idea: 81-5. 
Virilio, P. (1990 [1978]) Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles, trans. M. 
Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1991a [1980]) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. P. Beitchman. 
New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1991b [1984]) The Lost Dimension, trans. D. Moshenberg. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1991c) L'ficran du desert. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, P. (1994a [1975]) Bunker Archeology, trans. G. Collins. New York: Prince-
ton Architectural Press. 
Virilio, P. (1994b [1988]) The Vision Machine, trans. J. Rose. Bloomington and 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press and British Film Institute, London. 
Virilio, P. (1995 [1993]) The Art of the Motor, trans. J. Rose. Minnesota: University 
of Minnesota Press. 

Armitage - Interview with Virilio 
55 
Virilio, P. (1997 [1995]) Open Sky, trans. J. Rose. London: Verso. 
Virilio, P. (1999 [1990]) Polar Inertia, trans. P. Camiller. London: Sage Publica-
tions. 
Virilio, P. and Lotringer, S. (1997 [1983]) Pure War, revised edn, trans. M. 
Polizzotti, Postscript trans. B. 0' Keeffe. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Wall, D. (1971) Visionary Cities: The Arcology ofP.S. London: Banham. 
Paul Virilio is Director of the ficole Sp6ciale d' Architecture in Paris. 
John Armitage teaches at the Division of Government & Politics, Uni-
versity of Northumbria at Newcastle, United Kingdom. 


Indirect Light 
Extracted from Polar Inertia 
Paul Virilio 
Light is the name of the shadow of the living light. 
Bernard de Clairvaux 
I
STILL REMEMBER MY astonishment, ten years ago, when I saw video 
screens replacing mirrors on Paris Metro platforms. 
Soon after 1968, it is true, surveillance cameras had appeared at the 
entrances to the grandes e'coles and universities, and this new equipment 
was also used to keep watch on the boulevards and major junctions of the 
capital. Today, I am astonished once again when I see the lens of a micro-
camera rising above the keypad that gives coded access to a block of flats. 
Evidently entry phones are no longer enough to do the job of the old 
concierges. 
As an electro-optical substitute, videoscopy seems to come into its own 
with this role of indirectly lighting a domestic environment for which 
electric light, a direct form analogous to daylight, is no longer sufficient. 
Rapid miniaturization is indeed making the video camera and its monitor 
more and more akin to a warning light that comes on to let us see who is 
here or who is there. 
Even the old 35 mm cine-camera has had its eyepiece viewfinder 
replaced to advantage with a screen that actually displays the recorded 
images. 
How can one fail to see here the essential characteristic of video 
technology: not a more or less up-to-the-minute 'representation' of an event, 
but live presentation of a place or an electro-optical environment — the result, 
it would seem, of putting reality on waves by means of electro-magnetic 
physics? 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 57-70 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;57-70;009958] 

58 Theory, Culture & Society 
It is logical, then, to find here not any performance space, any 
'screening room', but only a control room. 
In furnishing the image of a place, videography does not itself require 
any 'space' except for its supporting camera and monitor, themselves 
integrated - or dissolved, as it were - into other equipment having nothing 
to do with 'artistic' televisual or cinematic representation. 
Just as one is not bothered by the dials and lights on a car dashboard or 
by the lighting in a shop window, so one is not really troubled by the 
'broadcasting' or 'diffusion' area of a video camera. That area is solely what 
is lit up, and not the 'theatre' or site of a cinema performance screened at 
some distant location. 
So great is the difference between video observation, cinema and 
television that the TV set has itself been overtaken through the incorpora-
tion of monitors into the most ordinary domestic equipment — for example, 
the 'electro-optical porter' that makes people visible as the entry phone only 
made them audible. 
The whole debate on the crisis of cinemas, on the miniaturization of 
public film theatres, will no doubt soon be repeated in relation to private 
homes and the 'living room', where the TV set is still often located. For the 
emancipation of the screen will involve not only its sudden expansion into 
the giant open-air Jumbotron or Olympic stadium screen, but also its 
compression into a scattered array of ordinary objects unconnected with 
televisual performance or information. 
Who still cares about the electrical wires in domestic appliances? 
Who tomorrow will care about the optical fibres built into commonly used 
materials or equipment? 
Alongside the broadcasting of current political or artistic events, video 
'illuminates' us about phenomena instantaneously transmitted across vary-
ing distances and thus becomes itself a new type of tele-topographic 'site' or 
location. (Is there not already talk of 'neighbourhood television'?) Just as 
Edison's invention of the electric light-bulb caused daytime places to 
appear at night, the new electro-optical lamp causes places to become 
visible amid generally invisible surroundings. As the site of the non-site of 
instantaneous transmission (at varying distances), it effects a kind of 
commutation of perceptible appearances similar to that which occurs in 
para-optic perception and quite unrelated to ordinary mass-media com-
munication. 
Thus, alongside the well-known effects of 'telescopy' and 'microscopy', 
which have revolutionized our perception of the world since the 17th 
century, it will not be long before the repercussions of 'videoscopy' make 
themselves felt through the constitution of an instantaneous, interactive 
'space-time' that has nothing in common with the topographical space of 
geographical or even simply geometrical distance. 
Whereas theatrical or cinematic mise en scene involves the spatio-
temporal organization of stage action or film narrative in an area used for 
public performances, and whereas, to a lesser degree, production for 

Virilio - Indirect Light 59 
television requires a private stage or broadcasting area (the rooms of a 
private home), this no longer applies to video transmission. For 'cine-
videography' solely consists in the commutation of more or less distant and 
disjointed appearances, and also in the commutation of interactive actors at 
varying distances. Commutation of the emission and reception of the video 
signal, at the monitoring terminal, indicates the mutation-commutation of 
distances (topology) into power (tele-topology), that is, into light energy as 
the union of relativist cinema and wave optics. 
The present crisis of cinemas is not therefore mainly due to an 
increase in domestic film-viewing; rather, it expresses a crisis in the idea 
of representation linked to rapid spread of the 'live' dimension. The live 
'real-time' spectacle is a result of the development of videoscopy, not only in 
people's homes, but here, there and everywhere, in the very body of the 
various pieces of equipment in which it began to be incorporated nearly 
twenty years ago. (The most striking example is the weaving of optical fibres 
into composite materials.) The crisis, then, is a crisis of delayed broadcast-
ing as such, so that electro-optical imaging techniques now impose the idea 
- or, to be more precise, the 'ideography' - of a veritable presentation of 
places and milieux, a 'presentation' which corresponds, on a human scale, to 
what telescopic presentation meant for astronomy or microscopic presen-
tation for the innermost properties of materials. 
Video is no more the eighth art than cinema was the seventh. The 
crisis affecting cinema box-office, rival TV channels but also what is 
called art video stems from the fact that, ever since the beginnings of 
photography and cinema, as well as of radio and television, the showing of 
events or entertainments has been more important than the lighting up of 
the places where they happen. Notwithstanding Edison, Marey, the Lumiere 
Brothers, Vertov and a few others, the fun of the fair nearly always took 
priority over illumination (and did so more than ever with the coming of 
television), but the appearance of an active optics has suddenly replaced 
the feats of passive optics (of glass and other transparent lens material) in 
the organization of perceptible reality. This startling new presence of tele-
reality transforms the nature of both the object and the subject of tra-
ditional representation, so that pictures of places have now taken over from 
the 'picture houses9 where performances used to occur. Only the theatre, 
thanks to its unity of time and place, still escapes the transmutations of 
electro-optical lighting whose immediacy excludes 'unity of place' for the 
sole benefit of 'unity of time', albeit of a real time which seriously affects 
the space of real things. 
In fact, alongside the 'radio-activity' of emission and reception, with 
its 'electro-acoustic high fidelity', there is now what might be called the 
'opto-activity' of videoscopic commutation, with all the problems of'electro-
optical high definition' that this implies. 
When there is talk in Toulouse and elsewhere of the imminent introduction 
of neighbourhood television {j,4U locale), people do not realize that they are 

60 Theory, Culture & Society 
borrowing a term from videoscopy or, in the case of a cabled city, from a 
'videography' that allows the town to see itselfand to make itself visible - that 
is, to become its own 'production', its own film. 
The city of Rennes, for example, has a plan for 'electronic public 
lighting' to boost the political and economic existence of the urban area -
hence the requirement for a municipal tele-noticeboard and the inevitable 
telesales that will replace the local press with one huge cathode shop-
window. But is this not already how things are with the more limited 
proximity of objects and places in our everyday environment, with the 
Metro video terminals, the company's closed-circuit television, or the 
shops that are able to see the faces of window-gazers? And that is nothing 
compared with 'wall-socket' cameras and 'light-bulb' monitors built into 
ordinary objects, much as the microphone and loudspeaker were earlier 
incorporated into alarm-clock, tape recorder or Walkman, or the digital 
displays of quartz watches were implanted into pen tops, cigarette lighters 
and all manner of other objects. In the realm of videoscopic display, 
however, commutation is different. 'Geographically close' television and 
'geometrically close' video are parasitic upon clear perception of the here 
and now: they interpenetrate and interchange places teletopologically, 
thanks to sudden 'live' revelation of the 'space-speed' at present supplanting 
the space-time of our ordinary activities. Merging with para-optical illumi-
nation, the upper speed limit of live transmission defines itself as indirect 
lighting at the speed of the video signal. 
It is often claimed in the West that miniaturization, like giant screens, 
is a Japanese gadget. But this is not true. What is happening in image 
physics is also happening in astrophysics, where the Hubble space tele-
scope is soon to come into operation with adaptive optics, that is, with image 
correction that depends on the computer's capacity and not just on the 
properties of the lens. 
Screen and picture size therefore have nothing to do with it; the 
dimensions of the object are no longer what counts. For now the cathode 
screen displays spatial distance that changes before our eyes into luminous 
energy, into illumination power. 
As a new kind of distance - the 'light (zero sign) of the new physics' -
suddenly takes the place of the customary distances of time (positive sign) 
and space (negative sign), every surface of whatever size has an objective 
existence only in and through the interface of an observation which, instead 
of just being the visible result of direct solar or electric lighting, is due to 
indirect lighting by the radio-electrical field of a Hertzian system or an 
optical fibre cable. 
What we see for the maximal surface of the globe subjected to constant 
scrutiny by military, meteorological and other satellites is also true for the 
minimal surfaces of objects and places subjected to the intense lighting of 
videoscopy. In fact, a mysterious 'tele-bridge' is established between an 
ever-growing number of surfaces, from the largest to the most minute, in 
a kind of sound-and-image feedback which triggers for us observers a 

Virilio - Indirect Light 61 
(video-geographical or video-geometrical) 'tele-presence' or 'tele-reality' 
essentially expressed by the concept of real time. 
What Einstein's 'point of view theory' taught us in 1905 about the 
relativity of extension and duration - that is, the inseparable face-to-face 
meeting of observer and observed surfaces, a relativist interface without 
which extension has no objective dimension - is visibly confirmed by 
instantaneous video feedback in which the electro-optical environment 
wins out over the classical 'ecological' environment. A kind of 'electronic 
meteorology' thereby asserts itself without which the meteorology of the 
earth's atmosphere would soon become incomprehensible. At a time when 
the major US television channels ABC, CBS and NBC are faring worse and 
worse, Ted Turner's live news channel, CNN, is planning a 'News Hound' 
service for a million subscribers with video equipment. That's a million 
opportunities for us,' Earl Casey, the man in charge of this future interactive 
system, said recently, 'a million witnesses able to provide us with pictures; all 
we'll have to do is select.' 
In the military sphere, eminently strategic research into stealth air-
craft points in the same direction. While a complex environment of electro-
magnetic detection is established at global level, active research is being 
pursued into ways of escaping 'radio-electrical sight' through special new 
materials such as the PBZ super-polymer, which is said to be capable of 
avoiding detection by radar waves. At the same time, however, aeronautical 
producers are asked to embed in the same material optical fibres capable of 
sounding, or permanently illuminating, the dense cells and organs driving 
the combat aircraft. 
For the philosopher Schopenhauer, the world was its representation. 
For the 'video-maker' or electronics expert, we may say, matter is becoming 
its presentation - direct and external 'presentation' and, at the same time, 
internal and indirect presentation, the object or instrument becoming not 
only present to the naked eye but remotely present or 'tele-present*. 
This physical non-separability of outside and inside, near and distant, 
is also exemplified by the road-haulage industry and by the development of 
'star' publicity. Thus the American Geostar company, and soon its European 
counterpart Locstar, are due in the near future to place the first piece of 
their 'Radio Determination Satellite Service' in orbit. Thanks to this sur-
veillance system, the headquarters of a haulage company will know at any 
moment the geographical position of each of its vehicles, a geo-stationary 
navigation satellite enabling it to monitor and control movements. We can 
see why the magazine Match has just had its logo drawn in the Chott Djerid 
(dear to Bill Viola) of central Tunisia, suddenly turning the desert into a 
kind of screen, as all the continental and oceanic surfaces have become for 
the gaze of orbiting satellites. 
But this ceaseless rapprochement of above and below would not be 
complete if, after the nadir, we left out the zenith - that is, the minor miracle 
of high-orbit billposting which is Coca-Cola's plan to leave its indelible 
mark on our nightly firmament.4 

62 Theory, Culture & Society 
Once again we notice the decline of the sites of representation and 
projection. Theatre, stage or screen become simply the sky and the ground, 
all the surfaces from the smallest to the largest that are exposed, nay, 
overexposed, to the inquisitive gaze of automatic instant-relay cameras -
surfaces or, more exactly, 'interfaces' which have objective existence only 
as a result of videoscopic examination by live-relay recording material. This 
'real-time9 tele-reality is supplanting the reality of the real-space presence of 
objects and places, now overridden by electro-magnetic paths. 
For Einstein, what distinguished a correct theory from a wrong theory was 
only the length of time for which it remained valid: a few years or decades 
for the former, a few moments or days for the latter. Is it not perhaps the 
same with the duration of images, with the difference between the 'real-time' 
and the 'delayed-time' image? 
In the end, the whole problem of 'tele-reality' (or 'tele-presence', if 
that seems preferable) hinges on this same question of the validity of a short 
duration; the real value of the object or subject instantaneously present at a 
distance entirely depends upon the passage, that is, the speed, of its image, 
the speed of light of contemporary electro-optics. It is the same with 'remote' 
or 'tele' action, thanks to the capacity for instantaneous interaction in 
telemetry. The opto-activity of the online image is similar to the radio-
activity of a device that handles objects at a distance (remote-controlled 
vehicles, transfer machines, various kinds of instrument). 
This advent of the real 'passage' to the detriment of the real object and 
subject — a phenomenon so indicative of the primacy of image over thing 
resulting from the new supremacy of real time over real space - clearly 
reveals the wave character of reality. For the sudden commutation of 
perceptible appearances is ultimately only the herald of a general derealiza-
tion resulting from the new illumination of perceptible reality — a reality not 
just 'apparent' as before, but 'transparent' or, to be even more precise, trans-
apparent. 
There is a fusion/confusion of transmitted appearances and immediate 
appearances, with indirect lighting capable of soon supplanting direct 
lighting — not only, of course, artificial electric lighting but above all natural 
lighting, with the revolutionary changes in perception that this implies. The 
advent of passage as instantaneous and ubiquitous is thus the advent of time 
light, the intensive time of electro-optics which is supplanting for ever 
traditional passive optics. 
We can bet, though, that the status of reality will not long resist this 
sudden illumination of places, happenings and events. For while improve-
ments in the spatial definition of optical camera lenses have made it easier 
to see contrasts and increased the luminosity of the habitual image, recent 
improvements in the temporal definition of filming and electronic trans-
mission procedures have increased the clarity and resolution of videoscopic 
images. Thus, audiovisual speed primarily helps us to see and to hear, or, in 

Virilio - Indirect Light 63 
other words, to move forward in the light of real time, as automobile speed 
helped us to move forward in the real space of an area of land. 
The greater 'transparency' of high-speed communications (TGV, 
supersonic aircraft, etc.) is thus compounded by the sudden (electro-optical 
and acoustic) trans-appearance of the means of information and telecom-
munication. High fidelity and high image definition serve greatly to modify 
the nature of the (acoustic or visual) relief, which in the end comes down to 
the greater or lesser reality of the things perceived, a spatio-temporal relief 
conditioning our apprehension of the world and of present time. Since the 
eye interprets any change in luminous intensity as a change in form, the 
light (direct or indirect, natural or artificial) produces not only the colour of 
objects and places but also their relief. Hence the importance of research 
into high definition of the image, definition at once spatial and temporal of a 
video signal capable of achieving for visual space what high fidelity of the 
radio signal has already done for the stereophony of sound volumes: a 
veritable stereo-optics integrated into the domestic environment. 
Thus, just as star-filming techniques continually improve the image 
resolution of remote detection satellites, so the constant improvement of TV 
picture definition increases not the electrical transparency of the local 
environment (as at the beginning of the century, with the electrification of 
town and country), but the electro-optical trans-appearance of the global 
environment. This means the emergence of a new kind of 'relief or audio-
visual volume applying to the totality of transmitted appearances, a 'stereo-
videoscopy' whose significance at macroscopic level is similar to that of the 
sudden breakthrough of electron microscopy in disclosing the infinitely 
small. In order to see, one is no longer content to dispel the shadows of 
surrounding darkness; the commutation of appearances can also remove the 
obstacle of extension, the opacity of great distance, thanks to ruthlessly 
penetrative videoscopic equipment that is analogous to the most powerful of 
floodlights. As the electro-optical faux jour of indirect public lighting 
dawns, as the real is put on air as the figurative, a new artificial light now 
complements electric lighting in much the same way that electric lighting 
once filled in for daylight. 
At 1.32 p.m. local time, on 26 October 1987, a Titan-34D rocket 
launched a KH11 satellite from Vandenberg air base in California. From its 
polar orbit covering the whole planet, this satellite is able, at any moment of 
its ceaseless electronic scanning, to zoom in, spin round and transmit 
pictures in the form of electronic impulses. The average life of this military 
light is 36 months. 
The invention of cinema can no more be separated from the invention of 
searchlights than it can from that of snapshot photography. Did not Thomas 
Edison, inventor of the incandescent lamp in 1879, work on the kinetograph 
a few years later? As to Louis Lumiere, at the Universal Exhibition of 1900 
the French Navy lent him its most powerful searchlight to project his films 
on a large screen, in the famous Gallery of Machines. And in 1948, shortly 

64 Theory, Culture & Society 
before his death, the pioneer of the cinema was still working to improve 
lighthouses for the Navy. 
Today, the projection of wide film on to planetarium domes is only 
possible with a 15 kW xenon lamp initially designed to illuminate NASA's 
rocket-launching sites. 
Finally, in 1969 when the astronauts returned from the Apollo XI 
lunar mission, the President of the USA ordered all the coastal cities to be 
lit up, as ordinary lampposts are lit up in the evening along marine 
boulevards. This was meant as a homage not only to the conquerors of the 
moon but also to the sudden power of public lighting to reveal man's 
presence to the farthest reaches of the atmosphere. 
If one thinks of the illumination of theatres and palace festivities in 
the age of Louis XIV or the introduction of electric street lighting at the end 
of the last century, it is clear that the history of public spectacle has been 
inseparable from the history of light — from fireworks through the diorama of 
Daguerre (a decorator at the Paris Opera and the Ambigu Comique) to the 
son et lumidre displays of recent times. The birth of the cinema was itself 
inseparable from the development of artificial light, the famous 'arc lamps' 
being necessary both for the shooting of films in studios and for their 
screening in public theatres. 
The other revealing aspect of this sudden extension of transparency 
has more to do with police requirements, for lighting makes the streets safer 
and so prolongs the time for commercial enrichment. Already in 1667, long 
before the days of video surveillance, Police Lieutenant La Reynie issued a 
famous ordinance that led to Paris's world reputation as the ville lumidre. 
Then came the electrification of town and country in the early 20th century, 
an undertaking rather like the present laying of cable to carry video along 
optical fibres throughout the big conglomerations. But now the shift con-
cerns the very nature of the light, which is no longer just artificial but 
indirect, differing from direct light as much as candlelight once did from the 
light of the stars. 
We should also mention here the light-intensification camera (or 
binoculars) currently used by the Army to see in the middle of the night 
over considerable distances. Often replacing infrared systems, this 'low-
light television' amplifies the surrounding light, however weak, by nearly a 
hundred thousand times. In a way it is similar to a particle accelerator. 
Consisting of a tube placed in a powerful and continuous electrical field, the 
film camera has successive levels of photon acceleration which increase 
accordingly the luminosity of the final image; the accelerated light particles 
strike a screen with a phosphorus film at the other end of the tube, causing 
each particle of the film to glow. Lately this kind of indirect lighting 
equipment has started to be used by the German and British police, 
especially for football stadium surveillance. 
In fact, where the real time of live television broadcasting prevails over 
the real space of a land actually crossed, the mere distinction between 
natural and artificial light is no longer enough; one has to add the difference 

Virilio - Indirect Light 65 
in kind between direct light, natural or artificial, and indirect light, for 
electro-optical lighting now replaces electrical lighting as the latter once 
did the rising of the day. 
And this is while we wait for the active optics of computer graphics to 
achieve its next feat: that is, the coupling of the passive optics of cameras 
with a computer capable of rectifying the transmitted image as only glass 
lenses used to do. Digital optics will then succeed analogue optics, as the 
latter once cleverly complemented the ocular optics of the human gaze. 
As the image is the most sophisticated form of information, it is logical 
to expect that advances in computing will also end in the deployment of this 
indirect light: digital light this time, capable of piercing reality's shadows 
and of most realistically conveying an unknown transparency, such as 
fractal geometry already makes possible, with digital zoom effects that are 
nothing other than computer-generated synthetic lighting. The passages and 
their 'trans-appearance' signal the innermost constituents of the form-
image, shape of that which has no shape, image of that which has no image 
(Lao-Tse) - a figure for the dynamic of emptiness, similar to the void of sub-
atomic physics for which Oriental thought long ago paved the way. 
But let us return to the city, the 'light-city' that has been home to all 
historical illuminations from the Fire of Rome through the pyrotechnics of 
the Age of Enlightenment to the laser displays of recent times. Since 
illumination is synonymous with the unveiling of a 'scene', with revelation 
of a transparency without which appearances would be nothing, only a 
narrow conception could still talk of light simply in terms of the lighting of 
places. For how can one fail to see, behind those dazzling electro-optical 
displays, that the public image is on the way to replacing public space, and 
that the political stage will not be able to do without indirect lighting, any 
more than it has been able to do without direct artificial lighting? With its 
origins in the city-theatre organized around the public spectacle of agora, 
forum or parvis, then in the cinecitta of Western modernity, the contempor-
ary 'telecittd? today establishes the commutation of perceptible appearances 
through the feats of satellites, Hertzian networks and optical fibre cables. In 
its respective time, each of these 'urban representations' has known how to 
use the spectacle of transparency, of public illumination, to develop its 
culture and collective imagination. 
An exceptional situation may serve to illustrate this point. In the spring of 
1989, between May and June, Beijing students decided to demonstrate for 
'democracy'. They gathered and gradually took over Tiananmen Square, not 
setting any time limit to their occupation — an old practice which goes back, 
not to the sit-ins of the 1960s (as some have suggested), but to the Greek 
City where the public space of the agora was the guarantee of the citizens' 
political unity against the threat of a tyrant. 
At the time of Gorbachev's arrival on 14 May, they numbered three 
hundred thousand, and three days later a million. Profiting from the fact that 
most of the international agencies had sent their cameras and reporters, and 

66 Theory, Culture & Society 
even such top editorial writers as Dan Rather, to cover the reconciliation of 
the two Communist giants, the Chinese students demanded live coverage of 
the Tiananmen events so that pictures of the country's most famous public 
square should be broadcast not only to the world but, above all, to Shanghai, 
Canton and everywhere else in China. 
This demand was rejected by the authorities, and the eventual 
introduction of martial law was accompanied by a massacre of the popu-
lation of Beijing by the tanks of the People's Liberation Army. What had 
already happened in Czechoslovakia after the Prague Spring, or in Poland 
with the decree establishing an 'internal state of war', was now being 
reproduced in Asia. The people's army was crushing the people. 
But let us return to the 'illumination' of these events by the world's 
press agencies. Aware that the presence of fifteen hundred journalists in 
Beijing was of extreme political importance, the students repeatedly showed 
signs of collusion with their far-off TV 'viewers' by writing banners in 
French or English, by deploying exotic symbols such as the 'statue of 
liberty' beneath the portrait of Mao Tse-tung, or by making frequent 
references to the French Revolution. Formerly, the surface of the agora or 
the parade ground of a garrison town corresponded to the 'surface area' of 
the men under arms: citizen-soldiers in Ancient democracy or enlisted 
troops of fortified towns. 'March separately, strike together': this infantry 
maxim also fitted the gathering of citizens on the public square; the adjoin-
ing streets enabled them to fly to where the public power was identified with 
the crowd united in the face of external aggression or civil war. 
Curiously enough, with the public image of Tiananmen Square broad-
cast all over the world, we saw both an infinite extension of that surface area 
(thanks to the real-time interface of the television screen) and a miniaturiz-
ation of it in the shape of a 51 cm cathode screen that did not seriously 
convey any depth of field. Hence the importance of the fact that in Hong 
Kong during that crucial period, not only private television but the giant 
screen in the city stadium was used to unite people collectively with what 
was taking place at the heart of the Chinese capital. 
This was a kind of 'teletopia' in which real-time continuity made up 
for the absence of real-space contiguity. For a time, the stadium and giant 
screen in Hong Kong became inseparable from Tiananmen Square, as the 
square already was from millions of television viewers around the world. 
However much the forbidden city may ban it, things at one end of the earth 
are made visible, accessible, at the other end, thanks to the energy of a 
living light, at once electro-optical and acoustic, whose effects on society 
will be incomparably more important than those of electrification were more 
than half a century ago. 
Real time, delayed time, two times, two 'movements'. On 15 May 1989, 
the students gathered on Tiananmen Square demanded live news coverage -
a fruitless effort on their part. 
After the tragic events of 7 June in Beijing, Chinese television con-
stantly broadcast recorded material, shot by automatic police surveillance 

Virilio — Indirect Light 67 
cameras, of certain excesses against isolated vehicles and soldiers - always 
without showing the peaceful occupation of the square or the massacre of its 
occupants by the People's Republic of China. The choice of image or, to be 
more precise, the time of the image chosen determined China's current 
political reality - as if, in the end, the country's vast expanse and the huge 
numbers living in it counted for less than the instant in time chosen to speak 
of it, to show what was really happening there; as if the real time and real 
space of the Tiananmen events disturbed the Chinese leaders so much that 
they had to temper its effects through a replay. 
It is a strange politics when public images shown with calculated 
delay are supposed to staunch the disastrous consequences, as the ramparts 
of the public space and the laws of the city used to block the threat of 
subversion or aggression. Not only is the day and hour of concrete action 
chosen as before; now there is a decision to obscure the immediate event 
temporally and temporarily, while the actors, the students on Tiananmen 
Square, are subjected to physical repression. 
The events may well be described as a 'siege', a new kind of 'state of 
siege': not so much an army encirclement of city-space as a temporal siege, a 
siege of the real time of public information. The key element is no longer the 
familiar censorship preventing disclosure of things that the state wishes to 
keep secret; it is the replaying of recorded material, the retarded ignition of 
the living light of events. 
This 'war over real time' finally shows how right Louis-Ferdinand 
Celine was at the end of his life, when he said in disillusion: 'For the 
moment only the facts count, and not even they for very long.' 
That moment has now passed, in China as in the wider world: what is 
done can be undone by means of interactive telecommunications; a 'tele-
topian' reality has the upper hand over the topical reality of the event. On 9 
June 1989, Chinese television solemnly announced that the Army would fire 
without warning upon anyone carrying a camera or other photographic 
device. 
The mutation currently under way is confirmed by another, final aspect: 
namely the crisis of the household car or, more precisely, its symbolic 
decline to the advantage of other objects, more eccentric vehicles. The car 
will be the last of your worries' — a slogan placed above the Ford stand at the 
Paris motor show in 1988 — was a wonderful illustration of this process. For 
it is a decline which, as always, adorns itself with a maximum of useless 
accessories, rather as the event itself changed its name to the 'World Motor 
Show'. 
In fact, what is really global today is live television; a particular car, 
whether for sport or transport, is never more than a local object. This 
explains the recent success of the all-weather vehicle, the famous 4 x 4 
which tries to escape the rut of the beaten track. It is an eccentric trial 
indeed — an attempt to leave the way, the motorway, at any cost. 
As we have seen, the image is now the only high-performance vehicle, 

68 Theory, Culture & Society 
the real-time image which is supplanting the space where the car still moves 
from one place to another. In the end, the crisis of the household car is 
rather like the crisis of the neighbourhood cinema. How many of those dark 
halls found themselves turned into garages or service-stations, before these 
in turn became supermarkets or, more recently still, recording studios or 
newspaper headquarters! 
As Fellini put it a short time ago: 'I no longer travel, I only have fits of 
moving around.' For as fever or energy occupies and possesses us, we no 
longer dwell in the motive energy of any 'means of transport' - hence the 
major risk posed by the various 'speed' drugs. 
The cinema, Alfred Hitchcock used to say, is armchairs with people 
inside. Even if the saloon-car bucket seats are for the moment less empty 
than the cinema armchairs, we should not have any illusions. How much 
longer will we accept the tedium of the motorway journey? 
In Japan television has already invaded taxis and high-rise lifts. Just 
as dogs are banned from garden squares, cars no longer enter pedestrian 
zones in some central areas; they go into exile on Paris's ring boulevard 
while awaiting completion of the super-ring boulevard, or the ultra-rapid 
underground laser system in which cars will think they are the Metro. 
How to make a journey without actually moving from one place to 
another? How to vibrate in unison? These questions should soon lead to 
different means of transport and transmission, quite unrelated to the dom-
estic contraption that still serves us today. 
Let us look more closely. We no longer turn a switch on our radio or 
television set; we touch a control or press a key on our remote-control pad. 
Even our quartz watches have a digital display instead of hands that move 
around. 
This will replace that', wrote old Victor Hugo referring to book and 
cathedral. Will it not be the same tomorrow with screen and limousine? 
Until when will we really keep moving from place to place? 
Was it not again the Japanese who recently invented the bo-do-kahn, a 
vibrating pillow that allows you to listen rhythmically to a Walkman? Even 
the rising sun no longer casts its moving rays upon Japanese apartments 
bathed in sunlight by optical fibre. 
Moreover, the people in charge tell us that in the Osaka conurbation, 
with a population of twenty million, cable networks are already being 
implanted beneath the motorways so that images can travel through the 
cars' subsoil. Listen to the Formula One world champion Alain Prost: 'Real 
speed is to approach obstacles with the impression that you are moving in a 
slow-motion film.' And the former rally-driver Bernard Darniche stated soon 
after retiring from competition: 'For me, the ideal car is a mobile video-
control.' 
Why try to hide it? The only way of saving the private car is to fit it 
with a temporal video-image compressor: a turbo-compressor of the real-time 
image. 
The talking car that warns drivers of engine trouble is a mistake, once 

Virilio - Indirect Light 69 
road simulators for motoring schools are on sale for a hundred thousand 
francs (the price of a new vehicle). What is needed is a car that actually sees 
other vehicles over the horizon, so that car speed and audiovisual speed are 
rendered compatible. Maybe the Prometheus project that unites twelve 
European companies within the framework of Eureka is actually working 
on such an idea. After all, the 'travel pilot' devised by the Blaupunkt 
corporation is already just an obsolete guidance system, given that elec-
tronic chips of less than one micron will soon each contain the equivalent of 
the whole US road network. 
At a time when a single videodisc can depict all the different journeys 
in a town — Aspen, Colorado, as it happens — how can there not be attempts 
to give motoring a new 'perspective' in which the temporal depth of the 
electronic image prevails over the spatial depth of the motorway network? 
Recent advertising for the Thomson washing-machine described this 
household object as a 'washing-computer'. So how can one fail to grasp that 
tomorrow's transport machine will first of all be a 'driving-computer' in 
which the audiovisual feats of the electronic dashboard will prevail over the 
optical qualities of the field beyond the windscreen? 
Just as parachute exercises are moving more and more in the direction 
of 'relative flight', so will car travel develop from a means of absolute 
physical transport to a means of 'relative transport' associated with instan-
taneous transmission, the kinematic energy of the video-computer image 
advantageously replacing the kinetic energy of engine capacity. 
As higher speeds progressively disentitle all others, the TGV and the 
ultrasonic aeroplane will not change anything. The time-reducing machine 
is no longer the motor-car but audiovisual and real-time technologies. 
A few years ago, the Cartier Foundation for Contemporary Art exhib-
ited a superb collection of Ferraris, a veritable symposium of coup6s, 
saloons and convertibles. But this luxury display in the Jouy-en-Josas park 
merely illustrated the evolution of 'aerodynamics', a science as antiquated 
in the age of computer-assisted design and driving as the aesthetics of old 
antique furniture has long since been. 
Translated by Patrick Camiller 
Notes 
This article is extracted from Polart Inertia, due to be published in October 1999 by 
Sage Publications. 
1. Symbolically enough, this electronic surveillance system is operated from the 
basements of the Paris City Hall. 
2. See Jules Romain, La Vision extra-r&inienne et le sens paroptique, Paris: 
Gallimard, 1964. 
3. See Gilles Cohen-Tannoudji and Michel Spiro, La Matidre-espace-temps, Paris: 
Fayard, 1986. 

70 
Theory, Culture & Society 
4. A harbinger of such eccentricity appeared in the 1930s with the sudden surge of 
aerial advertising. 'Skywriting' was then quite a common practice. 
5. On 19 October 1987, the computerized Wall Street crash gave us a preview of 
the negative effects of that instantaneous link-up of financial markets which is 
commonly known as the Big Bang. 
6. See in this connection the plan for 'decentralization of the capital of Europe' 
which I submitted to the £lys6e Palace on 14 July 1988. 

Virilio and Architecture 
Neil Leach 
A
GROWING NUMBER OF philosophers and cultural theorists of the 
20th century have turned their attention to aesthetic questions, and 
to architectural issues in particular. It is as though there has been an 
aesthetic turn which parallels and echoes the earlier literary turn. Among 
these theorists, Paul Virilio stands out as the one who has engaged most 
comprehensively with the world of architecture. An artist by background 
and a self-styled urbanist, he has consistently colonized the space of 
architecture as a platform from which to develop his cultural theory. 
Virilio's interest in architecture even led to his involvement in an 
architectural practice. In 1963 Virilio formed the 'Architecture Principe' 
group with Claude Parent. The two remained partners until they fell out over 
differences of opinion on the events of May 1968, in which Virilio took an 
active part. In the reforms following those events, Virilio became involved 
with teaching, and in 1972 was appointed co-director (alongside Anatol 
Kopp) of the ficole Sp6ciale d'Architecture in Paris. 
Virilio continues to explore architectural ideas, but the focus of his 
research has now shifted. His research concerns may be divided into two 
distinct phases. Virilio's early interests lay in questions of space, and his 
more recent interests relate to the problem of time. It is a shift which he 
himself describes as being from 'typology' to 'dromology'. With this shift 
Virilio has gone on to pursue more abstract theoretical enquiries, and to 
interrogate the way in which we perceive the environment around us. Yet, 
while this more recent work resists a concrete engagement with architec-
tural form, it always circles around the question of space and spatiality, and 
remains highly relevant to architecture. This article will attempt to offer an 
overview of Virilio's engagement with the world of architecture, acknowl-
edging the positive contribution that he has made to that realm, but also 
exposing the negative aspects of his work. 
One of the problems in assessing Virilio's work is that he often comes 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 71-^84 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;71^84;009959] 

72 Theory, Culture & Society 
across as a somewhat inconsistent thinker. It is difficult to construct any 
unified position out of Virilio's thought and, by extension, equally difficult 
to assess its contribution. Indeed, one of the perverse questions that seems 
to arise from the work of Virilio, no less that that of Fredric Jameson and 
Jean Baudrillard, is that it always appears to be double-edged. Even when 
he appears as an outspoken critic around certain issues, he displays a 
marked fascination with those issues, which seems to betray an underlying 
interest in precisely what he is criticizing. His criticism always threatens to 
falter, and to fold into some form of acquiescent support. 
One way to explain this might be to surmise that he has been seduced 
by his prey, as Baudrillard has suggested is typical of theorists in general 
through the analogy of Sophie Calle and her Suite Ve'nitienne (1988). 
Theorists are prone to become trapped by that which they are themselves 
attempting to stalk. Alternatively one might recognize that every intellectual 
position is defined by what it is not, and that the positive bears the imprint of 
the negative. A critical outlook will therefore often reveal the trace of its 
own repressed other. With Virilio, it is almost as though there is something 
he recognizes within himself which he wishes to suppress, and which he 
therefore projects on to some external object in order to criticize it. At 
certain strategic moments, then, it is profitable to read Virilio against Virilio 
as a theoristybr rather than against what he is critiquing. This, at any rate, is 
the strategy adopted here. But it is clear that, however the double-edged 
nature of Virilio's position might be explained, the inconsistencies in his 
thought ensure that any attempt to offer an overview of his work must be 
compromised, and can only constitute a provisional undertaking. 
Phase One: Virilio and Typology 
The first phase of Virilio's research - his interest in typology - was centred 
around two principal projects, his archaeological work on wartime bunkers 
on the Atlantic coast, which was published in Bunker Archeology (1975) and 
his theoretical work on the function of the 'oblique', which was published 
mainly in the journal Architecture Principe (Virilio and Parent, 1996), which 
he had co-founded with Parent. Virilio was also directly involved in the 
design process, and co-designed a building with Parent, the church of 
Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay in Nevers, which, with its bunker-like forms 
and tilted floors, to some extent fuses these two interests (Virilio, 1996). 
Bunker Archeology reads as a very personal exploration of the physical 
remains of the German Atlantic fortifications abandoned after the Second 
World War. Virilio had been brought up during the war. Life could not have 
been easy for a young boy in occupied France, especially one whose 
surname betrayed an obvious connection with 'fascist' Italy. If the war left 
a deep impression on Virilio, such that war and the weaponry of war echo 
throughout his work like some sort of constant refrain, the physical traces of 
war in the form of these all too concrete remains constitute an architectural 
version of this obsession. In Bunker Archeology Virilio presents an archaeo-
logical survey of these forms. Alongside his own exquisite photographs of 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 73 
these bunkers, he includes drawings, documents and his own written 
reflections. It is the photographs, however, that catch one's attention. 
These are hauntingly sublime images of the now silent relics of war, set 
against the natural beauty of the Atlantic coast. And it is clear that their 
sublime beauty has captivated Virilio. He quotes Rainer Maria Rilke: The 
beautiful is just the first degree of the terrible' (Virilio, 1975:139). It is here 
that we can begin to recognize an obsession with the sublime taking root, an 
obsession which, we shall see, will emerge as the Achilles' heel of Virilio's 
thought. 
In Bunker Archeology there is a curious echo of Le Corbusier. In 
Virilio's textured images of these massive concrete forms, with their crude 
imprints from the wooden shuttering, one senses a fascination that parallels 
Le Corbusier's passion for baton brut, the conscious use of these imprints, 
that became a form of architectural signature. And if the great grain 
elevators of the American Midwest inspired Le Corbusier in his architec-
tural design, so these pure, functional forms with their simple aesthetic, 
disappearing into the dunes, seemed to have fired the imagination of Virilio. 
Certainly, one can see the influence of these forms in the church at Nevers. 
Through the 'theory of the oblique', meanwhile, Virilio explored the 
possibility of a non-orthogonal architecture. In this he rejected the two 
fundamental principles of Euclidean space, the horizontal and the vertical, 
and argued for a third alternative, the 'oblique'. His approach was based on 
Gestalt theory and the phenomenology of perception of Maurice Merleau-
Ponty. Space was to be experienced not through the perception of the eyes, 
but through the movement of the body exploring new modes of habitation 
suggested by the possibilities of the oblique. In effect Virilio harnessed the 
work of Merleau-Ponty for a new dynamic model of dwelling. Whereas in 
traditional building there had been a split between dynamic zones of 
circulation and static areas of dwelling, Virilio sought to fuse the two to 
create circulation as a form of dwelling. This was underpinned by a concern 
to develop forms which would promote a sense of disequilibrium and 
instability. As he explains: 
The objective of our research was to challenge outright the anthropometric 
precepts of the classical era - the idea that the body is an essentially static 
entity with an essentially static proprioception - in order to bring the human 
habitat into a dynamic age of the body in movement. In our work, the 
traditional stability (habitable stasis) of both the rural horizontal order and 
the urban vertical order gave way to the Metastability of the human body in 
motion, in tune with the rhythms of life. (Virilio, 1996: 13) 
This challenging of a static anthropometric approach to architecture 
reflected a broader questioning of the social order at a cultural level. Virilio 
recognized that there had been a change in humanity, 'a metamorphosis of 
consciousness', and the function of the oblique was to respond to the 'new 
plane of human consciousness'. In this there are echoes of the Situationist 

74 Theory, Culture & Society 
position, which looked for an architecture to fire the imagination and 
allowed for a richer ontological experience that broke free of the reified 
relationships of the society of the spectacle. Indeed, the forms of Virilio and 
Parent do not differ widely from those of Situationist-inspired architects. 
Prominent among these was the Dutch architect, Constant, whose New 
Babylon projects, although not fully embraced by the movement, remained 
the most comprehensive attempt to translate the Situationists' ideals into 
architectural forms (Andreotti and Costa, 1996). In these projects Constant 
pursued themes such as 'disorientation' and 'dynamic space'. Anxious to 
avoid the limitations of the static spaces of utilitarian society, he promoted 
the concept of the 'dynamic labyrinth', one that accepted that the liberation 
of behaviour requires a labyrinthine space, but one which allowed that 
space to be continually subject to modification, according to the 'ludic' 
imagination. While Virilio's work on the oblique allowed little scope for 
modification, he clearly shared a common concern with Constant for the 
principle of 'dynamic space'. 
The theory of the oblique has also been considered influential in the 
origins of the architectural movement that has been termed 'deconstruction' 
or 'deconstructivism'. In challenging the authority of ideas such as stability 
and vertical equilibrium, and by introducing the unstable and the oblique, 
Virilio's work resonates with that of later architects, such as Bernard 
Tschumi, who likewise challenged the hegemony of concepts such as 
rectilinearity, order, symmetry and compositional hierarchy, some of the 
basic tenets of traditional architectural aesthetics. Tschumi has been con-
cerned to establish a new architecture for a new age. It is, perhaps, in the 
displaced, fragmented, angular forms of Tschumi's pavilions at the Pare de 
la Villette in Paris, and in the tilted ground plane of his video pavilion in 
Groningen, Holland, that we find the logical inheritance of Virilio's ideas. 
Phase Two: Virilio and Dromology 
With time, however, Virilio himself began to realize the limitations of his 
theory. Oblique forms were difficult to build and impractical to use. More-
over, Virilio's design collaboration with Parent had come to an end. 
Increasingly Virilio became preoccupied with more abstract questions of 
time. His interests began to shift from spatial considerations to spatio-
temporal ones. Out of a theory of movement through architecture there 
began to emerge a theory of architecture in an age of movement. The focus of 
his research changed from typology to 'dromology', which he defines as 'the 
study and analysis of the impact of increasing speed of transport and 
communications on the development of land-use' (Virilio, 1996: 13). 
Virilio's interest in dromology can be traced through a number of 
publications, of which Speed and Politics offers the most direct engagement 
with the subject (1986). Here, Virilio analyses the effect of speed within the 
contemporary city, which is read as a machine whose streets act as channels 
for rapid communications. Through these veins of the city course the 
'dromomaniacs', the mobile revolutionaries of the modern age. These 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 
75 
dromomaniacs - from sans culottes to brown-shirts - reveal how speed is the 
essence of political change. Beyond this they offer a model for change on an 
international scale through the medium of war. Modern warfare, Virilio 
notes, with its emphasis on mobility and surprise, depends on speed. Not 
only this, but speed becomes an issue of propaganda: 'Speed is the hope of 
the West, it is speed that supports the armies' morale' (Virilio, 1986: 55). 
Speed and Politics amounts to a panegyric of speed and the possibilities 
which it affords, written with a certain Futuristic fervour. 
Similar themes underpin Virilio's more recent publications, but it is in 
Lost Dimension that Virilio addresses these questions within a more obvi-
ously architectural framework (1991). Here Virilio offers a number of takes 
on a similar theme, the consequences of the collapse of the significance of 
spatial distance within an era of considerable technological advances. 
Again speed becomes the key theme, whether it is the speed of instan-
taneous information transfer or the speed of ballistic missile capabilities. 
Virilio explores the consequences of this in the context of domestic, urban, 
national and international scenarios. 
From an architectural perspective, one of the key ideas to emerge out 
of this later work has been that of the erosion of the hegemony of the 
physical, or, as Virilio calls it, the 'exhaustion' of the physical. Virilio 
questions whether or not we now exist in a condition of 'post-architecture', 
whereby the way in which we engage with traditional constraints imposed by 
architectural elements such as walls has shifted as a result of advances in 
technology. Emblematic of this has been the change in how the city is 
entered. It is no longer the port or the railway station, but the airport that is 
the chief entry to the city. With that the importance of city gates as the 
symbolic entrance to the city has been replaced by invisible forms of control 
embodied in electronic surveillance systems. Virilio's message is clear 
enough. Physical constraints, such as city walls, have been superseded by 
other, more sophisticated methods of control. This has a marked impact 
upon the urban. Not only has the development of new technologies reduced 
the need for physical proximity and therefore precipitated a process of de-
urbanization, but these technologies have challenged the very necessity of 
physical presence. Once personal interaction can be displaced into the 
realm of the virtual, all that is associated with the world of the physical loses 
its hegemony. This is the point at which the urban begins to wane, and the 
post-urban takes over. 
Moreover, advances in informational systems and transportational 
networks have had a significant impact on traditional modes of perception. 
And it is by engaging with these shifts that Virilio, who is above all a 
theorist of speed and time, has made so many penetrating observations. For 
it is by observing how the acceleration of various operations and, in 
particular, the development of systems of instantaneous information trans-
fer, have come to distort our conception of time, that Virilio highlights the 
influence of these developments on our perceptions of place. In an age when 
the window of the cathode ray tube comes to displace the actual window of 

76 Theory, Culture & Society 
the physical enclosure as the site of immediate and instantaneous infor-
mation transfer, we find ourselves in a location without a location: 
Thanks to satellites, the cathode-ray window brings to each viewer the light 
of another day and the presence of the antipodal place. If space is that which 
keeps everything from occupying the same place, this abrupt confinement 
brings everything precisely to that 'place', that location that has no location. 
The exhaustion of physical, or natural relief and of temporal distances 
telescopes all localization and all position. As with live televised events, the 
places have become interchangeable at will. (Virilio, 1997: 385) 
This 'instantaneity of ubiquity' further challenges the hegemony of physical 
space. We must now understand the world not in terms of spatial dimen-
sions, but in terms of spatio/temporal dimensions: 'Speed distance obliter-
ates the notion of physical dimension' (Virilio, 1997: 385) It is no longer a 
question of how far away a place is. Now it is simply a question of how long it 
takes to reach it. With the advent of supersonic transportation, for example, 
it can take less time to cross the Atlantic by plane than to traverse a single 
European city by foot. Physical distance gives way to temporal distance as 
'the loss of material space leads to the government of nothing but time' 
(Virilio, 1997: 385). 
Evaluating Virilio 
What, then, is the significance of Virilio's contribution to a debate about 
architecture? The significance of his early work is easy enough to appraise. 
In particular, the stylistic indebtedness of later architects to his work shows 
the not inconsiderable influence of the 'theory of the oblique' on shifts in 
architectural expression. Likewise, his Bunker Archeology has left its legacy 
in a more recent publication by Diller and Scofidio (1994) on links between 
tourism and war on the French Atlantic coast. But it is Virilio's later work, 
which arguably has the greatest potential impact. 
In particular, Virilio points towards a way of theorizing virtual reality. 
He recognizes that the key to understanding virtual reality is not to grasp the 
purely instrumental opportunities afforded by new technologies, but to 
apprehend the ways in which these affect our patterns of consciousness. If 
technology will never actually replace consciousness, it will at least influ-
ence it in ways that are only now becoming apparent. It is as though the 
concept of the 'tele-' - the 'far' - and all that is associated with the previous, 
modernist paradigm have to be radically rethought. By adapting Merleau-
Ponty's theory of perception, Virilio argues for a tele-perception as a new 
mode of operation. A theory of cyberspace, such as begins to emerge from 
Virilio's work, draws upon the notion of telekinesis, of the capacity of the 
body to operate in any corner of the universe through some form of 
prosthetic interactive device. The principle of traditional prosthetics, such 
as the walking stick or the artificial limb, as a mechanism for extending the 
motility of the body, is itself expanded to include techno-prosthetics, such 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 77 
as the virtual reality glove, which enlarge the body's sphere of operations 
indefinitely. As such the paraplegic confined to the wheelchair paradoxi-
cally offers a model of how the limitations of the body can be overcome, and 
how, in a virtual world, human beings may soon be able to access the far 
corners of the universe. Distance becomes no object. The body can operate 
as easily using this mechanism on the next planet, as it can in the next room. 
Yet while distance is obviated, a new depth is created. Operating 
through technology introduces a new anonymity already witnessed in 
telephone conversations. Persons communicating from adjacent VDU con-
soles correspond as though they are miles apart. Telecommunications, in 
dissolving the 'here' and 'now', serve both to break down distance, physical 
distance, and to create psychological 'distance'. While Virilio seems to 
prophesy the Internet with his observations that the screen has become the 
city square, 'the crossroads of all mass media', he equally highlights a new 
manner of communication, where technology introduces both a distance and 
an anonymity (Virilio, 1997: 389). It is in the new telephone dating systems 
and the frankness and openness that they engender, that the decisiveness of 
Virilio's comments becomes apparent. 
Virilio's work can be understood as an enquiry over the primacy of 
place in formulating ways of grounding the self. As such it offers a direct 
riposte to the work of Heidegger, whose concept of 'dwelling' has become 
something of a dominant paradigm within recent architectural theory amid 
calls for a regionalist architecture and celebration of the concept of genius 
loci. This concept has been pursued further by those who have developed 
Heidegger's thought — architectural theorists such as Christian Norberg-
Schulz (1980) and philosophers such as Gianni Vattimo (1995: 74-7). It is 
against Heidegger's static model of 'dwelling' that the potential of a more 
dynamic model of existence becomes apparent. Even prior to the technolo-
gical advances that Virilio considers so significant, one might perhaps 
challenge Heidegger's assumption on other accounts, and question whether 
such a place-specific mechanism for grounding the self could ever have been 
applied universally. One only has to consider nomadic tribes or, indeed, 
ethnic or religious groups such as gypsies and Jews, who traditionally -
whether voluntary or otherwise — have led the life of the 'wanderer' to 
understand that, even within traditional societies, Heidegger's concept of 
'dwelling' might have had certain shortcomings. But the important point, as 
Virilio realizes, is that more recent developments in material circumstances 
have influenced patterns of consciousness, so that even if Heidegger's 
outlook may once have been valid, its application can be seen as corre-
spondingly less relevant today. Indeed, one might even argue that to a large 
extent the paradigm of the dynamic 'wanderer' has replaced that of the static 
'dweller'. 
In an age in which human beings are constantly mobile, the import-
ance of place — place of origin, place of birth, etc. — as a mechanism for 
grounding the self is diminished. Even the home has been redefined as a 
'property' exchangeable within the marketplace. In a world dominated, in 

78 Theory, Culture & Society 
Marc Augers terms, by 'non-places', individuals now begin to constitute 
their identity through more transitory phenomena, such as jobs and posses-
sions (Auge\ 1995). These possessions may include even technological 
objects, such as cars and computers. All this has undermined the role of 
place as a mechanism for constituting one's identity. This is further 
exacerbated by the reduction in status of the physical and the increased 
reliance upon the virtual within our contemporary world. In short, the whole 
thesis of the link between building, dwelling and thinking needs to be 
revised. This is where Virilio has much to offer. Virilio as a theorist of non-
presence and omnipresence, as a theorist of the erosion of physical space 
and the increasing importance of virtual space, begins to suggest a model of 
dwelling as virtual dwelling, which feeds off the technological and absorbs it 
productively, and identifies new imaginative possibilities emerging from 
this situation. Furthermore, by engaging, seemingly positively, with tech-
nology, Virilio transcends the limitations of Heidegger's thought, and opens 
up the possibility of thinking of new, less place-specific, ways of grounding 
the self. 
It is as though Virilio develops Merleau-Ponty's notion of the primacy 
of perception into a notion of simulated perception, that echoes in some way 
Baudrillard's arguments for a notion of hyperreality over traditional notions 
of reality. Just as in Baudrillard's terms we have come adrift from any sense 
of referent in the real world, as we now read the world through the image of 
the world, so too, for Virilio, we have lost touch with 'authentic' perception, 
and we experience the world increasingly through simulated perceptions. 'It 
seems that the reality effect', Virilio observes, 'replaces immediate reality' 
(1997: 389). Virilio's vision is therefore a cinematographic one, a vision of 
the world in which Hollywood provides the model for our contemporary 
paradigm: 'So, more than Venturi's Las Vegas, it is Hollywood that merits 
urbanist scholarship' (Virilio, 1997: 389-90). 
Problematizing Virilio 
Virilio's futuristic outlook must be read, however, with some caution. On 
occasion his thought appears to lack a sense of the dialectic. Thus, while 
Virilio appears to identify a shift which undermines the significance of 
place, and which promotes instead a space of appearances, one might argue 
that this shift seems to anticipate its opposite in a mechanism of reciprocal 
presupposition. In other words, the very overcoming of a sense of place 
seems to invite a renewed interest in the importance of place. The possi-
bilities opened up do not introduce a total placelessness. Indeed, it is 
precisely because physical space does not constitute such an obstacle for 
the contemporary office with its faxes, Internet, telephones and so on, that 
choice of actual space becomes a significant concern. No longer is it 
necessary for offices to be trapped in congested, grimy cities. It is not 
therefore that physical space is irrelevant. Rather, traditional constraints in 
the way that physical space is perceived are now becoming less relevant. 
For example, the flexibilities introduced by instantaneous information 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 
79 
transfer now allow imaginative use of different time zones - and hence 
different spaces - for a new generation of technological servicing industries. 
Information can now be sent from New York at the end of the day to be 
processed overnight by others, say in Africa, operating during the day of 
their own time zone, so as to deliver the fully processed product back to New 
York for the following morning. Such strategies have the potential of 
exploiting not only differential time zones, but also differential labour 
markets. While the world becomes the potential office, the specific site of 
the individual workstation emerges as an increasingly important consider-
ation. 
Equally, one might introduce a sense of the dialectic to the opposition 
between the body and the virtual. The condition of cyberspace has the effect 
of obviating the body, while at the same time privileging the body. Not only 
is it that such conditions make one aware of the corporeality of one's own 
body by way of compensating for the erosion of the importance of the 
physical, but they also seem to highlight the body itself as a means of 
grounding these new perceptions. For it is only against the actual body in 
actual space that perceptions of the virtual body in virtual space can be 
gauged. To be fair, this is a conclusion that Virilio himself hints at. For 
while the notion of some ecstatic experience - an experience, that is, which 
is 'outside' the body - might provide some sense of temporary escape from 
the body, this can only be a provisional move. 'While spatial escape may be 
possible', notes Virilio, 'temporal escape is not' (Virilio, 1997: 386). Just as, 
for Virilio, there can be no escaping time, ultimately, one might surmise, 
there can be no escaping the body, since the body, like time, operates as a 
form of datum point, the baseline against which to measure all experiences. 
One might lose track of time, but one is always in time. One might lose sense 
of the body, but one is always in the body. To this extent virtual reality must 
always remain virtual. 
Another way to reflect on the limitations of Virilio's thought is to 
contrast it with that of Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze on the progres-
sive erosion of the importance of physical constraints. Foucault had first 
commented on the capacity for architectural form to condition behaviour in 
his essay 'Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias' (1997a). Here archi-
tecture was employed as a form of institutionalized demarcation of struc-
tures of power. In Discipline and Punish, Foucault develops this thesis 
within a more fluid, post-structuralist framework. He becomes concerned 
with the relationship between architectural form and more diffuse ways in 
which power is exercised (Foucault, 1997b). The panopticon provides a 
model which encapsulates the characteristics of a society founded on 
discipline. It embodies a system in which surveillance plays a cnicial role, 
and in which knowledge is inseparably bound to power. The very architec-
tural layout of the panopticon affords various techniques of control, which, 
Foucault thought, would in themselves assure almost automatically the 
subjection and the subjedification of the inmates. 
In his 'Postscript on the Societies of Control', however, Deleuze 

80 Theory, Culture & Society 
observes that disciplinary societies have now given way to societies of 
control (1997: 313). There has been a shift in mechanisms of control as 
visible constraints are superseded by invisible ones. This is reflected in the 
development from factories to corporations, and from machines to com-
puters. Physical discipline has been replaced by more gaseous systems of 
control, where the credit card has supplanted the gaze of the foreman. This 
leads to a situation in which humankind is no longer constrained by physi-
cal space, but forever trapped by debt, ensnared in a system of limitless 
postponement. The burrows of the molehill' have been replaced by the 
complex 'coils of the serpent' (Deleuze, 1997: 309-13). For Deleuze, then, 
we must step beyond the Foucault of panopticism. Power is no longer linked 
to space, and architectural forms have little control over human behaviour. 
This thesis echoes that of the 'exhaustion' of the physical in Virilio. 
But whereas Virilio looks at this condition invariably as an abstract conse-
quence of technological developments, Foucault and Deleuze consider the 
question within a specifically political context. Space is always seen as 
political space, as the space of political agency. Their concern throughout is 
for the politics of use of a space, and how that use might affect the freedom 
of the individual. No such concern appears in Virilio, who offers little 
comment on the control of the technological world of which he speaks. Nor 
indeed does he ever seem to engage fully at any point with the social and 
economic problems posed by late capitalism. In short, the political - in both 
the specific and the most general senses - is seldom addressed. This is all 
the more surprising, given the purportedly political focus of Virilio's 
writings, and his own political activities. 
How might we begin to explain this? One way would be to consider the 
extent to which Virilio's critique remains essentially an aesthetic one. The 
problem, it would appear, is that in any aesthetic discussion of form, the 
question of political content is all too easily elided, and while we might wish 
to refrain from a simplistic understanding of the relationship between 
aesthetics and politics, we might recognize that within the aestheticization 
of politics a certain complex restructuring of the relationship between the 
two occurs, whereby the political comes to collude with the aesthetic 
(Hewitt, 1993). But whatever the precise mechanism of interaction between 
the aesthetic and the political, it is clear that aestheticization leads if not to 
a rinsing of the political, then at least to a form of camouflaging. This is the 
guilty secret that haunts all engagements with the aesthetic. 
Virilio, one might suppose, ought to be especially cautious when he 
deals with issues that touch upon such terrain. Given his own background 
against the events of May '68, and his undoubted familiarity with debates 
which served to fuel those events, such as Guy Debord's critique of the 
'Society of the Spectacle', one would imagine that Virilio should have been 
only too aware of the issues at stake with the question of aestheticization. 
Yet the problem seems to be deeply ingrained in Virilio's whole project, and 
is evident in two early works, the publication, Bunker Archeology and the 
design for the church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay in Nevers. From these 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 81 
we can trace the emergence of a problem that is to haunt Virilio throughout 
his work. 
It is precisely in his handling of architectural form in Bunker Arche-
ology, where Virilio charts the German Second World War fortifications on 
the Atlantic coast, that the problem first appears. It is questionable enough 
- despite the accompanying text which is dressed up in the language of 
concern - for Virilio to publish a book full of exquisite photographs of 
bunkers, photographs that themselves fall prey to the trap of turning 
emblems of war into haunting, seductive images. But the problem becomes 
more deep-rooted when - with Parent - Virilio reproduces these forms in his 
design for the church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay. It is at this point 
when forms borne of war are reproduced in churches and other buildings, 
that the principle that Walter Benjamin had so incisively recognized in 
Marinetti's aesthetic celebration of war are replayed within an architectural 
forum (Benjamin, 1973: 234-5). And if Marinetti is to be criticized for 
proclaiming that war is beautiful, is not Virilio to be reprimanded for 
celebrating the aesthetic images of war, rinsed of their original meaning 
and recycled as abstract architectural forms? And even if Virilio had been 
attempting, however unsuccessfully, to reclaim these forms and harness 
them towards a Christian agenda, is it appropriate to attempt this in the first 
place? 
All this hints at the Achilles' heel of Virilio's thought. His outlook 
remains essentially an aesthetic one, abstracted from political or any form of 
social concerns. While he addresses shifts in patterns of consciousness that 
arise from the implementation of new technologies, unlike Foucault or 
Deleuze he fails to interrogate the full political ramifications of these 
developments. It is this that allows him to distance himself from the sinister 
potential of these technologies, and to claim so seemingly naively, as he 
does with the Tactical Mapping Systems, that the functions of eyesight and 
weaponry 'melt into each other' (Virilio, 1997:390). It is this that allows him 
to celebrate the 'dromomaniac' as a type, without distinguishing adequately 
the sans culottes of the French revolution from Hitler's brown-shirts, and 
without addressing the political ends to which his subject matter tends 
(Virilio, 1986: 20). And it is this that allows him to dwell so extensively and 
seemingly uncritically on themes such as 'war' and 'speed'. 
It is through the figure of Marinetti, perhaps, that we might best 
understand the trajectory of Virilio's thought. Virilio is above all a cham-
pion of speed as an aesthetic gesture, and with that the same problems that 
afflicted Marinetti's celebration of speed echo throughout his work. It is 
speed and the machinery of speed that Virilio promotes. And it is against 
the backdrop of his own questionable obsession with war and the para-
phernalia of war that we see further traces of this recurrent problem. Speed 
and Politics is less a manifesto for a general political agenda, than an 
enquiry as to how speed might facilitate one all too obvious particular 
agenda. 'Speed is the essence of war', notes Virilio, citing Sun Tzu. But in 
failing to distance himself from the problem, Virilio appears to condone this 

82 Theory, Culture & Society 
position, and to accept war as an almost necessary corollary of greater speed 
and mobility in contemporary society. 
Virilio and Parent were once greeted with a phalanx of Nazi salutes 
when they gave a paper at a conference on avant-garde architecture at 
Folkestone in 1966. It has been suggested that this was a response to the 
monumental scale of their designs, that also led them to be branded 'Prix de 
Romists of cosmic thought' by left-wing students at the Ecole des Beaux-
Arts (Ockman, 1993: 409). But perhaps those who offered the Nazi salute 
recognized only too clearly that there is more than a little of the Futurist 
mentality in their work, and that the whole criticism of the aestheticization 
of politics, raised by Benjamin, might equally be levelled at them. 'All 
efforts to render politics aesthetic', noted Benjamin, 'culminate in one thing: 
war' (Benjamin, 1973: 234). In this context it is perhaps no coincidence that 
Virilio himself should be so obsessed by war. 
How might this obsession with war be manifested within an architec-
tural scenario? An obvious example lies in the work of Lebbeus Woods. In 
his book, War and Architecture, Woods clearly finds the death and destruc-
tion in Sarajevo a deeply aesthetic experience. 'War is architecture, and 
architecture is war!' he proclaims (Woods, 1993: 1). What is most alarming 
about this equation of architecture with war is not the attempt to see 
architecture as a form of war, for inevitably architecture will involve some 
war-like destruction, in that the very process of construction presupposes 
the destruction of whatever had previously belonged to the site. It is, rather, 
the tendency to see war as a form of architecture. The destruction of the 
physical fabric of Sarajevo provides the aesthetic impulse for new forms of 
architecture. These forms are generated in response to the destruction of the 
buildings but, more importantly, in their jagged, torn aesthetic, they 
complement and draw inspiration from the mutilated buildings. As such 
they constitute an aesthetic celebration of destruction. The work of Woods 
therefore provides an obvious example of the potential consequences of 
Virilio's aestheticization of politics. 
If we are to find fault with Virilio, we should look beyond the pseudo-
scientific language which Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont criticize so 
simplistically, failing to recognize the essentially romantic nature of his 
futuristic vision (Sokal and Bricmont, 1998). Rather, we should focus on the 
problem of aestheticization. With the aesthetic bias of Virilio's project, the 
political is too often elided. There is a form of anaesthesia at work which 
'numbs' the concern for the political. Just as Albert Speer's sublime stage-
sets for Nazi rallies recast a highly unsavoury political agenda as an 
intoxicating spectacle, so too Virilio's celebration of the exhilaration of 
'speed' seems to overlook the political consequences of what is being 
celebrated. While 'speed' may offer many positive advantages, it may 
equally have negative ones. All this is lost in Virilio's empty, aphoristic 
slogans, such as, 'The speed of violence becomes the violence of unsur-
passed speed' (Virilio, 1997: 138). And the intoxication of Speer's sublime 
stage-sets is matched by the intoxication of speed - the 'high' of high speed, 

Leach - Virilio and Architecture 
83 
as Virilio describes it (Virilio, 1986: 27). And it is perhaps no coincidence 
that the term 'speed' is also used for various drugs. Virilio's celebration of 
the exhilaration of 'speed' and 'war' seems to appeal to a culture dominated 
by a desire for the sublime and for ecstatic escapism. 
In the aesthetics of disappearance, it would seem, it is not the 
aesthetic which disappears, but the political. Yet in reality the political 
never fully disappears. For what lurks beneath the veneer of the aesthetic is 
a more insidious, reactionary form of politics: a politics of acquiescence. 
All this points to a deeper underlying problem. If Virilio's work is so 
popular today, what does this say about contemporary culture? In an age in 
which, according to Baudrillard, everything has become aestheticized, is it 
surprising that a writer who holds such a viewpoint should prove so appeal-
ing? For it is in a culture where politics is reduced largely to a matter of 
mere images that Benjamin's formulation of the link between aesthetics and 
politics is replayed within a specifically postmodern constellation. Perhaps, 
then, rather than worry about the sinister implications of Virilio's work, we 
should be concerned about the culture in which it seems to command such 
appeal. For in a culture where 'speed' and 'war' become fashionable slogans, 
violence will always threaten to reappear. 
References 
Andreotti, Libero and Xavier Costa (eds) (1996) Situationists: Art, Politics, Urban-
ism. Barcelona: Actar. 
Auge\ Marc (1995) Non-Places, trans. John Howe. London: Verso. 
Benjamin, Walter (1973) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction', 
in Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn. London: Fontana. 
Calle, Sophie (1988) Suite Vinitienne, trans. Danny Barash and Danny Hatfield. 
Seattle, WA: Seattle Bay Press. 
Deleuze, Gilles (1997) 'Postscript on the Societies of Control', in Neil Leach (ed.) 
Rethinking Architecture. London: Routledge. 
Diller, Elizabeth and Richard Scofidio (eds) (1994) Back to the Front: Tourisms of 
War. Basse-Normandie: FRAC. 
Foucault, Michel (1997a) 'Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias', in Neil 
Leach (ed.) Rethinking Architecture. London: Routledge. 
Foucault, Michel (1997b) 'Panopticism', in Neil Leach (ed.) Rethinking Architec-
ture. London: Routledge. 
Hewitt, Andrew (1993) Fascist Modernism. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 
Norberg-Schulz, Christian (1980) Genius Loci: Towards a Phenomenology of Archi-
tecture. London: Academy Editions. 
Ockman, Joan (ed.) (1993) Architecture Culture 1943-1968. New York: Rizzoli. 
Sokal, Alan and Jean Bricmont (1998) Intellectual Impostures. London: Profile. 
Vattimo, Gianni (1995) 'The End of Modernity, the End of The Project?', trans. 
David Webb, Journal of Philosophy and the Visual Arts. London: Academy 
Editions. 

84 Theory, Culture & Society 
Virilio, Paul (1975) Bunker Archeology, trans. George Collins. Paris: Les Editions 
du Demi-Cercle. 
Virilio, Paul (1986) Speed & Politics, trans. Mark Polizotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991) Lost Dimension, trans. Daniel Moshenberg: New York: Semio-
text(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1996) 'Architecture Principe', in Pamela Johnston (ed.) Theory of the 
Oblique. London: Architectural Association Documents. 
Virilio, Paul (1997) 'The Overexposed City', in Neil Leach (ed.) Rethinking Archi-
tecture. London: Routledge. 
Virilio, Paul and Claude Parent (1996) Claude Parent and Paul Virilio 1955-1968. 
Paris: editions de L'Imprimeur. 
Woods, Lebbeus (1993) War and Architecture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architec-
tural Press. 
Neil Leach is Reader in Architecture and Critical Theory at the University 
of Nottingham. He is author of The Anaesthetics of Architecture (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1999) and Millennium Culture (London: Ellipsis, 1999). He 
is the editor of Rethinking Architecture (London: Routledge, 1997) and 
Architecture and Revolution (London: Routledge, 1999). He is also co-
translator of LB. Alberti, On the Art of Building in Ten Books (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1988). 

Paul Virilio's Bunker 
Theorizing 
Mike Gane 
If man has no need for the machine to live in his natural environment, he 
needs the machine to live in a hostile one. (Virilio, 1994 [1975]: 41) 
We must get inside pure war, we must cover ourselves in blood and tears. We 
mustn't turn away. (Virilio, in Virilio and Lotringer, 1997 [1983]: 108) 
Introduction 
P
AUL VIRILIO'S WORK has a curious status today. On the one hand 
his name is still absent from leading social theory commentaries. On 
the other he is widely cited — I note even in today's Guardian, Adrian 
Searle writes that Seurat's painting The Bathers has a 'kind of stillness we 
have nearly lost. And with its loss, we ourselves are in danger of disappear-
ing. This is the kind of dark thought Paul Virilio warms his hands over of an 
evening' (Guardian, G2 30 Dec. 1997: 13). This is precisely the kind of 
reference Jean Baudrillard's work was receiving ten years ago (Guardian, 21 
Sept. 1988: 27). The two writers are often associated as the pre-eminent 
French postmodern theorists (see Kroker, 1992; Ritzer, 1997). Both writers 
refer to the other in friendly terms, but admit some profound differences. 
Virilio: 'I have a friendly relationship with Baudrillard, even if I don't 
always agree with him' (in Rotzer, 1995: 98); Baudrillard: 
We have worked together ... without any problem... His analysis of the 
cyberworld is intransigent, inexorable, fatal I might dare say, and I find it 
beautiful and remarkable ... [but] he puts himself in the position of the anti-
apocalypse prophet, having been persuaded that the worst can come about. 
On this point we have ended up going our separate ways. I do not believe in 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 8S-102 
f0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;85-102;009960] 

86 Theory, Culture & Society 
his real apocalypse ... it is the coming of the virtual itself which is our 
apocalypse, and this deprives us of the real apocalypse. (1997b: 46-7). 
Virilio: 
There's a neonihilism in him that I don't like, (in Rotzer, 1995: 98) 
Baudrillard: 
Virilio takes a position which is very clearly moral 
Ultimately his 
analysis is more radical than mine. (1997b: 80) 
These cryptic remarks refer in fact to something of a major divergence, and 
it is highly instructive to follow through the logic of this particular differ-
ence of opinion. In this article I attempt to do this by examining Virilio's 
part in the exchange by tracing the theme of the bunker through his writings, 
and the way his thinking seems to be caught in an unresolved dilemma. 
Bunker Archaeology 
My relation to the war machine has always had a kind of mythic dimension. 
(Virilio, in Virilio and Lotringer, 1997 [1983]: 7) 
A selection of Virilio's earliest writings has recently been re-published (in 
Parent and Virilio, 1996), including material which makes it possible to 
reconstruct to some extent the first phase of Virilio's work. Born in 1932, he 
was brought up in war-time Nantes in France. He was educated at the ficole 
des Metiers, Paris, and trained to become an artist in stained glass, working 
eventually with Braque and Matisse. He followed courses by Jankelevitch, 
Merleau-Ponty, Wahl and Aron at the Sorbonne. He has been close to Abbe* 
Pierre, and the worker priest movement, having joined the Catholic move-
ment in 1950 (Petit, in Virilio, 1996). In 1958 he was on vacation at Saint-
Guenole (Virilio, 1994:10) when he noticed a German-built war bunker. He 
wrote up his reflections in a short piece called 'Bunker Achaeology' (1958, 
included in Parent and Virilio, 1996: 71). In this essay he reported: 'Using 
the techniques of archaeology, I have explored the subterranean world of 
one of the esoteric forms of times: the blockhouse. The plan of the block-
house is strangely reminiscent of that of an Aztec temple' (Parent and 
Virilio, 1996: 71). From 1958 to 1965 he made a study of the bunkers 
around the western and northern coasts of France. An exhibition of his 
photos with explanatory text was later presented by Virilio in 1975-6 at the 
Museum of Decorative Arts in Paris and published in translation as Bunker 
Archeology (1994). The first period of Virilio's thought goes through to about 
1978 and we can trace this through texts collected in Ulnsecurite' du 
territoire (1993 [1976]). 
In the decade 1958-68 Virilio passed from being an artist specializing 
in stained glass, to architect under the guidance of Claude Parent, though 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 87 
apparently Virilio had no technical qualification in architecture (who 
needed this in 1968?). Virilio became a teacher at the Ecole Speciale 
d'Architecture (ESA) in 1969, a co-director with Anatole Kopp in 1972 
(Parent and Virilio, 1996: 13) its General Director, 1975, and President in 
1990 (Virilio, 1994: 213). His relationship with Parent, 1963-8 was thus 
pivotal. Parent was an experimentally minded architect using concrete. 
Virilio's studies of the bunkers formed a natural point of convergence of 
ideas and interest. But Virilio was also interested in the structural charac-
teristics and philosophy of space, what he called topotonics. Having in-
vestigated bunkers that had toppled over in the sand, he had become 
fascinated with the potentialities of inclined planes as a resource. In what 
appears today as a frighteningly naive vision, he sought to combine bunker 
style with oblique planes in order to revolutionize the habitable space of 
cities. The revolution would involve a rejection of conventional room design 
— he stigmatized such spaces as 'micro-ghettoes' — to continuous 'habitable 
circulation' on slopes made possible by the technology of reinforced con-
crete. Curiously, Virilio and Parent wore smart black suits at this time in 
contrast to the 'psychedelic ensembles favoured by most architects' and 
when they presented their ideas for 'oblique cities unfolding across the 
landscape' at a conference at Folkstone in 1966, 'the audience rose up en 
masse and gave them a Hitlerian salute' (Crompton, cited by Migayrou, in 
Parent and Virilio, 1996: 63). Others, according to Claude Parent, com-
pared the oblique spaces proposed by Virilio 'to the prisons of the Bolshevik 
police, which had skewed cells and ceilings so low that it was impossible to 
stand' (Parent and Virilio, 1996: 55). 
Transforming the Bunker 
... to say that the positive phenomenon of technology came in large part from 
the arsenal and war is., hard for people to accept. (Virilio, in Virilio and 
Lotringer, 1997: 24) 
Though no large-scale project of this kind was ever realized, Virilio was 
able to win a commision through his Catholic contacts for a new church in 
Nevers, the church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay. The church indeed 
looks like a concrete bunker and has inclined floors. It also has stained-
glass windows (see Parent and Virilio, 1996: 20-31), though Parent 
detested them 'they weren't my idea, and I never show them in photographs' 
(Parent and Virilio, 1996: 52). Clearly Virilio's radical architecture was 
transformative: to make military architecture, as it condensed social energy 
and revealed new functions, serve other functions, a theme he was to 
develop at some length in essays on critical space. But in the mid-1960s 
Virilio seemed to be fascinated by the idea of a 'repellent' brutal architec-
tural style which would force users to question conventions in a mode 
similar to that adopted in Situationism (see Migayrou, in Parent and Virilio, 
1996: 62), adding alienation to alienation. At this juncture he promoted a 
revolutionary and expansive conception of space, a style of intervention 

88 Theory, Culture & Society 
within critical modernism. In the journal which functioned as their 
manifesto, Architecture Principe, Virilio wrote 'we have never before wit-
nessed a change in humanity itself. We are now on the brink of such a 
metamorphosis - a metamorphosis of our consciousness ... a radical 
transformation of the notion of dimensions' (1966, in Parent and Virilio, 
1996: 65). In a radical but obscure utopianism, Virilio wrote: 
... urbanism will in future have much more to do with ballistics than with the 
partition of territories. In effect, the static vertical and horizontal no longer 
correspond to the dynamics of human life. In future, architecture must be 
built on the oblique, so as to accord with the new plane of human conscious-
ness. (1966, in Parent and Virilio, 1996: 65) 
Virilio stressed the importance of bodies in circulation or, as he called it, 
'habitable circulation', indeed the 'conditions are ripe for the emergence of 
a civil architecture, for this spatial art to pass from the private to the public 
realm and, in so doing, to accede to its true role - the invention of society' 
(1996: 68). His vision was precise, the new oblique architecture would 
change the nature of the city, which now would become 'an enormous 
projector, a torrent of every kind of activity, every kind of fluidity' (1996: 
68). The emphasis was insistent: conventional architecture had condemned 
humanity to horizontality and therefore to stasis. The vision was one of 
transforming 'static space' into a habitat 'mobilized by the function of the 
oblique' and liquid technology (1996: 45, 68). The new structures of urban 
development would not grow in static concentric rings, but would be 
'mediated structures' and 'would form interlinked assemblages that would 
develop and spread out over regions, along the vital arteries of a territory'. 
Virilio saw this use of the incline, and the curve, as necessary 'when 
alienation has become commonplace' (1996: 71). 
In the seventh issue of Architecture Principe (1967), he republished the 
article he had written on 'Bunker Archaeology' in 1958 in which he noted 
that the geometry of these bunkers 'is no longer affirmatory, but eroded, 
worn. The right angle is reduced, suppressed, in order to make the structure 
resistant to capture.' The effect of ballistics on structure was clear, the 
oblique had been invented for essential, practical not aesthetic reasons. 
These monuments also had a different relation to the earth for 'the mass is 
no longer grounded ... but centred upon itself, independent, capable of 
movement and articulation' (1958, in Parent and Virilio 1996: 71). As 
Migayrou has pointed out, this meant for Virilio that the 'bunker expressed 
fluidity, building without foundation - the Corbusian ideal of the ocean 
liner' (1996: 62). Life in these bunkers, in Virilio's view, was 'an exercise in 
becoming more subtle' (1996: 71). Bunkers heralded he argued, without 
irony, 'a new architecture that is founded no longer on man's bodily 
proportions, but on his capacity for thought' (1996: 71). 
Claude Parent, crucial agent for the transformation of Virilio from 
master painter on glass to novice architect of the oblique, was interviewed in 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 89 
1995 about his early relation with Virilio. Parent met Virilio in 1963. 
Parent's background - decisively influenced by Andre Bloc (see Migayrou, 
in Parent and Virilio, 1996: 59f), neo-plasticism and geometric abstraction-
ism - naturally aligned itself with Virilio's study of bunkers (1996: 51). 
'After a while, he began coming to the office for a few hours each day', and 
he: 
... brought a couple of jobs into the office: the church of Sainte-Bernadette 
and the Thompson-Houston Aerospace Centre. I was responsible for drawing 
up the initial designs and plans (he lacked the technical know-how), but then 
... [we would] discuss how the project should evolve... (Parent and Virilio, 
1996: 51) 
Thus in the project for the church 'it was Virilio who said that we should put 
a slope on the floor planes ... the challenge of working together on a real, 
concrete project inspired a fundamental breakthrough - the first application 
of the function of the oblique' (19%: 51). The military aspects of the project 
was seen in a purely technical light, for what interested Virilio was not 
simply the war functioning in terms of a system of antagonistic blocs, but 
that the 'D-Day landings consolidated the whole of the industrial might of 
the United States' (1996: 51). Virilio 'admired that in the same way that he 
admired the super-organized Panzer divisions and the autobahn system' 
(1996: 52). There was considerable opposition to these ideas: 'Virilio 
insisted that the general resistance to the oblique derived from a resistance 
to anything new. In the early days of the automobile, people were afraid that 
they would suffocate if they went above thirty kilometres an hour' (Parent, in 
Parent and Virilio, 1996: 55). 
Virilio's theoretical ambitions were restated in a retrospective essay of 
1996: 
The objective of our research was to challenge outright the anthropometric 
precepts of the classical era - the idea of the body as an essentially static 
entity ... In our work, the traditional stability (habitable stasis)... gave way 
to the metastability (habitable circulation) of the human body in motion... 
The space of the body became mobile. (Parent and Virilio, 1996: 13) 
The project was not a success however and 'after a few years the overwhelm-
ing difficulties of building an oblique habitat led us to abandon this work' 
Virilio admitted (1996: 13). 
In 1975—6 Virilio was able to stage his photos of the bunkers in an 
exhibition at the Museum for Decorative Arts in Paris. His text for the 
exhibition (orig. 1975) has been republished with a new preface and after-
word (Virilio, 1994). The preface recounts the moment of discovery of the 
bunkers and the way in which they exercised their fascination: passing 
under a tympanum a 'companion piece to the porch of a religious building' 
and through this entrance to a 'low, small room, round or hexagonal ... and 

90 Theory, Culture & Society 
having, at its centre, a socle quite similar to a sacrificial altar. Trap doors 
open in the cement floor, through which access to the crypt is gained.' 
Virilio talks of 'the crushing feeling' experienced within this monumental 
structure, 'the visitor in this perilous place is beset with a singular heavi-
ness' (1994: 15-16). The text suggests that it is war, or the war machine 
which is at the origin of industry and industrialization, indeed Virilio argues 
that it is war which is at the origin of civil and religious social forms (1994: 
43-4). The bunker is the precursor of the survival machine, where the crypt 
is a form 'that prefigures resurrection', a 'vehicle that puts one out of danger' 
an 'ark that saves' (1994: 46). The 'Afterword' gives a concise overview of 
the changes in the character of the world's military situation from 1945 to 
1990 and it is clear that for Virilio a remarkable reversal has taken place, a 
reversal which his writings through the 1970s and 1980s charted in detail. 
He sums this up in the following way: 'the supremacy of arms of communi-
cation ... over arms of massive destruction ... became a reality, bringing 
about a mutation in real warfare as important as the mutation brought long 
ago by the supremacy of light arms of destruction' (1994: 202). It seems 
clear that even by the time the Bunker Archeology exhibition was held in 
Paris in 1975-6, Virilio had already reorganized his own position well 
beyond abandoning the idea of 'habitable circulation' for purely technical 
reasons. 
Out of the Bunker, Briefly 
May '68... the place was packed. I heard a guy ... say '.. ."imagination 
comes to power" that's not true, it's the working class!' I answered: 'so 
comrade, you deny the working class imagination...' (Virilio in Virilio and 
Lotringer, 1997: 82) 
Something else had also happened: the events of May '68 in Paris. As 
Claude Parent recounts, it was the dramatic politicization of Virilio in those 
events which was to lead to the break-up of their relationship. In the early 
part of 1968 Parent and Virilio were preparing to build a structure at the 
University of Nanterre called The Pendular Destabilizer'. This was a purely 
experimental double oblique structure (rather like two bunkers joined 
together side by side in the form of an X) elevated 12 metres above the 
ground and isolated from the rest of the world : 'there was no telephone, no 
post, no means of communication — except for a little hole in the wall that we 
could talk to each other through' (Parent and Virilio, 1996: 55). The events 
of May '68 ended the experiment. Virilio joined the student occupation of 
the Od6on. Parent remained convinced that the oblique was aesthetic not 
political, Virilio regarded it as essentially aesthetic and political; the 
friendship and the partnership came to an end in 1970. What Virilio 
encountered and explored through 1968 is developed through the idea of 
'critical space' which can be read as a very specific recasting of his idea of 
'habitable circulation'. 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 91 
Virilio's new ideas emerge over the period 1969-75 in journals 
Esprit, Cause Commune and Critique, essays collected together in Ulnse-
curite' du territoire (1993 [1976]).Virilio reports the joy of having been able 
to sleep in a lecture theatre at the Sorbonne (after making the intervention 
in the Richelieu Amphitheatre reported in Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 80) 
have breakfast in a box at the Op6ra, eat lunch in a director's office, find a 
nursery in the library, find a games room in the Renault showroom, indeed 
of having been able to find France, its stations, airports, schools, shops, as 
a space to be occupied, thereby reversing the alienated state of everyday 
life (Virilio, 1993: 86-7): just as there is a need for freedom of speech so 
there is also a need for freedom of movement. A barricade, he wrote, is not 
simply a territorial limit but a construction of a new kind of liberated 
space, a 'new mode of the appropriation of space and time' (1993: 89). 
Although Virilio uses the experience of May '68, in these years, he does 
not adopt Marxist language or ideas (with the possible rare exception of an 
observation that his work concerns the primacy of a revolution in the 
'means of destruction' rather than 'means of production' [Virilio and 
Lotringer, 1997: 105]). What interests him is the experience of space in 
the changing character of the overall strategic situation in its military 
aspect, and increasingly the logic of mass communications which he sees 
as its inevitable counterpart. 
Volte Face: Back to the Bunker 
We're in a system in which military order dominates ... no matter if that 
order is socialist, capitalist or anything else. (Virilio, in Virilio and Lotringer, 
1997: 96) 
Virilio's reflections on the failure of May '68 are now worked through the 
theme of speed, not of economics or politics. The leading body of capitalist 
civilization has become a 'jet set' which no longer resides in traditional and 
expected locations in time and space. This counter-revolution succeeds 
through an escalation to 'hyper-communication' transforming the terrain of 
struggle. Fundamental innovations and technical revolutions put an end to 
any hope of a genuine revolution in 'habitable circulation'. Indeed, his 
former position which depended on a critique of the stasis of bourgeois 
society is inverted. He charts the emergence of nuclear deterrence, 'total 
peace', not as stasis but as absolute war (1993 [1976]: 71), another reversal 
in the logistical order. He concludes his study in Ulnsecuritt du territoire by 
outlining the unexpected consequences brought in the wake of this new 
order (1993: 243—70). The old communism equated progress with speed but 
speed is no longer the sign of progress, quite the opposite, since speed is 
where the enemy to progress resides (1993: 266-70). 
Speed and Politics (1986 [1977]) and Popular Defense (1990 [1978]) 
register the scope of the vast change in Virilio's position. The problematic 
shifts from space to time, and from an expansive politics of mobilization 

92 Theory, Culture & Society 
and liberalization, to a defensive and conservative politics of resistance 
to acceleration and to a defence of the social. Responding to the appeals 
of theologians like Bonhoeffer, Virilio begins to warn of the dangers 
implied in the new state of the world, dangers to the experience of space of 
the city and of democracy, and of the new possibility of apocalypse brought 
about by new technologies and strategies available to and adopted by the 
military elite. In a sense the essay Speed and Politics, with its theory of 
power through control of movement a 'dromocracy' (1986: 70), was the 
culmination of an analysis applicable to a world already passing away. If 
the proletariat still thinks in terms of the control of streets and physical 
movement (1986: 103), the military thinks otherwise: it thinks logistically 
in relation to new meeting points such as airports, highways and telecom-
munications (1986: 104). Communism died, fascism survives (1986: 117) 
and has adapted. In this world, available in instantaneous communication 
and immediate information, a new permanent state of emergency is created 
which brings a sharp end to struggles in relative speed (1986: 149). 
Virilio draws out these conclusions more dramatically in his book 
Popular Defense: 
If... civilians could have resisted the assault of the war machine, gotten 
ahead of it, by creating a defence without a body, condensed nowhere, it is 
quite evident that today they don't even realize that technology has surpassed 
this kind of defence. (1990: 71) 
This is because: 'There is no need for an armed body to attack civilians, so 
long as the latter have been properly trained to turn on their radios or plug in 
their television sets' (1990: 71). In these conditions the political state 
declines, and where 'hyper-communicability' exists there grows totalitarian 
power (1990: 64-6). The right of armed defence by citizens is lost, while on 
the other hand 'from now on' the military power is so 'shapeless' it can no 
longer be identified as it installs itself in a regime of generalized security: an 
important and irreversible shift from a state of political and civil justice, to a 
state of logistical and military discipline (1990: 75). This is achieved 
through the systematic destruction of all the major forms of social solidarity 
which previously offered real resistance to the state: particularly the family, 
conceived by Virilio as essentially a combat unit. The liberation of women 
effectively weakens the solidarity of the family as a defensive form against 
the state. The resort to terrorism by ultra-left-wing groups again only serves 
to strengthen, not weaken, the war machine (1990: 88). This creates a 
paradox: the possibility that the revolution can succeed through control of 
the streets has been lost yet 'there is no more revolution except in resistance' 
(1997: 82). Virilio returns to his bunker. 
Symbolic Exchange and Death 
As soon as the civil detaches itself from death, denies it... we fall body and 
soul into the militaristic interpretation. (Virilio, in Virilio and Lotringer, 
1997: 129) 

Gone - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 93 
It is instructive at this point to compare Virilio's experience with that of 
Baudrillard, with whom he began to collaborate on the journal Traverses 
from 1976. Both Virilio and Baudrillard reversed their positions on the 
meaning of the events of May 1968, coming in the mid-1970s to a common 
point of view that the political situation had rendered a simple commitment 
to revolution and progress untenable. The points of departure were, how-
ever, very different. Baudrillard's background in literature, anthropology 
and sociology was in marked contrast with Virilio's background in craft-
work, theology and military architecture, but the convergence was strong 
and condensed around the acceptance of a new social condition marked by 
the success of material consumerism, the dominance of mass communi-
cation in a condition of political stasis (theorized by Virilio as a paradoxical 
situation of pure war). There were, however, clear differences of opinion. As 
Virilio was later to remark (in Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 125), Baudril-
lard's key text, Symbolic Exchange and Death (1993) developed no discus-
sion of the war machine (for take-up of this idea one has to go to Deleuze and 
Guattari); Baudrillard, if anything, moved to a pagan position of symbolic 
exchange which saw the Christian forms adhered to by Virilio as the very 
source of modern simulacra. And while Virilio sought a base in the social for 
retrenchment of resistance to ongoing technological transformations, Baud-
rillard notoriously announced the 'end of the social'. Baudrillard's essay on 
the architecture of the Pompidou Centre ('L'Effet Beaubourg: implosion et 
dissuasion', 1994a [1977]) stands in remarkable contrast with Virilio's 
Bunker Archeology (1994 [1975]). Just as Virilio had described the bunker 
as a dead animal, so Baudrillard began his essay on the Beaubourg by 
defining it as a 'carcass of flux and signs' (1994a: 61) and 'an imperial 
compression - figure of a culture already crushed by its own weight - like 
moving automobiles suddenly frozen in a geometric solid' (1994a: 63). 
Instead of celebrating the idea of polyvalent space in the interior of the 
new building, Baudrillard is scathing in his contempt for the idea of 
'circulation' in this space, with its 'immense to-and-fro movement similar 
to that of suburban commuters'. The paradox is, he said, people search for a 
'corner which is precisely not one, (and so) exhaust themselves secreting an 
artificial solitude ... the ideology of visibility, transparency, of poly valency' 
(1994a: 62). It leads Baudrillard to a famous formulation: from now on the 
vision of a possible revolutionary explosion has to be replaced by that of 
implosion; and the same is true of the city itself: 'fires, war, revolutions, 
criminal marginality, catastrophes: the whole problematic of the anticity, of 
the negativity internal or external to the city, has some archaic relation to its 
true mode of annihilation' (1994a: 70-1). Baudrillard reflects that the 
events of 1968 have to be rethought: 'something else began ... the violent 
involution of the social' (1994a: 73). 
Baudrillard's position in the mid-1970s is to pit 'culture', in the 
anthropological sense, against the regimes of simulacra. Baudrillard's criti-
cal essay only works, in fact, on the basis that he can say what this 
opposition between them is. Culture is at this moment in his thought an 

94 Theory, Culture & Society 
ordered structure, 'a site of the secret, of seduction, of initiation, of a 
restrained and highly ritualized symbolic exchange' (1994a: 64). While the 
Beaubourg Centre is 'nothing but a huge effort to transmute [the] famous 
traditional culture of meaning into the aleatory order of signs, into an order 
of simulacra (the third) that is completely homogeneous with the flux and 
pipes of the facade' (1994a: 65). But what about a concrete bunker? It is 
strange that Virilio sought to find, and did find in his concrete bunkers, a 
sacred altar, a place of initiation, a crypt. But the very fact that concrete is a 
liquid medium is for Baudrillard, against Virilio, important in its own right. 
In Symbolic Exchange and Death Baudrillard refers to the 'old cook' who 
lived in the Ardennes who sculptured everything in that 'single polymor-
phous material: reinforced concrete' (1993: 52). Everything modelled in 
concrete, and Baudrillard lists them: chairs, sewing machines, an entire 
orchestra. Baudrillard notes, that this project is: 
... not so far removed from the stucco builders of Baroque art, nor very 
different from projecting an urban community onto the terrain of a large 
contemporary group ... it is already aiming at control of a pacified society, 
cast in a synthetic substance ... a project which aims at political and mental 
hegemony, the fantasy of a closed mental substance. (1993: 53) 
In this analysis concrete plays the same role as stucco, a primitive medium 
for simulacra (of the first order), but Baudrillard already notes its second-
order industrial potentialities. The essential nature of this project is 
identified as belonging to the counter-reformation, conceived in detail by 
the Jesuits in a new type of reactionary elite and state organized around a 
homogeneous theology (1993: 52). Stucco is 'an apparatus of the same 
order' and the concrete of the Ardennes cook is a 'mental substance' 
(1993: 52-3). 
Baudrillard's analysis here was developed as part of what he called a 
theory of 'orders of simulacra' (1993: 50-88), a topic taken up as the feature 
of a special issue of the journal Traverses (no. 10, Le Simulacre) in February 
1978. Baudrillard's contribution was the essay 'La Precession des simu-
lacres' (orig. 1978: 3-37, trans, in 1994: 1-42), and Virilio wrote 'La 
Dromoscopie ou l'ivresse des grandeurs' (orig. 1978: 65-72) which was 
also published in an expanded version in the journal Critique (vol. 34: 324^-
37, as 'La Dromoscopie ou la lumiere de la vitesse', this version reproduced 
as chapter 6 of UHorkon negatif [1984<: 143-55]). It is not surprising to find 
that Virilio's discussion starts with the statement that 'movement commands 
the event' (1984: 143) which we find later is derived from Napoleon (1984: 
161). Virilio's idea sees simulacra as phenomena closely linked to those of 
command posts, control consoles, cockpits. He develops the idea that with 
moving vehicles like cars the travellers see the world in a new way, a double 
reduction: of the time-distance of the voyage and the new screen vision of 
the world. He calls this the dromoscopie simulation (1984: 146). Thus 
Virilio's idea of simulation is quite different from that of Baudrillard and 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 95 
closer to that of McLuhan (who theorized the new vision of the world 
produced by the speed of trains). Virilio's thesis is that the driver in such a 
position of simulation in the dromocratic order maintains the dictatorship of 
movement (1984: 148). Virilio traces the idea of the 'conductors' of peoples 
behind the 'dromoscopic screen of absolute power' before passing to the 
motorcyclist and 'conductors of families who reproduce in their little every-
day movements (evasions) the dromocratic order of great invasions'(1984: 
154—5). The discussion suggests that now it is the earth itself which is the 
vehicle, and all perception of the movement of the sun, moon and stars is 
equivalent to perception of 'the real' through a panoramic screen (1984: 
159). The way is open for new means of teleguidance or what he calls 
'dromovisual apparatuses' (1984: 160). But against McLuhan he argues that 
the significant developments here cannot adequately be seen as or reduced 
to the technological, the crucial effects concern the new levels of rapidity of 
communication between interlocutors: the violence of speed is not a simple 
technological phenomenon. Here the motor has been war, with industrial 
civilization its transformed effect, and the new acceleration producing the 
condition of pure war (1984: 161). 
Virilio's 'simulations' are representations of the real world, represen-
tations which are substituted for one another as technology develops. 
Baudrillard's conception of these relations is more complex: the real is not 
a brute given, but a historically and socially evolved form of appropriation 
of the world (and replaces other forms through their constant and system-
atic destruction). For Baudrillard, then, '[representation stems from the 
principle of the equivalence of the sign and the real' whereas simulation, 
'on the contrary, stems... from the radical negation of the sign as value, 
from the sign as reversion ... of every reference.' In this new situation 
'there is no longer a Last Judgement to separate the false from the true' 
(Baudrillard, 1994a: 6). As Baudrillard had noted in his essay on the 
Pompidou Centre in Paris the 'Beaubourg illustrates very well that an 
order of simulacra only establishes itself on the alibi of the previous order' 
(1994a: 64). What separates Baudrillard and Virilio at this point in time, 
is not just Christianity (where Baudrillard takes a Nietzschean position 
which is anathema to Virilio, (see Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 133), but 
essentially a dispute about the theory of the real as a referent for simula-
tion, and particularly the social as referent. The different emphasis given 
by Virilio to the theory of war could be seen as providing a relatively 
specialized zone which ensures that theoretical topics do not come into 
direct contact, and which allows theoretical exchanges between him and 
Baudrillard to occur. 
Both Virilio and Baudrillard follow McLuhan in their own way: the 
medium is the message. The development of the mass media, tele-technolo-
gies, brings about the ecstasy of communication and the hegemony of the 
screen, the vision machine. As I have noted, Virilio made this transition in 
his writings over the period 1969-75 (in Ulnsecurite*) with his thesis that 
acceleration is generalized through communication. This becomes a 

96 Theory, Culture & Society 
decisive new step in his account of dromocracy: at the end of Speed and 
Politics Virilio concludes with the observation that with the advent of 
nuclear war and the new means of communication 'the war-machine 
becomes (thanks to the reflexes of the strategic calculator) the very decision 
for war' (1986 [1977]: 139-40). Preparation for war is part of war itself, and 
creates 'extreme proximity of parties in which the immediacy of information 
immediately creates the crisis' (1986: 143). Virilio suggests this realizes 
what was most feared by Clausewitz, the 'full discharge' of total war (1986: 
151). The Red Brigades in Italy called in February 1978 for all militants to 
'act militarily in order to act politically against the "bunkers in which the 
agents of counter-revolution hide"' (Virilio, 1990: 42). Virilio, stung to 
reply wrote a resolute critique of this aim: it is too late for any assault, only 
popular defence is possible. But it is clear this creates a crisis at the heart of 
Virilio's position: there are three kinds of resistance - first, to struggle 
against the war-machine by declaring war on it or, second, to enter its body 
and divert its effect or, third, simply to act defensively where possible forms 
of solidarity arise and to build up these solidarities where possible. The 
former seems outmoded by the 1970s, but the question which haunts 
Virilio's project of popular resistance is what forms it would take and 
whether they are effective. Even more pressing is the question of what 
happened to the work of transforming the technological developments 
brought about by the military machine? 
Bunker Visions 
I believe in the peace of Christ. (Virilio, in Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 122) 
Virilio's most mystical text, The Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a [1980]), 
followed on from Baudrillard's own rather strange text Seduction (1990 
[1979]). Virilio's work might well be considered an attempt to counter 
Baudrillard's Nietzschean fatal theory with a statement of Christian medita-
tion on seduction and evil. Virilio's argument relies heavily on a range of 
bizarre mystical texts and positions including that of Saint Bernadette of 
Lourdes. He has no hesitation in claiming that her witness to the Virgin is as 
valuable as any work of the German romantics and idealist philosophers. 
Indeed, he sees a profound unity between the 'simple story' of a young seer, 
and the 'elaborate tales of the transcendental poets' (1991a: 42). One finds 
here he says a 'sort of para-optic aesthetics of the real world, an unusual 
activity of the senses, usurping their function by chance' (1991a: 42). 
Bernadette's visionary experience is cited as primary evidence of the 
experience of time: 
I saw poplars beside the torrent and brambles in front of the cave quiver as if 
the wind was shaking them, but all around nothing moved and suddenly I saw 
something white ... a white girl no bigger than me. She greeted me, 
bowing... (1991a: 38) 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 97 
Virilio is bitterly critical of the way children are now deprived of their 
apparitions. Bernadette said of her experience 'for that moment you'd give a 
whole lifetime', and Virilio records 'this is exactly what she does by hiding 
in a convent at Nevers where she dies at age 35' (1991a: 39). Nevers is now 
marked by Virilio's Bunker church. Virilio has subsequently noted the 
similarity of the experience of being in the grotto at Lourdes and being in a 
bunker (Virilio and Brausch, 1997: 35). 
At the end of this book Virilio muses on the mystery of the bunker. 'As 
a young man I wondered about the aesthetics of war machines ... I found 
myself often contemplating a bunker or the silhouette of some submarine 
seen at a distance, wondering why their polished forms were so inscrutable', 
he writes. His first reflections related these forms to: 
... zoomorphism, to metamorphism, but all of that was comparison, imitation 
and could not satisfy me. Then I believed these forms were inscrutable 
because they all related to speeds that were different, excessive... But the 
over-production of movement implied by war changed the way things looked; 
the motor, since it relates directly to the state of paradoxical wakefulness 
replaced the causal idea - that was its revolution; the motor proceeds from 
the soul. (1991a: 103) 
The deepest threat is the systematic elimination of genuine religious con-
sciousness (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 124). In his UHoHzon negatif 
(1984) Virilio specifies the nature of this threat and the military as false 
priesthood. It is a struggle between two temporalities: the 'instant' is the 
warrior, the 'eternal' the priest (1991a: 291). The condition of nuclear pure 
war sees the emergence of the cult of military-scientistic objects, a millen-
arianism founded as a cargo cult of the arsenal. It is the evocation of a 
mystical apocalypse through the 'adoration of vehicles'. It is 'the nuclear 
faith' (1991a: 305), a pure parody of religion. Virilio is fighting the war of a 
new virtual Christian priesthood. 
Bunkers in the Desert 
... the apocalypse is here. It could happen at any moment... [it] is hidden in 
development itself, in the development of arms - that is, in the non-develop-
ment of society. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 139) 
What happens to the bunker in the 1980s? In the key essay of UHorizon 
negatif he suggests pure speed and pure war are desert forms, devoid of 
human life and historical events. The desert as the negative horizon; the 
desert as 'the last figure of the bunker' (1984: 210). It is one of the effects of 
a series of important transformations: capital accumulation is to be under-
stood as the accumulation of wealth and wealth as condensation of speed. 
But speed is above all transport and as transportation structures accelerate 
it becomes clear that what occurs is above all a revolution in the transporta-
tion of messages, to the radical dematerialization of carriers: pure 

98 Theory, Culture & Society 
communication and the dramatic disappearance of man, cities, citizens. 
This radical situation makes even more significant the new value of the 
simple act of presence: in the Latin American case, a visible protest, a 
witness to the disappearance of individuals. With the emergence of the 
speed of the new media all peoples are exposed to a similar process, and 
also tend to disappear, 'as if by magic' (in Rotzer, 1995 [1986]: 101-2). 
When pure war changed gear and the Gulf War broke out in 1991, 
Virilio was keen to locate and analyse, just like Baudrillard, its new logic, 
in the light of theorizing over 25 years. Virilio's analysis, in UEcran du 
desert (1991b) concluded that a shift had indeed taken place and this was 
the first 'post-modern war' (1991b: 177) in the sense that it was now clear, 
as had been foreseen, many of the temporal and spatial aspects of war had 
been completely transformed by communication and other technologies 
(see the commentary on this transition in Bogard, 1996: 78-97). This war 
was, for Virilio, a world war 'in miniature', and deserved to be known as 
World War III 'in reduction' (1991b: 162), where the military vision ma-
chine proved itself sovereign. The instantaneity of decision-making 
through information produced at an unprecedented speed meant that 
space-time relations were fused in a total 'electromagnetic environment' 
(1991b: 165). Much has been made of the apparent difference between 
Baudrillard and Virilio on the Gulf War, indeed the difference appeared 
sharp at the time. Yet Virilio introduced the spectre of the '4th front': the 
speed of communication and information is so rapid and decisive it rules 
out at a stroke effective responsibility and democratic control. It creates 
the paradoxical elimination of the distinction between true and false, the 
fusion of object and image, even of defence and attack (1991b: 182). And 
Baudrillard wrote at the time: 
... in confronting our opinions on the war with the diametrically opposed 
opinions of Paul Virilio, one of us betting on apocalyptic escalation and the 
other on deterrence and the indefinite virtuality of war, we concluded that 
this decidedly strange war went in both directions at once. (Baudrillard, 
1995: 49) 
But this conclusion is superficial. For Baudrillard the crucial point 
was that the separation between war and peace was dissolved into virtual 
transpolitical forms. Virilio, on the other hand requires the separation of 
the two terms in order to perform his critique. We can say, therefore, that 
Virilio noted something Baudrillard did not: a new situation of the bunker. 
Unlike the bunkers on the Atlantic Wall, Saddam's bunkers were hidden 
and disguised, resembling other 'furtive' phenomena of this new type of 
war (1991b: 119). These bunkers were hidden in the desert, a modern 
Atlantis. Thus Virilio, from a Baudrillardian point of view, seems to have 
taken at face value the war machine's own propaganda (see Keeble, 1997: 
166—87, esp. 180), a further absolute reversal had taken place. The 
destructive arms were now exposed, but the defensive infrastructures were 

Gane - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 
99 
disguised (1991b: 121). The new bunkers were proof against nuclear 
attack and designed to maintain hundreds of soldiers in a new kind of 
hostile environment with sophisticated air filtration systems (1991b: 121). 
On the other hand one of the great 'errors' of the allies was to have bombed 
a civilian bunker less well disguised than others (1991b: 189, 185-6), 
compounded, paradoxically, by the problem of an inability to assess 
accurately the effect of its attacks, even with all the immense panoply of 
sophisticated spying apparatuses. These seemed able only to give precise 
information about position, not to be able to play any significant qualitative 
role in the verification of damage inflicted. 
Grey (Bunker) Ecology 
... a pollution no longer atmospheric or hydrospheric but dromospheric. 
(Virilio, 1997: 64) 
Virilio has often complained that people do not understand his position, 
that: 'war and not commerce is the source of the city, as they don't accept the 
negativity of technology' (1997: 24). Thus we must be clear: war and peace 
are not simply opposite states. They do not figure as unique categories, but 
are transformed into each other: the priest transforms war into peace, the 
warrior transforms peace into war. Virilio models himself, however, not on a 
Christian example, but on a pagan example: the Greeks brought politics and 
citizenship into existence out of war. In the Agon the individual dies for the 
city. He exchanges this death for a new life. But in the new situation the 
'military man is a false priest because the question of death doesn't interest 
him. He's an executioner, not a priest. A new inquisitor' (Virilio and 
Lotringer, 1997: 49). 
Virilio is also fascinated by the emergence of a new type of inertial 
mode of being, and in particular Howard Hughes, who 'ended up a 
technological monk in the desert of Las Vegas, without getting out of bed' 
(Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 73). All he did was to watch films. He saw Ice 
Station Zebra 164 times: 'he never stopped watching a film that represented 
exactly that same inertia in a polar city...' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 73). 
'What fascinated me about Howard Hughes ... was the fact that he managed 
to foreshadow a mass situation' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 74). But, asks 
Virilio: 'Who are these people fascinated by their electronic windows?' This 
interests him since here 'we have a phenomenon of inertia and death on the 
spot... a sedentariness in dead time' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 74). So: 
pure war which is infinite in its preparation (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 
92), has an ineluctable but paradoxical logic. The increase in the rate of 
acceleration of communication leads to the elimination of the world's 
dimensions: point, line, surface, volume. For Virilio this is the supreme 
pollution, the pollution of space—time: 'there is no longer any "here", 
everything is "now"' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 144). 

100 Theory, Culture & Society 
Conclusion 
Virilio ... the last and best of all the saints. (Kroker, 1992: 44) 
Virilio conceives the bunker occupant in this new situation as being 
'encapsulated in the arrow of cosmic time, cut off from local time by his 
very travels, the extra-worldly navigator (or worldly televiewer) is the victim 
of an unprecedented inertia' (1997: 128). The cybernaut is an atrophied 
body 'whose safety takes precedence over all activity, to the point where, for 
him, the concrete environment has only a single point left, the point' (1997: 
128). But it is clear that Virilio is unable to find any way he can enter and 
divert this machine (unlike Baudrillard's analyses of the virus, etc.). Virilio 
does not seek to introduce a pathology, the problem for Virilio is that 
pathology, in the shape of an accident, is all too likely to become general 
(1997: 69ff). The earnest and humourless logic of Virilio's position is quite 
different therefore from that of Baudrillard. Virilio in essence has a theory of 
the relentless and accumulative dromocracy, while if Baudrillard's 'orders 
of simulacra' appear accumulative (since they abolish previous orders) in 
the end they occupy a curved space and are subject to reversibility, for the 
last judgement has already occurred ('might it not perhaps be necessary to 
replace Paul Virilio's dromology with a palindromology?' asks Baudrillard 
wickedly [1994b: 122]). Virilio tries to specify a 'grey ecology' a new kind of 
resistance (it has no means) to a new pollution (it is 'omnipolitan') (Virilio, 
1997:143). For Baudrillard, Virilio's 'attempt to escape the apocalypse of 
the virtual, is... the last of our Utopian desires' (1994b: 117). 
We should return, finally, to the basic dilemma Virilio finds himself 
facing. If 'we must get inside pure war... cover ourselves in blood and tears' 
(Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: 108), he has failed to discover from his high-
tech bunker window any mode of entry to the machine. If he fights a battle 
for the real against the virtual, presenting a resisting distance, even from a 
low-tech bunker (no television or computer screen, no fixed or - horror! -
mobile telephone, fax, a kind of Non-pendular Stabilizer) he remains a 
prophet of the last Utopia arising on the lost horizon of the social. But in the 
new situation pure war brings a new obstacle to exchange: polar inertia, so 
that eventually every 'city will be in the same place - in time' (Virilio and 
Lotringer, 1997: 61). Every Bunker will be in the same place. Virilio now 
outlines his strategy: 
Proximity, the single interface between all bodies, all places, all points of the 
world - that's the tendency. And I push this tendency to extremes. It's not 
science fiction. Science and technology develop the unknown, not know-
ledge. Science develops what is not rational. That's what fiction is. (Virilio 
and Lotringer, 1997: 62) 
To pass from fiction into the 'real', however, he must at some point, come out 
of his bunker. He is profoundly furtive about his capabilities on this front: 'I 

Gone - Virilio's Bunker Theorizing 
101 
have no solution to offer', and he adds: 'if there's a salvation it lies in the 
humility of philosophical, scientific and political thinking . . . a radical 
scientific and philosophical humility. We are nothing' (in Rotzer, 1995: 
103-4). The perfect disguise. 
Notes 
Versions of this article were read at the Universities of Nottingham and Warwick. 
Many thanks to those who took part in the discussions and to the two anonymous 
referees who read the article. 
1. It is not uncommon to find their names associated with the same publications 
(e.g. at one time on the French journal Traverses, through numerous Semiotext(e) 
publications), at the same conferences (e.g. the Looking Back on the End of the 
World collection, Kamper and Wulf, 1989), interviewed for the same publication 
series by Sylvere Lotringer for Semiotexte (see Baudrillard, 1987, and Virilio's 
discussions with Lotringer in Pure War, 1997), by Rotzer - a chapter each for Boer 
Verlag (Rotzer, 1995 [1986]), and both interviewed at book length by Philippe Petit 
for Grasset: Virilio in Cybermonde, lapolitique dupire (1996) and Baudrillard in Le 
Paroxyste indifferent (1997a). 
2. It is interesting to note that in a recent interview Virilio remarks that the 
Beaubourg was 'already a symptom of the mobilization of architecture' in a way 
which paralleled the acceleration of the real (Virilio and Brausch, 1997: 74). 
References 
Baudrillard, J. (1987) Forget Foucault. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Baudrillard, J. (1990 [1979]) Seduction. London: Macmillan. 
Baudrillard, J. (1993 [1976]) Symbolic Exchange and Death. London: Sage. 
Baudrillard, J. (1994a) Simulacra and Simulation. Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
gan Press. 
Baudrillard, J. (1994b) The Illusion of the End. Oxford: Polity. 
Baudrillard, J. (1995) The Gulf War Did not Take Place. Sydney: Power Publica-
tions. 
Baudrillard, J. (1997a) Le Paroxyste indifferent. Paris: Grasset. 
Baudrillard, J. (1997b) 'Interview: Jean Baudrillard', Dazed and Confused June: 
80-3. 
Bogard, W. (1996) The Simulation of Surveillance: Hypercontrol in Telematic 
Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kamper, D. and C. Wulf (eds) (1989) Looking Back on the End of the World. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 
Keeble, R. (1997) Secret State, Silent Press: New Militarism, the Gulf and the 
Modern Image of Warfare. Luton: University of Luton Press. 
Kroker, A. (1992) The Possessed Individual. London: Macmillan. 
Parent, C. and P. Virilio (1996) The Function of the Oblique. London: Architectural 
Association. 
Ritzer, G. (1997) Postmodern Social Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

102 Theory, Culture & Society 
Rfltzer, F. (1995 [1986]) Conversations with French Philosophers. New Jersey: 
Humanities Press. 
Virilio, P. (1984) VHorizon negatif. Paris: Galil6e. 
Virilio, P. (1986 [1977]) Speed & Politics. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1990 [1978]) Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1991a [1980]) The Aesthetics of Disappearance. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, P. (1991b) Uficran du desert. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, P (1993 [1976]) L'InsecuritS du territoire. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, P. (1994 [1975]) Bunker Archeology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Virilio, P. (1996) Cybermonde, lapolitique dupire. Paris: Grasset. 
Virilio, P. (1997) Open Sky. London: Verso. 
Virilio, P. and M. Brausch (1997) Voyage d'hiver: entretiens. Paris: Parentheses. 
Virilio, P. and S. Lotringer (1997 [1983]) Pure War. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Mike Gane is Reader in Sociology in the Department of Social Sciences at 
Loughborough University. His main interests are in the development of 
social theory and he has published widely on Durkheimian sociology, on 
Baudrillard, and he has edited two collections on Foucault. His recent 
writings have concerned Comte, Marx, Durkheim, Mauss, Lyotard, Canguil-
hem, Baudrillard and Derrida. He is a member of the editorial board of 
Economy and Society and Durkheimian Studies. 

Virilio, War and Technology 
Some Critical Reflections 
Douglas Kellner 
P
AUL VIRILIO IS one of the most prolific and penetrating critics of the 
drama of technology in the contemporary era, especially military 
technology, technologies of representation, computer and information 
technologies, and biotechnology. For Virilio, the question of technology is 
the question of our time and his life work constitutes a sustained reflection 
on the origins, nature and effects of the key technologies that have 
constituted the modern/postmodern world. In particular, Virilio carries out 
a radical critique of the ways that technology is transforming the contem-
porary world and even the human species. 
Yet I want to argue in this study that Virilio has a flawed conception of 
technology that is excessively negative and one-sided, thus missing the 
empowering and democratizing aspects of new computer and media tech-
nologies. My argument is that his vision of technology is overdetermined by 
his intense focus on war and military technology and that this optic drives 
him to predominantly technophobic perspectives on technology per se as 
well as the new technologies of the contemporary era. I contend that 
Virilio's project is essentially conservative, wishing to preserve the human 
body and natural life against the assaults of what he sees as a demonic 
technology which he regards as having a highly destructive impact on 
nature, human beings and socio-political life. However, it is precisely the 
extremely critical discourse on war and military technology, as well as his 
penetrating reflections on war, cinema, technologies of representation and 
vision machines, and biotechnology, that constitute valuable aspects of his 
work. 
Consequently, in the following pages I will follow Virilio in pursuing 
what he calls the 'riddle of technology' and interrogate his critique of 
technology, the normative position from which he assails technology and 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 103-125 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;103~125;009961] 

104 Theory, Culture & Society 
the limitations of his project. Nowhere does Virilio directly theorize tech-
nology in any systematic or sustained way, although reflections on it 
permeate his analyses, hence I will survey a broad expanse of his works to 
elucidate his perspectives. Thus, I want to probe Virilio's work on tech-
nology to determine the extent of his insight and use-value, and to indicate 
what I see as problematic in his writings. In this reading, Virilio emerges as 
one of the major critics of war, technology and vision machines in our time, 
albeit with excessively hypercritical and even technophobic proclivities. 
Speed, Politics and Technology 
We must take hold of the riddle of technology and lay it on the table as the 
ancient philosophers and scientists put the riddle of Nature out in the open, 
the two being superimposed. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 30) 
Totalitarianism is latent in technology. (Virilio, 1995a) 
In Speed and Politics (1986 [1977]), Virilio undertakes his most 
sustained attempt to delineate the importance of accelerated speed, of the 
impact of technologies of motion, of types of mobility and their effects in the 
contemporary era. Subtitled 'Essay on Dromology', Virilio proposes what he 
calls a 'dromomatics' which interrogates the role of speed in history and its 
important functions in urban and social life, warfare, the economy, trans-
portation and communication, and other aspects of everyday life. This book 
sets up the basic terms of Virilio's problematic which is to measure how 
technologies alter our sense of space, time and the body, and have an impact 
on social, political and human life in destructive ways. 
'Dromology' comes from the Latin term, dromos, signifying race, and 
dromology studies how innovations in speed influence social and political 
life. The 'dromocratic revolution' for Virilio involves means of fabricating 
speed with the steam engine, then the combustion engine, and in our day 
nuclear energy and instantaneous forms of warfare and communication. 
Speed vectors constitute the trajectory of various technologies along a fixed 
length and direction, but from no fixed point. Vectors describe any trajec-
tory along which goods, money, information or military apparatuses can 
flow, including roadways, airwaves and communication and military cir-
cuits. Territory is the space across which speed, technology, politics, 
economics and urban and everyday life traverse, via vectors of transporta-
tion, commerce, war, social interaction, communication and information. 
From a political and military perspective, territory is the space of human 
habitation, it is a space to be defended and secured, or to be invaded and 
colonized. Within modern societies, the nation-state was the territory that 
defined politics and the city, with its public spaces and institutions, served 
as a key site of modernity. In the contemporary world, however, Virilio 
argues that the city has been displaced by technologies of speed and power, 
and the spaces of politics are being usurped by the forces of technology. 
Virilio was initially an urbanist who describes the city as a dwelling 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
105 
place organized by channels of communication and transportation, 
penetrated by roadways, canals, coastlines, railroads and now airports. 
Each crossing has its speed limits, its regulations, and its systematic 
enclosure and spaces within a system of societal organization. The city 
itself is in part a conglomeration of these roads, a stop-over for travel, and a 
system of 'habitable circulation' (Virilio, 1986: 6). City life unfolds in the 
spectacle of the street with its progressions and movements, its institutions 
and events, mobilizing and moving flows of traffic and people. Likewise, 
politics unfolds in the streets and in urban sites of debate, demonstrations, 
revolt and insurrection. 
For Virilio, the city and its institutions have military origins. In his 
view, the medieval cathedral and early modern fortified cities were military 
sites. In Virilio's words: 'Before it became the throne of totality, the 
Christian sanctuary was a stronghold, a bunker, a fortified church for those 
who remained within it; all their powers and capacities were deployed and 
strengthened in, through and as combat" (1986: 38). Likewise, although 
Virilio himself does not make this point, the early Christian missions in the 
Americas were military fortifications used by the colonizing powers as 
defense and control mechanisms. 
In the military sphere, the city no longer serves as a break against 
military conquest and as a site of protection of its citizens when instan-
taneous violence can assault it from hidden spaces (airplanes, nuclear 
submarines and missiles). With politics occurring through media and infor-
mation circuits, the time of deliberation and consensus is obliterated. Space 
and time are thus overwhelmed by technologies that travel at ever faster 
speeds and as new technologies instantaneously circulate images and 
information across space. 
Dromology also involves analysis of the forces that brake or diminish 
speed as well as those forces that accelerate it. War, for instance, involves 
both offensive attempts to rapidly control space and territory contrasted to 
defensive efforts to slow down the attack, to decelerate the offensive, just as 
laws and rules brake or slow down certain actions deemed destructive to the 
community. Virilio claims that the acceleration of speed dramatically 
increased in the 19th century with the combustion engine to electric 
telegraphy, a period in which first transportation is greatly speeded up and 
then communication takes place instantaneously over great distances, thus 
obliterating traditional barriers of time and space. Consequently, the gen-
eration of modernity involves transition from the age of the brake to that of 
the accelerator (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 44f), as intensification of speed 
generates new economic, political, social and other forms. 
Virilio argues that the role of speed had been previously overlooked in 
the organization of civilizations and politics and that speed is crucial, as 
well, to the production of wealth and power. Rejecting the forms of economic 
determinism associated with Marxism, without ignoring economic con-
ditions, Virilio's dromology focuses on those instruments that accelerate 
and intensify speed and that augment the wealth and power of those groups 

106 Theory, Culture & Society 
who control them. In his vision, it is groups like the military, the state and 
the corporation which control speed and become dominant societal powers. 
This situation produces an accelerating decline of the public sphere and 
democratic politics, and increasing power of the military, which, for Virilio, 
becomes a key force in politics and society whose importance he believes is 
often underestimated. 
Virilio thus makes important conceptual connections between tech-
nology, speed and war. In Virilio's view, the importance of warfare in 
understanding human history had been grossly undervalued. For Virilio, 
the need for defense and the preparation for war was at the origins of the 
foundation of cities, while logistics, the preparation for war, begins the 
modern industrial economy, fueling development of a system of specialized 
and mechanized mass production. War and logistics require increased 
speed and efficiency, and technology provides instruments that create 
more lethal and effective instruments of war. The acceleration of speed 
and technology, in turn, create more dynamic industry, and an industrial 
system that obliterates distances in time and space through the development 
of technologies of transportation, communication and information. The fate 
of the industrial system is thus bound up with the military system which 
provides, in Virilio's vision, its origins and impetus. 
Hence, on Virilio's optic, cities, cathedrals, the economy, politics and 
other key aspects of the modern world are products of military and 
technological mobilization and deployment. In his view, war technology 
serves as a constitutive force of history, producing many calamities. For 
Virilio, the system of deterrence in the Cold War nuclear stalemate created 
a situation in which technological development channels technology into 
military forms and technocratic political domination. In this situation, 
'Weapons and armor constantly need to be strengthened. Technological 
development thus leads to economic depletion. The war-machine tends 
toward societal non-development' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 5). With 
more and more resources going to the military and military imperatives 
dominating production, government and the evolution of science and tech-
nology in the Cold War and beyond, societal development is undermined 
and social underdevelopment becomes a defining mark of contemporary 
societies. 
This process culminates in what Virilio calls 'pure war', which is 
'improperly named "deterrence11 by the apologists of nuclear conflagration', 
and marks 'the emergence of a cult, the institution of a military scientific 
messianisrri9 similar to primitive cargo cults (1998a: 90 [1984]). Pure war 
advocates salvation through armament, faith in nuclear deterrence, sub-
mission to a system of mass destruction in the hopes that it will provide 
protection and security. Appropriately named MAD, such 'mutually assured 
destruction' constitutes for Virilio the insanity of the Cold War, the arms 
race and the erection of systems of mass destruction in which contemporary 
societies mobilize for the perpetual possibility of war, thus existing in a 
condition of 'pure war'. 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
107 
In addition, for Virilio, the acceleration of events, technological 
development and speed in the current era designates 'a double movement 
of implosion and explosion', so that 'the new war machine combines a 
double disappearance: the disappearance of matter in nuclear disintegration 
and the disappearance of places in vehicular extermination' (Virilio, 1986: 
134). The increased speed of destruction in military technology is moving 
toward the speed of light with laser weapons and computer-controlled 
weapons systems constituting a novelty in warfare in which there are no 
longer geo-strategic strongpoints since from any given spot we can now 
reach any other, producing what Virilio calls 'a strategy of Brownian move-
ment through geostrategic homogenization of the globe' (Virilio, 1986:135). 
Thus, ''strategic spatial miniaturization is now the order of the day', with 
microtechnologies transforming production and communication, shrinking 
the planet and preparing the way for what Virilio calls 'pure war', a situation 
in which military technologies and an accompanying technocratic system 
come to control every aspect of life. 
In Virilio's view, the war machine is the demiurge of technological 
development and an ultimate threat to humanity, producing 'a state of 
emergency' in which nuclear holocaust threatens the very survival of the 
human species. The ever increasing diminution of the time of reaction in 
nuclear crisis situations, the fatal 'one minute', takes issues of war and 
peace out of the hands of deliberating bodies and the public, putting the 
fatal power in the hands of techno-elites and their machines. This involves a 
shift from a 'geo-politics' to a 'chrono-politics', from a politics of space to a 
politics of time, in which whoever controls the means of instant information, 
communication and destruction becomes a dominant socio-political force. 
For Virilio, every technological system contains its specific form of accident 
and a nuclear accident would, of course, be catastrophic. Hence, in the 
contemporary nuclear era, in which weapons of mass destruction could 
create a world holocaust, we are thrust into a permanent state of emergency 
that enables the nuclear state to impose its imperatives on ever more 
domains of political and social life, disciplining and regulating populations 
to submit to the authority and dictates of the state and military. 
Politics too succumbs to the logic of speed and potential catastrophe 
as increased speed in military violence, instantaneous information and 
communication and the flow of events diminishes the time and space of 
deliberation, discussion and the building of consensus that is the work of 
politics. Speed and war thus undermine politics, with technology replacing 
democratic participation and the complexity and rapidity of historical 
events rendering human understanding and control ever more problemati-
cal. Ubiquitous and instantaneous media communication in turn makes 
spin-control and media manipulation difficult, but essential, to political 
governance. Moreover, the need for fast spin control and effective media 
politics further diminishes the space and role of democratic political par-
ticipation and interaction. 

108 Theory, Culture & Society 
For Virilio, technology drives us into new modes of speed and motion, 
it carries us along predetermined trajectories. He believes that the question: 
'Can we do without technology?' cannot be asked as such. We are forced to 
expand the question of technology not only to the substance produced, but 
also to the accident produced. The riddle of technology we were talking about 
before is also the riddle of the accident. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 31-2) 
Virilio contends that every technological system generates its specific form 
of accident: with the invention of the ship, you get the shipwreck; the plane 
brings plane crashes; the automobile, car accidents and so on. For Virilio, 
the technocratic vision is one-sided and flawed in that it postulates a perfect 
technological system, a seamless cybernetic realm of instrumentality and 
control in which all processes are determined by and follow technical laws. 
In the real world, however, accidents are part and parcel of technological 
systems, they expose technology's limitations, they subvert idealistic visions 
of technology. Accidents are consequently, in Virilio's view, an integral part 
of all modes of transportation, industrial production, war and military 
organization and other technological systems. 
Virilio further argues that new technologies alter our mode of percep-
tion and experience, change the way we see and encounter the world, and 
that in particular technologies of speed have produced an increasingly 
fragmented, discontinuous and transhistorical mode of experience that 
grasps instances, fragments and partial relations rather than whole fields. 
In his view, technological time has invaded the time and space of the city 
and other sites of habitation, creating new rhythms and modes of interaction 
that dramatically transform social and everyday life. Virilio describes what 
he calls 'endo-colonization' in which the state and technology colonize their 
own urban spaces and come to increasingly colonize the mind and body, as 
the eruption of new 'vision machines' and information technologies create 
autonomous realms of experience and perception. 
Technology and Representation: From Vision Machines to 
Information Technologies 
These new technologies try to make virtual reality more powerful than actual 
reality, which is the true accident. The day when virtual reality becomes 
more powerful than reality will be the day of the big accident. Mankind never 
experienced such an extraordinary accident. (Virilio, 1997a: 43) 
With War and Cinema (1989 [1984]) and his subsequent writings such as 
The Vision Machine (1994 [1988]), Polar Inertia (1998b [1990], The Art of 
the Motor (1995d [1993]), Open Sky (1997b [1995]) and Cybermonde (1996), 
Virilio focuses more on the relation between war, speed, technology and the 
means of representation, particularly vision machines and the logistics of 
perception embodied in cinema, computers and new virtual reality 
machines. War, Virilio suggests, has long been dependent on the logistics 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
109 
of representation, on providing accurate depictions of the enemy's troop and 
weapons deployment. As technologies of pictorial surveillance progressed, 
cinematic representation became more salient to military strategy although, 
more recently, informatics, computer simulation and satellite imaging have 
become more central. 
From approximately 1904, accelerating in the First World War, and 
until the recent high-tech explosion, the apparatus of cinema was deployed 
as part of military strategy, involving lighting the terrain of battle and enemy 
forces, accurately representing their strength and movement, and instanta-
neously perceiving the actual battlefield itself as a dynamic field of motion, 
all of which were crucial to military strategy. Cinema, too, followed a certain 
military logic, with great directors serving as dictators and authoritarian 
orchestrators of cinematic spectacle, leading Virilio to conclude that: 'War 
is cinema, and cinema is war' (1989: 26). 
Cinema has long been part of Virilio's imaginary and his reflections on 
cinema and war cover a vast expanse of modern history, providing a unique 
take on the history of cinema and the ways that modes of cinematic 
representation are also crucial to war and society. Virilio's theme is the 
progressive dematerialization of warfare in high-tech and virtual war, in 
which technologies progressively replace human beings: 
What the video artist Nam June Paik calls the triumph of the electronic image 
over universal gravity has carried this [dematerialization] still further. The 
sense of weightlessness and suspension of ordinary sensations indicates the 
growing confusion between 'ocular reality' and its instantaneous, mediated 
representation. The intensity of automatic weaponry and the new capacities 
of photographic equipment combine to project a final image of the world, a 
world in the throes of dematerialization and eventual total disintegration, one 
in which the cinema of the Lumiere brothers becomes more reliable than 
Junger's melancholy look-out who can no longer believe his eyes. (1989: 73) 
This passage refers to the tendency of technology to displace modes of 
human perception and representation in military planning and execution, as 
computer programs replace military planners and computer simulations 
replace charts and maps of the territory. On the level of the battlefield 
itself, human power is replaced by machines, reducing the soldier to a cog in 
a servomechanism. Virilio comments: 
The disintegration of the warrior's personality is at a very advanced stage. 
Looking up, he sees the digital display (opto-electronic or holographic) of the 
windscreen collimator; looking down, the radar screen, the onboard computer, 
the radio and the video screen, which enables him to follow the terrain with its 
four or five simultaneous targets; and to monitor his self-navigating Side-
winder missiles fitted with a camera of infra-red guidance system. (1989: 84) 
With The Vision Machine (1994 [1988]) and Virilio's subsequent 
reflections on information and computer technologies, the epistemological 

110 Theory, Culture & Society 
turn to focus on modes of representation and the logistics of perception 
decenter, to some extent, Virilio's intense focus on war, though his 
interconnection of the themes of war, technology and representation give a 
unity and coherence to his otherwise highly fragmentary and elusive 
thought. 
In the concluding chapter of The Vision Machine (1994), Virilio 
distinguishes between painting as the age of the image's formal logic, 
photography and film as the age of the image's dialectical logic, and video 
recording, holography and computer graphics as the beginning of an age of 
paradoxical logic: the latter emerges 'when the real-time image dominates 
the thing represented, real time subsequently prevailing over real space, 
virtuality dominating actuality and turning the very concept of reality on its 
head' (1994: 63). In this situation, images and representations replace the 
real, the object of representation declines in importance, and a domain of 
images and digital representation replaces reality. Culturally, this involves 
the proliferation of new vision machines that generate an artificial realm of 
data, images and information that constitute a novel realm of experience. In 
war, it involves new modes of weapons based on the annihilation of time 
(just as nuclear technology involved the disintegration of matter and space). 
Just as computers and new image machines dramatically transform the 
nature of culture, so too do new laser technologies, modes of surveillance, 
and new forms of image warfare, disinformation and high-tech military 
spectacle change the nature of war (1994: 66f), as was evident in the Gulf 
War. 
The Vision Machine did not, however, explore in any great detail the 
new forms of information technology, multimedia or high-tech warfare, 
providing instead an introduction to the ways that vision machines influence 
perception and representation. It is in Polar Inertia (1998b [1990]), The Art 
of the Motor (1995d [1993]), Open Sky (1997b [1995]), and many interviews 
and articles of the 1990s that Virilio interrogates the new information 
technology. His central insight is that new information, communication 
and transportation technologies are taking us out of this world, beyond the 
limits of space and time, outside of nature and the material world into a new 
dimension with its own temporality, spatiality and modes of being. Virilio 
fears that this journey will take us out of our bodies, minds, nature and world 
as we have experienced and known them into a terrifying new sphere that 
will cause disastrous, possibly fatal, mutations of mind, body and experi-
ence. 
For Virilio, the astronauts are harbingers of a new experience beyond 
the familiar space and time coordinates of material existence. Shot into 
outer space beyond the laws of gravity and earth's spatial and temporal 
coordinates, the astronauts found themselves in a no-place and no-time 
continuum without fixed coordinates or dimensions. In this new dimension, 
some experienced a vertigo of intense disorientation and collapsed into 
madness after their return, or into strange metaphysical musings. Virilio's 
comments here, however, are somewhat anecdotal and serve more as 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
111 
metaphorical and rhetorical devices to dramatize the strangeness of outer 
space travel and the displacement of our scientific and conceptual schemes 
in this new dimension than a serious scrutiny of the effects of space flight on 
human beings. Such statements are typical of his propensity to exaggerate 
negative effects, fixing on as examples extreme cases (i.e. madness after 
space flight) of the negative effects of new technologies, rather than sorting 
out positive and negative features and carrying out sustained investigations 
of the actual effects of technologies. 
Cyberspace, Virilio claims, supplies another space without the usual 
space-time coordinates that generates a disorienting and disembodying 
form of experience in which communication and interaction takes place 
instantaneously in a new global time, overcoming boundaries of time and 
space. It is a disembodied space with no fixed coordinates in which one 
loses anchorage in one's body, nature and social community. It is thus for 
Virilio a dematerialized and abstract realm in which cybernauts can become 
lost in space and divorced from their bodies and social world. 
In addition, Virilio analyzes and denounces what he calls 4a pernicious 
industrialization of vision' (1997b: 89) and what he fears is a displacement 
of vision by machines. Virilio is afraid that vision machines are increasingly 
seeing for us, ranging from cameras to video to satellite surveillance to 
nanotechnology which probes the body (and next the mind?). He fears that 
media like cinema and television train and constrain vision, leading to 
degradation of vision and experience: 
If, according to Kafka, cinema means pulling a uniform over your eyes, 
television means pulling on a straitjacket, stepping up an eye training regime 
that leads to eye disease, just as the acoustic intensity of the walkman ends in 
irreversible lesions in the inner ear. (1997b: 97) 
But even more, he fears that the 'standardization of vision feared by 
Kafka' will: 
... make way for a sort of electro-ergonomic suppressant, in which design of 
the pathways of waves and their sequential aesthetic will replace the movie 
theatre for the viewer armed with an audiovisual helmet that relays the 
eyeball's mis en scene, the optic nerve irradiated by laser beams reproducing 
on the screen of the occipital cortex that fine line of light once produced by 
the old movie projector. (1997b: 94) 
In other words, he fears that substitution of audiovisual helmets in virtual 
reality devices will replace the previous emphasis on natural sight, creating 
a new technological aesthetic and new mechanization of sight: 
There is no need to look for any further reasons for the decline of the film 
industry: following on from the innovation of the earlier vision machines of 
photography, film or video, we are already seeing the beginnings of a true 
'mechanization of perception', whereby the intrusion of optoelectronic 

112 Theory, Culture & Society 
devices right inside the nervous system partly explains the abandonment of 
projection rooms which have also become smaller and smaller. (1997b: 94-5) 
Moreover, Virilio fears that we are increasingly subjected to bombard-
ment by images and information and thus by 'a discreet pollution of our 
vision of the world through the sundry tools of communication' (1997b: 96). 
Virilio thus demonizes modern information and communication technolo-
gies, suggesting that they are doing irreparable damage to the human being. 
Sometimes over-the-top rhetorical, as in the passages just cited, Virilio's 
1990s comments on new information technology suggest that he is deploying 
the same model and methods to analyze the new technologies that he used 
for war technology. He speaks regularly of an 'information bomb' that is set 
to explode (1995a, 1995b, 1995c, 1997a, 1997b), evoking the specter of 'a 
choking of the senses, a loss of control of reason of sorts' in an explosion of 
information and attendant disinformation. 
Deploying his earlier argument concerning technology and the acci-
dent, Virilio argues that the information superhighway is just waiting for a 
major accident to happen (1995a, 1995b, 1997a, 1997b), which will be a 
new kind of global accident, affecting the whole globe, 'the accident of 
accidents' (Epicurus): 
The stock market collapse is merely a slight prefiguration of it. Nobody has 
seen this generalized accident yet. But then watch out as you hear talk about 
the 'financial bubble' in the economy: a very significant metaphor is used 
here, and it conjures up visions of some kind of cloud, reminding us of other 
clouds just as frightening as those of Chernobyl... (1995b) 
In a 1995 interview with German media theorist Friedrich Kittler 
(1995c), titled 'The Information Bomb', Virilio draws an analogy between 
the nuclear bomb and the 'information bomb', talking about the dangers of 
'fallout' and 'radiation' from both. In contrast to the more dialectical Kittler, 
Virilio comes off as exceedingly technophobic in this exchange and deploys 
an amalgam of military and religious metaphors to characterize the world of 
the new technologies. In one exchange, Virilio claims that 'a caste of 
technology-monks is coming up in our times', and 'there exist monasteries 
(of sorts) whose goal it is to pave the way for a (kind of) "civilization" that 
has nothing to do with civilization as we remember it'. These monks are 
avatars of a 'technological fundamentalism' and 'information monotheism', a 
world-view that replaces previous humanist and religious world-views, 
displacing man and god in favor of technology. 
[This world-view] comes into being in a totally independent manner from any 
controversy. It is the outcome of an intelligence without reflection or past. 
And with it goes what I think is the greatest danger (of all), the derailment, 
the sliding down into the Utopian, into a future without humanity. And that is 
what worries me. I believe that violence, nay hyperviolence, springs out of 
this fundamentalism. 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
113 
Virilio goes on to claim that fallout from the 'information bomb' will be 
as lethal for the socius as nuclear bombs, destroying social memory, 
relations, traditions and community with an instantaneous bombardment 
and overload of information. Thus, the technological 'monks' who promote 
the information revolution are guilty of 'sins in technical fundamentalism, of 
which we witness the consequences, the evil effects, today'. One wonders, 
however, if the discourse of 'sin', 'evil' and 'fundamentalism' is appropriate 
to characterize the effects and uses of new technologies which are, contrary 
to Virilio, hotly and widely debated, hardly monolithic and, in my view, 
highly ambiguous, mixing what might be appraised as positive and negative 
features and effects. 
Yet Virilio is probably correct that the dominant discourse is largely 
positive and uncritical, and that we should be aware of negative aspects and 
costs of the new technologies and debate their construction, structure, uses 
and effects. Virilio is also right that they constitute at least a threat to 
community and social relations, as previously established, though one could 
argue that the new communities and social relations generated by use of the 
new information and entertainment technologies have positive dimensions 
as well as potentially negative ones — an issue that takes us to the question 
of Virilio's normative perspectives on technology. 
Disappearance and Loss: Virilio's Critique 
We now have the aesthetics of the disappearance of a numerical, unstable 
image of fleeting nature, whose persistence is exclusively retinal. (Virilio, 
1991a: 36) 
In his recent writings, Virilio engages the ways that new technologies are 
penetrating the human body and psyche, taking over previous biological, 
perceptual and creative functions of human beings, making humans appen-
dages of a technological apparatus. He writes: 'I am a materialist of the body 
which means that the body is the basis of all my work' (Virilio, 1997a: 47). 
In his early work, Virilio spoke of the body as 'a vector of speed' and 
'metabolic vehicle' in which increased speed and velocity overwhelmed the 
human sensorium and empowered technologies of speed over humans 
(1986). These reflections on technology, speed and war, recall Walter 
Benjamin who pointed out that the human body simply could not absorb 
the speed and lethality of modern war (1969). 
In more recent work, Virilio has described the body as a planet, as a 
unique center around which objects gravitate, and criticizes an increasing 
derealization of the body in cyberspace and virtual technologies (1997a, 
1997b). He also critiques biotechnology that is invading the body and 
reconstituting the human being (1995d). In The Art of the Motor, Virilio 
claims that 'The technology question is inseparable from the question of 
where technology occurs', noting 'the very recent advent of nanotechnologi-
cal miniaturization' promoting 'biotechnology's physiological intrusion into, 

114 Theory, Culture & Society 
or insemination of, the living organism' (1995d: 99). Recent progress in 
technoscience, Virilio claims, 'has today resulted in the gradual 
colonization of the organs and entrails of man's animal body, the invasion 
of the microphysical finishing off the job that the geophysical invasion 
began' (1995d: 100). Such biotechnology leads to the intraorganic intrusion 
of technology and its micromachines into the heart of the living9 (1995d: 
100). 
Virilio fears here a 'postindustrial metadesign' of the human being, in 
which the "transplant revolution', biogenetic engineering and nanotechnol-
ogy will generate a new species of being, 'hyperactive man' which he sees as 
a caricature of Nietzsche's 'superman'. This analysis in conjunction with his 
critique of information technology discloses a conservative desire to pre-
serve life and human beings as they are, positing technology as a demonic 
threat to life and the human. Virilio thus operates with a Manichean value 
system, rooted in materialist phenomenology, that contrasts a positive 'life' 
and the human to a negatively interpreted technology. This normative 
position, never spelled out but implicit throughout his writings, constitutes 
an optic in which technology is seen as a dire threat to human life itself. 
Virilio is thus in part a materialist humanist and phenomenologist who 
is disturbed by the invasion of the human body by technology and the 
substitution of the technological for the human and lived experience. His 
project is to describe the losses, the disappearances, the substitutions and 
the invasions of new technologies, noting how technology displaces human 
faculties and experience, subjecting individuals to ever more powerful 
modes of technological domination and control. Virilio criticizes the dis-
courses of technophilia, that would celebrate technology as salvation, that 
are totally positive without critical reservations, but he himself is equally 
one-sided, developing a highly technophobic and hypercritical discourse 
that fails to articulate any positive aspects or uses for new technologies, 
claiming that critical discourses like his own are necessary to counter the 
overly optimistic and positive discourses. In a sense, this is true and justifies 
Virilio's predominantly negative discourse, but raises questions concerning 
the adequacy of Virilio's perspectives on technology as a whole and the 
extent to which his work is of use in theorizing the new technologies with 
their momentous and dramatic transformation of every aspect of our social 
and everyday life. 
There is a strong convergence on some themes between Virilio and 
Jean Baudrillard concerning the radical breaks and ruptures in the contem-
porary technological world with past modes of social organization, as well as 
significant differences in theorizing this rupture. For Baudrillard, postmo-
dernity means the end of reality, the end of being able to distinguish 
between the real and unreal, the end of being anchored in and living in a 
real material world. On Baudrillard's optic, we dwell increasingly in the 
realms of hyperreality: broadcast media, the cyberspace of computer inter-
action, video and computer games, and a range of mass-mediated worlds -
film, music, multimedia and VR devices. Moreover, it becomes increasingly 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
115 
difficult to distinguish between the real and hyperreal, leading to a dissolu-
tion of the real. Thus, as Virilio notes, The question of modernity and 
postmodernity is superseded by that of reality and post-reality' (1994: 84). 
Yet Virilio differs from Baudrillard in his theorizing of contemporary 
technological society. In an interview with John Armitage published in this 
issue, Virilio says that he disagrees with Baudrillard over the issue of 
simulation, seeing simulation not as an obliteration of reality, but instead 
as substitution, in which a technological reality replaces a human one, as 
photography substitutes itself for real life, or film substitutes the static 
representation of the real with 'moving pictures', or, in our day, when virtual 
reality substitutes itself for 'real life'. Consequently, unlike Baudrillard, 
Virilio believes reality does not disappear, but is rather displaced by 
another mode of reality, a virtual reality: Thus, there is no simulation, but 
substitution. Reality has become symmetrical. The splitting of reality in two 
parts is a considerable event which goes beyond simulation' (Virilio, 1997a: 
43). Thus, whereas for Baudrillard reality disappears in hyperreality, for 
Virilio new technologies provide a substitute reality, a virtual reality which 
becomes more powerful and seductive than ordinary reality. 
While Virilio focuses intensely on speed and a simultaneous eruption 
of a dialectic of implosion and explosion, both he and Baudrillard theorize 
inertia and the crisis of the subject and the political in the contemporary 
moment, evoking the end of history and politics. More than Virilio, who 
often expresses his own political and religious passions, Baudrillard more 
neutrally describes, accepts, perhaps even affirms, the end of politics and 
history, in the 'catastrophe of modernity'. Virilio, by contrast, wants to 
preserve and expand the social and politics against pure war and the 
military, opposing a transpolitics which denies the continued relevance of 
modern politics. 
Both Virilio and Baudrillard describe the loss of key human capacities 
and powers in the contemporary world under the influence of always 
accelerating technology, while Virilio, in The Lost Dimension (1991b 
[1984]) and other works, deals with the decline of the city, its decentering 
and displacement in the information and postindustrial society. For Virilio, 
the city is decentered in relation to the rise of suburbs and then telecommu-
nications and new sites of work and interaction in a postindustrial society. 
Virilio's 'overexposed city' is penetrated by media and advertising, infor-
mation technology, and what Debord called the 'Society of the Spectacle', 
overwhelming urban space and life. In Virilio's vision (1991b: 9fi), the 
urban walls and gateways have given way to a plethora of openings to media 
channels, information and communication networks and diverse new tech-
nologies. Each technology is a window to the outside world, and new 
cybertechnology obliterates urban boundaries and spaces in favor of the 
geo-political channels of the global world and atopic cyberspace. Exposed 
to global culture and communication, the city loses its specificity and city 
life gives way to technological cyberlife, an aleatory, heterogeneous and 

116 Theory, Culture & Society 
fractured space, and a world-time that enables individuals to experience 
events simultaneously from every time zone in the world. 
Henceforth, fragmentary images derived from diverse sources consti-
tute one's 'image of the city', rather than the grids of maps or personal 
experience. Virilio is analyzing a momentous shift in the image and imaging 
of the world, of what he calls a 'morphological irruption', of an 'iconological 
disruption' mutating from perception to quantitative representation and 
then to digitization. This shift in experience progressively volatilizes the 
real and obliterates the object of lived experience into technological modes 
of representation, that constitute a derealization and dematerialization of 
the object. That is, whereas the object of lived experience was once an 
object of perception, an object seen and handled by the bodily subject, the 
objects of cyberspace and virtual reality - as well as the objects of contem-
porary scientific theory - are abstract and immaterial, generating a new form 
of technological idealism. 
For Virilio, theories of light and speed replace time and space, as a 
new immateriality and 'new illuminism' comes to dominate contemporary 
scientific thinking. Virilio believes that, as with the notions of critical mass 
or temperature, when states of affairs break up and become radically other, 
space too becomes 'critical' (Virilio, 1997b: 9ff). The notion of 'critical 
space' refers to the breaking up and dissolution of previous configurations of 
lived space and time under the impact of technology. For Virilio, telecom-
munication that eradicates all duration and extension of time in the trans-
mission of messages and images, as well as interactive computer 
technologies that decenter urban or lived space, all constitute threats and 
dissolutions of previous configurations of experience as space becomes 
virtual and takes on new modalities. Lived space and time are replaced by 
time-light (i.e. the time of the speed of light) and a new 'lumiocentrism' 
(1997b: 5f, 14f), in which the instantaneous flow of information ruptures 
past organizations of time and space, requiring new concepts to describe the 
parameters and processes of the emergent worlds of technology and techno-
logical experience. 
For Virilio, developments in science and technology are thus obliter-
ating both modern and common-sense views of the world and producing new 
objects and spaces that cannot be explained by modern conceptual 
schemes. The 'physics of the infinitesimally small' and the cosmological 
speculations on outer space produce novelties and puzzles that put in 
question the facts of perception and the realm of experience, while pointing 
to novel, unperceived and imperceptible entities, which confound common 
sense and current scientific schemes (Virilio, 1991b). Moreover, new tech-
nologies are producing both new domains of experience (i.e. cyberspace, 
virtual reality, etc.) and new modes of perception and representation (i.e. 
fractal geometry, computer-generated representations of external and inter-
nal realities, etc.) that themselves require new modes of thought and 
cognition. Such shifts in modes of perception and representation began 
with cinematic photography that captured motion and phenomena not 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
117 
visible to the naked eye, increased with developments in microscopes and 
telescopes, and proliferated new modes of perception and representation 
with computers and new virtual technology. 
In short, Virilio is mourning the loss of the object of ocular perception 
in the emergent forms of technological vision and representation, the 
displacement of the dimension of direct observation and common sense 
(1991b: 111), and thus the loss of the materiality and concreteness of the 
objects of perception constituting the realm of appearance and lived experi-
ence. In other words, Virilio mourns the loss of the phenomenological 
dimension that privileged lived experience. Always a phenomenologist, as 
he affirms in his interview with John Armitage in this issue, Virilio roots his 
thought in concrete experience of objects, people and processes in the 
observed and experienced worlds of everyday life and the natural and social 
worlds. The new technological worlds, for him, constitute a break and 
rupture with ordinary experience and thus shift the locus of truth, meaning 
and validity to, for Virilio, an abstract and enigmatic virtual realm. 
His commitment to phenomenology is evident in the text in Polar 
Interia (1998b [1990]: 117f) in which Virilio undertakes a reading of 
Husserl's analysis of the body and ego as the fixed locus of experience and 
perception, which he contrasts to the volatilization of the body and subject 
in contemporary science and philosophy and the experiences of cyberspace 
and virtual reality. While noting some ways in which Husserl is outdated, 
Virilio nonetheless shows his commitment to philosophical perspectives 
committed to the primacy of the body, subjective experience and concrete 
relations to the earth that he sees as being undermined in both technological 
experience and contemporary theories which deconstruct experiences of the 
body and subject. 
Virilio's complaint is that 'new technologies of instantaneous inter-
activity' - as well as space travel - cause a detachment from our body, other 
people and our habitual experiences of time, space and the lived environ-
ment (1998a: 129). These technologies 'exile us from ourselves and make us 
lose the ultimate physiological reference: the ponderous mass of the 
locomotive body, axis, or more exactly seat of comportmental motility and 
of identity' (1998a: 129). Contemporary science and technology for Virilio 
are thus producing new forms of experience, new modes of perception and 
representation, and new objects of experience that decenter the human 
subject, that replace human cognition with technological vision, and dis-
place human labor power in favor of automated technological production. 
Losing control over its world, the human subject becomes a mere recording 
device and the human body is reduced to functions in a technological 
system. Material reality is decentered and a new technological idealism 
generates concepts increasingly distant from common sense, the body and 
material world, the conceptual systems of the past and lived experience. 
In addition to the loss of the concrete object of perception and the 
material reality of the body, Virilio mourns the disappearance of the city, 
the community and the end of politics in the new globalized technopolis. 

118 Theory, Culture & Society 
Just as computer-aided production and a new virtual form of automation 
displace human labor power, so too do 'flexible accumulation' (David 
Harvey), the new global division and organization of production, and inter-
national financial markets, databases and simultaneity of information 
transmission, communication and video representation obliterate previous 
experiences and concepts of time and space, producing a grave new world of 
transnational global corporations, political organizations and cities, displa-
cing the national firm, the city, the nation-state, and previous forms and 
sites of modern politics. 
Indeed, for Virilio part of the 'lost dimension' is the end of politics in a 
world of increased speed and virtualities. This is most evident in the realm 
of military technology in which the complexity of weapon systems creates 
ever shorter response times for humans to react to frightening computer-
generated information concerning military threats and in which military 
technology itself can autonomously generate catastrophes ranging from 
'friendly fire' incidents to nuclear apocalypse. But the loss of stable 
referents of the political - the city, state, nation - in the deterritorialized 
and dematerialized virtual and global spaces of the new information econ-
omy and polity, also render human participation in politics perplexing and 
perhaps futile. 
This vision of technological domination, of technology displacing 
human beings, has echoes of the theories of 'autonomous technology' 
(Winner) developed by Heidegger, Ellul and other totalizing critics of 
contemporary technology. Virilio cites Heidegger positively on technology, 
although he also suggests critiques of Heidegger and totalitarianism, 
specifically his affiliation with German National Socialism (1986: 90, 113f, 
passim, and Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 23f). Thus, while Virilio is quasi-
Heideggerian in his perspective on technology, seeing technology as the 
enframing demiurge of the modern world, as the matrix in which human 
practice unfolds, he is clearly anti-totalitarian, and might be seen perhaps 
as a left-Heideggerian. Further, in the light of his Christian religious beliefs, 
he has certain affinities with Jacques Ellul's radical critique of technology, 
that sees technology as an autonomous force that is coming to dominate the 
contemporary world, effacing human freedom and meaning. 
Certainly, there are echoes of Ellul's technique, of a totalitarian 
tendency toward domination and destruction from technological develop-
ment, running throughout Virilio's work, although he uses more concrete 
models of war machines, or vision machines, to characterize technology, is 
less overtly totalizing than Ellul and is more muted in his religious 
perspectives. Yet there are similar themes of the demise of human autonomy 
and creativity in a world in which technique and technological development 
impose their imperatives on human beings, and both have a predominantly 
negative and critical take on what they see as the totalitarianism of modern 
technology. Like Ellul, Virilio denies the technological imperative and 
affirms the dignity and sovereignty of human life and experience against 
the world of technology and things. 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
119 
Against all forms of economic determinism and idealist humanism, 
Virilio posits an autonomous force and power of technology and describes 
the ways that it constrains economic and social life. Yet in place of Marxian 
economic determinism, Virilio arguably substitutes a form of military-
technological determinism. In his view, the military organization and 
deployment of people is the origin of proletarianization and pre-dates 
capitalism; military mobilization is exploited by political, economic and 
military forces to augment their power; and the result is the ever more 
sophisticated and lethal development of a war machine, a destructive 
apparatus that is increasingly automated, lethal, fast, effective and removed 
from human control or values, producing 'a state of emergency' in which the 
very fate of the earth and humanity is at stake. 
Summing Up: Virilio, War and Technology 
I don't claim to define the situation, I try to reveal tendencies. And I think 
I've revealed a number of important ones: the question of speed; speed as the 
essence of war; technology as producer of speed war as logistics, not strategy; 
war as preparation of means and no longer as battles, declaration of 
hostilities. (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 157) 
This passage provides a fair summary of Virilio's major themes up to the 
point where he began critiquing new information technology, multimedia 
and biotechnology. Indeed, his sustained interrogation of the virulence and 
power of military technology constituted a strong contribution, but his 
work's limitation results from using the model of military technology to 
interrogate technology as such, and particularly the new information tech-
nologies. Virilio was justly distressed by the specter of total war, by the 
forces of military-technological domination, by the inexorable growth of 
power and the danger of the military-industrial complex during the Cold 
War. During this era, the propagation and growth of the military-industrial 
complex and military state capitalism was the fundamental project and the 
organizing force behind the development of science, technology and the 
allocation of public resources. More money was spent on this project than 
any other domain of existence and military priorities helped determine the 
mode of science, technology and industry that developed in the Cold War 
period. 
Military capitalism helped produce Big Government, Big Corporations 
and a Big Military that deployed a tremendous array of manpower, weapons 
and resources. Computers were largely developed from military imperatives, 
producing large, centralized calculating machines and 
information 
machines, including the so-called 'information superhighway' which had 
its origins in the defense industry (see Edwards, 1996). The military, big 
government and giant corporations also controlled scientific and technolo-
gical research and development, with the military-industrial complex domi-
nating the post-Second World War Cold War economies (see Melman, 1965, 
1974). 

120 Theory, Culture & Society 
New information technologies, personal computers, new multimedia 
and other microtechnologies, however, have a different trajectory, history 
and, arguably, effects than those technologies criticized by Virilio. While 
his earlier works stress the connection between the military and technology, 
he does not engage the corporate forces that are producing the new infor-
mation and entertainment technologies; that is, while Virilio criticizes the 
state and the military that developed military technology of vast destruction, 
he does not focus on the political economy of the mode of information, the 
corporate forces behind this development, or its imbrication in a global 
restructuring of capitalism (compare Castells, 1989, 1996, 1997,1998). 
Thus, Virilio's recent books seem to blame the woes of the present 
moment and dangers emerging from new technologies on technology itself, 
rather than specific forces like capitalism, the state and corporations. 
Moreover, he misses a key component of the drama of technology in the 
present age which involves a titanic struggle between national and inter-
national governments and corporations to control the structure, flows and 
content of the new technologies in contrast to the struggle of individuals and 
social groups to use the new technologies for their own purposes and 
projects. Such an optic posits technology as a contested terrain, as a field 
of struggle between competing social groups and individuals trying to use 
the new technologies for their own projects. Despite his humanism, there is 
little agency or politics in Virilio's conceptual universe and he does not 
delineate the struggles between various social groups for the control of the 
new technologies and the new politics that they will produce (compare 
Kellner, forthcoming; Best and Kellner, forthcoming). Simply by damning, 
demonizing and condemning new technologies, Virilio substitutes moralis-
tic critique for social analysis and political action, reducing his analysis to a 
lament and jeremiad. 
Hence, Virilio has no theory of justice and no politics to counter, 
reconstruct, reappropriate or transform technology, as well as no counter-
forces that can oppose technology, other than critical intellectuals like 
himself. He grounds his politics of technology in a rhetorical critique and 
condemnation, rather than engaging in a project of examining and carrying 
out reconstructions of technology that will serve human purposes, reinvigo-
rate a democratic politics and help produce a more egalitarian and just 
society (compare Feenberg, 1991, 1995, 1999). Instead, his politics are 
basically conservative, attempting to conserve 'life' and the human against 
the juggernaut of technology. 
While Virilio's take on technology is excessively one-sided and 
technophobic, his work is still of importance in understanding the great 
transformation currently under way. Clearly, speed and the instantaneity 
and simultaneity of information are more important to the new economy and 
military than ever before, so Virilio's reflections on speed, technology, 
politics and culture are extremely relevant. Yet he seems so far to have 
inadequately conceptualized the enormous changes wrought by an 
infotainment society and the advent of a new kind of multimedia 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
121 
information-entertainment technology. If my hunch is correct, his view of 
technology and speed is integrally structured by his intense focus on war 
and the military, while his entire mode of thought is a form of military-
technological determinism, which forces him not only to downplay the 
important role of capital, but also the complex ambiguities, the mixture of 
positive and negative features, of the new technologies now proliferating 
and changing every aspect of society and culture in the present era. 
Virilio thus emerges as a astute theorist of the post-Second World War 
and Cold War era of the military, with the domination of military technology 
and military capitalism, but is without an adequate analysis of the compli-
city of capitalism and those economic forces that use technology for power 
and profit, instead putting all blame for contemporary problems on tech-
nology and its deployment by the military and perhaps the state. But, 
against Virilio, it should be recognized that new technologies are part of 
the capitalist project, that capital recognizes, along with Marx, that surplus 
value is gained by productive deployment of new technologies, and that 
technology provides powerful weapons of profit and social control. Yet, to 
spin the dialectic in another direction, such technology can be appro-
priated, reconfigured and deployed in a multiplicity of ways so that it is a 
mistake to reject new technologies out of hand, as does Virilio, because of 
its allegedly nefarious nature and effects. 
By eschewing critical social theory, Virilio does not have the 
resources to theorize the complex relations between capital, technology, 
the state and the military in the present age, substituting a highly elusive 
and evocative method for systematic theoretical analysis and critique. 
Virilio himself acknowledges his rhetorical approach to writing, noting: 
I don't believe in explanations. I believe in suggestions, in the obvious 
quality of the implicit. Being an urbanist and architect, I am too used to 
constructing clear systems, machines that work well. I don't believe it's 
writing's job to do the same thing. I don't like two-and-two-is-four-type 
writing. That's why, finally, I respect Foucault more than I like him. (Virilio 
and Lotringer, 1983: 38-9) 
Indeed, Virilio's style is extremely telescopic, leaping from topic to topic 
with alacrity, juxtaposing diffuse elements and themes, proliferating 
images, quotes and ideas which rapidly follow each other, often overwhelm-
ing the reader and making it difficult to grasp the thrust of his argument. His 
work is fragmentary and disruptive, deploying collage methods of assemb-
ling pieces of quotes, examples and analysis, while quickly moving from one 
topic to another. 
One could argue, in fact, that the speed which Virilio so well theorizes 
enters into the very fabric and substance of his writings. Virilio's texts move 
along quickly, they catch their topics on the run, they overwhelm with 
detail, but rarely develop a topic in systematic and sustained fashion. His 
style thus reflects his themes with speed, fragmentation and complexity the 

122 Theory, Culture & Society 
warp and woof of his work. One wonders, however, whether a critic of speed, 
war and technology should not occasionally slow down and more carefully 
and patiently delineate his theoretical position. 
To some extent, Virilio exemplifies Walter Benjamin's (1969) method 
of illuminations and fragments, which creates constellations of ideas and 
images to illuminate specific phenomena and events. Like Benjamin, Virilio 
circles his prey with images, quotes, often startling and original ideas, and 
then quickly moves on to his next topic. Virilio believes in the virtue of 
breaks and interruptions, of gaps and absences, eschewing systematic 
theorizing. But although Virilio pursues some of the same themes as 
Benjamin, deploys a similar method and cites him frequently, there are 
major differences. Whereas Benjamin, in the spirit of Brecht, wanted to 
'refunction' new technologies to make them instruments of progressive 
social change and to develop political strategies to exploit the potentially 
progressive features of new technologies, Virilio is relentlessly critical, 
eschews developing a technopolitics and nowhere speaks of using or 
refunctioning technology to serve positive ends. 
Thus, Virilio is highly one-sided and does not develop a dialectical 
conception of technology or a progressive technopolitics. So far, Virilio has 
produced no master oeuvre that will pull together his ideas and perspec-
tives, that will provide a synthetic vision. His long interviews with Sylvere 
Lotringer (1983) and John Armitage (in this issue) contain the best over-
views of what I take to be his most valuable work, but it remains to be seen 
whether he will attempt to develop a critical theory of technology for the 
present age. In addition, as a critical philosopher, Virilio is quite ascetic, 
never articulating the normative position from which he carries on such a 
sustained and ferocious critique of technology. He seems to assume some-
thing like a philosophical humanism, that human beings are significant by 
virtue of their capacity for speech, reason, integral bodily experience, 
morality, political deliberation and participation, and creative and spiritual 
activity, while technology is seen as undermining these human capacities, 
taking over human functions and rendering humans subservient to techno-
logical rationality. Virilio himself, however, does not adequately articulate 
the humanist or religious dimension of his critique and, as noted, describes 
himself as a materialist and abstains from developing the normative per-
spective from which he carries out his critique. 
But first and foremost his critique of technology has echoes of 
Heidegger's and Ellul's complaints concerning the totalitarian ethos of 
modern, and we would now add postmodern, technology, the ways that its 
instruments and instrumentality dominate human beings and create a novel 
world in which things and objects increasingly come to rule human beings. 
To the extent that Virilio's works illuminate the great transformation that we 
are currently undergoing and warn us of its dangers, too often ignored by the 
boosters and digerati of the new technologies, he provides a useful antidote 
to the uncritical celebrations of the coming computopia. But to the extent 
that he fails to provide critical perspectives which delineate how new 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
123 
technologies can be used for democratization, human empowerment and to 
create a better world, he remains a one-sided critic rather than a philos-
opher of technology who grasps the full range, effects and possibilities of the 
high-tech adventure that we are currently undergoing. 
Notes 
1. His early text Bunker Archeology (1975) explores this theme; see also Virilio 
(1986: 3ff) and Virilio and Lotringer (1983: 2f). 
2. Virilio suggests that in science a Hall of Accidents should be put next to each 
Hall of Machines: 'Every technology, every science should choose its specific 
accident and reveal it as a product - not in a moralistic, protectionist way (safety 
first), but rather as a product to be "epistemo-technically" questioned. At the end of 
the nineteenth century, museums exhibited machines: at the end of the twentieth 
century, I think we must grant the formative dimensions of the accident its rightful 
place in a new museum' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 35). English novelist J.G. 
Ballard actually staged an exhibition of wrecked cars in London in 1966, described 
in his 1970 novel The Atrocity Exhibition, while an apocalyptic vision of Western 
civilization's systems of control and circulation erupting in proliferations of car 
wrecks informed Ballard's 1973 novel Crash and the 1996 film directed by David 
Cronenberg based on the novel. 
3. In an interview with Sylvere Lotringer, Virilio states that: 'For me, trans-politics 
is the beginning of the end. That's where my understanding of it radically differs 
from Jean Baudrillard's; for him it's positive. For me, it's totally negative. I fight 
against the disappearance of politics. I'm not saying that we should revert to ancient 
democracy, stop the clock and all that. I'm saying that there's work to be done ... in 
order to re-establish politics' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 28). One might argue, 
however, that Baudrillard does not see the end of politics, or 'trans-polities', as 
'positive', but rather as inevitable in an era in which politics, aesthetics, sexuality 
and culture implode; see Baudrillard (1994). 
4. On Debord and the Situationist International, see Best and Kellner (1997: 
Chapter 3, and forthcoming). 
5. When asked if EUul or Christian existential philosopher Gabriel Marcel 
influenced his thought, he affirmed the influence of EUul while denying the 
impact of Marcel. See Virilio's interview with John Armitage published in this 
issue and Virilio (1997b: 139f). 
6. Virilio well captures the political-military insanity of the 1980s in texts like 
LHorizon negatif excerpted in Virilio (1998a: 73-94). 
7. Virilio sometimes denies he is a technophobe and said in the interview with 
John Armitage that he is for Apple computers against IBM and in an interview with 
James Der Derian (1998a: 6), he claims that he 'is in love with technology', but 
these comments are a smokescreen to hide his virulent technophobia, for the 
overwhelming thrust of his major works is harshly negative and hypercritical. 
References 
Baudrillard, Jean (1994) The Illusion of an End. Oxford: Polity. 
Benjamin, Walter (1969) Illuminations. New York: Schocken Books. 
Best, Steven, and Douglas Kellner (1997) The Postmodern Turn. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

124 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Best, Steven, and Douglas Kellner (forthcoming) The Postmodern Adventure. New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Castells, Manuel (1989) The Informational City: The Space of Flows. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. 
Castells, Manuel (1996) The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Castells, Manuel (1997) The Power of Identity. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Castells, Manuel (1998) End of Millennium. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Edwards, Paul (19%) The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in 
Cold War America. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Feenberg, Andrew (1991) Critical Theory of Technology. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Feenberg, Andrew (1995) Alternative Modernity. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
Feenberg, Andrew (1999) Questioning Technology. New York and London, Rout-
ledge. 
Kellner, Douglas (forthcoming) Toward a Radical Democratic Technopolitics', 
Angelaki. 
Melman, Seymour (1965) Our Depleted Society. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston. 
Melman, Seymour (1974) The Permanent War Economy: American Capitalism in 
Decline. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Virilio, Paul (1975) Bunker Archaeology, trans. George Collins. Paris: Les Editions 
du Demi-Cercle. 
Virilio, Paul (1986 [1977]) Speed & Politics. New York: Semiotext(e), Foreign 
Agents Series, Autonomedia. 
Virilio, Paul (1989 [1984]) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception. London: 
Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1991a [1980]) The Aesthetics of Disappearence. New York: Semio-
text(e), Foreign Agents Series, Autonomedia. 
Virilio, Paul (1991b [1984]) The Lost Dimension. New York: Semiotext(e), Foreign 
Agents Series, Autonomedia. 
Virilio, Paul (1994 [1988]) The Vision Machine. Bloomington: University of Indiana 
Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1995a) 'Global Algorithm 1.7: The Silence of the Lambs: Paul Virilio 
in Conversation', in C-Theory [www.freedonia.com/ctheory]. 
Virilio, Paul (1995b) 'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', in C-Theory 
[www.freedonia.com/ctheory]. 
Virilio, Paul (1995c) The Information Bomb: A Conversation between Paul Virilio 
and Friedrich Kittler', translated and forthcoming in John Armitage (ed.) New 
Cultural Theory and Techno-Politics, Angelaki 4(2). 
Virilio, Paul (1995d [1993]) The Art of the Motor. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1996) Cybermonde, lapolitique depire. Paris: Textuel. 
Virilio, Paul (1997a) 'Cyberwar, God and Television: An Interview with Paul 
Virilio', pp. 41-8 in Digital Delirium. New York: St Martin's Press. 

Kellner - Virilio, War and Technology 
125 
Virilio, Paul (1997b [1995]) Open Sky. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1998a) The Virilio Reader, ed. James Der Derian. Maiden, MA and 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Virilio, Paul (1998b [1990]) Polar Inertia. London: Sage. 
Virilio, Paul and Sylvere Lotringer (1983) Pure War. New York: Semiotext(e), 
Foreign Agents Series, Autonomedia. 
Douglas Kellner is George Kneller Chair in the Philosophy of Education 
at UCLA and is author of many books on social theory, politics, history and 
culture, including Camera Political The Politics and Ideology of Contem-
porary Hollywood Film (co-authored with Michael Ryan), Critical Theory, 
Marxism, and Modernity, Jean Baudrillard: From Marxism to Postmodern-
ism and Beyond, Postmodern Theory: Critical Interrogations (with Steven 
Best), Television and the Crisis of Democracy, The Persian Gulf TV War, 
Media Culture, and the Postmodern Turn (with Steven Best). 


Virilio and New Media 
Sean Cubitt 
I
T IS ALWAYS FLATTERING to read that you inhabit the ultimate 
moment in history, and that your own time witnesses the definitive crisis 
of your civilization. Much of the interest and attraction of Virilio's 
writings comes from his belief that we inhabit today a crisis of perception, 
precipitated through the militarization of perceptual technologies and the 
embedding of these technologies in the familiar environs of the street, the 
home and the architecture of daily life. This crisis of architecture, in which 
the solid geometry of buildings gives way to the fluid transparencies of 
media, he sees inaugurated in the time-lapse chrono-photographic experi-
ments of Etienne Jules Marey (for example Virilio, 1994: 60-1; see also 
Ceram, 1965; Dagognet, 1992), precursors to cinema, and in any given text 
of Virilio's is seen as culminating in the latest upgraded and accelerated 
medium of transmission or recording. If much of his assertive and allusive, 
elliptical and epigrammatic writings are crowded with hyperbole and 
unsubstantiated assertions, yet the work seems to capture key elements of 
our awe before the new constellation of communicative technologies, our 
belittlement under the regime of contemporary mediated and networked 
societies. Yet Virilio's is a deeply liberal critique, formed not only in his 
Christian faith (see Virilio and Lotringer, 1997: passim) but in the centrality 
he affords to individuals. Faced with the collapse of the values he holds 
dearest, Virilio must recount the classical liberal scenario of Armageddon. 
Virilio's liberalism is in the lineage neither of Stirner's right-wing libertar-
ianism, the deep subtext of much North American neo-liberal techno-
utopianism, nor of Kropotkin and the agrarian utopianism that occasionally 
surfaces in contemporary writings critical of technological rationalism. 
Instead, it forms an anarchist mirror to the pessimistic Marxism of Adorno. 
But where Adorno is concerned to discover in the European past the roots of 
Nazism and authoritarianism, for Virilio the burning issue is a contemporary 
apocalypse. That catastrophe is ultimately ethical, since the progress of 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(S-6): 127-142 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;127-142;009962] 

128 Theory, Culture & Society 
media technologies leads to the destruction of the properly human will, the 
ground for ethical choice. 
Virilio's epigrammatic, even ideogrammatic prose traces a media 
history, deeply informed by current media and communications scholarship, 
in the attempt to trace not so much the genesis as the trajectory of a 
historical process under whose wheels we are even now being crushed. 
According to his central thesis, the militarization of society at large, and the 
media in particular, produces an acceleration of communication which 
demands of us an accommodation to rapidly shrinking technological time-
scales. This is the point in mediated perception into which Virilio inserts his 
concept of picnolepsia, the momentary lapse in consciousness which facil-
itates the invention of cinema, since it acclimatizes us to the production of 
continuities where there are none, and which ultimately will lead to 'the 
authority of electronic automatism, reducing our will to zero' (Virilio, 1991a: 
104). Virilio spends little time analysing the films of the Lumiere brothers, 
often seen as the originals of the documentary and realist traditions of 
cinema, and instead repeatedly returns to the illusionistic magical tableaux 
of Georges Melies. Marey's chronophotography, Virilio argues, established 
a science of the invisible, revealing what the eye is too slow too catch. In the 
trick films of the 1890s: 
What science attempts to illuminate, 'the non-seen of the lost moments', 
becomes with Melies the very basis of the production of appearance of his 
invention, what he shows of reality is what reacts continually to the absences 
of the reality which has passed. (Virilio, 1991a: 17) 
The problem addressed here, of the ability of the eye to establish continuity 
between frames ('persistence of vision') and even more so the ability to 
effect the transition from shot to shot, have been central to the discussion of 
cinema since the earliest times. It forms the nub of the famous Kuleshov 
effect, an experiment in montage in which the audience reinterpret a single 
shot of the actor Mosjoukin according to whether the following shot is of a 
plate of soup, a coffin or a pretty girl (Kuleshov, 1973). 
Film theory addresses this retrospective Gestalt in a number of ways, 
one of the most influential being the theory of suture advanced by Lacanian 
film analysts of the 1970s, according to which the closure of the film text 
depended on the responsibility assumed by the spectator to become the 
subject of that text, so completing its absences (marked by framing and 
editing) by becoming present as spectator (see Dayan, 1976; Heath, 1977/8; 
Oudart, 1977/8). As Rothman puts it, this view of film can be read as 
'intrinsically tyrannical' (Rothman, 1976: 453); the question remains as to 
whether it is, as Rothman believes, the theory that is tyrannical, or the 
media. Suture played a crucial role in restoring a temporal dimension to 
screen-theoretical accounts of cinematic subjectivity, a major crux of struc-
tural analysis. Effectively, what the theory of suture argued is almost exactly 
the opposite of Virilio: that the viewer is constituted as a presence by the 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 129 
absences of the filmic text. Where the suture theory scores, contra Rothman, 
is in giving to this newly constituted subject in return an active role in the 
construction of the film. If, in the post-'68 fervour of film theory in France, 
Oudart sees this as a complicity in the oppression operated by Hollywood, it 
can also give us the grounds for a more mature understanding of the 
interactivity between audiences and texts now that media studies is more 
forgiving of popular pleasures and more interested in the audience's active 
participation in the construction of meaning. 
Virilio's picnoleptic theory, by contrast, assumes the subordination of 
the viewer not to the textual production of the film, but to the apparatus of 
the cinema. Though this view too had its place in 1970s screen theory (see 
Baudry, 1975, 1985; Heath and de Lauretis, 1980), the specificity of the 
individual film was always a retardant on generalization about the medium 
as such. In Virilio's case, we come into contact with a media theoretical 
tradition for which, on the McLuhan principle, the medium rather than its 
individual instances is the message. This creates a crux in Virilio's thought, 
since to some extent, especially in The Aesthetics of Disappearance (1991a), 
he offers not only a sociological account of the powers of the militarized 
media, but the elements of a phenomenology of mediated experience. 
Where screen theory gave itself the task of understanding the production 
of subjectivity in the textual production of the reality effect, picnoleptic 
theory attempts to understand the abolition of subjectivity in the disappear-
ance of reality. In a lucid summary of his earlier work, Virilio argues a 
distinction between the 'small' or 'passive optics' he associates with the 
geometries of our immediate environs and the 'big' or 'active' optics of wave-
particle physics and the weapons and transmission media that operate at the 
speed of light. The former puns on 'grandeur nature\ translatable as both 
'life-sized' and 'natural grandeur', an experiential category of vision based 
on unmediated, immediate vision. The latter, 'big optics', is the optics of 
lasers, radar, television, to which materiality is transparent, and which 
reduces the human world at first to a tiny globe spinning in empty space 
and finally to a point disappearing into unreality. Founded in the irreality of 
quantum mechanics and technologically sourced outside the human per-
spective in satellites and aircraft, 'the active big optics of the speed of light 
are unleashed (from beyond any horizon) onto the intermittent perception of 
the SMALL WORLD made transparent by waves carrying their various signals' 
(Virilio, 1992: 88). The problem of intermittence still haunts perception, the 
more so, according to Virilio, as the photo-mechanical media, with their 
quasi-physiological pulse of 24 frames per second, are replaced by opto-
electronic circuits of pure information. Where analogue media still claim at 
least a resemblance to actual objects and actual vision, the digital image is 
now entirely abstracted, converted into signal and number, circulated at 
speeds that defy the human sensorium. The picnoleptic moment becomes 
then an ontological quality of the mediation of appearances, which in their 
most recent manifestations as satellite observations or immersive virtual 
reality systems reveal the destiny which all mechanical mediation has 

130 Theory, Culture & Society 
pursued under the governance of militaristic modernity: the eradication of 
distance: 'how can you not', he asks, 'as of now dread the advent of a deep 
feeling of confinement of man locked in an environment at once deprived of 
horizon and of optical depth?9 (Virilio, 1992: 88). 
The governing theme of this discourse is clearly one of loss, summar-
ized most apothegmatically as 'the more speed increases, the faster freedom 
decreases' (Virilio, 1986: 142) and, in a paraphrase of Kipling: 'the concept 
of reality is always the first victim of war' (Virilio, 1989a: 33). The impli-
cation - that freedom and reality are mutually dependent - of course begs 
the question of where such an innocent state of real freedom and free reality 
has ever existed. There seems to be some suggestion that this state exists in 
a divine time outside of human history, as an Ideal. Virilio rarely addresses 
the issue directly or positively, but by indirections amid the grim warnings 
concerning the accelerating degradation of human and material reality. 
Claiming his position as 'realist' (Oliveira, 1996: np), he nonetheless 
occupies an exclusively critical stance towards the technologies of transport 
and transmission which have, in his analysis, reformulated what it means to 
be human. In this way, as Kellner has proposed (Kellner, 1998: np), he 
follows in the phenomenological footsteps of Martin Heidegger (1977) and 
Jacques Ellul (1964) in offering an account of mass media as totalitarian, 
adding a specific spin concerning the loss of the local: as he expresses it to 
Oliveira, 'Globalization — and don't we have a paradox here? — also means 
the end of one entire world: the world of the particular and of the localized' 
(Oliveira, 1996: np). The human scale of perception is inundated by the 
sheer speed of communication, and in its place there arrives a fierce, 
inhuman view whose motive is assault and destruction, and whose mechan-
ical delivery systems not only carry into daily life the imperatives of warfare 
but, replacing the human scale of face-to-face perception, deprive us of the 
bases from which we might resist its domination. 
The position is summed in an essay dating from the mid-1980s: 
The will-to-power of those industrial nations who, at the turn of the century, 
practised the techniques of total war, has now been replaced by the theoreti-
cal operations of a totally involuntary war, on the part of post-industrial 
nations investing increasingly in informatics, automation, and cybernetics. In 
these societies, the use of human labor-force and the direct responsibility of 
people has been displaced by the powers of 'anticipated' and 'deferred' 
substitution, the power of the system of auto-directed armaments, self-
programmed detection networks, and automatic respondents who lead 
humanity to the confinement of a hopeless waiting. (Virilio, 1991b: 136) 
Like Baudrillard in the same period (Baudrillard, 1994: 32-3), Virilio reads 
the armed stand-off of the Cold War as a mutual pact between the 
antagonists to guarantee that both can extend their power over their own 
territories, a process Virilio describes as 'endo-colonization'. But in the 
period since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the effective end of global 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 131 
bipartisan politics, the motive force of cultural change has shifted towards 
the imagined enemy, now dematerialized as potential or virtual, whose 
Active character we had learned to delineate in the harshest years of nuclear 
deterrence. 
In one sense, the Gulf War of 1991 was the last gasp of Cold War-fare, 
a war based on the attempt to deter the enemy from striking. But in another 
it foreshadowed what has occupied Virilio throughout the subsequent years, 
the nature, dimensions and impact of information war. Again like Baud-
rillard (1995), Virilio understands Desert Storm as a derealization of 
warfare, not only in terms of the news coverage (his book on the subject is 
called Desert Screen), nor exclusively in terms of the abstraction of the 
combatants from the results of their actions (an effect he traces back at least 
to 'the pressurized cockpits of US Superfortress bombers' which 'had 
become artificial synthesisers that shut out the world of the senses' at the 
end of the Second World War [Virilio, 1989a: 24]). Much more than either, 
the accumulated data on the battlefield had allowed US pilots and tech-
nicians to simulate battle in the Iraqi desert in computer models and 
ground-based flight-simulators for several years prior to the actual events. 
The upshot of this dematerialized mode of information warfare was the 
terrifying effectiveness of the US military machine in the Gulf. Moreover, 
the enemy in this instance occupied effectively a different historical period 
to the US, fighting for a territory in which they still believed, and in which 
they had a stake. For the information warrior, territory, according to Virilio, 
has no meaning whatsoever. It has been assimilated into the datastreams of 
battle computers, and has become immaterial. 
Ironically, the automobile and the cinema alike produce an immobile 
spectator of action, not a mobile participant. From the first pan shot of 1896 
to the broadcasting technologies of the post-war period, he argues in The 
Last Vehicle', travelling has been diminished, losing first the transit in the 
acceleration of trains, cars and planes, then the act of departure, substitut-
ing 'the primacy of arrival (which is momentary)' (Virilio, 1989b: 118). With 
the diminution of journeys, there arrives the possibility of the elimination of 
space. Global electronic information and transmission systems now provide 
the technological infrastructure not only for the destruction of space, but for 
its replacement with the 'time of light', the instantaneous transmission of 
data at the limit speed of the universal constant. But while Virilio, consist-
ently and inaccurately describing transmission rates as 'instantaneous', 
argues for the triumph of time (speed) over space, he is also able to offer 
an insight into the changing nature of time. 'Today', he notes in The Vision 
Machine,' "extensive" time has given way to "intensive" time. This deepens 
the infinitely small of duration, of microscopic time, the final figure of 
eternity rediscovered outside the imaginary of the extensive eternity of 
bygone centuries' (Virilio, 1994: 72). Clearly for Virilio technology and 
science are barely distinguishable, science acting as the discursive ex-
pression of technology's historical imperative. The advanced dematerializa-
tion he sees in quantum physics, as indeed in the fractal mathematics of 

132 Theory, Culture & Society 
emergence, is intrinsic to the opto-electronic technologies which are busily 
substituting for first-hand experience. Equally clearly, he goes against the 
flow of Anglo-Saxon postmodernism, with its emphasis on spatialization and 
the diffusion of history and temporality. Instead, he sees the inhabiting of 
the moment as the end of historical experience, an experience itself 
premised on spatial and especially local awareness. The picnoleptic 
moment has ceased to function as the motive inattention that permits the 
illusion of cinema, and instead has become the goal of new data-streaming 
technologies whose speed exceeds that of perception, and which therefore 
promote a permanent state of unawareness, of null experience, with all 
activity delivered over to the optical machine, and all passivity delivered to 
the immobilized passenger aboard Concorde or immersed in virtual reality. 
One might forgive Virilio his typical use of 'final' and 'ultimate', the 
constant rhetorical companions of a certain journalistic urgency, were it not 
for the apocalypse which they so certainly announce. This vision, I would 
argue, derives from Virilio's misunderstanding of the nature of mediation in 
general and network communications in particular, a misunderstanding that 
limits his analysis to the existential position of the individual. 'The thing 
described takes over from the real thing' (Virilio, 1995a: 43) in the politics 
of disinformation, indeed the 'essential culture of disinformation' (Virilio, 
1995a: 61). This substitution or commutation of virtual for physical proxim-
ity reduces to zero that distance which, for Virilio, is constitutive of human 
identity: the distance between observer and observed, subject and object. 
Disinformation is then the creation of a fiction in which the world is no 
longer object over against the subject, but simply a malleable and consum-
able entity, almost a Heideggerian 'standing-reserve'. But this analysis, 
once again like Baudrillard's, derives from a sense that the business of 
mediation is representation. When, as he believes, representation ceases to 
evoke a real world of immediate perception, the representational media also 
curtail the possibility of democratic representation. 
Liberalism is a philosophy founded in individual identity. In Virilio's 
pessimistic liberal anarchism, the crisis of representation occurs in the 
essential subject-object relation though which identity marks itself off from 
the world and the others. But mediation is not representation: media serve to 
mediate, not between subjects and objects, but between subjects. This 
conclusion, already adumbrated in the theory of suture, provides us with 
the grounds for a social theory of mediation. Screen-theoretical work argues 
that identity, individuality and subjectivity are constructed, in a mediated 
society, through mediation. Individuality is then an end product of the 
mediation process, not its foundation. It is Virilio's imaginary embattled 
individual, clinging to identity in the face of technology, that grounds his 
more paranoid Jeremiads, and blinds him to the mutuality involved in media 
productivity. Where Virilio sees only the diminution and vanishing of 
subjectivity, the theory of suture allows us to understand subject formation 
as always already ephemeral, the always temporary and contingent structure 
of the self in the experience of media. What is being lost in the acceleration 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 133 
of communications media is only a historically specific mode of subjectivity, 
not subjectivity as such. It is only the individual - along with such 
perquisites as freedom and privacy - which disappears, faced with the new 
necessity for a blurred boundary between the public and, for lack of the 
private, the intimate sphere of what perhaps we can still refer to as the 
unconscious. This unconscious, however, is framed less by the individu-
ation process of the bourgeois family, and more by the interactive, fluid 
subjectivities of online communities. In a rare moment of positivity, Virilio 
concludes a 1995 article by suggesting that: 
We have to acknowledge that the new communication technologies will only 
further democracy if, and only if, we oppose from the beginning the carica-
ture of global society being hatched for us by big multinational corporations 
throwing themselves at a breakneck pace on the information superhighways. 
(Virilio, 1995b: np) 
It is an unusual moment in which the possibility of political action is 
entertained, and the opening up of this possibility comes from the equally 
unusual suggestion of a 'we': a community of the like-minded. It is also 
surprising to find Virilio recognizing that there are other agencies beyond 
self-activating technological change, and that the capitalization of online 
communications is, at least in the short-term, the major threat to the 
democratic capabilities of the net. The lack of such hopeful eschatologies 
among his major statements is a direct consequence of the grounding of his 
philosophical liberalism in the theory of representation. 
I cited earlier Virilio's rewriting of Kipling, equating war's first casu-
alty, truth, with the casualty reality. The slippage is effected, once again, by 
dependence on representation theory, in which the key function of significa-
tion is to establish referential links between subject and object. This surely 
sits well with the definitions of communication offered by contemporary 
cognitive science and information theory, for which the mathematics of 
communication systems and the metaphor of mind as computer both rely on 
the concept of signal as datum, byte or unit of information. But from the 
point of view of media theory, emphasis on reference ignores the centrality 
to mediated communication of the phatic, the establishment of social and 
cultural solidarity in dialogue, as when we ask almost content-free questions 
like 'How are you?' From the standpoint of a mediation theory, the history of 
the phatic mode includes the history of exclusions from communicative 
solidarity, the denial of their presence and the turn towards re-presenting 
them as objects external to the world of communication. In fact, I believe it 
is quite possible to argue that the phatic is the central function of communi-
cation, to the point that even the exchange of orders or information are 
modes of phatic solidarity. Emphasizing the phatic suggests that the truth-
content of messages is not necessarily restricted to their content but to their 
address. It is curious in this context that Virilio, normally so attentive to 
shifting technologies, centres so much of his attention on production and 

134 Theory, Culture & Society 
transmission technologies, and so little on the structure of distribution. It is 
distribution which holds the key to the massification of the media, from the 
film exchanges that gave rise to the Hollywood studios (see Gomery, 1992) 
to the global ambitions of the Microsoft Channel. Distribution not only 
focuses on the address to audiences, both in marketing and in such day-to-
day rhetorical truisms as 'We bring you live pictures' or Thank you for 
welcoming us into your home', with their implicit announcement of power 
relations, and also in the address characteristic of specific technologies like 
the Internet browser window or the layout of newspaper pages. It also draws 
us back to the relationships between people which appear, from Virilio's 
liberal point of view, as the magical relation between objects, specifically 
the vanishing world and the ever-more present media. 
Virilio's theory of representation appears to rest rather specifically on 
a concept of truth as total and complete, and completely identified with the 
existence of a pre-existing world, a unity only ruptured by its communi-
cation. Virilio's position is not only liberal but humanist, a humanism 
arising from a Christian phenomenology curiously akin to that of realist 
film critic Andre* Bazin. In The Vision Machine, Virilio addresses the 
intersection of militarization and representation in terms of 'the logistics of 
perception': 
It is a war of images and sounds, rather than objects and things, in which 
winning is simply a matter of not losing sight of the opposition. The will to see 
all, to know all, at every moment, everywhere, the will to universalised 
illumination: a scientific permutation on the eye of God which would forever 
rule out the surprise, the accident, the irruption of the unforeseen. (Virilio, 
1994: 70) 
War has changed, in the era of Stealth bombers and smart weapons, by a 
process of absolute acceleration, from the face-to-face struggle for occu-
pation of physical space to a thoroughly mediated struggle for absolute 
surveillance. This absolute surveillance and its counter, camouflage and 
deception, are extended to the politics of the militarized state. In the 
meantime, visual media accelerated to the point of instantaneity have 
altered the terms of perception, through the ambition to emulate God, in 
the erasure of the contingent which marks the perception of reality. 
In Virilio's terms, mediation eradicates first the substance, the immut-
able essence of objects and later, in a second movement from mechanical to 
electronic media, obliterates even the accidence, the material form in which 
substance presents itself to perception. The reality of an object's image is 
thus displacing the virtuality of its presence (Virilio, 1994: 64); that is, in 
transmission, even the materiality of the image is substituted in a process of 
virtualization in some ways the offspring of military dissimulation. We are 
then faced with the 'fusion of the object with its equivalent image' (Virilio, 
1994: 68) tending towards 'an artificial reality involving digital simulation 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 135 
that would oppose the "natural reality" of classical experience' (Virilio, 
1994: 76). 
Here, as throughout his work, Virilio depends upon a belief in the 
wholeness of perception independent of cognition. This depends upon (1) a 
whole event or state of affairs in the world which is (2) simultaneous with (3) 
a whole perception of that state of affairs. This phenomenology of percep-
tion, which appears to derive from Husserl, shares Husserl's dilemma over 
the relation between perception, memory (retentions) and expectation 
(protensions). Immediate perception is allied, in both Husserl and Virilio, 
with temporal and spatial contiguity and with instantaneous and mutual 
wholeness of both perception and perceived. Yet the duration introduced by 
cognitive functions of retention and protension shatters the wholeness of 
both. Virilio correctly notes that mediated perception does not share this 
immediacy. However, since he does not believe that perception is in every 
case mediated, both by the phenomenal aspect that the perceived takes on 
in the moment of perception, and by the retentions and protensions of the 
perceiver, he understands mediation as a fall from grace, from a natural 
perception which, in its integration of human and world, provided the basis 
of human identity. He is therefore free to declare that higher degrees and 
velocities of mechanical perception are the phenomenal form of a collapse 
of both humanity and reality, 'as though our society were sinking into the 
darkness of a voluntary blindness' (Virilio, 1994: 76). 
To turn Virilio on his head, it is sufficient to point out, as Derrida does 
in his critique of Husserlian phenomenology of perception (1973: 60-9), 
that consciousness has no present. Moreover, since the world itself is never 
self-present either, perception is already mediation. This is not to say that 
we should therefore embrace uncritically the loss of human identity, or that 
we should abandon the Bazinian project for a cinema in which 'life might... 
be the self into which film finally changes it' (Bazin, 1971: 82) . It does 
suggest, however, that we proceed beyond a state in which social relations 
appear in 'the fantastical form of relations between things' (Marx, 1976: 
165). As Linda Brigham argued in the excellent Special Issue of the online 
journal Speed devoted to his work, like Habermas Virilio interrogates 'the 
social effects of media in terms of their relation to a prior social and 
perceptual condition' (Brigham, 1995: np). But communication is not about 
the recuperation of some prior truth of things, but rather a perpetual and 
mutual building and negotiation of truth, reality and subjectivity. Virilio's 
representation theory understands truth as an impossibly total content of 
communication: that is why it is perpetually disappointed, or forced to 
confront the human impossibility of rendering in mediated form the totality 
of truth associated with an object. But if instead we were to direct attention 
towards the distributive moment, with its extended labour performed on the 
materials of mediation, we find instead that truth is always partial, always 
postponed and always negotiated, while offering also an understanding of 
the strategic structural domination practised by the mega-corporations of 
the infotainment industries over the distributive media. If it seems niggling 

136 Theory, Culture & Society 
to correct Virilio's description of new computer-mediated communication as 
'instantaneous', it is an important detail, most of all because the time 
needed to download a file is the temporal intervention into the mediation 
process of the labour time necessary to compose, store and decode its 
content. If it is a key job of commercial media to disguise the processes of 
their production, the very delay of distribution channels nonetheless bring 
back to us the labour involved in their making. 
Without an understanding of the control structures of the media 
industries, Virilio is cast back on the meagre resources of the isolated 
individual, unsurprisingly now envisioned as the stunned receiver of a vast, 
unintelligible, real-time data-stream. At such a juncture, 'Vision, once 
substantial, becomes accidentaV (Virilio, 1994: 13; original emphasis). This 
slogan carries with it the double meanings of substance and accident, read 
in the light of Nicholas de Cusa (Virilio, 1997: 17). If, as appears here, the 
substance is the truth of the object, then the truth lost in digital represen-
tations is that ideal form that precedes and exceeds the limits of the 
mundane, while accidence, which is all that can be captured in photo-
mechanical or opto-electronic media, is the merely ephemeral and worldly. 
Yet this ephemerality and worldliness are surely the most significantly 
material aspects of the object, not least because they give the lie to the 
thing-in-itself, and require us to speak of its appearance to some other, that 
is, its dependence on its subject or, in a mediated world, its dependence on 
its mediation. In this sense objects exist, as objects, only as mediations, only 
as they signify in relations between people 
For Virilio, on the contrary, the triumph of ephemeral appearance is a 
sign of the abolition of the weight, mass, bulk and depth of truth. Their 
obdurate otherness, their truth, gave objects a position relative to subjects 
that they have lost in the instantaneity of transmission. Without that relative 
position, accident takes on its second meaning, of catastrophe. Ungoverned 
now by truth, rendered into the quantum fluctuations of hypermedia, 
appearances circulating at unheard-of speeds bring us to the brink of info-
war and data-crash. Such is Virilio's account of the 1989 Black Friday 
crash, which he reads as the uncontrolled acceleration of machine-driven 
trading in derealized stocks and shares, rather than as a function of anarchic 
capital. Likewise, hacker hits on power supplies and databanks appear to 
him as the disaster which is always invented at the same moment as the 
vehicle, in the same way that derailments and wrecks are the necessary 
accompaniment of trains and cars. The 'general accident' (Virilio, 1997: 
132) will prove Virilio right in the moment that it makes all statements of 
truth or probability impossible. The insubstantial will, in that moment of 
wreckage, ruin the substance of the world, homogenizing all differences 
previously guaranteed by the distance between objects and subjects. 
If, however, we deny to Virilio his philosophical liberalism and his 
ontological substance, what can we draw from his poetics of transmission? 
Reversing his evaluation of the changing nature of mediation, we can take a 
conception of the new centrality of the ephemeral in human affairs. The true 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 137 
difference between computer-mediated communications and the older 
forms of print and photo-mechanical media is that the heart of computer 
media lies in distribution, not recording. The storage media associated with 
computers are notoriously liable to corruption and infection. The only hope 
for permanence is in proliferation of copies, that is, in the distribution of 
texts across a variety of media and machines. But even this belies the 
capacity of computer files to be overwritten: corrected, discussed, amended 
or erased. Like the death of privacy, the end of permanence is a frightening 
effect of new media, one that drives Virilio to distraction. Yet in that 
vertiginous impossibility of archiving the world's Internet traffic, we con-
front not the desecration of the temple of learning, but the avenue of escape 
from the Foucauldian archive. It is that archive, as much as the phenom-
enological Umwelt, that constitutes the horizon of the self, whose loss Virilio 
so greatly mourns, but which from a different viewpoint becomes a crucial 
act of emancipation. 
We can also, I believe, abstract from his description of the collapsing 
gap between subject and object a vision of the increasing integration of 
subject with subject in the mediation of objects. Neither cognitive science 
nor phenomenology allows for the socialization of subjectivity in a mediated 
world: the challenge remains to provide such a social psychology and social 
phenomenology in the pursuit of a sociology of communication that recog-
nizes its centrality, as Virilio does, but also permits intervention and 
creativity. The old liberal-anarchist tirades against state and technology 
cannot bring us a politics adequate to the new media formations. That task 
remains to be undertaken. But here again Virilio does give us some avenues 
to explore, most of all in his work on memory. Noting the movement from 
older theories of retinal retention to the theory of cognitive schemata in the 
formation of memory, he insists on 'the role of memorisation in immediate 
perception' (Virilio, 1994: 61). Such instantaneous memorization, de-
manded by the flicker of images at 24 or 25 frames per second, allows both 
for subliminal effects — a theory to which Virilio is almost alone in clinging -
and an editing of vision in the breaks between frames, producing a virtual 
memory of virtual objects. On the one hand, this will lead Virilio to worry at 
the emergence of prospective simulations, computer models devised in 
order to foresee, such as Geographical Information Systems (GIS). This is a 
genuine fear: the purpose of computer simulations is an extension of busi-
ness plans and Soviet 5-year plans: the administration of the future accord-
ing to the dictates of the present. But Virilio also recognizes, on the other 
hand, that 'The weak light that allows us to apprehend the real, to see and 
understand our present environment, itself comes from a distant visual 
memory without which there would be no act of looking' (Virilio, 1994: 
62). What now guides his anxiety is not the fact of memorization, which in 
any case shapes even direct perception, but the transfer of visual memory 
from the human sensorium to mechanical perception. 
The loss of a guiding 'distant visual memory' might be likened to a 
process in which we lost the ability to recognize the picturesque, 

138 Theory, Culture & Society 
painting-like quality of a landscape. One of the guiding themes of modernist 
art, indeed, is the elaboration of visual and verbal strategies to provoke a 
renewal of habituated vision. One of the most important single works of 
modernism, Duchamp's Large Glass (also known as The Bride Stripped Bare 
by her Bachelors, Even) of 1917-22, works along this fault-line of modernist 
mediated vision in a particularly fascinating way, eroticizing the gaze 
between the bachelors in the lower half and the bride in the upper, 
mechanizing the look through the intervention of fantastic machineries of 
desire, and capturing the whole fantastical narration in a variety of media 
which, in their physical materials and their dependence on chance techni-
ques, vividly capture the aporias of photography. One of the work's titles, 
Delay in Glass, can surely be read as a direct reference to glass-plate 
photography and the capture not only of light but of time, postponing its 
emergence back into the world. What Duchamp manages that Virilio does 
not, apart from his profound understanding of the implication of gender in 
visual technologies, is his readiness to surrender rational control. What, 
after all, is the purpose of GIS simulations if not rational control over the 
future environment? Duchamp, by contrast, demonstrates in a practical way 
the impossibility of exercising control even over the past. The apparatus for 
Duchamp as for Virilio takes on a life of its own. But in Duchamp's version, 
that life is one which can be respected as an authentic contribution to 
dialogue, the active participation of the machineries of mediation in the 
mediative process between humans. Where Virilio lives in terror of the 
mechanical take-over of human activities, Duchamp points us towards the 
necessary realization that we are already in dialogue with our devices. 
Our machines, now more than ever, constitute our environment. 
Where Virilio imagines a pre-media innocence of perception, always al-
ready lost to mediated humanity, he projects a curiously passive relation 
into the monologue of self and object, in which the object addresses the self, 
throwing itself before it, seeking in the self a completion of its truth. The 
Duchamp perspective suggests instead that there is a partnership between 
us and our technologies, an assimilation of our conventions into the tech-
nologies, and of their conventions into us, but in a dialogue in which both 
are subject to constant negotiation and change. This is not to say that the 
military and commercial applications of technological research have not 
had immense repercussions on the nature and functioning of such familiar 
gadgets as the desktop computer: the crushing individualism of the design 
of the typewriter keyboard, mouse and graphical user interface in the 
interests of office automation rather than commonality of communication is 
a case in point. But it is also true that our relations with technologies are as 
complexly negotiated as our relationships with films, novels or philosophies; 
that we jury-rig our sense of minute-by-minute existence and our world-
views out of the interactions we have with a world constituted as much by 
the materiality of the media as by the physical environment of which they 
form so salient a characteristic. 
The spectacular eradication of distance is exactly that: spectacular. 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 139 
And as with a Hollywood special effects blockbuster, our attention is split 
between the illusion and the spectacular craft that makes the illusion 
possible. That divorce is typical of our dialogue with the uncanny intelli-
gence of machines (and of course their equally uncanny ability to go wrong). 
For Virilio, there is no dialogue, only resistance to media technologies that 
have become forces of history: 'How', he asks, 'can we resist this deluge of 
visual and audiovisual sequences, the sudden motorization of appearances 
that endlessly bombard our imagination?' (Virilio, 1997: 96). Subjectivity, 
once formed in relation to objectivity, is now constituted in relation to 
mediation. The process appears to him one-sided, with the techno-logic of 
militarization and endo-colonialism enforcing the ongoing, yet final process 
of dehumanization. The only alternative is to turn away from mediation, 'out 
of a concern to preserve one's integrity, one's freedom of conscience9 (Virilio, 
1997: 96), a term which in French means both moral standards and con-
sciousness. One warms to his dogged refusal of cybertopian optimism, to his 
crying out against the abuse of power in the design and delivery of 
technologically mediated perception. But it is inadequate to refuse techno-
logization, to appeal to a pre-technological 'ethics of immediate perception' 
(Virilio, 1997: 102), or to refuse that mediation which, in the contemporary 
world, is the material form taken by our solidarity with others in the interests 
of an imaginary free consciousness. For all its perversion in the interests of 
transnational capital and the imperialism of finance, mediation is the con-
dition in which we live, and which in many respects has forced us, in the 
globalization as well as the mediation process, away from the philosophy of 
individual will into deeper mutual dependency, and a consequent surrender 
of individual freedom in the interests of a human ecology. In order to 
understand the processes through which we are living, and to develop 
tactical means for intervening in the macro-scale organization of communi-
cations in a critical moment of their evolution, more is required than 
philosophical nihilism. 
To take an example where Virilio's analysis is extremely informative, 
the private automobile is without doubt the single most deleterious inno-
vation of the last century, even more so than the military technologies 
deployed in wars too often begun to secure supplies of fuel for them. 
Motorists are careless of the ecological effect of the noxious fumes expelled 
by their vehicles, despite the fact that their own children suffer from the 
respiratory diseases they cause, just as they claim innocence for the oil 
spills attendant on the trade in petrol. The car instils in its driver and 
passengers that sense of right and invulnerability that is responsible for so 
many deaths. It inscribes in the motorist the expectation of surveillance. It 
travels far faster than the human sensorium can cope with. Few people 
would batter an animal to death in cold blood, but roadkill is considered an 
acceptable by-product of the right to speed. It is a device which isolates the 
driver from the world, transforming it into pure trajectory and removing all 
but the most rudimentary communication with others, consisting solely of 
signals concerning direction and velocity. The motorway, not the 

140 Theory, Culture & Society 
mediasphere, is the scene of picnolepsia, the suspended consciousness of 
auto-pilot driving. The non-space of the car's interior, underwritten by its 
isolating soundtrack of radio and recorded music, abstracts from the 
unplan-able environment of populations and weather. Inscribed in dis-
courses as various as marketing campaigns and Chuck Berry songs as the 
individualist icon of freedom and mastery, the motor is in fact quite the 
opposite: a device for immobilization and subjection. Its reality is neither 
the open road nor the moment of arrival but the horizonless no-man's-land of 
the traffic jam. Yet it would be absurd to accept this nightmare as either 
historical necessity or unchallengably hegemonic. From Greenpeace to 
Reclaim the Streets, the incompetent ugliness of private cars is challenged 
globally. One can hope for its eventual demise. 
Perhaps this ecological catastrophe is easier to fight than the process 
of mediation: more obvious, more dangerous, more tangible. In transport 
there is a single technology against which to rail: we are so interwoven in 
mediation that no act of sabotage can break our need to communicate. To 
develop beyond pessimism, we need not only the essayistic media theory of 
Virilio's vibrant gloom: we need the meticulous scholarship on which he 
draws, that analyses the detailed history of the new technologies as well as 
the old, work now being undertaken in the histories of radio, television and 
cinema but still in its infancy in terms of networked and digital media 
(though see Edwards, 1996, on Internet historiography and Curry, 1998: 
59-£6 for a critical history of an extremely germane digital technology). We 
need to understand the economic rationales and design philosophies that 
enter into the construction of new technologies. But most of all we need to 
grasp the nettle of principled analysis: that as the world changes, nostalgia 
for a lost innocence is no grounds for critique or politics. Virilio at the very 
least offers us the opportunity, indeed demands that we reflect upon the 
urgent necessity, for an ethical grounding of our coming to terms with the 
new media. 
I have tried to show that Virilio's liberal humanism, his reliance on 
theories of representation and, most of all, his philosophical individualism, 
have hampered his ability to provide a telling analysis and prognosis in the 
new media field. But I hope that I have also shown that re-reading his 
scenarios of disempowerment and indifferentiation in the light of concepts 
of dialogue, communication and mediation can provide us with a way of 
drawing from his works a sense of the ethical demands placed on us by the 
technologization of community. Apocalypse is not the only possible future. 
Even if it were, we are ethically bound to act as if it were not. As the old 
revolutionary has it, pessimism of the intellect; optimism of the will. 
Note 
1. Virilio has been an active participant in anti-racist and homeless struggles in 
France: it is his writing which tends towards political quietism. Like many of his 
contemporaries, notably Deleuze and Guattari and Jean Baudrillard, Virilio tends 
to see the state as the villain of the piece, a view that normally denies him access to 

Cubitt - Virilio and New Media 
141 
analysis of the globalized capitalist enterprise as central player in new media 
technologies. 
References 
Baudrillard, Jean (1994) Simulacra and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Baudrillard, Jean (1995) The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, trans. Paul Patton. 
Sydney: Power Publications. 
Baudry, Jean-Louis (1975) 'Le Dispositif, Communications 23: 56-72. 
Baudry, Jean-Louis (1985) 'Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic 
Apparatus', trans. Alan Williams, pp. 531—42 in Bill Nichols (ed.) Movies and 
Methods, vol. 2. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Bazin, Andr6 (1971), 'Umberto D: A Great Work', trans. Hugh Gray, pp. 79-82 in 
What is Cinema?, vol. 2. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Brigham, Linda (1995) Transpolitical Technocracy and the Hope of Language: 
Virilio and Habermas', Speed 1(4) [http://proxy.arts.uci.edu/~nideffer/_SPEED_/ 
1.4/articles/brigham.html]. 
Ceram, C.W. (1965) Archeology of the Cinema, trans. Richard Winston. London: 
Thames and Hudson. 
Curry, Michael R. (1998) Digital Places: Living with Geographic Information 
Technologies. London: Routledge. 
Dagognet, Francois (1992) Etienne-Jules Marey: A Passion for the Trace, trans. 
Robert Galeta with Jeanine Herman. New York: Zone Books. 
Dayan, Daniel (1976) The Tutor Code of Classical Cinema', pp. 438-51 in Bill 
Nichols (ed.) Movies and Methods, vol. 1. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Derrida, Jacques (1973) Speech and Phenomena, trans. David B. Allison. Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press. 
Edwards, Paul N. (1996) The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse 
in Cold War America. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Ellul, Jacques (1964) The Technological Society, trans. John Wilkinson. New York: 
Vintage. 
Gomery, Douglas (1992) Shared Pleasures: A History of Movie Presentation in the 
United States. London: BFI. 
Heath, Stephen (1977/8) 'Notes on Suture', Screen 18(4): 48-76. 
Heath, Stephen and Theresa de Lauretis (eds) (1980) The Cinematic Apparatus. 
London: Macmillan. 
Heidegger, Martin (1977) The Question Concerning Technology', pp. 3-35 in The 
Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, trans. William Lovitt. New 
York: Harper and Row. 
Kellner, Douglas (1998) 'Virilio on Vision Machines', Film-Philosophy: Electronic 
Salon 9 October 
[http://www.mailbase.ac.uk/lists/film-philosophy/files/kellner. 
html]. 
Kuleshov, Lev (1973) The Origins of Montage', pp. 67-76 in Luda Schitzer, Jean 
Schitzer and Marcel Martin (eds) Cinema in Revolution: The Heroic Era of Soviet 
Film, trans. David Robinson. London: Seeker and Warburg. 

142 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Marx, Karl (1976) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1, trans. Rodney 
Livingstone. London: NLB/Penguin. 
Oliveira, Carlos (1996) 'Global Algorithm 1.7: The Silence of the Lambs: Paul 
Virilio in Conversation', trans. Patrice Riemens, in CTheory [http://www.ctheory. 
com/gal .7-silence.html]. 
Oudart, Jean-Pierre (1977-8) 'Cinema and Suture', Screen 18(4): 35-47. 
Rothman, William (1976) 'Against "The System of Suture"', pp. 438-51 in Bill 
Nichols (ed.) Movies and Methods, vol. 1. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1986) Speed and Politics: An Essay in Dromology, trans. Mark 
Polizotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1989a) War and Cinema, trans. Patrick Camiller. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1989b) 'The Last Vehicle', pp. 106-19 in Dietmar Kamper and 
Christoph Wulf (eds) Looking Back on the End of the World, trans. David Antal. 
New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991a) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. Philip Beitchman. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991b) Lost Dimension, trans. Daniel Moshenberg. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1992) 'Big Optics', trans. Jorg von Stein, pp. 82-93 in Peter Weibel 
(ed.) Zur Rechtfertigung der hypothetischen Natur de Kunst und der Nicht-Identitdt 
in der Objektwelt/ On Justifying the Hypothetical Nature of Art and the Non-
Identicality within the Object World. Koln: Galerie Tanja Grunert. 
Virilio, Paul (1994) The Vision Machine, trans. Julie Rose. London: BFI. 
Virilio, Paul (1995a) The Art of the Motor, trans. Julie Rose. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1995b) 'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', trans. Patrice 
Riemens, in CTheory [http://www.ctheory.com/a30-cyberspace_alarm.html]. 
Virilio, Paul (1997) Open Sky, trans. Julie Rose. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul and Sylvere Lotringer (1997 [1983]) Pure War, rev. edn, trans. Mark 
Polizotti, 'Postscript' trans. Brian O'Keefe. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Sean Cubitt is Reader in Video and Media Studies at John Moores 
University, Liverpool. He has published widely on contemporary arts, 
media and culture, and his most recent book is Digital Aesthetics 
(Theory, 
Culture & Society/Sage, 1998). Forthcoming projects include an anthology 
on postcolonial science fictions co-edited with Ziauddin Sardar and special 
issues of Screen on special effects and of Third Text on global digital 
cultures. 

Blinded by the (Speed of) 
Light 
Scott McQuire 
Speed; the coitus of the future. 
(Saint-Pol Roux, in Virilio, 1997: 116) 
[A]re we about to lose our status as eyewitnesses of tangible reality once and 
for all... afflicted with a kind of paradoxical blindness due to overexposure of 
the visible and to the development of sightless vision machines...? (Virilio, 
1997: 91) 
O
VER THE LAST DECADE, the dissemination of Paul Virilio's 
writings outside France has generated a critical momentum which 
delineates a particular theoretical trajectory in contemporary 
thought. Framed by his long-standing interest in the social and political 
effects of technology, Virilio's major focus has been the twin 'revolutions' of 
transport and transmission. In this article, I want to examine the close 
parallels between mechanical and media 'vehicles' that Virilio develops in 
his work, particularly regarding their capacity to transform the social 
relations of space and time. While I will express some reservations as to 
the adequacy of the phenomenological framework he mobilizes in order to 
understand the effects of telematics on the human body, perception and 
identity, I will argue that Virilio has clearly helped to pose the sort of 
fundamental questions which are vital when the parameters of the social and 
political world are themselves undergoing fundamental change. 
The Last Vehicle? 
At least since the publication of Speed and Politics (1986a) Virilio has 
sought to emphasize the role of different regimes of dynamic vehicles and 
the techno-political imposition of differential speeds of social interaction as 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 143-159 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;143-159;009963] 

144 Theory, Culture & Society 
prime determinants of modern political economy. Yet, while acknowledging 
that the political revolution of modernity could itself be understood in terms 
of increasing mobilization, Virilio does not elevate unimpeded movement to 
an ideal as the path to absolute freedom. 
The events of 1789 claimed to be a revolt against subjection, that is, against 
the constraint to immobility symbolized by the ancient feudal serfdom (which 
furthermore persisted in certain regimes) - a revolt against arbitrary confine-
ment and the obligation to reside in one place. But no one as yet suspected 
that the 'conquest of the freedom to come and go' so dear to Montaigne could, 
by sleight of hand, become an obligation to mobility. (Virilio, 1986a: 29-30) 
For Virilio, it is this imposition of a state of 'permanent mobility' which 
places speed — and hence different types of engines or motors - at the heart 
of modern social and political life. The shift from what he dubs 'metabolic 
vehicles' (human bodies) to new generations of mechanical vehicles with 
superior velocity and acceleration has been integral to the development of 
industrial capitalism as a global phenomenon.2 
Yet, despite constant acceleration throughout the 20th century, 
mechanical vehicles have found themselves increasingly outpaced by what 
Virilio (1989a: 106-19) has evocatively termed 'the last vehicle': the audio-
visual one. Numerous landmarks could be cited in the consolidation of the 
new world information order in which geography has been increasingly 
subordinated to communications technology. Virilio (1995a: 49) highlights 
the first multiplex radio broadcast in 1938, when CBS correspondents were 
linked live from Rome, Berlin and Paris, noting: 
Subscribers were not so much buying daily news as they were buying 
instantaneity, ubiquity — in other words, their own participation in universal 
contemporaneity, in the movement of the future Planet City. 
Following the tracks of analysts such as Marshall McLuhan, Virilio has 
been consistently drawn to comparisons between the double impact of new 
vehicles of transportation and new media of communication on the human 
sensorium and human consciousness. However, where McLuhan's essen-
tially optimistic vision of television in the 1960s enabled him to assume a 
position of influence in a corporate culture flattered by his image of heroic 
technocracy - a role readily assumed in the digital era by someone like 
Nicholas Negroponte - Virilio's analysis of global media has been far less 
celebratory. 
From Virilio's 'vehicular' perspective, automobiles are less 'riding' 
animals than frames (in the optical sense), and the self-propelled vehicle is 
not only a vector of change in physical location but also a new means of 
representation (Virilio, 1989a: 114). The profound unity of vehicular travel 
and the cinematic tracking shot established the modern subject as a 
voyager-voyeur (Virilio, 1991a: 58). But the effects of older vehicles and 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 145 
media pale before the impact of technologies such as broadcast television 
and networked computers which transmit information at the upper limit of 
the physical universe: light speed. Virilio (1995b) argues: To have reached 
the light barrier, to have reached the speed of light, is a historical event 
which throws history into disarray and jumbles up the relation of the living 
being towards the world.' One consequence of this threshold is the potential 
reversal of the migratory tendencies of the modern age of transportation. 
If in fact the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth 
experienced the advent of the automotive vehicle, the dynamic vehicle of the 
railroad, the street and then the air, then the end of this century seems to 
herald the next vehicle, the audio-visual one, a final mutation: static vehicle, 
substitute for the change of physical location, and extension of domestic 
inertia, a vehicle that ought at last to bring about the victory of sedentariness, 
this time an ultimate sedentariness. (Virilio, 1989a: 108) 
Displacement of movement in space by the technological control of 
time, and the concomitant refiguring of the tradition of geopolitics by what 
Virilio calls chrono-politics, is predicated on the ubiquity of screen tech-
nologies. Once broadcast and distribution points are sufficiently generalized 
so that 'coverage' can assume the mantle of global completeness, and live 
events can be tele-distributed in Veal time' across geographically dispersed 
audiences occupying their own discrete 'private' spaces, the nature of the 
social contract becomes subject to new exigencies. Such a shift also implies 
a significant transformation in the constitution of contemporary subjectivity. 
Rather than the armoured body of the transport revolution eulogized earlier 
in the century by avant-gardists such as Marinetti and Ernst Jtinger, Virilio 
posits the emergence of a human body which has ceded its motor functions 
to technology. The contemporary hype of computerized 'interactivity' would 
thus be the precursor to prolonged inactivity. 
The urbanization of real time is in fact first the urbanization of one's own body 
plugged into various interfaces (keyboard, cathode screen, DataGlove or 
DataSuit), prostheses that make the super-equipped able-bodied person 
almost the exact equivalent of the motorized and wired disabled person 
Doomed to inertia, the inactive being transfers his natural capacities for 
movement and displacement to probes and scanners which instantaneously 
inform him about a remote reality, to the detriment of his own faculties of 
apprehension of the real 
Having been first mobile, then motorized, man 
will thus become motile, deliberately limiting his body's area of influence to a 
few gestures, a few impulses like channel surfing. (Virilio, 1997: 11, 16) 
While such a prognosis should not be blithely universalized - the 
global economy is still heavily reliant on manual factory labour even if the 
hyper-mobility of contemporary capital has seen certain forms of production 
flee the older 'developed' economies — the trajectory Virilio identified well 
before the take-off of the Internet in 1993 is of great significance. The 

146 Theory, Culture & Society 
generalization of 'audio-visual vehicles' which operate at 'light-speed' has 
the capacity to affect all aspects of social life, insofar as it involves the 
reconfiguration of borders of all kinds, from the physical boundaries of our 
houses, cities and nation-states, to the more immaterial architecture of our 
thought. In the telescoping of near and far which disturbs customary 
relationships of proximity and distance, and inscribes a new temporal 
regime privileging a 'permanent present', Virilio argues that the current 
'crisis' of culture is born of a fundamental loss of orientation, and, ulti-
mately, a loss of properly human measure. What emerges is a new mode of 
being in the world in which the extensive revolution sustained by dynamic 
transport technologies which supported global trade and global migration is 
counterpointed by an intensive circulation of images and information, a 
virtual movement in which the human body is potentially reduced to a node 
within a network: 
The initially confined rise of the dynamic, at first mobile, then automotive, 
vehicle is suddenly followed by the generalised rise of pictures and sounds in 
the static vehicles of the audio-visual 
From now on everything will 
happen without us moving, without us even having to set out. (Virilio, 1989a: 
112) 
Transparency and Overexposure 
What are the consequences of living in a world shrink-wrapped by global 
media in which 'events' increasingly enter our homes without knocking? In 
his influential essay 'The Overexposed City', Virilio (1986b) challenged the 
dominant currents of modern architectural theory, where the model home or 
office of the future was inevitably designed to be 'augmented' with every 
imaginable new communication device. For Virilio, the proliferation of 
screen technologies is less a simple enhancement of than a decisive 
interruption to traditional modes of inhabiting space. The ubiquity of the 
screen with its restless 'horizon' means: 
Urban form is no longer designated by a line of demarcation between here 
and there, but has become synonymous with the programming of a 'time 
schedule'. Its gateway is less a door which must be opened than an audio-
visual protocol - a protocol which reorganizes the modes of public percep-
tion. (Virilio, 1986b: 19) 
In contrast to popular images of broadcast television and the Internet 
offering the cosmopolitan viewer unfettered 'access' to the world at large, 
Virilio (1986b: 20) argues that the new electronic architecture promoted by 
telematics, while less apparent than the doors and windows of antiquity, is 
'just as real, constraining and segregating'. But its full import is found in the 
promotion of new forms of social interchange: insofar as electronic media 
function to 'connect' people across previously discrete spaces, they also 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 147 
actively undermine the solidity of the ground on which both architecture 
and geography imagined themselves to stand. 
If in the nineteenth century the lure of the city emptied agrarian space of its 
substance (cultural, social), at the end of the twentieth century it is urban 
space which loses in its turn its geographical reality. (Virilio, 1986b: 20) 
While this is a trajectory which dates at least from the profound de-
composition of appearances set in train by the moving images of cinema, it 
is the active surface-boundary of the contemporary television screen or 
computer terminal which most radically accentuates the transmutation of 
physical space in the present. 
We can now see more clearly the theoretical and practical importance of the 
notion of interface, that drastically new surface that annuls the classical 
separation of position, instant or object, as well as the traditional partitioning 
of space into physical dimensions, in favour of an almost instantaneous 
configuration in which the observer and the observed are roughly linked, 
confused and chained by an encoded language from which emerges the 
ambiguity of interpretation, an ambiguity which returns to that of the audio-
visual media, especially that of live television... (Virilio, 1991b: 52) 
According to Virilio, what emerges in the light-speed era of 'real time' 
media is a state of atopia, a condition defined by the exhaustion of natural 
relief (spatial perspective) and of temporal distance (chronology or suc-
cession). Atopia is the spatial consequence of an insatiable screen culture 
which 'brings everything — absolutely everything — back to that place which 
has no place' (Virilio, 1986b: 21). For Virilio (1986a: 135), this raises the 
ominous prospect of what he has dubbed the omnipolis or 'world city', 
presaging a catastrophic levelling of culture through the 'geostrategic hom-
ogenization of the globe'. 
The spanning of previously discrete sites of activity and the wholesale 
penetration of solid architectural surfaces by wired networks and immaterial 
information flows has fundamentally altered the division between public 
and private space. Such a transformation works along at least two axes 
simultaneously. On the one hand, the private home finds itself increasingly 
deterritorialized by transnational media vectors, while, on the other hand, 
the public realm is increasingly integrated with the politics of media 
spectacle. One way to approach this dual trajectory is via Virilio's evocative 
description of the electronic screen as 'the third window' (1988:185-97), an 
appellation situating television and computer terminal as the historical 
successor to — but also the historical departure from — two prior 'windows'. 
The first is the door-window, the opening for the passage of bodies which is 
the minimum requisite for any dwelling, whether cave, frame house or smart 
office tower. The second window is the light-window, a specialized opening 
for illumination and ventilation of interior space. In comparison to its 

148 Theory, Culture & Society 
predecessors, the screen-window is constitutively different, insofar as the 
'horizon' it reveals is both ephemeral and discontinuous, subject to the 
incessant mobility of perspective and the rapid oscillations of montage. 
Despite this fundamental difference, it is instructive to compare the 
function of the contemporary screen-window with the aspirations that 
modern architects such as Le Corbusier held for the light-window. Writing 
and designing in the context of the 1920s avant-garde, Le Corbusier saw the 
horizontal strip window as the ideal means of opening interior space to the 
outside, thereby alleviating problems of design, health and morality alike. 
Not only does the horizontal window provide more light, thus aiding Le 
Corbusier's perennial quest to expose the domestic interior to the cleansing 
properties of universal transparency; significantly it is the 'objective' eye of 
the camera which finally legitimates the new design in his eyes. As Beatriz 
Colomina (1996) has noted, the window-wall converts the house, which 
Corbusier famously described as a 'machine for living in', into something 
like a machine for making pictures. As an abstract frame which Corbusier 
intended to place in any landscape, the glass-walled house becomes a 
camera pointed at Nature. But today, as glass windows which admit solar 
light are juxtaposed with screen windows emitting their own luminescence, 
the modern affiliation between architecture and audio-visual media is 
taking another turn. 
For Le Corbusier, the ideal of architectural transparency symbolized 
by the strip window was not only aesthetic and hygienic: above all, it 
signified the end of superstition and irrationality. The belief that rational 
housing would give birth to rational society courses through his work. This 
moral dimension, in which architectural transparency provides a compel-
ling metaphor for a revolutionary transformation of consciousness, was also 
remarked on by Walter Benjamin in his 1929 essay on Surrealism: 
To live in a glass house is a revolutionary virtue par excellence. It is also an 
intoxication, a moral exhibitionism that we badly need. Discretion concern-
ing one's own existence, once an aristocratic virtue, has become more and 
more an affair of petit bourgeois parvenus. (1985: 228) 
It is precisely this modernist faith in the revolutionary virtues of architec-
tural and social transparency which is today being sorely tested in the 
crucible of the interactive screen-window. It has become increasingly 
evident that the spectacularization of public events and public space via 
the media doesn't simply make them 'available' to the domestic consumer; it 
also alters the nature of domestic space and unsettles the borders of the 
contemporary home. For Virilio (1994a: 64): 
Really, once public space yields to public image, surveillance and street 
lighting can be expected to shift too, from the street to the domestic display 
terminal. Since this is a substitute for the City terminal, the private sphere 
thus continues to lose its relative autonomy. 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
149 
This 'loss of relative autonomy' today far exceeds the attack on bourgeois 
hypocrisy envisaged by Benjamin and his contemporaries, as the imagined 
virtues of 'moral exhibitionism' are counterpointed by the growing risks of 
overexposure. The blurring of divisions between public and private space 
entrained by electronic media has created a crisis of space which needs to 
be mapped simultaneously across a number of fronts or frontiers. In fact, a 
principal symptom of this condition is that where divisions between public 
and private space, or local, regional, national and international spheres 
once seemed relatively secure and stable, 'real-time' screen technologies 
ensure that all these sites are immediately implicated in each other: the 
deterritorialization of domestic space goes hand in hand with the increasing 
subjection of the public sphere, including the political realm, to the 
exigencies of media spectacle. As Virilio (1997: 18) notes: This crisis in 
the notion of physical dimensions thus hits politics and the administration of 
public services head on in attacking what was once geopolitics.' 
Over the years since its inception, broadcast television has inspired 
numerous paeans to its capacity to sustain 'participatory democracy', an 
enthusiasm which was transferred almost seamlessly to the Internet with the 
utopic visions of 'cyberdemocracy' espoused across the mainstream political 
spectrum in the 1996 US presidential elections. 
In contrast, Virilio's 
analysis here follows the pathway first laid out by Walter Benjamin in a 
remarkable footnote to his 'Artwork' essay, which signalled the emergence 
of an unholy alliance between 'the star' and 'the dictator' under the ubiqui-
tous eye of the camera. 
What Benjamin identified is the extraordinary 
latent power released by the 'personalization' of political image via the mass 
media, as politicians adopted the techniques and inhabited the terrain first 
staked out by Hollywood in the 1920s. While Nazi Germany was arguably 
more 'advanced' than its contemporaries in using radio, cinema and even a 
nascent television to orchestrate a new type of political constituency based 
on spatial ubiquity and temporal simultaneity, this mode of highly media-
tized politics, in which spectacular rituals of national celebration are used 
to generate mass identification with a charismatic leader, has since become 
a staple across much of the world.12 
While the ability of political leaders to project selected elements of 
their personalities into the public realm has enabled the creation of new 
mythologies, the underbelly of this modern 'cult of personality' can now be 
seen in the seemingly insatiable public appetite for 'intimate' details of 
leaders' private lives. In fact this appetite, originating in the highly con-
trolled publicity machines which illuminated the movie stars of the 'classi-
cal' Hollywood era, has today spread out of control into the incessant 
exposure of the private lives of 'celebrities' of all kinds, whether painters, 
presidents or princesses. This situation is rapidly creating a new type of 
political crisis, particularly in the USA, as it proves increasingly difficult to 
find 'clean' candidates for high political office. 
Similar appetites are also evident in the growing fascination with the 
private lives of 'ordinary people', manifested in the burgeoning circuit of 

150 Theory, Culture & Society 
television talk-show confessionals in the mode pioneered by Donahue and 
Oprah, and now spreading into a profusion of 'personal' Web pages and 
chatrooms on the Internet. Perhaps the most pointed case of 'overexposure' 
is the example set by Jennifer Ringley, a young Washington student, who 
generated enormous publicity when she began to live on-line several years 
ago, using a digital camera to upload images of her one room apartment to 
the Web every 2 minutes. Since its inception, the so-called 'Jennicam' has 
become a thriving business attracting sponsorships and subscriptions.13 
While there is undoubtedly a pornographic element to the public 
interest in Ringley, the voyeurism involved goes well beyond the simple 
possibility of encountering nudity. Rather, it seems to be located in the 
fascination exercised by the fantasy of being able to observe the private life 
of a total stranger in all its minute details. This fantasy has been around for a 
long time, at least since the invention of the movie camera. Painter and film-
maker Fernand L6ger long ago described his dream of a film which would 
record the life of a man and a woman over 24 hours. Nothing should be 
omitted or hidden; nor should they ever become aware of the presence of the 
camera (Kracauer, 1960: 63-4). Lager's ambition pales before the mega-
lomania of the Active 'director' in Peter Weir's The Truman Show (1998), a 
film which plays with the same fantasy of total surveillance over an 
unwitting individual's private life. But while The Truman Show provided a 
safety valve with the possibility that Truman can eventually escape his 
fishbowl exposure, 'real' television has never proved so easy to step outside. 
The contemporary popularity of 'real life' television scenarios of all kinds, 
from 'home video' and police and surveillance camera shows, to extended 
productions such as Sylvania Waters (1992), where a television crew lived 
with a Sydney family over several months, register the ambivalence of a 
desire which is difficult to master according to traditional categories of 
publicity and privacy. 
The salient point concerns the role of television and on-line media in 
transforming the contemporary home into both a cell of surveillance and a 
scene of watching. Recalling Walter Benjamin's comment on the 'revol-
utionary virtue' of glass houses, today it needs to be recognized that 
electronic media have effectively placed us all in glass houses, where we 
are simultaneously watchers and watched. 
The most intimate 'private' 
images are susceptible to instant display across transnational 'public' 
spaces, while 'public' events of all kinds penetrate what were once the 
most remote and secluded spaces of private life. While this erosion of 
private space is partly a function of the rise of sophisticated surveillance 
systems, it is also the result of the growing internalization of these mechan-
isms. When asked 'Why are you giving up your privacy like this?', Jennifer 
Ringley responded: 'Because I don't feel I'm giving up my privacy. Just 
because people can see me doesn't mean it affects me — I'm still alone in my 
room, no matter what.' 
Such a comment also registers the seismic shift affecting notions of 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
151 
'community' in the age of electronic media. Connecting media overexposure 
to the rise of 'single unit' families, Virilio (1991b: 12f>-7) comments: 
After the explosion of the ancient extended family that arose from rural 
living, the present disintegration of the urban nuclear family progressively 
relieves threatened populations of any prospect for organized resistance. 
One need not subscribe wholly to his analysis of the family as 'a basic cell of 
resistance to oppression' - which leaves the question of patriarchy hanging 
- to acknowledge the profound changes in social bonding in cultures which 
implore their citizens to 'keep in touch' by telephone and computer. 
Telepresence and the Accident of the Present 
The overexposure of space which results in the effective collapse of geo-
graphical distance with relation to media events and the increasing annex-
ation of public and private space by screen and terminal, is equally the 
overexposure of time. Virilio argues that the emergence of media vectors 
which operate at the speed of light (or time-light as he calls it) has led to a 
fundamental change in our mode of being in the world, putting at risk our 
sense of identity grounded in the experience of physical proximity and the 
primacy of face-to-face communication. From this perspective, live tele-
vision, which is capable of distributing 'events' to a globally dispersed 
audience as an integral part of their everyday lives, does not so much 're-
present' real events as undermine the very grounds for determining their 
reality. 
This is in the end what we could call a temporal commutation, a 
commutation also related to a sort of commotion in present duration, an 
accident of a so-called 'real' moment that suddenly detaches itself from the 
place where it happens, from its here and now, and opts for an electronic 
dazzlement 
(Virilio, 1997: 14; emphases in original) 
Virilio contends that this situation has produced the possibility of a 
new type of 'accident'. Unlike the spatially localized accidents inaugurated 
with the invention of mechanical vehicles such as train and automobile, the 
emerging accident is primarily temporal: 'with the teletechnologies of gen-
eral interactivity we are entering the age of the accident of the present...' 
(1997: 14; emphasis in original). A prominent example of this threshold is 
the so-called 'Y2K bug', an 'accident' situated less in geographical space 
than technological time. But, for Virilio, the 'accident of the present' arising 
from the increased privileging of global time over local time and the 
emerging dominance of 'telepresence' over 'presence', is the source of far 
deeper cultural convulsions. The Y2K bug is itself merely symptomatic of 
the radically truncated temporal horizons of contemporary political econ-
omy: even bearing in mind the fact that repairing the 'glitch' is an economic 
boon rather than a burden to the computer industry, it still beggars belief 

152 Theory, Culture & Society 
that the problem could not have been foreseen by computer programmers 
who created it as recently as the 1980s. The fact that it wasn't underlines 
John Berger's (1982: 109) point that contemporary capitalism lacks shared 
values which extend beyond a few years or even a few months. In similar 
vein, Virilio's analysis of the advent of technological time has consistently 
led him to identify history as the 'lost dimension', insofar as the extensive 
time of historical succession is being submerged by the immediacy of live 
action. From this perspective, telematics is less a passport to the ideal of 
'world time' than the means of atomizing time by alienating us from both 
knowledge of the past and the capacity to imagine the future. What emerges 
instead is: 
... the incredible possibility of a 'civilization of forgetting', a live (live-
coverage) society that has no future and no past, since it has no extension 
and no duration, a society intensely present here and there at once - in other 
words, telepresent to the whole world. (Virilio, 1997: 25) 
From this perspective, the 'problem' of the contemporary media no 
longer belongs to the traditional order of censorship and restricted flows of 
information, but concerns the overwhelming of the subject by the speed of 
information and the exhaustion of the world's spatio-temporal dimensions in 
a perennial state of overexposure. Far from satisfying human desire for 
knowledge and mastery, continued technological acceleration has produced 
a 'generalized delirium of interpretation' (Virilio, 1991b: 53) in which 
events seem to collide randomly with each other, producing a paradoxical 
state of 'blindness'. 
Equally serious is the loss of critical points of 
reference arising from the emergent split between 'presence' and 'telepre-
sence'. Virilio (1997: 37) argues that telematics induces a: 
.. .split in time between the real time of our immediate activities - in which 
we act both here and now - and the real time of media interactivity that 
privileges the 'now' of the timeslot of the televised broadcast to the detriment 
of the 'here', that is to say, of the space of the meeting place. 
However, despite his undoubted effectiveness in delineating this threshold, 
certain limitations in Virilio's analysis have become evident over the years 
since his work first appeared. At key moments, he continues to rely heavily 
on an unreconstructed phenomenological concept of presence: 
We might recall in passing that there is no true presence in the World - in 
one's own world of sense experience - other than through the intermediary of 
the egocentration of a living present; in other words, through the existence of 
one's own body living in the here and now. (Virilio, 1997: 38) 
Curiously, Virilio has shown little interest in taking on board any elements 
of the critique of this definition of presence advanced in philosophy over 
this century from Heidegger to Derrida and beyond. 
This leaves him 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 153 
with a conceptual armature barely adequate at crucial points to fully 
comprehend the shift he is describing, insofar as he inevitably drifts 
toward the same polarization of 'image' and 'reality' which has been a 
staple of Western thought since Feuerbach, if not Plato.17 Adhering to this 
paradigm of representation, in which the image is positioned as both 
subordinate and subsequent to the real - as a matter of logic itself - is 
problematic, not least because the precedence of the real over the image 
is precisely what has been thrown into confusion by the era of live broad-
casting in which the 'event' and its 'representation' frequently coincide. 
A related problem is that, despite his interest in the effects of the spatial 
ubiquity and temporal simultaneity generated by media technologies, 
Virilio has been notably reluctant to extend his analysis to the metaphysics 
of presence and its uncritical implication in a humanist vision of the 
unified subject. 
These problems are both strategic and conceptual. I would argue that 
attempting to develop a critical relation to the contemporary media in terms 
of the paradigm of representation, which inevitably gravitates towards a 
binary split between image and reality, is unlikely to have much purchase 
with those born into a post-television, post-Internet world. At a fundamental 
level, it is time to accept that the media is real - not in the totalizing sense 
asserted by the shadowy McLuhanesque figure of Dr Brian O'Blivion in 
Cronenberg's cautionary Videodrome (1982), who argued that the television 
screen had become 'the retina of the mind's eye' and hence a substitute for 
the real, but in the sense that the media is both a constitutive part of 
contemporary experience and a particular frame or context through which 
experience is filtered and understood. While Virilio is attentive to the 
importance of the media in shaping contemporary social and political life, 
his tendency to uncritically resort to the paradigm of representation fre-
quently reduces 'the vision machine' to a distortion or veiling of the 
supposed purity of the phenomenological real. The emphasis on 'de-realiz-
ation' tends to undermine the more original and productive elements of his 
analysis, namely the media's capacity to transform the social relations of 
time and space. 
Virilio's reliance on a phenomenological notion of immediate pres-
ence is a more serious problem, insofar as it leads him to reproduce the ideal 
of the unified humanist subject as a theoretical norm. This emerges quite 
clearly in certain formulations: 
In days gone by, being present meant being close, being physically close to the 
other in face-to-face, vis-a-vis proximity.... If it is true that, from now on, we 
can not only act at a distance, but even teleact at a distance ... then the 
unheard of possibility arises of a sudden splitting of the subject's personality. 
(Virilio, 1995a: 106) 
This reference to the 'unheard of possibility ... of a sudden splitting of the 
subject's personality' must be read in context of Virilio's almost total lack of 

154 Theory, Culture & Society 
engagement with poststructuralist theories of the 'decentred' subject. 
Pointing this out is not to advocate the necessity of following theoretical 
fashion, but to question whether the theoretical resources he utilizes are 
capable of fully realizing the task he has set himself. To the extent that 
theories of decentred subjectivity are able to give expression to the hetero-
geneous temporality of consciousness, I would argue that they are more 
useful than Virilio's phenomenological humanism in challenging the vectors 
of universal linear time extended in global media. The problem with 
Virilio's de facto reliance on the traditional 'measure' of the unified subject 
is that his conclusions as to the effects of telematics tend to swing between 
extremes of nostalgia and apocalypse, rebounding between a 'once upon a 
time' of supposedly integrated identity and community and an emerging 
future defined by personal pathology and global 'desertification'. 
This 
leaves his work bereft of any explicit political strategy as to how such a 
condition might be resisted or reversed beyond repeating Susan Sontag's 
(1979) earlier call for an 'ecology of images'. 
Virilio is clearly aware of his growing reputation as a doomsayer, 
asserting in a recent interview (1995c): 'I am not at all of an apocalyptic 
mind, I merely perform a critique of the technique', adding, 'I am conscious 
of all the positive aspects of technology, but at the same time I am also 
conscious of its negative aspects.' Such protestations seem somewhat disin-
genuous: the 'balance' in his work has always been heavily one-sided, which 
is undoubtedly part of its appeal. Where his descriptions of the 'positive' 
impact of telematics are brief and border on the banal ('it enables humanity 
to be brought together'), the bulk of his analytical effort and rhetorical power 
has been devoted to developing the idea that Totalitarianism is latent in 
technology' (Virilio, 1995c). From there it is a small step to the assertion 
that: 'The typical modern human is characterised by life under the dictator-
ship of the screen' (Virilio, 1995c). 
The problem with such fundamentalist pronouncements is that they 
detract from the most interesting aspect of Virilio's work, which is his 
attention to the way in which the era of time-light media instantiates a 
society governed by an inordinate privilege granted to the present moment. 
Moreover, while his work describes the socio-political symptoms of this 
mode of temporality, what remains largely unexamined are the forces 
driving this trajectory. To understand this lacuna, it is vital to connect the 
contemporary desire for 'telepresence' to the paradox of the 'now' which is a 
founding presumption of humanist metaphysics. 
Undoubtedly, this is a 
complex issue, inasmuch as it highlights the embeddedness of conscious-
ness and identity in particular historic (and hence mutable) social relations 
of space and time. 
One of the distinctive features of capitalism as a social form is that its 
dominant conception of identity as 'presence' is manifested in terms of the 
materiality of the here and now. This orientation meshes with a temporal 
order privileging the present moment or 'now' as the moment of plenitude 
and supports a heightened social investment in technologies of transport 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
155 
and communication as the means of mastering distance and absence. How-
ever, such an investment is inherently unstable, insofar as the impossibility 
of ever completely overcoming absence and living wholly in the present 
moment - at least this side of death - can only accentuate the quest for 
increasing acceleration and more speed. While ever increasing speed offers 
the subject the promise of technological transcendence — for example, the 
sense of mastery experienced by the voyager-voyeur in a cinema - satisfac-
tion is only temporary. At the same time, the effect of the increasing 
saturation of the entire social fabric by telematics is to radically decentre 
and destabilize the cultural and perceptual framework which supported the 
ideal of the stable, centred, individual subject in the first place. In other 
words, pursuing subjective plenitude or identity as self-presence through 
the technological mastery of distance and absence imbricates the subject in 
a vicious circle. It is at this point that we can best situate the problems 
raised by Virilio's continuing recourse to a metaphysics of presence in order 
to critique the advance of telepresence: the two terms are mutually impli-
cated. Pointing to the displacement of the 'here' by the 'now' is to recognize 
a significant transformation in the operation of the system, but it is also to 
remain within the same paradigm. As long as Virilio continues to deploy a 
concept of 'real presence' conceived on the basis of the 'here and now', his 
critique is ultimately grounded in the privilege of the present moment. This 
is precisely the same terrain that supports contemporary investment in 
'telepresence' as a potential strategy of mastery. 
Nevertheless, I would argue that Virilio's work provides important 
resources for constructing an effective critique of the social relations of the 
contemporary media in the face of the dominant political-economic currents 
eulogizing untrammelled media expansionism. The key move is to shift 
analysis away from the paradigm of representation and the problematic of 
'de-realization' to one focusing on the temporal paradoxes that 'real-time' 
media accentuate. In the future, it seems increasingly likely that more of our 
social and political battles will be fought out in the dimension of time. In the 
same way that indigenous peoples were routinely stigmatized in the 19th 
century as 'backward', 'slow' and generally dwelling 'out of time' by Euro-
pean colonizers who proclaimed themselves as 'modern' and 'progressive', 
the emergence of the so-called 'information poor' at the end of the 20th 
century is symptomatic of the spread of a new temporal disjunction. As the 
nets of 'real-time' global media are stretched ever more tightly, attentive-
ness to the existence of differential regimes of temporality will assume 
heightened importance in articulating relations of cultural, racial and class 
difference. 
Notes 
1. In line with his marked proclivity for describing 'revolutions' in three phases, 
Virilio (1997: 51) has subsequently added a third stage: that of transplants. 
2. Marx (1973: 539) clearly recognized rapid movement as critical to the develop-
ment of the capitalist system: *[W]hile capital on the one side must strive to tear 

156 
Theory, Culture & Society 
down every spatial barrier to intercourse, i.e. to exchange, and conquer the whole 
earth for its market, it strives on the other side to annihilate this space with time, 
i.e. to reduce to a minimum the time spent in motion from one place to another. The 
more developed the capital, the more extensive the market over which it circulates, 
which forms the spatial orbit of its circulation, the more does it strive simul-
taneously for an even greater extension of the market and for greater annihilation of 
space with time.' 
3. A similar landmark was the first satellite link-up of all five continents for a live 
television broadcast in 1964, following the possibilities indicated by Arthur C. 
Clarke's 1945 article 'Extra-Terrestrial Relays' which discussed the communi-
cations potential of satellites in geostationary orbit. 
4. The relationship between Virilio and McLuhan deserves more space than I can 
give it here. As Arthur Kroker has pointed out, both developed their theories as 
practising Catholics, which perhaps goes some way to situating the marked theo-
logical tenor of many of their pronouncements. Contrary to McLuhan's vision of 
television functioning to restore the gestalt unity of human consciousness fragmen-
ted by centuries of print culture Virilio (1994b) has argued that: 'television is a 
media of crisis, which means that television is a media of accidents. Television can 
only destroy. In this respect, and even though he was a friend of mine, I believe that 
McLuhan was completely wrong...'. 
5. Virilio (1991b: 24) has related this to the postmodern crisis of 'grand narratives', 
arguing: 'the crisis in the conceptualization of "narrative" appears as the other side 
of the crisis of the conceptualization of "dimension" as geometrical narrative, the 
discourse of measurement of a reality visibly offered to us all'. I will take up the 
issue of the residual humanism in some of his formulations below. 
6. In relation to cinema, Virilio (1989b: 47) noted: 'When the offer of a trip 
"Around the World in Eighty Minutes" shone outside cinemas in the '30s, it was 
already clear that cinema was imposing itself on a geostrategy which for a century 
or more had inexorably been leading to the direct substitution, and thus sooner or 
later, the disintegration of things and places.' 
7. Such pronouncements concerning the impact of global media in the formation of 
global culture are highly contentious. Here, I would merely note that Virilio gives 
little or no attention to theories which stress the role of the individual viewer/ 
consumer in actively 'making' their 'own' meanings from the media. 
8. Corbusier writes: 'I have recently discovered in a photographer's chart these 
explicit graphics: I am no longer swimming in the approximations of personal 
observations. I am facing sensitive photographic film that reacts to light. The table 
says this:... The photographic plate in a room illuminated with a horizontal window 
needs to be exposed four times less than in a room illuminated with two vertical 
windows...' (cited in Colomina, 1996: 311). 
9. Of course, Le Corbusier famously posed the equation slightly differently: archi-
tecture or revolution. 
10. Josh Meyerowitz (1985: 323), for example, has argued that television has 'the 
potential of the closest thing the earth has witnessed to participatory democracy on 
an enormous scale'. Commenting on the public advocacy of 'virtual democracy' by 
leading political figures including Al Gore, Newt Gingrich and Ross Perot, Virilio 
(1995b) characterized their discourse as 'reminiscent of a fundamental mysticism'. 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
157 
11. Benjamin (1973: 249) argued: 'Since the innovations of camera and recording 
equipment make it possible for the orator to become audible and visible to an 
unlimited number of persons, the presentation of the man of politics before camera 
and recording equipment has become paramount 
This results in a new selec-
tion, a selection before the equipment from which the star and the dictator emerge 
victorious.' 
12. I have discussed this in more detail elsewhere (McQuire, 1998: 233-40). 
Virilio's analysis of modern media as an integral arm of politico-military strategy 
explores similar terrain. In relation to Hitler and Stalin, he observes: 'Perhaps it has 
not been properly understood that these miracle working dictators no longer ruled, 
but were themselves directors' (Virilio, 1989b: 53). 
13. Ringley writes: 'Initially I bought the camera to update portions of my webpage 
with pictures of myself. A friend joked that it could be used to do a Fishbowl cam, but 
of a person. The idea fascinated me, and I took off with it. Initially the Jennicam had 
an audience of half a dozen of my close friends, and it spread like wildfire from there.' 
All quotes from Ringley taken from the FAQ page [http://www.jennicam.org/]. 
14. Elsewhere, I have discussed this condition of generalized overexposure in 
terms of 'the technological uncanny' (McQuire, 1997). 
15. In a recent interview, Virilio (1995c) argued: 'Something other than history is 
now coming to the fore. In a sense, we are now standing at the foot of the wall of 
time. We have realised absolute speed on a global plane 
History is simply 
smashing into the wall of time. This is an extraordinary occurrence.' 
16. Perhaps not all that surprising for one who has described the artists Malevich, 
Braque, Duchamp and Magritte as 'the last authentic philosophers' (Virilio, 1994a: 
31). 
17. For example, Virilio (1997: 19) argues that 'the current revolution in (inter-
active) transmission is in turn provoking a commutation in the urban environment 
whereby the image prevails over the thing it is an image of. Numerous other 
examples employing this binary structure of a split between the real (as presence, 
face-to-face communication, etc.) and the image (virtual, telepresence, etc.) could 
be cited. 
18. For an account of the way in which the subordinate and subsequent nature of 
the image is part of the temporal order of 'logic' itself, see Derrida (1981: 191). 
19. In one of his few references to Lacan, Virilio (1994a: 24) describes the 
dominance of theories of language and linguistic being as 'forbidding any con-
ceptual opening, and deploying to this end, massive reinforcement of Marxist-
Freudian babble and semiological cant'. In fact, his position in this regard is 
neither entirely clear-cut or consistent. At certain points (1994a: 21), he argues that 
the spatio-temporal 'disorientation' caused by the spread of electronic media can be 
theorized in terms of Einsteinian relativity - a move which, extended to its fullest 
logic, implies a potentially critical attitude to the stability and centredness of the 
humanist subject. He has also disputed, in Bergsonian terms, the equation of 
retinal vision with unmediated perception, arguing in favour of a model which 
recognizes the irreducible implication of memory in any 'direct perception' (1994a: 
1-19). While he doesn't acknowledge it, such a model has as much in common with 
psychoanalytical as phenomenological accounts of consciousness. 
20. Virilio (1995c) has argued that the 'doubling' of reality caused by telematics is 
'something that, to the best of my knowledge, results in clear pathological 

158 
Theory, Culture & Society 
consequences'. On the pollution of the world's dimensions, or 'desertification', see 
Virilio (1997:125). 
21. See Virilio (1997: 97) for his call for an 'ecology of images'. 
22. Such a paradox, handed down from Aristotle to Kant, Hegel, Bergson and 
beyond, circles around the 'impossible' nature of the present moment conceived as 
'now' - that it has no duration and therefore cannot properly 'exist'. I have 
discussed this at greater length elsewhere (McQuire, 1998: 248-53). 
References 
Benjamin, Walter (1973) Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn. London: Fontana. 
Benjamin, Walter (1985) One Way Street and Other Writings, trans. E. Jephcott and 
K. Shorter. London: Verso. 
Berger, John and Jean Mohr (1982) Another Way of Telling, New York: Pantheon 
Books. 
Clarke, Arthur C. (1945) 'Extra-Terrestrial Relays', Wireless World 51(10): 305-8. 
Colomina, Beatriz (19%) Privacy and Publicity: Modern Architecture as Mass 
Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Derrida, Jacques (1981) Dissemination, trans. B. Johnson. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press. 
Kracauer, Siegfried (1960) Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality. 
London: Oxford University Press. 
McQuire, Scott (1997) The Uncanny Home: Or Living Online with Others', pp. 
682—709 in P. Droege (ed.) Intelligent Environments: Spatial Aspects of the Infor-
mation Revolution. Rotterdam: Elsevier Science. 
McQuire, Scott (1998) Visions of Modernity: Representation, Memory, Time and 
Space in the Age of the Camera. London: Sage. 
Marx, Karl (1973) Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy, 
trans. M. Nicolaus. London: Allen Lane/NLR. 
Meyerowitz, Josh (1985) No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on 
Social Behaviour. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sontag, Susan (1979) On Photography. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Virilio, Paul (1986a) Speed & Politics: An Essay on Dromology, trans. M. Polizzotti. 
New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1986b) The Overexposed City', trans. A. Hustvedt, Zone 1(2): 14-31. 
Virilio, Paul (1988) The Third Window', pp. 185-97 in C. Schneider and B. Wallis 
(eds) Global Television. New York and Cambridge, MA: Wedge Press and MIT 
Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1989a) 'The Last Vehicle', pp. 106-19 in D. Kamper and C. Wulf 
(eds) Looking Back on the End of the World, trans. D. Antal. New York: Semi-
otext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1989b) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. P. 
Camiller. London and New York: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1991a) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. P. Beitchman. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991b) The Lost Dimension, trans. D. Moshenberg. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 

McQuire - Blinded by the (Speed of) Light 
159 
Virilio, Paul (1994a) The Vision Machine. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1994b) 'Cyberwar, God and Television: Interview with Paul Virilio', 
in CTheory [http://www.ctheory.com/a-cyberwar__god.html]. 
Virilio, Paul (1995a) The Art of the Motor, trans. J. Rose. Minneapolis and London: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1995b) 'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', trans. P. Rie-
mens, CTheory [http://www.ctheory.com/a30-cyberspace__alarm.html]. 
Virilio, Paul (1995c) The Silence of the Lambs: Paul Virilio in Conversation', 
trans. P. Riemens, CTheory [http://www.ctheory.com/gal.7-silence.html]. 
Virilio, Paul (1997) Open Sky, trans. J. Rose. London and New York: Verso. 
Scott McQuire lectures in Art and Architecture in the School of Social 
Inquiry at Deakin University, Australia. He is the author of Crossing the 
Digital Threshold (1997) and Visions of Modernity: Representation, Memory, 
Time and Space in the Age of the Camera (1998). He was recently awarded 
an Australian Postdoctoral Fellowship to research the relationship between 
architecture and mass media, and is currently completing a report on large 
format and special venue cinema entitled Impact Aesthetics: Cinematic 
Subjectivity into the Next Millennium (forthcoming). 


The Tendency, the Accident 
and the Untimely 
Paul Virilio's Engagement with the Future 
Patrick Crogan 
Introduction 
S
PEED', SAYS VIRILIO in Pure War (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983:30), 
'is not considered important'. For him, however it is a crucial if 
neglected factor in all historical and political developments. He 
suggests that the ever increasing speeds of contemporary technologies of 
transportation, communication, destruction and representation threaten to 
overwhelm the capacity for conventional historical modes of interpretation 
to make sense of them. These speeds challenge the ability of historico-
critical discourse to account adequately for their impacts on society, poli-
tics, culture and even the perception of reality. In exploring this challenge, 
Virilio has questioned the mainstream discourses of a 'future perfect' that 
accompany, promote and even generate techno-scientific advance. At a 
more profound level, Virilio's work addresses not only these technophilic 
discourses but also the humanist conception of history that allows both 
positivist and critical discourse to be articulated — including, necessarily, 
his own. 
This article will examine Virilio's engagement with speed's challenge 
to criticality. In the first section I will characterize the widely perceived 
crisis in conventional critical discourse that Virilio has identified with the 
'problem of speed'. This will involve reference to Gilbert Hottois's (1981) 
critique of futurology and Jacques Derrida's (1984) notion of the 'aporia of 
speed'. This last is, I will argue, a key formulation of the problem confront-
ing criticism today. It will serve to orient our discussion of Virilio's work as 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 161-176 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;161-176;009964] 

162 Theory, Culture & Society 
a response to this problem in the second and third sections of this article. In 
the second section, Virilio's interest in the accident and his stated aim of 
seeking the tendency in phenomena will be analysed as the crucial com-
ponents of his response to the challenge of speed. How this response opens 
the possibility of a critical engagement with the 'untimely' future is the 
subject of the final section of this essay. 
The Future of Futurology and the Aporia of Speed 
In an article entitled The "Future Dimension" in Mythical, Historical and 
Techno-Scientific Temporality' (1981), Gilbert Hottois argues that the 
current interest in the future, evidenced by the rise of 'futurology' and the 
popularity of science fiction, is indicative of a shift in or even an overturning 
of the conventional concept of temporality that has held sway in the West 
since the 'Judeo-Christian vision' supplanted the mythical temporality 
which preceded it. What he finds most revealing about futurological 
studies are the extraordinary reservations expressed in the prefaces of 
futurological books about the accuracy of their predictions concerning the 
state of humanity in the future. What becomes most apparent in these 
accounts of the future when these disclaimers are considered is that an 
account of the future cannot in fact be rendered; its unforeseeability is 
radical and not just of the order of a minor miscalculation of present 
tendencies. The source of this temporality of a completely 'open' and 
'opaque' future is named by Hottois as contemporary techno-science 
(1981: 77). 
Comparing the science of antiquity to techno-science, Hottois says 
that the former was: 
... deductivist, conceptual, speculative - thought must in principle be 
capable of securing knowledge by deducing, without surprise, a priori, the 
body of science from premises. Logical and speculative, the former science 
was in some way intemporal. (1981: 77) 
Contrasted to this is techno-science which is described as being entirely 'in 
time: the time of research and of construction' (1981: 77). It does not deduce 
from first principles but reacts to the most recent results of research and 
experimentation. The future is not the guarantee or end result predicted 
from the beginning but is always limited and contingent. Hottois writes: 
'potentially, surprise, the unexpected are everywhere. Those in the know 
repeat it: "What is important in research is the unforeseeable". "All major 
discoveries are unforeseeable"' (1981: 77). It is for this reason that any 
attempt to envision the future quickly runs up against that which renders 
prediction logically unjustifiable. This situation is exacerbated by the fact 
that diverse scientific disciplines are more and more interlocked in research 
and that a particular discovery can have several different repercussions in 
different fields, leading to further interdisciplinary innovations and research 
projects. 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 163 
In Hottois's view futurology, the projected history of the future, cannot 
be written because of this opaque, unforeseeable nature of techno-scientific 
change. The further implication of this is that neither can an adequate 
history of the present nor of the recent past be formulated, because of the 
pervasive influence of techno-science in the era of modernity. The reserva-
tions about predicting the future that Hottois focuses on are indicative, 
precisely, of the crisis in the interpretation of the present. The techno-
scientific discovery and development of theories and technics in such fields 
as audio-visual media, motorized transportation and flight, atomic physics 
and nuclear weapons, bio-chemistry, birth control and genetic engineering 
- to name some of the areas which have had the most significant impacts 
over the last century - cannot be explained in a conventionally historical 
manner. In another text, The Sign and the Technique (1984), Hottois argues 
that what results from the effort to do so is a discourse of legitimation after 
the event which tries vainly to reinscribe the technical development in a 
meaningful anthropological narrative of progress: 
There exists a curious movement proper to technics: its causally autonomous 
growth tends to produce the illusion of progress toward ends which are only in 
reality justifications after the fact of a blind proliferation. (1984: 123) 
Hottois goes on to say it is the technocratic and humanist socio-political 
discourses that provide the institutional and political framework for this 
illusion of technical 'progress'. Attendant on the 'benefit of humankind' and 
labouring under the illusion that technics exist as the neutral tool of 
humanity, these discourses produce this justification 'after the fact' (1984: 
192). But these justifications appear more and more tenuous with each 
techno-scientific development. The intrinsically unforeseeable nature of 
these developments and their consequences undermines the effort of the 
discourses of progress and rationality to reinscribe them in a meaningful 
teleology. The impulse to effect a retroactive legitimation of techno-science 
is the desperate measure of the predictive Enlightenment discourses of 
progress in the face of their increasing irrelevance today. Their enabling 
assumption of discernible continuities and coherencies in the linear, 
onward march of time is grievously shaken by what Hottois calls the 'blind 
proliferation' of technics. 
In 'No Apocalypse, Not Now' (1984), Jacques Derrida addresses this 
challenge that modern techno-science poses to historico-critical interpre-
tation in a different, but not unrelated context. He is discussing speed's 
effects on society and politics — both the speeds of modern technological 
communication, transportation, etc. and the speed of advance in these 
fields. Like Hottois, Derrida calls into question the viability of traditional 
historical modes of interpretation in accounting for techno-scientific devel-
opments and the radical changes in the speeds of cultural and political 
existence they bring. But this does not lead Derrida to a total rejection of 

164 Theory, Culture & Society 
historical interpretation. As we will see shortly, this questioning leads him 
to propose an 'aporia of speed' that confronts critical work today. 
First, I want to follow Derrida's interrogation of what he calls the 
'speed race in search of speed' that has dominated social and political life 
globally since the end of the Second World War. This will help us better 
understand the problematic concerning speed that leads Derrida to formu-
late the notion of the 'aporia of speed'. Writing in the early 1980s Cold War 
revival under the then American President Ronald Reagan, Derrida is 
initially referring here to the arms and space races, but he goes on assert -
in a move characteristic of Virilio's discourse on 'pure war' (to be examined 
in the next section) - that all techno-scientific developments must be 
considered in the light of this speed race (1984: 23). Indeed, he says that 
'no single instant, no atom of our life (our relation to the world and to being) 
is not marked today, directly or indirectly, by that speed race' (1984: 20). 
Derrida first poses the question about how to understand this 'speed 
race' of (military) techno-science and the effect it is having on human 
existence thus: 'Is it new? Is it the first time "in history"?' (1984: 20). The 
quotation marks around ' "in history"' are then immediately foregrounded 
as the sign of a questioning of the validity of this question: 'Is it [the speed 
race] an invention, and can we still say "in history" to speak about it?' 
(1984: 20). This questioning of the question is elaborated as an uncertainty 
about the adequacy of history to the experience of this 'speed race', to the 
contemporary experience of speed: 
Are we having today, another, a different experience of speed? Is our relation 
to time and to motion qualitatively different? Or must we speak prudently of 
an extraordinary — although qualitatively homogeneous - acceleration of the 
same experience? (1984: 20) 
Conventional historical discourse would want to maintain the concept of 
speed as a characteristic of things - objectively measurable because of its 
constant quality across quantifiable changes (accelerations, decelerations, 
changes in direction). Modern physics has shown this to be only a conven-
tional understanding of speed with a limited validity. Heisenberg's prin-
ciple and the general theory of relativity before it have undermined the 
'objectivity' of speed in undermining belief in the absolute character of 
space and time. The question, 'Is it the first time "in history"?' was 
'simplistic' because it opposed quantity and quality: 
... as if the concept of speed, linked to some quantification of objective 
velocity, remained within a homogeneous relation to every experience of time 
- for the human subject or for a mode of temporalisation that the human 
subject - as such - would have himself covered up. (1984: 20) 
Derrida suggests that speed has to be rethought beyond the simple oppo-
sition of quality and quantity in view of its all-encompassing influence 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 
165 
today. Such a rethinking would be more than a consideration of how 
modern technology has increased the speed and efficiency of modern work, 
warfare, construction, etc. In addition, it would need to theorize the impact 
of these technologies on the experience of these phenomena, and on how 
these new experiences of speed have affected the nature of the world they 
constitute. 
But this theoretical project would not be immune from the problems 
facing critical interpretation that both Hottois and Derrida discuss, for it 
would also depend on a conventional critical assumpton of the possibility of 
articulating present phenomena with historical developments, even in the 
effort to theorize the novelty of contemporary cultural and political realities. 
This critical assumption is challenged by the unforeseeable nature of 
techno-scientific development (Hottois) and the possibility of the alteration 
of the human experience of time under the speeds of contemporary social, 
political and individual existence (Derrida). While the attempt to 'locate' 
the current state of affairs in history' would appear to be problematical, 
Derrida will go on to state his 'belief that 'the historian's critical vigilance' 
does have an important role to play in analysing what he calls the 'nuclear 
age', even if this analysis carries the risk of not seeing what is radically new 
about this age (1984: 21). 
This is the challenge facing critical work today, one which is unavoid-
able: how to think the new, the unforeseeable in terms of the old, the 
conventional — and this at a time when the new developments of techno-
science appear to be rendering the conventional modes of critical thought 
untenable. Derrida proposes that it is the present situation which has thrown 
up this challenge and hence allowed us the opportunity to confront what he 
calls the 'aporia of speed'. 
According to Derrida, the aporia of speed concerns an obligation to 
move quickly over against the need for potentially infinite consideration. 
The criticism of the nuclear age must proceed from a decision about whether 
this age represents an entirely unforeseen development of the human socius 
or whether it must be theorized historically in terms of earlier forms of the 
nexus of the social and the technical. While Derrida's text oscillates from 
one alternative to another on this initial question, the text is nevertheless 
traversed by the urgency of the situation, a situation requiring a decisive 
departure for the inquiry into the nuclear age. Recognizing the dilemma that 
what he calls the 'the critical slowdown may thus be as critical as the critical 
acceleration', Derrida goes on to ask: 
What is the right speed, then? Given our inability to provide a good answer 
for that question, we at least have to recognise gratefully that the nuclear 
age allows us to think through this aporia of speed (i.e., the need to move 
both slowly and quickly); it allows us to confront our predicament starting 
from the limit constituted by the absolute acceleration in which the unique-
ness of an ultimate event, of a final collision or collusion, the temporalities 
called subjective and objective, phenomenological and intra-worldly, 

166 Theory, Culture & Society 
authentic and inauthentic, etc., would end up being merged into one 
another. (1984: 21) 
The 'limit' of 'absolute acceleration ... of a final collision or collusion' in 
which 'the temporalities called subjective and objective would end up being 
merged into one another' refers explicitly to nuclear holocaust in this 1980s 
text. But it also figures implicitly the end of criticism in the speed of 
technological advance (the 'final collusion'). This limit point is, Derrida 
argues here, both the 'ultimate threat' and the best starting point for the 
necessary confrontation with 'our predicament'. These pairs of opposed 
'temporalities' are highly allusive to Western thought's most influential 
attempts to confront its situation, its object(s), its 'self. The pairs 'subjective 
and objective, phenomenological and intra-worldly, authentic and 
inauthentic, etc' function as a shorthand description of the various major 
attempts to construe and interpret events in time, including the Hegelian 
dialectic of subject and object and all its progeny, and the Heideggerian 
rethinking of history in terms of authentic and inauthentic apprehensions of 
temporality, 'etc.'. 
Without exploring all the ramifications of this shorthand reference to 
the major 'philosophemes' of modernity, we can perceive that the threat of 
the end of criticism lies in the dissolution - under the tranformative press-
ure of acceleration - of the distinctions upon which these modes of inter-
pretation depend for their significance. This threat posed by the nuclear age, 
namely, that critical interrogation of it will no longer be possible, is also, 
paradoxically or aporetically, the opportunity it affords us. For if the urgent 
decision on the question of how to approach the age (quickly or slowly, 
historically or as a totally novel phenomenon) cannot be made and the path 
of questioning leads only to the aporia of speed, this is not necessarily the 
end for criticism. If criticality is in crisis because it faces its end, this crisis 
always carries with it the opportunity for a renewed confrontation, for 
renewed interpretations. 
The task, concludes Derrida, for those in 'the humanities', that is, 
those who practise critical work in the disciplines experiencing this aporia 
of speed, is to 'reinvent [critical] invention' by rethinking the relations 
'between the invention that finds what was already there and the one that 
produces new mechanisms or new spaces' (1984: 21). It cannot be a ques-
tion of simply abandoning as outmoded historical interpretation that 'finds 
what was already there'. That move would relinquish all possibility of 
articulating the present with earlier modes of the cultural-technological 
formation, resulting in a critical belief tantamount to holding that the 
present sprang fully formed in an instant without precedent. But nor can it 
be a case of ignoring what is unlooked for in the present and unforeseeable 
in the future, for this would lead - and indeed has led - to the increasing 
irrelevance of conventional critical work. Critical invention must also 
attempt to produce 'new mechanisms or new spaces'. The task Derrida 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 
167 
describes is one of rethinking the relations between the two critical efforts 
required. 
The future, one might say, depends on this attempt being made. As I 
will discuss in the following sections, Virilio's work represents just such a 
task of thinking between conventional criticality and its undoing in the 
invention of 'new mechanisms'. His project encounters the aporia of speed 
through its form of encounter with both historical and contemporary techno-
scientific and cultural phenomena. The teleological model of history and of 
the future is the terrain in which this encounter takes place. I will argue that 
Virilio's work can be understood as a form of anti-futurology that faces up to 
the unforeseeable nature of today's techno-scientific future in a way that 
attempts the aporetic task of moving both slowly and quickly in the face of 
the transformative speeds of contemporary existence. 
The Tendency and the Accident 
Virilio's work is best thought of as an ongoing series of 'tendential analyses' 
that privilege the accident over the substance of any given techno-scientific 
development. The tendency and the accident are crucial concepts in 
Virilio's discourse and it will be necessary to examine each in detail. 
Above all, understanding how they function together in Virilio's work is 
essential to comprehending his response to the aporia of speed. 
The form of Virilio's writing immediately bears witness to his effort to 
meet the challenge that speed has posed to criticality. The speed of his own 
discourse is the most apparent and widely recognized feature of his critical 
engagement. Virilio's work is rapid. It executes fast-moving analyses of 
contemporary phenomena and historical developments so as to outline what 
he sees as the major tendencies inherent in them. His writing privileges a 
sketching-out of these tendencies over the detailed historico-critical analy-
sis and interpretation of the various phenomena which in combination 
constitute those tendencies. For the most part, his books are collections of 
essays, many of which are published individually prior to their appearance 
together in book form. While they maintain a thematic consistency, the 
essays in a book by Virilio do not come together to build a homogeneous, 
linear argument as so many chapters of a unified study. Each essay moves 
quickly from one idea to the next, from consideration of one phenomenon to 
another, without extensive analysis or interpretation. In addition, the 
thematic linkage between two ideas or phenomena is often evoked in such 
a way as to challenge traditional modes of interpreting such linkages. 
Immediately one can see the risk involved in Virilio's project. His 
emphasis on writing 'rapid books' leaves him open to criticism on the 
grounds that he fails to substantiate, via careful and rigorous analysis and 
discussion, the claims he makes. This is undoubtedly correct in many 
instances - Virilio often relies on brief evocations of well-established 
interpretative models such as Marxism, positivism and the discourses of 
military history and theory which he summarily subverts, diverts or inverts. 

168 Theory, Culture & Society 
But this weakness is, I will argue, also paradoxically what constitutes the 
strength of Virilio's engagement with the aporia of speed. 
What is the tendency, then, for Virilio, and why does he prefer the 
rapid sketching out of the tendency over the more measured steps of 
historico-critical analysis? In the light of our discussion in the first section 
of this article we can hypothesize that Virilio is responding to the crisis in 
historical modes of interpretation by attempting to bring critical discourse 
'up to speed' as it were with contemporary developments. Virilio would 
seem to confirm this when he talks about his preference for the tendency 
over the 'episode' in the long interview with Sylvere Lotringer published as 
Pure War: 
I work in staircases - some people have realized this. I begin a sentence, I 
work out an idea and when I consider it suggestive enough I jump a step to 
another idea without bothering with the development. Developments are the 
episodes. I try to reach the tendency. Tendency is the change of level. (1983: 
39) 
The tendency is the elusive element, the faintly perceived movement of an 
event, something which will have future consequences not immediately 
apparent when the event appears in its conventional form as one part of a 
development that has led to the present. To posit the presence of an 
unnoticed tendency in past events is to recast the historical interpretation 
of those events, challenging the established sequence of the salient and 
substantial elements of a particular historical development. As Hottois has 
argued, this established sequence is increasingly problematical today as the 
rationalist discourse of progress attempts to legitimate techno-scientific 
advances that bear less and less relation to the humanist model of scientific 
and social progress. The jump from one step in 'the staircase' of ideas that 
Virilio ascends to another attempts a refiguring of the historical chain of 
cause and effect, undoing its apparent continuity and reinventing it in a 
parallel but heterogeneous enchainment. 
Virilio's jumps are suggestive; they work with absences, with the gaps 
between the levels of different ideas, different developments. His project -
with its leaps from one state of affairs to a qualitatively different state of 
affairs - relies on these absences, these gaps in the tracks of historico-
critical interpretation and the accidents that make interpretation jump 
tracks across these gaps. We will examine the nature of these accidents 
shortly. 
The opposition between tendency and episode that Virilio uses to 
describe his project derives from a statement by Winston Churchill (cited 
earlier in Pure War) that 'in ancient warfare, the episodes were more 
important than the tendencies; in modern warfare, the tendencies are more 
important than the episodes' (1983: 11). Virilio's effort to reach the tend-
ency reveals, therefore, that his is not only a discourse on war — more 
specifically, what he calls 'pure war', and the speeds of its techno-scientific 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 
169 
proliferation - but also a discourse at war with pure war, one which is trying 
to match the speed of its tendential changes of level and their widespread 
impacts on cultural and political reality. 
Pure war, probably Virilio's most well known concept, is his term for 
the overarching tendency discernible in the post-Second World War era. As 
such it makes an excellent example for our consideration of Virilio's 
tendential mode of critical analysis. The pure war tendency is one in which 
war has mutated: war is overflowing the bounds of its traditional dwelling 
place in actual hostilities and seeping into the 'pure' form of its preparation. 
The arrangement and maintenance of a permanent state of preparation for 
war, an arrangement which increasingly dominates social and political 
formations in the post-war period, has tended toward a radical alteration of 
those formations. This alteration is not adequately theorized by the standard 
accounts of the Cold War and the rise of the military-industrial complexes of 
the Superpowers, for they rely on conventional assumptions about the 
relations between economics, politics, the military and the social. Pure war 
tends to indetermine the distinction between war and peace and along with 
it traditional models of the state-individual relationship and of the military 
and non-military ('domestic') spheres. 
The rapid passage of the Second World War from the politico-strategic 
level to the extremes of total and nuclear war is a key factor, according to 
Virilio, in the post-war acceleration of the tendency toward pure war. The 
tendential element that Virilio perceives in the formation of the strategy of 
nuclear deterrence is the deterrence not only of nuclear war, but of previous 
forms of political and cultural relationships at individual, local, national 
and international levels. This was an unforeseen, transformative element of 
nuclear deterrence that has had profound consequences beyond the field of 
military strategy and geopolitics. It has amounted to a speeding up of what 
Virilio has characterized as the 'logistical' reordering of the state and the 
social that is pure war. 
Logistics is a key term in Virilio's characterization of the pure war 
tendency. It is generally associated with the economic, supply and transport 
considerations taken into account by military planning staff in their pre-
parations for war or for maintaining standing armed forces. Manuel de 
Landa defines logistics as 'the art of assembling war and the agricultural, 
economic and industrial resources that make it possible' (1991:105). It has 
also gained a wider usage in describing economic resource management and 
deployment more generally.5 Virilio, for his part, has taken this term and 
pushed its implication - that war and the military cannot be considered as 
separate from the socio-economic and cultural spheres — to the forefront in 
his characterization of pure war. In this 'avant-garde' position, the term 
'logistics' always announces a question for Virilio about the overflowing of 
the military into every domain of life: the economic, the social, the political 
and the cultural. Broadly speaking, his earlier texts dealt with the social and 
political dimensions of this tendency. Later texts such as War and Cinema: 
The Logistics of Perception (1989 [1984]), The Vision Machine (1994 [1988]), 

170 Theory, Culture & Society 
Ulnertie polaire (1999 [1990]) and The Art of the Motor (1995 [1993]) have 
examined the wider impacts of the influence of logistics in such areas as 
architecture, design, communications, vision and visual culture. 
As mentioned above, for Virilio the tendency towards pure war gains 
momentum dramatically in the Second World War. It is during this long 
conflict that logistical considerations begin to dominate traditional strategic 
and political modes of organization under the impetus of the policies of total 
mobilization. This dominance extends beyond the end of open hostilities 
into the Cold War period. Virilio sees in General Eisenhower's management 
of the Allies' D-Day invasion of occupied France the culmination of an 'a-
national logistical revolution', subsequently instantiated in an early post-
war definition of logistics that issued from the Pentagon: 'Logistics is the 
procedure following which a nation's potential is transferred to its armed 
forces, in times of peace as in times of war' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 16; 
emphasis added). 
It is an accident, however, that occurs during the First World War 
which plays a major role in the formation of the logistical tendency. Virilio 
describes this accident and its immediate consequence in Pure War: 
After several months of trench warfare - that is, of position warfare, since the 
armies could no longer move - they realized that their current war produc-
tion, the traditional production foreseen during peacetime, could no longer 
meet the demands of military consumption (in the number of shells fired, of 
bombs, of planes, etc.) 
This was the 'technical surprise', as it was called, 
of World War One. They could no longer say that on one side there was the 
arsenal which produced a few shells, and on the other civilian consumption 
and the budget. No, they noticed that they needed a special economy, a 
wartime economy. This wartime economy was a formidable discovery, which 
in reality announced and inaugurated the military-industrial complex. 
(1983: 16) 
The 'technical surprise' of the Great War is an excellent example of 
Virilio's notion of the accident. It was the unforeseen result of technological 
'progress' in a range of areas, from industrial modes of production in general 
and weapons manufacture in particular to logistical systems of transport and 
communication. Instead of producing the anticipated short and decisive 
conflict befitting the modern machine age, this technological 'progress' led 
to the protracted, immobilized bloodbath of trench warfare - a bloodbath 
which was also a black hole for the economic resources of the warring 
nations. It is this accident that induced the 'discovery' of the wartime 
economy, the origin of the military-industrial complex of pure war. 
The 'technical surprise', then, is just the type of accident Virilio is 
concerned with in his work. Virilio's interest in the accident is central to his 
critique of the positivist, technophilic discourses of progress, those dis-
courses that Hottois characterized as legitimating technological develop-
ments after their (unforeseen and often violent) advent. His interest is 
succinctly elaborated in Pure War: 

Crogan — Virilio and the Future 171 
The riddle of technology ... is also the riddle of the accident. I'll explain. In 
classic Aristotelian philosophy, substance is necessary and the accident is 
relative and contingent. At the moment, there's an inversion: the accident is 
becoming necessary and substance relative and contingent. Every 
technology produces, provokes, programs a specific accident. For example: 
when they invented the railroad, what did they invent? An object that 
allowed you to go fast, which allowed you to progress - a vision a la Jules 
Verne, positivism, evolutionism. But at the same time they invented the 
railway catastrophe 
I believe that from now on, if we wish to continue 
with technology (and I don't think there will be a neolithic regression), we 
must think about both the substance and its accident - substance being 
both the object and its accident. The negative side of technology and speed 
was censored. (1983: 32) 
Virilio recasts the relation between what is considered essential and what 
peripheral to technological 'advance' by punning on the buried relationship 
between the classical, philosophical notion of accident as an 'inessential' 
attribute or quality of a thing and the everyday sense of the term accident as 
an unexpected mishap. In doing so Virilio proposes not just to remove the 
censorship of positivism by acknowledging the 'specific accident' of a given 
technology. Instead he calls for a rethinking of technological development 
so as to address the substance/accident 'inversion' through which the acci-
dent is not only a regretable contingency but becomes something 'every 
technology produces, provokes, programs'. 
This is why war and military developments are so crucial for Virilio. 
'What are war machines?', Virilio asks in an interview with Chris Dercon: 
'They are machines in reverse — they produce accidents' (Dercon, 1986:36). 
This explains to a significant extent Virilio's focus on theorizing war as a 
central aspect of modernity. War not only provides a major impetus for the 
development of new technologies of speed - it is, he says in the same text, 
the 'laboratory of modernity' (1986: 36). The war machine, in its reversal of 
the commonsense notion that machinery is essentially productive, promotes 
this 'negative side of technology' which Virilio argues is a central aspect of 
all technologies. This negative side, he says in another interview (with 
Florian Rotzer), is always there, doubling the side of 'productive reason' 
(Rotzer, 1995: 100). In privileging the accident over the substance Virilio 
sees himself as a theorist of this hidden negativity, correcting, he says, the 
Western metaphysical tradition's denial of 'military intelligence': 'When 
Aristotle says there is no science of the accidental, he puts into motion the 
process of denying the negative' (1995: 100).6 
Virilio provides further insight into his privileging of the accident 
in 'La Mus6e de Paecident' (in Virilio, 1996).7 Taking the occasion of the 
opening of a museum of technology at the Pare de la Villette in Paris, he 
repeats his assertion of the 'symmetry between the substance and the 
accident' and speculates on the need for and the possible design of a 
'museum of accidents' to counter the positivism of conventional museologi-
cal practices (1996: 110). Describing the approach of such a museum as 

172 Theory, Culture & Society 
'postpositivist', he argues that its goal - to 'expose the accident' - would be 
to 'expose the unlikely, the unusual yet inevitable' (1996: 112). This would 
serve to expose to 'us' 'that to which we are habitually exposed' as a form of 
protection from it. To achieve this 'preventive perspective' the museum 
would need to comprehend the accident as: 
... no longer identifiable simply with its deadly consequences, its actual 
results: ruins and scattered debris, but also with a dynamic and energetic 
process, a kinetic and cinematic sequence not bound to the relics of all kinds 
of destroyed objects and rubble. (1996: 114) 
This 'kinetic and cinematic sequence' is the inverse of the positivist concep-
tion of the dynamic process of historical progress. It is the double of 
progress in that it borrows the 'progressive' assumptions of linear tempor-
ality and teleological inevitability, as well as the notion that a visible image 
of the movement of progress is discernible across the passage of time. The 
revealing of this sequence that Virilio identifies with the accident would 
challenge the habitual understanding of the connection between historical 
and technical developments by 'showing the advent of something in what 
seems to happen unexpectedly' (1996: 115). 
What Virilio's 'meta-museography' of the imaginary museum of acci-
dents amounts to is a characterization, in a typically rapid, evocative form, 
of his theoretical project. The kinetic sequence of the unexpected that 
doubles the narrative of historical/technological progress is another 
description, I would suggest, of the tendency. As seen in the relation 
between the 'technical surprise' of the First World War and the logistical 
tendency toward pure war, the accident plays a central role in the 'vector-
ization' of the tendential sequence. Indeed, it is the 'substance' of the 
tendency's change of level, the motor of its unexpected detouring of the 
rational course of progress. Virilio's writing attempts to sketch out the 
tendency through a description of the accidents of technological (post)mo-
dernity. These descriptions are in effect critical reinscriptions of these 
adventitious yet somehow constitutive mishaps of techno-science. 
The tendency is, therefore, accidental — it arises and gains momentum 
in and through these unforeseen detours of techno-scientific 'advances' in 
civilization. But these unexpected events are, paradoxically, 'substantial'; 
they link up to form the dynamic sequence that perturbs the march of 
forward progress by doubling and disfiguring its teleology. The tendency is 
made up of these enigmatic accidents that Virilio says 'every technology 
produces, provokes, programs'. 
The Untimely 
We are now in a position to articulate Virilio's project in terms of the aporia 
of speed confronting critical work discussed in the first section of this 
article. It was stated there that the aporia of speed concerned the contra-
dictory necessities for criticism in the era of techno-science to move 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 
173 
quickly, in order to account for the rapidly transforming present, over 
against the need for careful consideration of the continuities between past 
and present. Finding the 'right speed' for critical interpretation is an 
aporetic task which must nevertheless be attempted, for it is the opportunity 
that presents itself to criticism even as the critical discourses of the 
humanities find themselves in crisis in the face of the techno-scientific 
transformation of culture. To recall, this task involves rethinking the 
relations between what Derrida calls 'the invention that finds what was 
already there and the one that produces new mechanisms or new spaces' 
(1984: 21). 
This is what Virilio's tendential analyses attempt. They represent a 
profound meditation on the relation between traditional historical modes of 
interpretation and the new event that challenges the coherence of such 
historical interpretation. As we have seen, the tendency appears as a 
double of the discourse of progress in its mirroring of the structure of 
linear temporal development toward a future endpoint. For instance, the 
pure war tendency would culminate in the total merging of the military and 
non-military spheres and the complete dominance of logistics over all 
other considerations (economic, social, political, ethical) in the ordering of 
the social. In such a situation there would be no possibility of a criticality 
outside of logistical imperatives. In doubling the discourse of progress, his 
rapid analyses retain a link to the historical form of criticality. Virilio 
reaffirms the traditional mode of historical analysis even as he attempts to 
counter the more or less explicit positivism that pervades conventional 
accounts of techno-science. His efforts to bring the negative side of 
technological advance into focus by exposing the accidents that have con-
tributed to the generally unnoticed, dynamic tendencies that shadow and 
transform 'progress' are, in this sense, efforts toward a corrective form of 
anti-futurology. This anti-futurology avoids the retroactive legitimation of 
techno-scientific developments and the increasingly tenuous prediction of 
the inevitable advance of (Western) world civilization. It raises crucial 
questions about the nature of techno-scientific development by proposing a 
perverted version of the dominant teleological narratives told about it. 
But this corrective anti-futurology is not the only dimension of 
Virilio's response to the aporia of speed. In his focus on the accident, Virilio 
does more than reverse the positivist censorship of the negative in standard 
discourses on technology. By treating the accident as somehow both unfore-
seen and integral to a dynamic process of transformation, his project 
addresses the aporetic task of thinking 'between the invention that finds 
what was already there and the one that produces new mechanisms or new 
spaces' (Derrida, 1984: 21). The accident becomes a paradoxical object of 
Virilio's analysis that mediates between these two forms of critical inven-
tion. As integral to the tendency, the accident is described as contributing/ 
having contributed to an established and future-directed chain of events. As 
what is unforeseen, however, the accident in its very nature eludes all 
critical 'pre-destining' or explanation in terms of a foreseeable outcome. 

174 Theory, Culture & Society 
When Virilio says that studying the accident allows one 'to see the advent of 
something in what seems to happen unexpectedly' (1996: 115), he evokes 
the aporetic nature of his critical enterprise. 
The accident is unforeseen; when it happens it changes everything 
suddenly, like a vehicular accident that violently and unexpectedly breaks 
a journey. It postpones the arrival at the destination or perhaps even 
eradicates the original destination by necessitating a new journey(s). The 
accident threatens the possibility of achieving a rational, homogeneous, 
linear development. While the accident will come to be incorporated in a 
narrative which will assimilate it after the fact to a sequence of events (the 
'original' journey started, the accident happened, new journeys/a delayed 
journey resulted), the accident will always have been experienced as the 
irruption of another temporality, other to the anticipated continuity of the 
journey. In the accident, time is, momentarily at least, 'out of joint'. ° 
The accident is this spatio-temporal/conceptual disjunction. It 
is 'untimely' in that it is inassimilable to the temporality of historico-
criticality. It can never be questioned as such even if it allows — and 
indeed necessitates - the commencement of (historico-critical) questioning. 
This questioning may discover a certain substantial development in and 
through which the accident is explained, and this is so also for Virilio's own 
refigurings of technological developments as tendencies leading to and from 
certain accidental events. But in its untimeliness the accident will always 
be outside the temporality of these interpretations. It will have been that 
which interrupts their journey and promises others. Virilio's work tries to 
think the relation between those well-known paths and those that are 
unforeseeable yet which will have been necessary. It engages the future in 
the aporia between its radical unforeseeability and its potential as alterna-
tive endpoint to the end of progress. 
Notes 
1. All translations of Hottois are my own. 
2. As mentioned above the paper was first presented in 1984 in the renewed Cold 
War climate of the Reagan administration at a colloquium on 'Nuclear Criticism'. 
For an account of the intellectual and political context of this colloquium see the 
first chapter of Ken Ruthven's Nuclear Criticism (1993). Hence the question may be 
asked of its relevance to the contemporary state of affairs after the end of the Cold 
War and the mutation of nuclear deterrence. But Derrida's text is investigating 
precisely the issue of whether conventional historical modes of understanding 
socio-political and cultural changes are valid in the era of the ongoing speed race 
of techno-science. As such, his meditations on this issue would bear on the 
question of the relevance of Derrida's analysis in view of the recent progress of 
history, that is, the question of whether his analysis is 'dated'. 
3. See Stephen Hawking, A Brief History of Time, on 'the situation' in the general 
theory of relativity: 'when a body moves or a force acts, it affects the curvature of 
space and time - and in turn the structure of space-time affects the way in which 
bodies move and forces act. Space and time not only affect but are affected by 
everything that happens in the universe' (1988: 36). 

Crogan - Virilio and the Future 
175 
4. For Virilio, this process of logistical reordering has continued after the end of 
the Cold War and the collapse of the former Soviet Union. Nuclear deterrence has 
transformed into a different form of dissuasion, evidenced in such events as the 
Gulf War. See Virilio's U£cran du desert: chroniques de guerre (1991:168-9). 
5. This more general usage of the term is already an indication of the diffusion of a 
military model into the 'domestic' sphere. And according to Manuel de Landa, the 
interrelation between military logistical considerations and the development of 
modern mass production has a long history. See his discussion of the interplay 
between the US Department of Ordnance and private enterprise munitions produ-
cers from the 1830s onwards and the influence it had on the development of the 
'American system' of manufacture and on the later formulation of the 'scientific 
principles of management' (1991: 30-1). 
6. For a corroborating perspective on the hidden but essential side of the tradition 
of Western metaphysics see John Onians' fascinating discussion of the centrality of 
military concerns in the development of Greek art and thought in 'War, Mathemat-
ics, and Art in Ancient Greece' (1989). 
7. Translations from this text are mine. 
8. Virilio's description of this 'dynamic and energetic process' associated with the 
accident as 'cinematographic' links up with his concluding claim in this essay that 
the television screen, with its constant projection of catastrophes and disasters, is 
the museum of accidents. This is a characteristically polemical move by Virilio that 
attempts to provoke a 'postpositivist' review of television - specifically in regard to 
the conventional understandings of television as a (more or less flawed) medium of 
mass and global communication and information dissemination. Moreover, it is an 
attempt to figure the kind of rapid, mobile regard the theorist requires in order to 
perceive the elusive sequence that inheres in a given accident. This is why, for 
Virilio, a 'museum of accidents' could not be merely a collection of damaged or 
destroyed objects but would need to embrace an 'aesthetic of disappearance' in 
order to portray a 'landscape of events' in time (1996: 115). 
9. The notion of the vector is used in a number of places in Virilio's text to describe 
the directed movement of a certain technological or tendential development. For 
instance, in Pure War he describes the inauguration of logistics in the coordination 
of ordnance transportation and delivery systems that amounts to 'a system of 
vectors, of production, transportation, execution' (Virilio and Lotringer, 1983: 16). 
The media theorist, McKenzie Wark, has elaborated Virilio's concept of the vector 
as a major aspect of his project. See his Virtual Geography: Living with Global 
Media Events (1994: 11-13). 
10. See Jacques Derrida's The Time is Out of Joint' (1995). My allusion to this 
piece is by way of a suggestion of the relatedness of Virilio's work - especially in its 
figuring of the accident - to what Derrida has to say there on the aporetic 'experi-
ence' of time, space, the real, life and death that 'is' deconstruction. Deconstruc-
tion, we might say - all too precipitously and without the careful and detailed 
consideration required of such a comparison of disparate theoretical projects -
takes place in the 'accidental' temporality Virilio evokes. 
References 
Dercon, Chris (1986) 'An Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. Daphne Miller, 
Impulse 4(12): 35-7. 

176 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Derrida, Jacques (1984) 'No Apocalypse, Not Now (Full Speed Ahead, Seven 
Missiles, Seven Missives)', trans. Catherine Porter and Philip Lewis, Diacritics 14 
(summer): 20-31. 
Derrida, Jacques (1995) The Time is Out of Joint', in Anselm Haverkamp (ed.) 
Deconstruction is/in America: A New Sense of the PolitkaL New York: New York 
University Press. 
Hawking, Stephen (1988) A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black 
Holes. London: Bantan. 
Hottois, Gilbert (1981) 'La "Dimension du futur" a travers la temporality mythique, 
historique et techno-scientifique', Cahiers Internationaux du Symbolisme 42-4:69-
84. 
Hottois, Gilbert (1984) Le Signe et la technique: la philosophie a Ve'preuve de la 
technique. Paris: Aubier. 
de Landa, Manuel (1991) War in the Age of Intelligent Machines. New York: Zone 
Books. 
Onians, John (1989) 'War, Mathematics, and Art in Ancient Greece', History of the 
Human Sciences 2(1): 39-62. 
Rfltzer, Florian (1995) Conversations with French Philosophers, trans. Gary E. 
Aylesworth. New Jersey: Humanities Press. 
Ruthven, Ken (1993) Nuclear Criticism. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1989 [1984]) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. P. 
Camiller. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1991) L'tcran du desert: chroniques de guerre. Paris: Editions Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1994 [1988]) The Vision Machine, trans. J. Rose. Bloomington and 
Indianpolis: Indiana University Press and British Film Institute, London. 
Virilio, Paul (1995 [1993]) The Art of the Motor, trans. J. Rose. Minnesota: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1996) Un Paysage d'&ve'nements. Paris: Editions Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1999 [1990]) Polar Inertia, trans. P. Camiller. London: Sage. 
Virilio, Paul and Sylvere Lotringer (1983) Pure War, trans. Mark Polizotti. New 
York: Semiotex(e). 
Wark, McKenzie (1994) Virtual Geography: Living with Global Media Events. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Patrick Crogan teaches film, television and new media theory in the 
Screen Studies Department of the Australian Film, Television and Radio 
School in Sydney. His doctoral thesis explored critical theories of technol-
ogy, concentrating on the work of Paul Virilio. 

Virilio, Stelarc and Terminal' 
Technoculture 
Nicholas Zurbrugg 
A
CCORDING TO THE AMERICAN poet John Giorno, 'All great art 
is a mistake - it's like falling down the stairs and seeing stars - and 
then you realize what the mistake is, and you continue doing it. You 
realize what you've done good' (1994: 101). Viewed from this perspective, 
the milestones of 20th-century culture offer a series of happy accidents or 
mistakes, as different creative spirits make successive lucky breaks from 
this or that status quo. 
From Paul Virilio's point of view, the most significant 'accidents' of 
20th-century technoculture require confrontation rather than celebration. 
Remarking that his generation is 'obliged to acknowledge breakdowns and 
examine accidents' (1998a), and questioning whether technocultural acci-
dents have ever really 'done good', Virilio aligns himself with those children 
of 'total war and post-war totalitarianism' — such as the East German writer 
Heiner Miiller - who share his conviction that 'all the misery of the world 
arises from man's feeling that he can be improved by machines invented to 
take his place' (1997b: 7-8). 
Explaining, 'I'm not afraid of fire! I'm not afraid of being burned' 
(1998b), Virilio might well define himself as a man caught within late 20th-
century cultural crossfire or as Miiller puts it, 'The man between the ages 
who knows that the old age is obsolete', but who feels that 'the new age has 
barbarian features he simply cannot stomach' (Miiller, 1980: 137). Or, more 
accurately, Virilio is perhaps the man between the ages who knows that the 
most superficial aspects of the 'old age' are obsolete, but who shores past 
fragments against contemporary ruin, finding it almost impossible to look 
beyond the most barbaric aspects of the 'new age'. 
By contrast, Virilio's principal technological b§te noire, the Australian 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 177-199 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;177-199;009965] 

178 Theory, Culture & Society 
cybernetic performance artist Stelarc, seems to be the man beyond the 'old 
age', unable to stomach what he thinks of 'those old metaphysical distinc-
tions between the soul and the body, or the mind and the brain', and alarmed 
that contemporaries should still attempt to justify or condemn new tech-
nologies in terms of 'obsolete desires' (1998). 
Fervently resisting conceptual closure, but at the same time remaining 
firmly enclosed within their respective logics, Virilio's and Stelarc's con-
flicting priorities find eventual resolution in the work of what one might 
think of as 'new age' multimedia visionaries such as Stelarc's American 
contemporary, the video-artist Bill Viola. Confident that both past and 
present 'desires' await articulation in the 'new alphabet, new words, new 
semantics' and 'new grammar' (1996) identified by the mid-century techno-
logical avant-garde, and remarking, 'new technologies of image-making are 
by necessity bringing us back to fundamental questions, whether we want to 
face them or not' (1995: 257), Viola stirringly concludes: 
Media art, in its possession of new technologies of time and image, maintains 
a special possibility of speaking directly in the language of our time, but in its 
deeper capacity as art, it has an even greater potential to address the deeper 
questions and mysteries of the human condition. (1995: 257) 
In much the same way, the American digital composer Steven R. Holtzman 
argues that 'as we approach the twenty-first century, we can return to an 
integrated view of art, science, and the mystical' (1995: 292). 
Virilio comes closest to Viola's and Holtzman's conclusions in the 
more spontaneous speculations of his interviews, rather than in the cau-
tiously argued hypotheses of his books. For example, finding present 
cultural transitions 'in many ways comparable to the Renaissance' (1988: 
57), and remarking that few 'explorers' are 'ready and able to analyze' the 
'great opaque block' of contemporary imaging, he calls for interdisciplinary 
collaboration between 'Scientists, artists, philosophers', in 'a kind of "new 
alliance" for the exploration of the nebular galaxy of the image'. 
Everybody has a piece of it. Nobody understands that he has to put his piece 
in a common pot, and that he has to try to enter that sphere of reciprocity and 
intelligence that made for the phenomenon of the Renaissance, in which 
everyone could participate. Even before being a question of the organization 
and geometrical perfecting of the city, the Renaissance was first of all a 
question of organizing a way of seeing. (1988: 61) 
While Virilio clearly hesitates before notions of 'tele-reality at a distance', 
protesting that 'That's an unheard-of phenomenon like the splitting of the 
atom, but here what's being split is reality', he concludes this interview by 
acknowledging that 'this isn't to say that one won't be capable of recon-
structing a reality through the new images of tomorrow' (1988: 61). 
Reassessing the viability of this kind of 'alliance' between science, art 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
179 
and philosophy, Virilio's most intransigent recent writings and interviews 
envisage increasing antagonism between those faithful to 'the god of 
transcendence' and those converted to 'techoscience' and 'the machine-
god' (1996b: 81). Indeed, while Virilio insists that he 'is not opposed to 
technology or technological performance' (1996a: 122), and argues that 'it's 
quite evident that my writings on art are all clearly in favour of technology' 
(1996a: 117), his single-minded discussion of things he 'cannot stomach' in 
Ulnertie polaire (1994) and Open Sky (1997a) consistently obscures the 
subtlety of his other recent accounts of those pre-technological, partially 
technological or wholly technological 'resistant' practices that he most 
passionately champions or condemns. 
As becomes apparent, the full complexity of Virilio's vision is most 
clearly evinced by the tension between his blistering attacks upon what he 
takes to be the neo-fascist or neo-eugenicist artistic 'resistance' of the 
modernist and postmodern technological avant-gardes, in The Art of the 
Motor (1995), and his equally fervent advocacy of the kinds of positive 
artistic 'resistance' that he outlines in his interviews with Philippe Petit in 
Cybermonde, la politique du pire (1996b) and with Marianne Brausch in 
Voyage d'hiver (1997b). 
Generally speaking, Virilio's ambiguous responses to the postmodern 
avant-garde coalesce most obviously in his responses to Stelarc, whom The 
Art of the Motor both counts among postmodern culture's foremost 'fallen 
angels' (1995: 111), and discounts as little more than a human 'laboratory 
rat' (1995: 113). Subsequently offering Stelarc's agenda more moderate 
consideration, Virilio explains: 
I think of Stelarc as being the Antonin Artaud of technology - that's what I 
find so interesting in his work... He's an artist whose work has religious 
dimensions without really being aware of it! He thinks that technological 
forces will allow him to transfigure himself - to become something other than 
what he is. An angel, an archangel, a mutant, a cyborg or whatever. There's a 
sort of devotion in his work to the machine god - to a deus ex machina — and 
Stelarc is its prophet 
But for me, man is the last of God's miracles. Hence 
my rejection of all eugenic theories based upon the argument that man is only 
a prototype awaiting improvement. And Stelarc's research is quintessential^ 
eugenicist in the sense that he's trying to improve his condition. His is a kind 
of body-building, a kind of body-art! And I'm fundamentally opposed to 
eugenics! I believe that man is finished! (1998a) 
As Virilio indicates, his technological and existential priorities hover mid-
way between those of Stelarc and Viola. For Stelarc, the future can best be 
improved by 'cyber-systems' redressing the 'technophobic streak and Fran-
kensteinian fear' generated by 'platonic metaphysics envisioning a soul 
driving a zombie-like body', and enabling the body 'to function more 
precisely and more powerfully' (1995: 46-8). For Viola, media art should 
'address the deeper questions and mysteries of the human condition' in 
order to restore 'balance between the emotions and the intellect' and 

180 Theory, Culture & Society 
reintegrate 'the emotions, along with the very human qualities of compas-
sion and empathy, into the science of knowledge' (1995: 257). 
But for Virilio, individual and planetary survival depend upon huma-
nity's dual capacity to curb its compulsion to engineer eugenic calamities 
rivalling the worst nightmares of 'total war and post-war totalitarianism' 
(1997b: 7), and to cultivate its capacity for tangible, real space, face-to-face 
relationships. Anticipating both the increasing mediatization and 'Siciliani-
zation' (1996c: 69) of a society fraught by local civil wars, Virilio concludes 
that 'Salvation lies in writing and speaking' (1996b: 85) rather than in the 
'alternate interfaces' that Stelarc associates with 'extended fields of oper-
ation' (1998). Concluding that humanity's presently 'finished' - or com-
pleted - condition already provides the best conditions for survival in a 
world stabilized by a sense of 'here' and 'now', and calling for more 
'vigilance regarding the ethics of immediate perception' (1997a: 102), 
Open Sky urgently warns: 
How can we really live if there is no more here and if everything is now? How 
can we survive the instantaneous telescoping of a reality that has now become 
ubiquitous, breaking up into two orders of time, each as real as the other: that 
of presence here and now, and that of a telepresence at a distance, beyond the 
horizon of tangible appearances? 
How can we rationally manage the split, not only between virtual and 
actual realities but, more to the point, between the apparent horizon and the 
transapparent horizon of a screen that suddenly opens up a kind of temporal 
window for us to interact elsewhere, often a long way away?' (1997a: 37) 
In much the same way, The Art of the Motor insists that the 'question of 
freedom' is 'central to the problematic of technoscience and of neu-
roscience', anxiously asking to what extent the individual can 'avoid sensory 
confusion', 'keep his distance when faced with the sudden hyperstimulation 
of his senses' and generally resist technological 'dependency or addiction' 
(1995: 118-19). Briefly, if Stelarc is 'the Antonin Artaud of technology' 
(1998a), Virilio seems to be the Hamlet, Prince of Cyberculture, not so 
much pondering 'to be or not to be', as wondering whether it will even prove 
possible 'to be' on a planet 'not only polluted but also shrunk, reduced to 
nothing, by the teletechnologies of generalized interactivity' (1998a: 21). 
Generally envisaging technologically enslaved rather than technologically 
enhanced existence, Open Sky concludes: 'Service or servitude, that is the 
question' (1997a: 20). 
Somewhat as his 'bloodbrother' (1997a: 8), Heiner Mtiller explains 
that he stood 'with one leg on each side' of the Berlin wall because 'no other 
position' seemed 'real enough', Virilio seems to find — or place - himself in a 
similarly 'schizophrenic position' (Miiller, 1990:32-3). On the one hand, he 
celebrates real space: a realm in which the material and the metaphysical 
comfortably coexist, where True distances' and 'the true measure of the 
earth, lie in my heart' (1997a: 64), and where 'The Old Testament... seems 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
181 
something that I've personally experienced' (1997b: 54). On the other hand, 
particularly in Open Sky, Virilio struggles against the currents of real time 
and 'the speed of liberation from gravity' (1997a: 2), contemplating a limbo 
offering 'no space worthy of the name9 (1997a: 3), and no 'action worthy of 
the name' (1997a: 131), where he feels we may well become 'at once exiled 
from the exterior world' and 'the interior world' (1994: 165). 
As Virilio explains in Voyage d9hiver, he associates 'action worthy of 
the name' with the responsibility of those 'men of good will' (1997b: 88) 
working to improve society, and waging a war of resistance against what The 
Art of the Motor thinks of as 'the quiet legalization of disinformation, in total 
mediatization' (1997b: 96). Both sharing F6lix Guattari's sense that 'It is in 
underground art that we find some of the most important cells of resistance 
against the steam-roller of capitalistic subjectivity' (1995: 90-1), and 
shunning such mediatized 'underground' art as Stelarc's research, Virilio 
repeatedly seeks inspiration from the past, somewhat as Joyce's Stephen 
Dedalus seeks strength from his 'Old father' (1972: 253). 
The Art of the Motor, for example, commends the example of 'the 
ancient stoic', likening technoculture to what Petrarch damns as 'that 
plague of phantoms who dissipate our thoughts and whose pernicious variety 
bars the way to luminous contemplation' (1995: 61), while Voyage d'hiver 
defends the function of the artist by invoking romantic revelation: 
The artist is surely the most authentic observer: he intuits the meanings of 
things, and has the ability to identify and understand the most important 
aspects of fugitive and unfamiliar reality', writes Novalis. Here we have the 
perfect definition of perceptive energy, iconic energy or more precisely, 
informational energy. (1997b: 102) 
Nothing could be less accurate, in other words, than Cybermonde's 
modest suggestion that Virilio merely conducts 'statistical research' in order 
to 'avert disaster' (1996b: 64). Far from simply stacking statistics, Virilio 
attempts to decode such omens as the 'signs in the sky', 'in the clouds' and 
'in the water' that he associates with 'the year of signs, 1986, rich in major 
accidents' (1996c: 129), seeking out calamities that 'exceed ... statistical 
approximation' (1996c: 179), asking questions that 'nobody else asks' 
(1996c: 140), and working as it were against the clock and beyond the 
clock, in order to 'analyze' and 'overtake' terminal symptoms of 'accident' 
and 'negativity' (1996b: 87). Confronted by what he thinks of as a 'super-
human' (1996b: 92) task, Virilio's prophetic writings evaluate 'unfamiliar 
reality' as best they may, reading between and beyond the lines - across 
disciplines, continents, cultures and centuries — in terms of an immense 
array of multicultural paradigms drawn from Old and New Testament 
writings, ancient and modern philosophy, urban and sociological research, 
folkloric and romantic wisdom, and modernist and postmodern aesthetics. 

182 Theory, Culture & Society 
I'm a painter who writes, you know! Surely you feel that my books are very 
visual - they're very, very visual books! They're not words, they're visions! 
I'm painting, you know! If I can't see it I can't write about it. (1998a) 
Yet despite his sense of being a theoretical artist - or an artistic 
theorist - orchestrating a 'logic of extremes', Virilio stubbornly predicts 'the 
end of contemporary art' (1998a), and in consequence systematically over-
looks many of the most 'luminous' contemporary technocultural practices, at 
best explaining: T always consider the worst. I'm forced to consider the 
worst!' (1998a). Arguably, Virilio's method is far more subtle than this. 
Censuring 'the worst' of the present in terms of exemplary precursors, he 
never allows the reader to forget 'the best' of the past. And censuring 'the 
best' of the present, by employing a logic of 'negative extremes', according 
to which things can only go from bad to worse, he never allows the reader to 
forget 'the worst' of the present. Heads, the past wins; tails the present loses. 
However much Virilio generally claims to address the 'global dimen-
sions' of contemporary culture, his principal examples in Uinertie polaire 
are self-consciously restricted to realms of general social mediocrity 'with-
out any relation to "artistic" representation' (1994: 10). But why should 
analysis purporting to address the 'global' ignore positive artistic practices? 
Again, Virilio's explanation is deceptively simple. 'That wasn't my concern 
here. My main concern here was the general impact of technologies' 
(1998a). Significantly, wherever Marshall McLuhan's earlier study of 
global technoculture - Understanding Media (1964) - finds potential light, 
Virilio finds potential darkness, generally deploring almost everything that 
left 'McLuhan drooling' (1995: 10). 
Yet at first sight, McLuhan and Virilio seem to share identical values. 
Both address what McLuhan calls 'the transition from mechanical to electric 
technology' and both agree that 'the peculiar drama of the twentieth century' 
derives from the difficulty of living with old and new technologies 'at the 
same time' (1964: 297). Likewise, both endorse Novalis's dictum that artists 
'understand the most important aspects of fugitive and unfamiliar reality' 
(Virilio, 1997b: 102), and both generally conclude that 'The artist picks up 
the message of cultural and technological challenge decades before its 
transforming impact occurs' and builds 'models ... for facing the change 
that is at hand' (McLuhan, 1964: 70). 
In turn, just as McLuhan notes that the artist's ability 'to sidestep the 
bully blow of new technology' and 'parry such violence with full awareness' 
is often fatally frustrated by 'the inability of the percussed victims, who 
cannot sidestep the new violence, to recognize their need of the artist' 
(1964: 71), Virilio regrets that his most visionary writings seem fated to fall 
upon permanently percussed Parisian ears. 'Neither Baudrillard nor I are 
accepted here - we're not good Cartesians. There's no sensitivity here to 
irony, to wordplay, to argument that takes things to the limit and to excess. 
This kind of thought is virtually forbidden' (1998a). 
At its most sensitive, Virilio's research memorably champions the 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
183 
ways in which the most illuminating kinds of multimedia creativity evince 
exemplary 'excess', remarking for example, how 'a masterpiece of video-
installation' such as the Canadian artist Michael Snow's La Region centrale 
(1969) is clearly comparable to 'the work of Beckett or Kafka' (1998a), and 
acknowledging that There's a quality of truth in the work of the best of these 
artists that clearly corresponds to that of the great writers, the great painters 
- and the great architects' (1996a: 120). 
Likewise, at its most flexible, Cybermonde emphasizes the swings and 
roundabouts quality of a world in which 'there is no gain without loss' 
(1996b: 49), and perhaps no loss without gain. Or perhaps not. Sensing that 
even implicit optimism edges too close to 'the superficially positive dis-
courses of publicity, as opposed to the more rigorous discourse of critical 
theory' (1996a: 118), Virilio promptly nips hope in the bud. 'The world 
being a finite place', he reasons, 'a day will come when its losses will 
become intolerable and its gains will no longer appear.' And 'The 21st 
century will probably make this discovery: the discovery that our losses 
outweigh our gains' (1996a: 49). 
Predictably, Understanding Media ends on a more upbeat note. Dis-
missing 'Panic about automation'; reasoning that 'Persons grouped around 
... a candle' are 'less able to pursue independent ... tasks, than people 
supplied with electric light'; and anticipating more rather than less 'artistic 
autonomy' (1964:311); McLuhan seems to conclude 'Candle bad, electricity 
good'. 'Electricity bad, candle quite good', Virilio virtually ripostes. 
But need one reduce debate to the kind of 'either-or proposition' that 
William Burroughs deplores as 'one of the great errors of Western thought' 
(1965: 27)? As American multimedia performance artists such as Laurie 
Anderson and Meredith Monk remind us, neither candle-power nor cyber-
power necessarily cause sensorial or existential deprivation. In Anderson's 
terms, 'fire's magic, and so is technology' (1991: 12), and when all is 
technologically said and done, electronic media are merely 'a way of 
amplifying or changing things'. 
It's just a different way of doing it. No better or no worse. It is really just a 
tool. And a lot of people focus on it as if it were something important. It's the 
least important thing about what I do 
The latest thing that I did was 
extremely intimate, and at the same time had this huge amount of high-tech 
stuff. It was a solo thing. Seventeen people came on tour for this so-called 
solo thing. But I felt myself that it was by far the most intimate thing that I've 
ever done. (1991: 13) 
Arguing in turn that both technological and pre-technological practices can 
counter mass-cultural 'numbing', Monk similarly concludes: 
You use technology when you use it for what it can do. I certainly sing in front 
of a microphone and I use lights, although I also feel that I'd be very 
comfortable singing with one candle - and that's it! Basically I think that 

184 
Theory, Culture & Society 
what we need to do now, all of us - as human beings and as artists - is just to 
learn how to be incredibly flexible. I think that's why the hard times in a 
sense are kind of interesting. They're calling us to be very fluid and very 
flexible with what comes up. (1992) 
Passionately diagnosing global techno-disaster rather than dispassio-
nately weighing the merits of particular techno-practices, Virilio frequently 
sacrifices conceptual and empirical flexibility, and even when outlining the 
rationale for his 'logic of excess', tends to slip out of line into self-caricature 
as a lone resistance-fighter, struggling against a culture of collaborators. 
If I make my case somewhat forcefully it's because few others bother to do 
this 
I am not at all opposed to progress, but I feel that it would be 
unforgivable ... after the ecological and ethical catastrophes that we've been 
through ... to allow ourselves to be duped by the kind of Utopian thought 
claiming that technology will restore greater happiness and humanity to the 
world. My generation cannot just sit back and let that sort of thing happen 
New technologies and media are a kind of Occupation. And I'm working in 
the 'resistance' because there are too many enemy 'collaborators' champion-
ing the ways in which progress will allegedly save, emancipate and free 
mankind from all constraint, etc. (1996b: 77-8) 
Elsewhere in Cybermonde Virilio distinguishes himself from the kind 
of 'thaumaturge' 
who 'acclaims the miraculous quality of every kind of 
technology', and defines himself as a 'dramaturge' who, while not opposed to 
progress, 'wishes to reveal its drama, and the losses that it entails' (1996b: 
54). As the most startling descriptions in Open Sky indicate, Virilio's 
'dramaturgian' 
skills frequently rival those of Cronenberg and Ballard. 
Tracing the probable decline of the individual 'super-equipped able-
bodied person' (1997a: 11), for example, to the figure of the 'citizen-ter-
minal\ decked out to the eyeballs with interactive prostheses based on 'the 
pathological model of the "spastic"', Virilio envisages the 'catastrophic' 
prospect of: 
... an individual who has lost the capacity for immediate intervention along 
with the natural motricity and who abandons himself, for want of anything 
better, to the capabilities of captors, sensors and other remote control 
scanners that turn him into a being controlled by the machine with which, 
they say, he talks. (1997a: 20) 
Likewise, predicting that 'terminal' humanity will bifurcate into either the 
terrestrial 'sedentary type of the great metropolis' (1997a: 33), or the 
astronautic sedentary type, 'not so much on the moon as in the gravitational 
inertia of a fixed point, without spatial 
reference' (1997a: 121), Virilio 
conjures Dantesque images of permanently lost bodies and souls, washed 
up on and off the planet as it were, with all the 'exhaustion and helplessness' 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
185 
of the drowned giant in J.G. Ballard's The Terminal Beach (1966: 47), and 
with all the pathos that he associates elsewhere with: 
Tourists of desolation, like the Albanians who landed half-naked and lugga-
geless on the hostile coasts of Mezzogiorno, the most poverty-stricken region 
of the European community, only to realize that they had been had and that 
the land of milk and honey shown on Western TV never existed. (1995: 97) 
L'Inertie polaire introduces its genealogy of domestic, cybernetic and 
astronautic inertia by describing how the automated currents in Tokyo 
swimming pools hold swimmers 'on the spot' (1994: 39), just as currents of 
Internet information similarly immobilize cybernauts before their screens. 
In such circumstances, 'Polar inertia begins' (1994: 46). Real-time inter-
activity subsequently aggravates early 'clinical' symptoms of 'domestic 
electronic incarceration' (1994: 70) to levels of 'pathological fixity' (1994: 
136) and to the 'technical equivalent of the coma9 (1994: 133). And worse 
follows: 
As we prioritize the 'real time' of interactivity, as opposed to the real space of 
everyday activity, are we going to see more and more inter-residential 
activity, analogous here on earth to those of astronauts orbiting on high? 
Regrettably this is all too likely, since the generalized transmission of facts 
and images finally places us in ... domestic inertia which will radically 
modify our relations with the world, our relations with the REAL environment, 
be these terrestrial or extra-terrestrial. (1994: 135-6, my translations) 
Looping the apocalyptic loop, L'Inertie polaire's final pages bow out with the 
extraordinary conjecture that those defying terrestrial and conceptual grav-
ity may well become petrified in outer space - 'the perfect equivalent of a 
star, or an asteroid' - having reached 'that point of inertia at which the 
weight of the human body becomes identical to that of a planet' (1994: 166). 
In turn, just as L'Inertie polaire's ecological subtext warns that the 'advanced 
extermination' (1994: 165) and 'the premature ageing of this world' (1994: 
146) is rapidly approaching 'organic senility' (1994: 144), Open Sky predicts 
that the speed of telematic 'interactivity' will induce corporeal disintegration 
'analogous to the disintegration of the elementary particles of matter caused 
by radioactivity' (1997a: 115). 
Worse still, Open Sky advises, 'home automation' will sell us the 
televisual 'straitjacket' (1997a: 97) or lure 'TelesexuaP initiates into states 
of'precocious dementia' (1997a: 112); the 'transplantation revolution' will 
incarcerate us within the 'biotechnical ... straitjacket' (1997a: 53); retreat 
from 'mundane space-time' will deliver us to the 'cybernetic strait-jacket of 
the virtual-reality environment control programme' (1997a: 131); and mis-
sions beyond our 'native world' will maroon us in 'gravitationless space' 
(1997a: 131-2). Put very simply, 'Things aren't looking very good, Houston.' 
The crew of Apollo 11 thus become 'the prophets of doom of 

186 Theory, Culture & Society 
humanity's unhappy future' (1997a: 139). Neil Armstrong was only belat-
edly 'aware of what he had done "up here"', and arguably 'did not really live 
if (1997a: 139); Buzz Aldrin's disorienting experience of 'moving directly 
from total shadow into sunlight, without any transition' (1997a: 138), seems 
to have prompted 'two nervous breakdowns' and eventual confinement 'in a 
psychiatric ward' and Mike Collins's 'strange feeling of having been both 
present and absent at the same time, on the earth as on the moon\ portends 
the collective 'loss of the hie and the nunc* that Virilio likens to 'precocious 
senility' (1997a: 139-40). 
Perhaps Open Sky should have been titled Closed Sky. For while 
initially hinting that we may 'soon need to change our bearings' towards a 
'secret perspective ... on high' if 'we really want to reorient our daily lives' 
(1997a: 2-3), Open Sky rapidly reverses gear, and by the end of its 
introduction ominously equates vertical take-off with the worst possible 
kind of 'Philosophical let-down', warning that 'the speed of light' may well 
eradicate all 'idea of the real9 (1997a: 6). 
Indeed, envisaging a Beckettian future where 'Nothing happens, 
nobody comes, nobody goes' (1977: 41), Open Sky predicts an 'endless 
perpetuation of the present' in which 'contemporary man no longer arrives 
at, achieves, anything*. Anticipated, it seems, by 'Kafka's sense of inertia', 
and exemplified by 'our astronauts on their return from their extraterrestrial 
cruise' (1997a: 143), this crisis offers the Miltonian prospect of lost 'angelic 
attributes' as we more or less 'shed our "wings", in a fall from - a forfeiting 
of - grace into a corpse-like fixedness' (1997a: 68). In such circumstances, 
Virilio advises, we should lower our sights, follow old maxims such as 'if you 
stop running around the playground it will appear much bigger' (1997a: 57), 
and generally heed scriptural or folkloric wisdom. 
'What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world, but lose his only soul', 
his anima, that which moves him and allows him to be both animated and 
loving, allows him to draw towards himself not only the other, otherness, but 
the environment, proximity, by moving from place to place. 
An Armenian proverb puts it well: 'If my heart is narrow, what is the 
good of the world being so wide?' (1997a: 64) 
Reasoning that all attempts to explore space and extend experience with 
technology lead us away from the essential insights of the heart, and that 
attention to the illuminations of the heart must in turn prohibit technological 
and astronautical aspirations, Virilio's Cybermonde argues that 'We must 
stop speculating' about 'realms beyond the world, beyond Earth or beyond 
mankind'. So far as Virilio is concerned, 'There's nothing beyond mankind', 
because 'man is terminal, and represents the completion of God's miracles'. 
'One cannot improve mankind' because 'The human species does not lend 
itself to eugenics' (1996b: 86). 
As becomes evident, Virilio's objections to technological research 
arise not so much from urban, socio-political or ecological considerations, 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
187 
as from ethical, theological and historical convictions prompting his fear 
that 'the future transplantation revolution and the ingurgitation of micro-
machines, the technological fuelling of the living body* (1997a: 53) will 
almost inevitably injure the general 'miracle' of humanity. 
While sharing Virilio's general sense that Hechno-scientific power, 
like political power, or like religious power' can be 'at once both a blessing 
and a calamity' (1998a), Stelarc reverses Virilio's priorities, warning that 
dogmatic use of notions of the 'soul' may well obstruct interactive technolo-
gical research seeking 'multiple possibilities rather than coercive solutions' 
beyond the 'old metaphysical distinctions between the soul and the body' 
(1998). Once again, then, we confront examples of deadlocked 'Either-or 
thinking' (Burroughs, 1965: 27), and of what Beckett, contemplating the 
vicissitudes in Proust's writing, calls the 'great mind in the throes' (1934: 
975), as both Virilio and Stelarc defend or condemn what we might think of 
as 'grand' values which - as both 'a blessing and a calamity' - seem neither 
wholly defendable nor wholly condemnable. 
Intuitive visionaries, instinctively reaffirming their species' finest 
qualities, Virilio and Stelarc unanimously reject the petty orthodoxies of 
institutional and industrial logic, and the totalitarian claims that Lyotard 
defines as 'the legitimating power of the grand narratives of speculation and 
emancipation' (1994: 38). Just as Virilio dismisses the way in which the 
'publicity mentality' (1996a: 123) indiscriminately celebrates 'the miracu-
lous quality of every kind of technology' (1996b: 54), Stelarc condemns the 
complacency with which 'corporate' approaches to technology 'simply affirm 
the status quo of everything' (1998), and generally argues that the techno-
logically enhanced body should function 'more as an artist than as a 
bureaucrat' (1995: 49). 
Likewise, just as Virilio remarks: 'My father was a Marxist and I was 
more of an anarchist, but we believed that the grand narratives offered 
salvation. But all of that is finished!' (1998a), Stelarc still more insistently 
disputes the claims of ideological master narratives. 
I don't want to participate in political ploys. Political rhetoric is often 
simplistic, dogmatic and vindictive. What's interesting is alternative aesthet-
ics and speculative ideas. I guess that's why gender issues irritate me 
because they represent social and political agendas that I've intentionally 
never been a part of. (1994: 381) 
Clearly then, despite their considerable suspicion of repressive master 
narratives, neither Virilio nor Stelarc ever wholly abandon 'master' values 
or master 'questions'. Acknowledging 'communism's death', and reflecting 
that 'there's no point in pretending that its corpse is still alive', Virilio, for 
example, concludes: 'Let's work instead at something else, in terms of the 
relationship between the individual, which is always at the heart of history' 
(1998a). Likewise, in the very process of distancing himself from gender 
debates, Stelarc identifies further 'fundamental questions' (1994: 381): 

188 Theory, Culture & Society 
I see things from a human stand-point, not so much from a gendered stand-
point. That might sound contradictory and certainly if this person is a male, 
what this person says is going to be highly charged by the culture of 
patriarchal society. That's a fair comment. But the point in time when 
gender issues become an issue is the very moment when more fundamental 
questions should be asked. Can the issue of what it means to be human be 
situated in cyber systems rather than in the biological status quo? (1994: 
392) 
At their most interesting, both Virilio and Stelarc consciously 'diverge' 
from the status quo, provocatively pursue logics of excess and metaphori-
cally invoke their 'visions' rather than statistically imposing 'closure'. Yet 
for all their shared virtues and mutual respect, they seem fated to remain 
closed to one another's 'master values', propelled beyond reconciliation by 
their respective convictions, intuitions and beliefs. For his part, Stelarc 
regretfully concludes: 
Virilio's one of my favourite writers, but I think that his critique in this 
instance is one that is in a sense obsessed with an ethical and a very human-
based concern - he sees technology as a kind of threat to the body 
Technology outside the body might be OK, but he seems to see technology as 
more of a threat when it invades the body's tissues - as if it betrays a body 
operating with a capital T - a body with a possessed mind, a body that is a 
possessed individual. This is just a query, but is it possible to consider a body 
without an T, without a self, in the traditional metaphysical way? ... these 
are central questions, I think. (1998) 
As Virilio emphasizes in Cybermonde, he is extremely unwilling to coun-
tenance such questions, and as 'a limited man forced to address a limitless 
situation', he finds can 'only say "no"' (1996b: 51); a strategy that he 
endorses in terms of his sense that 'The essential characteristic of man is 
his capacity for resistance' (1996b: 25). But living in the 'terminal' 1990s, 
how can one best say 'no', and to what should one say 'no'? 
At his most censorious, Virilio considers the possibility of extending 
the 'speed limit' imposed upon the arms race (1996c: 184) to 'legal 
sanctions' generally restraining the ways in which acceleration exhausts 
'temporal distances' (1997a: 25). But as Cybermonde concedes, 'Withdraw-
ing oneself from the problem is no solution', given that 'It's no more possible 
to disinvent genetic engineering or the atomic bomb than it is possible to 
disinvent nuclear energy.' Accordingly, 'Our work consists not so much in 
disinventing, as in overtaking. One can only fight one invention with another 
invention. One can only fight one idea with another idea, or with another 
concept' (1996b: 35). 
At this point Virilio's and Stelarc's arguments once again converge. 
Like Virilio, Stelarc concludes that artists 'can't suppress surveillance and 
military technologies', and like Stelarc, Virilio insists that the 'real' artist or 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
189 
'real' critic' has to 'try to generate new uses, new aesthetics ... alternative 
possibilities for those technologies' (Stelarc, 1994: 391). 
In Virilio's terms, 'A real artist never sleeps in front of new technolo-
gies but deforms them and transforms them', and 'If one is a critic one 
doesn't ever accept things at face value and one doesn't ever sleep in front of 
new technologies' (1998a). For Stelarc, new technologies are most signifi-
cant as catalysts empowering the artist to work 'beyond spaces of certainty', 
'between biology and silicon-chip circuitry', in projects exploring 'those 
thresholds, those zones of slippage, those areas of interface, with anxiety, 
with hope and desire, but without romantic nostalgia' (1995: 49). 
But once again, Virilio parts company from Stelarc in terms of his 
sense that the key questions posed by late 20th-century technoculture are 
not so much whether humanity can maintain hopeful exploration of new 
'zones of slippage', as the question of whether humanity can simply survive 
its battle for self-preservation 'against technoscience, against cloning, 
robotics and so on' (1998a). Doubting whether humanity can long remain 
'free in the face of science and technology', and yet at the same time 
insisting that things can only go forwards, Virilio cautiously concludes: 
Personally, I think that the next political struggle ... will be the struggle 
against technoscience, against the reign of technoscience, against cloning, 
robotics and so on. But this ... doesn't imply a return to a previous situation. 
It means the attempt to fight against technology itself- not in order to destroy 
it, but in order to transfigure it 
I've never been an 'ecologist' as it were, 
proposing a return to a lost paradise. Not at all. (1998a) 
As Cybermonde indicates, Virilio models his tactics for resisting the 
21st-century 'tyranny of technoscience' (1996b: 34) upon the 'extraordinary 
quality of divergence ... in the work of the 19th-century painters' (1996b: 
25). 
Quite simply, we have to invent divergence. And this time it's the turn of 
science to a kind of impressionism or cubism ... commensurate with our 
culture's problems 
It's this kind of invention which allows us to reattain 
equilibrium and a common culture, not to speak of the possibility of democ-
racy. The work of the poets, painters and film-makers has always diverged in 
this way. We now need to know whether or not contemporary scientists are 
capable of doing the same. (1996b: 37) 
Predictably, Virilio answers this question negatively. The very concept of 
there being a kind of technocultural resistance to technoculture seems to 
strike Virilio as both an alarming and an unacceptable paradox, and how-
ever much a technological artist such as Stelarc may emphasize that their 
work explores 'the divergent rather than the convergent' (1998), such 
'divergence' from Virilio's metaphysical 'master' values seems doomed to 
disapproval. Thus, whereas Roland Barthes's essay The Third Meaning' 
distinguishes the way in which innovative multimediated practices may well 

190 
Theory, Culture & Society 
be 'born technically' or 'aesthetically' long before they are finally 'born 
theoretically' (1977 [1970]: 67), Virilio's implacable conceptual 'closure' 
before what he thinks of as the eugenicist impulse within technological 
performance renders it more or less axiomatically 'still-born'. Live arts such 
as dance and theatre win Virilio's loyalty, and partially architectural 
technological practices such as video-installation win his interest, but 
thereafter Virilio, like Beckett's Estragon in Waiting for Godot, seems 
persuaded that there is 'Nothing to be done' (1977 [1956]: 9). 
I can't see many signs of this divergence or struggle in contemporary art save 
in dance - which I adore! and theatre - which I adore! - Heiner Mtiller, for 
example! Apart from dance, from theatre and one or two video-installation 
artists, I can't see any real traces of critical divergence or any attempt to do 
something else, in some other way 
Like Baudrillard I'm conscious of a 
crisis in contemporary art and even of something like the end of contempor-
ary art. But not an end in the sense of there no longer being any art, but in the 
sense of witnessing the end of a certain kind of art, or what Beckett would call 
the 'endgame' of art - in every sense of the word. (1998a) 
Finally then, despite its acknowledgment that 'Technological culture is just 
as necessary as artistic culture', Cybermonde argues that technological art is 
most conspicuous in terms of its absence, that 'Only critical responses can 
help technological culture to develop', and that 'Unless we see an increasing 
number of art critics over the next few years, we will lose all freedom before 
new multimedia technologies' (1996b: 33-4). 
At this point, Virilio turns to 'the wonderful biblical image of Jacob 
wrestling with the angel' (1998a), in order to introduce the salutary potential 
of the kind of rigorously resistant critical discourse towards which he feels 
an almost existential or religious obligation. 
Jacob met his God in the person of an angel and he wrestled with this angel 
for a whole night and at the end of this night he said to the angel, 'Bless me, 
because I have fought all night'. What does this symbolize? It means that 
Jacob did not want to sleep before God. He wanted to respect him as a man. 
He wanted to remain a man before God ... he fought, rather than sleeping as 
though he were before an idol. Technology places us in the same situation. 
We have to fight against it rather than sleeping before it. And me, I don't 
sleep at all before technology! I adore it! I adore technology! (1998a) 
Virilio's 'adoration' for technology is obviously strictly rhetorical. As 
Cybermonde indicates, he envisages the late 20th century as a battlefield 
where those faithful to 'the god of transcendence' must confront converts to 
the 'machine god', and where nobody can 'behave like unbelievers'. 
Henceforth, we all have to choose our faith. Either one believes in tech-
noscience ... or one believes in the god of transcendence. It's an illusion to 

Zurbrugg — Virlio and Stelarc 
191 
claim to be an atheist. In reality, all atheists today are followers of the 
machine-god. (1996b: 81) 
Clearly then, Virilio's 'closure' before technological culture derives from 
two principal complaints; his sense that virtual culture negates transcen-
dent values, and his sense that it eradicates the more mundane values of 
'near and far' that make up 'the necessary conditions for sensory experience' 
(1997a: 45). In turn, as his discussions of the technological avant-garde in 
The Art of the Motor indicate, Virilio's systematic rejection of technoculture 
pivots upon his fear that the futurist impulse in 20th-century creativity is 
inseparable from eugenicist and fascist ideologies. 
As we have already remarked, Virilio's Voyage d'hiver unequivocally 
argues that 'all the misery of the world arises from man's feeling that he can 
be improved by machines invented to take his place', and summarily 
dismisses any art form tainted by 'the fatal illusion of eugenics' (1997b: 
7-8). Observing in turn that he still 'has a score to settle with Italian 
Futurism', Virilio still more explicitly explains: 
Like them my approach is futurist, but whereas their work is positive, mine is 
negative. And I completely reject the fascist impulse that I perceive in their 
work. For me it's quite clear. Those who are optimistic about technology are 
very closely allied to fascism. He who is critical of technology is not fascist. 
(1998a) 
Ironically then, Virilio's sympathy for ways in which the painterly avant-
gardes (such as Impressionism, Pointillism and Cubism) 'resist' realist 
photographic culture seems counterbalanced by his antipathy towards the 
ways in which subsequent partially technological avant-gardes (such as 
Futurism and Surrealism) offer still more radical resistance to 19th-century 
cultural conventions. Consistently discrediting the technological aspi-
rations of the modern and postmodern avant-gardes according to a 'closed' 
logic determining: 'Pre-technological art, good. Technological art, bad', The 
Art of the Motor typecasts the technological avant-garde into obscurity, 
clearing the way for Open Sky's worst-possible-scenario surveys of a doomed 
techno-planet unredeemed by any trace of aesthetic invention. 
Vigorously refuting rather than rigorously researching 20th-century 
technoculture, The Art of the Motor reflects the same lack of aesthetic faith 
in the integrity of the modernist avant-garde that one finds in Jiirgen 
Habermas's still more conservative claim that 'the failure of the surrealist 
rebellion' (1981: 6) affronts 'the standards of... communicative rationality' 
(1981:8). In Habermas's terms, Surrealism fails because it addresses only 'a 
single cultural sphere — art', and therefore cannot influence 'all spheres -
cognitive, moral-practical and expressive' (1981: 11), and because its 'non-
sense experiments' merely induce 'destructured form' rather than any 
'emancipatory effect' (1981: 10). 
In turn, Virilio dismisses Surrealist art because he too finds it without 

192 Theory, Culture & Society 
emancipatory value, and because its technological aspirations seem to 
anticipate contemporary calamity. Thus, while Voyage d'hiver hails Marcel 
Duchamp as 'a real philosopher', acknowledging that 'philosophy can paint 
and can film' and 'doesn't have to end up in books' (1997b: 80), it is as an 
artist working with constructions such as his doubled Door: 11 rue Larery9 
Paris (1927) - rather than as a kinetic and filmic artist - that he wins 
Virilio's approval. 
More specifically, The Art of the Motor condemns Surrealism for the 
same reason that it condemns mainstream digital art; because its mediocrity 
affronts what one might think of as 'communicative poetry' and 'communi-
cative philosophy', exhausting what Virilio calls 'the fragile sphere of our 
dreams' (1995: 70-1). In Virilio's terms, 
The works of the Surrealists ... showed us the poverty of the trivial dream, 
which is so curiously lacking in variety and imagination that the representa-
tion of our desires becomes a load of drivel, with endless repetition of a few 
limited themes. The same thing can be said of digital imagery, which merely 
imitates the special effects and tricks of the old 3D cinema or animated 
cartoon. (1995: 71) 
Subsequently endorsing Artaud's charge that 'Surrealism was an elusive 
virtual hope and probably as much of a con as anything else' (1995: 146), 
The Art of the Motor dismisses the 'virtual hope' of virtual reality as a 
chimera concealing imminent collective incarceration. In such 'an artificial 
world peopled by imperative signals, the man of tomorrow will not for long 
be able to escape an environmental control', and will 'no longer be at liberty 
to construct some kind of mental imagery' (1995: 146). 
Such prospects, The Art of the Motor concludes, make a mockery of the 
Surrealist boast that 'science will kill travel by bringing the country we want 
to visit to us' (1995: 151). Indeed, so far as Virilio is concerned, mass-
mediated humanity is already a 'Victim of the set' (1995: 152), hoodwinked 
by high-tech counterparts to 'the famous mobile sets Prince Potemkin had 
ranged along the horizon, the entire length of his sovereign's itinerary, to 
give her a false impression of how civilized and prosperous her immense 
empire was' (1995: 78-9). 
In much the same way, Virilio suggests that the exultant Futurist 
vision of 'Man multiplied by the machine' (1973: 97) introduced in Mar-
inetti's 'Destruction of Syntax - Imagination - without - Strings - Words -
in - Freedom' Manifesto (1973 [1913]: 97), and the equally assured 
Surrealist ideal of 'Pure psychic automatism' in 'the absence of all control 
exerted by reason' outlined in Andr6 Breton's 'First Surrealist Manifesto' 
(1965 [1924]: 72), decline into the automated and disoriented thought of 
those 'shattered' - or, we might say, 'shuttered' - by present technologies. 
So far as The Art of the Motor is concerned, if 'the cutting loose 
initiated by Futurism' has any recognizable consequences, these culminate 
in the wholly negative spectacle of the 'new man-machine'; a being 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
193 
'Controlled to an unimaginable degree' (rather than enjoying 'Imagination -
without - Strings' or 'Pure psychic automatism'), and traumatized by forces 
'shattering man's unity of perception and ... producing, this time 
AUTOMATICALLY, the persistence of a disturbance in self-perception that will 
have lasting effects on man's rapport with the real' (1995: 146-7). 
Finally, anticipating Open Sky's claim that 'terminal' culture eradi-
cates one's 'only soul', one's 'ammo? and the 'very being of movement' 
(1997a: 25), The Art of the Motor concludes with the suggestion that 
'cybernetic ideography' merely brings us 'belated conformation of Antonin 
Artaud's desperate observation about the immediate postwar period: "What 
defines the obscene life we are living is that all our perceptions, all our 
impressions have been distilled for us"' (1995:147). 
Ironically, the more one reads Virilio's accounts of postmodern 
escalations of the imperfection implicit within the modernist technological 
avant-garde, the more obvious it becomes that his own arguments similarly 
leave 'all impressions' of technoculture unfavourably 'distilled for us'. Like 
the revisionist historians that Voyage d'hiver condemns as 'Negationists, 
perversely camouflaging historical reality' (1997b: 33), Virilio's The Art of 
the Motor offers a surprisingly 'camouflaged' account of the Futurist and 
Surrealist traditions. 
Briefly, while Virilio defines his general approach to contemporary 
culture as the attempt to resuscitate 'ill-perceived or voluntarily neglected 
incidents and details' from the public pool of 'great events' (1996c: 11), his 
choice of 'neglected' incident and detail is telling selective. Or put another 
way, if 'the real problem of the press and television' derives from 'what they 
manage to obliterate, to hide' rather than from 'what they are able to show' 
(1995: 3), the 'real problem' in Virilio's writings similarly derives from their 
tendency to hide — and virtually obliterate — all traces of positive technolo-
gical practices. 
From Virilo's viewpoint this kind of'distillation' of the facts is perhaps 
a necessary evil. Resisting deceptive reassurance, Voyage d'hiver insists 
that 'those who say .. ."things will finally work themselves out", are not only 
liars but ... negationists ... counteracting the difficult work of social 
workers, sociologists, doctors and all men of good will' (1997b: 88). But in 
much the same way, Virilio's worst scenarios similarly hinder recognition of 
those creative 'men of good will' whose techno-compositions still await 
theoretical explanation. As case-histories suggest, the positive lineage be-
tween the modernist and postmodern avant-gardes frequently receives more 
lucid recognition from the veterans of the modernist avant-garde than from 
the luminaries of postmodern critical theory. 
Writing in his 'Open Letter to Andr6 Breton' of 2 June 1971, for 
example, the veteran Surrealist Louis Aragon observes how the American 
director Robert Wilson's Paris production of Deafman dance 
(1971) 
projects the Surrealist project into a realm which he defines as being 'not 
surrealism at all', but 'what we others, who fathered surrealism, what we 
dreamed it might become after us, beyond us' (1987). While sympathizing 

194 Theory, Culture & Society 
with those 'who think that science may come to take the place of art, who 
fear the "robotization" of humanity', Aragon insists that when technology is 
used with the finesse of a multimedia artist like Wilson, 'A play like DEAFMAN 
GLANCE is an extraordinary freedom machine', generating 'Freedom, radiant 
freedom of the soul and the body' (1987). 
Likewise, writing in a letter of 1 August 1979, the veteran Dadaist 
Marcel Janco similarly acknowledges the ways in which the tape-recorded 
poe*sie sonore of postmodern poets such as Henri Chopin project Dada's 'new 
expression of life' into the still more forceful realms of compositions 
incorporating 'the fantastic mechanical and technological progress of today 
... radio waves, stereo, the tape-recorder' (1982: 75), and in turn, recount-
ing the reaction of Virilio's most respected modernist master to his first 
public presentation of the audio-podme 'Espace et Gestes' at the Galerie 
Mesure in Paris in 1961, Chopin tellingly recounts: 
An artist who had been listening to the tape gave me his address and said, 
'Come to my studio and I'll give you a painting, because you've achieved with 
sound something which we could never have done'. So I went to visit him. It 
was Marcel Duchamp! (1995: 23) 
By contrast, The Art of the Motor's accounts of the ways in which 'the 
Italian Futurists' dream actually come true' (1995:103), merely offer further 
parables of escalating degradation. If 'Marinetti trumpeted .. ."Let's make 
way for the imminent and inevitable identification of man with the motor"' 
(1995: 129), postmodern technoculture - it seems - ends up 'treating the 
living being like a motor, a machine that needs to be constantly revved up9 
(1995: 123), as humanity lurches towards what Virilio describes as 'a new 
type of FUNDAMENTALISM ... one no longer associated with trust in God of 
traditional beliefs, but with ... the "technocult", of a perverted science' 
(1995: 120). 
Left to its own devices, The Art of the Motor concludes, such a 
'perverted science' will transform humanity into the kind of technological 
untouchable that Virilio associates with the 'profane body', or into the kind 
of technological unsavable that he thinks of as the 'body-without-a-souP 
(1995: 113). But as Viola suggests, there is no reason to suppose that 
technoculture is necessarily any more perverse than its precursors. 'The 
video camera is well suited to looking closely at things, elevating the 
commonplace to higher levels of awareness' (1995: 78), and 'One of the 
most interesting aspects of recording media' is the way in which they can 
offer 'surrogate sensory perceptual systems, in some ways similar, in some 
ways different, from our own, but nonetheless with a specific set of charac-
teristics that we can hold up and compare against ourselves' (1995: 65). 
Far from identifying the advantages of such surrogate awareness and 
insight, The Art of the Motor argues that the body of 'the wholly hyperacti-
vated man' (1995: 120) may well quite literally lose all its senses when 
exposed to the kind of informational overload 'whose advent Pascal evoked, 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
195 
when he wrote, ' "Our senses cannot perceive extremes ... Extreme 
qualities are our enemies. We no longer feel anything; we suffer"' (1995: 
132). Yet again Virilio projects his writings into Beckett country, where one 
can 'only suffer' events resisting all attempts 'to saddle them with meaning' 
(1963: 75-6). 
But for Virilio, such extreme prospects seem far from fictional. Once 
we 'not only act at a distance, but even teleact at a distance - see, hear, 
speak, touch, and even smell at a distance', he observes, we may well 
witness 'the unheard-of possibility ... of a sudden splitting of the subject's 
personality', as 'the classic distinction between "inside" and "outside" ' 
flies 'out the window' (1995:106-7). But since when did any self-respecting 
20th-century writer or artist lose sleep over the co-presence of 'inside' and 
'outside' experience? Reconsidering his claim that he wishes 'to see more of 
what's out there, to look outside', whereas 'Beckett wants to go inward' 
(1965: 23), Burroughs, for example, effortlessly concludes, 'Well of course 
... there's no dichotomy there. At some point inward becomes outward, and 
outward becomes inward. It's just a part of the spectrum' (1987: 33). 
Likewise, as Virilio himself remarks in The Aesthetics of Disappear-
ance Proustian evocations of the mind's 'entry into another logic' (1991 
[1980]: 35) - such as the following sentence from Swann's Way - typify the 
assurance with which the modernist text evokes dissolving distinctions 
between such 'classic' distinctions as here and now, solid and liquid, 
inside and outside, and 'container' and 'contained'. 
I enjoyed watching the glass jars which the village boys used to lower into the 
Vivonne to catch minnows, and which, filled by the stream, in which they in 
their turn were enclosed, at once 'containers' whose transparent sides were 
like solidified water and 'contents' plunged into a still larger container of 
liquid, flowing crystal, conjured up an image of coolness more delicious and 
more provoking than they would have done standing upon a table laid for 
dinner, by showing it as perpetually in flight between the impalpable water in 
which my hands could not grasp it and the insoluble glass in which my palate 
could not enjoy it. (1989 [1917]: 183^1) 
In turn, The Aesthetic of Disappearance notes how Magritte similarly 
evokes the co-presence of 'familiar things' and 'something else of an 
unfamiliar nature' (1991: 36), and describes the ways in which Bernadette 
de Soubirous's mystical revelations reflect 'the passage from the familiar to 
the unfamiliar', slipping out of focus like 'those surprising moments that 
precede epileptic absence', before 'perceiving the kind of infra-ordinary 
reality' for which 'you'd give a whole lifetime' (1991: 37-8). Briefly, while 
associating Proust's, Magritte's and de Soubirous's visions of 'infra-ordinary 
reality' with positive kinds of temporal and spatial travel, Virilio suggests 
that the technological blurring of'inside' and 'outside' reality only leads to a 
kind of permanent 'epileptic absence'. 
Anticipating such negative responses to his long-distance cybernetic 

1% Theory, Culture & Society 
collaborations; admitting that these could be unfavourably caricatured as 
'electronic voodoo where you're prompting the body to move'; and generally 
discounting the hyperbole of 'infra-ordinary' categorization; Stelarc remarks 
that his work still frequently awaits more pragmatic discussion according to 
its artistic and conceptual merits, 'as a kind of true interactive situation 
where I can borrow a part of your body and make it perform a task in another 
space' (1995: 4fi). 
These performances aren't about shamanistic displays of human prowess. 
They're not pseudo-medical scientific research. They're not yogic feats of 
fine-tuning to attain higher spiritual states. They're none of these things. 
They're simply works of art, exploring intuitively new realms of aesthetics 
and images. (1995: 49) 
In turn, patiently reassessing — rather than precipitately dismissing - 'the 
unheard-of possibility' of 'splitting ... the subject's personality' (Virilio, 
1995: 106), and the still more unheard-of condition of the 'split body', 
Stelarc speculates that variants of both conditions may well offer significant 
advantages to those still championing the hypothesis that the technological 
artist may well be 'capable of reconstructing a reality through the new 
images of tomorrow' (Virilio, 1988: 61). 
I'm intrigued by the way in which our psycho-social and historical and 
cultural development has always tended to perceive the notion of the split 
personality as pathological. We query whether it's possible to function with 
multiple personalities. But in our cyber-real of existence, it'll be an advan-
tage to have a split personality - where one body might function in multiple 
and unconnected ways. You see limbs move as alien arms remotely actuated 
by agents elsewhere. You have a split body - your right side collaborating 
with local awareness with the alien left side of your body 
In our Platonic, 
Christian, Cartesian and Freudian pasts this might have been considered 
pathological. But in this terrain of cyber-complexity that we now inhabit the 
inadequacy and the obsolescence of the ego-agent driven biological body 
cannot be more apparent. A transition from the psycho-body to cybersystem 
becomes necessary to function effectively and intuitively in remote spaces, 
speeded-up situations and alien information beyond sensory experience. 
(1998) 
As Stelarc observes, his research follows the assumption that 'To be human 
is to be augmented, extended and enhanced by technology', actively and 
critically attempting to explore the potential of unexpected kinds of perfor-
mative interaction in situations where 'you have the choice' to define the 
performance situation, and where 'because you are aware of what's going on, 
this loop of consciousness creates the possibility of response and inter-
action' (1998). 
In other words, his performances in works such as such as Ping Body 
(1996) are neither those of a 'willing victim' (Virilio, 1995: 114) wholly 

Zurbrugg — Virlio and Stelarc 
197 
sacrificed to the 'CYBERNETIC programming of vital rhythms' (1995: 128), nor 
those of a 'total automaton', but the reactions of a willing collaborator, 
intentionally physically and mentally exploring what he thinks of as 'alter-
nate and possibly augmented experiences' in a kind of partially voluntary 
and partially involuntary dance with — and within — 'the structural, spatial 
and temporal parameters of the internet'. Here, Stelarc explains, 'you're 
using the structural parameters of the net to activate the body, but then, in 
turn, to upload it' in a 'very intriguing' kind of 'looping, uploading/down-
loading' operation, as 'movements initiated by the internet activity were 
then in turn uploaded to a website on the net' (1998). 
Here too, perhaps, we witness something very like a contemporary 
counterpart to Virilio's favourite image of critical resistance — the spectacle 
of Jacob wrestling with the angel, 'measuring himself against some incom-
mensurable being, without either one letting go', 'forced to acknowledge the 
limits of his own body' (1995:84) and as Stelarc puts it, 'querying the limits' 
of 'knowledge and experience' (1994: 381). 
Like Virilio, Stelarc is a global traveller, an irresistible agent provo-
cateur, and as 'real' a philosopher as Duchamp, if one accepts Voyage 
d'hiver's general dictum that philosophy 'doesn't have to end up in books', 
but can also 'paint' and 'film' (1997b: 80) - and one might add, 'explore 
cybernetic interactive performance'. Revising this dictum, we can also 
surely posit that 'art can philosophize and write' and 'doesn't have to end 
up in galleries', and can surely conclude - hopefully for the better rather 
than for the worse - that Virilio himself is quite as 'real' an artist as 
Duchamp or Stelarc. 
Unrepentantly offering the warnings of a 'child of total war and post-
war totalitarianism' (1997b: 7), and in many respects sharing Heiner 
Miiller's sense of being a writer more interested in 'conflict' than in 'answers 
and solutions' (1990: 34), Virilio commands respect as one of the most 
compelling cultural theorists of the last decades. Stelarc is surely not alone 
when he remarks that 'Virilio's one my favourite writers.' 
Note 
1. The translations from Virilio's Ulnertie polaire (1994), Cybermonde (1996b), Un 
Paysage d,6ve'nements (1996c) and Voyage d'hiver (1997b) are my own. 
References 
Anderson, Laurie (1991) 'Interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg', Eyeline 17: 12-14. 
Aragon, Louis (1987) 'Open Letter to Andr6 Breton (2 June 1971)', in Programme 
for Heiner Muller, Hamletmachine, trans. Linda Moses. London: Almeida Theatre, 
unpaginated. 
Ballard, J.G. (1996) The Terminal Beach. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Barthes, Roland (1977 [1970]) The Third Meaning, Research Notes on Some 
Eisenstein Stills', in Image-Music-Text, ed. and trans. Stephen Heath. Glasgow: 
Fontana. 
Beckett, Samuel (1934) 'Proust in Pieces', The Spectator 22 June: 975-6. 

198 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Beckett, Samuel (1963 [1953]) Watt. London: Jupiter. 
Beckett, Samuel (1977 [1956]) Waiting for Godot. London: Faber and Faber. 
Breton, Andre" (1965 [1924]) 'First Surrealist Manifesto', in Surrealism ed. and 
trans. Patrick Waldberg. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Burroughs, William S. (1965) The Art of Fiction XXXVF, Interview with Conrad 
Knickerbocker, The Paris Review 35: 13—49. 
Burroughs, William S. (1987) 'A Footnote to William Burroughs's Article "Beckett 
and Proust"', Interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg, The Review of Contemporary 
Fiction 7(2): 32-3. 
Chopin, Henri (1995) Interview with and trans. Nicholas Zurbrugg, Art and Design 
10(11/12): 21-31. 
Giorno, John (1994) 'Poetry, Entertainment, and the Mass Media', Interview with 
Nicholas Zurbrugg, Chicago Review 40(2/3): 83-101. 
Guattari, Felix (1995 [1992]) Chaosmosis: An Ethico-Aesthetic Paradigm, trans. 
Paul Bains and Julian Pefanis. Sydney: Power Publications. 
Habermas, Jiirgen (1981) 'Modernity versus Postmodernity', trans. Seyla Ben-
Habib, New German Critique 22: 3-14. 
Holtzman, Steven R. (1995) Digital Mantras: The Languages of Abstract and Virtual 
Worlds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Janco, Marcel (1982) Letter of 1 August 1979, trans. Nicholas Zurbrugg, in Stereo 
Headphones (Brisbane) 8-10: 75. 
Joyce, James (1972 [1916]) A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Harmonds-
worth: Penguin. 
Lyotard, Jean-Francois (1994 [1979]) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on 
Knowledge, trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Manchester: Manchester 
University Press. 
McLuhan, Marshall (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New 
York: Signet. 
Marinetti, F.T. (1973 [1913]) 'Destruction of Syntax - Imagination without Strings -
Word - in - Freedom', in Futurist Manifestos, edited by Umbro Apollonio, trans. 
R.W. Flint. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Monk, Meredith (1992) Unpublished interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg. 
Miiller, Heiner (1980) 'Heiner Mtiller: The Despair and the Hope', Interview with 
and trans. Carl Weber, Performing Arts Journal 12: 135—40. 
Miiller, Heiner (1990) 'Walls', Interview with Sylvere Lotringer, in Germania, 
edited by Sylvere Lotringer, trans. Bernard and Caroline Schtitze. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Proust* Marcel (1989 [1917]) Swann's Way, in Remembrance of Things Past, vol. 1, 
trans. C.K. Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin. London: Penguin. 
Stelarc (1994) 'Just Beaut to Have Three Hands', Interview with Martin Thomas, 
Continuum (Perth) 8(1): 377-93. 
Stelarc (1995) 'Electronic Voodoo', Interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg, 21. C (Mel-
bourne) 2: 44-9. 
Stelarc (1998) Telematic Tremors: Telematic Pleasures - Stelarc and "Fractal 
Flesh"', Interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg in Carnal Pleasures: Spaces of Public 
Desire. Seattle: Bay Press (forthcoming). 

Zurbrugg - Virlio and Stelarc 
199 
Viola, Bill (1995) Reasons for Knocking at an Empty House: Writings 1973-1994. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Viola, Bill (1996) Unpublished interview with Nicholas Zurbrugg. 
Virilio, Paul (1988) Interview with J6rdme Sans, trans. Henry Martin, Flash Art, 
138: 57-61. 
Virilio, Paul (1991 [1980]) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. Philip Beitch-
man. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1994) L'Inertie polaire. Paris: Christian Bourgois. 
Virilio, Paul (1995 [1993]) The Art of the Motor, trans. Julie Rose. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio Paul (1996a) 'A Century of Hyper-Violence', Interview with and trans. 
Nicholas Zurbrugg, Economy and Society 1: 111-26. 
Virilio, Paul (1996b) Cybermonde, la politique du pire, Interviews with Philippe 
Petit. Paris: Les Editions Textuel. 
Virilio, Paul (1996c) Un Paysage d'tve'nements. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1997a [1995]) Open Sky, trans. Julie Rose. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1997b) Voyage d'hiver, Interviews with Marianne Brausch. Paris: 
Editions Parentheses. 
Virilio, Paul (1998a) Unpublished Interview with and trans. Nicholas Zurbrugg. 
Virilio Paul (1998b) Conversation with and trans. Nicholas Zurbrugg. 
Nicholas Zurbrugg is Professor of English and Cultural Studies, and 
Director of The Centre for Contemporary Arts at De Montfort University, 
Leicester. 


The Passenger 
Paul Virilio and Feminism 
Verena Andermatt Conley 
W
HEN RECENTLY ASKED if he'd rather be a cyborg or a goddess, 
Paul Virilio, with an air of malice, responded: 'Neither'. Indeed, 
the chronicler of teletopia, the present-day archivist of the future, 
does have a sense of humor. True, at first, his pronouncements have little if 
anything to do with feminism. He is a vir, man + /eo, or lion. A masculine 
man. Though puns and anagrams have, much to the delight of serious 
American scholars, all but disappeared from the horizon of cultural theory, 
it is still acceptable to think that one is prisoner of one's name. How could 
such a masculine man be interested in gender? And in the French repub-
lican universalist tradition, isn't there only one? The question does not even 
pose itself! To corroborate our findings further, we can add that Virilio was 
trained as an urban architect. And architecture does not have much space 
for gender questions - yet. Planning cities, designing the future, deal with 
concrete and pragmatic issues that presumably leave architects with little 
space, let alone time, to make such frivolous distinctions! How is it possible 
then, we may ask, to open a space for feminism in Paul Virilio? Or, to put it 
yet another way, how is it possible to bring the architect turned culture critic 
into the space(s) of feminism(s)? 
A fascination for bunkers, airplanes, air raids and general war para-
phernalia, witnessed possibly first-hand during his teens and later through a 
slew of American war films and posters unloaded onto France from the 
'Liberty Ships', sailing under the Marshall Plan, may have caught Virilio's 
youthful imagination. His fascination with technology never prevented him 
from reflecting on the horrors of war. Under his account of technological 
dazzle, there is a strong will to denounce violence, the enslavement of 
humans, especially of ordinary people - men, women and children included 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 201-214 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-£;201-214;009966] 

202 
Theory, Culture & Society 
- carried out by successive groups in power who wield ever more perfected 
technologies. 
Using a Heideggerian blueprint but politicizing the German philoso-
pher's ideas, Virilio argues that the history of the West reads according to 
the development of technologies — from war machines to teletechnologies 
that include the media. It is one of increasing enframing, dispropriating and 
domesticating from those he calls 'soldier-proletarians' to entire civilian 
populations. Technologies in the service of war and speed lead to a 
progressive loss of habitable space. He singles out two recent events that 
marked turning points in the history of the logistics of the West: first that of 
the real and symbolic crumbling of the Atlantic Wall when Allied planes 
flew over and penetrated into civilian territory behind. Suddenly, lines 
criss-crossed inside a territory and introduced war into everyday life. 
Citizens are no longer protected by city walls and battles lose their status 
as spectacles. This shift already prefigured the second' event, the conquest 
of outer space and the advent of cyberspace that, for Virilio, dispenses with 
social interaction entirely by coupling man to machine. Both the historical 
and technological implications of these two moments determine radical 
changes in humans' relations to time, space and habitat. 
Let us see if, and where, in these rather universalist declarations, we 
can disengage some gender lines and how the latter might criss-cross or 
weave themselves through Virilio's oeuvre. Though not immediately notice-
able because they are often taken up in arguments concerning the general 
population, the question of women in Virilio's work also follows that of the 
general history of technologies whose acceleration is inversely proportion-
ate to the loss of animal and social territories, that is of bodily, human ways 
of interacting and dwelling. It cannot be separated from ecological and 
economic questions. This general argument that includes women is ac-
companied by myriad provocative, if not systematically developed remarks 
concerning sexual relations and gender that may infuriate some women 
readers, make others laugh, but that will also prompt them to inflect their 
investigations in new directions. 
Throughout his work, Virilio's main argument focuses on the loss of a 
fleshy body and of a fixed, habitable space. His line of reasoning is based on 
a rather classic notion of space - Virilio reasserts the latter throughout his 
work by means of analyses that, at the same time, trace its progressive 
disappearance. The argument is punctuated by another that deals more 
specifically with sexual difference. Repeatedly, Virilio claims that woman is 
man's first vehicle in a series of relays that leads from the prehistoric pugilat 
(fight) to present-day teletopia and that goes along with the progressive loss 
of 'Mother Earth'. She is the vehicle; he is the passenger. This argument is 
often brought in to eroticize the evolution of the technological object from 
that of the prehistoric femme-objet to the objet-femme in cyberspace. While 
mainly subtending the long history of enslavement and displacement of 
humans by machine, the example of woman-vehicle and male-passenger 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 203 
also serves to theorize space along the lines of sexual difference no longer in 
static but dynamic - and erotic - terms. 
Tracing the evolution of war and speed from a certain pugilat, with the 
early metempsychoses or transmigrations of the soul of the hunter in the 
days that would have existed before the invention of fortifications, Virilio 
ascertains that hunt and war, predicated upon the demarcation of a space, of 
a field, begin with woman as the carrier of man. He is literally and 
figuratively brought into the world by her. A mediator, but also an initiator, 
woman is the first in a series of relays that helps launch man progressively 
further into space and away from animal and social territories in his pursuit 
of total control. In this reverie of origins, the hunter's subsequent metemp-
sychoses led from the domestication of women to animals - horses - to that 
of other people, such as the soldier-proletarian and, ultimately, to the 
machine (Virilio, 1977a). 
A variant of this episode, less historic than mythic, deals with the Fall 
and the expulsion from Paradise of the original couple in the Judeo-
Christian tradition. While the allusion to the woman-vehicle recurs time 
and again in Virilio's work, the biblical episode is introduced only in The 
Aesthetics of Disappearance (Virilio, 1991: 78). Linking science fiction 
narratives to Genesis, Virilio writes that 
Satan, appearing in the Bible as seducer of woman who in turn seduces man, 
commences then the cycle of humanity sworn less to death than to disap-
pearance, that is to expulsion from the world in which it has lived, this being 
accomplished, initially, as a phenomenon of consciousness. (Virilio, 1991: 
78) 
Seduction, linked to a succession of visual phenomena and a change in 
perception, is a rite of passage from one world to another that implies 
... the beginning of a navigation of body and sense from something immo-
vable toward another category of Time, a space—time essentially different 
because it is sensed as unstable, mobile, conductive, transformable, like the 
creation of a second universe depending entirely on this initial rite of 
passage. (Virilio, 1991: 77) 
Here, the loss of space is more complicated. Suspending a more general, 
phenomenological approach to his objects of interest, Virilio introduces the 
possibility of an ungrounding through eros that facilitates the emergence of 
a new world. Woman becomes a force of attraction, her body as commu-
nicational body - and not simply flesh - the ideal vector between man and 
the new world in which the attraction of bodies is linked to gravity. Move-
ment henceforth is primary and the trajectory is forever to be invented. The 
coupling is seen as a 'yoking' that implies the territorial body as third 
partner. More even than in the first episode of woman-vehicle, where Virilio 
hovers between fixed and dynamic space, in the biblical tale, instead of 

204 Theory, Culture & Society 
mourning the loss of being, he hints at a possibility of ungrounding and 
becoming. Yet, again, Virilio is ambiguous. He closes the parenthesis by 
asserting that the story of Genesis was prompted by a threat, that of the 
disappearance of human intermediaries and the emergence of a sexuality 
directly connected to the technical object. In the Bible, woman as seduc-
tress is leading man astray on his search for the perfect technological object. 
Apart from these two variants on a similar theme - woman as carrying 
off man and as seductress - that dynamizes space through eros, Virilio is 
concerned primarily with domestication and enslavement of humans and the 
progressive loss of habitable space that is complete today with the impact of 
electronics technology that functions in real time. Women's oppression is 
part of a larger domestication of entire populations. Writing out of the Cold 
War period, Virilio is concerned with a type of everyday war that, in the late 
1970s, he sees as extending all over the world. This war aims not only at the 
destruction of enemy armies but also of social and territorial bodies as well 
as of the identity and the honor of civilian populations. Industrial war in the 
20th century ruptures the social status quo between civilians and military; it 
replaces the millenary pact of semi-colonization with one of total coloniz-
ation because it now reaches all spheres of life (Virilio, 1978: 48). 
Henceforth, the notion of 'popular defense', in use since the construction 
of the first fortifications, loses its military significance and becomes part of a 
strategy of survival in a devastated habitat. Nietzsche's aphorism, 'the desert 
grows', is to be taken both literally and metaphorically. Defense becomes 
physiological and psychological. More and more, an invisible system in 
power tries to eliminate popular resistance by undoing social solidarity and 
by extending the destruction of political and unionized networks to that of 
the family. By emancipating women, by lowering the voting age and granting 
the right to abortion, divorce and euthanasia, a false liberalism opens the 
way to the self-destruction of families by themselves (Virilio, 1978: 77-8). 
Such pronouncements will not bring Virilio any prizes for feminist 
scholarship but add an interesting twist in the familiar tale of heroic 
feminist resistance and agency. Indeed, by inserting women's cause in a 
wider social and political framework, Virilio's arguments show how, in a 
complex system, the fluctuations of, and tensions between, many terms 
render possible the emergence of a new order. Change hinges less on the 
resistance of one term alone or on individual agency, where humans are said 
to be engaged in flows or tendencies. 
The new society Virilio outlines in the late 1970s - a decade that 
witnessed the withering of the hopes of '68, the renewal of the Cold War with 
the beginnings of Reaganomics and the continuing military oppression in 
much of South America - is no longer that of the great 'enclosure', the 
disciplinary society that Foucault emblematized with the panopticon. Pro-
gressively, because of advances in technologies, surveillance and control 
can be located everywhere and nowhere. With the advent of 'pure war', 
populations are physically and mentally deterritorialized. Resistance is 
made difficult if not impossible.3 The territorial body has disappeared 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 205 
under myriad networks and different media that dictate their strategies and 
do away with 'Mother Earth' (Virilio, 1986). 
In developing his argument about loss of habitable space and bodily 
interaction, Virilio provides a provocative analysis of the restructuring of 
urban centers under the influence of rapid transportation and now electronic 
communication. Curiously, it is his understanding of what he denounces — 
such as the radical transformation of life and urban centers under the 
impact of teletechnologies - that becomes the compelling part of his argu-
ment more than the critique itself. For Virilio, the restructuring of the 
French territory, of cities such as Paris, leads to an emptying out of its 
people. Communication networks are superimposed over the map of the city 
that has long lost its function of polis with its active citizens. International 
jet sets and tourists roam the inner parts of the cities at the expense of its 
inhabitants, displaced to the peripheries. The people are made to move to 
the grands ensembles, described in the American press as 'these large, ugly, 
concrete buildings9 in the distant suburbs. They lose their freedom of 
movement and of dwelling (Aug6, 1996; Evenson, 1979; Godard, 1969).4 
Virilio joins here with the findings of feminists for whom a kind of agitated 
and enforced movement has little to do with an existential force necessary to 
break both visible and invisible walls. From H6lfene Cixous to Luce Irigaray, 
French feminists in the 1970s equally insisted on the right to movement and 
on that of simply being there, on a Dasein or 6tre-ld,. 
Along similar lines, Virilio links present-day eviction strategies by the 
French government in many cities to those of British colonialists who 
weakened tribal structures the better to conquer indigenous people. In the 
West, an invisible military and industrial power set out to divide and 
conquer the family. No longer working where they live, family members 
are dispersed, isolated. They spend much of their time being shuttled 
around. The single status of many women cannot be seen only as emanci-
pation, it is also part of a process that weakens a cell of potential 
resistance. Again, Virilio argues here for a grounded space, a territory, 
that is taken away from humans. The family unit is seen as a social unit of 
communication and interaction rather than as a locus of oppression. 
Some of the latter hypotheses, while not without critical punch, are 
bound to be unpopular with feminists who refuse to consider familial 
structures (be they nuclear or extended) as carriers of great solidarity and 
support but who see in them the cold fact of oppression. Yet, Virilio's razor-
edged remarks provide a fresh look at social, political and economic 
transformations that women cannot simply ignore. From de Beauvoir to 
Badinter, French feminists asked for changes in production and repro-
duction, in familial and economic structures. They declared that women 
could not simply try to integrate themselves into a system that had made 
possible their repressions in the first place. A general change in politics and 
ecopolitics, they felt, was needed. Many of these changes never came about. 
Emancipation came along with the destruction or withering away, rather 
than the transformation of certain key institutions. 

206 Theory, Culture & Society 
Deploring a general erosion of animal and social territories in the 
ongoing War of Speed, Virilio gives much praise to those who resist, to 
producers of existence, mainly women. Defense populaire et lutte e'cologique 
(1978), weighing the possibility of Revolutionary Resistance in the era of 
Pure War, is dedicated to 'The People without land, The Disappeared Ones 
(Los Desparecidos), The Madwomen of the Plaza de Mayo (Las Locas de la 
Plaza de Mayo)? Virilio here refers specifically to the Dirty War in 
Argentina during the 1970s when the military, often in collusion with 
church and government, murdered thousands. Some women, called the 
Madwomen, took up resistance. They took to the streets and protested in 
silent marches against the dispossession of the people under a military 
dictatorship. They fought for their right to existence often at the expense of 
their own lives. Below the dedication, in an epigraph borrowed from Caspar 
David Friedrich, Virilio underscores the fact that ordinary people - le 
peuple - have no voice, no conscience and are not permitted to honor 
themselves. Paying double homage to these last 'existential heroines', the 
Folles de la Place de Mai, the revolutionary women who risked their lives 
while defending their rights to social, animal and territorial bodies, Virilio 
makes it clear that, in an era of progressive loss of habitat, the only struggle 
worth fighting for is a truly ecological struggle. In this perspective, ecology 
is not that slightly archaic, folkloristic activity of people who wish to put 
'Paris in the country'. Rather, it is a struggle for the right to move, but also to 
be, a struggle for which women become the true representatives. 
Next to 'pure war' in the aftermath of the Second World War, the 
second moment Virilio singles out in this race for speed is that of the move 
into cyberspace. It perfects the coupling of humans and machine and 
completely alters all our notions of space, geography, politics of the last 
2000 years. The Cold War atmosphere tied to the military-industrial com-
plex still perceptible in the late 1970s has given way in the final years of this 
century, to a market 'dromocracy' that reigns supreme. The year 1989 
marked not only the 'fall of communism', it also coincided with the general-
ization of electronic or speed space. 
From his earliest publications, Virilio, flamboyantly and with rhetori-
cal bravura, chronicles the technological developments in the West and the 
implicit transformation of humans' positions in time and space. Two 
constants prevail in his archeology of the future: (1) acceleration goes hand 
in hand with an increasing loss of territory, with a doing away of 'Mother 
Earth', with the animal and social body; (2) objectification through tech-
nology does away with soul or conscience and enslaves all those who are not 
in power. Underscoring present 'dangers' and praising those who resist, 
Virilio denounces the contemporary myth of global salvation through 
technological progress. His vision could be dubbed pessimistic. 'With the 
realization of a dromocratic-type progress', he writes, 'humanity will stop 
being diverse' (Virilio, 1986: 47). It will tend to divide only into hopeful 
populations (who are allowed the hope that they will reach, in the future, 
some day, the speed that they are accumulating, which will give them access 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 207 
to the possible - that is, to the project, the decision, the infinite: speed is the 
hope of the West) and despairing populations, blocked by the inferiority of 
their technological vehicles, living and subsisting in a finite world. Thus, 
'the related logic of knowing-power, or power-knowledge, is eliminated to 
the benefit of moving-power - in other words, to the study of tendencies, of 
flows' (Virilio, 1986: 47). To make his point, he has recourse to the same 
quotation by Caspar David Friedrich already used as epigraph in Defenses 
populaires et luttes id^ologiques (1978). Yet over time, he will replace le 
peuple, the people in the sense of class, and class struggles, with les peuples 
as peoples or nations, when he writes: 'Peoples will have no more voice. 
They will not be permitted to have a conscience and to honor themselves' 
(Virilio, 1998: 84-5). 
The world, for Virilio, is henceforth divided into haves and have-nots, 
into those who do have speed and those who do not; those who operate in 
speed-space and those who are in anthropological — or finite - space. Rarely 
does Virilio broach these issues of what he calls 'technological and econ-
omic imperialism' exclusively along gendered lines. When he does, he 
mainly deals, as we have seen, with ordinary women and 'the people', not 
with the elite of either sex that - because it has moving power - is always 
suspect to him. 
One of the main questions now — at least among the hopeful women — 
is whether, with the shift from territorial grounding often identified with a 
nationalistic and patriarchal subject to teletopic simultaneity, mobile geo-
graphies and virtual subjects - electronic transmission dooms women's 
animal and social bodies and their territories or whether, by disconnecting 
them from space and place, it enables them to reconnect in entirely different 
and novel ways. A second question might be whether the poor living in a 
more anthropological space have no control or whether their lives too are 
altered in other than purely negative ways. 
Virilio leaves no room for doubt. He refuses to see teletechnologies as 
enabling humans to rethink and transform their more traditional spaces 
such as body, city, territory. In Vitesse de liberation (1995c) and even more 
in Cybermonde, la politique du pire (1996) and La Bombe informatique 
(1998), he broaches the politics of speed less in ecological terms of habitat 
than in relation to a quality of life and its negative urbanization under the 
influence of machines. Even more than for 'Mother Earth', he sees the 
necessity to opt for 'real space and one's own world, that is one's own body 
since one cannot separate the body from one's own world' (Virilio, 1996: 
51). He refuses to follow those lines of flight that would lead to a positive 
ungrounding. Again, in spite of Virilio's gloom, his incisive analyses of the 
transformation of a 'real' space like that of the neighborhood or the city in a 
teletopic era can be of interest to women few of whom - with the exception of 
observers, such as Saskia Sassen (1991) - deal with new 'urban facts' in 
other than romantic and antiquated ways. 
Next to the loss of'real space', Virilio examines the implications of the 
passing of a new frontier, that of the screen in cyberspace that disconnects 

208 Theory, Culture & Society 
humans in his view and connects them entirely with the machine. The threat 
of the biblical prophecy has been fulfilled: man has become one with the 
machine. After having deplored the death of the family, seen as the basic 
operative unit in an climate of increasing fear of the bodily other,Virilio now 
condemns cybersex in no uncertain terms: 
In fact, if industrial technologies have progressively brought about the 
decline of the extended family of the rural world, in favor of the bourgeois 
family, then the nuclear family ( so well designated), during the era of urban 
expansion in the last century, the end of the supremacy of physical proximity 
in the megalopolis of the postindustrial era will no longer simply promote the 
expansion of the single parent household, it will provoke an even more radical 
break between man and woman that will threaten directly the future of sexed 
reproduction ... the 'Parmenidean' cut betweeen masculine and feminine 
principles will intensify as a result of lovemaking at a distance. (Virilio, 
1995c: 130) 
One could counter-argue that cybersex, somewhat like earlier phone-sex, 
has not yet replaced the coupling of bodies. Electronic machines may have 
changed bodies' relations to the world in such a way that information now 
circulates instead of people. In the process, the increasing irrelevance of 
muscular strength at the basis of much sexual division of labor, may have 
benefitted many skilled women. 
Nonetheless, Virilio answers feminist critics who celebrate move-
ments in speed space as 'authorless digital interactions' or as 'bodies 
moving and gliding over surfaces' quite decisively. Most bodies in cyber-
space are neither the nomadic bodies of Deleuze and Guattari's 12th plateau 
nor are they simply moving through smooth spaces. The spaces most women 
inhabit are heavily striated so that the agitation called 'movement' is often 
empty repetition rather than change. In Cybermonde, la politique du pire, in 
his exchange with Philippe Petit, Virilio praises Gilles Deleuze for his 
insistence on an existential depth {4paisseur) that he sees as threatened with 
extinction in today's world under the sway of speed and the media: 
I have a nostalgia for an inscription in a spatial and temporal depth, in a 
depth of the relation to the other and of meaning. Gilles Deleuze worked a lot 
at that level. I am sure that my interest for him is linked to this. (1996: 104) 
The focus on the loss of lived space gives way here to a stringent critique of 
live time in the age of media. With the increasing privileging of speed, 
information and advertisement, the depth that comes with words, stories and 
communication are lost. Paradoxically, this loss is equated with a progres-
sive mental and physical slowing down to the point of immobilization. 
Virilio sees little or no convergence between dromological progress 
and human or social progress. The philosopher of speed enumerates five 
stages in the development of Western societies: 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 209 
1. A society without vehicle where the woman plays the part of the logistic 
wife. 
2. The domestication of bodies without soul as vehicles. 
3. The empire and the speed of technological vehicles. 
4. Rivalry between the metabolic and the technological vehicle. Victory of 
technology. 
5. End of the proletariat and end of History in the war of Time. (Virilio, 
1986: 96). 
Exploitation is complete and all class war but an illusion. Members of the 
military gave the proletariat for a short while the illusion of being able to 
dominate the bourgeoisie, a class that came up with the city, already ruined 
by highways, media, radio, telephone and soon, television and computers. 
The crisis of liberal democracies is the end of a type of mobilization 
(mobility) of its male and female citizens. Mobility, synonymous with the 
concept of freedom since the Age of Enlightenment has been lost. Any 
attempt at 'reclaiming the streets' cannot be but artificial. Yet this state of 
things is kept secret. People in power try to keep the masses in strategic and 
social convictions that are largely superannuated. They keep them occupied 
with dead thought. Not just sports, as in Roman times, but many cultural and 
leisure activities, many topics of research and investigation, are there to 
keep people from exploring real political issues. Quoting James Baldwin 
saying that, 'tomorrow you will all be negroes', Virilio reminds his readers 
how the black book of French colonialism equated Africans with 'furniture'. 
They could be moved or set in place. The French discouraged Africans from 
building a civilization. Similarly today, despite all the hype to the contrary, 
people - especially women - as long as they are controlled by the media, are 
prevented from freely constructing animal or social territories. 
Throughout his work, Virilio decries a progressive loss of animal and 
social territory and points to the difficulty of inventing new cultural 
practices in the current climate that eliminates diversity and strives toward 
monoculture. He denounces the political use of superannuated mental 
frameworks out of which even women sometimes operate when they con-
struct subjectivities that do not account for consequences of scientific or 
technological innovation, or when they speak of 'agency' without problema-
tizing the latter accordingly. Their actions will thus be tolerated, even 
encouraged, because the consequences will be considered quite limited. 
Virilio's argument forces women to rethink the terms in which they speak 
and launch their calls to action. 
Globalization seen through this lens is no longer the realization of a 
dream of universal connectedness. Quite the contrary. It means the end of 
an entire world, the world of the particular and the localized (Virilio, 
1995c). The emergence of the information (superhighways has transformed 
the world of history that humans knew for centuries, with its traditions, 
conventional space, geographical territories, physical journeys and the 
like. Humans - men and women alike - are at the foot of a new wall, that 

210 Theory, Culture & Society 
of time. On the one hand, Virilio recognizes the positive aspects of this new 
situation that could bring humanity together because of a free flow of 
information. On the other, he denounces it as an unprecedented, totalitar-
ian situation.10 
More than ever, an ecological struggle - Virilio calls it 'grey' or 'urban' 
ecology, that is, an ecology that deals with the transformations of habitat 
under the impact of electronics technologies - seems necessary to obviate 
the absolute power of information with its totalitarian features. The past two 
decades have witnessed the progressive disappearance of reality. First, 
'reality was a matter of mass; then it became mass + force; today it is mass 
+ force + information.' Virilio cautions that the totalitarianism of the infor-
mation-medium might be even more powerful than the traditional political 
totalitarianism of the old national-socialist or communist hues. The dangers 
are greater and the stakes are higher. Where are these danger zones? Virilio 
seems a bit reluctant to elaborate. He continues to caution against the 
immobilization of the valid invalid and, as I have shown elsewhere (Conley, 
1997: 76-90), he joins many feminists who argue for the freedom of writing 
over the castrating effects of the image (Virilio, 1995b). Images threaten to 
destroy the possibility of conjuring up mental pictures and productive 
phantasms. Humans no longer write, they call. Soon, he adds, they will no 
longer speak. 
This will be 'the silence of the lambs!' (Virilio, 1995a) that 
goes with an atrophy of the limbs. Speech, words are producers of existence. 
Humans no longer construct habitable spaces in a closed world dominated 
by the machine. 
In a recent interview with Catherine David, Virilio softens his position 
by declaring that he is not advocating the end of THE world, but the end of A 
world, as we knew it, that is, the material and anthropological world with its 
bodily contact and human exchange (Virilio, 1997). Today's world, Virilio 
warns his readers, is not simply one in which we move along surfaces or 
communicate and celebrate in cyberspace but one in which virtual uni-
verses of fascism loom large. Some women may decide to accompany Paul 
Virilio and explore the unlimited possibilities of celebration opened by 
teletechnologies to his dissident tune of caution. For cyberphiles like Donna 
Haraway, Sherry Turkle, Allucquere Rosanne Stone, Christine Boyer, Sadie 
Plant and others, Virilio's racy visions may appear like those of an 
unwelcome passenger accompanying males and females who roam through 
cyberspace. 
Virilio discusses transformations of the world in ways rarely adressed 
by women who are more focused on the dilemmas of subjectivity. He 
bemoans the loss of physical space by humans and praises those women 
who resist this tendency and who, thereby, 'accede to existence', in a quasi-
Sartrian way. The space lost is a phenomenological, grounded space with 
echos of Heidegger whose name is quoted repeatedly in Vitesse de liberation 
(1995c). Gendered questions are developed in relation to the loss of ground, 
existence and the disappearance of a fleshy body with the advent of real 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 211 
time first through acceleration in transportation and then through electronic 
transmission. 
Yet, there are moments, or glimpses, when space in relation to gender 
functions differently. Disrupting Virilio's more general, phenomenological 
approach to, and critique of, space and the body, I earlier mentioned the 
passages of biblical seduction and of the woman-vehicle carrying off the 
male as passenger. To these, I would now like to return. In the biblical 
scene, the most explicit of them all, seduction of the man by the woman 
leads to the fall, is accompanied by a sudden change in perception and the 
emergence of a new world where movement is 'originary'. Similarly, though 
a bit less radical, in the instance when woman-as-vehicle carries off man-
as-passenger, time is dynamic and space becomes a moving trajectory. This 
episode that mediates between a more conventional sense of space and a 
more radical one brought about by woman, is first mentioned in 'M6tempsy-
chose du passager' (1977a: 11-18), quoted again in footnote 1, on page 94 of 
Vitesse etpolitique (1977b) and in footnote 5 of Chapter 3 of UEsthttique de 
la disparition (1980: 137). Not content with this, Virilio decides to reprint 
the article under the same title in UHorizon ntgatif (1984: 35-52) and 
briefly alludes to it in Vitesse de liberation (1995c: 135). Virilio has a point 
to make. His position, though ambiguous, gives us a fleeting glimpse of 
another time—space when he argues that woman is man's first 'vehicle'; he is 
her first 'passenger' not only at birth but also in sexual relations! Paraphras-
ing Samuel Butler, he writes: 
One could say that the female [femelle in the French text] is the means that 
the male found to reproduce himself, that is, to come into the world. In that 
sense, woman is the first means of transport of the species, its first vehicle, 
the second would be the coupling of dissimilar bodies, geared up for mi-
gration, for the common trip. (Virilio, 1984: 38) 
Here, time is dynamic and space becomes a moving trajectory. As in the 
Bible, movement is initiated by women and is linked to eros and affect. This 
opening on to another time and space is quickly closed when Virilio adds: 
In a sense, woman was at the origin of the first continuation of battle, the first 
'revolution' of transportation, she enabled the hunter to specialize in the 
obscenity of the narcissistic, male duel.... Through domestication, the weak 
sex [sic] made possible the invention of the enemy beyond the prey ... the 
invention of the road, the revolution of technological and not only of meta-
bolic transportation. (Virilio, 1984: 39-40)12 
The dynamic space opened through trajectory and movement in connection 
with eros opens to an affective diagram quite different from that of calcu-
lation that elsewhere, in Virilio, is said to lead to eradication of space. It is 
perhaps from these moments that deal with affect and the sexes, with 
changes in perception, that we could develop notions of space, body and 

212 Theory, Culture & Society 
gender with the help of Virilio's incisive analyses of contemporary transfor-
mations of cities, geography and geopolitics that would open to possibilities 
of transformations. 
Despite the delphic style of a Gallic orator, despite his seeming 
posture of gloom, the French philosopher of speed may help women 
recompose notions of agency, resistance, ecological struggle and myriad 
other concepts whose anachronistic use is favored by the media (urban, city, 
heterosexual, family, single parent...). He cautions women against simply 
and non-critically buying into a controlling system while thinking they are 
emancipating themselves. As a lone voice of caution in the midst of all the 
glitz and hype about communities and liberation in cyberspace, Virilio 
resists the teletopic trendiness and stylish bashing of social causes. Some-
what ironically, he himself seems to be one of these immobile subjects - or 
smart travellers - who gather information by scanning the screen and the 
printed page rather than by spanning the globe. At the same time, he surges 
ahead, chronicling the future with its object-women, while regretting the 
woman-vehicle, or her recent avatars, such as the Madwomen of the Plaza de 
Mayo. The insistent repetitions in Virilio's work make it clear that, for him, 
women are more immanent. They are also more mobile. Hence, they are 
more capable not only of mediating between animal or social territories and 
speed-space but also of constructing an elsewhere to Virilio's anticipated, 
totalitarian closure, that is, of reinventing space and territory. 
Notes 
1. In a provocative remark, Virilio adds that when the Allies invaded [sic] France 
and Germany in 1944-5, they brought with themselves a rich experience in 
economic and physical violence, a memory of ethnocides, human deportation, 
slavery and colonialism. 
2. Baudrillard (1983) claims that all war is to liquidate resistance of autochtonous 
people against the military-industrial complexes. 
3. Virilio is also close to the hypotheses of Michel de Certeau (1986), to those of 
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari (1988) and to Guattari (1989). 
4. Jean-Luc Godard underscores Virilio's hypotheses against Giscard d'Estaing's 
restructuring of Paris and weakening of familial ties by showing the link between 
consumption and prostitution in the Parisian 'grands ensembles'. 
5. Here we can remind the reader once again that McDonald's was founded by Ray 
Kroc in 1960 to cater to single mothers who had no time for life at home. Kroc 
foresaw, and indeed fostered, the shift in family structures and with a keen sense of 
business took advantage of it. 
6. This results in a banality that is different from Michel de Certeau's 'art of 
everyday life' (1986) and from Jean Baudrillard's hypotheses (1991). 
7. In connection with these hypotheses we could see a noticeable increase in the 
number of 'people's stories' in the newspapers not as a progressive personalization 
but as a form of anachronism. 
8. The end of history in the sense of Virilio has nothing to do with that of Francis 
Fukuyama. 

Conley - Virilio and Feminism 
213 
9. A case in point is the recent closing down of free email exchange by the Chinese 
government, that views it as a political threat. Roger Cohen in his article on Brazil 
(New York Times, 5 Feb. 1998) notes that peasants can organize their resistance 
faster because of access to electronic devices. 
10. Much has been said about the abolition of the boundaries between private and 
public, etc. But also, technologies allow the speedy transfer of money and exchange 
of currencies for unprecedented profits and at the expense of many ordinary people. 
11. For many French theorists, language is equated with freedom. The eradication 
of language is seen as the loss of diversity and the advent of monoculture. Virilio 
here echoes the pronouncements of feminists as diverse as Helene Cixous, Luce 
Irigaray and Assia Djebar. 
12. On the question of narcissistic homosexual male duel, Luce Irigaray and 
Helene Cixous reached similar conclusions. In addition, the feminists differen-
tiated this type of homosexuality from another, less 'fraternal' type. Going against 
much contemporary theory, Virilio in a passing remark mentions how heterosexual 
relations in the French legal codes were devised by a homosexual count, Jean-
Jacques de Cambaceres, who favored the relations of men and made women 
miserable. Virilio's provocative remarks add an interesting twist to the by now 
cliched expression, 'compulsory heterosexuality' (Virilio, 1995c: 80). 
References 
Aug6, Marc (1996) 'Paris and the Ethnography of the Contemporary World', pp. 
175-9 in M. Sheringham (ed.) Parisian Fields. London: Reaktion Books. 
Baudrillard, Jean (1983) Simulations. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Baudrillard, Jean (1991) 'L'Am£rique ou la pens£e de Pespace', in J. Baudrillard et 
al. Citoyennete' et urbaniti. Paris: Seuil. 
de Certeau, Michel (1986) The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Michael Rendall. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Conley, Verena A. (1997) Ecopolitics. New York: Routledge. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari (1988) A Thousand Plateaus, trans. Brian 
Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Evenson, Norma (1979) Paris: A Century of Change. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press. 
Guattari, Felix (1989) Les trois Ecologies. Paris: Galilee. 
Godard, Jean-Luc (1969) Two or Three Things I Know About Her. 
Sassen, Saskia (1991) The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1977a) 'M6tempsychose du passager', Traverses 8: 11-18. 
Virilio, Paul (1977b) Vitesse et politique. Paris: Galil6e. 
Virilio, Paul (1978) Defenses populaires et luttes e'cologiques. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1980) UEsthe'tique de la disparition. Paris: Balland. 
Virilio, Paul (1984) UHorizon ntgatif Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1986) Speed & Politics, trans. Mark Polizotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. Philip Beitchman. New 
York: Semiotext(e). 

214 Theory, Culture & Society 
Virilio, Paul (1995a) 'Global Algorithm 1.7: The Silence of the Lambs: Conver-
sation with Carlos Oliveira', trans. P. Riemens. CTheory [http://www.ctheory.com/ 
gall.7-silence.html] 
Virilio, Paul (1995b) The Art of the Motor, trans. Julie Rose. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1995c) La Vitesse de liberation. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1996) Cybermonde, lapolitique dupire, Entretien avec Philippe Petit. 
Paris: Editions Textuel. 
Virilio, Paul (1997) The Dark Spot of Art', Interview with Catherine David. 
documenta documents 1: 47-67. 
Virilio, Paul (1998) La Bombe informatique. Paris: Galilee. 
Verena Andermatt Conley teaches in the Literature Program at Harvard 
University. Recent publications include an edited volume, Rethinking 
Technologies (University of Minnesota Press, 1993) and Ecopolitics: The 
Environment in Poststructuralist Thought (Routledge, 1997). She is cur-
rently working on problems of transformation of space in contemporary 
culture. 

The Conceptual Cosmology of 
Paul Virilio 
James Der Derian 
P
AUL VIRILIO, like the truth, is out there. From his 1976 exhibition 
on bunker archeology to his recent millennial project on the integral 
accident, Virilio's relentless inquiry into the interdependent relation-
ships of speed and politics, technology and ecology, and war arid cinema has 
left many a reader breathless, befuddled and sometimes in the dust. A not 
atypical Virilio chapter begins with a comparison of the phenomenologist 
Edmund Husserl to the astrophysicist Stephen Hawkings, and ends with 
account of the billionaire recluse, Howard Hughes. A single Virilio sen-
tence, full of concatenated clauses and asyndetic phrases, can collapse a 
century of political thought, dismantle a foundation of scientific absolutes. 
His take on a deterritorialized, accelerated, hyper-mediated world redefines 
outlandish. Nonetheless, when shit happens - events that defy conventional 
language, fit no familiar pattern, follow no conception of causality - 1 reach 
for Virilio's conceptual cosmology. 
And I did so again, when Monicamania, Iraq redux and a live-feed 
frenzy took the USA once more to the brink of what Virilio identified several 
years ago in The Art of the Motor as a 'data coup d'&a? (Virilio, 1995a 
[1993]: 23—34). Virilio's study of a virtually mediated reality provided a 
template for the domestic scandal and foreign crisis which befell the Clinton 
White House and spread, as Virilio would have it, like radioactivity through 
the infosphere. Indeed, the chapter titles alone of Art of the Motor read like a 
chronology of the events and actors of Zippergate, from the first salacious 
rumours to the final impeachment melodrama: 'The Media Complex', 'The 
Data Coup d'Etat, The Shrinking Effect', 'A Terminal Art', 'Victims of the 
Set', 'From Superman to Hyperactive Man'. Virilio's melding of the military-
industrial-media complex anticipates the deliberations of the pundits who 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 215-227 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;215-227;009967] 

216 Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
began, usually in a single sentence, to collapse topics like the ambiguity of 
defining a 'sexual relationship' with the efficacy of Cruise missiles in 
eradicating terrorist threats. Unlike the academic 'specialist' who has little 
time for the everyday, Virilio immerses himself in the minutial of mass 
culture. Moving from Plato to Nato, finding high theory in daily headlines, 
matching intellectual alacrity with rhetorical superficiality, Virilio's pro-
nouncements cannot help but be - by reflection and evaluation - at once 
hyperbolic and prescient: 'movement creates the event'; 'information 
explodes like a bomb'; 'the televised poll is now a mere pale simulation of 
the ancient rallying of citizens' (1995a: 23-34). Virilio illuminates the 
current shift of representation into what he calls the 'virtual theatricalization 
of the real world': it has taken us from statistical management to electoral 
polls to video wars, until politics becomes a form of 'cathodic democracy 
(1995a: 23-34). 
He seeks to reclaim the medium with a serious message: obsessive 
media vigilance over behavior combined with political correctness trans-
forms democracy from an open participatory form of government into a 
software program for the entertainment and control of all spectators. Speed 
enhances this phenomenon through a global 'shrinking effect': 'With accel-
eration there is no more here and there, only the mental confusion of near 
and far, present and future, real and unreal - a mix of history, stories, and 
the hallucinatory Utopia of communication technologies' (1995a: 35). The 
coeval emergence of a mass media and an industrial army was the signifying 
moment of modernity, of a capability to war without war, producing 'a 
parallel information market' of propaganda, illusion, dissimulation. How-
ever, technological accelerants like satellite link-ups, real-time feeds and 
high-resolution video augment the power of television to dissimulate in time 
as well as space. Now the danger lies in the media's power to 'substitute' 
realities. With the appearance of a global view comes the disappearance of 
the viewer-subject: in the immediacy of perception, our eyes become indis-
tinguishable from the camera's optics, and critical consciousness goes 
missing. 
In the abstract, Virilio's attribution of such powers to media tech-
nology might seem to be overstated, even border on reification. Yet consider 
again the mediated event called Monica, from the first Linda Tripp-wire, 
when data was accumulated, manipulated and substituted through multiple 
media, to the Starr Report, which at one moment appeared likely to topple a 
US President and at the next propels him to his highest approval ratings. At 
moments, it seemed as if Virilio was writing the script himself. The day after 
the news broke of Tripp's tape-recordings, PBS's Jim Lehrer assembled his 
team of pundits; movement of information, that is, speed, quickly became 
the primary discussion point. Presidential scholar Doris Kearns Goodwin 
contrasted the slow deliberative process of Watergate to the accelerated 
news cycle of today; journalist Haynes Johnson responded that 'Speed has 
conditioned us to daily scandal'; and revolving-door David Gergen, evoking 
the film in which the White House brings in Hollywood to produce an 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 217 
imaginary war in Albania, warns of a 'Wag the Dog Syndrome' that would 
make it impossible for the President to send Iraq an unequivocal signal. 
Soon after, James Carville, Clinton's hound-dog loyalist, bayed on Meet the 
Press that 'there's going to be a war.' 
And war we got. A deadly abstraction of conflict like Virilio's 'pure 
war', so-named not to suggest out propriety but the immaculate conception 
of a war without 'real' warring, a war based on the mediated ideology of 
deterrence. 
The weeks that followed were full of transgressive events transformed 
by sensational reportage into trivial moments - and sometimes the other way 
around. Major newspapers used the p-word; networks debated whether oral 
sex constituted a 'sexual relationship'; and Camille Paglia appeared on talk 
radio - much too often. Then, predictably, like Red Guards just before the 
defenestration of a bourgeois intellectual, the media broke out into a rash of 
auto-critique. In one of the first of many self-flagellating, self-righteous 
essays, New York Times media critic, Janny Scott, put the spotlight of blame 
on the new media, especially the Internet, for being just too damn fast: 
The episode provides another cautionary tale in the reporting of a story as 
fast-paced as the one that broke two weeks ago centering on accusation that 
the President has sex with an intern in the White House and encouraged her 
to lie about it under oath. The speed with which news travels has been 
accelerated in recent years by the rise of the Internet and 24-hour cable 
television news. (1998: BIO) 
At the height of the scandal, the Blairs, the Clintons, and just about every 
significant player from Disney, Dreamworks and the whole media-entertain-
ment complex took time out for a State Dinner, and got down to an overly 
symbolic pairing of Stevie Wonder and Elton John for the Beatles-Motown 
hit, 'Money (that's what I want)'. But the very next day, President Clinton 
went to the Pentagon to address the brass. After gilding the microchip — 'bit 
by bit the information age is chipping away at the barriers - economic, 
political and social - that once kept people locked in and freedom and 
prosperity locked out' — he warned of the data-abusers hanging out in the 
shadows : 
But for all our promise, all our opportunity, people in this room know very 
well that this is not a time free from peril, especially as a result of reckless 
acts of outlaw nations and an unholy axis of terrorists, drug traffickers and 
organized international criminals. We have to defend our future from these 
predators of the 21st century. They feed on the free flow of information 
technology. 
Soon thereafter, center court in the basketball arena of Ohio State Uni-
versity, Messengers Albright, Cohen and Berger, intent on sending - with a 
little help from CNN - a signal of resolution to Saddam Hussein, were 
undone by the power of the live feed and a group of noisy protesters ('One, 

218 Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
two, three, four, we don't want your racist war'). In Baghdad, an agitated 
pharmacist told a reporter, 'I think this may be the first time a lot of people 
may die because your President has turned the White House into a brothel' 
(Ibrahim, 1998: A9). Rahm Emmanuel, one of Clinton's senior advisers, 
made duration the significant factor, declaring that the 'only common 
thread' between Whitewater and Lewinsky is that 'they're both twenty-four 
years old' (Anderson, 1998: 34). In one New York Times op-ed article, 
Maureen Dowd wrote: 'Slick Willie has morphed into Tricky Dicky. Ken-
neth Starr has morphed into the X-Files Cigarette Man' (Dowd, 1998: A29). 
In another, Thomas Friedman claimed, 'It is only when you combine the 
medieval with the postmodern that you can fully grasp this Iraq story' (1998: 
A27). 
But it got much worse. After US embassies were truck-bombed on the 
same day in Sudan and Kenya, the dog of war wagged again as Cruise 
missiles hunted down former freedom-fighter turned terrorist-bomber, 
Omasa Bin Laden. The semen-stained dress from the GAP required the 
President to provide a DNA sample. An apology race to the abject bottom 
took over the air-waves. Finally, the Starr Report was put on the Web by the 
Congress (yes, the same guys who passed the Communications Decency 
Act), and over four million hits were registered (with access denied to any 
users who had porn-screening programs on their computers). French Minis-
ter of Culture Jack Lang and British actor/activist Vanessa Redgrave 
organized a global petition campaign against the sexual McCarthyism of 
the 'Starr Tribunal'. Asked about the impending release of the President 
Clinton's four-and-a-half hour video testimony, Germany's Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl says, 'It makes me vomit.' And the private sphere contracted 
ever smaller, until it imploded under the concentric pressure of a prurient 
public voyeurism. 
Such is the dark power which Virilio discerned within the 'hallucina-
tory Utopia of communication technologies'. We might just be witnessing 
the first of the 'integral accidents' predicted by Virilio, where global 
interconnectedness destroys the firewalls of civil society, information flows 
outstrip the powers of deliberation, truth is further relativized by velocity, 
and crises spread like a contagion. The Military-Industrial-Media-Enter-
tainment Network (MIME-NET) becomes the infrastructure for Pure War. 
Against this backdrop of the everyday bizarre, the apocalyptic hype 
and rhetorical hyperbole of Virilio seems almost normal. His remarkable 
cosmology of concepts continues to provide an inexhaustible array of 
dispositifs, those investigatory instruments and prescriptive strategies 
which produce mental images to disturb commonsensical views of the 
world, to capture the highly mutable and often peculiar forms of the truth 
out there. Virilio is best-known for his use of speed as a variable, chrono-
politics as a concept and dromology as a method to produce new under-
standings of an ever-accelerating global politics. However, in practically 
every book he coins new concepts which take on new heuristic as well as 
political value as they are reinterpreted and re-circulated by others. 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 219 
Like Deleuze, Virilio construes concepts as mental images for 
disturbing conventional, commonsensical views of world events - but with 
the added visual warp of a life lived at the speed of cinema, video, light itself 
(Patton, 19%: 1-17). It is not, then, a criticism (nor, for that matter, an 
unqualified recommendation) to say that reading Virilio will probably leave 
one feeling mentally disturbed, usually compounded by a bad case of 
vertigo, since speed is not only the subject but the style of Virilio (helping 
to account for a dozen books in as many years). In a typical Virilio sentence, 
which often elongates into a full paragraph, the concepts can spew out like 
the detritus of a Mir supply-ship. Many get recycled in later books. Some, 
benefiting from refinement and new empirical settings, stand out like 
polished gems. But almost all of them provide radically different takes on 
the social implications of new technological forces, liberating their analysis 
from the customary academic dullness and expert narrowness. 
Some of the concepts, often the most neologistic ones, burn brightly 
but briefly, flaming-out once they are lifted from Virilio's seductive rhetori-
cal flow and subjected to the atmosphere of contemporary politics. Such 
might be an interpretation of one of the opening paragraphs from the last 
chapter of L'espace critique: 
In effect, the geopolitics of nations that yesterday still presupposed the 
hierarchical privilege of the center over its peripheries, of the summit over 
the base, the 'radioconcentrism' of exchanges and horizontal communi-
cations, loses its value in the same way as does the extreme vertical 
densification to the benefit of an inapparent morphological configuration. 
The NODAL succeeds the CENTRAL in a preponderantly electronic environment, 
'tele-localization' favoring the deployment of a generalized eccentricity, 
endless periphery, forerunner of the overtaking of the industrial urban form, 
but especially of the decline of the sedentary character of the metropolis to 
the advantage of an obligatory interactive confinement, a sort of inertia of 
human populations for which the name of teleconcentrism may be proposed, 
while waiting for that of 'homeland' to replace that of the large suburb. The 
secular opposition city/country is being lost while the geomorphological 
uniqueness of the state is dissipating. (Virilio, 1984: 156) 
Now it is all too easy — and all too often a gambit of the hack critic - to 
take a complex sentence or paragraph out of context and to assert its 
incomprehensible character. In this paragraph Virilio is actually leading 
up to a very important and central claim of the book, that the exo-colonial-
ism of the industrial, imperial period has become introverted - internally by 
the de-industrialization and pauperization of the urban center, and exter-
nally by the rise of an intensive transnational capital and transpolitical 
megalopoles - into a post-industrial endo-colonkation: Mexico City, Shang-
hai, Sao Paulo, and the South African Homelands are presented as pointed 
examples. Perhaps there are simpler ways to introduce or to translate this 
idea. But it would probably take at least three more paragraphs and a lot of 
loose translation to do it. 

220 Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
Because I have found it to vary by the reader whether Virilio's 
concepts offer a supernova flash of illumination or a black-hole obscuring 
of complex subjects, I will not pretend to have a sure measure of the 
heuristic value of his concepts. However, not least because Virilio has 
such a yen for astrophysics (he once remarked that a lack of formal training 
in the sciences was one of Baudrillard's shortcomings), I will risk belaboring 
the astral metaphors to make one supernal caveat lector: there are in Virilio 
some conceptual wormholes which can take the reader to very strange and 
not always rewarding places. They often appear just as a rhetorical dead-
end looms, and imaginative or empirical exhaustion is setting in, as Virilio 
tries to bolster an extravagant claim or weak concept by piling on superficial 
evidence, like the moment in The Suicidal State', where he goes from a very 
long, deeply political account of the persecution of nomadism under the 
German Third Reich, marked by the rounding up and killing of gypsies and 
bohemians, to the trivial, modern-day right of a Frenchman to park his 
camper anywhere he damn well pleases (Virilio, 1993: 41). 
At other times and different places, Virilio's wormholes can open 
doors of perception (think of Blake rather than Huxley) that make the trip 
well worth the effort. For instance, take Polar Inertia (1999 [1990]), one of 
his most difficult and most philosophically dense works. Virilio returns to 
Germany in the 1930s, to posit the rupture between philosophy and physics 
as one of the reasons for technology going out of control, leading to 
Auschwitz and Hiroshima, and then leaps forward to identify a similar gap 
opening up between the power of new remote-control technologies and our 
ability to understand a rapidly changing environment. From this he induces 
an ethical imperative to rejoin current metaphysical and astrophysical 
thinking about everything from the beginnings of time to the end of the 
world as we conventionally know it. Fortunately, he has covered this ground 
- that is, where the ground in effect gives way to speed - in simpler ways in 
other works: 
In our situations of televisual experience, we are living in nothing less than 
the sphere of Einstein's relativity, which wasn't at all the case at the time that 
he wrote it since that was a world of trolley cars, and at most, the rocket. But 
today we live in a space of relativity and non-separability. Our image of time 
is an image of instantaneity and ubiquity. And there's a stunning general lack 
of understanding of speed, a lack of awareness of the essence of speed 
And this passage from an extensive to an intensive time will have consider-
able impact on all the various aspects of the conditions of our society: it leads 
to a radical reorganization both of our social mores and of our image of the 
world. This is the source of the feeling that we're faced with an epoch in many 
ways comparable to the Renaissance: it's an epoch in which the real world 
and our image of the world no longer coincide ... (in Sans, 1991: 139-40) 
In Polar Inertia, however, the issue entails some heavy wading through, 
among other difficult works, the writings of Edmund Husserl and Stephen 
Hawking. The first couple of times I did not get it. Moreover, I thought this 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 221 
was this kind of thing most likely to get the hard-core Protectors of the 
Virgin Sciences up in arms (viz. Alan Sokal of the Social Text hoax). After 
all, Virilio was arguing from the perspective of a post-Einsteinian theory of 
relativity that not only seemed to play fast and loose with analogical 
reasoning, but also to violate some of the basic laws of physics, like the 
impossibility of exceeding the speed of light, or the impossibility of two 
objects simultaneously occupying the same space. But then, as is often the 
case with Virilio, the physical world appears to catch up to his metaphysi-
cal analysis: news came from Switzerland that objects, albeit sub-nuclear 
ones, can, sort of (to use a technical term) simultaneously communicate at 
speeds exceeding the speed of light. What Einstein had disparagingly 
dismissed as 'spooky action at a distance' had been achieved in an experi-
ment in Geneva: 'It was as if some ghostly bridge across the city of 
Geneva, Switzerland, had permitted two photons of light nearly seven 
miles apart to respond simultaneously to a stimulus applied to just one of 
them' (Browne, 1997: Cl). As one commentator, George Johnson, later put 
it, 'two photons ... "correlated" in some funny mathematical way that 
defies common sense' (1997: E5). Johnson begins and ends his article with 
the physicists' plaint about the inadequacy of language to describe the 
results and the field of quantum mechanics in general, confirming, I be-
lieve, Virilio's point — and why the reader might have to suffer some 
conceptual gymnastics to get it: 
Physicists, exasperated at trying to explain to puzzled laymen the meaning of 
that weird cornerstone of reality called quantum mechanics, complain about 
what they call 'the word problem.' The counterintuitive manner in which sub-
atomic particles behave couldn't be clearer to those who can sight-read the 
mathematics, nature's symphonic score. But try translating these truths into 
language and the trouble begins 
But if scientists are surer than ever about 
the truth of quantum mechanics, they are not any closer to explaining what it 
means. There is no reason to expect that our linguistic toolkits will contain 
tweezers fine enough to grasp the slippery concepts that hold in the sub-
atomic realm. (1997: E5) 
Yet, for every one of Virilio's oblique concepts or extravagant theor-
etical claims, there are others which slice right through the sludge that is 
served up as political analysis. By this quality alone, there is no question 
that he belongs in the company of Benjamin and Adorno, Debord and 
Baudrillard, Foucault and Deleuze, Barthes and Derrida, for taking our 
understanding of the discursive relationship of technology, society and 
politics to a higher plane of political as well as critical consciousness. He 
might not always match some of these thinkers in their philosophical 
consistency, historical knowledge or rhetorical flair. But as the millennium 
turns, he stands out from the critical crowd, as a conceptual innovator and 
intellectual provocateur, the one who goes to the edge and sees beyond the 
traditional maps of modernity. Take, as just one example of many, a 1988 

222 Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
interview, in which he displayed a remarkable prescience about the 
televisual power of new military technologies and what it would mean for 
contemporary war and politics: 
When you couple a video camera with a computer on a robot or on a missile 
like a cruise missile, the gaze, even if for the moment a poor gaze, is a self-
sufficient gaze, a blind gaze, the machine looking for itself and no longer for 
some spectator or telespectator. And I think that this accession of the vision 
machine demonstrates well to what point meaning, in the rich human, I was 
even going to say humanist sense, is destined to be superseded. (Block, 1988: 
4-7) 
Virilio's reputation should not stand or fall by the oxyopia of his own gaze. I 
do believe, however, that his work can judged by the extent to which his 
conceptual cosomology has infused the debate about late modernity with a 
critical awareness of dangers extant and future. I can only offer here a rapid-
fire proof, that will, I hope, inspire a closer reading of his works. 
In his first book (The Insecurity of Territory first published in 1976), 
Virilio introduces the concepts of deterritorialization, nomadism and the 
suicidal state, which Deleuze and Guatarri pick up and brilliantly elaborate 
in their most significant work, A Thousand Plateaus (1987: 345,395-6, 520-
1 n.24, 536 n.8, 551 n.56). Virilio draws on Walter Benjamin's fear of an 
aestheticized politics, but takes it further, showing how politics, no longer 
willing, no longer able to maintain representational distinctions between the 
real, the visual and the virtual, disappears into the aesthetic (The Aesthetics of 
Disappearance, 1991 [1980]). This disappearance is facilitated by the 
melding of military, cinematic, and techno-scientific 'logistics of perception9 
(War and Cinema, 1989 [1984]). All economies of sight and might, remnants 
of presence like quattrocento linear fields of perception, national-territorial 
politics, Cartesian subjectivity, Newtonian physics, become coordinated, 
and eventually subordinated by a relativist, quantum, transpolitical war 
machine (Negative Horizon, 1986 [1984]). In political terms, this means that 
the geopolitics of extensivity and exo-colonization is displaced by the 
chronopolitics of intensivity and endo-colonization (L'Espace Critique, 
1984). In turn, episodic war gives way, through the infinite requirements 
and preparations of deterrence and simulations, to a permanent pure war 
(Pure War, 1997 [1983]). 
Displaying no anxiety of influence, Virilio takes Foucault's panopticon 
model to an extra-terrestrial level of discipline and control, offering a micro-
analysis of how new technologies of oversight and organizations of control, 
innovated by strategic alliances of the military, industrial and scientific 
communities, have made the cross-over into civilian and political sectors to 
create a global administration of fear (Popular Defense and Ecological 
Struggles, 1990 [1978]). It is not so much the acuity and reach of Foucault's 
analysis that is extended by Virilio, as it is the dimensionality, showing how 
the control of space has been force-multiplied if not displaced by the control 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 223 
of pace (Speed and Politics, 1986 [1977]). As the individual historically 
moves from geocentric (Copernican) to egocentric (Husserlian) to exocentric 
(Einsteinian) perspectival fields, and the species from the sedentariness of 
the agricultural biosphere to the mobility of the industrial technosphere to the 
velocity of the informational dromosphere, the once-progressivist identity 
politics of location loses out to the inertial motility of a real-time telepresence 
{Polar Inertia, 1999 [1990]). 
And long before Derrida spotted the ghost of globalization haunting 
post-communist Europe, Virilio was writing that Europe's future would not 
be decided in the various nations' foreign ministries or on the battlefield, but 
in the electromagnetic spectrum of informational, cybernetic wars of persua-
sion and dissuasion - that is, deterrence writ temporal and global (Bunker 
Archtologie, 1975). Similarly, he presaged an ever-expanding hierarchy of 
contemporary virtual realities (The Vision Machine, 1994b [1988]), where 
the pseudo-proximity of live news and faux military interventions were 
displacing the consumptive spectacles of Debord and the seductive simu-
lations of Baudrillard with constant irruptive spasms of 'media-staged stra-
tegic events' ['strategico-mtidiatique9]. This was a diagnosis which Virilio 
applied early on to a critique of the Gulf War (UEcran du desert, 1991), 
predicting a real-time war of short duration with high if hidden [furtive] 
intensity and costs, in contrast to most liberal intellectuals who were 
stunned into silence, or even support, by the spectacle of excess as well as 
seeming success of the war machine. While military strategists and think-
tank courtiers were searching for a name for a new kind of warfare without 
war — was it netwar, cyberwar, infowar? — Virilio had already given notice of 
the data coup d'etat that had shifted the aim of battle from capturing to 
captivating the enemy through the media complex (The Art of the Motor, 
1995a [1993]). And while environmentalists try to arouse a world con-
sciousness by warning of a possible ecological desertification of the planet, 
Virilio is one dimension beyond, prophesying the chronological desertifica-
tion of world time, global time, by the negative synergy of the integral 
accident (Open Sky, 1997). 
What is one to make of this dire scan of the human condition? 
Probably much less than I have. There is certainly more than a hint of 
millenarian doom to Virilio's work; but as he has made clear in more than 
one interview, this is not to encourage quietism but to alert the reader that 
the time to act is now. 'I don't believe', says Virilio, 4in the end of the world — 
I believe in the end of a world' (in Zurbrugg, 1995). More specifically, a 
technologically induced end — of the body as well as the body politic — is not 
inevitable but increasingly possible: 
We haven't reached that point yet: what I have described is the end, or a 
vision of the end. What will prevail is this will to reduce the world to the point 
where one could possess it. All military technologies reduce the world to 
nothing. And since military technologies are advanced technologies, what 

224 Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
they actually sketch today is the future of the civil realm. But this, too, is an 
accident. (Virilio, 1994a) 
Other critical thinkers have provided new concepts for investigating the 
political and social implications of new technologies of reproduction. Yet 
many of them already seem out of date, stuck in place and, to use a word 
Virilio favors, folklorique, when compared to the restless yet, in all its 
time/uZ/ness, strangely rustless conceit of Virilio, that the proliferation of 
high-speed, real-time, cinematic, global, computer networked — in a word -
virtual systems of how we see, has forever changed how we know, the other. 
In an essay which originally appeared in Le Monde diplomatique, Virilio 
maps the social consequences: 
What lies ahead is a disturbance in the perception of what reality is; it is a 
shock, a mental concussion. And this outcome ought to interest us. Why? 
Because never has any progress in a technique been achieved without 
addressing its specific negative aspects. The specific negative aspect of 
these information superhighways is precisely this loss of orientation regard-
ing alterity (the other), this disturbance in the relationship with the other and 
with the world. It is obvious that this loss of orientation, this non-situation, is 
going to usher in a deep crisis which will affect society and hence, democ-
racy. (Virilio, 1995b) 
And in an interview he warns, when distance and distinctions between 
mental and visual images collapse, multiple, intensive, coterminous sub-
stitutions of reality begin to war with another: 
From now on everything passes through the image. The image has priority 
over the thing, the object, and sometimes even the physically-present being. 
Just as real time, instantaneousness, had priority over space. Therefore the 
image is invasive and ubiquitous. Its role is not to be in the domain of art, the 
military domain or the technical domain, it is to be everywhere, to be 
reality 
I believe that there is a war of images 
And I can tell you my 
feelings in another way: winning today, whether it's a market or a fight, is 
merely not losing sight of yourself (Block, 1988: 4-7). 
In short, virtuality disappears reality. On its own, perhaps not a great 
loss; but Virilio has his eye where others do not, on the collateral damage 
done to the ethos of reality, the highly vulnerable public space where 
individuals responsively interact. For Virilio, the interconnectivity of vir-
tual systems is not ushering in a new day for democracy but a new order of 
telepresence', high-paced interconnectivity is becoming, technically and 
literally, a substitute for the slower-paced intersubjectivity of traditional 
political systems. He sees the self as a kind of virtually-targeted ground-
zero; once voided, concentric circles of political fall-out spread, leaving in 
the vitrified rubble all responsibility for the other that forms the prior 
condition for truly intersubjective, ethical, human relationships. This 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 225 
forms the gravitas of Virilio's body of work. In practically all of his writings 
it registers more as a persistent ethical, even spiritual pull than as a moral 
theory or an explicit religious sentiment (although in interviews Virilio has 
acknowledged the profound significance of Catholicism in his life). I 
believe it is also this deep ethical force, more so than his corrosive 
intellectual critique, which keeps his often elliptical rhetoric and some-
times errant concepts in something resembling a coherent orbit. 
At the end of a long lunch at La Coupole in Paris, Virilio put this all 
much more succinctly, in the aphoristic style he favors for interviews: 
'Interactivity is to real space what radioactivity is to the atmosphere.' 
Before I could get my head around the thought - I was stuck trying to 
imagine the virtual equivalent of thyroid cancer — he tempered one hyper-
bolic statement by another, declaiming, 'I am in love with technology!' Since 
I knew from the difficulty in arranging the interview that this was a man 
without email, fax or even an answering machine, I asked him to explain the 
apparent contradiction. It's just that he wasn't about to make it easy for the 
intellectual love of his life. Another aphorism followed: like Jacob, he 
wrestled with the angel of technology not to prove his disbelief, but to 
prove his freedom to believe. Sound cosmological advice, I believe, for all in 
search of a livable relationship with the new techno-deities. 
Notes 
1. 'In Clinton's Words', New York Times 18 February 1998: A9. 
2. To me, the first sign that the nation had been suborned (in the preferred scandal-
ese) by a technologically induced hallucination came when I began to confuse the 
Bennett brothers, Robert, the President's personal lawyer whose questioning 
months ago of Tripp's credibility led her to begin secretly taping Monica Lewins-
ky's conversations, and William, the ever-virtuous Republican activist who ap-
peared on just about every talk show except Jerry Springer, impugning the morals of 
President Clinton. And things got even stranger. Time magazine ran a sidebar (2 
March 1998) titled 'Good, Al, but that's with a W. It reports that Allen Ginsberg 
wrote a poem in 1949, about a 'Sweet Levinsky', of whom Ginsberg wonders: 'do you 
giggle out of spite/or are you laughing in delight/Sweet Levinsky, sweet Levinsky'. 
There's also a line about trembling when the cock crows (it turns out that Levinsky 
was actually Leon Levinsky, a minor character in Jack Kerouac's first novel, The 
Town and the City). When the Cruise missiles were launched after the embassy 
bombings in Sudan and Kenya, I imagined the dead poet Allen Ginsberg taking 
over William Ginsburg's body (there is a resemblance), who would then show up on 
Larry King Live for one last hurrah, chanting Ginsberg's mesmerizing poem, 'Hum 
Bomb' ('Whom bomb?/We bomb them!/ Whom bomb?/We bomb them!/ Whom 
bomb?'). 
3. One waits to see what happens when integral accidents combine with integral 
crises, as foreshadowed by the testimony of US Federal Reserve Board chairman 
Alan Greenspan to the US Senate budget committee that the 'Asian Crisis' had 
entered a 'more virulent phase' (Globe and Mail 24 September 1998: Bl). 
4. See Malcom Browne, 'Far Apart, 2 Particles Respond Faster Than Light' (1997). 
It would also seem that the New York Times Sunday Magazine is catching up with 

226 
Theory, Culture & Society 16(5-6) 
Virilio. In a special issue on 'What Technology is Doing to Us' (28 September 
1997), speed is the ruling concept in just about every essay. See for instance, James 
Gleick's 'Addicted to Speed' (1997: 54-61), which states on one page that scenes 
from contemporary television and movies 'speed by so fast they've left the laws of 
physics behind' (1997: 55); and on the next (after a spread of edited shots from Men 
in Black) quotes an executive from ABC: 'We're all bound by the laws of physics. 
There are only 24 hours in a day and 60 minutes in an hour and 60 seconds in a 
minute. Everybody looks at their time with a microscope to get the best utilization 
they can. It is the only real estate we have.' 
5. Since Virilio, in the period of his architectural collaboration with Claude Parent, 
did make a virtue of the 'oblique function' in urban planning (the theoretical basis 
for the 1966 parochial center Sainte-Bernadette de Nevers, and the 1969 Thomson-
Houston aerospace center in Villacoublay), it might warrant further investigation to 
see if there is a commensurate conceptual application in his later writings. 
6. Bunker Arche'ologie was published a year earlier in 1975, but it was primarily a 
secondary text to accompany the photography exhibition; and Virilio himself refers 
to Insecurity of Territory as his first book (interview with author, June 1995). 
7. This was confirmed during his teleconference at the Ars Electronica Symposium 
on Infowar in Linz, Austria (8 September 1998). 
References 
Author- 'In Clinton's Words', New York Times, February 18, 1998 
Anderson, Ken (1998) 'Entertainer-in-Chief, New Yorker 16 February. 
Block (1988) 'Paul Virilio', interview in Block 14: 4-7. 
Browne, Malcolm (1997) 'Far Apart, 2 Particles Respond Faster than Light', New 
York Times, 22 July. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari (1987) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Dowd, Maureen (1998) 'D.C. Confidential', New York Times 25 February. 
Friedman, Thomas (1998) 'Iraq of Ages', New York Times 28 February. 
Gleick, James (1997) 'Addicted to Speed', in New York Times Sunday Magazine, 
Special Issue on 'What Technology is Doing to Us', 28 September. 
Greenspan, Alan (1998) Globe and Mail 24 September. 
Ibrahim, Yousef (1998) 'Despite Threat of Missiles, the Iraqi Capital's People Take 
a Crisis in Stride', New York Times 23 February. 
Johnson, George (1997) The Unspeakable Things that Particles Do', New York 
Times 27 July. 
Patton, Paul (1996) Deleuze: A Critical Reader. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Sans, Jerdme (1991) 'Paul Virilio', trans. H. Martin, pp. 139—50 in AA and 
Philosophy. Milan: Giancarlo Politi Editore. 
Scott, Janny (1998) 'Internet Story Revives Questions on Standards', New York 
Times 6 February. 
Virilio, Paul (1975) Bunker Arche'ologie. Paris: Centre Georges. Pompidou, Centre 
de Creation Industrielle. 
Virilio, Paul (1991 [1980]) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. P. Beitchman. 
New York: Semiotext(e). 

Der Derian - Paul Virilio: An Introduction 
227 
Virilio, Paul (1984) UEspace critique. Paris: Christian Bourgois. 
Virilio, Paul (1990 [1978]) Negative Horizon, trans. M. Polizotti. New York: 
Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1986 [1977]) Speed and Politics: An Essay in Dromology, trans. M. 
Polizotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1989 [1984]) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. P. 
Camiller. London and New York: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1990 [1978]) Popular Defense and Ecological Struggles, trans. M. 
Polizotti. New York: Semiotext(e). 
Virilio, Paul (1991) Uficran du desert: chroniques de guerre. Paris: Galilee. 
Virilio, Paul (1993) Ulnse'curite' du territoire. Paris: Galilee. (Orig. 1976.) 
Virilio, Paul (1994a) 'Cyberwar, God and Television', interview with Louise 
Wilson, C-Theory 21 October. 
Virilio, Paul (1994b [1988]) The Vision Machine, trans. J. Rose. Bloomington and 
London: Indiana University Press and British Film Institute. 
Virilio, Paul (1995a [1993]) The Art of the Motor, trans. Julie Rose. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Virilio, Paul (1995b) 'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', Le Monde 
Diplomatique, August, translated by Patrice Riemens, and published in ctheory, 
'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', 27 September. 
Virilio, Paul (1997) Open Sky, trans. J. Rose. London: Verso. 
Virilio, Paul (1999 [1990]) Pfolar Inertia, trans. P. Camiller. London: Sage. 
Zurbrugg, N. (1995) The Publicity Machine and Critical Theory', interview with N. 
Zurbrugg, 13 Jan., trans. N. Zurbrugg, Eyeline 27: 8-14. 
James Der Derrin is Research Professor of International Relations at 
Brown University and Professor of Political Science at the University of 
Massachusetts at Amherst. He has written and edited several books, most 
recently The Virilio Reader (Blackwell, 1998). His articles on security, 
technology and the information revolution have appeared in Wired, the 
Washington Quarterly, 21 -C and Cultural Values. 


Paul Virilio 
A Select Bibliography 
Compiled and Introduced by John Armitage 
Introduction 
This select bibliography of the cultural and theoretical works of Paul Virilio 
in French and English has been compiled from all the references to Virilio's 
published works that I have been able to find in books, articles, periodicals, 
newspapers and Internet sites. However, my efforts have benefited greatly 
from the research skills and generosity of Virilian scholars and others from 
around the world. Prior to beginning, some brief notes are in order. 
The first section simply lists the main published works of Paul Virilio 
in French. I have also included in this section one or two second editions of 
Virilio's main published works where new material (e.g. a new Preface or 
Afterword) has been added. The second section records all of Virilio's 
articles, collaborations, working papers, discussions and edited works in 
French. In some instances, I was unable to verify page numbers and this, 
rather than inattention to bibliographical detail, explains the occasional 
absence of page numbers not only in this section but also in all the other 
sections. Some references in the second section have an asterisk (*) at-
tached. The asterisk simply signals that, in this case, Virilio is not the sole 
author of the piece but has collaborated in some way, usually through the 
writing of a working paper or, more generally, through a published round-
table discussion or the editorial process. Section 3 catalogues all of Virilio's 
interviews first published in French. Where I was able to ascertain the name 
of the interviewer, I have included it. The absence of an interviewer's name 
indicates only that I was unable to confirm it at the time of writing. 
The fourth section lists all of the English translations of Virilio's main 
published works. Translators are noted where credited or known throughout 
the English sections. Section 5 is an inventory of all of Virilio's articles that 
■ Theory, Culture & Society 1999 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), 
Vol. 16(5-6): 229^-240 
[0263-2764(199910/12)16:5-6;229^-240;009968] 

230 Theory, Culture & Society 
have been translated into English. Section 6 itemizes all Virilio's interviews 
published in English. Interviewers are named where credited or known. I 
have also noted where an interview published in English is a translation 
from the French original and where an interview in English has been 
reprinted elsewhere. Section 7 lists all the studies of Virilio's writings in 
French and English. I have indicated electronic journals and have included 
a few details concerning book reviews, chapter sections, a PhD thesis, a 
conference paper, 'plateaus', Virilio's early writings, and discussions of his 
work in books that are not, principally, about Virilio. Section 8 is the final 
section and merely sets down three Internet sites related to the work of 
Virilio for the reader's viewing pleasure. 
My hope is that I have provided the most complete bibliography of 
Virilio's works available in French and English. No doubt there are a great 
many Virilian texts contained in obscure journals or still swirling around the 
Internet that I have not been able to find or access. Indeed, some Virilio 
publications are so marginal that I often get the impression that once he has 
finished writing a piece he simply hands it to the first person he meets. 
Consequently, I would be most interested to receive the details of any 
omissions from this bibliography at the Division of Government and Politics, 
University of Northumbria, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. Happy 
reading. 
1 • Main Published Works of Paul Virilio in French 
(1975) Bunker arche'ologie. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, Centre de Creation 
Industrielle. 
(1976) Ulnse'curite' du territoire. Paris: Stock. 
(1977) Vitesse et politique. Essai de dromologie. Paris: Galilee. 
(1978) Defense populaire et luttes 6cologiques. Paris: Galilee. 
(1978) La Dromoscopie ou la lumidre de la vitesse. Paris: Minuit. 
(1980) Esthe'tique de la disparition. Paris: Balland. 
(1984) UEspace critique. Paris: Christian Bourgois. 
(1984) Guerre et cine'ma 1. Logistique de la perception. Paris: l'Etoile. 
(1984) UHorizon ntgatif: essai de dromoscopie. Paris: Galilee. 
(1988) La Machine de vision. Paris: Galilee. 
(1989) Esthe'tique de la disparition (2nd edn, contains a new Preface.) Paris: 
Galilee. 
(1990) Ulnertie polaire. Paris: Christian Bourgois. 
(1991) Uftcran du desert: chroniques de guerre. Paris: Galilee. 
(1991) Bunker arche'ologie (2nd edn, contains a new Afterword, '1945/1990'.) Paris: 
Demi-Cercle. 
(1991) Guerre et cine'ma 1. Logistique de la perception (2nd edn, contains a new 
Preface.) Paris: Galilee. 
(1993) Ulnse'curite' du territoire (2nd edn, contains a new Afterword, Tostface: De 
Pextr£me limite k Pextr§me proximity'.) Paris: Galilee. 
(1993) L'Art du moteur. Paris: Galilee. 

Armitage - Virilio Bibliography 
231 
(1995) La Vitesse de liberation. Paris: Galilee. 
(1996) Un paysage d'evtinements. Paris: Galilee. 
(1998) La Bombe informatique. Paris: Galilee. 
(1999) Strategic de la deception. Paris: Galilee. 
2. Articles, Collaborations, Working Papers, Discussions and 
Edited Works of Paul Virilio in French 
(1967) 'Bunker arch6ologie', Architecture Principe 7 (March.) 
(1971) 'Architecture of the Open Systems', Architecture, Formes & Fonctions: 
155-64. 
(1974) 'Le Littoral vertical', Critique 30(320): 48-53. 
(1975) 'La Guerre pure', Critique 31(341): 1090-103. 
(1975) 'La delation de masse... ou la contre-subversion', pp. 13-57 in Paul Virilio 
and Georges Perec (eds) Le Pourrissement des socie'te's. Paris: Union G£n6rale 
d'fiditions, collection 10/18.* 
(1976) 'Le Soldat inconnu', Les Temps Modernes 32(360): 2334-53. 
(1977) 'M6tempsychose du passager', Traverses 8: 11-19. 
(1978) Architecture d'ingtnieurs XlXe-XXe siicles. Paris: Centre de Creation 
Industrielle.* 
(1978) 'La Dromoscopies ou la lumiere de la vitesse', Critique 34(370): 324-37. 
(1980) Le Nouvel Ordre gendarmique. Paris: Seuil.* 
(1980) Tabas, la strategic de Paccident', Liberation May: 7. 
(1981) 'La Ville id6ale\ Quinzaine Litteraire 353: 39. 
(1981) 'Les Folles de la Place de Mai', Traverses 21-2: 9-18. 
(1982) 'Le Compte a rebours a commence^, Quinzaine Litteraire 376: 5-6. 
(1982) 'Perec, ami paisible', Quinzaine Litteraire 368: 4. 
(1982) 'L'Accident origineF, Confrontation 7 spring: 5-10. 
(1983) La Crise des dimensions: la representation de Vespace et la notion de dimen-
sion. Paris: 1' UDRA - ESA (Unit6 de recherche appliqu6 - Ecole sp6ciale 
d'architecture.)* 
(1983) Portes de la ville. Paris: Centre de Creation Industrielle.* 
(1984) 'Une ville surexposeV, Change International 1: 19-22. 
(1984) 'Le Cin6ma, ce n'est pas je vois, c'est je vole', Cahiers de Cinema 357: 30-3. 
(1984) 'L'fitat nucteaire', Change International 2: 9-23.* 
(1984) 'Un habitat exorbitant', Corps tcrit 9: 25-7. 
(1985) 'Guerre des 6toiles: la propagande - fiction', Cahiers du Cinema 378: xv. 
(1985) 'Le Devoir de d^peupter', Traverses 33/4: 154-60. 
(1985) 'Un jour, le jour viendra ou le jour ne viendra pas', Traverses 35: 5—11. 
(1986) Reinhard Mucha. Paris: Mus6e National d'Art Moderne.* 
(1986) 'Le Cinema instrumental', Cahiers du Cinema 385: xiv. 
(1986) 'L'Engin exterminateur', Cahiers du Cinema 388: 29-30. 
(1986) 'L'Op6ration de la cataracte', Cahiers du Cinema 386: 35-9. 
(1986) (With J.-P. Fargier) The Cinema of Speed', Revue d'Esthetique 10: 37-43. 

232 
Theory, Culture & Society 
(1986) 'Video Technology and the Perception of the Image', Revue d'Esthttique 10: 
33-5. 
(1986) 'Image virtuelle', Revue d'Esthe'tique 10. 
(1986) 'Le Cinema instrumental: "L'imaginaire numerique" a Saint-Etienne', 
Cahiers du Cine'ma 385:14. 
(1987) Jean Nouvel. Paris: Institut Francaise d'Architecture.* 
(1987) Tennis de d&ruire', Cahiers du Cine'ma 401: 29-30. 
(1987) 'Le Rest du temps', Corps tcrit 24: 11-15. 
(1987) 'Un cockpit en ville', Traverses 41: 69. 
(1988) 'De dromoscopie', Museum Journaal 33(5/6): 310-16. 
(1988) 'L'Image virtuelle mentale et instrumentale', Traverses 44/5: 35-9. 
(1988) 'La Lumiere indirecte', Communications 48: 45-52. 
(1989) De Vinstabilite'. Paris: Centre National des Arts Plastiques. Nov.-Dec. Paris: 
Centre National des Arts Plastiques.* 
(1989) 'Le Ph6nomene Rybczinski', Cahiers du Cinema 415: 64. 
(1989) 'Le Mer a vior', Cahiers du Cine'ma 424,: 17. 
(1990) 'L'Inertie dromotique', Techniques et Architecture 390: 119-21, 181. 
(1990) 'La Nouvelle Domesticity', ARQ: Architecture/Quebec 57: 29-30. 
(1990) 'Marcel Odenbach: Die Einen Den Anderen, 1987', in R. Bellour (ed.) 
Passages de Vintage. Paris: Editions du Centre Pompidou. 
(1991) 'L'Ins6curit6 des territoires', in ART LAB Concept Book. Tokyo: ART LAB. 
(1991) 'Quarante ans d'histoire', Cahiers du Cine'ma 443/4: 62. 
(1991) UOdysse'e du virtuel. Paris: Dossiers de PAudiovisuel. INA Numero 40, 
Novembre-Decembre. Sous la direction d'A.-M. Dugent et J.-M. Peyron. 
(1991) 'La Guerre des dupes', U$,ve'nement du Jeudi: 36-7. 
(1991) (With P. Goulet and J. Nouvel) 'Aesthetic des versch windens', Arch Plus 
108: 32-40. 
(1992) 'Une guerre non-conventionnelle', Transversales 14: 4-6. 
(1994) Yann KersaU/UInstant Liimidre. Paris: Hamzan.* 
(1994) Atom Egoyan. Paris: Distributed Art Publications.* 
(1995) 'Alerte dans le cyberspace', Le Monde Diplomatique 28 August: 1. 
(1995) 'M^moire de l'ait: une politique du relief, pp. 7-8 in U. Pfammater (ed.) 
Cuno Brullman. Basel: BirkhSuser. 
(1996) 'L'Horizon du trait', pp. 74-7 in M. Jacques and A. Lavalou (eds) Christian 
de Portzamparc. Basel: Birkhauser. 
(1996) 'Dangers, perils et menaces', Maniere de voir: Internet: L'extase et l'effroi, 
Le Monde Diplomatique: October: 54-6. 
(1996) (With C. Parent) Architecture principe, 1966 et 1996. Besangon: LTmpri-
meur. 
(1996) 'Le Mus6e du soleiP, Intercommunication 15(Winter): 25-8. 
(1997) 'Un monde surexpos£', Le Monde Diplomatique August: 20. 
(1998) 'Le Regne de la delation optique', Le Monde Diplomatique August: 20. 

Armitage - Virilio Bibliography 
233 
3. Interviews with Paul Virilio First Published in French 
(1981) 'Vid6o, vitesse, technologie: la troisieme fenStre', Cahiers de Cinema 322: 
35-40. (Interview with the editors of Cahiers de Cine'ma.) 
(1984) 'Entretien avec Paul Virilio', Empreintes 6: 28-31. (Interview with D. 
Dobbels and B. Remy.) 
(1986) 'Vers l'espace des interfaces: entretien avec Paul Virilio', Technique et 
Architecture 364: 130-3. (Interview with A. Pelissier.) 
(1987) 'Paul Virilio', 8 May. (Interview on the French cultural channel, La Sept.) 
(Interviewer unknown.) 
(1990) Architecture Interieure-Cree, 239: 108-14 (Interviewer unknown.) 
(1993) 'La D6faite des faits', UAutre Journal 4: 12-17. (Interview with K. Bros and 
M. Weitzman.) 
(1993) 'Interview avec Paul Virilio', Archithese 23(2): 54-6. (Interview with M. 
Brausch.) 
(1994) 'Nous allons vers des Tchernobyls informatiques', Revue Terminal: Une 
reflexion sur le concept de technoscience 62. (Interview with G. Lacroix.) 
(1994) 'La Ville, espace mutant: entretien avec Paul Virilio', Architecture Interieure 
Cr4e 261: 104-7. (Interview with M. Brausch.) 
(1995) 'Bientdt, seuls ceux qui seront dans la virtualit6 s'aimeront', Supplement 
multimedia du journal Le Monde. 30 Septembre. (Interviewer unknown.) 
(1995) 'La Guerre de Pinformation', Telecom Observer 11 Octobre. (Interview with 
F. Burman on Swiss Radio International.) 
(1995) 'L'Utopie du cybermonde', France Culture. (Radio interview with J. de 
Rosnay.) 
(1995) 'Devant la liquidation du monde', Black Notes. (Interview with A. Kyrou and 
J.Y. Barbichon.) 
(1995) 'Vitesse, guerre et videV, Le Magazine Litteraire 337 (Novembre): 96-103. 
(Interview with F. Ewald.) 
(1996) 'L'Urbanit6 virtuelle, Petre au monde au temps r6el', Fluctuation fugitive: 
revue d'architecture. (Interview with A. Sina.) 
(1996) Cybermonde, lapolitique dupire. Paris: Textuel. (Book-length interview with 
P. Petit.) 
(1996) 'Cybermonde, la politique du pire', Liberation 10 May. (Interviewer un-
known.) 
(1996) 'Les Formes virtuelles', Les Sciences de la Forme Aujourd'hui, 
Points 
Sciences (October.) (Interview with £. Noel.) 
(1996) 'Caution against the Cyberworld', Connaissance des Arts 532(October.) 
(Interview with P. Jodidio.) 
(1996) 'Quand il n'y a plus temps a partager, il n'y a plus de democratic possible', 
Les Grands Entretiens du Monde 3: 37-9. (Interview with J.-M. Frodon.) 
(1996) 'Paysage d'6v£nements surfond de vitesse', Art Press 217: 19-26. (Interview 
with P. Sterckx.) 
(1996) 'Virilio, cyb^resistant', Liberation 10 May. (Interviewer unknown.) 
(1996) 'Entrer en cyber^sistance', La Rafale 19 May. (Interviewer unknown.) 

234 
Theory, Culture & Society 
(1996) 'Le Bombardement de Nantes', Cahiers du Cinema 503. (Interviewer un-
known.) 
(1996) 'Les Grands Entretiens du monde', Chapter 1 in Dossiers et documents du 
monde June: Part 3. (Interviewer unknown.) 
(1996) 'Un monde sans espace', Le Nouvel Observateur Novembre. (Interview with 
P. Gari.) 
(1997) 'La Revolution de rinformation est une revolution de la d6nonciation', 
Ultve'nement du Jeudi 656 (May-June): 60. (Interview with B. Ponlet.) 
(1997) Voyage d9hiver. Marseille: Parentheses (Book of interviews with M. 
Brausch.) 
4. English Translations of the Main Published Works of Paul 
Virilio 
(1986) Speed & Politics: An Essay on Dromology, trans. M. Polizzotti. New York: 
Semiotext(e.) 
(1986) Negative Horizon, trans. M. Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1989) War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, trans. P. Camiller. London and 
New York: Verso. 
(1990) Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles, trans. M. Polizzotti. New York: 
Semiotext(e.) 
(1991) The Lost Dimension, trans. D. Moshenberg. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1991) The Aesthetics of Disappearance, trans. P. Beitchman. New York: Semio-
text(e.) 
(1994) Bunker Archeology, trans, (of 2nd edn) G. Collins. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
Architectural Press. 
(1994) The Vision Machine, trans. J. Rose. Bloomington and London: Indiana 
University Press and British Film Institute. 
(1995) The Art of the Motor, trans. J. Rose. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. 
(1997) Open Sky, trans. J. Rose. London: Verso. 
(1999) Polar Inertia, trans. P. Camiller. London: Sage Publications. 
5. English Translations of Articles by Paul Virilio 
(1980) 'Popular Defense and Popular Assault', trans. J. Johnston, pp. 266-72 in S. 
Lotringer and J. Fleming (eds) Italy: Autonomia. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1981) 'Moving Girl', trans. J. Johnston, pp. 242-8 in P. Lamborn Wilson and J. 
Fleming (eds) Semiotext(e) Poly sexuality. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1984) The Overexposed City', trans. A. Hustvedt, pp. 15-31 in M. Feher and S. 
Kwinter (eds) Zone 1/2. New York: Urzone. 
(1985) 'Dromoscopy, or Drunk with Magnitude', trans. N. Sanders, Frogger 7. 
(1986) 'Star Wars', trans, unknown, Art & Text 22: 15-18. 
(1986) The Privatisation of War', trans. M. Imrie, New Statesman 112 (10 
October): 19. 
(1987) 'Space, Time, and the City', trans. Unknown, Lotus International 51: 25-9. 
(1987) 'Nervous Peace', trans. M. Imrie, New Statesman 113 (16 January): 36-7. 

Armitage - Virilio Bibliography 
235 
(1987) 'Negative Horizons', trans. M. Polizzotti, pp. 163-80 in J. Fleming and P.L. 
Wilson (eds) Semiotext(e) USA. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1989) Trans-Appearance', trans. D. Stoll, Artforum 27(10): 128-30. 
(1989) The Last Vehicle', trans. D. Antal, pp. 106-19 in D. Kamper and C. Wulf 
(eds) Looking Back on the End of the World. New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(1989) The Museum of Accidents', trans. Y. Lawrence, in The Lunatic of One Idea, 
Special Issue of Public 2: 81-5. 
(1990) 'Cataract Surgery: Cinema in the Year 2000', trans. A. Fatet and A. Kuhn, 
pp. 169-74 in A. Kuhn (ed.) Alien Zone: Cultural Theory and Contemporary Science 
Fiction Cinema. London and New York: Verso. 
(1990) The Third Interval', trans, unknown, Art and Design 7 (1/2): 78. 
(1990) The Image to Come', trans. S. Sartarelli, Art & Text 36: 90-4. 
(1991) 'Head High?', trans. T. Hausman, Newsline 3(7): 3. 
(1992) 'Gray Ecology', trans, unknown, pp. 186-9 in C.C. Davidson (ed.) Anywhere. 
New York: Rizzoli. 
(1992) 'Aliens', trans. B. Massumi, pp. 446-9 in J. Crary and S. Kwinter (eds) Zone 
6: Incorporations. New York: Urzone. 
(1992) 'Big Optics', trans. J. Von Stein, pp. 82-93 in Peter Weibel (ed.) On 
Justifying the Hypothetical Nature of Art and the Non-Identicality within the Object 
World. Koln: Galerie Tanja Grunert. 
(1992) The Law of Proximity', trans. W. Nijenhuis, pp. 121-7 in V2 Organization 
(eds.) Book for the Unstable Media. Amsterdam: den Bosch. 
(1993) The Third Interval: A Critical Transition', trans. T. Conley, pp. 3-12 in V.A. 
Conley (ed.) Rethinking Technologies. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
(1993) 'Speed and Vision: The Incomparable Eye', trans, unknown. Diadalos: 
Berlin Architectural Journal 47: 96-107. 
(1993) The Interface', trans, unknown, Lotus International 75: 126. 
(1993) 'From Superman to Superexcited Man', trans, unknown, Domus 755:17-24. 
(1993) The Law of Proximity', trans. L.E. Nesbitt, Columbia Documents of Archi-
tecture and Theory 2: 123—37. 
(1993) The Primal Accident', trans. B. Massumi, pp. 211-18 in B. Massumi (ed.) 
The Politics of Everyday Fear. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
(1994) The Vision Machine', trans. J. Rose, Transition 43: 20-35. 
(1995) 'Red Alert in Cyberspace', trans. M. Imrie, Radical Philiosphy 74: 2-4. 
(1995) 'Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!', trans. P. Riemens, CTheory 
(Ctheory www.com) (Electronic journal.) 27 September. 
(1995) 'Critical Reflections', trans, unknown, Artforum 34(3): 82-3. 
(1995) 'Comforting Light', trans, unknown, Forum 38: 17-19. 
(1995) 'Politics of Relief, trans, unknown, Forum 38: 77. 
(1995) 'Memory of Air: A Policy of Relief, trans. I. Taylor, pp. 8-9 in U. Pfammater 
(ed.) Cuno Brullmann. Basel: Birkha*user. 
(1996) The Horizon of the Line', trans. S. Pleasance and F. Woods, pp. 74-7 in M. 
Jacques and A. Lavalou (eds) Christian de Portzamparc. Basel: Birkhauser. 

236 
Theory, Culture & Society 
(1997) The Overexposed City', trans. A. Hustredt, pp. 381-90 in N. Leach (ed.) 
Rethinking Architecture: A Reader in Cultural Theory. London and New York: 
Routledge. 
(1997) 'Cybernetics and Society', trans. C.T. Wolfe, pp. 1-13,19-20 in Any (editor 
unknown.) New York: Architecture. 
(1997) The Museum of the Sun', trans. L. Reijnen, pp. 331-62 in V2 Organization 
(eds) Technomorphica. Rotterdam: V2 Organization. 
(1998) 'Foreword', trans, unknown, in J. Rajchman, Constructions. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
(1998) 'We May Be Entering an Electronic Gothic Era', transcribed and edited by 
0. Fillion, Architectural Design 68(11/12) (November-December): 61. 
6. Interviews with Paul Virilio Published in English 
(1983) Pure War, trans. M. Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e.) (Book-length inter-
view with S. Lotringer.) 
(1985) The Spirit of Defense: An Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. M. Polizzotti, 
Impulse (Death Issue) 11(4): 35-7. (Interview with C. Mellon.) 
(1986) 'Speed-Space', trans. D. Miller, Impulse 12(4): 35-9. (Interview with C. 
Dercon.) 
(1988) 'Paul Virilio', trans, unknown, Block 14: 4-7. (Interviewer unknown.) 
(1988) 'Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. H. Martin, Flash Art, International 
Edition 138: 57-61. (Interview with J. Sans.) 
(1988) The Third Window: An Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. Y. Shafir, with a 
preface by J. Crary, pp. 185-97 in C. Schneider and B. Wallis (eds) Global 
Television. Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press and Wedge Press. (Interview 
with the editors of Cahiers du Cinema. A translation of Virilio's 1981 interview in 
French with Cahiers du Cinema.) 
(1991) 'Paul Virilio', trans. H. Martin, pp. 139-50 in Art and Philosophy. Milan: 
Giancarlo Politi Editure. (Reprint of the interview with Jerdme Sans in Flash Art.) 
(1991) 'For a Geography of Trajectories', trans, unknown, Flux 5: 48—54. (Interview 
with J.-M. Offner and A. Sander.) 
(1992) 'Interview with Paul Virilio', trans, unknown, pp. 74-86 in 100 affiches 
francaises a Saint-Peterbourg. Paris: Demi-Cercle. (Interview with D. Joubert.) 
(1993) 'Marginal Groups', trans, unknown, Diadalos: Berlin Architectural Journal 
50(December): 72-81. (Interview with M. Brausch.) 
(1994) 'Cyberwar, God and Television: Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. L.K. 
Wilson, M. Fowler, and R. Stesan, CTheory (Electronic journal) 17(3): 1-7. (Inter-
view with L.K. Wilson for CTheory.) 
(1994) 'Gravitational Space', trans, unknown, pp. 35-60 in L. Louppe (ed.) Traces 
of Dance: Drawings and Notations of Choreographers. Paris: Editions Dis Voir. 
(Interview with L. Louppe and D. Dobbels.) 
(1995) 'Paul Virilio', trans. G. Aylesworth, pp. 97-104 in F. Rotzer (ed.) Conversa-
tions with French Philosophers. New Jersey: Humanities Press. (Interview with F. 
Rotzer.) 
(1995) 'Cyberrevolution', trans, unknown, Telecom Observer 16 October. (Interview 
with M. Alberganti.) 

Armitage - Virilio Bibliography 
237 
(1995) 'Critical Mass', trans, unknown, World Art 1: 7B-82. (Interview with V. 
Madsen.) 
(1995) The Publicity Machine and Critical Theory', trans. N. Zurbrugg, Eyeline 
27(autumn-winter): 8-14. (Interview with N. Zurbrugg.) 
(1995) 'Century of Violence', trans. N. Zurbrugg, Versus 4: 42-7. (Interview with N. 
Zurbrugg. Reprint of The Publicity Machine' interview in Eyeline 27.) 
(1995) The Silence of the Lambs: Paul Virilio in Conversation', trans. P. Riemens, 
CTheory (Electronic journal) 1(7): 1-3. (Interview with C. Oliveira.) 
(1996) 'Speed Pollution', trans. M. Degener, J. Der Derian and L. Osepchuk, Wired 
4.05: 120-1. (Interview with J. Der Derian.) 
(1996) The Game of Love and Chance', trans. C. Volke, Grand Street 52: 12-17. 
(Interview with J. Sans.) 
(1996) The Game of Love and Chance', trans. C. Volke, Architectural Design 121: 
24-6. (Reprint of the J. Sans interview in Grand Street 52.) 
(1996) 'Paul Virilio and the Oblique', trans, unknown, pp. 174--84 in S. Allen and 
K. Park (eds) Sites and Stations: Provisional Utopias: Architecture and Utopia in the 
Contemporary City. New York: Lusitania Press. (Interview with E. Limon.) 
(1996) '"A Century of Hyper-violence": Paul Virilio: An Interview', trans. N. 
Zurbrugg, Economy and Society 25(1): 111—26. (Interview with N. Zurburgg. 
Reprint of N. Zurbrugg interviews in Eyeline 27 and Versus 4.) 
(1996) The Dark Spot of Art', trans. B. Holmes, pp. 47-55 in Herausgeber 
documenta Gmbtt. (ed.) documenta documents 1. Kassel: Cantz Verlag. (Interview 
with C. David.) 
(1996) The Dark Spot of Art's Presence', trans. B. Holmes, Metronome 0: 7-10. 
(Reprint, in edited form, of the interview with C. David in documenta documents 1.) 
(1997) 'Interview with Paul Virilio', trans. J. Der Derian, M. Degener and L. 
Osepchuk, Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-8. (Interview with J. Der Derian. 
Reprinted in J. Der Derian [ed.] The Virilio Reader, 1998.) 
(1997) 'Virilio's Apocalypse', trans, unknown, pp. 70-3 in A. Crawford and R. 
Edgar (eds) Transit Lounge. North Ryde: Craftsman House. (Interview with V. 
Madsen.) 
(1997) Pure War: Revised Edition, trans. M. Polizzotti, Postscript translated by B. 
O'Keeffe. (Contains a new Postscript: '1997: Infowar'.) New York: Semiotext(e.) 
(Book-length interview with S. Lotringer.) 
(1998) 'Surfing the Accident', trans. P. Riemens, pp. 30-44 in V2 Organization 
(eds) The Art of the Accident. Rotterdam: NAI. (Interview with A. Ruby.) 
(1999) (With Friedrich Kittler.) The Information Bomb: Paul Virilio and Friedrich 
Kittler in Conversation', edited and introduced by J. Armitage, trans. P. Riemens, 
in J. Armitage (ed.) Machinic Modulations: New Cultural Theory and Technopoli-
tics, Special Issue of Angelaki 4(2.) (First broadcast on the Franco-German tele-
vision channel ARTE, in November 1995.) 
7. Studies of Paul Virilio in French and English 
Aidar, M. (1997) 'IDEAL CAR', Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-4. 
Armitage, J. (1996) The Vision Thing', Radical Philosophy 77: 45-6. (Book review 
of The Vision Machine.) 

238 
Theory, Culture & Society 
Armitage, J. (1997) 'Accelerated Aesthetics: Paul Virilio's The Vision Machine\ in 
C. Blake and L. Blake (eds) Intellectuals and Global Culture, Special Issue of 
Angelaki 2(3): 199-209. 
Armitage, J. (1999) 'Paul Virilio', pp. 464-5 in E. Cashmore and C. Rojek (eds) 
Dictionary of Cultural Theorists. London: Arnold. 
Armitage, J. (1999) 'Resisting the Neoliberal Discourse of Technology: The Politics 
of Cyberculture in the Age of the Virtual Class', CTheory (Electronic journal) 22(1-
2) Article 68:1-10. 
Auber, 0. (1997) 'Esquisse d'une position the orique pour un art de la vitesse', 
Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-10. 
Brigham, L. (1992) 'Motion and Destruction', American Book Review 14(2): 10. 
(Book review of The Aesthetics of Disappearance.) 
Brigham, L. (1997) Transpolitical Technocracy and the Hope of Language', Speed 
(Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-6. 
Conley, V.A. (1997) Ecopolitics: The Environment in Poststructuralist Thought. 
London: Routledge. (Contains chapter section on Virilio.) 
Conrad, P. (1989) 'Screen Spectaculars', Times Literary Supplement 1-7 Septem-
ber: 939. (Book review of War and Cinema.) 
Crawford, T.H. (forthcoming) 'Conducting Technologies: Virilio's and Latour's 
Philosophies of the Present State', in J. Armitage (ed.) Machinic Modulations: New 
Cultural Theory and Technopolitics, Special Issue of Angelaki 4(2.) 
Crogan, P. (1996) 'Paul Virilio and the Aporia of Speed'. Unpublished PhD thesis, 
Sydney, Power Department of Fine Arts. 
Crogan, P. (1996) 'Paul Virilio and the Aporia of Speed', Virtual Cultures Confer-
ence Paper, Sydney, 13 July: 1-5. 
Crogan, P. (1997) 'Metaphoric Vehicles', Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-6. 
Crogan, P. (forthcoming) Theory of State: Deleuze, Guattari and Virilio on the 
State, Technology, and Speed', in J. Armitage (ed.) Machinic Modulations: New 
Cultural Theory and Technopolitics, Special Issue of Angelaki 4(2.) 
Couples, C. (1996) 'Virilio, the Cyborg, and Me'. Archived at: http://ebbs.english.v-
t.edu/exper/couples/personal/academia/reviews/art.of.motor.html. (Book review of 
The Art of the Motor.) 
Coyle, R. (1992) 'Sound and Speed in Convocation: An Analysis of The Listening 
Room Radio Programs on Paul Virilio', Continuum 6(1): 118-38. 
Der Derian, J. (1992) Antidiplomacy: Spies, Terror, Speed, and War. Oxford: Black-
well. (Contains chapters discussing Virilio's work.) 
Der Derian, J. (1998) 'Virtually Wagging the Dog', Theory & Event (Electronic 
journal) 2(1): 1-7. (Book review of The Art of the Motor.) 
Der Derian, J. (ed.) (1998) The Virilio Reader. Oxford: Blackwell. (Contains a 
reprint of Der Derian's interview with Virilio in Wired. Contains 'A Select Bibli-
ography of Works by Paul Virilio'. This bibliography also includes some Spanish, 
Italian and Cerman Virilio references.) 
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1986) Nomadology: The War Machine, trans. B. 
Massumi. New York: Semiotext(e.) (Contains a critical discussion of Virilio's work. 
This book is also one of the 'plateaus' in Deleuze and Guattari's A Thousand 
Plateaus immediately below.) 

Armitage - Virilio Bibliography 
239 
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1987) 'Nomadology: The War Machine', in their A 
Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. B. Massumi. Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Drake, M. (1997) The Question of Military Technology: Apocalyptics or Politics?', 
Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-13. 
Douglas, LR. (1997) 'Ecology to the New Pollution', Theory & Event (Electronic 
journal) 2(2): 1-5. (Book review of Open Sky.) 
Douglas, LR. (1997) The Calm Before the Storm: Virilio's Debt to Foucault, and 
Some Notes on Contemporary Global Capital', Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-
18. 
Gilfedder, D. (1994) 'VIRILIO: The Cars that Ate Paris', Transition 43: 36-43. 
Hake, S. (1989) 'War and Cinema', Film Criticism 14(1): 40-2. (Book review of War 
and Cinema.) 
Johnson, P. (ed.) (1996) The Function of the Oblique: The Architecture of Claude 
Parent and Paul Virilio, trans. P. Johnson. London: Architectural Association. 
(Contains Virilio's early architectural writings, drawings, and photographs. Also 
included is an interview with Parent.) 
Kellner, D. (1998) 'Virilio on Vision Machines', Film-Philosophy (Electronic 
journal), Salon review: 1-10. (Book review of Open Sky.) 
Kerrigan, J. (1997) 'When Eyesight is Fully Industrialised', London Review of Books 
16 October: 14-15. (Book review of Open Sky.) 
Koppes, C.R. (1991) 'War and Cinema', Technology and Culture 32(2): 447-8. 
(Book review of War and Cinema.) 
Kroker, A. (1992) The Possessed Individual: Technology and 
Postmodernity. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan. (Contains a chapter critically discussing Virilio's works.) 
Manovich, L. (1997) 'Film/Telecommunication, Benjamin/Virilio', Speed (Elec-
tronic journal) 1(4): 1-5. 
Messmer, M.W. 'War and Cinema', The Minnesota Review 34(3): 175-81. (Book 
review of War and Cinema.) 
Oki, K. (1997) 'Decisions at the Speed of Electronic Circuitry', Speed (Electronic 
journal) 1(4): 1-4. 
Sokal, A. and Bricmont, J. (1998) Intellectual Impostures: Postmodern Philosopher's 
Abuse of Science. London: Profile Books. (Contains a critique of Virilio.) 
Waite, G. (1996) Nietzsche's Corps/e: Aesthetics, Politics, Prophecy, or, the Spectacu-
lar Technoculture of Everyday Life. Durham, NC and London: Duke University 
Press. (Contains discussions of Virilio's thought.) 
Wark, M. (1988) 'On Technological Time: Virilio's Overexposed City', Arena 83: 
82-100. 
Wark, M. (1990) The Logistics of Perception', Meanjin 49(1): 95-101. (Review 
article on War and Cinema.) 
Weissberg, J.-L. (1996) 'Ralentir la communication', Terminal 63: 1-10. 
Wilbur, S. (1994/7) 'Paul Virilio: Speed, Cinema, and the End of the Political 
Slate', Speed (Electronic journal) 1(4): 1-10. (Originally posted on the Net in 1994. 
Reprinted in Speed.) 

240 Theory, Culture & Society 
Zurbrugg, N. (1995) '"Apocalyptic!" "Negative!" "Pessimistic!": Baudrillard, 
Virilio, and Techno-culture', pp. 72-90 in S. Koop (ed.) Post: Photography: Post 
Photography. Fitzroy: Centre for Contemporary Photography. 
8. Internet Sites Related to the Work of Paul Virilio 
Paul Virilio (Off) line 
http://web5.netculture.net/~ovk/virilio/index.html. 
Enterprise: Theoretical: Virilio 
http://www.uradio.ku.dk/~enterprz/virilio.html 
Speed 
http://proxy.arts.uci.edu/~nideffer_SPEED_/ 
Note 
1. In this regard, and apart from a large thank you to Virilio himself, I must thank 
James Der Derian, Patrick Crogan, Wim Nijenhuis, Mark Little, Andreas Broeck-
mann, Kevin Robins, Nicholas Zurbrugg, Gerard Greenway, Patrice Riemens and 
Andreas Ruby. Lastly, I would like to thank Joanne Parkes, Assistant Divisional 
Administrator in the Division of Government and Politics, University of North-
umbria, UK. Suffice it to say that Joanne's magical skills with a Word for Windows 
character map are a wonder to behold. 

Index 
acceleration see speed 
accident 
and modernity, 40-1,108,177 
teleprescence, 151-5 
tendency and, 167-74 
vision, 136 
aesthetics 
of disappearance, 41-2,46 
and politics, 80-3 
Agamben, C, 52 
anarcho-Christianity, 30-1 
Anderson, Laurie, 183 
aporia of speed, 162-7,172-4 
architecture 
habitable circulation, 88,89,90, 91 
light-window, 148 
oblique function, 3, 4, 32-3, 73-^, 88,89 
Pompidou Centre, Paris, 93, 95 
postmodernism, 25 
Saint Bemadette church, Nevers, 32,80-1, 87, 
89,96-7 
Virilio's research 
dromology, 74-6 
evaluation and critique, 76-83 
typology, 72-4 
and war, 82 
see also bunkers 
Architecture Prinicipe (group), 2, 3, 32, 71 
Architecture Prinicipe (journal), 4, 72,88 
art, 41-2,177-97 
art cnticism of technology, 15-16, 34 
astronauts, 64,110-11,185-6 
Atlantic Wall, 3, 31, 202 
atopia, 147 
audio-visual vehicles, 144,146 
autonomous technology, 118-19,130 
Baudrillard, J., 42-3,100,114-15 
on Gulf War, 98 
symbolic exchange and death, 93-4,95 
and Virilio, 85-6 
Benjamin, W., 82,113,122,148,149,150 
Black Friday crash (1989), 136 
body 
and cyberspace, 79, 208 
habitable circulation, 88, 89,90, 91 
invasion by technology, 49-51,113-14 
primacy in phenomenology, 117 
and space, 211-12 
bunkers 
archeology, 31-2,46, 72-3,86-90 
in the desert, 97-9 
occupancy, 100 
religious perspective on, 32,89-90,96-7 
Burroughs, W., 183,187 
capitalism, 3 
global restructuring of, 120 
identity as presence, 154--6 
military, 119,121 
car 
crisis of, 67-9,139-40 
see also vehicles 
Christianity 
Biblical references, 203-4 
Saint Bemadette church, Nevers, 32,80-1,87, 
89,96-7 
Virilio's conversion to, 29,30-1 
chrono-politics, 107 
cinema, 27,43-4 
crisis of, 58-9,68 
invention of, 64,128 
shift of perception and representation, 116-17 
theory of suture, 128-9,132-3 
and war, 45-6,108-10 
city, 5-6 
disappearance of, 117—18 
fortifications, 3, 75,105 

242 Theory, Culture & Society 
city-conk 
military origins, 3, 104—5 
modernization of, 205 
oblique architecture, 87, 88 
overexposed, 115-16 
Clinton/Lewinsky scsndal, 216-18 
Cold War, 106, 119, 130-1, 206 
colonization, 45, 50-1 
computer simulations, 137 
critical space, 33,90-1 
cyberdemocracy, 149 
cyberfeminism, 51,210 
cybersex, 51, 208 
cyberspace 
and body, 79, 208 
space/time distortion, 111 
Virilio on, 34 
Deleuze, G., 26, 47-S, 79-80 
Dernda, J., 34-5,135,163-7, 173 
desert screen see Gulf War 
digital light, 65 
digital optics, 65 
disappearance 
aesthetics of, 41-2, 46 
and loss, 113-19 
disciplinary societies, 79-80 
disinformation, 132,181 
distribution, media, 134,135-6,137 
dromocracy, 92, 95-6 
dromology, 4-6, 35-6, 74-6,104,105-6 
dromoscopic simulation, 94-5 
Duchamp, M., 138,192 
ficole Sp6ciale d'Architecture, 33, 42, 71, 87 
Einstein, A., 5,6, 27,61,62, 221 
either-or thinking, 183,187 
Ellul, J., 118,130 
endo-colonization, 50,219 
ephemera of human affairs, 136-7 
eugenics, 30-1,186 
everyday life, politics of, 36-7 
feminist perspective, 201-12 
Foucault, M., 26,42, 79,80, 222 
futurology, 162-7 
gender relations, 210-12 
geometry of fractals, 5,6, 33 
Gestalt theory, 26, 31, 73 
globalitarianism, 37-9, 47, 51 
globalization, 130, 209-10 
and cybernetic wars, 223 
grey ecology, 99, 210 
Guattari, F., 47-8 
Guillaume, P., 26 
Gulf War, 46-7,98-9, 110,131, 223 
habitable circulation, 88, 89, 90, 91 
Heidegger, M. 
autonomous technology, 118, 130 
concept of dwelling, 77, 78 
Hildegarde of Bmgen, 30 
Holtzman, Steven R., 178 
homeless people, 3, 37 
Hottois, G., 162-3 
Hughes, Howard, 99 
Husserl, E., 26,117 
hypereality, 114-15 
hypermobility, 143-6 
hypermodernism, 6-9 
and postmodernism, 25-7 
identity, 77-8,132,154-6 
illumination, new technologies of, 60-5 
illuminism, 116 
inertia, 99,100, 185,186 
speed and, 39-40 
'information bomb', 112-13 
information and communications technology, 34, 
131-2, 135-6 
acceleration of transmission, 36, 75-6, 78-9 
see also media communication 
Internet, 34, 150 
'Jennicam', 150 
Kuleshov effect, 128 
Le Corbusier, 3, 73,148 
light speed, 145-6,147 
logic of excess, 184 
logic of technoscience, 5 

logistics, 169-70 
of perception, 45-6,134 
loss 
disappearance and, 113-19 
of space, 207,209-11 
luminocentrism, 116 
Lyotard,J.-F.,39,187 
McLuhan, M., 95,182 
Mandelbrot, B., 5,6, 33 
Marxism, 28-9 
media communication 
Clinton/Lewinsky scandal, 216-18 
as 'last vehicle', 143-6 
multimedia information-entertainment 
technology, 120-1 
Tiananmen Square, 65-7 
transparency and overexposure, 146-51 
ubiquitous and instantaneous, 107 
media distnbution, 134,135-6,137 
memory, 137-8 
Merleau-Ponty, M. 
phenomenology of perception, 73, 76, 78 
Virilio as pupil of, 2,4,26,28, 29 
military space, 2-4 
to cyberspace, 31-4 
military technology, 61,64,92,106,118,131 
military-industrial complex, 119, 206 
military-technological determinism, 119 
mobility, 209 
modernism to hypermodernism, 6-9 
modernity 
and 'globalitananism', 37-9 
integral accidents, 40-1,108,177 
Monk, Meredith, 183-4 
motorization of appearances, 139 
multimedia information-entertainment 
technology, 120-1 
Nietzsche, F., 14-15,34-5,114 
oblique function, 3,4, 32-3, 73-4,88,89 
overexposure, 115-16,146-51 
Index 243 
Paris 
ficole Sp£ciale d*Architecture, 33, 42, 
71,87 
homeless people of, 3,37 
May '68 events, 90,91,93 
Museum of Decorative Arts, 86,89 
Pompidou Centre, 93,95 
perception, 134-5 
and memorization, 137-8 
phenomenology of, 73, 76, 78,135 
performance art see Stelarc 
phenomenology, 2, 4,114 
concept of presence, 152—3 
and Marxism, 28-9 
of perception, 73, 76, 78,135 
and virtual realm, 117 
photography, 46 
bunkers, 31, 81,86,89-90 
picnolepsia, 128,129-30,132 
political economy of speed, 4-5, 35-6 
politicization of Virilio, 90-2 
politics 
and aesthetics, 80-3 
cult of personality, 149 
of everyday life, 36-7 
speed and technology, 104—8 
popular defense, 204 
popular resistance see resistance 
postmodernism 
and hypereality, 114-15 
and hypermodernism, 25-7 
power, 35, 79,80 
presence of telereality, 59,60-1,62,64-5 
'pure war\ 5, 36-7,106,168-9,170, 222 
real time of interactivity, 185 
reality 
classes of, 43 
and hypereality, 114-15 
media presentation of, 65-7 
virtuality becomes, 224 
relativity theory, 27-8 
religious culture, 44 
religious perspectives 
on bunkers, 32, 89-90,96-7 
on resistance, 190-1 
panopticon model, 42, 222 
Parent, C, 2, 32, 33, 71, 72, 74, 82,86-7, 88-9, 
90 

244 Theory, Culture & Society 
representation 
*image' and 'reality', 153 
and perception, 116-17 
technology and, 108-13 
theory of, 133-5 
resistance, 92,96, 204-5 
to war, 36-7 
women's, 205-6 
Saint Bernadette church, Nevers, 32,80-1,87, 
89,96-7 
satellite technology, 61,63, 76 
Second World War, 26,44-5,169,170 
Shakespeare, W., 27,34 
shape recognition devices, 48-9 
simulacra, 93—4 
simulations, 42-3,115 
dromoscopic, 94-5 
soul, loss of, 186,187,193,194 
space 
and body, 211-12 
character and philosophy of, 87 
control of, 222-3 
and gender relations, 210-12 
loss of, 207, 209-11 
political, 80 
see also oblique function 
space-time 
astronauts' experiences, 110-11 
cyberspace, 111 
information transfer, 36, 75-6, 78-9 
pollution of, 99 
versus light and speed, 116 
speed 
and aesthetics of disappearance, 41-2 
aporia of, 162-7,172-4 
Derrida's perspective, 163-7 
development stages of Western societies, 208-
9 
as essence of war, 81-3 
global 'shrinking effect', 216 
importance of in history, 26-7 
and inertia, 39-40 
politics and technology, 104-8 
and Virilio's writing style, 121-2,167-8 
and war, 97-S, 107, 206 
see also dromology 
speed space, 206-7 
Stelarc, 177-8,179,180,196-7 
Vinlio's criticism of, 50 
structuralism, 30 
subjectivity, 132-3,139 
surrealism, 191-4 
surveillance, 11,134, 150 
by panopticon, 79 
cameras, 57, 75 
suture theory, 128-9,132-3 
symbolic exchange, 92-6 
technological culture, 43-4 
technological fundamentalism, 44,112 
technology 
invasion of body by, 49-51,113-14 
politics and speed, 104-8 
and representation, 108-13 
and sexuality, 51 
and totalitarianism, 118,154 
Virilio's negativity, 15-16,34, 111, 113,122-3 
and war, 119-23 
see also information and communications 
technology; media communication; 
military technology; video technology 
technoscience, logic of, 5 
teleprescence, 151-5, 223, 224 
teletopia, 66, 67 
tendency and accident, 167-72 
territory, organization of, 2-4 
time light, 62,131,151,154 
see also space—time 
totalitarianism, 118,154 
see also globalitarianism 
transparency, 62, 63, 64, 146-51 
transplant revolution, 49-51,114 
vehicles 
of transport and communication, 143-6 
women as, 202-3,204, 211 
video technology, 57-61 
videoscopic images, 62-3 
Viola, Bill, 178,179-80 
Virilio, P. 
and Baudrillard, 85-6 

biographical details, 2—3, 44-5 
conceptual cosmology of, 215-29 
conservatism, 114,120 
conversion to Christianity, 29,30-1 
criticisms of technology, 15—16, 34,1 
122-3 
double-edged position, 72 
early influences, 26 
interview with, 25—52 
as military cartographer, 31-2,45-6 
politicization of, 90-2 
writing style, 121-2,167-8 
virtual reality devices, 111—12 
virtuality becomes reality, 224 
vision by machines, 48-9,111-12 
war 
aesthetic images of, 81 
and architecture, 82 
and cinema, 45-6,108-10 
cybernetic, 223 
'pure', 5,36-7,106,168-9,170, 222 
and speed, 81-2, 97-8,107 
and technology, 119-23 
,113, 
vision machine, 48-9 
war machine 
definition, 171 
to flesh machine, 9-13 
war model, 3, 44-5 
women 
cyberphiles, 210 
emancipation of, 204 
as seducers, 203-4,211 
as vehicles, 202-3, 204, 211 
see also gender relations 
world citizenship, 38 
Y2K bug, 151-2 


Theory, Culture & Society 
Theory, Culture & Society caters for the resurgence of interest in culture 
within contemporary social sciences and the humanities. Building on the 
heritage of classical social theory, the book series examines ways in which 
this tradition has been reshaped by a new generation of theorists. It also 
published theoretically informed analyses of everyday life, popular culture, 
and new intellectual movements. 
EDITOR: Mike Featherstone, Nottingham Trent University 
SERIES EDITORIAL BOARD 
Roy Boyne, University of Durham 
Mike Hepworth, University of Aberdeen 
Scott Lash, Goldsmiths College, University of London 
Roland Robertson, University ofPittsburg 
Bryan S. Turner, University of Cambridge 
THE TCS CENTRE 
The Theory, Culture & Society book series, the journals Theory, Culture & 
Society and Body & Society, and related conference, seminar and postgradu-
ate programmes operate from the TCS Centre at Nottingham Trent Univer-
sity. For further details of the TCS Centre's activities please contact: 
Centre Administrator 
The TCS Centre, Room 175 
Faculty of Humanities 
Nottingham Trent University 
Clifton Lane, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK 
e-mail: tcs@ntu.ac.uk 
web: http://tcs@ntu.ac.uk 
Recent volumes include: 
Love and Eroticism 
edited by Mike Featherstone 
Polar Inertia 
Paul Virilio 
Peformativity and Belonging 
edited by Vikki Bell 
Feminist Imagination 
Genealogies in Feminist Theory 
Vikki Bell 
Michel de Certeau 
Cultural Theorist 
Ian Buchanan 
The Cultural Economy of Citites 
Allen J. Scott 

Lightning Source UK Ltd 
Milton Keynes UK 
15 November 2010 
162912UK00002B/13/A 
780761 959021 

