Planning and Building Services
www.stcatharines.ca
P.O. Box 3012, 50 Church Street, St. Catharines, ON  L2R 7C2
Phone (905) 688-5601 ext. 1660  |  TTY 905-688-4TTY (4889)
A Guide to 
Residential 
Plumbing 
for Homeowners
The Plumbing System
The plumbing system in a dwelling comprises four basic 
elements as follows:
1. The water supply and distribution system 
This system is composed of the water pipes which transport 
potable water from the source of supply and conveys it to 
the fixtures and appliances and in the case of hot water, from 
the water heater to the fixtures and appliances. The source 
of supply may be the municipal system, or a private well or 
cistern, etc.
2. The drainage system 
This system consists of the drain and sewer pipes which 
convey waste fluids from the fixtures to a place of disposal 
which may be the municipal sewer system, or a septic tank or 
holding tank, etc.
3. The venting system
This system consists of pipes which terminate in open air 
above the roof connected to the drainage system and which 
introduces air into the drainage system.
4. The fixtures and appliances
These consist of sinks, wash basins, water closets (toilets), 
laundry tubs, water heaters, washing machines, etc. All 
fixtures are required to be equipped with a trap which 
provides a water seal in the drain which prevents the emission 
of sewer gases. The trap must be vented.
Some of the more common terms used in plumbing and 
defined in the code are as follows:
Sanitary Building Drain – the horizontal pipe at the lowest 
point in the building (generally the basement floor) which 
receives the discharge from the other drainage piping and 
conducts the sewage to a building sewer.
Clean Out – a fitting access in a drainage pipe for cleaning 
and inspection provided with a readily replaceable air tight 
cover.
Sanitary Drainage Pipe – all piping which conveys sanitary 
sewage to a sanitary building drain, sanitary building sewer, 
soil stack, waste stack, or waste pipe.
Plumbing Appliance – a receptacle that receives water etc. 
and which discharges to a plumbing system.
Horizontal – departing from the true horizontal by not more 
than 45º 
Potable Water – water fit for human consumption
Waste Stack – a vertical waste pipe that passes through one 
or more stories that conducts liquid waste from fixtures other 
than sanitary units.
Trap – a fitting or device that provides a liquid seal to prevent 
the emission of sewer gas without affecting the flow of water.
Vent – a pipe that connects a drainage system with open air 
for circulation of air and the protection of trap seals 
The minimum size of piping, in general, which is required to 
serve a specific fixture or appliance is as follows:
1. Water Pipes
The minimum size of water service pipe entering a dwelling 
from the exterior is required to be ¾” diameter. The ¾” 
diameter should be maintained towards the water heater until 
the first takeoff branch and thereafter it can be reduced to 
½” diameter. The hot and cold water distribution system is 
required to be a minimum diameter of ½”.
2. Drainage Pipes
The minimum size of pipe serving the various fixtures is as 
follows:
Building drain – 4” Min
Floor drain – 2” Min
Bath tub – 1-1/2” Min
Laundry tub – 1-1/2” Min
Wash basin – 1-1/4” Min
Shower Stall– 1-1/2” Min
Sink (kitchen)– 1-1/2” Min
Water Closet (Toilet) – 3” Min
Washing Machine– 2” Min
3. Vent Pipes
The main stack vent (through roof) is 3” min.
All other vent pipes in a dwelling are generally required to be 
a minimum diameter of 1-1/2”..

Planning and Building Services
www.stcatharines.ca
P.O. Box 3012, 50 Church Street, St. Catharines, ON  L2R 7C2
Phone (905) 688-5601 ext. 1660  |  TTY 905-688-4TTY (4889)
Permit Requirements
A permit is required for the following work:
•	 The installation of plumbing in a new building
•	 The installation of new plumbing in an existing building
•	 The alteration of existing plumbing
•	 The repair of existing plumbing except for the repair of 
existing fixtures, leaks or blockages.
•	 The replacement of existing plumbing except for the 
replacement of existing fixtures.
A plumbing permit can only be issued to a qualified, 
licensed plumber except where the owner of a residence 
is performing the work in a renovation or addition to the 
owner’s principal residence.
Applying For a Permit 
Applications for a building permit are available at the City 
of St. Catharines, Planning and Building Services (PBS) 
Department or downloaded at the City of St. Catharines 
website www.stcatharines.ca or https://www.stcatharines.
ca/en/building-and-renovating/applying-for-a-building-
permit.aspx).
Provide information regarding the number of plumbing 
fixtures and/or the length of underground pipe to be 
installed. Pay the plumbing permit fee, as based on the 
number of plumbing fixtures and/or length of pipe being 
installed. Your application will be checked to determine 
if it complies with all applicable regulations and by-laws. 
Your plumbing permit will be issued when you have all the 
necessary approvals.
All plumbing for which a permit has been issued is required 
to be inspected. No plumbing should be covered or 
concealed until it has been inspected. No plumbing system 
should be put into use until it has been inspected and the 
use authorized.
What to Do When Waiting For the Permit 
to Be Issued
Once you have submitted your application, we will review 
your submission as quickly as we can. We are aware of the 
importance to you in obtaining the permit quickly. Please 
make yourself available at the telephone number you 
provided at the time of application to ensure we can contact 
you should we require any clarification of your submission.
What to do When the Permit Has Been Issued 
Once you receive your permit, please read the approved 
permit plans and documents thoroughly before commencing 
construction. The construction must be in accordance with 
the approved plans and documents issued with your permit. 
Any changes made before or during construction must be 
submitted to the Building Section for approval and additional 
fees may be applicable.
Inspections by the Building Section are also required during 
construction to ensure that all work is done in accordance 
with the approved plan. Some key inspections include:
•	 Rough-in Inspection
•	 Water/Sewer Inspection
•	 Interior Drain Inspection
•	 Final Inspection
The Plumbing Permit must be posted on the property in a 
conspicuous location and the approved permit documents 
must be kept on site and available during inspections.
Note: It is the responsibility of the owner to ensure 
that either you or the contractor contact the City of St. 
Catharines, Building Section to request an inspection before 
proceeding to the next phase of construction. All required 
inspections are listed on the permit.
Failure to schedule inspections will result in not being 
allowed to use the plumbing fixtures and may also result in 
uncovering the work. 
For inspection, call 905-688-5601, ext. 1660. 
Please have your permit number ready when scheduling 
an inspection. 
If you have any further questions or concerns, please do 
not hesitate to contact the City of St. Catharines, PBS 
Department between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
at 905-688-5601, ext. 1660. 
Materials
The most commonly used materials in plumbing in a dwelling are copper water pipes, ABS plastic drainage and 
vent pipes above ground, and below ground. However, a wide variety of other materials as listed in the Ontario 
Building Code can be used.
It should be noted that all materials, fixtures and appliances in a plumbing system are required to meet 
prescribed standards, e.g. certified by the Canadian Standards Association or other accredited testing agency, 
as applicable. The installation of any element of a plumbing system which does not meet the required standard 
would not be acceptable when the work is inspected.

