
 
 
THEORY   CONTENTS
 
 
1.               Some Important Definitions                           
                            3 
2.               Computer System Parts & Peripherals             
              4                              3.               Power Supplies &
Testing                                                        7
4.               Computer Case / Chassis (Cabinet)             
              11
5.              Data storage in CPU, RAM, HDD, DVD Etc
              13
6.              Binary Coded Language & Units             
                            16
7.               Motherboard I / O Ports (USB…) &
Devices              18
8.              Storage Drives (HDD, SSD…) & Ports             
              24
9.              Expansion Adapters                                          
                            27             

10.               Expansion Slots & Interfaces                            
                           31
11.               Chipset & Controllers                           
                                         33                            12.               RAM
Types (Static, Dynamic, DDR1,2,3,4…)              35
13.               Processor / CPU              (Core 2, Core i3, i5,
i7…)              38                             14.               Computer Ports
& Symbols                                                        44
15.               Other Computer Parts & Peripherals             
             45
PRACTICAL    CONTENTS
1.      Assembly of Computer                                         
                            49
2.      Internal and External  Connections                           
              51
3.      Laptops and Notebooks                                         
                            53
4.      BIOS              and  Options                                         
                            54
5.      Introduction to Operating Systems                           
              58
6.      Hard disk Partitions and File Systems             
              61             
7.     Windows Vista / 7 / 8 / 10 Basics                           

              62
8.     Windows Vista / 7 / 8 / 10 Installation                           
64
9.     Device Drivers Installation                                         
              71
10.     Internet Configurations                                         
                            73
11.     Virus and antivirus                                         
                                          78
12.     System Maintenance Tips                                         
              80
13.     Windows  7 / 8/ 10 Troubleshooting             
                            82
14.     Hardware Troubleshooting                            
                            83             
15.     Advanced System Care                                         
                            91             
16.     Printers Types and Mechanisms                           
              92
17.     Scanner Installation & Configuration             

              95
18.     Webcam Installation & Configuration             
              97
Definitions
1. What is a Computer?
Computer is an electronic device that can process and stores the information or
data.
2. What is Information?
Set of facts about human being or about an object are called as information.
3. What is Data?
Collection of information is called as data.
4. What is Data Storing?
Storing the data means keeping or holding the data in digital format.
5. What is processing?
Performing both logical and arithmetic operations according to user given
instructions or user written program or installed software.
 
6. What is Computer Hardware?
The physical components of a computer system are called as computer
hardware.
 
7. What is software?

Set of instructions or programs which will be used to control the operation of a
computer system and to perform tasks are called as Software.
 
8. What is a Program?
A computer program, or just a program, is a sequence of instructions, written
to perform a specified task with a computer.
9. What is firmware?
Software permanently stored in hardware (Ex: Software stored in BIOS).
10. What is Peripheral?
Input / Output device like Printer, Scanner, Web Camera etc. Those are not the
part of the Computer, they are separate devices, for a specific purpose we are
attaching them to Computer
11. What is a Computer system?
Computer with software installed and peripherals connected is called as
computer system.

Computer Parts and Peripherals
S
Component /

No
Peripheral
Description
1
Computer
Case /
Chassis/
Cabinet
A computer case (also known as the computer
chassis, box or housing) is the enclosure that
contains the main components of a computer.
 
2
 
Motherboard /
Mainboard /
Systemboard
 
The main printed circuit board in a computer that
carries the system buses. It is equipped with sockets
to which all processors, memory modules, plug-in
cards, daughter boards, or peripheral devices are
connected.
 
3
CPU /
Processor
 
Central Processing Unit / Processor .The brain of the
computer - the device capable of performing
Arithmetic and Logical operations on data. Or for
thinking.
 
4
Memory /
RAM
 
Abbreviation 
for 
Random 
Access 
Memory.
Operating System Software, programs and data are
usually copied into RAM from a disk drive for the
central processing unit (CPU) to have fast and direct
access when needed to perform tasks.
 
5
Display / Video
/
Graphics
Adapter
 
 
Display Adapter is an expansion card which
generates a feed of output images to a display. It
converts digital signals into video signals.
 
6
Hard Disk
Drive
 
A hard disk Drive is a computer storage device that
stores 
data 
on 
rotating 
magnetic 
surfaces
permanently.
 

7
Floppy Disk
Drive
 
A drive that reads from or writes to separate
diskettes which the user inserts. Information is
stored on the diskettes themselves.
 
8
Optical Disc
Drive (ODD)
 
An optical disk drive is a storage device that uses
light or lasers to store or retrieve information.
Common types include CD or DVD drives.
 
9
Sound Card /
Audio Adapter
A sound card is an internal computer expansion card
that facilitates the input and output of audio signals
to and from a computer under control of computer
programs.
10
LAN / Ethernet
Adapter
 
The Ethernet card provides a standardized way of
connecting computers together to create a network.
11
MODEM
(Modulator and
Demodulator)
 
A device that allows two computers to communicate
over telephone lines. It converts digital computer
signals into analog and converts the analog signal
back into a digital format.
 
12
TV / FM Card
 
A TV tuner card is hardware that allows analogue or
digital broadcast television signals to be received
and converted or translated for display by a
computer.
 
13
Monitor
 
 
The monitor displays the video and graphics
information generated by the computer through the
video card. Monitors are very similar to televisions
with high resolution.
 

14
Keyboard
 
The keyboard is an input device designed to enter
text, characters and other commands into a
computer or similar device.
 
15
Mouse
 
The mouse is a part of a computer which provides
the major way of interacting with graphical user
interfaces on a computer.
 
16
Printer
 
A computer printer is a computer peripheral device
that produces a hard copy (permanent human-
readable text and/or graphics, usually on paper)
from data stored in a computer connected to it.
 
17
Scanner
 
A device that reads a printed page and converts it
into a graphics image (Soft Copy) for the computer.
 
18
Web Cam
 
Used to capture images and videos and transfer
them over Web or Internet
 
19
Microphone
 
A microphone, sometimes called a Mic (pronounced
“mike”), is a device that converts sound into an
electrical signal.
 
20
Speakers
You need speakers to hear the sound generated by a
sound card. You should buy speakers with a built-in
amplifier to strengthen the sound signal and improve
the performance.

21
Thumb Drive /
Pen Drive /
USB Flash
Drive 
A USB Flash Drive is used as a small, lightweight,
removable data storage device. This hot-swappable,
non-volatile.
Power Supplies
Current : Flow of electric Charge or Flow of electricity or flow of electrons (negative
charged particles) through a conductor or wire.
 
AC              : Alternating Current (~): Flow of Electrons direction will be changed
  alternatively (OR) Polarity will be changed alternatively.
DC              : Direct Current (
): Always Electrons will be flow in only one direction.
(OR)
  polarity will not be changed.
AC Sources: 1. Mains, 2. Output from Stabilizer, UPS and Inverter, 3. Generator etc

DC Sources: 1. Cells,               2. Batteries,                3. AC / DC Adapters 4. Dynamos
etc.
Voltage : An electromotive force or potential difference between two points on a circuit
Note:  INDIAN VOLTAGE: 230V, 50HZ AC                            US VOLTAGE: 120V,
60HZ  AC
Stabilizer / Voltage Regulator
A voltage stabilizer is an electrical appliance used to feed constant voltage current to
electrical gadgets like ACs and computers, and protects them from damage due to voltage
fluctuations.
Buck Boost Stabilizer
It works on the principle of a transformer, where the input current is connected to primary
windings and output is received from secondary windings. When there is a drop in
incoming voltage, it activates electromagnetic relays which add to more number of turns
in the secondary winding, thus giving higher voltage which compensates for loss in output
voltage. When there is rise in the incoming voltage, the reverse happens, and, thus, the
voltage at the output side remains almost unchanged. However, output voltage accuracy is
usually ±10%.

 
 
UPS
A UPS (uninterruptible power supply) is a device that allows your computer to keep
running for at least a short time when the primary power source is lost. It also provides
protection from power surges. A UPS contains a battery that “kicks in” when the device
senses a loss of power from the primary source. If you are using the computer when the
UPS notifies you of the power loss, you have time to save any data you are working on
and exit gracefully before the secondary power source (the battery) runs out. When all
power runs out, any data in your computer’s random access memory (RAM) is erased.
When power surges occur, a UPS intercepts the surge so that it doesn’t damage your
computer
Internal battery ups
 

 
External Battery ups
Inverter:
The mains power comes to the Inverter. This is directly sent to the output but the AC is
also converted to DC and this DC is constantly charging 
the battery. A sensor
and relay mechanism checks whether the mains is ON or OFF. When the main switches
OFF, the relay actuator triggers to switch from mains to inverter. Rest is same like the
UPS. Because of this sensor and relay, there is a gap between triggering. 
UPS involves more costly circuits and is therefore more expensive to make and sell.
UPS Vs Inverter
While both provide backup power during mains outage, with the UPS the switch is
instantaneous whereas with the Inverter there is a gap of a second or two. This gap is OK
for household gadgets such as lights, fans, fridge, etc. but not OK for 
computers. 
Apart from these there is another difference. The AC supply has a pure sine wave whereas
in UPS the output is a near sine wave, not a pure sine wave where as for a inverter its
square wave, waveform which uses less battery power for longer backups. This is the
reason that we hear a hum when we attach a inductive load (Fan, Tube light etc.) to a

Inverter. But we do not hear anything when it’s on AC supply or low on UPS.
Digital Multimeter
Computer Case / Chassis (Cabinet)
 

AT (Advanced Technology) Cabinet: In olden days AT cabinet was used. In AT AC power
enter into ON / OFF switch in front panel of Cabinet. So there was only one way to Power
on the System. And there are no safety features.                            
ATX (Advanced Technology Extended) Cabinet: Present Cabinets are ATX. In ATX
Power controlled through Motherboard. So there are so many ways to Power ON. And
also there are safety features             
SMPS :Switch Mode Power Supply (SMPS uses Transistors, by Transistors Switching
Operation output will be obtained.) Using SMPS technology Power Supply units
became smaller and lighter and Constant Output will be obtained.
Parts of Cabinet
1.    PSU / SMPS : It coverts AC into DC and supplies to various parts
2.    Power Button: For Power On and Power Off.
3.    Reset Button              : For Fast Off & On when Computer become Struck/
Hang /Freeze
4.    Power LED              : Power Status Indicator
5.    HDD LED              : Data transfer / Process Status Indicator
6.    System Speaker: For System Diagnostics.

Power Supply Voltages
1. YELLOW                                          +12 VOLTS
2. RED                                                        +5   VOLTS
3. ORANGE                                          +3.3 VOLTS
4. BLACK                                          0 (GROUND / COMMON)
5. WHITE                                          -5    VOLTS (Not used in Present Motherboard)
6. BLUE                                          -12   VOLTS (Not used in Present Motherboard)
7. GREEN                                          +5    VOLTS (POWER ON)
8. PURPLE                                          +5    VOLTS (STANDBY)
9. GREY                                          +5    VOLTS (POWERGOOD)
10. BROWN                                          +3.3 VOLTS (REMOTE SENSING)
Generally, supply voltages must be within ±5% of their nominal values at all times.
Four wires have special functions:
Green               : PS_ON or “Power On” is a signal from the motherboard to the power
supply. When the line is connected to GND (by the motherboard), the power supply turns
on. It is internally pulled up to +5 V inside the power supply.
Purple               : +5 VSB or “+5 V standby” supplies power even when the rest of the
supply lines are off. This can be used to power the circuitry that controls the Power On
Signal (Generally it supplies power to Keyboard, Mouse etc in standby mode).
Grey                : PWR_OK or “Power Good” is an output from the power supply that
indicates that its output has stabilized and is ready for use. Or it monitors SMPS.
Brown               : +3.3 V sense should be connected to the +3.3 V on the motherboard or
its power connector. This connection allows for remote sensing of the voltage drop in the
power supply wiring due to overload, generally by adding Graphics Card.
Power Supply Unit (PSU) connectors & Pinouts
For Motherboard

 
For Peripherals
(For 40 Pin HDD / DVD)                 (For FDD / Graphics Card Fan)       For 7Pin HDD / DVD)
Data Storage in Various Parts
1. Processor / CPU: Made with Silicon Chip, Made up with Transistors

Transistors are commonly used as electronic switches, for both high power applications
including switched-mode power supplies and low power applications such as logic gates.
When the transistor reaches a base voltage of a certain level the current will no longer
increase and the output will be held at a fixed voltage. Because of this property the
transistor can have values of input voltage such that the output is either completely off or
completely on. The transistor is acting as a switch, and this type of operation is common
in digital circuits where only “on” and “off” values are relevant. Transistor is also called
as electronic switch.
2. Memory / RAM: Made with Silicon Chips, Made up with Capacitors
A capacitor or condenser is an electronic device which consists of two plates (electrically
conductive material) separated by an insulator called dielectric.
A capacitor is a little like a battery. Although they work in completely different ways,
capacitors and batteries both store electrical energy. Inside the battery, chemical
reactions produce electrons on one terminal and absorb electrons on the other terminal. A

capacitor is much simpler than a battery, as it can’t produce new electrons — it only stores
them.
Semiconductor device fabrication: is the process used to create the integrated circuits
that are present in everyday electrical and electronic devices. It is a multiple-step sequence
of photolithographic and chemical processing steps during which electronic circuits are
gradually created on a wafer made of pure semi conducting material. Silicon is almost
always used. The entire manufacturing process, from start to packaged chips ready for
shipment, takes six to eight weeks and is performed in highly specialized facilities referred
to as fabs.
3. Hard Disc : Made with Magnetic coated disc, Made up with magnetic parts
/ domains.
Platter: One or more aluminum, glass, or ceramic disk that is coated in a magnetic media
and is located within a hard drive to permanently store all your computer’s data. When the
computer is turned on, these platters will begin to rotate at so many rotations per minute
(RPM). As the disk platters are rotating, the read/write head accesses information on one
of the platters.

4. Optical Disc (CD / DVD / BD)
A direct access storage device that is written and read by light (Laser). The most common
optical discs in use are CDs,  DVDs and BDs. As removable media, optical discs have
advantages over the older removable magnetic disk cartridges. They weigh less, have
higher capacities and are not subject to head crashes or corruption from stray magnetic
fields.
                           
1. CD                                    (120mm)  - 700MB,                                                 Mini CD 
(80mm) - 185MB  
2. DVD                             (120mm)  - 4.7 GB (Single Layer)                            Mini
DVD(80mm) -  1.4GB
3. DVD                   (120mm)  - 8.5 GB (Double Layer)
4. BD                            (120mm) – 25GB  (Single Layer)                            Mini BD 
(80mm) – 7.8GB
5. BD                            (120mm) – 50 GB (Double Layer) ,               100 - 200GB (Multi
Layer)
5. Data Transfer : Cables   Copper wires
Parallel Interface

Serial Interface
The Binary Language of Computers
 
This topic describes how Information, Pictures, Movies and Songs will be stored in
different devices and how information will transferred from one device to another device
through wires.
Example: To store “NEO”, it will be converted into 0s and 1s as follows.
                            01001110              01000101              01001111
Now these 0s and 1s are stores in different devices as follows.
DEVICE
DESCRIPTION
POSITION
 
 
For “0”
For “1”
1. CPU / Processor
Made with Silicon, and made
up with Transistors (Bipolar).
(Electronic switches)
 
OFF
ON
2. Memory / RAM
Made with Silicon, and made
up with Capacitors.
(Stores Electrical Charge)
 
No Charge
Charge
3. Hard Disc /
Floppy Disc
Plastic / Fiber / Glass /
Aluminum Disc with
Magnetic coating

 
4. CD / DVD / BD
Optical Disc with Aluminum
Reflective Layer
 
Pit  / bump
Land
5. PEN Drive 
Made with Silicon, and made
up with Transistors (Floating
Gate)
(Electronic switches)
 
OFF
ON
6. Data Cable
Copper wires
 
Low Voltage/
No Current
High Voltage /
Current
Bit
These 0s and 1s are called as binary digits or bits (b). A bit is the smallest unit of
information that is recognized by a computer: a single on or off event.
The binary system of numbers uses the base of 2 (0 and 1). As described earlier, a bit can
exist in only two states, on or off. When bits are represented visually:
0 equals off.
1 equals on.
Byte
A byte is a group of 8 bits. A byte is required to represent one character of information.
Pressing one key on a keyboard is equivalent to sending 1 byte of information to the
computer’s central processing unit (CPU). A byte is the standard unit by which memory is
measured in a computer—values are expressed in terms of kilobytes (KB) or megabytes
(MB) Etc..

UNITS
Memory Unit
Value
 
Value in Bytes
 
1 KB   (Kilo
Byte)
1024 Bytes
Exact Value :1,024
 
Approximate Value:
1 thousand = 1,000 (10 3 )
 
1 MB (Mega
Byte)
1024 Kilo
Bytes
Exact :1,048,576
 
App:
1 million =1,000,000 (10 6 )
10 lakhs=10,00,000
 
1 GB  (Giga
Byte)
1024 Mega
Bytes
Exact: 1,073,741,824
 
App:
1 biilion =1,000,000,000 (10 9 )
100 crores = 100,00,00,000
 
1 TB  (Tera
Byte)
1024 Giga
Bytes
Exact: 1,099,511,627,776
 
App:
1 trillion = 1,000,000,000,000 (10 12 )
1 lakh crores =1,00,000,00,00,000
 
1 PB  (Peta
Byte)
1024 Tera
Bytes
Exact: 1,125,899,906,843,624
 
App:
1 quadrillion = 1,000,000,000,000,000 (10
15 )
10 crore crores=10,00,00,000,00,00,000

 
1 EB  (Exa
Byte)
1024 Peta
Bytes
Exact :1,152,921,504,607,870,976
 
App:
1 quintillion =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000(10 18 )
10,000 crore crores
10,000,00,00,000,00,00,000
 
1 ZB  (Zetta
Byte)
1024 Exa Bytes
Exact: 1,180,591,620,718,458,879,424
 
App:
1 sextillion=1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 (10 21)
1 crore crore crore
 
1 YB  (Yotta
Byte)
1024 Zetta
Bytes
Exact: 1,208,925,819,615,701,892,530,176
 
App:
1septillion=1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 (10 24 )
1000 crore crore crore
Low                                                        High
MOTHERBOARD / MAINBOARD

I / O Ports (Input / Output Ports)
6 Pin PS/2 Ports ( PS/2 :Personal System Series 2)

Bandwidth : 33 Kbps (Kilo bits / Sec) / 4 KBps (Kilo Bytes / Sec)
Cable length : 50MTS+               Type : Mini DIN ((Deutsches Institut fur Normung) German Standard
9 Pin  COM / SERIAL Ports
COM                  : Communication
SERIAL : Data Will be Transferred Serially / bit by bit / One bit at a time in one wire
BANDWIDTH : 115.2 Kbps (Kilo bits / Sec) or 14.4 KBps / 15KBps (Kilo Bytes / Sec)
Cable length : 3MTS (10 Feet)              Type : D-Sub Male (D-subminiature)
 
Supported Devices:
1.  Modem
2. Webcam
3. Digital Camera
4. Digital Pen
5. Some Printers Old Only (New Devices come with USB connector) 
Etc.
 
Note : Only Modem will use all 9Pins(2 for Power, 2 for Data (1Transmit+1Receive))
Other Devices will use only 4 pins (2 for Power, 2 for Data)
 

MODEM: Modulator and De Modulator
Modulation : Conversion of Digital Data Signal into Analog Telephone Signal
Demodulation : Conversion of Analog Telephone Signal into Digital Data Signal.
Webcam
A Webcam is a compact digital camera you can hook up to your computer to broadcast
video images in real time (as they happen). Just like a digital camera, it captures light
through a small lens at the front using a tiny grid of light-detectors, known as a Image
sensor. As we’ll see in a moment, the Image sensor converts the picture in front of the
camera into digital format—a string of zeros and ones that a computer knows how to
handle. Unlike a digital camera, a webcam has no built-in memory chip or flash memory
card: it doesn’t need to “remember” pictures because it’s designed to capture and transmit
them immediately to a computer. That’s why webcams have USB cables coming out of the
back. The USB cable supplies power to the webcam from the computer and takes the
digital information captured by the webcam’s CCD back to the computer—from where it
travels on to the Internet.
25 Pin Parallel Port / Printer  Port / LPT
(Device side 36Pin)

PARALLEL : Data will be transferred parallely / 8 bits (1Byte) at a time in 8 wires.
LPT : Local Printer                            BANDWIDTH : Maximum 150 KBPS
Cable Length: 1.8MTS (6 Feet)
Maximum Devices = Two / Port
Type : D-Sub Female (D-subminiature)
Supported Devices:
1. Printer
2. Scanner        Old Only (New Devices comes with USB connector) 
3. Plotter   
4. Etc.
Plotter:
A plotter is a special type of printer which is able to draw high quality images on very
large peace of paper. They are used by Engineers, Architects and map makers to draw
plans of buildings, diagram of machines or large scale maps.
A plotter differs from a printer in that it draws images using pen a pen that can be lowered,
raised and moved across the paper to form continuous lines. The electronically controlled
pen is moved around the paper by computer controlled motors. 
4 PIN USB PORTS
            

USB (Universal Serial Bus) is a specification to establish communication between
devices and a host controller (usually personal computers) USB is intended to replace
many varieties of serial and parallel ports. USB can connect computer peripherals such as
mice, keyboards, digital cameras, printers, personal media players, flash drives, and
external hard drives. For many of those devices, USB has become the standard connection
method. USB was designed for personal computers, but it has become commonplace on
other devices such as smart phones, PDAs and video game consoles, and as a power cord
between a device and an AC adapter plugged into a wall plug for charging
BANDWIDTH                             : 12 Mbps / 1.5 MBps
Data Transfer                             : 1bit (serial)
Duplex Mode                             : Half Duplex (Transmit / Receive)
Devices                                          : 127 DEVICES / Controller by using Hubs
Cable Length                                          : 5 MTS (Up to 30 Meters with hubs and 6 Cables)
Voltage                                           : 5 Volts DC
Power                                                        : Up to 2.5 Watts
Supported Devices
1.Keyboard,              2. Mouse,                             3. Cordless / Wireless Keyboard &
Mouse
4. Modem               5. Web Camera,              6. Digital Cam              7.Digital Pen
8. Printer,               9. Scanner,                             10. Plotter                              11. Pen /
Flash Drive
12. External Drives              : CD / DVD / HDD
13. External Adapters               : (Display, Audio, LAN, TV, Modem etc.)
14. Converters                            : (USB to Parallel, USB to PS /2 etc.)
15. Accessories                            : (Light, Fan , Charger , Cleaner etc.)
16. Gaming Devices              : (Joy Stick, Game Pad, Steering Wheel etc.)
17. Dongles                            : (Bluetooth, Internet Data Card etc.)

 
USB Versions
 
USB 1.1
USB 2.0
USB 3.0
Bandwidth
12Mbps
(1.5MBPS)
480Mbps(60MBPS)
4800Mbps (600MBPS)
(4.8Gbps)
Cable Length
Limit
5MTS (16Feet)
5MTS (16Feet)
3MTS (10Feet)
Bus Power
500mA (2.5
Watts)
500mA (2.5 Watts)
900mA (4.5 Watts)
Duplex Mode
Half Duplex
Half Duplex
Full Duplex
Pins
4 Pin
4 Pin
9 Pin
USB 3.0  (9pin)
 
USB 3.0 is the third major revision of the Universal Serial Bus (USB) standard for
computer connectivity. In the late 1990s. USB 3.0 has transmission speeds of up to
5 Gbit/s, which is 10 times faster than USB 2.0 (480 Mbit/s) with full duplex support.
USB 3.0 significantly reduces the time required for data transmission, reduces power
consumption, and is backwards compatible with USB 2.0.              

34 PIN FDC
FDC : Floppy Disk Connector                                           FDD : Floppy Disk Drive

Disc Capacity : 1.44MB (Latest)
Bus Width : 1bit (Serial Interface)
Data Transfer Rate: 500Kbps (62.5KBPS)
40 PIN PATA / IDE PORTS
PATA                                          : Parallel ATA (Parallel Advanced Technology
Attachment)
IDE                                          : Integrated / Intelligent Drive Electronics
Bus Width                            : 16bit (2Bytes)
Cable Length                            : 1.5 Feet
Drives / Cable               : Two (Master & Slave)
Power Plug                            : 4 Pin Molex
Bandwidth                             : 66 MBPS (ATA66) / 100 MBPS (ATA100) /133 MBPS
(ATA133)
Note: 80 wire cable is preferred)

IDE (40 PIN) Devices:
1. Hard Disk Drive (HDD)
2. Optical Disc Drive (ODD) Ex: CD / DVD / BD drive.
3. ZIP DRIVE
4. TAPE DRIVE Etc.
7PIN SATA Ports                           
SATA                                           : Serial ATA (Serial Advanced Technology Attachment)
Bus Width                            : 1bit
Cable Length                            : 3.3 Feet
Drives / Cable               : One (Master)
Power Plug                            : 15 Pin Molex (For Some Drives 4 Pin Port also added)
Bandwidth                             : 1.5 Gbps Theoretical (1.2Gbps Practical) / 150 MBPS
(SATA – I)
Gbps Theoretical (2.4Gbps Practical) / 300 MBPS (SATA– II)
Gbps Theoretical (4.8Gbps Practical) / 600 MBPS (SATA– III)
 

SATA Advantages: Due to Low Electro Magnetic Interference (EMI) or Cross Talk
1. High Data Transfer Rate.
2. Full Duplex operation
3. Cable Length increased
Disadvantages with Hard Disk Drives (HDD)
1. Large in Size (3.5”)                                          2. Heavy Weight             
3.  Damage by Vibrations                            4. Damage by Magnetic Effect
5. Damage by Impact Force                            6. Damage by Electro Static Discharge
7.  High Power consumption                             8. Large amount of Heat
9.  Noise                                                                      10. Spin up Time
11. Slow Operation                                          12. Slow Down in Future
13. Bad area formation                                          14. Crashing problem
15. Short Life                                                        Etc
Advantages: 1. Cheap                                          2. High Capacities
Solid State Drive / Disk (SSD)
A solid state drive (SSD), or solid state disk, is a data storage device that uses solid-state
memory to store persistent data. SSD emulates conventional hard disk drive, thus easily
replacing it in any application. With no moving parts, a solid state drive largely eliminates
seek time, latency and other electro-mechanical delays and failures associated with a
conventional hard disk drive. Solid state disks use either NAND flash (non-volatile
storage ). NAND flash is so-called because of the NAND-gate technology it uses and is
common in USB flash drives and many types of memory card.

SSD Advantages :                                                                      SSD Disadvantages :
1. Faster than HDD                                                                      1. Expensive             
2. Less Problems                                                                      2. Lower Capacities             
3. Long Life
HDD & SSD Sizes and Pins in Desktop & Laptop
 
 
IDE / PATA HDD
SATA HDD
SATA SSD
Desktop
Size 3.5”, 40 Pin Data + 4 Pin Power
Size 3.5”, 7 Pin Data + 15 Pow
Size 2.5”, 7 + 15
Laptop
Size 2.5”, 44 Pin Data and Power
Size 2.5”, 7 Pin Data + 15 Pow
Size 2.5”, 7 + 15
                                         
Converter to use Laptop 44 pin IDE /PATA HDD on Desktop 40 pin IDE /PATA port
Note : No Converter is required to use Laptop 7 pin SATA HDD in Desktop Computer.
Expansion Adapters

1. Display / Video / VGA / Graphics Adapter
VGA   : Video Graphics Array,                                            CRT                     : Cathode
Ray Tube
DVI   : Digital Visual Interface,                                            LCD                     : Liquid
Crystal Display
TFT  : Thin film Transistor                                          S-video   : Separate Video
                                         

HDMI : High Definition Multimedia Interface (For HD LCD TV)
2. Sound / Audio Adapter
2 Channel  / 2 Way  audio Adapter (For 2 / 2.1 Speakers)
6 Channel Audio Adapter (For 5.1 / 4.1 / 2.1 / 2 Speakers)
 
6 Channel  Onboard Audio
3. Dial-Up Modem

4. LAN / Ethernet Adapter
Local-Area Network (LAN): A LAN (Local-Area Network) is a computer network that connects PCs, workstations or
other LANs and networks to enable data and device access and sharing. It is used to cover a small local area such as a
home, office or small group of buildings.
LAN: Local Area Network                NIC : Network Interface Card              RJ :
Registered Jack
Types and Speeds (All 100 Meters Range)
1. Ethernet                                                                                                   10Mbps
2. Fast Ethernet                                                                      100Mbps
3. Gigabit Ethernet              (Gb Ethernet / GbLAN)              1000Mbps / 1Gbps
5. WLAN / Wi-Fi / IEEE802.11 Adapter

 
 
 

Expansion Slots
124 Pin PCI Slot:  (Peripheral Component Interconnect)
For              : Display, Audio, Modem, Network etc.
32bit / 4Bytes     X               33MHZ                    = 133MBPS
                                            Bus Width                     X               Bus Speed               = 
Bandwidth
                           (bits / Bytes)                  (Hz)                                    (PS)
132 Pin AGP Slot: (Accelerated Graphics Port / Advanced Graphics Port)
For               : Display only

32bit / 4Bytes     X               66MHZ                    = 266MBPS
                                          Bus Width                     X               Bus Speed               = 
Bandwidth
                            (bits / Bytes)                  (Hz)                                    (PS)
AGP Versions
1. AGP                            (3.3V)                            : 32 bit, 66MHZ X 1               (66MHZ)  = 266MBPS (Single Pumping)
2. AGP  2X              (3.3V  &1.5V)               : 32 bit, 66MHZ X 2               (133MHZ)= 533MBPS  (Double Pump)
3. AGP  4X              (3.3V & 1.5V)              :32 bit, 66MHZ X 4              (266MHZ)=1066MBPS (1GBPS) (Quad)
4. AGP  8X              (1.5V)                            :32 bit, 66MHZ X 8              (533MHZ)= 2133MBPS(2.1GBPS)(Oct )
 
CNR SLOT (Communications  Networking Riser)
Communications and Networking Riser, or CNR, is a slot found on certain
PC motherboards and used for specialized networking and telephony equipment. CNR
slots were once commonly found on Pentium 4-class motherboards.
PCI Express Expansion Slots (Serial)
 

 
(Advantages: 1. Serial               2. High Data Transfer Rate, 3. Full Duplex Operation)
 
 
Versions: V1.0=250MBPS, V2.0=500MBPS, V3.0=1GBPS, V4.0=2GBPS
                                          Per Lane (Each Direction)
 
Chipset & Controllers

Bus: The bus often refers to a data pathway (sometimes called the power pathway) which
transfers data (or power) between computer components inside a computer system or
between different computers. For example, there is a front side bus to connect the CPU to
the chipset, and there is the PCI bus to connect the chipset to PCI devices.
IC: An integrated circuit (IC), sometimes called microchip, is a semiconductor wafer on

which thousands or millions of tiny resistors, capacitors, Diodes and transistors are
fabricated. An IC can function as an amplifier, oscillator, timer, counter,
computer memory, or microprocessor. A particular IC is categorized as either linear
(analog) or digital, depending on its intended application. IC has two side connections.
Chip: A chips is a group of integrated circuits (microchips) that can be used together to
serve a single function and are therefore manufactured and sold as a unit. For example,
one chips might combine all the microchips needed to serve as the communications
controller between a processor and memory and other devices in a computer. (Simply
Chip contains so many Integrated Circuits called Controllers). Chip has four side
connections.
Chipset:
The term “chipset” (sometimes called core logic) often refers to the two main chips on the
motherboard: the Northbridge and the Southbridge. The Northbridge and Southbridge are
sometimes combined. This is called single-chip design.
1. North Bridge / MCH (Memory Controller Hub)
The Northbridge typically handles communications among the CPU, RAM, and PCI
Express (or AGP) video cards, and the Southbridge. Some north bridges also contain
integrated video controllers, also known as a Graphics and Memory Controller Hub
(GMCH) in Intel systems. Because different processors and RAM require different
signaling, a Northbridge will typically work with only one or two classes of CPUs and
generally only one type of RAM.
2. South Bridge / ICH  (Input / Output Controller Hub)
Southbridge is the chip that controls all of the computers I/O functions, such as USB,
audio, serial, the system BIOS, the ISA bus, the interrupt controller and the IDE channels.
In other words, all of the functions of a processor except RAM, PCI and AGP.
3. Super I / O (Super Input / Output)
Super I/O is a class of I/O controller integrated circuits that began to be used on personal
computer motherboards in the late 1980s, originally as add-in cards, later embedded on the
motherboards. A super I/O chip combines interfaces for a variety of low-bandwidth
devices. The functions provided usually include:
A floppy disk controller, A parallel port (commonly used for printers), One or more serial
ports, A keyboard and mouse interface. Temperature sensor and fan speed monitoring.

Random Access Memory (RAM)
STATIC  RAM (SRAM)
 
DYNAMIC  RAM (DRAM)
 
Made up with Transistors to store data.
Transistors stores information
statically. No need to refresh the data.
That’s why it is called as Static RAM
 
 
Advantages
 
1. Operates at Very High Speed
(Equals to Processor Speeds)
 
Made up with Transistors &
Capacitors, But Capacitors are used
to store Data. Capacitors have to be
recharged dynamically. We have to
refresh data. That’s why it is called
as Dynamic RAM
 
 
 
 
Disadvantages
 
1. Operates at high / medium Speed
(Compared to Static)

2. No Data Refreshment is Required.
 
Disadvantages
 
1. Large in Size
(Requires 6 transistors to store 1 bit)
 
2. Complex Design
 
3. High Power Consumption
 
4. Very high Cost.
 
Due to High Cost and Large size
smaller capacities will be used.
(1 /2 /4 / 8 MB…)
 
Ex: Registers, L1, L2 & L3 cache
memories used in CPU/ Processor
 
2. Data Refreshment is required
 
Advantages
 
1. Small in Size
(Requires 1 transistor & 1 Capacitor to store 1
bit)
 
2. Simple Design
 
3. Low Power Consumption
 
4. Low cost
 
Due to Low cost and Small size
higher capacities will be used.
(1 / 2/ 4 /8 GB…)
 
Ex: DDR1, DDR2, DDR3, DDR4 
RAMS installed on the
motherboard.
Memory Hierarchy

CPU Register: A, special, high-speed storage area within the CPU. All data must be
represented in a register before it can be processed. For example, if two numbers are to be
multiplied, both numbers must be in registers, and the result is also placed in a register.
(The register can contain the address of a memory location where data is stored rather than
the actual data itself.)
The number of registers that a CPU has and the size of each (number of bits) help
determine the power and speed of a CPU. For example a 32-bit CPU is one in which each
register is 32 bits wide. Therefore, each CPU instruction can manipulate 32 bits of data.
A CPU cache is a cache used by the central processing unit (CPU) of a computer to
reduce the average time to access memory. The cache is a smaller, faster memory which
stores copies of the data from frequently used main memory locations. Most CPUs have
different independent caches, including instruction and data caches, where the data cache
is usually organized as a hierarchy of more cache levels (L1, L2, L3)
Main Memory (Primary memory), often referred to simply as memory, is the only one
directly accessible to the CPU. The CPU continuously reads instructions stored there and
executes them as required. Any data actively operated on is also stored there in uniform
manner.
Secondary Memory: This type of memory is also known as external memory or non-
volatile. It is slower than main memory. These are used for storing Data/Information
permanently. CPU directly does not access these memories, instead they are accessed via
input-output routines. Contents of secondary memories are first transferred to main

memory and then CPU can access it. For example, disk, CD-ROM, DVD, etc.
 

CPU
CPU is a brain of a computer. It called Central Process Unit. CPU fetches and executes
instructions. CPU consists of an Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU), a control unit,
registers and buses.
Part of CPU                                                Instruction Cycle
(Processing)
 
ALU: is a digital circuit that calculates an arithmetic operation (like an addition,
subtraction, etc.) and logic operations (like an Exclusive Or) between two numbers. the
ALU is a fundamental building block of the central processing unit of a computer.
Control Unit: controls CPU operations, including ALU operations, the movement of data
within the CPU, and the exchange of data and control signals across external interfaces
(e.g., the system bus)
Registers: these components are special memory locations that can be accessed very fast.
Three registers are shown: the Instruction Register (IR), the Program Counter (PC), and
the Accumulator.
Buses: these components are the information highway for the CPU. Buses are bundles of
tiny wires that carry data between components. The three most important buses are the
address, the data, and the control buses.
Input, Process, Output (IPO)
Input involves entering the data and instructions that the computer needs to carry out a
particular task.
process is what the computer is to do with the data or instructions that have been input

Output is the set of results which is obtained when the instructions have been run.
Instruction Cycle : Executing a single instruction consists of a particular cycle of
events; fetching, decoding, executing and storing .
For example, to do the add instruction above the CPU must
Fetch                            : get the instruction from memory into the processor.
Decode               : internally decode what it has to do (in this case add).
Execute               : take the values from the registers, actually add them together
Store                             : store the result back into another register.
Intel Processor / CPU Generations
First Generation Processors               (1971)
4004, 4040                                                                                                  
             (4bit CPU  )
8008, 8080, 8085                                                                                                  
(8bit CPU  )
8086, 8088, 80186, 80188                                                                                    
(16bit CPU)
Second Generation Processors               (1982)
80286                                                                                                               
             (16bit CPU)
Third Generation Processors               (1985)

80386DX, 80386SX, 80386SL, 80386EX                                          (32bit
CPU)
Fourth Generation Processors               (1989)
80486DX, 80486SX, 80486DX2, 80486SL, 80486DX4              (32bit CPU)
Fifth Generation Processors               (1993)
Pentium, Pentium MMX                                                                                   
(32bit CPU)
Sixth Generation Processors               (1995)
Pentium Pro, Pentium II, Pentium III, Celeron              (Slot)                           
(32bit CPU)
Pentium III, Celeron                                                                     
(Socket)              (32bit CPU)
Seventh Generation Processors (2000)
Pentium 4, Celeron, Pentium 4 HT                                                                     
(32bit CPU)
Pentium D, Celeron D, Pentium4 EE                                                        (32bit
CPU)
Eighth Generation Processors (2006)
Core    Solo, Core Duo                                                                                   

             (32bit CPU)
Core 2 Solo, Core 2 Duo, Core 2 Quad, Core2 Extreme              (64bit CPU)
Pentium Dual Core, Celeron Dual Core, Atom               (Low Cost)             
(64bit CPU)
Core i3, Core i5, Core i7                                                                                   
(64bit CPU)



Generations in Core i3, i5, i7
 
 
1st Gen
2nd  Gen
3rd  Gen
4th  Gen
5th Gen

Code Name
Clarkdale
Sandy
Bridge 
Ivy Bridge 
Haswell
Broadwell
Architecture
(Transistor size)
32nm
(Bi-Polar)
32nm
(Bi-Polar)
22nm
(Bi-Polar)
22nm
(3D/ Trigate)
14nm
(3D/ Trigate)
Power
consumption
75 Watts
65 Watts
35 Watts
17 Watts
15 Watts
Number  of  Pins
1156
1155
1155
1150
1150
Graphics
Processor
Graphics
Processor
HD Graphics
2000 MHZ
HD Graphics
2500 MHZ
HD Graphics
4600 MHZ
HD Graphics
5500-6100
Intel Core i3 Processor
This particular Intel processor is the enter level processor of this new series of Intel
processors. While it may not be the fastest one of the bunch, it can get the job done, at
least for most applications.
Mind you, if you need high speed, I suggest one of the other processors that I will unveil
in front of your eyes later on in this post. Here’s some of the Core i3 features.
* Uses less heat and energy than earlier processors, which is always a good thing in
this day and age.
Intel Core i5 Processor
This is the mid-size processor of this bunch, recommended for those who demand a
little speed, but not quite enough where the user will be running resource-intensive
applications.
* This is also a heat and energy efficient processor, but it does seem to be better at this
particular job than the Core i3 processor.
* The number of threads used in this is no different than the Core i3 with 2-4 threads,
and it also uses hyper threading technology for a boost in performance.
* The Core i5 is where the turbo mode is made available, this provides users with the
opportunity to turn off a core if it’s not being utilized.
Intel Core i7 Processor
This is for the users that demand power, yes it does provide more power and if Tim

 Allen gets one of these, this would be the best that he gets his hands on. Great for
 gamers and other resource intensive users.
* You will have four cores to take advantage of with this particular series.
* And just like the other ones in this Intel series of processors, it is more energy efficient
 and produces less heat.
Core i3, i5 and i7 comparison
 
 
Core i3
Core i5
Corei7
 
No of Cores
2
4
4
Hyper Threading
Yes
No
Yes
No of Threads / Applications
4
4
8
L3 / Smart Cache
4MB
6MB
8MB
Turbo Boost
No
Yes
Yes
Power
54 Watts
84 Watts
84 Watts
Ports / Interfaces   Symbols
 
KEYBOARD
MOUSE
 
 
COM / SERIAL
PRINTER
 
MONITOR
DISPLAY
 
 
FIREWIRE

USB
 
MIC
 
LINE-OUT
LINE - IN
JOYSTICK
 
 
 
 
LAN
BLUETOOTH
WIFI
 
TELEPHONE
POWER
BUTTON
 
AC IN
 
DC IN
 
 
TV OUT
INFRARED
 
 
MICROWAVE
 
 
E- SATA
 
LOCK
Computer Parts and Peripherals
S No
Component /

Peripheral
Description
Picture
1
All-In-One
Printer
All-in-one printer, also known
as a multifunction printer
(MFP), is a great buy. All-in-
one printers can print, scan,
copy, and sometimes fax.
 
2
Barcode Reader
A barcode reader (or barcode
scanner) 
is 
a 
computer
peripheral 
for 
reading
barcodes printed on various
surfaces. 
Like 
a 
flatbed
scanner, it generally consists
of a light source, a lens and a
photo conductor translating
optical impulses into electrical
ones.
 
3
Blue tooth
Adapter
A short distance, low speed
radio frequency technology
primarily used to allow a
Personal 
Digital 
Assistant
(PDA) or mobile phone to
interact with a laptop or
desktop computer.
 
 
4
Camcorder
A 
camcorder 
(camera
recorder) 
is 
a 
portable
electronic recording device
capable of recording live-
motion video and audio for
later playback. Generally uses
Hard Disk for Storage.
 
A Card reader is an extra piece
of hardware which will plug
directly into your computer,
generally via a USB port and
allow you to read the contents

5
Card Reader
of a media card without the
need to plug your camera into
the PC.
 
6
CMOS Battery
CMOS 
(pronounced 
“see-
moss”), 
which 
stands 
for
complementary 
metal-oxide-
semiconductor 
uses 
3Volts
Lithium battery power to store
data in CMOS RAM.
7
Data Cartridge /
Tape
Magnetic tape has been used
for data storage for over 50
years. In this time, many
advances in tape formulation,
packaging, and data density
have been made. Modern
magnetic 
tape 
is 
most
commonly 
packaged
in cartridges and cassettes.
 
 
 
8
Digital Camera
A camera which stores images
as digital information rather
than on photographic film.
This allows images to be
easily displayed and edited on
computer.
 
9
Digital Pen
An instrument that captures
what the user writes on paper
and sends it to the computer.
Using special paper with a tiny
grid that enables the pen to
sense what is actually written
or drawn, the device turns the
writing into an image file and
transmits it to the computer via
wireless or when mounted in a
cradle.

 
10
Game Pad
A pointing device like a mouse
used to move an object on a
computer screen. A game pad
is a flat hand held pad with
several 
control 
buttons
connected tot he computer by
a special port.
 
 
11
HD TV
High-definition television (or
HDTV) is a digital television
broadcasting 
system 
with
higher resolution. The number
of lines that create the image
and the letter are 720 or 1080
lines 
into 
perspective,
televisions of the past had only
576/ 480 lines. And audio with
Digital Dolby.
 
 
12
Heat Sink
Compound /
Thermal
Compound
A thick gooey substance, with
very good heat conductive
qualities. 
This 
is 
placed
between the CPU core and the
surface of the heatsink, to
assist in the quick transferal of
heat from the core.
 
13
Ink Cartridge
A cartridge that contains ink
and Nozzles. It will be used in
Ink Jet / Desk Jet Printers. And
can be replaced
 
14
USB Data Card
 
An USB device will be used to
get Internet through Wireless
from Cell Phone Towers.
In electronics and particularly
computing, a jumper is a short
length of conductor used to

15
Jumpers
close a break in or bypass part
of 
an 
electrical 
circuit.
Jumpers are typically used to
set up or adjust printed circuit
boards
 
 
16
Memory Card/
Flash Memory
Card
 
A memory card is a small
storage medium used to store
data such as text, pictures,
audio, and video, for use on
small, 
portable 
or 
remote
computing devices.
 
17
PCMCIA Card
Personal Computer Memory
Card 
International
Association. A standard for
miniaturized laptop expansion
cards for modems, storage, and
other devices. Often called PC
cards.
 
18
Projector
A projector is a device that
integrates a light source, optics
system, 
electronics 
and
display(s) for the purpose of
projecting an image from a
computer or video device onto
a wall or screen for large
image viewing.
 
 
19
Ribbon /
Ribbon
Cartridge
Used by Impact printers like
Dot Matrix and Line Printers
to produce an imprint on
paper.
20
RJ11 Connector
Registered Jack number 11.
Small line plug and socket
used on telephone handsets

and modem connections with 4
pins
 
21
RJ45 Connector
Registered Jack-45, an eight-
wire connector used to connect
computers onto a local-area
networks (LAN), especially
Ethernets.
22
SATA Card
An 
expansion 
card 
that
provides 
additional 
SATA
ports for SATA Hard Disk
Drives.
 
23
SO DIMM
Short for Small Outline
DIMM, a small version of a
DIMM used commonly in
notebook computers
 
24
Steering Wheel
A gaming device with a
steering wheel and foot pedals.
 
 
 
 
 
25
Tape Drive
An add-on component to a
computer system that allows a
great volume of information to
be 
stored 
on 
inexpensive
magnetic tape cartridges. Used
for daily back-ups and long
term archival storage of past
projects
 
 
A cartridge in laser printers
which contains the toner (Dry

26
Toner Cartridge
ink / Powder).
 
 
 
27
Wrist Strap /
ESD Wrist
Strap/
Ground
Bracelet
An excellent way to prevent
ESD damage to your computer
is to use an anti-static wrist
strap. It’s a conductive strap
that fits on your wrist as
you’re working. It has a wire
attached to it with an alligator
clip on the end to connect to
your case or to an anti-static
mat. Some can be plugged
right into the wall socket
 
 
Assembly of Computer System
The minimum tools required to assemble a PC is a set of screwdrivers. Here is also
suggested list of other items you should use to help resolve potential problems.
1. Magnetic Screwdriver
2. Cutting Plier or Nose Plier
3. Wrist Strap
4. Startup Disk and CDROM Drivers
5. List of Components to be assembled
6. Thin razor blade
7. POST Diagnostic tool
8. PC repair Book
9. Notepad and Pencil
10.                      Telephone close to the PC assemble area
11.                      Telephone numbers for manufacturers and known “Experts”
12.                      Access to the world wide web, with accompanying list of websites

CAUTIONS
Before continuing, make sure that you always unplug the power supply from the power
source (surge protector / wall unit). There are three main reasons:
1. Your are trying to create a common ground between you and the parts.
Electrons migrate based on charge differentials. The static charge or ESD
(Electrostatic discharge) destroys components. No, you will not see the damage
with your eyes. No, you will not here any sparks fly. Instead, memory chips are
slowly degraded, holes are created in the chip, and random errors will be present.
Then one day, the part will stop functioning.
 
2. Motherboards use +5V from the power supply to turn on the PC. For ATX systems
this voltage is  always present when the power supply is plugged into the wall and
motherboard. They use a momentary switch the uses this voltage to turn on the PC.
Sliding parts in and out of the main board while the power is available might cause
damage. (Note: some power supplies should not receive power if they are not
plugged into the motherboard. Doing this can cause problems.
 
Gather all your components
Make sure that you have clean area to work, and plenty of time without interruptions.
Start with the power supply , main board, CPU, CPU fan, and case speaker. Do not
mount the motherboard in your enclosure. Set the main board on a cardboard box on
top of the enclosure so that the power supply connection will reach.
 
 
 
Check your components.
 
1. Before you touch any of the parts, ground yourself by touching the metal case and /
or ware wrist strap.
 
2. Open your components in static free area (away from plastic wrap, packing
material, carpet, wool, polyester, your shirt sleeves) and visually inspect them.
 
3. Keep all your packing material, manuals and any instructions that may accompany
the parts.

 
4. Make sure that all of the parts arrived.
 
5. Check all parts to verify they are the correct model numbers.
 
6. Look for physical damage; dents, scuffs, broken or bent pins. Do not power to any
parts that are damaged.
 
7. Verify that you have the mainboard manual. Read the manual
 
8. Check all jumper setting by comparing them with manual’s instructions.
 
9. Do not let any one else touch you or your components while you are working on the
system. Keep everyone at least 3 feet away (arms distance!) from the system.
 
 
Benchtop Assembly
 
You will start your assembly outside of the computer case. The motherboard,
Processor, Power supply, and speaker will be assembled together first.
 
Check the motherboard
 
Now that you have your new computer components, you want to verify that the
mainboard works.
 
1. Read the manual thoroughly. Your component manuals contain detailed information
about your products and often step-by-step installation instruction. Most good
technicians double-check the manual.
2. Check all jumper setting on your motherboard to make sure they are accurate. Use
your motherboard manual as a reference. The main jumpers to check are the external
bus speed setting, clock multipliers and voltage jumpers.

3. You can Install Processor, cooling fan and memory on the motherboard before
installing it in the cabinet.
 
 
 
 
Rear Panel Connections
 

 

 LAPTOP AND NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS
Some Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM’s) call their mobile computers “laptops”
and some call them “notebooks”.
Laptop computers are somewhat larger than notebooks and will accommodate a built-in

disk drive unit and; optionally, a floppy drive unit. That is, a CD ROM drive is either built
into the unit or the unit has a built-in bay that will accommodate a removable CD drive.
Notebook computers will allow you to attach, via cable, a CD ROM drive, Since the drive
is not built into the unit, notebooks are smaller and lighter than laptops. Hence, a notebook
is an ultra small laptop. Another way to look at it is a notebook is about the size (or a little
larger than) of a real [binder] notebook. If you use note books are more harder than
laptops as my laptop’s system dead twice but note book not. 
The Laptop Computer 
The standard laptop computer would have some , if not all, of the following features:
1. 14” - 17” (widescreen) TFT screen.
2. Medium to Maximum graphics subsystem.
3. Internal DVD-ROM or DVD-RW drive
4. Large full featured keyboard.
5. 3 hour+ battery life.
6. Upgradeable.
7. Integrated modem, network, Bluetooth & Wi-Fi.
8. High quality integrate audio and speaker system.
The Notebook Computer
A standard notebook has the following features:
1. Ultralight. Less weight is better.
2. 4 - 5 hour battery life.
3. No internal floppy drive.
4. Minimal graphics subsystem.
5. No internal DVD or CD system.
6. 12” - 14” TFT screen.
7. Low profile (thin).
8. Integrated modem and network connection.
9. Smallest possible keyboard.
SO DIMM (Small Outline Memory Module)

Memory used in Laptop / Notebook
BIOS
In IBM PC Compatible computers, the basic input/output system (BIOS) , also known
as the System BIOS.
The BIOS is boot firmware, designed to be the first code run by a PC when powered on.
The initial function of the BIOS is to identify, test, and initialize system devices such as
the video display card, hard disk, floppy disk and other hardware. The BIOS sets the
machine hardware into a known state, so that software stored on compatible media can be
loaded, executed, and given control of the PC. This process is known as booting, or
booting up, which is short for bootstrapping.
Functions of BIOS:
BIOS Contains Read Only Software (Firmware) and will be used to
1. Start the Computer.
2. Performs POST (Power On Self Test)
3. IPL (Initial Program Load- The Process of Getting the Operating System started)
4. Stores Drivers Software for Basic Input / Output devices like Keyboard, Hard Disk,
Floppy Disk , Serial , Parallel ports etc..
5.  Used to Change System Setting / Configuration.
 
Booting: Loading of Operating System into Main Memory is called as Booting.
CMOS

Motherboards also include a separate block of memory made from very low power
consumption CMOS (complementary metal oxide silicon) RAM chips, which is kept
“alive” by a battery even when the PC’s power is off. This is used to store basic
information about the PC’s configuration: number and type of hard and floppy drives, how
much memory, what kind and so on. All this used to be entered manually, but modern
auto-configuring BIOSes do much of this work, in which case the more important settings
are advanced settings such as DRAM timings. The other important data kept in CMOS
memory is the time and date, which is updated by a Real Time Clock (RTC).
The CMOS memory is usually located with the real-time clock in the motherboard chipset
or in a separate real-time clock chip. The PC reads the time from the RTC when it boots
up, after which the CPU keeps time - which is why system clocks are sometimes out of
sync.
BIOS Setup
The BIOS (basic Input Output System) setup Utility displays the system’s configuration
status and provides you with options to set system parameters. The parameters are stored
in battery-backed-up CMOS RAM that saves this information when the power is turned
off. When the system is turned on, the system is configured with the values you stored in
CMOS.
Note : For Some Computers Hit     F1, F2, F8, F10, ESC, CTRL+ESC, CTRL+S .
AWARD BIOS (Used in MSI, Mercury, Gigabyte, Biostar, EVGA
MB…)
 
Award BIOS CMOS Setup Utility
 
        
       Standard CMOS Features
 
       Advanced  BIOS Features
 
       Advanced Chipset Features
 
  Frequency / Voltage Control
 
  Load Fail – Safe Defaults
 
  Load Optimized Defaults

 
       Integrated Peripherals
 
       Power Management Setup
 
       PnP / PCI Configurations
 
       PC Health Status
 
 
  Set supervisor Password
 
  Set User Password
 
  Save & Exit Setup
 
  Exit Without Saving
Esc  :  Quit                                                     : Select Item
F10  :  Save & Exit Setup
Time, Date, Hard Disk Type…
 
 
 
 
 
AMI BIOS (Used in INTEL & ASUS Motherboards…)
BIOS Setup Utility.
Main    Advanced    Security    Power    Boot   
Exit                                      .                                                 
 
Bios Version                                   BX97510J.86A.1209.2009.0601.1340
 
Processor Type                              Intel (R) Core (TM) 2 CPU
Processor Speed                           2.92  GHz
System Bus Speed                        1066 MHz 
System Memory Speed                  667  MHz
 
L2 Cache RAM                               4096 KB

Total Memory                                 2048 MB
Memory Mode                                Dual Channel
Memory Channel A Slot 0             1024 MB
Memory Channel A Slot 1             Not Installed
Memory Channel A Slot 0             1024 MB
Memory Channel A Slot 1             Not Installed
 
Language                                       <English>
System Date                                   [06/15/2009]
System Time                                  [08:45:12]
CMOS clear
Method 1: Clearing the CMOS can be done a few ways. The most common way is to use
the jumper on the motherboard. This jumper has two settings. Normal and Clear. Moving
the jumper to the Clear setting will erase the settings stored in CMOS. It does not remove
the BIOS itself, only the user defined settings within the CMOS. When you clear the
CMOS you will most likely see the error message “CMOS Checksum Error” on the next
reboot. You can enter the BIOS setup at this point or before and reconfigure the settings.
 
Method 2: Another method is to remove the CMOS battery from the system. Removing
the battery is usually the second method as it may take anywhere from 15 minutes to 8
hours in order for the CMOS to loss the settings, For immediate clearing Short the Battery
terminals on Motherboard. Once the CMOS is clear, you should know by the “BIOS
checksum error, press F1 to continue “, or “CMOS Checksum Error - Defaults Loaded”
message at bootup.
Clear CMOS in Intel Motherboard
Switch off the Computer and put the CMOS jumper in 2-3 position as follows

Now switch on the Computer, it will automatically enters into BIOS and you will get the
following screen as follows. In the Maintenance option select “Clear BIOS Passwords”
and “Save & Exit”.
Now replace the CMOS jumper to 1-2 position and restart the Computer.
BIOS Recover
The BIOS recovers Data in the event of a failed BIOS Update.
UEFI BIOS (Latest for All MB)
(UEFI : Unified Extensible Firmware Interface )

Advantages : 1. Graphical User Interface 2. Ability to boot from large disks (over 2 TB)
3.. CPU-independent architecture               4. CPU-independent drivers  
5. Flexible pre-OS environment, including network capability. 6. Modular Design.
Operating system (OS)
An operating system (OS) is a set of computer programs that manage the hardware and

software resources of a computer. An operating system processes raw system and user
input and responds by allocating and managing tasks and internal system resources as a
service to users and programs of the system. At the foundation of all system software, an
operating system performs basic tasks such as controlling and allocating memory,
prioritizing system requests, controlling input and output devices, facilitating networking
and managing file systems. Most operating systems come with an application that
provides an interface to the OS managed resources. These applications have had command
line interpreters as a basic user interface but, since the mid-1980s, have been implemented
as a graphical user interface (GUI) for ease of operation. Operating Systems themselves
have no user interfaces; the user of an OS is an application, not a person. The operating
system forms a platform for other system software and for application software. Windows,
Linux, and Mac OS are some of the most popular OSes.
Services:
1. Process management
2. Memory Management
3. Disk and File systems
4. Networking
5. Internal Secuirty
6. External Security
7. Graphical User Interface
8. Device Drivers.
Kernel :
In computer science, the kernel is the central component of most computer operating
systems (OS). Its responsibilities include managing the system’s resources(the
communication between hardware and software components). As a basic component of an
operating system, a kernel provides the lowest-level abstraction layer for the resources
(especially memory, processors and I/O devices) that application software must control to
perform its function. It typically makes these facilities available to application processes
through inter-process communication mechanisms and system calls.
Assembler :
An assembly language is a low-level language for programming computers. It
implements a symbolic representation of the numeric machine codes and other constants
needed to program a particular CPU architecture. This representation is usually defined by
the hardware manufacturer, and is based on abbreviations (called mnemonics) that help

the programmer remember individual instructions, registers, etc. An assembly language is
thus specific to a certain physical or virtual computer architecture (as opposed to most
high-level languages, most of which are portable).
Assembly languages were first developed in the 1950s, when they were referred to as
second generation programming languages. They eliminated much of the error-prone and
time-consuming first-generation programming needed with the earliest computers, freeing
the programmer from tedium such as remembering numeric codes and calculating
addresses. They were once widely used for all sorts of programming. However, by the
1980s (1990s on small computers), their use had largely been supplanted by high-level
languages, in the search for improved programming productivity. Today, assembly
language is used primarily for direct hardware manipulation, or to address critical
performance issues. Typical uses are device drivers, low-level embedded systems, and
real-time systems.
A utility program called an assembler, is used to translate assembly language statements
into the target computer’s machine code. The assembler performs a more or less
isomorphic translation (a one-to-one mapping) from mnemonic statements into machine
instructions and data. (This is in contrast with high-level languages, in which a single
statement generally results in many machine instructions. A compiler, analogous to an
assembler, is used to translate high-level language statements into machine code; or an
interpreter executes statements directly.)
Firmware :
In computing, firmware is a computer program that is embedded in a hardware device, for
example a microcontroller. It can also be provided on flash ROMs or as a binary image
file that can be uploaded onto existing hardware by a user.
As its name suggests, firmware is somewhere between hardware and software. Like
software, it is a computer program which is executed by a computer. But it is also an
intimate and vital part of a piece of hardware, and has little meaning outside of that
particular hardware.

 
 
List of Operating Systems
Microsoft:
 
1. MS-DOS Family
1. MS-DOS 1.0                                          1981
2. Windows 1.0                                          1985
3. MS-DOS 6.22                                          1994
4. Windows 3.11                                          1994
 
2. Windows 9X Family
1. Windows 95                                          1995
2. Windows 95B (OSR2)                            1997
3. Windows 98                                          1998
4. Windows 98 SE                                          1999
5. Windows ME                                          2000
3. Windows NT Family
1. Windows NT 4.0                                          1996
2. Windows 2000                                          2000
3. Windows XP 32bit (x86)              2001
4. Windows XP MC                                          2003

5. Windows Server 2003                            2003
6. Windows XP 64bit                            2005
7. Windows Vista                                          2007
8. Windows Server 2008                            2008
9. Windows 7                                                        2009
10. Windows 8              (32bit & 64bit)              2012
11. Windows Server 2012                            2012
12. Windows 10 (32bit & 64bit)              2015
 
Non- Microsoft:
1. MAC / Macintosh (Apple)                            1997
2. OS/2 Warp (IBM)                                          1999
3. PC-DOS (IBM)                                          1991
4. Unix (Bell)                                                        1971
5. Linux (Linus Torvalds)                            1991
6. Netware (Novell)                                          1983
7. Solaris (Sun Microsystems)              1992
 
DOS : Disk Operating System,              SE : Second Edition                           
 
ME: Millennium Edition                                          NT: New Technology               XP:
Experience             
MC: Media Center                                          OSR: OEM Service Release
 
OEM: Original Equipment Manufacturer.                           

MBR (Master Boot Record)                             Contains Partition table and Boot Partition Information
PBR (Partition Boot Record)                 Contains Operating System First File Information
FAT: File Allocation Table, just like index in Notebook.
NTFS: New Technology File System, also like FAT, but with so many security features.
Windows 7

Windows 7 is the latest public release version of Microsoft Windows, a series of operating
systems produced by Microsoft for use on personal computers, including home and
business desktops, laptops, netbooks, tablet PCs, and media center PCs. Windows 7 was
released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009, and reached general retail availability on
October 22, 2009, less than three years after the release of its predecessor, Windows Vista.
Windows 7’s server counterpart, Windows Server 2008 R2, was released at the same time.
Minimum hardware requirements for Windows 7
Architecture
32-bit
64-bit
Processor
1 GHz 32-bit processor
1 GHz 64-bit processor
Memory (RAM)
1 GB of RAM
2 GB of RAM
Graphics Card DirectX 9 graphics processor with WDDM driver model 1.0 (For Aero)
HDD free space
16 GB of available disk space
20 GB of available disk space
Optical drive
DVD drive
Standard editions
1. Windows 7 Starter
2. Windows 7 Home Basic
3. Windows 7 Home Premium
4. Windows 7 Professional
5. Windows 7 Enterprise
6. Windows 7 Ultimate
Windows 8
Windows 8 is a upcoming operating system part of the Microsoft Windows series
produced by Microsoft, for use on personal computers, including home and business
desktops, laptops, tablets, and home theater PCs. The release to manufacturing (RTM) is
expected in the first week of August 2012, and Windows 8 will be available to users
starting October 26, 2012.

Minimum hardware requirements for Windows 8
Architecture
32-bit
64-bit
Processor
1 GHz 32-bit processor
1 GHz 64-bit processor
Memory (RAM)
1 GB of RAM
2 GB of RAM
Graphics Card DirectX 9 graphics processor with WDDM driver model 1.0 (For Aero)
HDD free space
16 GB of available disk space
20 GB of available disk space
Optical drive
DVD drive
Standard editions
1. Windows 8
2. Windows 8 Professional
3. Windows 8 Enterprise
Windows 10
Windows 10 has launched globally in 190 countries today on 29 July 2015.
Minimum hardware requirements for Windows 10
Architecture
32-bit
64-bit
Processor
1 GHz 32-bit processor
1 GHz 64-bit processor
Memory (RAM)
1 GB of RAM
2 GB of RAM
Graphics Card DirectX 9 graphics processor with WDDM driver model 1.0 (For Aero)
HDD free space
16 GB of available disk space
20 GB of available disk space
Optical drive
DVD drive
Windows 10 has eight editions (excluding the four “N” editions), with varying feature
sets and intended hardware.

All mentioned editions have the ability to use language packs, enabling multiple user
interface languages. This functionality was previously only available in Windows 7
Ultimate or Enterprise.
Windows 10 Home
Windows 10 Home is designed for use in PCs, tablets, and 2-in-1s. It includes all
consumer-directed features and is the equivalent to basic Windows 8, 8.1, Windows
7 Home Basic and Home Premium.
 
Windows 10 Pro
Windows 10 Pro is comparable with Windows 8 Pro, Windows 7 Professional and
Ultimate and Windows Vista Business and Ultimate. It builds on the Home edition
and adds features essential for businesses, and functionality-wise equal to Windows
8.1 Pro.
 
Windows 10 Enterprise
Windows 10 Enterprise provides all the features of Windows 10 Pro, with
additional features to assist with IT-based organizations, and is functionality-wise
equal to Windows 8.1 Enterprise.
 
Windows 10 Enterprise 2015 LTSB
Windows 10 Enterprise 2015 LTSB (Long Term Servicing Branch) is the same
edition as Windows 10 Enterprise but will not receive any feature updates and
gives companies more control over the update process.
 
Windows 10 Education
Windows 10 Education provides all Windows 10 Enterprise features, designed for
use in schools, colleges and universities. It will be available with Microsoft‘s
Academic Volume Licensing, in a manner similar to Windows 8.1 Enterprise.
Windows 10 Mobile
Windows 10 Mobile Enterprise
Windows 10 IoT Core

Windows 7 / 8 /10 Installation using a Disc
1. Enter your computer’s BIOS. Turn off the computer that you want to install Windows
on then turn it back on. When the BIOS screen appears or you are prompted to do so,
press ⌦ Del, ⎋ Esc, F2, F10, or F9  (depending on your computer’s motherboard) to
enter the system BIOS. The key to enter the BIOS is usually shown on the screen.
2. Find your BIOS’s boot options menu. The boot options menu of your BIOS may vary
in location or name from the illustration, but you may eventually find it if you search
around.
3. Select the CD-ROM drive as the first boot device of your computer.
Although this method may vary among computers, the boot options menu is typically a
menu of movable device names where you should set your CD-ROM drive as the first
boot device. It can also be a list of devices that you can set the order of their boot on.
Consult a manual or the internet for help if you’re stuck.
4. Save the changes of the settings. Press the button indicated on the screen or select the
save option from the BIOS menu to save your configuration and restart.
5. Insert the Windows 7 disc into your disc drive.
6. Start your computer from the disc. After you have placed the disc into the disc drive,
start your computer. When the computer starts, press a key if you are asked if you would
like to boot from the disc by pressing any key. After you choose to start from the disc,
Windows Setup will begin loading.

7. Choose your Windows Setup options. Once Windows Setup loads, you’ll be presented
with a window. Select your preferred language, keyboard type, and time/currency format,
then click Next.
8. Click the Install Now button.

9. Accept the License Terms. Read over the Microsoft Software License Terms, check I
accept the license terms, and click Next.
10. Select the Custom installation.

11. Decide on which hard drive and partition you want to install Windows on. A hard
drive is a physical part of your computer that stores data, and partitions “divide” hard
drives into separate parts.
If the hard drive has data on it, delete the data off of it, or format it.
Select the hard drive from the list of hard drives.
Click Drive options (advanced).
Click Format from Drive options.
 
If your computer doesn’t have any partitions yet, create one to install Windows on
it.
Select the hard drive from the list of hard drives.
Click Drive options (advanced).
Select New from Drive options.
Select the size, and click OK.

12. Install Windows on your preferred hard drive and partition. Once you’ve decided
on where to install Windows, select it and click Next. Windows will begin installing.
13. Wait while Windows installs files. The percentage next to Expanding Windows files
will steadily increase. This part of the process can take up to 30 minutes.
Windows will automatically restart your computer when finished.
Setup will launch again, and a message will tell you that Setup is updating registry
settings.
Setup will then configure your computer’s services. This happens every time you
start Windows, but will happen in the background next time.
A window will open letting you know that Windows is completing the installation.
Your computer will restart again when this is complete.
Setup will now load drivers and check video settings. This part does not require any
input from you.

14. Enter your user name and computer name. Your username will be used to log in to
the computer and personalize your account. Your computer name is the name that your
computer will display on the network.
You can add more users later through the Windows 7 control panel.
Windows will ask you for a password. This is optional but highly recommended,
especially if the computer will be accessible by users other than yourself. If you’d
rather not have a password, leave the fields blank and click Next.
15. Enter your product key. This is the 25-character key that came with your copy of
Windows. Check the “Automatically activate Windows when I’m online” to have
Windows automatically verify your key the next time it is connected to the internet.

16. Select your Windows Update option. To make sure that your copy of Windows runs
securely and stably, it is highly recommended that you choose one of the first two options.
The first option will install all updates automatically, the second option will prompt you
when important updates are available.
17. Select your date and time. These should be correct already as they are linked to your
BIOS, but you can change them now if they are not. Check the box if your area observes
Daylight Savings.
18. Select network preferences. If your computer is connected to a network, you will be
given an option to identify that network. Most users will select Home or Work network. If
your computer is being used in a public place, select Public network. Mobile broadband
users should always select Public network.
Windows will now attempt to connect your computer to the network. This process
is completely automated.
19. Explore your desktop. After one final loading screen, your new Windows 7 desktop
will appear. Installation is now complete.

Startup in Windows Vista 7 / 8
The boot process in Microsoft’s Windows Vista operating system (Windows Vista) differs
from Windows XP in the way that the operating system is located and initialized.
Starting in Windows Vista is different from XP because the code written by Windows
Vista no longer looks for NTLDR. The new boot loader in Windows Vista is Bootmgr.
Bootmgr loads the Boot Configuration Database (BCD), which, in turn, loads an OS
loader boot application (Winload.exe, in the case of Windows Vista). Finally, the OS
loader application is responsible for initializing the kernel.
(MBR = Master Boot Record; PBR = Partition Boot Record)
Two key actions performed by NTLDR in previous Windows versions have been divided
between two components:
\Bootmgr: Reads the boot configuration, including device and path locations.
\Windows\System32\Winload.exe: Initializes the kernel.
The boot configuration stored by Boot.ini in previous Windows versions is now stored in
an extensible database:
\Boot\BCD: The Boot Configuration Database (BCD)

 
What Is the BCD Store?
The Boot Configuration Data (BCD) store contains boot configuration parameters and
controls how the operating system is started in Windows Vista. These parameters were
previously in the Boot.ini file (in BIOS-based operating systems) or in the nonvolatile
RAM (NVRAM) entries (in Extensible Firmware Interface–based operating systems).
The BCD is a database used by Bootmgr. It contains the functions of boot.ini and is
located at {ActivePartition}\boot folder.
Device Drivers Installation
  
 
 
In computing, a device driver or software driver is a computer program allowing higher-
level computer programs / Operating System to interact with a hardware device.

A driver typically communicates with the device through the computer bus or
communications subsystem to which the hardware connects. When a calling program
invokes a routine in the driver, the driver issues commands to the device. Once the device
sends data back to the driver, the driver may invoke routines in the original calling
program. Drivers are hardware-dependent and operating-system-specific. They usually
provide the interrupt handling required for any necessary asynchronous time-dependent
hardware interface.
To know Drivers Status open “Device Manager”,
We have to load drivers for Other Devices
Drivers Installation
Method 1               By running “SETUP.EXE” from Driver CD / DVD
Insert the Drivers CD / DVD, If it is Autorun Disc  a Menu will be appeared
on the screen. In this menu click on Device name you want to install. If it not
Autorun Disc then enter in to the Drivers directory and search for
SETUP.EXE  or  .EXE file and run it
Removal of Drivers:

Uninstall from Start, Settings, control Panel,   “Add/Remove Programs”.
Method 2               By Update Driver through Device Manager
Insert Drivers Disc or Connect to the Internet
In Device Manager Right click on “Other devices”, Device name you want
to load driver and select “Update Driver…” option.
Removal of Drivers:
1. Remove Driver from Device Manager
2.  Remove “.Inf” file from C:\WINDOWS\INF and confirm it by opening.
(User installed drivers are with oem0.inf, oem1.inf etc.)
Internet Configurations
1. By using ADSL Modem & Phone Line ( Broadband)

ADSL : Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (External Modem only)
Bandwidth : Min 256Kbps (Broadband),  Max : 8Mbps
Note: We can use USB / LAN (Ethernet) interface between Modem and Computer.
                  a. If you use USB interface, you have to load ADSL Modem Driver.
    b. If you use LAN interface, you have to load Ethernet Card Driver.
       (But is better to use LAN / Ethernet Interface than USB interface.)
1. Install LAN / Ethernet Card Driver (Ignore if already  installed)
 
(Install ADSL Modem Driver if you are using USB Interface)
 
2. Right click on “My Network Places” and select “Properties”.
In left side windows, Network Tasks, click on “create a new connection”.
3. Select “connect to the Internet” in Network connection type and next.
 
4. Select “Set up my connection manually” in getting Ready and next
5. Select “Connect using a broadband connection that requires a user name and
password” in Internet connection and next.
6. In ISP Name inter Internet Service Provider Name(BSNL Broadband) and next, 
Next In Internet Account Information
7. Select “Add a short cut to this connection to my desktop and finish”.  In

completing the new connection wizard and finish.
 
8. To Connect Internet, first dial through BSNL Broadband shortcut on desktop.
While dialing enter user name and Password (Already provided by the ISP) 
  
9. After connection has established,  open the Inter Explorer & Browse.
10.                      To check you Account usage and Password change open
www.dataone.in
 
 

 
 
Deselecting ADSL MODEM as Internet Server (BSNL Modem)
1. Open Internet Explorer and type the address as 192.168.1.1 and enter.

2. Select “WAN” in “Advanced Setup” and Edit the VPI/VCI values with 0/35
3. In “Connection” Type select “Bridging” and select next.
Selecting ADSL MODEM as Internet Server
1. Select “WAN” in “Advanced Setup” and Edit the VPI/VCI values with 0/35
2. In “Connection Type” select PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE) and select next.
3. In the following screen enter the broadband username & password and select next.
when Internet Connects the Internet light will glow.
PPPoE: Point to Point Protocol over Ethernet                             PVC: Permanent Virtual
Circuit
VPI: Virtual Path Identifier                                                                      VCI: Virtual

Circuit Identifier
Note: To change Broadband Password and Usage check open the website (http://selfcare.sdc.bsnl.co.in ) and register.
Selecting ADSL MODEM as Internet Server (D-Link)
 
Enter the VPI & VCI values as 0 & 35, Protocol as PPP Over Ethernet (PPPOE) and
PPP Username, PPP Password & Confirm PPP Password.

Note : To Deselect  select “Edit” and in “Connection Type”, “Protocol”  select “Bridging”
and select Apply.
2. By using Radio Frequency (RF) waves / Wi-Fi / Hotspots
 
3. By using Microwaves / Wi-Max / Wireless Broadband
 
4 . By using Fibre Optic Cable / Fibre To Home
Installation is common for above 2,3 & 4 Methods
 
1. Install LAN / Ethernet Card / WALN Driver (ignore if already installed)
 
2. Right click on “My Network Places” and select “Properties”.
3.  Right click on “Local Area Network / WLAN Connection” and “Properties”.
 
4.  Select Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) , Properties and enter the  addresses as 
provided by the ISP. (1. IP Address, 2.Default Gateway, 3.Preferred DNS Server )

(No need to enter Address for BSNL Broadband Wifi Modem)
5. By using USB Modem / Data Card
 
For this method no additional configuration is required.
When we insert the USB device, Automatically installation will start from USB device
and a shortcut will appear on the Desktop.
By running the Shortcut on the Desktop internet will connect.

Computer Virus
 
Computer virus is a small software program or piece of code that is designed to spread
from one computer to another and to interfere with computer operation.
How do viruses work?
Basic viruses typically require unwary computer users to inadvertently share or send them.
Some viruses that are more sophisticated, such as worms, can replicate and send
themselves automatically to other computers by controlling other software programs, such
as an e-mail sharing application.
Certain viruses, called Trojans, can falsely appear as a beneficial program to coax users
into downloading them. Some Trojans can even provide expected results while quietly
damaging your system or other networked computers at the same time.
To help avoid viruses, it’s essential that you keep your computer current with the latest
updates and antivirus tools, stay informed about recent threats, and that you follow a few
basic rules when you surf the Internet, download files, and open attachments.
Once a virus is on your computer, its type or the method it used to get there is not as
important as removing it and preventing further infection.
Who Writes Viruses… and Why?
The people who write viruses generally have their own reasons for what they do, and they
aren’t too open about identifying themselves, for obvious reasons. It is believed that most
virus authors are young men in their teens or early twenties, who have a great deal of
technical knowledge and have decided for various reasons to use it for destructive
purposes. Some of the reasons that people write viruses:
1. Sociopathy: Many virus writers are just troublemakers—or maybe just troubled
individuals—who want to create havoc and then thrive on the attention it generates. They
are the electronic equivalents of graffiti artists, prank phone callers, etc., looking for fame
and glory in a rather twisted way.
2. Revenge: Sometimes viruses or trojan horses are written by disgruntled employees or
others who want to get back at someone or make a statement.
3. The Challenge: Some virus writers do it just to see if they can away with it. As virus
detection software gets smarter, virus writers have to employ new tricks to have their
“products” evade notice.
4. Education: Writing viruses, especially ones smart enough to avoid detection, requires a
great deal of technical know-how. Some people take up virus writing to teach themselves
how to program at a low-level within the PC. It’s ironic, but experienced virus writers are
among the most technically skilled PC programmers in the world! What a waste, isn’t it?

Antivirus
Antivirus or anti-virus software is used to prevent, detect, and remove computer viruses,
worms, and trojan horses. It may also prevent and remove adware, spyware, and other
forms of malware.
Identification methods
There are several methods which antivirus software can use to identify malware
1. Signature based detection is the most common method. To identify viruses and other
malware, antivirus software compares the contents of a file to a dictionary of virus
signatures. Because viruses can embed themselves in existing files, the entire file is
searched, not just as a whole, but also in pieces.
2. Heuristic-based detection, like malicious activity detection, can be used to identify
unknown viruses.
3. File emulation is another heuristic approach. File emulation involves executing a
program in a virtual environment and logging what actions the program performs.
Depending on the actions logged, the antivirus software can determine if the program is
malicious or not and then carry out the appropriate disinfection actions.
Top Antivirus
1. Bitdefender :
BitDefender is an antivirus software suite developed by Romania-based software company
SOFTWIN. It was launched in November 2001, and it includes several protection and
performance enhancements as Search Advisor and Performance Optimizer.
2.  Kaspersky:
Kaspersky Lab is a Russian computer security company, co-founded by Natalia Kaspersky
and Eugene Kaspersky in 1997, offering anti-virus, anti-spyware, anti-spam, and anti-
intrusion products
3. Norton Antivirus

Norton AntiVirus, developed and distributed by Symantec Corporation, provides malware
prevention and removal during a subscription period. It uses signatures and heuristics to
identify viruses. Other features include e-mail spam filtering and phishing protection.
4. ESET NOD32 :
ESET NOD32 Antivirus, commonly known as NOD32, is an antivirus software package
made by the Slovak company ESET. It sports the fastest, most effective technology
available to protect you from viruses and spyware without slowing you down while you
work or play
5.  AVG Antivirus: (Free)
AVG is an umbrella term for a range of anti-virus and Internet security software developed
by AVG Technologies, a privately held Czech company formerly known as Grisoft.
System Maintenance Tips
 
 
1)    Clean the components regularly to avoid overheat and damage due to rust.
2)    Run “Check Disk” regularly to rectify disk and file system problems.
3)    Run “Defragmenter” frequently to speed up your computer.
4)    Run “Disc Cleanup” regularly to delete temporary files.
(Run Check Disk, Defragmenter, Disc Cleanup through C: Drive properties, Tools)
5)    Run “Registry Cleaner” regularly to fix registry problems (Download from
Internet).
6)    Maintain free space in C Drive for Virtual Memory.
7)    Uninstall “unnecessary programs” through Add / Remove programs.
8)    Install latest Antivirus Software and update regularly to protect from latest viruses.
9)    Store Data files like Docs, Pics etc.. in separate drives.(Other than OS drive).

10)           Backup your Data regularly into Tape or CD / DVD / Ext HDD.
11)           There will be no loose connections, to avoid components damage and restarts.
12) Always shut your system down properly (use the Start —> Shutdown method) .
13) Don’t place Electro magnetic  components (UPS, Stabilizers…) close to the system
14) Earthing should be provided to avoid electrical shock and components damage.
 
15) Always Mains will be equipped with fuses and Circuit Breakers.
16) UPS or Stabilizer must be installed to protect from high & low voltages.
17) Whenever you move your system, even if it’s just across the desktop, make sure
the machine is shut down and unplugged.
18) If it is External battery UPS, check distilled water level and clean terminals regularly
and apply grease or petroleum jelly to avoid corrosion.
19) Place your computer in cool, secured and ventilated place.
20) Monitor SMPS voltages and Temperatures through BIOS, PC Health or Hardware
Monitor option frequently.
21) Don’t leave your monitor running. The best way to extend your display’s life is to
shut it off when it’s not in use.
22) Use dust covers when the System is not in use to avoid entering of unnecessary
dust. (Remove all covers when the system is in use)
 
23) Store CDs & DVDs in cool and secured place. Use Boxes.

24) To unplug Pen drive, Eject them in “Safely Remove Hardware)
25) Sufficient packing (Use Antistatic covers, thermocol, Boxes etc) must be provided
while carrying components.
26) Disconnect Power & Telephone connections during strong winds.
27) Use Preferred CPU Heat Sink and Fan only while replacing.
28) Apply Heat Sink Compound between CPU and Heat Sink when necessary.
29) Hold the components by the edges and try not to touch the IC chips, leads.
30) Always switch of the Mains and unplug cables while Replacing Components.
31) Don’t use poor quality CDs / DVDs, It may damage your Drive lens.
32) Put Silica Gel Packets inside the Cabinet to reduce the moisture. 
33)  Do not smoke around a PC. Cigarette smoke can damage exposed metal contacts.
34) Create and use Duplicate CDs for Original software and Driver software.
35) Always install latest Drivers / Software and update regularly.
36) Do not let  lot of programs to be loaded automatically  when you  start Your
Computer (Use MSCONFIG command to stop them)
 
37)  When necessary, Always add Same Capacity, Same speed memories only. Same
Company memories are preferred.
38) Cooling Fans must be checked and cleaned regularly.
39) Clean Up Your Desktop (Don’t store files in desktop) to Speed Up Your Computer.
40) Use Passwords to protect your Computer and to prevent from unauthorized access.


Windows Vista / 7 / 8 /10 Troubleshooting
1. Windows Vista / 7 will not Start                   -Rebuild MBR & PBR
 
(Master Boot Record (MBR) or Partition Boot Record (PBR) has damaged)
 
Boot through Windows Vista / 7 DVD and select “Repair your Computer” then  
the following menu will appear on the screen. Now Select “Command prompt”
In command Prompt run the following Commands.
Bootrec.exe /FIXMBR
Bootrec.exe /FIXBOOT
2. Windows Vista / 7 Struck or Restart                      -Reinstall Vista / 7
(Windows Vista / 7 files may corrupted)
Boot through Windows Vista / 7 DVD and select “Repair your Computer” then  the 
above menu will appear on the screen. Now Select “Startup Repair “
3. If reinstallation not possible                                      -Restore registry

Boot through Windows Vista / 7 DVD and select “Repair your Computer” then  the
above menu will appear on the screen. Now Select “System Restore”
4. If Registry Restore is not possible                   -Restore from Backup
Boot through Windows Vista / 7 DVD and select “Repair your Computer” then  the
above menu will appear on the screen. Now Select “Complete PC Restore /
System Image Recovery” (It overwrite files on current drive, Be Careful)
 
5. If Backup Image file not available                     -Fresh install Vista /7
Boot through Windows Vista / 7 DVD and select “Install Now”
Troubleshooting Flow Chart
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

                                                     HEAR BEEPS
                   FAIL                                                                                   
             OK
LONG BEEPS                                                                        NUM LOCK
                            OK                              OPERATES
                FAIL                                                                                   
             OK
SHORT BEEPS                                                                      SINGLE BEEP
OK

 
 
Hardware Troubleshooting
 
S
No
 
Problem

 
Reason & Solution
 
1
Not Getting
Power
 
A). Not getting Power to Both CPU and
MONITOR, then check Mains, UPS / Stabilizer,
Spike busters  Cables, Switches, Fuses, Sockets 
Etc..
 
B). Not getting Power to Monitor, Press Power
Card at rear panel, Press plug on Spike buster,
Insert into another socket. If not solved test with
CPU Power Card If works Monitor Power Card
has damaged, If not works there is problem in
Monitor, then give it to repair.
 
C). Not getting Power to CPU, then press
Power Card at SMPS, Switch on SMPS, press
plug on Spike buster, insert into another socket .
If not solved test with Monitor Power Card, If
CPU works then CPU Power cable has damaged.
 
If not solved open the cabinet and
1. Check Button connections at Button and
Motherboard side in Cabinet by touching the
power on pins by using tester.
 
2. Clear CMOS if not solved, then
 
3. Check SMPS by touching Black Wire and
Green wires of Motherboard plug. If not working
check SMPS Fuse.
If Fuse is OK, then check for damaged
Capacitors. If Capacitors are damaged give it
repair. Otherwise replace it
 
4. If SMPS works, check Capacitors on
Motherboard. If Capacitors are damaged give it
for repair. Otherwise replace Motherboard.

 
2
No Display /
No Signal
Message after
switch on
 
CPU  and Monitor
Power Supply is
OK
 
With Beeps from
System Speaker
Hear Beeps
 
A). If you hear a single beep, then the problem
everything is ok in System Unit. Then the
problem may with Monitor Data Cable or
Problem within the Monitor. Tight Monitor Data
Cable at both sides. If not solved test with
another data cable. Otherwise there will be
problem within Monitor.
 
B). If you hear continuous long beeps, then the
problem is with RAM / Motherboard. Clean and
Reinstall the RAM If not solved, test your RAM
on another System and test with another RAM on
your System If RAM has damaged replace with
another one. If RAM is working there may
problem within Motherboard.
 
C). If you hear  one long and 2/3 Short beeps,
then the problem is with Display Card /
Motherboard. Clean and Reinstall the Display
Card, If not solved test your Display Card on
another System and test with another Card on
your System. If Display Card has damaged
Replace with another.
 
- If Display Card is working then there may be
problem within Motherboard.
 
- If it is onboard display then Clear the CMOS.
 
- If not solved then the onboard GPU fail, install
add-on graphics card.
 
D). If you hear high frequency beeps, then the
problem is with CPU overheat, check cooling
fans.
 
E). If you hear low and high beeps, then the

problem may be with CPU / Motherboard check
CPU and Motherboard with another system.
 
3
No Display /
No signal
message
after switch on
 
SMPS  and
Monitor Power
Supply is OK
 
No Beeps from 
System Speaker
 
Num-Lock is
working
 
This means Power Supply Unit, Motherboard,
CPU and Memory is OK.
 
1) Then the problem with Monitor Data Cable.
Tight both System Unit and Monitor side.
 
2).If not solved check with another cable.
 
3).If not solved, then the problem is with Display
Card or Monitor. Then check Display Card and
Monitor by attaching them to another System or
check with another display Card or Monitor with
you System.
 
4). If Display Card has damaged replace with
new one
 
5). If Monitor is not working give it for repair
 
4
No Display /
No Signal
message after
switch on
 
SMPS  and
Monitor Power
Supply is OK
 
No Beeps from 
System Speaker
 
Num-Lock
1). Clear CMOS, If not solved.
 
2). 
Check 
for 
damaged 
Capacitors 
on
motherboard.
 
3). Problem may be with HDD, CD/DVD, and
Expansion Cards, disconnect them and check.
 
4). May be RAM problem Clean and Reinstall
RAM. If not solved check the RAM on another
System.
 
5). If not solved the problem may with PSU,
Motherboard or Processor. First check PSU.
 
6) If not solved check CPU on another
Motherboard and check another CPU on this

Doesn’t Operates
Motherboard.
 
7. If CPU is gone replace with new.
 
8. If CPU is ok, then replace Motherboard
5
No Signal / Out of
Sync / Frequency
out of Range
message after
Starting Windows
 
Resolution Problem
 
In Windows XP Press F8 while booting and
select VGA mode while booting. And change
resolution in display properties.
 
In Windows 7 /8 Press F8 while booting and
select Low Resolution Mode(640,480) And
change resolution in display properties.
 
6
CMOS Check
Sum error /
 
Battery failure
message
 
Date and Time are
not storing.
 
1). Check 3 Volts Battery and Replace the battery
If necessary.
 
2). If 3Volts Battery is ok. May with loose
contact tight them.
 
3).Check CMOS Jumpers.
7
Disk Boot failure
 
 
1). Check in the BIOS for Hard Disc Name.
 
2). If not detected  open the Cabinet cover and
check Power and Data cables of Hard Disk for
loose connections. If not solved test with another
cable and another port.
 
3). If not solved test them on another System or
test another Drives on your System.
 
4). Check the Boot sequence in BIOS.
 
5) Boot Record may damaged, Rebuilt them (See
Windows XP / Windows 7/8 troubleshooting
given in previous pages.
 

6). If not solved, the OS may gone. Reinstall.
 
8
System Slow
While loading /
running Operating
System.
 
1). Run Scandisk / Check Disk
 
2).Run  Disk Defragmenter
 
3) Run Disk Cleanup
 
4) Check free space available in C drive
 
5). Stop auto running of all unnecessary
programs through “MSCONFIG”.
 
6). Uninstall unnecessary programs
 
7). Set BIOS defaults.
 
8). Check Memory Capacity.
 
9). Install and run Antivirus program
 
10) Run “SFC / SCANNOW” command to scan
OS files and replace with new files.
 
(click 
Start, 
click 
All 
Programs, 
click
Accessories, right-click Command Prompt, and
then click Run as administrator)
 
11) If not solved Reinstall Operating System
 
12). If not solved may be Hard disc slow.
1). Problem may be with recently installed
Drivers or Software remove them, if not entering
into Normal mode then Enter into safe mode by
pressing F8 while booting and remove recently
installed drivers or software.
 
2). May be Registry or System files problem
restore System to Earlier time. If not entering

9
System struck /
 
Shutdown  while
loading / running
Operating System
into normal mode, enter into safe mode and 
Restore the System to Earlier Time.
 
3). Stop auto running of unnecessary software
through “MSCONFIG” command.
 
4). Enter into Safe Mode and run Thorough
Scandisk for Hard Disk Errors.
 
5).Set BIOS defaults
 
6). Check for Virus
 
7).Over heat problem check Fans
 
8). May be with damaged Capacitors.
 
9). May faulty RAM check another one.
 
10) Check Hard Disc Cables.
 
11). Check SMPS voltages.
 
12) Run “SFC / SCANNOW” command to scan
OS files and replace with new files.
 
(click 
Start, 
click 
All 
Programs, 
click
Accessories, right-click Command Prompt, and
then click Run as administrator, At the command
prompt, type the above command)
 
13). Reinstall Operating System
 
14). If not solved Check CPU
 
15). If not solved may be it Motherboard internal
problem
 

10
Keyboard not
working
 
1). Check Keyboard connector for loose
connection and disconnection 
 
2.) If it is USB keyboard check on another port.
 
3). If not solved check BIOS USB setting
 
4).If it is PS/2 keyboard test your keyboard on
another System or Test with another keyboard on
your System.
 
5). If your keyboard in not working then Check
cable. If your keyboard is working your PS/2
Port / controller has damaged, then use USB  
Keyboard.
11
Keyboard some
times working but
some times not
working
 
1). Connect Keyboard Connector tightly.
 
2)If it is USB keyboard check on another port
 
3).If it is PS/2  test your keyboard on another
System or test with another keyboard on your
System.
 
4). If your keyboard is not working properly on
another Computer Check cable.
 
5). If your keyboard is working properly your
PS/2 Port or controller has damaged. Use USB
Keyboard.
 
1). Check Mouse Connector for loose connection
and Disconnection.
 
2). If it is USB mouse Check on another port.
 

12
Mouse not
working
 
3. If not solved check BIOS USB setting
 
4).If it is PS/2  test your mouse on another
System or test with another mouse on your
System.
 
5). If your mouse is not working Check cable. If
your mouse is working your PS/2 Port has
damaged. Use USB mouse.
 
13
Grinding noise
from Hard Disk
1. If the hard drive makes a grinding noise it is
due to a heard crash. This is usually not
repairable and should be replaced.
 
2. If the data is extremely valuable, there are
companies that can recover the data but at a high
price
 
14
Disk boot failure
(some times only)
1). HDD  Data cable loose or damaged. Tight
them if not solved test with another ribbon cable.
 
2). HDD power plug loose tight it. If not solved
Use another power plug.
 
3). If not solve it is Hard Disk problem. Copy all
important data CD and replace with new.
 
15
Can’t boot from
Bootable CD /
DVD
1. CD / DVD drive not detected.
 
2). CD / DVD may not be bootable.
or Disc may be damaged
 
3) CD / DVD drive is not reading Properly.
 
4). Check Boot sequence in BIOS.

16
Reddish or Bluish
or Greenish
Display.
 
1). Most of the time this is a bad Data Cable.
 
2). It also could be a loose connection either on
the Computer or inside the Monitor. If
connections are tight trying changing cords.
 
3). Presets damaged in the Monitor, give it to
repair.
 
17
Wavy screen
1). Could be caused by any electrical device such
as a fan, UPS, Stabilizer, Adapters or telephone
too close to the Monitor.
 
2).Move all electrical devices away from the
Monitor and see If that helps.
 
3). If not solved, there may be problem within the
monitor.
 
18
Applications /
Programs are not
opening
 
1). Software Package files may have corrupted
reinstall.
 
2).May be Virus problem.
 
3). Low Memory / RAM.
 
4). Virtual memory problem Check free space in
C drive.
 
Struck while
1).Set BIOS defaults
 
2). CD / DVD has damaged
 
3).CD / DVD drive is not reading properly.

19
Windows  XP
Installation /
 
Installation fail
with Blue screen
error
 
 
4). OS not supported. Try Latest Version
 
5). May be bad area in HDD, select full format
while installation.
 
6). RAM has damaged partially.
 
7). If not solved Check CPU
 
20
Ups is not
working after
Power fails.
1). Switch on the UPS.
 
2). Fully Charge it (8 hours) and try.
 
3). If it is internal battery UPS, the Battery may
gone.
(Maximum battery life is approximately 2
years)
 
4). If it is external Battery UPS, Clean the
terminals and apply grease and Fill the Battery
with Distilled water.
 
5). If the battery is too old replace it.
 
6). If not solved may be internal problem.
Beep Codes
 
Award BIOS  (MSI, Mercury, Gigabyte, Biostar, EVGA …Motherboard)
 
 Beeps
Error Message
Description
1long, 2 short
Video adapter error
Either video adapter is bad or is not
seated properly.  Also, check to ensure
the monitor cable is connected properly.

Repeating (endless loop) Memory error
Check for improperly seated or missing
memory.
1long, 3short
No video card or
bad video RAM
Reseat or replace the video card.
High frequency beeps
while running
Overheated CPU
Check the CPU fan for proper operation.
Check the case for proper air flow.
Repeating High/Low
CPU
Either the CPU is not seated properly or
the CPU is damaged. May also be due to
excess heat. Check the CPU fan or BIOS
settings for proper fan speed.
Single Beep
Everything fine
Everything fine in System Unit. So
check the Monitor Data cable on both
Motherboard and Monitor Side.
 
AMI BIOS  (Intel & ASUS… Motherboards)
 
Beep Code
Description
1 Short Beep
DRAM Refresh Failure (RAM)
2 Short Beeps
Parity Circuit Failure (RAM)
3 Short Beeps
Base 64K RAM Failure (RAM)
4 Short Beeps
System Timer Failure (Motherboard)
5 Short Beeps
Process Failure (CPU)
6 Short Beeps
Keyboard / Keyboard Controller
7 Short Beeps
Processor / Motherboard
8 Short Beeps
Display Memory Read / Write Failure
9 Short Beeps
ROM BIOS Checksum Failure
10 Short Beeps
CMOS Read / Write Failure

11 Short Beeps
CPU Cache Memory
1 long, 3 short
Conventional / Extended Memory Failure
1 long, 8 short
Display / Retrace Failure
Advanced System Care
 
(Toolbox contains the following Tools)
1. Registry Cleaner                            - To rectify registry problems.
2. Privacy Sweeper                            - To remove internet History & Traces.
3. Uninstaller                                          - To Uninstall Programs / Applications
4. Disk Cleaner                            - To delete unnecessary and junk files.
5. File Shredder                            - To delete files permanently.
6. Startup Manager                            - To manage startup programs.
7. Smart Defrag                            - To Defrag the Hard Disc to improve Speed
8. Undelete                                          - To recover deleted files.
9. Disk Doctor                            - To rectify Disk and File system problems
10. Win Fix                                          - To fix Windows OS problems
11. Driver Manager                            - To update and Backup Drivers.
12. Malware Fighter                            - To detect and remove Malware and
Spyware.
13.Clonned Files Scanner               - To find and delete duplicate files.
14. System Information              - To display detailed information of System.
15. System Control                            - To change Operating System setting.
Etc…

PRINTERS
 
Printer is an indirect output device (Peripheral) used to take printouts
(Hard copies)
Dot Matrix Printer
A Dot Matrix printer is an impact printer that forms characters as a series of dots. The
print head contains a grid of pins which form a character. This heads stamps on to the
paper through an inked ribbon to produce a character (for example, “H”) that is made up
of dots.
The print heads can have from 9 to 24 pins in them. The more pins the print head has, the
better the quality of the printed output. Printers with 24 pins produce letter quality output.
The quality of the printed output is measured in dpi (dots per inch). The higher the dpi, the
better the quality of the printed output.
Dot Matrix printers come with a standard parallel interface. They can also use a serial
interface. Parallel interfaces are faster, but serial interfaces can be used over greater
distances.
Impact printers are the only printers that will make an impression on carbon paper. Any
printing that is done on paper with a carbon behind it or on self carbonated paper needs to
be done on an impact printer for the printing come through on the second layer of paper.

InkJet or Desk Jet Printer
A typical inkjet receives control info from your printer driver/PC, or may process the
printout in its onboard electronics. Either way, rollers advance a page from your paper
tray (1) under a sliding printhead/cartridge assembly (2). Then, the printhead stepper
motor (3) kicks in, drawing the assembly on a sliding rod (4) to its starting position,
usually via a belt (5).
The printhead (6) proper is an incredible piece of miniaturization, in some cases

fabricated via an etching process similar to semiconductor manufacture. On some printers,
the head and ink cartridge (7) are one unit. The head’s microscopic nozzles (8)—
anywhere from dozens to literally thousands—are outlets for incredibly tiny ink chambers
(9), which are fed by the cartridge’s reservoirs. Microscopic droplets (10), measured in
millionths of a millionth of a liter (no, that’s not a typo), fire through the nozzles.
But how? Pumps simply don’t come that small. Instead, most inkjets (Epsons excepted)
use “thermal” technology in which a tiny resistor (11) in an ink chamber is pulsed, as
needed, with intense current, superheating the ink and vaporizing part of the droplet. The
result: Terrific pressure blasts it out the nozzle and onto your page.
 
Laser Printer
The most important piece of equipment might be the optical photoconductive (OPC)
drum. This drum holds an electromagnetic charge that can be changed by exposure to
light. As the process starts, the OPC passes a highly charged wire that gives an electric
charge to the OPC. A laser beam is turned on and off rapidly as a spinning mirror focuses
the light on a specific part of the OPC.
In most cases, your PC talks with controller circuitry (1) in your laser printer to queue up
and translate printing data; a raster image processor (RIP) converts images and text into a
virtual matrix of tiny dots.
The main actor, however, is the photoconducting drum (2), a specially coated cylinder

that receives a positive or negative charge from a charging roller (3) (or, in some printers,
a corona wire). A laser beam (4), switching rapidly on and off and deflected off a rotating
mirror (5), scans the charged drum horizontally in precise lines. When the beam flashes
on, it reverses the charge of tiny spots on the drum, corresponding to dots that are to be
printed black. After the laser scans a line, a stepper motor advances the drum, and the laser
repeats the process—all, of course, blindingly fast.
Next, the drum’s laser-kissed portion encounters the developer roller (6), which is coated
in charged toner particles from the toner hopper (7), part of the toner cartridge. Charged
toner clings to the discharged areas of the drum, reproducing, in reverse, your images and
text.
Meanwhile, a belt or roller assembly (8) draws paper inside from the paper tray (9), past a
transfer roller or charging wire (10) that applies a charge opposite the toner’s to the
paper. As the paper sheet meets the drum, the drum-borne toner transfers to paper. A
cleaning blade (11) then cleans the drum, and the process continues in a smooth, circular
flow. (Color lasers work similarly, but the paper may require four passes by the drum for
four toner colors. Alternately, the printer may transfer each color layer to an intermediate
belt before applying it to the paper, or employ four drum/toner assemblies.)
Last, your page, with its imprint of tenuously anchored toner, reaches the fuser (12)—a
heat roller and a pressure roller. It melts the toner, which contains resins and sometimes
wax, onto the page. Voila, pages in your out tray.
Scanner Setup

A charge-coupled device (CCD) is an image sensor, consisting of an integrated circuit
containing an array of linked, or coupled, light-sensitive capacitors. This device is also
known as a Color-Capture Device.
A / D Converter – Analog to Digital Converter
Method 1. Scanning through Manufacturer Software

Method 2. Scanning through Microsoft Windows (My Computer)
Webcam Setup

(OR)

