 
On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation
Author(s): C. S. Peirce
Source: American Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Jan., 1885), pp. 180-196
Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2369451
Accessed: 10-06-2016 19:36 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to American Journal of Mathematics
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On the Algebra of Logic:
 A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NOTATION.
 BY C. S. PEIRCE.
 I.-Three kinds of Signs.
 Any character or proposition either concerns one subject, two subjects, or
 a plurality of subjects. For example, one particle has mass, two particles attract
 one another, a particle revolves about the line joining two others. A fact con-
 cerning two subjects is a dual character or relation; but a relation which is a
 mere combination of two independent facts concerning the two subjects may be
 called degenerate, just as two lines are called a degenerate conic. In like manner
 a plural character or conjoint relation is to be called degenerate if it is a mere
 compound of dual characters.
 A sign is in a conjoint relation to the thing denoted and to the mind. If
 this triple relation is not of a degenerate species, the sign is related to its object
 only in consequence of a mental association, and depends upon a habit. Such
 signs are always abstract and general, because habits-are general rules to which
 the organism has become subjected. They are, for the most part, conventional
 or arbitrary. They include all general words, the main body of speech, and any
 mode of conveying a judgment. For the sake of brevity I will call them tokens.
 But if the triple relation between the sign, its object, and the mind, is degen-
 erate, then of the three pairs sign object
 sign mind
 object mind
 two at least are in dual relations which constitute the triple relation. One of
 the connected pairs must consist of the sign and its object, for if the sign were
 not related to its object except by the mind thinking of them separately, it
 would not fulfil the function of a sign at all. Supposing, then, the relation of the
 sign to its object does not lie in a mental association, there must be a direct dual
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 181
 relation of the sign to its object independent of the mind using the sign. In the
 second of the three cases just spoken of, this dual relatioin is not degenerate, and
 the sign signifies its object solely by virtue of being really connected with it.
 Of this nature are all natural signs and physical symptoms. I call such a sign
 an index, a pointing finger being the type of the class.
 The index asserts nothing; it only says " There ! It takes hold of our
 eyes, as it were, and forcibly directs them to a particular object, and there it
 stops. Demonstrative and relative pronouns are nearly pure indices, because
 they denote things without describing them; so are the letters on a geometrical
 diagram, and the subscript numbers which in algebra distinguish one value from
 another without saying what those values are.
 The third case is where the dual relation between the sign and its object is
 degenerate and consists in a mere resemblance between them. I call a sign
 which stands for something merely because it resembles it, an icon. Icons are so
 completely substituted for their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them.
 Such are the diagrams of geometry. A diagram, indeed, so far as it has a general
 signification, is not a pure icon; but in the middle part of our reasonings we forget
 that abstractness in great measure, and the diagram is for us the very thing.
 So in contemplating a painting, there is a moment when we lose the consciousness
 that it is not the thing, the distinction of the real and the copy disappears, and it
 is for the moment a pure dream,-not any particular existence, and yet not
 general. At that moment we are contemplating an icon.
 I have taken pains to make my distinction* of icons, indices, and tokens
 clear, in order to enunciate this proposition: in a perfect system of logical nota-
 tion signs of these several kinds must all be employed. Without tokens there
 would be no generality in the statements, for they are the only general signs;
 and generality is essential to reasoning. Take, for example, the circles by which
 Euler represents the relations of terms. They well fulfil the function of icons, but
 their want of generality and their incompetence to express propositionis must
 have been felt by everybody who has used them. Mr. Venn has, therefore,
 been led to add shading to them; and this shading is a conventional sign of the
 nature of a token. In algebra, the letters, both quantitative-and functional, are
 of this nature. But tokens alone do not state what is the subject of discourse;
 and this can, in fact, not be described in general terms; it can only be indicated.
 The actual world cannot be distinguished from a world of imagination by any
 *See Proceedintgs American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Vol. VII, p. 294, May 14, 1867.
 VOL. VII.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 182 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of- Logic.
 description. Hence the need of pronoun and indices, and the more complicated
 the subject the greater the need of them. The introduction of indices into the
 algebra of logic is the greatest mnerit of Mr. Mitchell's system.* He writes F1 to
 mean that the proposition F is true of every object in the universe, and FE, to
 mean that the same is true of some object. This distinction can only be made
 in some such way as this. Indices are also required to show in what manner
 other signs are connected together. With these two kinds of signs alone any
 proposition can be expressed; but it cannot be reasoned upon, for reasoning
 consists in the observation that where certain relations subsist certain others are
 found, and it accordingly requires the exhibition of the relations reasoned with
 in an icon. It has long been a puzzle how it could be that, on the one hand,
 mathematics is purely deductive in its nature, and draws its conclusions apodic-
 tically, while on the other hand, it presents as rich and apparently unending a
 series of surprising discoveries as any observational science. Various have been
 the attempts to solve the paradox by breaking down one or other of these asser-
 tions, but without success. The truth, however, appears to be that all deductive
 reasoning, even simple syllogism, involves an element of observation; namely,
 deduction consists in constructing an icon or diagram the relations of whose
 parts shall present a complete analogy with those of the parts of the object of
 reasoning, of experimenting upon this image in the imagination, and of obser-
 ving the result so as to discover unnoticed and hidden relations among the parts.
 For instance, take the syllogistic formula,
 All M is P
 S isM
 S is P.
 This is really a diagram of the relations of S, M, and P. The fact that the
 middle term occurs in the two premises is actually exhibited, and this must be
 done or the notation will be of no value. As for algebra, the very idea of the
 art is that it presents formulae which can be manipulated, and that by observing
 the effects of such manipulation we find properties not to be otherwise discerned.
 In such manipulation, we are guided by previous discoveries which are embodied
 in general formulae. These are patterns which we have the right to imitate in
 our procedure, and are the icons par excellence of algebra. The letters of applied
 algebra are usually tokens, but the x, y, z, etc. of a general formula, such as
 (x + y)Z = xz + yz,
 * Studies in Logic, by members of the Johns Hopkins University. Boston: Little & Brown, 1883.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 183
 are blanks to be filled up with tokens, they are indices of tokens. Such a for-
 mula might, it is true, be replaced by an abstractly stated rule (say that multi-
 plication is distributive); but no application could be made of such an abstract
 statement without translating it into a sensible image.
 In this paper, I purpose to develope an algebra adequate to the treatment
 of all problems of deductive logic, showing as I proceed what kinds of signs have
 necessarily to be employed at each stage of the development. I shall thus attain
 three objects. The first is the extension of the power of logical algebra over
 the whole of its proper realm. The second is the illustration of principles which
 underlie all algebraic notation. The third is the enumeration of the essentially
 different kinds of necessary inference; for when the notation which suffices for
 exhibiting one inference is found inadequate for explaining another, it is clear
 that the latter involves an inferential element not present to the former. Accord-
 ingly, the procedure contemplated should result in a list of categories of reasoning,
 the interest of which is not dependent upon the algebraic way of considering
 the subject. I shall not be able to perfect the algebra sufficiently to give facile
 methods of reaching logical conclusions: I can only give a method by which any
 legitimate conclusion may be reached and any fallacious one avoided. But I
 cannot doubt that others, if they will take up the subject, will succeed in giving
 the notation a form in which it will be highly useful in mathematical work. I
 even hope that what I have done may prove a first step toward the resolution of
 one of the main problems of logic, that of producing a method for the discovery
 of methods in mathematics.
 11.-Non-relative Logic.
 According to ordinary logic, a proposition is either true or false, and no
 further distinction is recognized. This is the descriptive conception, as the
 geometers say; the metric conception would be that every proposition is more
 or less false, and that the question is one of amount. At present we adopt the
 former view.
 Let propositions be represented by quantities. Let v and f be two constant
 values, and let the value of the quantity representing a proposition be v if the
 proposition is true and be f if the proposition is false. Thus, x being a propo-
 sition, the fact that x is either true or false is written
 (x f)(V-x) = 0.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 184 PEIRcE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 So (x-f)(v- y) = ?
 will mean that either x is false or y is true. This may be said to be the same as
 'if x is true, y is true.' A hypothetical proposition, generally, is not confined to
 stating what actually happens, but states what is invariably true throughout a
 universe of possibility. The present proposition is, however, limited to that -one
 individual state of things, the Actual.
 We are, thus, already in possession of a logical notation, capable of working
 syllogism. Thus, take the premises, 'if x is true, y is true,' and 'if y is true, z is
 true.' These are written
 (x -f)(v -y) = 0
 (Y-f)(v-z) =0.
 Multiply the first by (v - z) and the second by (x - f) and add. We get
 (x - f)(v - f)(v - z) 0,
 or dividing by v - f, which cannot be 0,
 (x - f)(v - z)= 0;
 and this states the syllogistic conclusion, "if x is true, z is true."
 But this notation shows a blemish in that it expresses propositions in two
 distinct ways, in the form of quantities, and in the form of equations; and the
 quantities are of two kinds, namely those which must be either equal to f or to v,
 and those which are equated to zero. To remedy this, let us discard the use of
 equations, and perform no operations which can give rise to any values other
 than f and v.
 Of operations upon a simple variable, we shall need but one. For there
 are but two things that can be said about a single proposition, by itself; that it
 is true and that it is false, x; and '=f.
 The first equation is expressed by- x itself, the second by any function, (P, of x,
 fulfilling the conditions cpv=f pf =v.
 The simplest solution of these equations is
 px= f+ v -x.
 A product of n factors of the two forms (x - f) and (v - y), if not zero equals
 (v -f)'f. Write P for the product. Then v -(v - f-l is the simplest
 function of the variables which becomes v when the product vanishes and f
 when it does not. By this means any proposition relating to a single individual
 can be expressed.
 If we wish to use algebraical signs with their usual significations, the mean-
 ings of the operations will entirely depend upon those of f and v. Boole chose
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of LLogic. 185
 v = 1, f = 0. This choice gives the following forms:
 f+ v- 1- x
 which is best written X.
 (x -f)(v - y)
 v -(v - -y) = 1- + y - $y
 V v-f
 V --(v - x)(v - Y)(V - z) = X + y + z - Y- Z yZ + xYZ
 (v - f)2
 v (X-f)(Y-f)= 1 .y=zy
 It appears- to me that if the strict Boolian system is used, the sign +
 ought to be altogether discarded. Boole and his adherent, Mr. Yenn (whom
 I never disagree with without finding his remarks profitable), prefer to write
 x + a;y in place of Zy. I confess I do not see the advantage of this, for the dis-
 tributive principle holds equally well when written
 xyz -Szyz.
 The choice of v = 1, f = 0, is agreeable to the received measurement of pro-
 babilities. But there is no need, and many times no advantage, in measuring
 probabilities in this way. I presume that Boole, in the formation of his algebra,
 at first considered the letters as denoting propositions or events. As he presents
 the subject, they are class-names; but it is not necessary so to regard them.
 Take, for example, the equation t = n + hf,
 which might mean that the body of taxpayers is composed of all the natives,
 together with householding foreigners. We might reach the signification by
 either of the following systems of notation, which indeed differ grammatically
 rather than logically.
 Sign. Signification. Signification.
 lst System. 2d System.
 t Taxpayer. He is a Taxpayer.
 n Native. He is a Native.
 h Householder. He is a Householder.
 f Foreigner. He is a Foreigner.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 186 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 There is no index to show who the " He " of the second system is, but that makes
 no difference. To say that he is a taxpayer is equivalent to saying that he is a
 native or is a householder and a foreigner. In this point of view, the constants
 1 and 0 are simply the probabilities, to one who knows, of what is true and what
 is false; and thus unity is conferred upon the whole system.
 For my part, I prefer for the present not to assign- determinate values to f
 and v, nor to identify the logical operations with any special arithmetical ones,
 leaving myself free to do so hereafter in the manner which may be found most
 convenient. Besides, the whole system of importing arithmetic into the subject
 is artificial, and modern Boolians do not use it. The -algebra of logic should be
 self-developed, and arithmetic should spring out of logic instead of reverting to it.
 Going back to the beginning, let the writing of a letter by itself mean that a
 certain proposition is true. This letter is a token. There is a general under-
 standing that the actual state of things or some other is referred to. This under-
 standing must have been established by means of an index, and to rome extent
 dispenses with the need of other indices. The denial of a proposition will be
 made by writing a line over it.
 I have elsewhere shown that the fundamental and primary mode of relation
 between two propositions is that which we have -expressed by the form
 (x _ f)(v -Y)
 V v-f
 We shall write this x -< y,
 which is also equivalent to (x - f)(v - y) = 0.
 It is stated above that this means "if x is true, y is true.." But this meaning is
 greatly modified by the circumstance that only the actual state of things is
 referred to.
 To make the matter clear, it will be well to begin by defining the meaning
 of a hypothetical proposition, in general. What the usages of language may be
 does not concern us; language has its meaning modified in technical logical for-
 mulae as in other special kinds of discourse. The question is what is the sense
 which is most usefully attached to the hypothetical proposition in logic? Now,
 the peculiarity of the hypothetical proposition is that it goes out beyond the
 actual state of things and declares what would happen were things other than
 they are or may be. The utility of this is that it puts us in possession of a rule,
 say that "if A is true, B is true," such that should we hereafter learn something
 of which we are now ignorant, namely that A is true, then, by virtue of this
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 187
 rule, we shall find that we know something else, namely, that B is true. There
 can be no doubt that the Possible, in its primary meaning, is that which may be
 true for aught we know, that whose falsity we do not know. The purpose is
 subserved, then, if, throughout the whole range of possibility, in every state of
 things in which A is true, B is true too. The hypothetical proposition may
 therefore be falsifiedhby a single state of things, but only by one in which A is
 true while B is false. States of things in which A is false, as well as those in
 which B is true, cannot falsify it., If, then, B is a proposition true in every case
 throughout the whole range of possibility, the hypothetical proposition, taken
 in its logical sense, ought to be regarded as true, whatever may be the usage of
 ordinary speech. If, on the other hand, A is in no case true, throuighout the
 range of possibility, it is a matter of indifference whether the hypothetical be
 understood to be true or not, since it is useless. But it will be more simple to
 class it among true propositions, because the cases in which the antecedent is
 false do not, in any other case, falsify a hypothetical. This, at any rate, is the
 meaning which I shall attach to the hypothetical proposition in general, in this
 paper.
 The range of possibility is in one case taken wider, in another larrower;
 in the present case it is limited to the actual state of things. Here, therefore,
 the proposition a-< b
 is true if a is false or if b is true, but is false if a is true while b is false. But
 though we limit ourselves to the actual state of things, yet when we find that a
 formula of this sort is true by logical necessity, it becomes applicable to any single
 state of things throughout the range of logical possibility. For example, we shall
 see that from x -< y we can infer z -< x. This does not mean that because in
 the actual state of things x is true and y false, therefore in every state of things
 either z is false or x true; but it does mean that in whatever state of things
 we find x true and y false, in that state of things either z is false or xis true.
 In that sense, it is not limited to the actual state of thiings, but extends to any
 single state of things.
 The first icon of algebra is contained in the formula of identity
 X-< X.
 This formula does not of itself justify any transformation, any inference. It
 only justifies our continuing to .hold what we have held (though we may, for
 instance, forget how we were originally justified in holding it).
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 188 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 The second icon is contained in the rule that the several antecedents of a
 consequentia may be transposed; that is, that from
 x-< (Y-< Z)
 we can pass to y-< (x-< z).
 This is stated in the formula
 l'S -< (Y -<s z) I -<}Y -< (x -< Z)}
 Because this is the case, the brackets may be omitted, and we may write
 y -< x -< z.
 By the formula of identity
 (x -< Y) (x -< Y);
 and transposing the antecedents
 x -< { (x -< Y) -< y
 or, omitting the unnecessary brackets
 X-< (x-< y)-< Y.
 This is the same as to say that if in any state of things x is true, and if the pro-
 position " if x, then y" is true, then in that state of things y is true. This is the
 modus ponens of hypothetical inference, and is the most rudimentary form of
 reasoning.
 To say that (x -< x) is generally true is to say that it is so in every state of
 things, say in that in which y is true; so that we may write
 y -< (x -< x),
 and then, by transposition of antecedents,
 x -< (y -< x),
 or from x we may infer y-< x.
 The third icon is involved in the principle of the transitiveness of the copula,
 which is stated in the formula
 (x -< Y) -< (y -< z) -< x -< z.
 According to this, if in any case y follows from x and z from y, then z follows
 from x. This is the principle of the syllogism in Barbara.
 We have already seen that from x follows y -< x. Hence, by the transi-
 tiveness of the copula, if from y -< x follows z, then from x follows z, or from
 (y -< x)-< z
 follows X-< z,
 or I (y -< x) -< z x -< Z.
 The original notation x -<y served without modification to express the
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 189
 pure formula of identity. An enlargement of the conception of the notation so
 as to make the terms themselves complex was required to express the principle
 of the transposition of antecedents; and this new icon brought out new propo-
 sitions. The third icon introduces the image of a chain of consequence. We
 must now again enlarge the notation so as to introduce negation. We have
 already seen that if a is true, we can write x -< a, whatever x may be. Let b
 be such that we can write b -< x whatever x may be. Then b is false. We have
 here a fourthi icon, which gives a new sense to several formulae. Thus the prin-
 ciple of the interchange of antecedents is that from
 x -< (y -< z)
 we can infer y-< (X-< z).
 Since z is any proposition we please, this is as much as to say that if from the
 truth of x the falsity of y follows, then from the truth of y the falsity of x follows.
 Again the formula x -< { (x -< y) -< y I
 is seen to mean that from x we can infer that anything we please follows from
 that things following from x, and a fortiori from everything following from x.
 This is, therefore, to say that from x follows the falsity of the denial of X; which
 is the principle of contradiction.
 Again the formula of the transitiveness of the copula, or
 x -< y } -< (y -< z) -< (x -< Z)
 is seen to justify the inference x-< y
 The same formula justifies the modus tollens,
 X-< y
 So the formula { (y -< Xr) -< z } -(X -< z)
 shows that from the falsity of y -< x the falsity of x may be inferred.
 All the traditional moods of syllogism can easily be reduced to Barbara by
 this method.
 A fifth icon is required for the principle of excluded middle and other pro-
 positions connected with it. Oine of the simiplest formula3 of this kind is
 I(X -< Y) -< X} -< x.
 This is hardly axiomatical. That it is true appears as follows. It can only be
 false by the final consequent x being false while its antecedent (x -< y) -< x is
 VOL. VII.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 190 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 true. If this is true, either its consequent, x, is true, when the whole formula
 would be true, or its antecedent x-< y is false. But in the last case the antev
 cedent of x-< y, that is x, must be true.*
 From the formula just given, we at once get
 {(x -< y) -< -< x,
 where the a is used in such a sense that (x -< y)-< a means that from (x -< y)
 every proposition follows. With that understanding, the formula states the
 principle of excluded middle, that from- the falsity of the denial of x follows
 the truth of x.
 The logical algebra thus far developed contains signis of the following kinds:
 1st, Tokens; signs of sinlple propositions, as t for 'He is a taxpayer,' etc.
 2d, The single operative sign -<; also of the nature of a token.
 3d, The juxtaposition of the letters to the right and left of the operative
 sign. This juxtaposition fulfils the function of an index, in indicating tne con-
 nections of the tokens.
 4th, The parentheses, subserving the same purpose.
 5th, The letters a, d , etc. which are indices of no matter what tokens, used
 for expressing negation.
 6th, The indices of tokens, x, y, z, etc. used in the general formulae.
 7th, The general formulae themselves, which are icons, or exemplars of
 algebraic proceedings.
 8th, The fourth icon which affords a second interpretation of the general
 formulae.
 We might dispense with the fifth and eighth species of signs-the devices
 * It is interesting to observe that this reasoning is dilemmatic. In fact, the dilemma involves the
 fifth icon. The dilemma was only introduced into logic from rhetoric by the humanists of the renais-
 sance; and at that time logic was studied with so little accuracy that the peculiar nature of this mode
 of reasoning escaped notice. I was thus led to suppose that the whole non-relative logic was derivable
 from the principles of the ancient syllogistic, and this error is involved in Chapter II of my paper in
 the third volume of this Journal. My friend, Professor Schr6der, detected the mistake and showed that
 the distributive formulas (a + y) z -< xz + yz
 (x z)(Y+z) -< xy+z
 could not be deduced from syllogistic principles. I had myself independently discovered and virtually
 stated the same thing. (Studies in Logic, p. 189.) There is some disagreement as to the definition of the
 dilemma (see Keynes's excellent Formal Logic, p. 241); but the most useful definition would be a
 syllogism depending on the above distribution formulae. The distribution formulw
 xz + yz-< (x + y) z
 xy+z-< (X+Z)(y+Z)
 are strictly syllogistic. DeMorgan's added moods are virtually dilemmatic, depending on the principle
 of excluded middle.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Alqebra of Logic. 191
 by which we express negation-by adopting a second operational sign <, such
 that x' Y
 should inean that x v, y - f. With this. we should require new indices of
 connections, and new general formulae. Possibly this might be the preferable
 notation. We should thus have two operational signs but no sign of negation.
 The forms of Boolian algebra hitherto used, have either two operational signs
 and a special sign of negation, or three operational signs. One of the operational
 signs is in that case superfluous. Thus, in the usual notation we have
 x +y =- xy
 showing two modes of writing the same fact. The apparent balance between
 the two sets of theorems exhibited so strikingly by Schr6der, arises entirely from
 this double way of writing everything. But while the ordinary system is not so
 analytically fitted to its purpose as that here set forth, the character of superfluity
 here, as in maniy other cases in algebra, brings with it great facility in working.
 The general formulae given above are not convenient in practice. We may
 dispense with them altogether, as vell as with one of the indices of tokens used
 in them, by the use of the following rules. A proposition of the forin
 x -< y
 is true if x - f or y = v. It is only false if y = f and x = v. A proposition
 written in the form z_< y
 is true if x = V and y = f, and is false if either x = f or y = v. Accordingly,
 to find whether a formula is necessarily true substitute f and v for the letters
 and see whether it can be supposed false by any such assignment of values. Take,
 for example, the formula
 '(X -< 3/) -<4(y -< z) -< (a:,x z),
 To make this false we must take
 (x-< y) = v
 I (Y < z) -< (x -< Z) t=f
 The last gives (y-<z)=v, (x-<z)'=f, xV, z-f.
 Substituting these values in
 (x-<y)=v (y-<z)=v
 we have (v-<y)=v (Y-<f)=V,
 which cannot be satisfied together.
 As another example, required the conclusion from the following premises.
 Any one I might marry would be either beautiful or plain; any one whom I
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 192 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 might marry would be a woman; any beautiful woman would be an ineligible
 wife; any plain woman would be an ineligible wife. Let
 m be any one whom I might marry,
 b, beautiful,
 p, plain,
 w, woman,
 i , ineligible.
 Then the premises are
 m -<(b -<f) -
 m-< w,
 w -< b-< ,
 w-< p-< i.
 Let x be the conclusion. Then,
 [m -< (b -< f) -< p] -< (m -< w) -<(w -<b-< i) -<(w -<p<x)-
 is necessarily true. Now if we suppose m =v, the proposition can only be
 made false by putting w v and either b or p v. In this case the proposition
 can only be made false by putting i = V. If, therefore, x can only be made f by
 putting m = v, i = f, that is if x = (m -< i) the proposition is necessarily true.
 In this method, we introduce the two special tokens of second intention
 f and v, we retain two indices of tokens x and y, and we have a somewhat
 complex icon, with a special prescription for its use.
 A better method may be found as follows. We have seen that
 x < (y -< z)
 may be conveniently written -< y -< z;
 while (x< y) -< z
 ought to retain the parenthesis. Let us extend this rule, so as to be more
 general, and hold it necessary always to include the antecedent in parenthesis.
 Thus, let us write (x) -< y
 instead of x -< y. If now, we merely change the external appearance of two
 signs; namely, if we use the vinculum instead of the parenthesis, and the sign
 + in place of-<, we shall have
 x -< y written x + y
 -< y-< z It" z x+y9+z
 (x-< y)-< z It x + y + z, etc.
 We may further write for x < y, x + y implying that X + y is an antecedent for
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 193
 whatever consequent may be taken, and the vinculum becomes identified with
 the sign of negation. We may also use the sign of multiplication as an abbre-
 viation, putting xy = 7 + Y= x-< .
 This subjects addition and multiplication to all the rules of ordinary
 algebra, and also to the following:
 y+x-x-y y(x+x)-y
 x + x - VX xzf
 xy + z= (x + z)(y + z).
 To any proposition we have a right to add any expression at pleasure; also
 to strike out any factor of any term. The expressions for different propositions
 separately known may be multiplied together. These are substantially Mr.
 Mitchell's rules of procedure. Thus the premises of Barbara are
 + y and y+z.
 Multiplying these, we get (x + y)(y + z) =xy + yz.
 Dropping y and y we reach the conclusion x + z.
 III.-First-intentional Logic of Relatives.
 The algebra of Boole affords a language by which anything may be expressed
 which can be said without speaking of more than one individual at a time. It
 is true that it can assert that certain characters belong to a whole class, but only
 such characters as belong to each individual separately. The logic of relatives
 considers statements involving two and more individuals at once. Indices are
 here required. Taking, first, a degenerate form of relation, we may write xiyj
 to signify that x is true of the individual i while y is true of the individual j.
 If z be a relative character zi0 will signify that i is in that relation to j. In this
 way we can express relations of considerable complexity. Thus, if
 1, 2, 3,
 4, 5, 6,
 7, 8, 9,
 are points in a plane, and 1123 signifies that 1, 2, and 3 lie on one line, a well-
 known proposition of geometry may be written
 il'59 -< 1267 K< 1348 -< 1147 '< 1258 < 1369 < 1123 (< 1456 < 1789
 In this notation is involved a sixth icon.
 We now come to the distinction of some and all, a distinction which is pre-
 cisely on a par with that between truth and falsehood; that is, it is descriptive,
 not mnetrical.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 194 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 All attempts to introduce this distinction into the Boolian algebra were
 more or less complete failures until Mr. Mitchell showed how it was to be effected.
 His method really consists in making the whole expression of the proposition
 consist of two parts, a pure Boolian expression referring to an individual and a
 Quantifying part saying what individual this is. Thus, if k means 'he is a king,'
 and h, 'he is happy,' the Boolian (k + h)
 means that the individual spoken of is either not a king or is happy. Now,
 applying the quantification, we may write
 Any (k + 7t)
 to mean that this is true of any individual in the (limited) universe, or
 Some (k+7t)
 to mean that an individual exists who is either not a king or is happy. So
 Some (kih)
 means some king is happy, and Any (kch)
 mieans every individual is both a king and happy. The rules for the use of this
 notation are obvious. The two propositions
 Any (x) Any (y)
 are equivalent to Any (xy).
 From the two propositions Any (x) Some (y)
 we may infer Some (xy).*
 Mr. Mitchell has also a very interesting and instructive extension of his notation
 for some and all, to a two-dimensional universe, that is, to the logic of relatives.
 Here, in order to render the notation as iconical as possible we may use z for
 some, suggesting a sum, and H for all, suggesting a product. Thus X;i x means
 that x is true of some one of the individuals denoted by i or
 xixi =X + X + Xk + etc.
 * I will just remark, quite out of order, that the quantification may be made numerical; thus pro-
 ducing the numerically definite inferences of DeMorgan and Boole. Suppose at least 2 of the company
 have white neckties and at least i have dress coats. Let w mean 'he has a white necktie,' and d 'he has
 a dress coat. ' Then, the two propositions are 2 (w) and i (d).
 These are to be multiplied together. But we must remember that xy is a mere abbreviation for x + y,
 and must therefore write W + + d.c
 Now 2 w is the denial of 1 w, and this denial may be written (>1)i, or more than 3 of the universe
 (the company) have not white neckties. So d - (> 1) d. The combined premises thus become
 (> 1) + -Xd
 Now (> -) w (>)+(>) d gives May be ( + 1) (w + d).
 Thus we have May be (-f7Y,) (W + dc),
 and this is (At least -) (W + d),
 which is the conclusion.
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic. 195
 In the same way, Hli x means that x is true of all these individuals, or
 fli Xi-xi Xij Xk, etc.
 If x is a simple relation, Hi Hj x-j means that every i is in this relation to every j,
 ;i-j xj that some one i is in this relation to every j, njHXfx0 that to every
 j some i or other is in this relation, E*EZxjj that some i is in this relation to
 some j. It is to be remarked that ;ixi and H1ixi are only similar to a sum and
 a product; they are not strictly of that nature, because the individuals of the
 universe may be innumerable.
 At this point, the reader would perhaps not otherwise easily get so good a
 conception of the notation as by a little practice in translating from ordinary
 language into this system and back again. Let l,j mean that i is a lover of j,
 and bij that i is a benefactor of j. Then
 Hi ;j la; bij
 means that everything is at once a lover and a benefactor of something; and
 1i j Ij} bji
 that everything is a lover of a benefactor of itself.
 iZXkIj (lij + bjk)
 means that there are two persons, one of whom loves everything except bene-
 factors of the other (whether he loves any of these or not is -not stated). Let
 gi mean that i is a griffin, and -c that i is a chimera, then
 Hi HJ(9i 1u + Cj)
 means that if there be any chimeras there is some griffin that loves them all;
 while iHII gi (4., + c
 means that there is a- griffin, and he loves every chimera that exists (if any exist).
 On the other hand, Hi yi gi + J)
 means that griffins exist (one, at least), and that one or other of them loves each
 chimera that may exist; and 1i ; (g 4IV + c,)
 means that each chimera (if there is any) is loved by some griffin or other.
 Let us express: every part of the world is either sometimes visited with
 cholera, and at others with small-pox (without cholera), or never with yellow
 fever anid the plague together. Let
 cV mean the place i has cholera at the time j
 sij it it it small-pox " i
 y,f, " " Tyellow fever "
 Pi " " plague "
 Then we write Hi 52 XkH1(CijGikSik + Yil +_ pi)
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 196 PEIRCE: On the Algebra of Logic.
 Let us express this: one or other of two theories must be admitted, ist,
 that no man is at any time unselfish or free, and some men are always hypocritical,
 and at every time some men are friendly to men to whom they are at other times
 inimical, or 2d, at each moment all men are alike either angels or fiends. Let
 tt mean the man i is unselfish at the time j,
 fij 4 " " free
 hypocritical"
 a. " " 4' an angel
 dtij b' " " a fiend "
 PVAI " " " friendly I " i
 to the mank
 e.k the man i is an enemy at the time j to the man k;
 ijm the two objects j and m are identical.
 Then the proposition is
 HiXhljlk XI XmI-In11pIq (ij7ij hhjpkjlekmz ljm + apn + dqn)
 We have now to consider the procedure in working with this calculus. It
 is far from being true that the only problem of deduction is to draw a conclusion
 from given premises. On the contrary, it is fully as important to have a method
 for ascertaining what premises will yield a given conclusion. There are besides
 other problems of transformation, where a certain system of facts is given, and
 it is required to describe this in other terms of a definite kind. Such, for
 example, is the problem of the 15 young ladies, and others relating to synthemes.
 I shall, however, content myself here with showing how, when a set of premises
 are given, they can be united and certain letters eliminated. Of the various
 methods which might be pursued, I shall here give the one which seems to me
 the most useful on the whole.
 1st. The different premises having been written with distinct indices (the
 same index not used in two propositions) are written together, and all the Il's
 and 's are to be brought to the left. This can evidently be done, for
 , xi . Hi9 xi = H,rIjxix.i
 Xi xi * rI j xi- Xi HjXx Xi
 2d. Without deranging the order of the indices of any one premise, the IH's
 and X's belonging to different premises may be moved relatively to one another,
This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 19:36:08 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

