Perceptual control theory
Perceptual control theory (PCT) is a model of behavior
based on the principles of negative feedback, but diﬀer-
ing in important respects from engineering control the-
ory. Results of PCT experiments have demonstrated that
an organism controls neither its own behavior, nor exter-
nal environmental variables, but rather its own percep-
tions of those variables. Actions are not controlled, they
are varied so as to cancel the eﬀects that unpredictable en-
vironmental disturbances would otherwise have on con-
trolled perceptions.
According to the standard catch-
phrase of the ﬁeld, “behavior is the control of percep-
tion”. PCT demonstrates circular causation in a nega-
tive feedback loop closed through the environment. This
fundamentally contradicts the classical notion of linear
causation of behavior by stimuli, in which environmental
stimuli are thought to cause behavioral responses, medi-
ated (according to Cognitive Psychology) by intervening
cognitive processes.
Numerous computer simulations of speciﬁc behavioral
situations demonstrate its eﬃcacy,[1] with extremely high
correlations to observational data (0.95 or better), such as
are routinely expected in physics and chemistry. While
the adoption of PCT in the scientiﬁc community has not
been widespread, it has been applied not only in experi-
mental psychology and neuroscience, but also in sociol-
ogy, linguistics, and a number of other ﬁelds, and has led
to a method of psychotherapy called the Method of Lev-
els.
PCT has roots in insights of Claude Bernard and 20th
century control systems engineering and cybernetics. It
was originated as such, and given its present form and
experimental methodology, by William T. Powers.[2][3]
1
The place of purpose (intention)
and causation in psychology
A tradition from Aristotle through William James recog-
nizes that behavior is purposeful rather than merely re-
active. However, the only evidence for intentions was
subjective.
Behaviorists following Wundt, Thorndyke,
Watson, and others rejected introspective reports as data
for an objective science of psychology. Only observable
behavior could be admitted as data.[4]
There follows from this stance the assumption that envi-
ronmental events (stimuli) cause behavioral actions (re-
sponses). This assumption persists in cognitive psychol-
ogy, which interposes cognitive maps and other postu-
lated information processing between stimulus and re-
sponse, but otherwise retains the assumption of linear
causation from environment to behavior.
Another, more speciﬁc reason for psychologists’ rejecting
notions of purpose or intention was that they could not see
how a goal (a state that did not yet exist) could cause the
behavior that led to it. PCT resolves these philosophical
arguments about teleology because it provides a model of
the functioning of organisms in which purpose has objec-
tive status without recourse to introspection, and in which
causation is circular around feedback loops.
2
History
The unaﬃliated scientist William T. Powers recognized
that to be purposeful implies control, and that the con-
cepts and methods of engineered control systems could
be applied to biological control systems. Powers recog-
nized further that in any control system the variable that is
controlled is not the output of the system (the behavioral
actions), but its input, that is, a sensed and transformed
function of some state of the environment that could be
aﬀected by the control system’s output. Because some
of these sensed and transformed inputs appear as con-
sciously perceived aspects of the environment, Powers
labelled the controlled variable “perception”. The the-
ory came to be known as “Perceptual Control Theory”
or PCT rather than “Control Theory Applied to Psychol-
ogy” because control theorists often assert or assume that
it is the system’s output that is controlled. In PCT it is
the internal representation of the state of some variable in
the environment—a “perception” in everyday language—
that is controlled.[5] The basic principles of PCT were ﬁrst
published by Powers, Clark, and MacFarland as a “gen-
eral feedback theory of behavior” in 1960,[6] with credits
to cybernetic authors Wiener and Ashby, and has been
systematically developed since then in the research com-
munity that has gathered around it. Initially, it received
little general recognition, but is now better known.
3
Example
A simple negative feedback control system is a cruise
control system for a car. A cruise control system has a
sensor which “perceives” speed as the rate of spin of the
drive shaft directly connected to the wheels. It also has a
driver-adjustable 'goal' specifying a particular speed. The
1

2
4
THE METHODOLOGY OF MODELING, AND PCT AS MODEL
sensed speed is continuously compared against the spec-
iﬁed speed by a device (called a “comparator”) which
subtracts the currently sensed input value from the stored
goal value. The diﬀerence (the error signal) determines
the throttle setting (the accelerator depression), so that
the engine output is continuously varied to counter varia-
tions in the speed of the car. This type of classical nega-
tive feedback control was worked out by engineers in the
1930s and 1940s.
If the speed of the car starts to drop below the goal-speed,
for example when climbing a hill, the small increase in the
error signal, ampliﬁed, causes engine output to increase,
which keeps the error very nearly at zero. If the speed ex-
ceeds the goal, e.g. when going down a hill, the engine is
throttled back so as to act as a brake, so again the speed is
kept from departing more than a barely detectable amount
from the goal speed (brakes are needed only if the hill is
too steep). The result is that the cruise control system
maintains a speed close to the goal as the car goes up and
down hills, and as other disturbances such as wind aﬀect
the car’s speed. This is all done without any planning of
speciﬁc actions, and without any blind reactions to stim-
uli.
The same principles of negative feedback control (includ-
ing the ability to nullify eﬀects of unpredictable external
or internal disturbances) apply to living control systems.
The thesis of PCT is that animals and people do not con-
trol their behavior; rather, they vary their behavior as their
means for controlling their perceptions, with or without
external disturbances. This directly contradicts the his-
torical and still widespread assumption that behavior is
the ﬁnal result of stimulus inputs or cognitive plans.
4
The methodology of modeling,
and PCT as model
The principal datum in PCT methodology is the con-
trolled variable. The fundamental step of PCT research,
the Test for controlled variables, is the slow and gentle
application of disturbing inﬂuences to the state of a vari-
able in the environment which the researcher surmises is
already under control by the observed organism. It is es-
sential not to overwhelm the organism’s ability to control,
since that is what is being investigated. If the organism
changes its actions just so as to prevent the disturbing in-
ﬂuence from having the expected eﬀect on that variable,
that is strong evidence that the experimental action dis-
turbed a controlled variable. It is crucially important to
distinguish the perceptions and point of view of the ob-
server from those of the observed organism. It may take
a number of variations of the Test to isolate just which
aspect of the environmental situation is under control, as
perceived by the observed organism.
PCT employs a black box methodology. The controlled
variable as measured by the observer corresponds to a ref-
erence value for a perception that the organism is con-
trolling. The controlled variable is thus an objective in-
dex of the purpose or intention of those particular be-
havioral actions by the organism—the goal which those
actions consistently work to attain despite disturbances.
With few exceptions, in the current state of neuroscience
this internally maintained reference value cannot be di-
rectly observed as such (e.g. as a rate of ﬁring in a neu-
ron), nor have all of the relevant electrical and chemical
variables been traced by their speciﬁc pathways while a
living organism is engaging in what we externally observe
as behavior. However, when a working negative feedback
system simulated on a digital computer performs essen-
tially identically to observed organisms, then the well un-
derstood negative feedback structure of the simulation or
model (the white box) is understood to demonstrate the
unseen negative feedback structure within the organism
(the black box).
Data for individuals are not aggregated for statistical
analysis;[7] instead, a generative model is built which
replicates the data observed for individuals with very high
ﬁdelity (0.95 or better).
To build such a model of a
given behavioral situation requires careful measurements
of three observed variables:
qi The input quantity, that aspect of the stimulus which
the subject perceives and has been demonstrated to
be controlling.
qo The output quantity, that aspect of the subject’s be-
havior which aﬀects the state of qi.
d The disturbance, a value summing the eﬀects that any
other inﬂuences in the environment have on the state
of qi. In a controlled experiment one aims to have
just one disturbing inﬂuence that is under the control
of the investigator, but in naturalistic observation the
situation is frequently more complex.
A fourth value, the internally maintained reference r (a
variable ′setpoint′), is deduced from the value at which
the organism is observed to maintain qi, as determined
by the Test for controlled variables (described at the be-
ginning of this section).
With two variables speciﬁed, the controlled input qi and
the reference r, a properly designed control system, sim-
ulated on a digital computer, produces outputs qo that
almost precisely oppose unpredictable disturbances d to
the controlled input.
Further, the variance from per-
fect control accords well with that observed for living
organisms.[8] Perfect control would result in zero eﬀect
of the disturbance, but living organisms are not perfect
controllers, and the aim of PCT is to model living organ-
isms. When a computer simulation performs with >95%
conformity to experimentally measured values, opposing
the eﬀect of unpredictable changes in d by generating
(nearly) equal and opposite values of qo, it is understood

3
to model the behavior and the internal control-loop struc-
ture of the organism.
By extension, the elaboration of the theory constitutes a
general model of cognitive process and behavior. With
every speciﬁc model or simulation of behavior that is
constructed and tested against observed data, the general
model that is presented in the theory is exposed to poten-
tial challenge that could call for revision or could lead to
refutation.
5
Mathematics of PCT
To illustrate the mathematical calculations employed in a
PCT simulation, consider a pursuit tracking task in which
the participant keeps a mouse cursor aligned with a mov-
ing target on a computer monitor.
The model assumes that a perceptual signal within the
participant[9] represents the magnitude of the input quan-
tity qi. In the tracking task, the input quantity is the verti-
cal distance between the target position T and the cursor
position C, and the random variation of the target posi-
tion acts as the disturbance d of that input quantity. This
suggests that the perceptual signal p quantitatively repre-
sents the cursor position C minus the target position T, as
expressed in the equation p=C–T.
Between the perception of target and cursor and the con-
struction of the signal representing the distance between
them there is a delay of Τ milliseconds, so that the work-
ing perceptual signal at time t represents the target-to-
cursor distance at a prior time, t – Τ. Consequently, the
equation used in the model is
1. p(t) = C(t–Τ) – T(t–Τ)
The negative feedback control system receives a refer-
ence signal r which speciﬁes the magnitude of the given
perceptual signal which is currently intended or desired.
(For the origin of r within the organism, see under "A hi-
erarchy of control", below.) Both r and p are input to a
simple neural structure with r excitatory and p inhibitory.
This structure is called a “comparator”.[10] The eﬀect is to
subtract p from r, yielding an error signal e that indicates
the magnitude and sign of the diﬀerence between the de-
sired magnitude r and the currently input magnitude p of
the given perception. The equation representing this in
the model is:
2. e = r–p
The error signal e must be transformed to the output quan-
tity qo (representing the participant’s muscular eﬀorts af-
fecting the mouse position). Experiments have shown
that in the best model for the output function, the mouse
velocity Vcursor is proportional to the error signal e by a
gain factor G (that is, Vcursor = G*e). Thus, when the
perceptual signal p is smaller than the reference signal r,
the error signal e has a positive sign, and from it the model
computes an upward velocity of the cursor that is propor-
tional to the error.
The next position of the cursor Cnew is the current po-
sition Cold plus the velocity Vcursor times the duration
dt of one iteration of the program. By simple algebra,
we substitute G*e (as given above) for Vcursor, yielding
a third equation:
3. Cnew = Cold + G*e*dt
These three simple equations or program steps consti-
tute the simplest form of the model for the tracking task.
When these three simultaneous equations are evaluated
over and over with the same random disturbances d of the
target position that the human participant experienced,
the output positions and velocities of the cursor duplicate
the participant’s actions in the tracking task above within
4.0% of their peak-to-peak range, in great detail.
This simple model can be reﬁned with a damping factor
d which reduces the discrepancy between the model and
the human participant to 3.6% when the disturbance d is
set to maximum diﬃculty.
3'. Cnew = Cold + [(G*e)–(d*Cold)]*dt
Detailed discussion of this model in (Powers 2008) in-
cludes both source and executable code, with which the
reader can verify how well this simple program simulates
real behavior. No consideration is needed of possible
nonlinearities such as the Weber-Fechner law, potential
noise in the system, continuously varying angles at the
joints, and many other factors that could aﬄict perfor-
mance if this were a simple linear model. No inverse
kinematics or predictive calculations are required. The
model simply reduces the discrepancy between input p
and reference r continuously as it arises in real time, and
that is all that is required—as predicted by the theory.
6
Distinctions
from
engineering
control theory
Even a cursory reading of the Wikipedia article for
engineering control theory shows that in the artiﬁcial sys-
tems described there the reference signal is considered to
be an external input to the ‘plant’. In engineering control
theory, the reference signal or set point is public; in PCT,
it is not, but rather must be deduced from the results of
the test for controlled variables, as described above in the
methodology section. This is because in living systems
a reference signal is not an externally accessible input,
but instead originates elsewhere within the system. In the
hierarchical model, error output of higher-level control
loops, as described in the next section below, evokes r
from synapse-local memory, and the strength of r is pro-
portional to the (weighted) strength of the error signal or
signals from one or more higher-level systems.
In engineering control systems, in the case where there
are several such reference inputs, a ‘Controller’ is de-

4
8
REORGANIZATION IN EVOLUTION, DEVELOPMENT, AND LEARNING
signed to manipulate those inputs so as to obtain the eﬀect
on the output of the system that is desired by the system’s
designer, and the task of a control theory (so conceived) is
to calculate those manipulations so as to avoid instability
and oscillation. The designer of a PCT model or simu-
lation speciﬁes no particular desired eﬀect on the output
of the system, except that it must be whatever is required
to bring the input from the environment (the perceptual
signal) into conformity with the reference. In Perceptual
Control Theory, the input function for the reference sig-
nal is a weighted sum of internally generated signals (in
the canonical case, higher-level error signals), and loop
stability is determined locally for each loop in the man-
ner sketched in the preceding section on the mathematics
of PCT (and elaborated more fully in the referenced lit-
erature). The weighted sum is understood to result from
reorganization.
Engineering control theory is computationally demand-
ing, but as the preceding section shows, PCT is not. For
example, contrast the implementation of a model of an
inverted pendulum in engineering control theory[11] with
the PCT implementation as a hierarchy of ﬁve simple
control systems.[12]
7
A hierarchy of control
Perceptions, in PCT, are constructed and controlled in
a hierarchy of levels. For example, visual perception of
an object is constructed from diﬀerences in light inten-
sity or diﬀerences in sensations such as color at its edges.
Controlling the shape or location of the object requires al-
tering the perceptions of sensations or intensities (which
are controlled by lower-level systems). This organizing
principle is applied at all levels, up to the most abstract
philosophical and theoretical constructs.
The Russian physiologist Nicolas Bernstein[13] indepen-
dently came to the same conclusion that behavior has to
be multiordinal—organized hierarchically, in layers. A
simple problem led to this conclusion at about the same
time both in PCT and in Bernstein’s work. The spinal
reﬂexes act to stabilize limbs against disturbances. Why
do they not prevent centers higher in the brain from us-
ing those limbs to carry out behavior? Since the brain
obviously does use the spinal systems in producing be-
havior, there must be a principle that allows the higher
systems to operate by incorporating the reﬂexes, not just
by overcoming them or turning them oﬀ. The answer is
that the reference value (setpoint) for a spinal reﬂex is
not static; rather, it is varied by higher-level systems as
their means of moving the limbs. This principle applies
to higher feedback loops, as each loop presents the same
problem to subsystems above it.
Whereas an engineered control system has a reference
value or setpoint adjusted by some external agency, the
reference value for a biological control system cannot be
set in this way. The setpoint must come from some in-
ternal process. If there is a way for behavior to aﬀect it,
any perception may be brought to the state momentarily
speciﬁed by higher levels and then be maintained in that
state against unpredictable disturbances. In a hierarchy
of control systems, higher levels adjust the goals of lower
levels as their means of approaching their own goals set
by still-higher systems. This has important consequences
for any proposed external control of an autonomous living
control system (organism). At the highest level, reference
values (goals) are set by heredity or adaptive processes.
8
Reorganization in evolution, de-
velopment, and learning
If an organism controls inappropriate perceptions or con-
trols some perceptions to inappropriate values, it is less
likely to bring progeny to maturity, and may die. Con-
sequently, by natural selection successive generations of
organisms evolve so that they control those perceptions
that, when controlled with appropriate setpoints, tend to
maintain critical internal variables at optimal levels, or at
least within non-lethal limits. Powers called these critical
internal variables “intrinsic variables” (Ashby’s “essential
variables”).
The mechanism that inﬂuences the development of struc-
tures of perceptions to be controlled is termed “reorgani-
zation”, a process within the individual organism that is
subject to natural selection just as is the evolved structure
of individuals within a species.[14]
This “reorganization system” is proposed to be part of
the inherited structure of the organism. It changes the
underlying parameters and connectivity of the control hi-
erarchy in a random-walk manner. There is a basic con-
tinuous rate of change in intrinsic variables which pro-
ceeds at a speed set by the total error (and stops at zero
error), punctuated by random changes in direction in a
hyperspace with as many dimensions as there are criti-
cal variables. This is a more or less direct adaptation of
Ashby’s "homeostat", ﬁrst adopted into PCT in the 1960
paper and then changed to use E. coli’s method of navi-
gating up gradients of nutrients, as described by Koshland
(1980).[15]
Reorganization may occur at any level when loss of con-
trol at that level causes intrinsic (essential) variables to
deviate from genetically determined set points. This is
the basic mechanism that is involved in trial-and-error
learning, which leads to the acquisition of more system-
atic kinds of learning processes.[16]

11.1
Learning
5
9
Conﬂict
In a hierarchy of interacting control systems, diﬀerent
systems at one level can send conﬂicting goals to one
lower system. When two systems are specifying diﬀer-
ent goals for the same lower-level variable, they are in
conﬂict. Protracted conﬂict is experienced by human be-
ings as many forms of psychological distress such as anxi-
ety, obsession, depression, confusion, and vacillation. Se-
vere conﬂict prevents the aﬀected systems from being
able to control, eﬀectively destroying their function for
the organism.
Higher level control systems often are able to use known
strategies (which are themselves acquired through prior
reorganizations) to seek perceptions that don't produce
the conﬂict. Normally, this takes place without notice. If
the conﬂict persists and systematic “problem solving” by
higher systems fails, the reorganization system may mod-
ify existing systems until they bypass the conﬂict or until
they produce new reference signals (goals) that are not in
conﬂict at lower levels.
When reorganization results in an arrangement that re-
duces or eliminates the error that is driving it, the process
of reorganization slows or stops with the new organiza-
tion in place. (This replaces the concept of reinforce-
ment learning.) New means of controlling the percep-
tions involved, and indeed new perceptual constructs sub-
ject to control, may also result from reorganization. In
simplest terms, the reorganization process varies things
until something works, at which point we say that the or-
ganism has learned. When done in the right way, this
method can be surprisingly eﬃcient in simulations.
10
PCT and psychotherapy:
the
Method of Levels (MOL)
The reorganization concept has led to a method of psy-
chotherapy called the Method of Levels (MOL) currently
being tested in England, the United States, and Australia.
11
PCT and neuroscience
11.1
Learning
Currently, no one theory has been agreed upon to ex-
plain the synaptic, neuronal or systemic basis of learn-
ing. Prominent since 1973, however, is the idea that long-
term potentiation (LTP) of populations of synapses in-
duces learning through both pre- and postsynaptic mech-
anisms (Bliss & Lømo, 1973; Bliss & Gardner-Medwin,
1973). LTP is a form of Hebbian learning, which pro-
posed that high-frequency, tonic activation of a circuit of
neurones increases the eﬃcacy with which they are acti-
vated and the size of their response to a given stimulus as
compared to the standard neurone (Hebb, 1949). These
mechanisms are the principles behind Hebb’s famously
simple explanation: “Those that ﬁre together, wire to-
gether” (Hebb, 1949).
LTP has received much support since it was ﬁrst observed
by Terje Lømo in 1966 and is still the subject of many
modern studies and clinical research. However, there are
possible alternative mechanisms underlying LTP, as pre-
sented by Enoki, Hu, Hamilton and Fine in 2009, pub-
lished in the highly esteemed journal Neuron. They con-
cede that LTP is the basis of learning. However, they
ﬁrstly propose that LTP occurs in individual synapses,
and this plasticity is graded (as opposed to in a binary
mode) and bidirectional (Enoki et al., 2009). Secondly,
the group suggest that the synaptic changes are expressed
solely presynaptically, via changes in the probability of
transmitter release (Enoki et al., 2009).
Finally, the
team predict that the occurrence of LTP could be age-
dependent, as the plasticity of a neonatal brain would be
higher than that of a mature one. Therefore the theo-
ries diﬀer, as one proposes an on/oﬀoccurrence of LTP
by pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms and the other pro-
poses only presynaptic changes, graded ability, and age-
dependence.
These theories do agree on one element of LTP, namely,
that it must occur through physical changes to the synap-
tic membrane/s, i.e. synaptic plasticity. Perceptual Con-
trol Theory encompasses both of these views. It proposes
the mechanism of ‘reorganisation’ as the basis of learning.
Reorganisation occurs within the inherent control system
of a human or animal by restructuring the inter- and in-
traconnections of its hierarchical organisation, akin to the
neuroscientiﬁc phenomenon of neural plasticity. This re-
organisation initially allows the trial-and-error form of
learning, which is seen in babies, and then progresses to
more structured learning through association, apparent in
infants, and ﬁnally to systematic learning, covering the
adult ability to learn from both internally and externally
generated stimuli and events. In this way, PCT provides
a valid model for learning that combines the biological
mechanisms of LTP with an explanation of the progres-
sion and change of mechanisms associated with develop-
mental ability (Plooij 1987, 2003, 2010).
Powers (2008) produced a simulation of arm co-
ordination. He suggested that in order to move your arm,
fourteen control systems that control fourteen joint an-
gles are involved, and they reorganise simultaneously and
independently. It was found that for optimum perfor-
mance, the output functions must be organised in a way
so as each control system’s output only aﬀects the one
environmental variable it is perceiving. In this simula-
tion, the reorganising process is working as it should, and
just as Powers suggests that it works in humans, reduc-
ing outputs that cause error and increasing those that re-
duce error. Initially, the disturbances have large eﬀects
on the angles of the joints, but over time the joint angles

6
12
CURRENT SITUATION AND PROSPECTS
match the reference signals more closely due to the sys-
tem being reorganised. Powers (2008) suggests that in
order to achieve coordination of joint angles to produce
desired movements, instead of calculating how multiple
joint angles must change to produce this movement the
brain uses negative feedback systems to generate the joint
angles that are required. A single reference signal that is
varied in a higher-order system can generate a movement
that requires several joint angles to change at the same
time.
11.2
Hierarchical organisation
Botvinick (2008) proposed that one of the founding in-
sights of the cognitive revolution was the recognition
of hierarchical structure in human behavior.
Despite
decades of research, however, the computational mech-
anisms underlying hierarchically organized behavior are
still not fully understood. Bedre, Hoﬀman, Cooney &
D’Esposito (2009) propose that the fundamental goal in
cognitive neuroscience is to characterize the functional
organization of the frontal cortex that supports the con-
trol of action.
Recent neuroimaging data has supported the hypothesis
that the frontal lobes are organized hierarchically, such
that control is supported in progressively caudal regions
as control moves to more concrete speciﬁcation of action.
However, it is still not clear whether lower-order con-
trol processors are diﬀerentially aﬀected by impairments
in higher-order control when between-level interactions
are required to complete a task, or whether there are
feedback inﬂuences of lower-level on higher-level control
(Bedre, Hoﬀman, Cooney & D’Esposito 2009).
Botvinik (2008) found that all existing models of hier-
archically structured behavior share at least one general
assumption – that the hierarchical, part–whole organiza-
tion of human action is mirrored in the internal or neural
representations underlying it. Speciﬁcally, the assump-
tion is that there exist representations not only of low-
level motor behaviors, but also separable representations
of higher-level behavioral units. The latest crop of mod-
els provides new insights, but also poses new or reﬁned
questions for empirical research, including how abstract
action representations emerge through learning, how they
interact with diﬀerent modes of action control, and how
they sort out within the prefrontal cortex (PFC).
Perceptual Control theory (PCT) can provide an explana-
tory model of neural organisation that deals with the cur-
rent issues. PCT describes the hierarchical character of
behavior as being determined by control of hierarchi-
cally organized perception. Control systems in the body
and in the internal environment of billions of intercon-
nected neurons within the brain are responsible for keep-
ing perceptual signals within survivable limits in the un-
predictably variable environment from which those per-
ceptions are derived. PCT does not propose that there
is an internal model within which the brain simulates be-
havior before issuing commands to execute that behavior.
Instead, one of its characteristic features is the principled
lack of cerebral organisation of behavior. Rather, behav-
ior is the organism’s variable means to reduce the discrep-
ancy between perceptions and reference values which
are based on various external and internal inputs (Cools,
1985). Behavior must constantly adapt and change for
an organism to maintain its perceptual goals.
In this
way, PCT can provide an explanation of abstract learn-
ing through spontaneous reorganisation of the hierarchy.
PCT proposes that conﬂict occurs between disparate ref-
erence values for a given perception rather than between
diﬀerent responses (Mansell 2011), and that learning is
implemented as trial-and-error changes of the properties
of control systems (Marken & Powers 1989), rather than
any speciﬁc response being ‘‘reinforced.’’ In this way, be-
havior remains adaptive to the environment as it unfolds,
rather than relying on learned action patterns that may not
ﬁt.
Hierarchies of perceptual control have been simulated in
computer models and have been shown to provide a close
match to behavioral data. Marken (1986) conducted an
experiment comparing the behavior of a perceptual con-
trol hierarchy computer model with that of six healthy
volunteers in three experiments. The participants were
required to keep the distance between a left line and a
centre line equal to that of the centre line and a right line.
They were also instructed to keep both distances equal to
2 cm. They had 2 paddles in their hands, one controlling
the left line and one controlling the middle line. They
had to react to random disturbances applied to the posi-
tions of the lines. As the participants achieved control,
they managed to nullify the expected eﬀect of the distur-
bances by moving their paddles. The correlation between
the behavior of subjects and the model in all the experi-
ments approached .99. It is proposed that the organiza-
tion of models of hierarchical control systems such as this
informs us about the organization of the human subjects
whose behavior it so closely reproduces.
The preceding explanation of PCT principles provides
justiﬁcation of how this theory can provide a valid ex-
planation of neural organisation and how it can explain
some of the Current issues of conceptual models.
12
Current situation and prospects
Perceptual control theory currently proposes a hierarchy
of 11 levels of perceptions controlled by systems in the
human mind and neural architecture. These are: inten-
sity, sensation, conﬁguration, transition, event, relation-
ship, category, sequence, program, principle, and system
concept. Diverse perceptual signals at a lower level (e.g.
visual perceptions of intensities) are combined in an input
function to construct a single perception at the higher level
(e.g. visual perception of a color sensation). The percep-

13.1
Sociology
7
tions that are constructed and controlled at the lower lev-
els are passed along as the perceptual inputs at the higher
levels. The higher levels in turn control by telling the
lower levels what to perceive: that is, they adjust the ref-
erence levels (goals) of the lower levels.[17]
While many computer demonstrations of principles have
been developed, the proposed higher levels are diﬃcult
to model because too little is known about how the brain
works at these levels. Isolated higher-level control pro-
cesses can be investigated, but models of an extensive
hierarchy of control are still only conceptual, or at best
rudimentary.
Perceptual Control Theory has not been widely ac-
cepted in mainstream psychology, but has been eﬀec-
tively used in a considerable range of domains[18] in hu-
man factors,[19] clinical psychology, and psychotherapy
(the "Method of Levels"), and it has formed the concep-
tual foundation for the reference model used by a succes-
sion of NATO research study groups.[20] It is the basis
for a considerable body of research in sociology.[21] It is
being taught in several universities worldwide and is the
subject of a number of PhD degrees.
13
Notes
• Cziko, Gary. (1995). Without miracles: Univer-
sal selection theory and the second Darwinian rev-
olution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (A Bradford
Book). ISBN 0-262-53147-X (Online)
• Cziko, Gary. (2000). The things we do: Using the
lessons of Bernard and Darwin to understand the
what, how, and why of our behavior. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press (A Bradford Book). ISBN 0-262-
03277-5 (Online)
• Marken, Richard S. (1992) Mind readings: Experi-
mental studies of purpose. Benchmark Publications:
New Canaan, CT.
• Marken, Richard S. (2002) More mind readings:
Methods and models in the study of purpose. Chapel
Hill, NC: New View. ISBN 0-944337-43-0
• Plooij, F. X. (1984). The behavioral development
of free-living chimpanzee babies and infants. Nor-
wood, N.J.: Ablex.
• Plooij, F. X. (2003). “The trilogy of mind”. In M.
Heimann (Ed.), Regression periods in human infancy
(pp. 185–205). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
• Powers, William T. (1973). Behavior: The control
of perception. Chicago: Aldine de Gruyter. ISBN
0-202-25113-6. [2nd exp. ed. = Powers (2005)].
• Powers, William T. (1989). Living control systems.
[Selected papers 1960–1988.] New Canaan, CT:
Benchmark Publications. ISBN 0-9647121-3-X.
• Powers, William T. (1992). Living control systems
II. [Selected papers 1959–1990.] New Canaan, CT:
Benchmark Publications.
• Powers, William T. (1998). Making sense of be-
havior: The meaning of control. New Canaan, CT:
Benchmark Publications. ISBN 0-9647121-5-6.
• Powers, William T. (2005).
Behavior: The con-
trol of perception. New Canaan: Benchmark Pub-
lications.
ISBN 0-9647121-7-2.
[2nd exp.
ed.
of Powers (1973).
Chinese tr.
(2004) Guong-
dong Higher Learning Education Press, Guangzhou,
China. ISBN 7-5361-2996-3.]
• Powers, William T. (2008). Living Control Systems
III: The fact of control. [Mathematical appendix by
Dr. Richard Kennaway. Includes computer pro-
grams for the reader to demonstrate and experimen-
tally test the theory.] New Canaan, CT: Benchmark
Publications. ISBN 978-0-9647121-8-8.
• Powers, William. T., Clark, R. K., and McFarland,
R. L. (1960). “A general feedback theory of hu-
man behavior [Part 1; Part 2]. Perceptual and Motor
Skills 11, 71-88; 309–323.
• Powers, William T. and Runkel, Philip J. 2011. Di-
alogue concerning the two chief approaches to a sci-
ence of life: Word pictures and correlations versus
working models. Hayward, CA: Living Control Sys-
tems Publishing. ISBN 0-9740155-1-2.
• Robertson, R.J. & Powers, W.T. (1990). Introduc-
tion to modern psychology: the control-theory view.
Gravel Switch, KY: Control Systems Group.
• Robertson, R. J., Goldstein, D.M., Mermel, M., &
Musgrave, M. (1999). Testing the self as a control
system: Theoretical and methodological issues. Int.
J. Human-Computer Studies, 50, 571-580.
• Runkel, Philip J[ulian].
1990.
Casting Nets and
Testing Specimens: Two Grand Methods of Psychol-
ogy. New York: Praeger. ISBN 0-275-93533-7.
[Repr. 2007, Haywood, CA: Living Control Sys-
tems Publishing, ISBN 0-9740155-7-1.]
• Runkel, Philip J[ulian]. (2003). People as living
things. Hayward, CA: Living Control Systems Pub-
lishing. ISBN 0-9740155-0-4
13.1
Sociology
• McClelland, Kent (1994). “Perceptual Control and
Social Power”. Sociological Perspectives 37: 461–
496. doi:10.2307/1389276.
• McClelland, Kent (2004). “The Collective Control
of Perceptions: Constructing Order from Conﬂict”.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
60: 65–99. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2003.08.003.

8
15
EXTERNAL LINKS
• McClelland, Kent and Thomas J. Fararo, eds.
(2006). Purpose, Meaning, and Action: Control Sys-
tems Theories in Sociology.
New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
• McPhail, Clark. 1991. The Myth of the Madding
Crowd. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
14
References
[1] For example in this collection.
[2] Runkel, Philip J. (1990). Casting nets and testing spec-
imens: Two grand methods of psychology. New York:
Praeger. p. 103. ISBN 0-275-93533-7.
[3] Cziko, Gary (2000), The things we do: Using the lessons
of Bernard and Darwin to understand the what, how, and
why of our behavior, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, p. 9,
ISBN 0-262-03277-5
[4] “The behaviorist asks: Why don't we make what we can
observe the real ﬁeld of psychology? Let us limit ourselves
to things that can be observed, and formulate laws con-
cerning only those things. Now what can we observe? We
can observe behavior—what the organism does or says.”
Watson, J.B. (1924). Behaviorism. New York: People’s
Institute Publishing Company.
[5] For additional information about the history of PCT, see
interviews with William T. Powers in the “Audio” section
under “External links”.
[6] Powers. W.T., Clark, R.K., and McFarland, R.L. (1960).
“A general feedback theory of human behavior”. Percep-
tual and Motor Skills 11, 71-88 (Part 1) and 309-323 (Part
2). [Reprinted in General Systems V, 63-83, 1960. Partial
reprint in Smith, A. G., Communication and Culture, New
York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston (1966).]
[7] See Runkel 1990 on the limitations of statistical methods
and the value of individual performance data.
[8] Powers (2008).
[9] This has been demonstrated to be a rate of ﬁring in a neu-
ron, at least at the lowest levels. See Powers (1973).
[10] Powers (1973).
[11] Documented e.g. at Miranda, José Luis Corona. 2009.
Miranda, José Luis Corona.
2009.
“Application of
Kalman Filtering and PID Control for Direct Inverted
Pendulum Control”. M.A. Thesis, Chico State University,
Chico, CA.
[12] Documented at Powers, William T. & Richard Kenn-
away. (Edited by Dag Forssell.) 2004. “Inverted Pen-
dulum”. Hayward, CA: Living Control Systems., with
downloadable source and executable code. Other demon-
strations are available at www.livingcontrolsystems.com/
demos/tutor_pct.html.
[13] Bernstein, Nicolas. 1967. Coordination and regulation of
movements. New York: Pergamon Press.
[14] For an introduction, see the Byte articles on robotics and
the article on the origins of purpose in this collection.
[15] Koshland, Daniel.
(1980).
Bacterial chemotaxis as a
model behavioral system. New York: Raven Press.
[16] Cziko, Gary (1995).
Without Miracles.
ISBN 0-262-
03232-5..
[17] Powers, William T. (1973). Behavior: The Control of
Perception.
ISBN 0-7045-0092-2.Cziko, Gary (1995).
Without Miracles. ISBN 0-262-03232-5..
[18] The June 1999 Issue of The International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies contained papers ranging from
tracking through cockpit layout to self-image and crowd
dynamics.
[19] PCT lies at the foundation of Component-Based Usability
Testing.
[20] Reports of these groups are available from the NATO
Research and Technology Administration publications
page <http://www.rta.nato.int/Abstracts.aspx> under the
titles RTO-TR-030, RTO-TR-IST-021, and RTO-TR-
IST-059.
[21] For example: McClelland, Kent A. and Thomas J. Fararo,
eds. 2006, Purpose, Meaning and Action: Control Systems
Theories in Sociology, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
(McClelland is co-author of Chapter 1, “Control Systems
Thinking in Sociological Theory,” and author of Chapter
2, “Understanding Collective Control Processes.”). Mc-
Clelland, Kent, 2004, “Collective Control of Perception:
Constructing Order from Conﬂict”, International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies 60:65-99. McPhail, Clark.
1991, The myth of the madding crowd New York: Aldine
de Gruyter.
15
External links
• Articles
• PCT for the Beginner by William T. Powers
(2007)
• The Dispute Over Control theory by William
T. Powers (1993) - requires access approval
• Demonstrations of perceptual control by Gary
Cziko (2006)
• Audio
• Interview with William T. Powers on origin
and history of PCT (Part One - 20060722
(58.7M)
• Interview with William T. Powers on origin
and history of PCT (Part Two - 20070728
(57.7M)
• Websites
• PCTWeb - Warren Mansell’s website on PCT

9
• The Control Systems Group
• Living Control Systems Publishing - resources
and books about PCT
• Mind Readings - Rick Marken’s website on
PCT

10
16
TEXT AND IMAGE SOURCES, CONTRIBUTORS, AND LICENSES
16
Text and image sources, contributors, and licenses
16.1
Text
• Perceptual control theory Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perceptual_control_theory?oldid=674421301 Contributors: Michael
Hardy, AllanR~enwiki, Evercat, Topbanana, Piotrus, Zro, Chris Howard, Mmt, John Vandenberg, Cmdrjameson, Mdd, GregorB, Scm83x,
Rjwilmsi, Gcziko~enwiki, Gary Cziko, Sherool, Epolk, DanMS, Joel7687, Janarius, Drdmg, Kent McClelland, SmackBot, DCDuring,
Psiphiorg, Chris the speller, Bluebot, Oli Filth, Bn, Mgiganteus1, Scoty6776, Saviourmachine, CmdrObot, Myasuda, Meno25, Dougher,
User A1, Ekotkie, ExplicitImplicity, Tim Barber, Optigan13, Hello71, Mild Bill Hiccup, SchreiberBike, Yobot, AnomieBOT, Citation bot,
Kithira, Omnipaedista, L29Ah, FrescoBot, Jonesey95, Orenburg1, BillPCT, Hazard-Bot, Willem-Paul, Helpful Pixie Bot, BG19bot, Snow
Rise, Sasha lucy, Biogeographist, Lizia7, Kolv, EChastain, Piotrzuralski and Anonymous: 34
16.2
Images
• File:Text_document_with_red_question_mark.svg Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a4/Text_document_
with_red_question_mark.svg License: Public domain Contributors: Created by bdesham with Inkscape; based upon Text-x-generic.svg
from the Tango project. Original artist: Benjamin D. Esham (bdesham)
16.3
Content license
• Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0

