The
Periodic
Table
P
r
i
m
o
 
L
e
v
i
Translated from the Italian by
Raymond  Rosenthal
S C H O C K E N  B O O K S
N E W  Y O R K

English translation copyright © 1984 by Schocken Books Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Schocke n Books Inc. , 
Ne w York. Distributed by Pantheon Books, a division of Random 
House, Inc. , New York. Originally published in Italy as Il Sistema 
Periodico by Giulio Einaudi editore , s.p.a.,Turin , Italian text copyright © 
1975 by Giulio Einaudi editore, s.p.a. Originally published in 
hardcover by Schocken Books in 1984 .
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Levi, Prim o
The periodic table
Translation of: Il sistema periodico. 
I. Title .
PQ4872.E8S51 3 198 4
854'.91 4
84-545 3
ISBN 0-8052-1041- 5
Manufactured in the Unite d States of America
[‘95 ] 19 18 17 16

C O N T E N T S
Argon
6
Hydrogen
24
Zinc
32
Iron
40
Potassium
53
Nickel
64
Lead
82
Mercury
99
Phosphorus
112
Gold
130
Cerium
142
Chromium
150
Sulfur
163
Titanium
168
Arsenic
172
Nitrogen
178
Tin
187
Uranium
194
Silver
203
Vanadium
214
Carbon
227

Ibergekumene tsores iz gut tsu dertsejlin. 
Troubles overcome are good to tell.
—Yiddish Proverb

T h e 
P e r i o d i c 
T a b l e

A R G O N
There are the so-called inert gases in the air we breathe. They 
bear  curious  Greek  names  of  erudite  derivation  which  mean  “the 
New,” “the  Hidden,” “the  Inactive,” and  “the  Alien.” They are 
indeed so inert, so satisfied with their condition, that they do not 
interfere in any chemical reaction, do not combine with any other 
element, and for precisely this reason have gone  undetected for 
centuries. As late as 1962 a diligent chemist after long and ingenious 
efforts succeeded in forcing the Alien (xenon) to combine fleetingly 
with extremely  avid and lively  fluorine, and the feat seemed so 
extraordinary that he was given a Nobel prize. They are also called 
the noble gases—and here  there’s  room  for  discussion as  to 
whether all noble gases are really inert and all inert gases are noble. 
And, finally, they are

also  called  rare  gases,  even  though  one  of  them,  argon  (the 
Inactive), is present in the air in the considerable proportion of 
1 percent, that is, twenty  or thirty times  more abundant than 
carbon dioxide, without which there would not be a trace of life 
on this planet.
The little that I know about my ancestors presents  many 
similarities to these gases. Not all of them were materially inert, 
for that was not granted them. On the contrary, they were—o r 
had to be—quit e active, in order to earn a living and because of 
a reigning morality that held that “he who does not work shall 
not eat.” But there is no doubt that they were inert in their inner 
spirits, inclined to disinterested  speculation, witty discourses, 
elegant, sophisticated, and gratuitous discussion. It can hardly be 
by  chance  that  all  the  deeds  attributed  to  them,  though quite 
various, have in common a touch of the static, an  attitude of 
dignified abstention, of voluntary (or accepted) relegation to the 
margins of the great river of life.  Noble, inert,  and rare:  their 
history is quite poor when compared to that of other illustrious 
Jewish communities in Italy and Europe. It  appears that they 
arrived in Piedmont about 1500, from Spain by way of Provence, 
as seems proven by certain typical toponymic surnames, such as 
Bedarida-Bédarrides, Momigliano-Montmélian, Segre (this is a 
tributary of the Ebro which flows  past  Lérida  in  northeastern 
Spain),  Foà-Foix,  Cavaglion-Cavaillon, Migliau-Millau; the name 
of the town Lunel near the  mouth  of  the  Rhône  between 
Montpellier  and  Nîmes  was  translated into the Hebrew yareakh 
(“moon” ; luna in Italian), and  from  this  derived the Jewish-
Piedmontese surname Jarach.
Rejected  or given a less than warm welcome in Turin, they 
settled in various  agricultural localities in southern Piedmont, 
introducing there the technology of making silk, though without 
ever getting beyond, even in their most flourishing periods, the 
status of an extremely tiny minority. They were never much loved 
or much hated; stories of unusual persecutions have not  been 
handed down.  Nevertheless, a wall  of suspicion, of undefined 
hostility and mockery, must have kept them substantially 
separated from the rest of the population, even several decades 
after the emancipation of 1848 and the consequent flow into the 
cities, if what my father told me of his childhood in Bene Vagienna 

is true. His contemporaries, he said, on coming out of  school 
used to mock him without malice, greeting him with the corner 
of their jackets gathered in their fists to resemble a donkey’s ear 
and chanting, “ Pig’s ear, donkey’s ear, give ‘em to  the Jew 
that’s here.” The allusion to the ear is arbitrary, and the gesture 
was  originally  the  sacrilegious parody  of the  greeting  that pious 
Jews would exchange in synagogue when called up to read the 
Torah, showing each other the hem of the prayer shawl whose 
tassels,  minutely  prescribed  by  ritual  as  to  number,  length, and 
form, are replete with mystical and religious significance. But by 
now  those  kids  were  unaware  of the  origin  of  their gesture. I 
remember here, in passing, that the vilification of  the prayer 
shawl is as old as anti-Semitism—from those shawls, taken from 
deportees,  the  SS  would  make  underwear  which  then  was 
distributed to the Jews imprisoned in the Lager.
As is always the case, the rejection was mutual. The minority 
erected a symmetrical barrier against all of  Christianity (gojim, 
narelim,  “Gentiles,” the  “uncircumcised”),  reproducing  on  a 
provincial scale and against a pacifically bucolic background the 
epic 
and 
Biblical 
situation 
of the 
chosen 
people. 
This 
fundamental dislocation fed the good-natured wit of our uncles 
(barbe in the dialect of Piedmont) and our aunts (magne, also in the 
dialect): 
wise, 
tobacco-smelling 
patriarchs 
and 
domestic 
household queens, who would still proudly describe themselves as 
“the people of Israel.”
As for this term “uncle,” it is appropriate here to warn the 
reader immediately that it must be understood in a very broad 
sense. It is the custom among us to call any old relation uncle, 
even if he is a distant relation, and since all or almost all of the 
old persons in the community are in the long run relations, the 
result is that the number of uncles is very large. And then in the 
case of the uncles and aunts who reach an extremely old age (a 
frequent event: we are a long-lived people, since the time of

Noah),  the  attribute  barba  (“uncle”) ,  or,  respectively,  magna 
(“aunt”) tends gradually to merge with the name, and, with the 
concurrence 
of ingenious  diminutives and  an  unsuspected 
phonetic analogy between Hebrew and the Piedmontese dialect, 
become fixed in complex, strange-sounding appellations, which 
are handed down unchanged from generation to generation along 
with the events, memories, and sayings of those who had borne 
them for many long years. Thus came into existence  Barbaiòtô 
(Uncle Elijah), Barbasachín (Uncle Isaac), Magnaiéta (Aunt Maria), 
Barbamôisín (Uncle Moses, about whom it is said that he had the 
quack pull his two lower incisors  so  as  to  hold the  stem of his 
pipe
 more 
comfortably), 
Barbasmelín
 (Uncle
 Samuel), 
Magnavigaia  (Aunt  Abigail,  who  as a  bride had entered Saluzzo 
mounted on a white mule, coming up the  ice-covered  Po  River 
from Carmagnola), Magnafôriña (Aunt Zepora, from the Hebrew 
Tsippora which means “ bird”: a  splendid name). Uncle  Jacob 
must have belonged to an even remoter period. He had been to 
England to purchase cloth and  so “wore a checked  suit”; his 
brother Barbapartin (Uncle  Bonaparte, a name still common 
among the Jews, in memory of the first ephemeral emancipation 
bestowed by Napoleon), had  fallen from his rank as  uncle 
because the Lord, blessed be He, had given him so unbearable a 
wife that he had had himself baptized, became a monk, and left to 
work as a missionary in China, so as to be as far away from her 
as possible.
Grandmother Bimba was very beautiful, wore a boa of ostrich 
feathers, and was a baroness. She and her entire family had been 
made barons by Napoleon,  because they had lent him money 
(manòd).
Barbabarônín  (Uncle  Aaron)  was  tall,  robust,  and  had  radical 
ideas; he had run away from Fossano to Turin and had worked at 
many trades. He had been signed up by the Carignano Theater as 
an extra in Don Carlos and had written to his family to come for 
the opening. Uncle Nathan and Aunt Allegra came and sat in the 
gallery; when the curtain went up and Aunt Allegra saw her son 
armed like a Philistine, she shouted at the

top of her lungs: “Aaron, what are you doing! Put that sword 
down!”
Barbamiclín was simple; in Acqui he was respected  and 
protected because the simple are the children of God and no one 
should call them fools. But they called him “turkey planter” 
since the time a rashan (an unbeliever) had made a fool of him by 
leading him to believe that turkeys (bibini) are sowed like peach 
trees, by planting the feathers in furrows, and that then they grow 
on the branches. In any event, the turkey  had a curiously 
important place in this witty, mild, and orderly  family world, 
perhaps because, being presumptuous, clumsy, and wrathful, it 
expresses the opposite qualities and lends itself to being an object 
of  ridicule;  or  perhaps,  more  simply,  because  at  its  expense a 
famous, semi-ritual turkey meatball was confected at  Passover. 
For example,  Uncle Pacifico also raised a turkey-hen  and had 
become very attached to her. Across the way from him  lived 
Signor  Lattes,  who  was  a  musician.  The  turkey  clucked  and 
disturbed Signor Lattes; he begged Uncle Pacifico to silence his 
turkey. My uncle replied, “Your orders will be carried  out; 
Signora Turkey keep quiet. “
Uncle Gabriele was a rabbi and therefore he was known as 
Barba Moréno, that is, “Uncle Our Teacher.” Old and nearly blind, 
he would return on foot, under the blazing sun, from Verzuolo to 
Saluzzo. He saw a cart come by, stopped it, and asked for a ride; 
but then, while talking to the driver, it gradually dawned on him 
that this was a hearse, which was carrying a dead Christian to the 
cemetery: an abominable thing, since, as it is written in Ezekiel 
44:25, a priest who touches a dead man, or even simply enters the 
room  in  which  a  dead  person is lying, is contaminated and 
impure for seven days.  He  leaped to his feet and cried: “ I’m 
traveling with a  pegartà,  with a  dead woman! Driver, stop the 
cart!”
Gnôr Grassiadiô and Gnôr Côlômbô were two friendly enemies 
who, according  to the legend, had lived from time  immemorial 
face to face on the two sides of an alleyway in the  town  of 
Moncalvo. Gnôr Grassiadiô was a Mason and very

rich. He was a bit ashamed of being a Jew and had married a 
goyà, that is, a Christian, with blond hair so long it touched the 
ground, who cuckolded him. This goyà, although really a goyà, was 
called Magna  Ausilia, which indicates a certain degree of 
acceptance on the part of the epigones; she was the daughter of 
a sea captain who had  presented Gnôr Grassiadiô with a large, 
varicolored  parrot which came from Guyana and would say in 
Latin, “Know thyself.” Gnôr Côlômbô was poor and a Mazzinian. 
When the parrot arrived he bought a crow without a feather on 
its back and taught it to speak. When the parrot croaked, “Nosce te 
ipsum,” the crow answered, “Wise up. “
But as for Uncle Gabriele’s pegarta, Gnôr Grassiadiô’s goyà, Nona 
Bimba’s  manòd,  and  the  havertà  of  which  we  will  speak, an 
explanation  is required. Havertà is a Hebrew word,  crippled in 
both its form and meaning and quite suggestive. Actually it is an 
arbitrary feminine form of haver, which equals  “companion” 
and means “ maid,” but it  contains the accessory  notion  of a 
woman of low  extraction and of different customs  and beliefs 
that one is forced to harbor under  one’s roof; by  inclination a 
havertà  is  not very clean and is ill-mannered, and  by definition 
she is malevolently curious about the customs and conversations 
of the masters of the house, so much so as to force them to use a 
particular jargon in her presence, to which, besides all the others 
mentioned  above, the term havertà itself  obviously belongs.  This 
jargon has now almost disappeared; a few generations back it still 
numbered a few hundred words and locutions, consisting for the 
most part of Hebrew roots with  Piedmontese endings and 
inflections.  Even a hasty examination  points to its dissimulative 
and underground function, a crafty  language meant to  be 
employed when speaking about goyim in the presence of goyim; or 
also, to  reply boldly with  insults and  curses that are not to be 
understood, against the regime of restriction and oppression which 
they (the goyim) had established.
Its historical interest is meager, since it was never spoken by 
more than a few thousand people; but its human interest is

great, as are all languages on the frontier and in transition. In fact 
it  contains  an  admirable comic force,  which springs  from  the 
contrast between the texture of the discourse, which is  the 
rugged, sober, and laconic Piedmontese  dialect, never written 
except on a bet, and the Hebrew inlay, snatched from the language 
of the fathers, sacred and solemn, geologic, polished smooth by 
the  millennia  like  the  bed  of a  glacier.  But  this  contrast reflects 
another, the essential conflict of the Judaism of  the  Diaspora, 
scattered among the Gentiles, that is, the goyim, torn between their 
divine vocation  and the daily misery of  existence; and  still 
another, even more general, which is  inherent in the human 
condition, since man is a centaur, a tangle of  flesh and mind, 
divine inspiration and dust. The Jewish people,  after the 
dispersion, have lived this conflict for a long time and dolorously, 
and have drawn from it, side by side with its wisdom,  also  its 
laughter, which in fact is missing in the Bible and the Prophets. It 
pervades Yiddish, and, within its modest limits, it also pervades 
the bizarre speech of our fathers of this earth,* which I want to set 
down here before it disappears: a skeptical, good-natured speech, 
which only to a careless examination could appear blasphemous, 
whereas it is rich with an affectionate  and  dignified  intimacy 
with  God—Nôssgnôr  (“Our  Lord”),  Adonai  Eloenó  (“Praise  be 
the Lord”), Cadòss Barôkhu (“Dear Lord”).
Its humiliated roots are evident. For example, there are missing, 
because  useless,  words for “ sun,” “man,” and  “city,” while 
words  are  present  for “night,” “to  hide,” “money,” “prison,” 
“dream” (the last, though, used almost exclusively in  the 
locution bahalom,  “in  a  dream,” to be added jokingly to  an 
affirmation, and to be understood by one’s interlocutor, and by 
him alone, as its contrary), “to steal,” “to hang,” and suchlike. 
Besides this, there exist a good number of disparaging words, used 
sometimes to judge persons but more typically employed,  for 
example, between wife and husband in front of a Christian
*This is an allusion to the Christian prayer that begins, “Our Father, who art in 
heaven. “

shopkeeper’s  counter  when  uncertain  about  the  purchase.  We 
mention: n saròd, the royal plural, no longer understood as such, of 
the Hebrew tsara, which means “misfortune” and is  used  to 
describe a piece of  goods or a person of scant value;  there also 
exists its graceful diminutive, sarôdĭnn, and at the  same time I 
would not want forgotten the ferocious linkage  sarôd  e  senssa 
manód used by the marriage broker (marosav) to describe ugly girls 
without dowries; hasirud, an abstract collective from hasir, which 
means “ pig” and therefore is more or less equivalent to “filth, 
piggishness.” It should be noted that the sound “u” (French) does 
not exist  in  Hebrew;  instead  there  is  the  ending “ut”  (with  the 
Italian “u”) ,  which  serves  to  coin  abstract  terms  (for  example, 
malkhut,  “kingdom”),  but  it  lacks  the  strongly  disparaging 
connotation  it  had  in  jargon  usage.  Another use, typical and 
obvious, of these and similar terms was in the store, between the 
owner and the clerks and against the customers. In the Piedmont 
of the last century the trade in cloth was often in Jewish hands, 
and from it was born a kind of  specialized  sub-jargon which, 
transmitted by the clerks become  owners  in  their  turn,  and  not 
necessarily Jews, has spread to many stores in the field and still 
lives, spoken by people who are quite surprised if by chance they 
happen to find out that they are using Hebrew words. Some, for 
example,  still  use  the  expression na vesta a kinim  to describe a 
polka-dot dress: now, kinim are lice, the third of the ten scourges 
of Egypt, enumerated  and  chanted  in  the  ritual  of the Jewish 
Passover.
There is also a rather large assortment of not very decent terms, 
to be used not only with their real meaning in front of children but 
also 
instead 
of curses, 
in 
which case,  compared to  the 
corresponding Italian and Piedmontese  terms, they offer,  besides 
the  already  mentioned  advantage  of not  being  under- stood,  also 
that of relieving the heart without abrading the mouth.
Certainly more interesting for the student of customs are the 
few terms that allude to things pertaining to the Catholic faith. 
In this case, the originally Hebraic form is corrupted much more

profoundly, and this for two reasons: in the first place, secrecy 
was rigorously necessary here because their comprehension by 
Gentiles  could have  entailed  the  danger of being charged  with 
sacrilege; in the second place, the distortion in this case acquires 
the precise aim of denying, obliterating the sacral content of the 
word, and thus divesting it of all supernatural virtue. For the same 
reason, in all languages the Devil is named with many appellations 
of an allusive and euphemistic character, which make it possible to 
refer  to  him  without p r o f f e r i n g  his  name.  The church 
(Catholic) was  called tônevà, a word whose origins I have not 
been able to reconstruct, and which probably takes from Hebrew 
only its sound; while the synagogue, with proud  modesty, was 
simply called the scola (“school”), the place where  one learns 
and is brought up.  In a parallel instance, the rabbi is  not 
described with the word rabbi or rabbenu (“our rabbi”) but as 
morénô  (“our  teacher”) ,  or  kbakhàm  (“the  wise  man”) .  In  fact  in 
“school” one is not afflicted by the hateful khaltrúm of the Gentiles: 
khaltrúm, or khantrúm, is the ritual and bigotry of the  Catholics, 
intolerable because polytheistic and above all because swarming 
with images (“Thou shalt have no other gods before me; Thou 
shalt not make unto thee any graven image . . . and shalt not 
bow down thyself to them,” Exodus 20:3) and therefore 
idolatrous. For this term  too, steeped in execration, the origin is 
obscure, almost certainly not Hebraic; but in other Jewish-Italian 
jargons there is  the adjective khalto,  in  the  sense  precisely of 
“ bigot” and  used  chiefly  to  describe  the  Christian  worshiper of 
images.
A-issá  is the  Madonna (simply, that is, “the woman”).  Com-
pletely cryptic and indecipherable—and  that was to be fore- 
seen—is  the  term  Odo,  with  which,  when  it  was  absolutely 
unavoidable, one alluded to Christ, lowering  one’s voice and 
looking around with circumspection; it is best to speak of Christ 
as little as possible because the myth of the God-killing people 
dies hard.
Many other terms were drawn exactly as is from the ritual and 
the holy books, which Jews born in the last century read

more or less fluently in the original Hebrew, and more often than 
not understood, at least partially; but, in jargon usage, they 
tended to deform or arbitrarily enlarge the semantic area. From 
the  root  shafòkh,  which is  equivalent to “pour” and appears in 
Psalm 79 (“Pour out Thy wrath upon the heathen that have not 
recognized Thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not invoked 
Thy name”), our ancient  mothers have taken the homely  ex-
pression fé sefkh, that is, “to make sejokh,” with which one described 
with delicacy the vomit of infants.  From rúakh,  plural  rukhòd, 
which means “ breath,” illustrious term that can be read in the 
dark and admirable second verse of Genesis (“The wind of the 
Lord  breathed upon  the  face of the  waters”) was  taken  tiré  ‘n 
rúakh, “make a  wind,” in  its  diverse  physiological  significances, 
where  one  catches a  glimpse of the  Biblical  intimacy of the 
Chosen People with its  Creator. As an example of  practical 
application, there has been handed down the saying of  Aunt 
Regina,  seated  with  Uncle  David  in  the  Café  Florio  on  Via  Po: 
“Davidin, bat la carta, c’as sento nen le rukhòd!”  (“David,  thump 
your  cane,  so  they  don’t  hear  your  winds!”),  which  attests to a 
conjugal relationship of affectionate intimacy. As for the cane, it 
was at that time a symbol of social status, just as traveling first 
class on the railroad can be today. My father, for  example, 
owned two canes, a bamboo cane for weekdays, and  another of 
malacca with a silver-plated handle for Sunday. He did not use 
the cane to lean on (he had no need for that),  but  rather to 
twirl jovially in the air and to shoo insolent dogs from his path: 
in short, as a scepter to distinguish him from the vulgar crowd.
Barakhà is the benediction a pious Jew is expected to pronounce 
more than a hundred times a day, and he does so with profound 
joy, since by doing so he carries on a thousand-year-old 
dialogue with  the  Eternal,  who in  every  barakhà  is  praised  and 
thanked for His gifts. Grandfather Leonin  was my great- 
grandfather. He lived at Casale Monferrato and had flat feet; the 
alley in front of his house was paved with cobblestones, and he 
suffered when he walked on it. One morning he came out of his

house and  found  the  alley  paved  with  flagstones, and  he  ex- 
claimed from the depths of his heart, “’N abrakha a coi goyim c’a 
I’an fait i losi!” (“A blessing on those unbelievers who made these 
paving  stones!”).  As  a  curse,  however,  there  was  the  curious 
linkage medà meshônà, which literally  means “strange  death” but 
actually is an imitation of the Piedmontese assident, that is, in plain 
Italian, “may  he  drop  dead.” To  the  same  Grandpa Leonin is 
attributed the inexplicable imprecation “ C’ai  takeissa  ‘na  medà 
meshônà faita a paraqua” (“May he have an accident shaped like an 
umbrella”).
Nor could I forget Barbaricô, close in space and time, so much 
so  that  he just  missed (only by  a  single generation)  being  my 
uncle in the strict sense of the word. Of him I preserve a personal 
and  thus  articulated  and  complex memory.  Not figé  dans  une 
attitude, like that of the mythical characters I have mentioned up 
until now. The comparison to inert gases with which these pages 
start fits Barbaricô like a glove.
He had studied medicine and had become a good doctor, but 
he did not like the world. That is, he liked  men, and especially 
women, the meadows, the sky;  but  not hard  work,  the racket 
made by wagons, the intrigues for the sake of a career, the hustling 
for one’s daily bread, commitments, schedules, and due  dates; 
nothing in short of all that characterized the feverish life of the 
town of Casale Monferrato in  1890.  He would have liked  to 
escape, but he was too lazy to do so. His friends and a woman 
who loved him, and whom he tolerated with distracted benevo-
lence, persuaded him to take the test for the position of ship’s 
doctor aboard a transatlantic steamer. He won the competition 
easily, made a single voyage from Genoa to New York, and on 
his return to Genoa handed in his resignation because in America 
“ there was too much noise.”
After that he settled in Turin. He had several  women, all of 
whom wanted to redeem and marry him, but he regarded both 
matrimony and an equipped office and the regular exercise of his 
profession as too much of a commitment. Around about

1930 he was a timid little old man, shriveled and neglected, 
frightfully nearsighted; he lived with a big, vulgar goyà, from whom 
he tried at intervals and feebly to free himself, and whom  he 
described from time to time as ‘na sôtià (“a nut”), ‘na hamortà (“a 
donkey”), and ‘ na gran  beemà  (“a great beast”), but  without 
acrimony and indeed with a vein of inexplicable tenderness. This 
goyà  even wanted to have him samdà “baptized”  (literally, 
“destroyed”):  a thing he had always refused to  do, not  out of 
religious conviction but out of indifference and a  lack of 
initiative.
Barbaricô had no less than  twelve brothers and sisters, who 
described his companion with the ironic and cruel name of Magna 
Morfina (Aunt Morphine): ironic because the woman, poor thing, 
being a  goyà  and  childless  could  not  be a  magna  except in an 
extremely limited sense, and indeed the term magna  was  to  be 
understood as its exact opposite, a non-magna, someone excluded 
and  cut  off  from  the  family;  and  cruel  because it contained a 
probably  false and at any rate pitiless  allusion to a certain 
exploitation on her part of Barbaricô’s prescription blanks.
The two of them lived in a filthy and chaotic attic room on 
Borgo Vanchiglia. My uncle was a fine doctor, full of  human 
wisdom and diagnostic  intuition, but he spent the entire day 
stretched out on his cot reading books and old newspapers: he 
was an attentive reader, eclectic and untiring, with a long memory, 
although myopia forced him to hold the print three inches from 
his eyeglasses, which were as thick as the bottom of a beer glass. 
He only got up when a patient sent for him, which  often 
happened because he almost never asked to be paid; his patients 
were  the  poor people  on  the  outskirts of town,  from  whom  he 
would  accept  as  recompense  a  half-dozen  eggs,  or  some lettuce 
from the garden, or even a pair of worn-out shoes. He visited his 
patients  on  foot  because  he  did  not  have  the  money for  the 
streetcar; when on the street he caught a dim view, through the 
mist of his myopia, of a girl, he went straight up to her and to her 
surprise examined her carefully, circling

from a foot away. He ate almost nothing, and in a general way 
he had no needs; he died  at over ninety, with discretion and 
dignity.
Like Barbaricô in her rejection of the world was Grandmother 
Fina, one of the four sisters whom everyone called Fina: this first 
name singularity was owed to the fact that the four girls had been 
sent successively to the same wet nurse in Bra whose name was 
Delfina and who called all her “ nurslings” by  that name. 
Grandmother Fina lived at Carmagnola, in an apartment on the 
second  floor, and did splendid crochet work. At  eighty-six she 
had a slight indisposition, a caodana, as ladies used  to have in 
those days and today mysteriously no longer do: from then on, 
for twenty years—that is, until her death—she never left her 
room; on the Sabbath, from her little terrace overflowing with 
geraniums, fragile and pale, she waved her hand to the people 
who came out of the scola  (“synagogue”).  But she must  have 
been quite different in her youth, if what is told about her  is 
true: namely, that her husband having brought to the house as a 
guest the Rabbi of Moncalvo, an  erudite and illustrious man, 
she had served him, without his  knowing, a pork cutlet, since 
there was nothing else in the pantry. Her brother  Barbaraflín 
(Raphael), who before his promotion to Barba was known as I fieul 
d’ Moise ‘d Celin (“the son of the Moses of Celin”), now at a 
mature age and very rich because of the money earned from army 
supplies had fallen in love with the very beautiful Dolce Valabrega 
from Gassino; he did not dare declare himself, wrote  her love 
letters that he never mailed, and then wrote impassioned replies 
to himself.
Marchín,  too,  an  ex-uncle, had  an unhappy  love.  He  became 
enamored of Susanna (which means “lily“ in Hebrew), a brisk, 
pious woman, the depository of a  century-old recipe for  the 
confection of goose sausage; these sausages are made by using the 
neck of the bird itself as a casing, and as a result in the Lassòn 
Acodesh  (the  “holy  tongue,” that  is,  in  the jargon  we  are 
discussing), more than three synonyms for “neck” have survived. 
The first, mahané, is neuter and has a technical,

generic use; the second, savar, is used only in metaphors, as “at 
breakneck speed”; and the third, khanèc, extremely allusive and 
suggestive,  refers  to  the  neck as a  vital  passage, which can  be 
obstructed, occluded, or severed; and it is used in imprecations, 
such as “ may it stick in your neck” ; khanichésse means “to 
hang  oneself.” In  any  event,  Marchín  was  Susanna’s  clerk and 
assistant; both  in  the  mysterious kitchen-workshop and  in  the 
store, on whose shelves were promiscuously placed sausages, holy 
furnishings, amulets, and prayer books. Susanna turned him down 
and Marchín got his abominable revenge by selling the recipe for 
the sausage to a  goy. One must think that this goy  did not 
appreciate its value, since after Susanna’s death (which  took 
place in a legendary past) it has no longer been possible to find 
in  commerce  goose  sausage  worthy  of  the  name and  tradition. 
Because of this contemptible retaliation, Uncle Marchín lost his 
right to be called an uncle.
Remotest of all, portentously inert, wrapped in a thick shroud 
of legend and the incredible, fossilized in his quality as an uncle, 
was 
Barbabramín 
of Chieri, 
the 
uncle of  my 
maternal 
grandmother. When still young he was already rich, having bought 
from the aristocrats of the place numerous farms between Chieri 
and  the Asti region; relying on the inheritance  they  would 
receive  from  him,  his  relations  squandered  their  wealth on 
banquets, balls, and trips to  Paris.  Now it happened  that  his 
mother, Aunt Milca (the Queen) fell sick, and after much argument 
with her husband was led to agree to hire a havertà, that is, a maid, 
which she had flatly refused to do until  then:  in fact,  quite 
prescient, 
she 
did 
not 
want 
women 
around  the  house. 
Punctually, Barbabramín was overcome with love for this havertà, 
probably  the  first  female  less  than  saintly  whom he had  an 
opportunity to get close to.
Her  name  has  not  been  handed  down,  but  instead  a  few 
attributes. She was opulent and beautiful and possessed splendid 
khlaviòd  (“breasts”):  the  term  is  unknown  in  classic  Hebrew, 
where, however, khalàv means “milk.” ) She was of course a goyà, 
was insolent, and did not know how to read or write; but

she was an excellent cook. She was a peasant, ‘na ponaltà,  and 
went barefoot in the house. But  this  is exactly what my uncle 
fell in love with: her ankles, her straightforward speech, and the 
dishes she cooked. He did not say anything to the girl but told 
his father and mother that he intended to marry her; his parents 
went wild with rage and my uncle took to his bed. He stayed 
there for twenty-two years.
As to what Uncle Bramín did during those  years, there are 
divergent accounts. There is no doubt that for a good part he 
slept and gambled them away;  it  is  known for certain  that  he 
went to pot economically because “he did not clip the coupons” 
of the treasury bonds, and because he had entrusted the admin-
istration of the farms to a mamser (“bastard”), who had sold them 
for a song to a front man of his; in line with Aunt Milca’s 
premonition, my uncle thus dragged the whole family into ruin, 
and to this day they bewail the consequences.
It is also said that he read and studied and that, considered at 
last knowledgeable and just, received at his bedside delegations 
of Chieri notables and settled disputes; it is also said that the path 
to that same bed was not unknown to that same havertà, and that at 
least during  the first years my uncle’s voluntary  seclusion  was 
interrupted by nocturnal sorties to go and play billiards in the café 
below. But at any rate he stayed in bed for almost a quarter of a 
century, and when Aunt Milca and Uncle  Solomon died he 
married a goyà and took her into his bed definitively, because he 
was by now so weak that his legs no longer held him up. He died 
poor but rich in years and fame and in the peace of the spirit in 
1883.
Susanna of the goose sausage was the cousin of Grandmother 
Malia, my paternal grandmother, who survives in the figure of 
an overdressed, tiny vamp in some studio poses executed around 
1870, 
and 
as 
a 
wrinkled, 
short-tempered, slovenly, 
and 
fabulously deaf old lady in my most distant childhood memories. 
Still today, inexplicably, the highest shelves of the closets give us 
back her precious relics, shawls of black lace embroidered with 
iridescent spangles, noble silk embroideries, a marten fur muff

mangled by four generations of moths, massive silver tableware 
engraved with her initials: as though, after almost fifty years, her 
restless spirit still visited our house.
In her youth she was known as “the heartbreaker”; she was 
left a widow very early and the rumor spread that my grand- 
father had killed himself in desperation over her infidelities. She 
raised alone three boys in a Spartan manner and made them study; 
but at an advanced age she gave in and married an old Christian 
doctor,  a  majestic,  taciturn,  bearded man,  and  from  then on 
inclined to stinginess and oddity, although in youth she had been 
regally prodigal, as beautiful, much loved women usually are. With 
the passing of the years she cut herself off completely from any 
family affections (which in any case she must never have felt very 
deeply). She lived with the doctor on Via Po, in a gloomy, dark 
apartment, barely warmed in winter  by  just a small Franklin 
stove, and she no longer threw out anything, because everything 
might  eventually come  in  handy:  not even the cheese rinds or 
the foil on chocolates, with which  she made silver balls to be 
sent to missions to “free a little black boy.” Perhaps out of a fear 
of making a mistake in her definitive choice, on alternate days 
she attended the scola on Via Pius the  Fifth and the parish 
church of Sant’ Ottavio, and it appears that she would even go 
sacrilegiously to confession. She died past eighty in 1928, watched 
over by a chorus of unkempt neighbors, all dressed in black and, 
like her, half demented, led by a witch  whose name was 
Madame 
Scilimberg.  Even 
though  tormented  by her renal 
occlusion, my grandmother kept a sharp eye on Scilimberg until 
her last breath for fear she might find the maftekh (“key”) hidden 
under  the  mattress and  carry  off the  manòd  (“money”)  and  the 
hafassim (“jewels”) , all of which turned out to be fake.
At her death, her sons and daughters-in-law spent weeks, filled 
with dismay and disgust, picking through the mountains of 
household debris with which the apartment overflowed. Grand- 
mother Malia had indiscriminately saved exquisite objects and 
revolting garbage. From severe carved walnut closets issued

armies of bedbugs dazzled by the light, and then linen sheets never 
used, and other sheets patched and threadbare, worn so thin as 
to  be  transparent,  curtains, and  reversible  damask  bedspreads; a 
collection of stuffed hummingbirds which as soon as touched fell 
into dust; in the cellar lay hundreds of bottles of precious wines 
which had turned into vinegar. They found eight  overcoats 
belonging  to  the  doctor,  brand  new,  stuffed  with  mothballs, and 
the only one she had allowed him to use, all patches and darnings, 
its collar slick with grease and a Masonic emblem hidden in its 
pocket.
I  remember almost  nothing about  her, whom my father called 
Maman (also in the third person) and loved to describe, with 
his eager taste for the bizarre, slightly tempered by a veil of filial 
piety. Every Sunday morning my father took me on foot in a visit 
to Grandmother Malia: we walked slowly down Via Po, and he 
stopped to caress all the cats, sniff at all the truffles, and  leaf 
through all the secondhand books. My father was l’ingegné (“the 
engineer”),  with  his  pockets  always  bulging  with  books  and 
known to all the pork butchers because he checked with his 
logarithmic ruler the multiplication for the prosciutto purchase. 
Not  that  he  purchased this  last  item  with  a  carefree  heart: 
superstitious rather than religious, he felt ill at ease at breaking 
the kasherut rules, but he liked prosciutto so much that, faced by 
the temptation of a shop window, he yielded every time, sighing, 
cursing under his breath, and watching me out of the corner of 
his eye, as if he feared my judgment or hoped for my 
complicity.
When we arrived at the tenebrous landing of the apartment 
on Via Po, my father rang the bell, and when my grandmother 
came to open the door he would shout in her ear: “He’s at the 
head of his class!” My grandmother would let us in with visible 
reluctance and guide us through a string of dusty, uninhabited 
rooms, one of which, studded with sinister instruments, was the 
doctor’s semi-abandoned  office.  One  hardly ever saw  the  doc- 
tor, nor did I certainly want to see him, ever since the day on 
which I had surprised my father telling my mother that, when

they brought him stammering children to be treated, he would 
cut the fillet of skin under the tongue with his scissors. When 
we got to the good living room, my grandmother would dig out 
of some recess the box of chocolates, always the same box, and 
offer me  one.  The  chocolate was  worm-eaten, and  with great 
embarrassment I would quickly hide it away in my pocket.

H Y D R O G E N
It was January. Enrico came to call for me right after dinner: his 
brother had gone up into the mountains and had left him the 
keys to the laboratory. I dressed in a flash and joined him on the 
street.
During the walk I learned that his brother had not really left him 
the  keys:  this  was  simply  a  compendious 
formulation,  a 
euphemism, the  sort  of thing  you  said  to  someone ready  to 
understand. His brother, contrary to his habit, had not hidden 
the keys, nor had he taken them with him; what’s more, he had 
forgotten to repeat to Enrico the prohibition against appropriating 
these  same  keys, and  the  punishment  threatened  should  Enrico 
disobey. To put it bluntly, there were the keys, after

months of waiting; Enrico and I were determined not to pass up 
the opportunity.
We were sixteen, and I was fascinated with Enrico. He was 
not very active, and his scholastic output was pretty meager, but 
he had virtues that distinguished him from all the other members of 
the class, and he did things that nobody else did. He possessed a 
calm,  stubborn  courage, a  precocious  capacity  to  sense his own 
future and to give it weight and shape. He turned his back (but 
without contempt) on our interminable discussions, now Platonic, 
now  Darwinian,  later still  Bergsonian; he  was  not vulgar,  he  did 
not boast of his virile attributes or his skill at sports, he never lied. 
He knew his limitations, but we never heard him say (as we all 
told each other, with the idea of currying comfort, or blowing off 
steam): “You know, I really think I’m an idiot.”
He had a slow, foot-slogging imagination: he lived on dreams 
like all of  us, but his dreams were sensible; they were obtuse, 
possible, contiguous to reality, not romantic, not cosmic. He did 
not experience my tormented oscillation between the heaven (of 
a scholastic or sports success, a new friendship, a rudimentary 
and fleeting love) and the hell (of a failing grade, a remorse, a 
brutal revelation of an inferiority which each time seemed eternal, 
definitive).  His goals  were  always  attainable.  He  dreamed of 
promotion and studied with patience things that did not interest 
him. He wanted a microscope and sold his racing bike to get it. 
He wanted to be a pole vaulter and went to the  gym every 
evening for a year without  making a fuss about it,  breaking any 
bones, or tearing a ligament, until he reached  the  mark of 3.5 
meters he had set himself, and then stopped. Later he wanted a 
certain  woman  and  he  got  her;  he  wanted  the  money to live 
quietly and obtained it after ten years of boring, prosaic work.
We had no doubts: we would  be chemists, but our expecta-
tions and  hopes  were  quite  different.  Enrico asked chemistry, 
quite reasonably, for the tools to earn his living and have a secure 
life. I asked for something entirely different; for me

chemistry represented an indefinite cloud of future potentialities 
which enveloped my life to come in black volutes torn by fiery 
flashes, like those which had hidden  Mount Sinai. Like  Moses, 
from that cloud I expected my law, the principle of order in me, 
around me, and in the world. I was fed up with books, which I 
still continued  to gulp down with indiscreet  voracity,  and 
searched  for  another  key  to  the  highest  truths:  there must  be a 
key, and I was certain that, owing to some monstrous conspiracy 
to my detriment and the world’s, I would not get it in school. In 
school  they  loaded  me  with  tons  of  notions which I diligently 
digested, but which did not warm the blood in my veins. I would 
watch the buds swell in spring, the mica glint in the granite, my 
own hands, and I would say to myself: “I will understand this, too, 
I will understand everything, but not the way they want me to. I 
will find a shortcut, I will make a lock-pick, I will push open 
the doors.”
It was enervating, nauseating,  to listen  to lectures on the 
problem of being and knowing, when everything around us was 
a mystery pressing to be revealed: the old wood of the benches, 
the sun’s sphere beyond the windowpanes and the roofs, the vain 
flight of  the pappus down in the June air. Would all the 
philosophers and all the armies of the world be able to construct 
this little fly? No, nor even understand it: this was a shame and 
an abomination, another road must be found.
We would  be chemists, Enrico and I. We would  dredge the 
bowels of the mystery with our strength, our talent: we would 
grab 
Proteus 
by 
the 
throat, 
cut short  his 
inconclusive 
metamorphoses  from Plato to Augustine, from Augustine to 
Thomas, from Thomas to Hegel, from Hegel to Croce. We would 
force him to speak.
This being our program, we could not afford  to waste any 
opportunities. Enrico’s brother, a mysterious and choleric per- 
sonage, about whom Enrico did not like to talk, was a chemistry 
student,  and  he  had  installed  a  laboratory  at  the  rear  of  a 
courtyard, in  a  curious, narrow, twisting alleyway  which 
branched off Piazza della Crocetta and stood out in the obsessive

Turinese geometry like a rudimentary  organ trapped in the 
evolved structure of  a mammalian. The laboratory was also 
rudimentary: not in the sense of an atavistic vestige but in that 
of extreme poverty. There was a tiled workbench, very few glass 
receptacles,  about twenty flasks with reagents, much  dust and 
cobwebs, little light, and great cold. On our way we had discussed 
what we were going to do now that we had “ gained access to 
the laboratory,” but our ideas were confused.
It seemed to us an  embarras de richesses, and it was instead a 
different embarrassment, deeper and more essential: an embar-
rassment tied to an ancient atrophy of ours, of our family, of our 
caste.  What  were  we  able  to  do  with  our hands? Nothing,  or 
almost  nothing.  The  women,  yes—our  mothers  and  grand- 
mothers had lively, agile hands, they knew how to sew and cook, 
some 
even 
played the 
piano, 
painted  with 
watercolors, 
embroidered, braided their hair. But we, and our fathers?
Our hands were at once coarse and weak, regressive, insensi-
tive: the least trained part of our bodies. Having gone through 
the first fundamental experiences of play, they had learned to 
write, and that was all. They knew the convulsive grip around 
the branches of a tree, which we loved to climb out of a natural 
desire and also (Enrico and I) out of a groping homage and return 
to  the  origins  of the  species;  but  they  were  unfamiliar  with the 
solemn, balanced weight of the hammer, the concentrated power 
of a blade, too cautiously forbidden us, the wise texture of wood, 
the similar and diverse pliability of iron, lead,  and copper. If 
man is a maker, we were not men: we knew this and suffered 
from it.
The glass in the laboratory enchanted and intimidated us. Glass 
for us was that which one must not touch because it breaks, and 
yet, at a more intimate contact, revealed itself to be a substance 
different from all others, sui generis, full of mystery and caprice. 
It is similar in this to water, which also has no kindred forms: but 
water is bound to man, indeed to life, by a  long-lasting 
familiarity, by a relationship of multifarious necessity,

due to which its uniqueness is hidden beneath the crust of 
habit. Glass, however, is the work of man and has a more recent 
history. It was our first victim, or, better, our first adversary. In 
the Crocetta laboratory there was the usual lab glass, in various 
diameters and long and short sections, all covered with dust: we 
lit the Bunsen burner and set to work.
To bend the tube was easy. All you had  to do was hold the 
section of tube  steady over the  flame:  after a  certain  time  the 
flame turned yellow and simultaneously the glass became weakly 
luminous. At this point the tube could be bent: the curve obtained 
was far from perfect, but in substance something took place, you 
could create a new, arbitrary  shape; a potentiality  became act. 
Wasn’t this what Aristotle meant?
Now, a tube of copper or lead can also be bent, but we soon 
found out that the red-hot tube of glass possessed a unique virtue: 
when it had become pliable, you could, by quickly pulling on the 
two  cold  ends,  pull  it  into  very 
thin  filaments,  indeed 
unimaginably thin, so thin that it was drawn upwards by  the 
current of hot air that rose from the flame. Thin and flexible, like 
silk. So then silk and cotton too, if obtainable in a massive form, 
could be as inflexible as glass? Enrico told me that  in  his 
grandfather’s town the fishermen take silkworms, when they are 
already big and ready to form the pupa and, blind and clumsy, try 
to crawl up on the branches; they grab them, break them in two 
with their fingers, and pulling on the two stumps obtain a thread 
of silk, thick and coarse, which they then use as a fishing line. 
This fact, which I had no hesitation in believing,  seemed  to me 
both abominable and fascinating: abominable because of the cruel 
manner of that death, and the futile use of a  natural portent; 
fascinating because of  the straightforward and  audacious act of 
ingenuity it presupposed on the part of its mythical inventor.
The glass  tube  could also  be  blown up;  but  this  was  much 
more  difficult.  You  could close  one  end  of a  small  tube:  then 
blowing hard from the other end a bubble formed, very beauti-

ful to look at and almost perfectly spherical but  with absurdly 
thin walls. Even the slightest puff of breath in excess and the walls 
took on the iridescence of a soap bubble, and this was a certain 
sign of death: the bubble burst with a sharp little snap and its 
fragments were scattered over the floor with the tenuous rustle 
of eggshells. In some sense it was a just punishment; glass  is 
glass, and it should not be expected to simulate the behavior of 
soapy water. If one forced the terms a bit, one could even see an 
Aesopian lesson in the event.
After an hour’s struggle with the  glass, we were tired and 
humiliated. We both had inflamed, dry eyes from looking too long 
at the red-hot glass, frozen feet, and fingers covered with burns. 
Besides, working with glass is not chemistry: we were in  the 
laboratory with another goal. Our goal was to see with our eyes, 
to provoke with our hands, at least one of the phenomena which 
were described so offhandedly in our chemistry textbook.  One 
could, for example, prepare nitrous oxide, which in Sestini and 
Funaro was still described with the not very proper and unserious 
term of laughing gas. Would it really be productive of laughter?
Nitrous oxide is prepared by cautiously  heating ammonium 
nitrate. The latter did not exist  in the lab; instead  there was 
ammonia  and nitric acid. We mixed them, unable to make any 
preliminary calculations until we had a neutral litmus reaction, 
as a result of which the mixture heated up greatly and emitted 
an abundance of white smoke; then we decided to bring it to a 
boil to eliminate the water. In a short time the lab was filled with a 
choking fog, which was not at all laughable; we broke off  our 
attempt, luckily for us, because we did not know what can happen 
when this explosive salt is heated less than cautiously.
It was neither simple nor very amusing. I looked around and 
saw in a corner an ordinary dry battery. Here is something we 
could do: the electrolysis of water. It was an experiment with a 
guaranteed result, which I had already executed several times at 
home. Enrico would not be disappointed.

I put some water in a beaker, dissolved a pinch of salt in it, 
turned two empty jam jars upside down in the beaker; then found 
two  rubber-coated  copper  wires,  attached  them  to  the  battery’s 
poles,  and  fitted  the  wire  ends  into  the  jam  jars. A  minuscule 
procession  of air  bubbles  rose  from  the  wire  ends:  indeed, 
observing them closely you could see that from the cathode about 
twice as much gas was being liberated as from the anode. I wrote 
the well-known equation on the blackboard, and  explained  to 
Enrico  that  what  was  written  there  was  actually  taking place. 
Enrico didn’t seem too convinced, but by now it was dark and 
we were half frozen; we washed our hands, bought some slices of 
chestnut  pudding  and  went  home,  leaving  the  electrolysis to 
continue on its own.
The next day we still had access. In pliant obsequiousness to 
theory, the cathode jar was almost full of gas; the anode jar was 
half full: I  brought  this  to  Enrico’s attention, giving  myself as 
much importance as I could, and trying to awaken the suspicion 
that, I won’t say electrolysis, but its application as the 
confirmation  of the  law 
of definite  proportions, was  my 
invention, the fruit of patient experiments conducted secretly in 
my room. But  Enrico was in a bad mood and doubted 
everything. “ Who says that it’s actually hydrogen and oxygen?” 
he said to me rudely. “And what if there’s chlorine? Didn’t you 
put in salt?”
The objection struck me as insulting: How did Enrico dare to 
doubt my statement? I was the theoretician, only I: he, although 
the proprietor of the lab (to a certain degree, and then only at 
second hand), indeed, precisely  because he was in a position to 
boast  of other  qualities,  should  have  abstained  from  criticism. 
“Now we shall see,” I said: I carefully lifted the cathode jar and, 
holding it with its open end down, lit a match and brought it 
close. There was an explosion, small but sharp and angry, the jar 
burst into splinters (luckily, I was holding it level with my chest 
and not higher), and there remained in my hand,  as a sarcastic 
symbol, the glass ring of the bottom.
We left, discussing what had occurred. My legs were shaking a bit; 

 I experienced retrospective fear and at the same time a kind 
of foolish pride, at having confirmed a hypothesis and having 
unleashed  a  force  of  nature.  It  was  indeed  hydrogen, 
therefore: the same element that burns in the sun and stars, 
and  from  whose  condensation  the  universes  are  formed  in 
eternal silence.

Z I N C
For five months we had attended, packed together like sardines 
and  full  of  reverence,  Professor  P.’s  classes  in  General  and 
Inorganic Chemistry, carrying away from them varied sensations, 
but all of them exciting and new. No, P.’s chemistry was not the 
motor-force of the Universe, nor the key to the Truth: P. was a 
skeptical, ironic old man, the enemy of all forms of rhetoric (for 
this  reason, and  only  for  this,  he  was  an  anti-Fascist), intelligent, 
obstinate, and quick-witted with a sad sort of wit.
His  students  handed down stories  of his  examinations  con-
ducted  with ferocious coldness and ostentatious prejudice: his 
favorite victims were women in general, and then nuns, priests, 
and all those who appeared before him “ dressed like soldiers.”

On his account were whispered murky legends of  maniacal 
stinginess  in  running  the  Chemical  Institute  and  his  personal 
laboratory: that he conserved in the basements innumerable boxes 
of used matches, which he forbade the beadles to throw away; 
and  that  the  mysterious minarets  of the  Institute  itself,  which 
even now confer on that section of the Corso Massimo d’Azeglio 
a jejune tone of fake exoticism, had been built at his bidding, 
in his remote youth, in order to celebrate there each year a foul 
and  secret orgy  of salvage.  During  it  all  the past  year’s  rags  and 
filter papers  were  burnt, and  he  personally analyzed the ashes 
with beggarly patience to extract from them  all  the  valuable 
elements (and perhaps even less valuable) in a  kind of ritual 
palingenesis which only Caselli, his faithful technician-beadle, 
was authorized to attend. It was also said that he had spent his 
entire  academic  career  demolishing a  certain  theory of stereo-
chemistry,  not with experiments but with  publications. The 
experiments were performed by someone else, his great rival, in 
some unknown part of  the world; as he proceeded, the  reports 
appeared in the Helvetica Chemica Acta, and Professor P. tore them 
apart one by one.
I could not swear to the authenticity of these rumors: but in 
fact, when he came into the laboratory for Preparations, no Bunsen 
burner was even low enough, so it was prudent to turn it off 
completely; actually, he made the students prepare silver 
nitrate from the five-lire coins taken from their own pockets, and 
chloride  of  nickel from  the  twenty-cent  pieces  with  the  flying 
naked lady; and in truth, the only time I was admitted to his 
study, I  found written  on  the blackboard  in a fine  script: “Don’t 
give me a funeral, neither dead nor alive.”
I liked P. I liked the sober rigor of his classes; I was amused 
by the disdainful ostentation with which at the exams he exhibited, 
instead of the prescribed  Fascist shirt, a comic black  bib  no 
bigger  than  the  palm  of a  hand,  which  at  each  of his  brusque 
movements would pop out between his jacket’s lapels. I valued 
his  two  textbooks,  clear  to  the  point  of  obsession,  concise, 
saturated with his surly contempt for humanity in

general and for lazy and foolish  students in particular: for all 
students were, by definition, lazy and foolish; anyone who by rare 
good luck managed to prove that he was not became his peer and 
was honored by a laconic and precious sentence of praise.
Now  the  five  months  of anxious  waiting  had  passed:  from 
among us eighty freshmen had been selected the twenty least lazy 
and foolish—fourteen boys and six girls—and the Preparation 
laboratory opened its doors to us. None of us had a precise idea 
of what was at stake: I think that it was his invention, a modern 
and technical version of the initiation rituals of savages, in which 
each of his subjects was abruptly torn away from book  and 
school  bench  and  transplanted  amid  eye-smarting  fumes,  hand-
scorching acids, and practical events that do not jibe with  the 
theories.  I  certainly do not want to dispute the  usefulness, 
indeed the necessity of this initiation: but in the brutality with 
which it was carried out it was easy to see P.’s spiteful talent, his 
vocation for hierarchical distances and the humiliation of us, his 
flock. In sum: not a word, spoken or written, was spent by him 
as viaticum, to encourage us along the road we had chosen, to 
point out the dangers and pitfalls, and to communicate to us the 
tricks of the trade. I have often thought that deep down P. was a 
savage, a hunter; someone who goes hunting simply has to take 
along a gun, in fact a bow and arrow, and go into the woods: 
success or failure are purely up to him. Pick up and go, when 
the time comes the haruspices and augurs no longer count, theory 
is useless and you learn along the way, the experiences of others 
are useless, the essential is to meet the challenge. He who  is 
worthy wins; he who has weak eyes, arms, or instincts turns 
back and changes his trade: of the eighty students I mentioned, 
thirty changed their trade in their second year and another twenty 
later on.
That laboratory was tidy and clean. We stayed in it five hours 
a day, from two o’clock  to seven o’clock: at the entrance, an 
assistant assigned to each student a preparation, then each of us 
went to the supply room, where the hirsute Caselli handed out

the raw material, foreign or domestic: a chunk of marble to this 
fellow, ten grams of bromine to the next, a bit of boric acid to 
another, a handful of clay to yet another. Caselli would entrust 
these  reliquiae  to  us  with an  undisguised air of suspicion: this 
was the bread of science, P.’s bread, and finally it was also the 
stuff that  he  administered; who  knows what  improper use we 
profane and unskilled persons would make of it?
Caselli loved P. with a bitter, polemical love. Apparently he 
had been faithful to him  for forty years; he was his shadow, his 
earthbound incarnation, and, like all those who perform vicarial 
functions,  he was an interesting human specimen: like those, I 
mean to say, who represent Authority without possessing any of 
their own, such as, for example, sacristans, museum  guides, 
beadles,  nurses,  the  “young  men” working  for  lawyers  and 
notaries, and salesmen. These people, to a greater or lesser degree, 
tend to transfuse the human substance of their chief into  their 
own mold, as occurs with pseudomorphic crystals: sometimes 
they suffer from it, often they enjoy it, and they possess two 
distinct patterns of behavior, depending on whether they act on 
their own or “in the exercise of their function.” It often 
happens that the personality of their chief  invades them so 
completely as  to  disturb their  normal  human contacts  and  so 
they remain celibate: celibacy is in fact prescribed and accepted 
in the monastic state, which entails precisely the proximity and 
subjection to the highest authority. Caselli was a modest, taciturn 
man, in whose sad but proud eyes could be read:
— he  is a great scientist, and as  his “famulus” I  also am a 
little great;
— I , though humble, know things that he does not know;
—I know him better than he knows himself; I foresee his acts;
—I have power over him; I defend and protect him;
—I can say bad things about him because I love him; that is 
not granted to you;
—his principles are right, but he applies them laxly, and
“once upon a time it was not like this. “ If I weren’t here . . . and

in fact, Caselli ran the Institute with a parsimony and hatred of 
novelty even greater than P.’s.
The first day it was my fate to be assigned the preparation of 
zinc sulfate: it should not have been too difficult; it was a matter of 
making an elementary stoichiometric calculation and  attacking 
the 
zinc 
particles 
with 
previously 
diluted 
sulfuric 
acid: 
concentrate, crystallize, dry with the pump, wash and recrystal-
lize. Zinc, Zinck, zinco: they make tubs out of it for laundry, it is 
not an element which says much to the imagination, it is gray 
and its  salts  are  colorless,  it  is  not  toxic,  nor does  it  produce 
striking chromatic reactions; in short, it is a boring metal. It has 
been known to humanity for two or three centuries, so it is not 
a veteran covered with glory like copper, nor even one of those 
newly minted elements which are still surrounded  with the 
glamour of their discovery.
Caselli handed  me my zinc; I returned to the bench and 
prepared to work: I felt curious, shy, and vaguely annoyed, as 
when you reach thirteen and must go to the temple to recite in 
Hebrew the Bar Mitzvah  prayer before the rabbi; the moment, 
desired and somewhat feared, had come. The hour of  the 
appointment with Matter, the Spirit’s great antagonist, had struck: 
hyle, which, strangely, can be found embalmed in the endings of 
alkyl radicals: methyl, butyl, etc.
There was no need to get from Caselli the other raw material, 
the partner of zinc, that is, sulfuric acid: it was there in abundance 
in every corner. Concentrated, of course: and you had to dilute it 
with water; but watch out! it is written in all the treatises, one 
must operate in reverse, that is, pour the acid in the water and 
not the other way around, otherwise that innocuous-looking oil 
is prone to wild rages: this is known even to the kids in liceo. 
Then you put the zinc in the diluted acid.
The course notes contained a detail which at first reading had 
escaped  me, namely, that the so tender and delicate zinc, so 
yielding to acid which gulps it down in a single mouthful, behaves, 
however, in a very different fashion when it is very pure: then it 
obstinately resists the attack. One could draw from

this two conflicting philosophical conclusions: the praise of purity, 
which protects from evil like a coat of mail; the praise of 
impurity, which gives rise to changes, in other words, to life. I 
discarded the first, disgustingly moralistic,  and I lingered to 
consider the second, which I found more congenial. In order for 
the wheel to turn, for life to be lived, impurities are needed, and 
the impurities of impurities in the soil, too, as is known, if it is 
to be fertile. Dissension, diversity, the grain of salt and mustard 
are needed: Fascism does not want them, forbids them, and that’s 
why you’re not a Fascist; it wants everybody to be the same, and 
you  are  not.  But  immaculate  virtue  does  not  exist  either,  or  if  it 
exists it is detestable. So take the solution of copper sulfate which 
is in the shelf of reagents, add a drop of it to your sulfuric acid, 
and you’ll see the reaction begin: the zinc wakes up, it is covered 
with a white  fur of hydrogen bubbles,  and  there  we  are,  the 
enchantment has taken place, you can leave it to its fate and take a 
stroll around the lab and see what’s new and what the others are 
doing.
The others are doing various things: some are working intently, 
perhaps whistling to give themselves a nonchalant air, each one 
behind his particle of hyle; others are roaming about or gazing out 
the windows at Valentino Park, by now entirely green; still others 
are smoking and chatting in the corners.
In one corner there was a hood, and Rita sat in front of it. I 
went over to her and realized with fleeting pleasure that she was 
cooking my same dish: with pleasure, I say, because for some time 
now I had been hanging around Rita, mentally preparing brilliant 
conversational openings, and then at the decisive moment I did 
not dare come out with them and put it off to the next day. I 
did not dare because of my deep-rooted shyness and  lack  of 
confidence, and also because Rita discouraged all contact, it was 
hard to understand why. She was very thin, pale, sad, and sure of 
herself: she got through the exams with good marks, but without 
the genuine appetite that I felt for the things she had to study. She 
was  nobody’s  friend, no  one knew anything about her, she said 
very little, and for all these reasons

she attracted me; I tried to sit next to her in class and she did 
not take me into her confidence,  and I felt frustrated and 
challenged. In fact I was desperate, and surely not for the first 
time; actually at  that  period I  thought myself condemned to a 
perpetual masculine solitude, denied a woman’s smile forever, 
which I nevertheless needed as much as air.
It was quite clear that on that day I was being presented with 
an opportunity that should not be wasted: at that moment between 
Rita and myself there was a bridge, a small zinc bridge, fragile 
but negotiable; come on now, take the first step.
Buzzing around Rita, I  became aware  of a  second fortunate 
circumstance: a familiar book jacket, yellowish with a red border, 
stuck out of the girl’s bag; the image was a raven with a book in 
its beak. The title? You could read only IC and TAIN, but that’s 
all  I  needed:  it  was  my  sustenance  during  those  months, the 
timeless story of Hans Castorp in enchanted exile on the magic 
mountain. I asked Rita about it, on tenterhooks to  hear her 
opinion, as if I had written the book: and soon enough I had to 
realize that she was reading the novel in an entirely different way. 
As a novel, in fact: she was very interested in finding out exactly 
how far Hans  would go with  Madame Chauchat, and  mercilessly 
skipped  the  fascinating  (for  me)  political, 
theological, 
and 
metaphysical discussions between  the humanist Settembrini and 
the Jewish Jesuit Naphtha.
Never mind: actually, it’s ground for debate. It could even
become an essential and fundamental discussion, because I  too 
am Jewish, and she is not: I am the impurity that makes the zinc 
react, I am the grain of salt or mustard. Impurity, certainly, since 
just during those months the publication of the magazine 
Defense  of the Race had begun, and there was much talk about 
purity, and I had begun to be proud of being impure. In truth, 
until precisely those months it had not meant much to me that I 
was a Jew: within myself, and in my contacts with my Christian 
friends, I had always considered my origin as an almost negli- 
gible  but  curious fact, a  small amusing anomaly, like  having a 
crooked nose or freckles; a Jew is somebody who at Christmas

does not have a tree, who should not eat salami but eats it all the 
same, who has learned a bit of Hebrew at thirteen and then has 
forgotten it. According to the above-mentioned magazine, a Jew 
is stingy and cunning; but I was not particularly stingy or cunning, 
nor had my father been.
So there was plenty to discuss with Rita, but the conversation 
I had in mind didn’t strike a spark. I soon realized that Rita was 
different from me: she was not a grain of mustard; she was the 
daughter of a poor, sickly storekeeper. For her the university was 
not at all the temple of Knowledge: it was a thorny and difficult 
path which led to a degree, a job, and regular pay. She herself 
had worked since childhood: she had helped her father,  had 
been a salesgirl in a village store, and had also ridden about 
Turin on a bicycle, making deliveries and picking up payments. 
All this did not put a distance between us; on the contrary I found 
it admirable, like everything that was part of her: her not very 
well cared for, rough-looking hands, her modest dress, her 
steady  gaze, her concrete sadness, the reserve with which she 
accepted my remarks.
So my zinc sulfate ended up badly by concentrating, turned 
into nothing more than a bit of white powder which in suffocat- 
ing clouds exhaled all or almost all of its sulfuric acid. I left it to 
its fate and asked Rita to let me walk her home. It was dark, and 
her home was not close by. The goal that I had set myself was 
objectively modest, but it seemed to me incomparably audacious: I 
hesitated half of the way and felt on burning coals, and 
intoxicated myself and her with disjointed, breathless talk. Finally, 
trembling with emotion, I slipped my arm under hers. Rita did 
not pull away, nor did she return the pressure: but I fell into step 
with her, and felt exhilarated and victorious. It seemed  to me 
that I had won a small but decisive  battle against the  darkness, 
the emptiness, and the hostile years that lay ahead.

I R O N
Night lay beyond the walls of the Chemical Institute, the night of 
Europe: Chamberlain had returned from Munich duped,  Hitler  had 
marched  into  Prague  without  firing  a  shot,  Franco  had subdued 
Barcelona and was ensconced in Madrid. Fascist Italy, the small-time 
pirate,  had  occupied  Albania,  and  the  premonition of imminent 
catastrophe condensed like grumous dew in the houses and streets, in 
wary conversations and dozing consciences.
But the night did not penetrate those thick walls; Fascist censorship 
itself, the regime’s masterwork, kept us shut off from  the world, in a 
white, anesthetized limbo. About thirty of us had managed to surmount 
the  harsh barrier of the first exams  and  had been admitted to the 
second year’s Qualitative Analysis

laboratory. We had entered that enormous, dark, smoky hall like 
someone who, coming into the House of the Lord, reflects on 
each of his steps. The previous lab, where I had tackled zinc, 
seemed an infantile exercise to us now, similar to when as children 
we  had  played  at  cooking:  something,  by  hook  or  crook,  in  one 
way or another, always came of it, perhaps too little, perhaps not 
very pure, but you really had to be a hopeless case or pigheaded 
not to get magnesium sulfate from magnesite,  or potassium 
bromide from bromine.
Not here:  here  the affair had turned serious, the  confronta- 
tion with Mother-Matter, our hostile mother, was tougher  and 
closer. At two in the afternoon, Professor D., with his ascetic and 
distracted air, handed each of us precisely one gram of a certain 
powder:  by  the  next  day  we  had  to  complete  the  qualitative 
analysis, that is, report what metals and non-metals it contained. 
Report in writing, like a police report, only yes and  no, 
because doubts and hesitations were not admissible: it was each 
time a choice, a deliberation,  a mature and responsible 
undertaking, for  which Fascism had not prepared us, and from 
which emanated a good smell, dry and clean.
Some elements, such as iron and copper, were easy and direct, 
incapable of concealment; others, such as bismuth and cadmium, 
were deceptive and elusive. There was a method, a toilsome, age-
old plan for systematic research, a kind of combined steamroller 
and fine-toothed comb which nothing (in theory) could escape, 
but I preferred to invent each time a new  road, with swift, 
extemporaneous forays, as in a war of movement, instead of 
the deadly grind of a war of position. Sublimate  mercury into 
droplets, transform sodium into chloride,  and  identify it  as 
trough-shaped chips under my microscope. One way or another, 
here the relationship  with  Matter changed, became dialectical: it 
was fencing, a face-to-face  match. Two  unequal opponents: on 
one side, putting the questions, the unfledged, unarmed chemist, 
at his elbow the textbook by Autenrieth as his sole ally (because 
D., often called to help out  in difficult cases, maintained a 
scrupulous neutrality, refused to

give an opinion: a wise attitude, since whoever opens his mouth 
can put his foot in  it, and professors are not supposed to  do 
that);  on the other side, responding with enigmas, stood Matter, 
with her sly passivity, ancient as the All and portentously rich in 
deceptions,  as  solemn and subtle  as  the  Sphinx.  I  was just 
beginning  to read German words and was enchanted by the 
word  Urstoff (which  means  “element”:  literally,  “primal  sub- 
stance”) and by the prefix Ur which appeared in it and which in fact 
expresses ancient origin, remote distance in space and time.
In  this  place,  too,  nobody wasted many words  teaching  us 
how to protect ourselves from acids, caustics, fires, and explo- 
sions; it  appeared that the Institute’s rough and ready morality 
counted on the process of  natural selection to pick out those 
among us most qualified for physical and professional survival. 
There were few ventilation hoods; each student, following his 
text’s prescriptions, in the course of systematic analysis, consci- 
entiously let loose into the air a good dose of hydrochloric acid 
and ammonia, so that a dense, hoary mist of ammonium chloride 
stagnated permanently in the lab, depositing minute scintillating 
crystals on the windowpanes. Into the hydrogen sulfide room with 
its murderous atmosphere withdrew couples seeking privacy and 
a few lone wolves to eat their snacks.
Through  the  murk  and  in  the  busy  silence,  we  heard  a 
Piedmontese voice say: “Nuntio vobis gaudium magnum. Habemus 
ferrum.” “I announce to you a great joy. We have iron.” It was 
March 1939, and a few days earlier an almost identical solemn 
announcement (“Habemus Papam”) had closed the conclave that 
had raised to Peter’s  Throne Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli, in whom 
many put their hopes, since one must after all put one’s hope in 
someone or something. The blasphemous announcement came 
from Sandro, the quiet one.
In our midst, Sandro was a loner. He was a boy of medium 
height, thin but muscular, who never wore an overcoat, even on 
the coldest days. He came to class in worn corduroy knickers, 
knee socks made of homespun wool and sometimes a short black 
cape which made me think of the Tuscan poet Renato

Fucini. He had large, calloused hands, a bony, rugged profile, a 
face baked by the sun, a low forehead beneath the line of his hair, 
which he wore very short and cut in a brush. He walked with 
the peasant’s long, slow stride.
A few months before, the racial laws against the Jews had been 
proclaimed, and I too was becoming a loner. My Christian 
classmates were civil people; none of them, nor any of the teachers, 
had  directed at  me a  hostile word or gesture,  but I  could feel 
them withdraw and, following an ancient pattern, I withdrew as 
well:  every look exchanged between me 
and 
them  was 
accompanied by a  minuscule but perceptible flash of mistrust 
and suspicion. What do you think of me? What am I for you? 
The same as six months ago, your equal who does not go to Mass, 
or the Jew who, as Dante put it, “in your midst laughs at you”?
I had noticed with amazement and delight that something was 
happening between Sandro and me. It was not at all a friendship 
born from affinity; on the contrary, the difference in our origins 
made us rich in “ exchangeable goods,” like two merchants who 
meet after coming from remote and mutually unknown regions. 
Nor was it the normal, portentous intimacy of twenty-year-olds: 
with  Sandro I never reached this  point. I  soon realized that he 
was generous, subtle, tenacious, and brave, even with a touch of 
insolence, but he had an elusive, untamed  quality; so that, 
although we were at the age when one always  has  the  need, 
instinct, and  immodesty  of  inflicting  on  one  another  everything 
that swarms in one’s head and elsewhere (and this is an age that 
can last long,  but ends with the first  compromise),  nothing had 
gotten  through  his  carapace  of  reserve, nothing of his inner 
world, which nevertheless one felt  was dense and fertile—
nothing save a few occasional, dramatically truncated hints. He 
had the  nature  of a  cat with  whom  one  can  live  for  decades 
without ever being permitted to penetrate its sacred pelt.
We had many concessions to make to each other. I told him 
we were like cation and anion, but Sandro did not seem to

acknowledge the comparison. He was born in Serra d’Ivrea, a 
beautiful but niggardly region. He was the son of a mason and 
spent his  summers working as a  shepherd. Not a  shepherd of 
souls: a shepherd of sheep, and not because of Arcadian rhetoric or 
eccentricity, but happily, out of love for the earth and grass and an 
abundance of heart. He had a curious mimetic talent, and when 
he  talked about cows, chickens, sheep, and dogs  he was 
transformed, imitating their way of looking, their movements and 
voices,  becoming  very  gay  and  seeming  to  turn  into  an  animal 
himself, like a shaman. He taught me about plants and animals, 
but said very little about his family. His father had died when he 
was a child; they were simple, poor people, and since (he boy 
was bright, they had decided to make him study so that  he 
would bring money home:  he had accepted this with  Pied-
montese seriousness but  without enthusiasm.  He had  traveled 
the long route of high school—liceo—aiming at the highest marks 
with  the  least effort.  He  was  not  interested in  Catullus  and 
Descartes, he was interested in being promoted, and spending 
Sunday on  his  skis and climbing the rocks.  He  had chosen 
chemistry because he had thought it better than other studies; it 
was a trade that dealt with things one can see and touch, a way 
to earn one’s bread less tiring than working as a carpenter or a 
peasant.
We began studying physics together, and Sandro was surprised 
when I  tried to explain to him some of the ideas that at  the 
time I was confusedly cultivating. That the nobility of Man, 
acquired in a hundred centuries of trial and error, lay in making 
himself the  conqueror  of matter,  and  that  I  had  enrolled  in 
chemistry because I  wanted to remain faithful to this  nobility. 
That conquering matter is to understand it, and understanding 
matter is necessary to understanding the universe and ourselves: 
and that therefore Mendeleev’s Periodic Table, which just during 
those weeks we were laboriously learning to unravel, was poetry, 
loftier  and  more  solemn  than  all  the  poetry  we  had  swallowed 
down in liceo; and come to think of it, it even rhymed! That if one 
looked for the bridge, the missing link,

between the world of words and the world of things, one did not 
have to look far: it was there, in our Autenrieth, in our smoke-filled 
labs, and in our future trade.
And finally, and fundamentally, an honest and open boy, did 
he not smell the stench of Fascist truths which tainted the sky? 
Did he not perceive it as an ignominy that a thinking man should 
be asked to believe without thinking? Was  he not filled  with 
disgust at all the dogmas, all the unproved affirmations, all the 
imperatives? He did feel it; so then, how could he not feel a new 
dignity and majesty in our study, how could he ignore the fact 
that the chemistry and physics on which we fed, besides being in 
themselves nourishments vital in themselves, were the antidote 
to Fascism which he and I were seeking, because they  were 
clear and distinct and verifiable at every step, and not a tissue 
of lies and emptiness, like the radio and newspapers?
Sandro listened to me with ironical attention, always ready to 
deflate me  with  a  couple of civil  and  terse  words when I 
trespassed  into  rhetoric.  But  something  was  ripening  in  him 
(certainly not all my doing; those were months heavy with fateful 
events), something that troubled him because it was at once new 
and ancient. He, who until then had read only Salgari,  Jack 
London, and Kipling, overnight became a furious reader: he 
digested  and  remembered  everything,  and  everything  in  him 
spontaneously fell into place as a way of life; together with this, 
he began to study, and his average shot up from C to A. At the 
same time, out of unconscious gratitude, and perhaps also out of 
a desire to get even, he in turn took an interest in my education 
and made it clear to me that it had gaps. I might even be right: it 
might be that Matter is our teacher and perhaps also, for lack of 
something better, our political school; but he had another form 
of matter to lead me to, another teacher: not the powders of the 
Analytical Lab but the true, authentic, timeless Urstoff, the rocks 
and ice of the nearby mountains. He proved to me without too 
much difficulty that I didn’t have the proper credentials to talk 
about matter. What commerce, what intimacy had I had, until 
then, with Empedocles’ four elements? Did I know how to light

a stove? Wade across a torrent? Was I familiar with a storm high up 
in the mountains? The sprouting of seeds? No. So he too had 
something vital to teach me.
A comradeship was born, and there began for me a feverish 
season. Sandro seemed to be made of iron, and he was bound to 
iron by an ancient kinship: his father’s fathers, he told me, had 
been  tinkers (magnín) and  blacksmiths in  the  Canavese valleys: 
they  made nails on the charcoal forges, sheathed wagon wheels 
with red-hot hoops, pounded iron plates until deafened by the 
noise; and  he himself when  he saw the  red vein of iron  in  the 
rock felt he was meeting a friend. In the winter when it suddenly 
hit him, he would tie his skis on his rusty bike, leaving early in 
the  morning  and  pedaling away  until  he  reached  the  snow, 
without a cent, an artichoke in one pocket and the other full of 
lettuce; then he came back in the evening or even the next day, 
sleeping in haylofts, and the more storms and hunger  he 
suffered the happier and healthier he was.
In the summer, when he went off by himself, he often took 
along a dog to keep him company. This was a small yellow mongrel 
with a downcast expression; in fact, as Sandro had told  me, 
acting out in his way the animal episode, as a puppy he had had 
a mishap with a cat. He had come too close to a litter of newborn 
kittens, the mother cat was miffed and became enraged, and had 
begun  to  hiss, getting all  puffed  up;  but  the  puppy  had  not  yet 
learned the meaning of those signals and remained there like a fool. 
The cat had attacked him, chased him, caught him, and scratched 
his  nose;  the  dog  had  been  permanently  traumatized.  He  felt 
dishonored, and so Sandro had made him a cloth ball, explained 
to him that it was the cat,  and every morning presented it to 
him so that he could take his  revenge on it for the insult and 
regain his canine honor. For the  same therapeutic motive, 
Sandro took him to the mountains, so he could have some fun: 
he tied him to one end of a rope, tied himself to the other, set 
the dog firmly on a rock ledge, and then climbed up; when the 
rope ended, he pulled it up slowly, and the dog had learned to 
walk up with his muzzle pointed

skywards and  his  four paws  against  the  nearly vertical  wall  of 
rock, moaning softly as though he were dreaming.
Sandro climbed the  rocks more  by  instinct than  technique, 
trusting to the strength of his hands and saluting ironically, in the 
projecting  rock to which he clung, the silicon, calcium, and 
magnesium he had learned  to recognize in the course on 
mineralogy. He seemed to feel that he had wasted a day if he had 
not in some way gotten to the bottom of his reserve of energy, and 
then even his eyes became brighter and he explained to me that, 
with a sedentary life, a deposit of fat forms  behind the eyes, 
which is not healthy; by working hard the fat is consumed and the 
eyes sink back into their sockets and become keener.
He spoke grudgingly about his exploits. He did not belong to 
that species of persons who do things in order to talk about them 
(like me); he did not like high-sounding words, indeed words. It 
appeared that in speaking, as in mountain climbing, he had never 
received lessons; he spoke as no one speaks, saying only the core 
of things.
If necessary he carried a thirty-kilo pack, but usually he traveled 
without it; his pockets were sufficient, and in them he put some 
vegetables,  as  I  have  said,  a  chunk  of  bread,  a  pocketknife, 
sometimes the dog-eared Alpine Club guide, and a skein of wire 
for emergency repairs. In fact he did not carry the guide because 
he believed in it, but for the opposite reason. He  rejected it 
because he felt that it shackled him; not only that, he also saw it 
as a bastard creature, a detestable hybrid of snow and rock mixed 
up with paper. He took it into the mountains to vilify. Happy if he 
could catch it in an error, even if it was at his and his climbing 
companion’s expense.  He could walk for two  days  without 
eating, or eat three meals all together and then leave. For him , all 
seasons were good.  In  the  winter he  skied,  but  not  at  the  well-
equipped,  fashionable  slopes,  which  he  shunned  with  laconic 
scorn: too poor to buy ourselves the sealskin strips for the ascents, 
he  showed me how you sew on  rough hemp cloths, Spartan 
devices which absorb the water and

then freeze  like  codfish, and must be  tied around your waist 
when you ski downhill. He dragged me along on exhausting treks 
through the  fresh snow,  far from any sign of human life, 
following routes  that  he  seemed to  intuit like a  savage.  In  the 
summer, from shelter to shelter, inebriating ourselves with the 
nun, the effort, and the wind, and scraping the skin of our fingertips 
on rocks never before touched by human hands: but not on the 
famous peaks, nor in quest of memorable feats; such things did 
not matter to him at all. What mattered was to know  his 
limitations, to test and improve himself; more obscurely, he felt 
the need to prepare himself (and to prepare me) for an iron 
future, drawing closer month by month.
To see Sandro in the mountains reconciled you to the world 
and made you  forget  the  nightmare weighing on  Europe.  This 
was his place, what he had been made for, like the marmots whose 
whistle and snout he imitated: in the mountains he became happy, 
with a silent, infectious happiness, like a light that is switched on. 
He aroused a new communion with the earth and sky, into which 
flowed my need for freedom, the plenitude of my strength, and a 
hunger to understand the things he had  pushed me toward. We 
would come out at dawn, rubbing our eyes, through the small door 
of the Martinotti bivouac, and there, all around us, barely touched 
by  the  sun,  stood the white and brown mountains, new as if 
created during  the night that had just ended and at the same 
time innumerably ancient. They were an island, an elsewhere.
In any event, it was not always necessary to go high and far. 
In  the  in-between  seasons  Sandro’s  kingdom  was  the  rock 
gymnasiums. There are several, two or three hours by bike from 
Turin, and I  would be  curious to  know whether they  are  still 
frequented: the Straw Stack Pinnacles with the Wolkmann Tower, 
the  Teeth  of  Cumiana,  Patanüa  Rock  (which  means  Hare  Rock), 
the Plô, the Sbarüa, and others, with their homely, modest names. 
The last, the Sbarüa, I think was discovered by Sandro himself and 
a mythical brother of his whom Sandro never let me see but who, 
from his few scanty

hints, must have stood in the same relationship to him as he stood 
to  the  run  of humanity.  Sbarüa  is a noun  from  the verb  sbarüé, 
which  means  “to  terrify”;  the Sbarüa  is a  prism  of  granite that 
towers about a hundred meters above a modest hill  bristling 
with brambles and a brushwood coppice; like Dante’s Veglio di 
Creta—the Old Man of Crete—it is split from base to summit by 
a fissure that gets narrower as it rises, finally forcing the climber to 
come out on the rock face itself, where, precisely, he is terrified, 
and where at that time there was just a single piton, charitably 
left behind by Sandro’s brother.
Those were curious places, frequented  by a few dozen ama-
teurs of our stamp, all of whom Sandro knew either by name or 
sight: we climbed up, not without technical  problems, and 
surrounded by the irritating buzz of  enormous bluebottle flies 
attracted  by our sweat, crawling  up good solid rock walls 
interrupted by grassy ledges where ferns and strawberries grew 
or, in the fall, blackberries: often enough we used as holds  the 
trunks of puny little trees, rooted in the cracks, and after a few 
hours we reached the peak, which was not a peak at all but mostly 
placid pastureland where cows stared at us with indifferent eyes. 
Then  we  descended  at  breakneck  speed,  in a  few  minutes,  along 
paths strewn with old and recent cow dung, to recover our bikes.
At other times our exploits were more demanding; never any 
quiet jaunts, since Sandro said that we would have plenty of time 
when we were forty to look at the scenery. “ Let’s go, shall 
we?” he said to me one day in February—which in his language 
meant that, since the weather was good, we should leave in the 
afternoon for the winter climb of the Tooth of M., which for some 
weeks had been one of our projects. We slept in an inn and left 
the next day, not too early, at some undetermined hour (Sandro 
did not like watches: he felt their quiet continuous admonishment 
to be an arbitrary intrusion). We plunged boldly  into the fog 
and came out of it about one o’clock, in gleaming sunlight and 
on the big crest of a peak which was not the right one.

I then said that we should be able to go down about a hundred 
meters, cross over halfway up the mountain, and go up along the 
next ridge: or, better yet, since we were already there, continue 
climbing and be satisfied with the wrong peak, which  in any 
case was only forty meters lower than the right one. But Sandro, 
with splendid bad faith, said in a few dense syllables that my last 
proposal was fine,  but  from there “ by way of the  easy 
northwest  ridge” (this was a sarcastic quotation from the 
abovementioned Alpine Club guide) we could also reach the Tooth 
of M. in half an hour; and what was the point of being twenty if 
you couldn’t permit yourself the luxury of taking  the wrong 
route.
The easy ridge must really have been easy, indeed elementary 
in the summer; but we found it  in a very discomforting state. 
The rock was wet on the side facing the sun and covered with a 
black layer of ice in the shade; between one large outcrop of rock 
and  another  lay  pockets  of melting  snow  into  which  we  sank to 
our waists. We reached the top at five; I dragged myself along so 
pitifully that it was painful, while Sandro was seized by a sinister 
hilarity that I found very annoying.
“And how do we get down?”
“As  for getting  down, we  shall  see,” he  replied,  and  added 
mysteriously: “The worst that can happen is to have to taste bear 
meat.” Well,  we  tasted  bear  meat  in  the  course  of that  night, 
which seemed very, very long. We got down in two hours, helped 
badly by the rope, which was frozen; it had become a malignant, 
rigid tangle that snagged on each projection and rang against the 
rock face like the cable of a funicular. At seven we were on the 
bank of a frozen pond and it was dark. We ate the little that was 
left, built a useless dry stone wall facing the wind, and lay down 
on the ground to sleep, pressed to each other. It was as though 
time itself had frozen; every so  often we got to our feet to 
reactivate our circulation, and it was  always the  same  time: the 
wind never stopped blowing, there was always the same ghost 
of a moon, always at the same point

in the sky, and in front of the moon passed a fantastic cavalcade 
of tattered clouds, always the same. We had taken off our shoes, 
as described in Lammer’s books, so dear to Sandro, and we kept 
our feet in our packs; at the first funereal light, which seemed to 
seep from the snow and not the sky, we rose with our  limbs 
benumbed and our eyes glittering from lack of sleep, hunger, and 
the hardness of our bed. And we found our shoes so frozen that 
they rang like  bells, and to get  them on we had  to hatch  them 
out like brood hens.
But we went back down to the valley under our own steam; 
and to the innkeeper who asked us, with a snicker, how things 
had gone, and meanwhile was staring at our wild, exalted faces, 
we answered flippantly that we had had an excellent outing, then 
paid the bill and departed with dignity. This was it—the bear 
meat; and now that many years have passed, I regret that I ate 
so little of it, for nothing has had, even distantly, the taste of that 
meat, which is the taste of being strong and free, free also to 
make mistakes and be the master of one’s destiny. That is why I 
am grateful to Sandro for having led me consciously into 
trouble, on that trip and other undertakings which  were only 
apparently foolish, and I am certain that they helped me later on.
They didn’t help Sandro, or not for long. Sandro was Sandro 
Delmastro, the first man to be killed fighting in the Resistance 
with the Action Party’s Piedmontese Military Command. After a 
few months of extreme tension, in April of 1944 he was captured 
by the Fascists, did not surrender, and tried to escape from the 
Fascist Party house  in Cuneo. He was killed with a  tommygun 
burst in the back of the neck by a monstrous child-executioner, 
one of those wretched murderers of fifteen whom  Mussolini’s 
Republic  of  Salò  recruited  in  the  reformatories. His body was 
abandoned in the road for a long time, because the Fascists had 
forbidden the population to bury him.
Today I know that it is a hopeless task to try to dress a man in 
words, make him live again on the printed page, especially a man 

like Sandro. He was not the sort of person you can tell stories about, 
nor  to  whom  one  erects  monuments-he  who  laughed  at  all 
monuments: he lived completely in his deeds, and when they were 
over nothing of him remains-nothing but words, precisely.

P O T A S S I U M
In January 1941 the fate of Europe and the world seemed to be 
sealed. Only the deluded could still think that Germany would 
not win; the stolid English “ had not noticed that they had lost 
the game, “ and obstinately resisted under the bombings; but they 
were alone and suffered bloody losses on all fronts. Only a 
voluntarily deaf and blind man could have any doubts about the 
fate reserved for the  Jews in a German Europe: we had read 
Feuchtwanger’s Oppermanns,  smuggled secretly in  from  France, 
and  a  British  White  Book,  which  arrived  from  Palestine  and 
described the “ Nazi atrocities”; we had only believed half of it, 
but that was enough. Many refugees from Poland and France had 
reached Italy, and we had talked with them: they did not know 
the details of the slaughters that were taking place behind

a monstrous curtain of silence, but  each of them was a 
messenger, like those who run to Job to tell him, “I alone have 
escaped to tell you the story.“
And yet, if we wanted to live, if we wished in some way to take 
advantage  of the  youth  coursing  through  our  veins,  there  was 
indeed  no  other  resource  than  self-imposed  blindness;  like  the 
English,  “we did  not notice,“ we pushed all dangers  into the 
limbo of things not perceived or immediately forgotten. W e could 
also,  in  the  abstract,  throw  everything  away  and  escape  and be 
transplanted  to  some  remote,  mythical  country,  chosen  from 
among the few that kept their frontiers open:  Madagascar, 
British Honduras. But to do this one needed a lot of money and 
a  fabulous capacity for initiative—and I, my family, and our 
friends  had neither one nor the other.  Besides,  if looked  at 
from  close by and in detail, things did not after all seem so 
disastrous: the Italy around us, or, to put it more accurately (at a 
time  when  one  traveled  little),  Piedmont  and Turin  were  not 
hostile.  Piedmont  was our true country, the one in which we 
recognized  ourselves;  the  mountains  around  Turin,  visible  on 
clear  days,  and  within 
reach 
of a 
bicycle, 
were ours, 
irreplaceable, and had taught us fatigue, endurance, and a certain 
wisdom. In short, our roots were in Piedmont and Turin, not 
enormous but deep , extensive, and fantastically intertwined.
Neither in us nor, more generally,  in our generation, 
whether “Aryan” or Jew,  had  the  idea  yet gained  ground  that 
one  must  and  could resist Fascism. Our resistance at the time 
was passive and was limited to rejection, isolation, and avoiding 
contamination.  The  seed of active struggle  had  not  survived 
down to us, it had been stifled a few years before with the final 
sweep of the scythe, which had relegated to prison, house arrest, 
exile,  or  silence the last Turinese protagonists and witnesses—
Einaudi , Ginzburg, Monti, Vittorio Foa, Zini, Carlo Levi. These 
names  said  nothing to us, we knew hardly anything about 
t hem—the Fascism around 

us did not have opponents. We had to begin  from scratch, 
“invent“ our  anti-Fascism,  create  it  from  the  germ,  from the 
roots, from our roots. We looked around us and traveled up 
roads that led not very far away. The Bible, Croce, geometry, 
and physics seemed to us sources of certainty.
We gathered in the gym of the Talmud Torah—in the School of 
the Law, as the very old Hebrew elementary school was proudly 
called—and taught each other to find again in the Bible justice 
and injustice and the strength that overcomes  injustice; to 
recognize the new oppressors in Ahasuerus and Nebuchadnezzar. 
But where was Kadosh Barukhú, “the Holy One, Blessed be He”: 
he who breaks the slaves’ chains and submerges the Egyptians’ 
chariots? He who dictated the Law to Moses, and  inspired  the 
liberators Ezra and Nehemiah, no longer inspired anyone; the sky 
above us was silent and empty: he allowed the Polish ghettos to 
be  exterminated,  and  slowly, confusedly, the idea was making 
headway in us that we were alone, that we had  no allies we 
could count on, neither on earth nor in heaven, that we would 
have  to  find  in  ourselves  the  strength  to  resist.  Therefore the 
impulse that drove us to explore our limits was not completely 
absurd: to travel hundreds of kilometers on our bikes, to climb 
with fury and patience up rock walls that we did not know very 
well, to subject ourselves voluntarily to hunger, cold, and fatigue, 
to train ourselves to endure and to make decisions. A piton goes in 
or it doesn’t; the rope holds or it doesn’t: these too were sources of 
certainty.
Chemistry, for me, had stopped being such a source. It led to 
the heart of Matter, and Matter was our ally precisely because 
the Spirit, dear to Fascism, was our enemy; but, having reached 
the fourth year of Pure Chemistry, I could no longer ignore the 
fact that chemistry  itself, or at least that which we were being 
administered, did not answer  my questions. To prepare phenyl 
bromide or methyl violet according to Gattermann was amusing, 
even exhilarating, but not very much different from following 
Artusi’s recipes. Why in  that  particular way and not in another? 
After having been force fed in liceo the truths revealed by Fascist 
Doctrine, all revealed, unproven truths either bored me stiff or 
aroused my suspicion. Did chemistry theorems exist?  No: 
therefore you had to go further, not be satisfied with the

quia, go back to the origins, to mathematics and physics. The 
origins of chemistry were ignoble, or at least equivocal: the dens 
of the alchemists, their abominable hodgepodge  of ideas and 
language, their confessed interest in gold, their Levantine 
swindles typical of charlatans or magicians; instead, at  the 
origin of  physics lay the strenuous clarity of the West—
Archimedes and  Euclid. I would become a physicist, ruat 
coelum: perhaps without a degree, since Hitler and Mussolini 
forbade it.
A brief course of exercises in physics formed part of the fourth-
year chemistry program: simple measurements of viscosity, 
surface tension, rotatory power, and suchlike exercises. The 
course was conducted by a young assistant, thin, tall, a bit hunched 
over, polite, and extraordinarily shy, who behaved in a way that 
we  were  not  used  to.  Our  other  teachers,  almost  without 
exception, showed themselves convinced of the importance and 
excellence of the subject they taught; some of them were in good 
faith, for others it was evidently a matter of personal supremacy, of 
their private hunting grounds. That assistant, however, almost had 
the air of apologizing to us, of ranging himself on our side: in his 
somewhat embarrassed and well-bred ironic smile, one seemed to 
read:  “I  too  know  that  with this antiquated and worn-out 
equipment you’ll not be able  to put together anything useful, 
and that furthermore these are  all marginal futilities, and 
knowledge lives elsewhere; but this is a trade that you and I too 
must work at—so please try not to do much damage and to learn 
as much as you can.” In short, all the girls in the course fell in 
love with him.
During the span of those months I made desperate attempts 
to be taken on as a student assistant by this or that professor. 
Some of them snidely or even arrogantly told me that the racial 
laws prohibited it; others fell back on hazy or flimsy excuses. After 
having  imperturbably collected the  fourth or  fifth  rejection, I 
was going home one evening on my bike, with an almost 
palpable load of disheartenment and bitterness on my back. I was 
pedaling  listlessly up Via Valperga Caluso, while from the 
Valentino Park gusts of freezing wind overtook and passed me ;

it was night by now, and the light of the street lamps, covered 
with  purple for the blackout, did not prevail over the mist and 
darkness. The passersby were few and hurried; and then suddenly 
one  among them caught my attention.  He  was going  in  my 
direction with a long, slow stride, he wore a long black overcoat, 
and his head was bare. He was walking a bit hunched over and 
looked like the assistant—it  was the assistant. I passed  him, 
uncertain as to what I should do; then I plucked up my courage, 
went back, and once again did not dare speak to him. What did 
I know about him? Nothing. He could be indifferent, a hypocrite, 
even an enemy. Then I thought that I risked nothing  but 
another rejection, and  without  beating around the  bush I  asked 
him whether it would be possible to be accepted for experimental 
work in his school. The assistant looked at me with surprise; and 
instead of going into the long explanation I expected, he replied 
with two words from the Gospel: “Follow me.”
The inside of the Institute of Experimental Physics was full of dust 
and  century-old 
ghosts.  There  were  rows  of glass-doored 
cupboards packed with slips of paper, yellowed and gnawed by 
mice and paper moths: these were the observations of eclipses, 
registrations of  earthquakes, meteorological bulletins from well 
into the last century. Along the walls of one corridor I found an 
extraordinary trumpet, more than thirty feet long, whose origin, 
purpose, and use no one any  longer knew—perhaps it was to 
announce the Day of Judgment, when all that which is hidden 
will appear. There was an Aeolipyle in Secession style, a Hero’s 
fountain, and a whole obsolete and prolix fauna of contraptions 
for generations destined for classroom demonstrations: a pathetic 
and ingenuous form of  minor physics, in which stage  setting 
counts  for  more  than  concept.  It  is  neither  illusionism  nor 
conjuring trick but borders on them.
The assistant welcomed me in the tiny room on the ground 
floor where he himself lived, and which was bristling with a much 
different sort of equipment, unknown and exciting enthusiasm.

Some molecules are carriers of an electrical dipole; they behave 
in  short  in  an  electrical field  like  minuscule compass  needles: 
they orient themselves, some more sluggishly, others  less so. 
Depending on conditions, they obey certain laws with greater 
or less respect. Well, now, these devices served to clarify those 
conditions and that  inadequate respect. They were waiting  for 
someone to put them to use; he was busy with other matters 
(astrophysics, he specified, and the information shook me to 
the marrow: so I had an astrophysicist right in front of me, in 
flesh and blood!) and besides he had no experience with certain 
manipulations  which  were  considered  necessary  to  purify  the 
products  that  had  to  be  measured;  for  this  a  chemist  was 
necessary, and I was the welcomed chemist. He willingly 
handed over the field to me and the instruments. The field was 
two square meters of a table and desk; the instruments, a small 
family, but the most important were the Westphal balance 
and the heterodyne. The first I already knew; with the second I 
soon  established a  friendship.  In  substance it  was  a  radio-
receiving apparatus, built to reveal the slightest differences in 
frequency; and in fact, it went howlingly out of tune and barked 
like a watchdog simply if the operator shifted in his chair or 
moved a  hand, or if someone just came into the room. 
Besides, at certain hours of the day, it revealed a whole intricate 
universe  of  mysterious messages,  Morse  tickings,  modulated 
hisses,
 and
 deformed, 
mangled 
human 
voices, 
which 
pronounced sentences in incomprehensible languages, or others 
in Italian, but they were senseless sentences, in code. It was the 
radiophonic Babel of the war, messages of death transmitted by 
ships  or  planes  from God knows who to God knows whom, 
beyond the mountains and the sea.
Beyond the mountains and the sea, the assistant explained 
to  me, there was a scholar  named Onsager, about whom he 
knew nothing except that he had worked out an equation that 
claimed to describe the behavior of polar molecules under all 
conditions,  provided that  they  were  in  a  liquid  state.  The 
equation  functioned well  for diluted solutions; it did not 
appear that anyone

had bothered to verify it for concentrated  solutions, pure polar 
liquids, and mixtures of  the latter. This was the work that he 
proposed I do, to prepare a series of complex liquids and check 
if  they obeyed Onsager’s equation, which I accepted with 
indiscriminate  enthusiasm. As a first step, I would have to do 
something he did not know how to do: at that time it was not 
easy to find pure products for analysis, and I was supposed to 
devote myself for a few weeks to purifying benzene, chloroben-
zene, chlorophenols, aminophenols, toluidines, and more.
A few hours of  contact were sufficient for the assistant’s 
personality to become clearly defined. He was thirty, was recently 
married,  came  from  Trieste  but  was  of Greek  origin,  knew four 
languages, loved  music, Huxley, Ibsen, Conrad, and  Thomas 
Mann, the last so dear to me. He also loved physics, but he was 
suspicious of every activity that  set itself a goal: therefore, he 
was nobly lazy and, naturally, detested Fascism.
His relationship to physics perplexed me. He did not hesitate 
to harpoon  my last hippogriff, confirming quite explicitly that 
message about “marginal futility” which we had read in his eyes 
in the lab. Not only those humble exercises of ours but physics 
as a whole was marginal, by its nature, by vocation, insofar as it 
set  itself  the  task  of  regulating  the  universe  of  appearances, 
whereas the truth, the reality, the intimate essence of things and 
man exist elsewhere, hidden behind a veil, or seven veils (I don’t 
remember  exactly). He was a physicist, more precisely an 
astrophysicist, diligent and eager but without illusions: the Truth 
lay  beyond,  inaccessible to  our  telescopes, accessible to  the 
initiates. This was a long road which he was traveling with effort, 
wonderment, and profound joy.  Physics was prose: elegant 
gymnastics  for  the  mind,  mirror  of Creation,  the  key  to  man’s 
dominion over the planet; but what is the stature of Creation, of 
man and the planet? His road was long and he had  barely 
started up it, but I was his disciple: Did I want to follow him?
It was a terrifying request. To be the assistant’s disciple was 
for me an enjoyment of every minute, a never before experi-

enced  bond, without shadows, rendered more intense by the 
certainty that the relationship was mutual: I, a Jew, excluded and 
made skeptical by recent upheavals, the enemy of violence but 
not yet caught up in the necessity of an opposed violence, I 
should be for him the ideal interlocutor, a white sheet on which 
any message could be inscribed.
I did  not  mount  the  new  gigantic  hippogriff  which  the 
assistant offered me. During those months the Germans destroyed 
Belgrade, broke the Greek resistance, invaded Crete from the air: 
that  was  the  Truth,  that  was  the  Reality.  There  were no escape 
routes, or not for me. Better to remain on the Earth, playing with 
the  dipoles  for  lack  of  anything  better,  purify benzene and 
prepare for an unknown but imminent and  certainly  tragic 
future. To purify benzene, then, under the conditions to which the 
war and the bombings had reduced the  Institute  was  not  an 
insignificant  undertaking: the assistant declared that I had carte 
blanche, I could rummage everywhere  from basement to attic, 
appropriate any instrument or product, but I could not buy 
anything, even he couldn’t, it was a regime of absolute autarky.
In  the  basement I  found a huge  demijohn of technical ben-
zene, at 95 percent purity, better than nothing, but the manuals 
prescribed  rectifying  it  and  then  putting  it  through  a  final 
distillation in the presence of sodium, to free it from the last traces 
of humidity. To rectify means to distill by fractions, discarding the 
fractions that boil lower or higher than prescribed, and gathering 
the “heart, “ which must boil at a conslant temperature: I found in 
the  inexhaustible  basement  the  necessary glassware, including 
one of those Vigreux distillation columns, as pretty as a piece of 
lace, the product of superhuman patience and ability on the part 
of the glass blower, but (be  it  said between  us)  of debatable 
efficiency, I made the double boiler with a small aluminum pot.
Distilling is beautiful. First of  all, because it is a slow, 
philosophic, and  silent  occupation, which  keeps  you  busy  but 
gives you time to think of other things, somewhat like riding a

bike. Then, because it involves a metamorphosis from liquid to 
vapor (invisible), and from this once again to liquid; but in this 
double journey, up and down, purity is attained, an ambiguous 
and fascinating condition, which starts with chemistry and goes 
very far. And finally, when you set about distilling, you acquire 
the consciousness of  repeating a ritual consecrated by the 
centuries, almost a religious act, in which from imperfect mate- 
rial you obtain the essence, the usia, the spirit, and in the first 
place alcohol, which gladdens the spirit and warms the heart. I took 
two good days to obtain a fraction of satisfying purity: for this 
operation, since I had to work  with an open flame, I had 
voluntarily exiled myself to a  small  room on  the  second floor, 
deserted and empty and far from any human presence.
Now I had to distill a second time in the presence of sodium. 
Sodium is a degenerated metal: it is indeed a metal only in the 
chemical significance of the word, certainly not in that of everyday 
language. It is neither rigid nor elastic; rather it is soft like wax; 
it is not shiny or, better, it is shiny only if preserved  with 
m a n i a c a l  care, since otherwise it reacts in a few instants with 
air,  covering  itself with  an  ugly  rough  rind:  with  even  greater 
rapidity it reacts with water, in which it floats (a metal  that 
floats!), dancing frenetically and developing hydrogen. I ransacked 
the  entrails  of  the  Institute  in vain:  like  Ariosto’s  Astolfo on  the 
Moon I  found  dozens of labeled ampules, hundreds  of  abstruse 
compounds,  other  vague  anonymous  sediments 
apparently 
untouched for generations, but not a sign of sodium. Instead I 
found a small phial of potassium: potassium is sodium’s twin, so I 
grabbed it and returned to my hermitage.
I put in the flask of benzene a lump of potassium, “as large as 
half a  pea”—so  said  the  manual—and diligently  distilled the 
contents: toward the end of the operation I dutifully doused the 
flame, took apart the apparatus, let the small amount of liquid in 
the flask cool off a bit, and then with a long pointed stick skewered 
the “half pea” of potassium and lifted it out.
Potassium, as I said, is sodium’s twin, but it reacts with air 
and water with even greater energy: it is known to everyone

(and was known also to me) that in contact with water it not only 
develops hydrogen but also ignites. So I handled my “ half pea” 
like a holy relic: I placed it on a piece of dry filter paper, 
wrapped it  up  in  it,  went down into the  Institute’s courtyard, 
dug out a  tiny grave, and  buried the  little  bedeviled corpse. I 
carefully tamped down the earth above it and went back up to 
my work.
I took the now empty flask, put it under a faucet, and turned 
on the water. I heard a rapid thump and from the neck of the 
flask came a flash of flame directed at the window that was next 
to the washbasin and the curtains around it caught fire. While I 
was stumbling around looking for some even primitive means to 
extinguish it, the panels of the shutter began to blister and the 
room was now full of smoke. I managed to push over a chair and 
tear down the curtains; I threw them on the floor and stomped 
furiously on them, while the smoke half blinded me and my blood 
was throbbing violently in my temples.
When it was all over, when the incandescent  tatters were 
extinguished, I remained standing there for a few minutes, weak 
and stunned, my knees turned to water, contemplating the vestiges 
of the disaster without seeing them. As soon as I got my breath 
back, I  went  to  the  floor  below  and  told  the  assistant  what had 
happened.  If it is true that there is no greater sorrow  than to 
remember a happy time in a state of misery, it is just as true that 
calling up a moment of anguish in a tranquil mood, seated quietly 
at one’s desk, is a source of profound satisfaction.
The assistant listened to my account with polite attention but 
with a questioning look: Who had compelled me to embark on 
that voyage, and to distill benzene by going to so much trouble? 
In a way, it served me right: these are the things that happen to 
the profane, to those who dawdle and play before the portals of 
the temple instead of going inside. But he didn’t say a word; he 
resorted for  the  occasion  (unwillingly,  as  always)  to  the  hier-
archical distance and pointed out to me that an empty flask does 
not  catch  fire:  so  it  must  not  have  been  empty.  It  must  have 
contained, if nothing else, the vapor of the benzene, besides of

course the air that came in through its neck. But one has never 
seen the vapor of benzene, when cold, catch fire by itself: only 
the potassium could have set fire to the mixture, and I had taken 
out the potassium. All of it?
All, I answered; but then I was visited by a doubt, returned to 
the scene of the accident, and found fragments of the flask still 
on the floor: on on e of them, by looking closely, one could see, 
barely visible, a tiny white fleck. I tested it with phenolphtha-
lein: it was basic, it was potassium hydroxide. The guilty party 
had been found: adhering to the glass of the flask there must have 
remained a minuscule particle of potassium, all that was needed 
to react with the water I  had poured in and set fire to  the 
benzene vapors.
The assistant looked  at me with an amused, vaguely ironic 
expression: better not to do than to do, better to meditate than 
to act, better his astrophysics, the threshold of the Unknowable, 
than my chemistry, a mess compounded of stenches, explosions, 
and small futile mysteries. I thought of another moral, more down 
to earth and concrete, and I believe that every militant  chemist 
can confirm it:  that one  must distrust the  almost-the-same 
(sodium is almost the same as potassium, but with sodium 
nothing would have happened), the practically identical,  the 
approximate, the or-even, all surrogates, and all patchwork. The 
differences can be small, but they can lead to radically different 
consequences, like a railroad’s switch points; the chemist’s trade 
consists in good part in being aware of these differences, knowing 
them  close up,  and foreseeing their  effects. And not  only  the 
chemist’s trade.

N I C K E L
I had in a drawer an illuminated parchment on which was written 
in elegant characters that on Primo Levi, of the Jewish  race, 
had been conferred a degree in Chemistry summa cum laude. It 
was therefore a dubious document, half glory and half derision, 
half absolution and half condemnation. It had remained  in that 
drawer since July  1941, and now we were at the end of 
November. The world was racing to catastrophe, and around me 
nothing  was  happening.  The  Germans had  spread  like a  flood in 
Poland, Norway, Holland, France, and Yugoslavia and  had 
penetrated the Russian steppes like a knife cutting through 
butter. The United States did not move to help the English, who 
remained alone. I could not find work and was wearing myself 
out looking for any sort of paid occupation; in the next room

my father, prostrated by a tumor, was living his last months.
The doorbell rang—it was a tall, thin young man wearing the 
uniform of the Italian army, and I immediately recognized in him 
the figure of the messenger, the Mercury who guides souls, or, if 
one wishes, the  annunciatory angel.  In short, the person  for 
whom everyone waits, whether he knows it or not, and who 
brings the heavenly message that changes your life for good or 
ill, you don’t know which until he opens his mouth.
He opened his mouth, and he had a strong Tuscan accent and 
asked for Dr. Levi, who incredibly was myself  (I still wasn’t 
accustomed to the title), introduced himself urbanely, and offered 
me a job. Who had sent him to me? Another Mercury, Caselli, 
the inflexible custodian of another man’s fame: that “laude” on 
my diploma had actually served for something.
That I was a Jew the lieutenant apparently knew (in any event, 
my  last  name  left  little  room  for  doubt),  but  it  didn’t seem to 
matter to him. Moreover, it seemed that the business somehow 
suited him, that he took a bitter and subtle pleasure in breaking 
the laws of racial separation—in short, he was secretly an ally 
and sought an ally in me.
The work he offered me was mysterious and quite fascinat-
ing. “ In some place” there was a mine, from which was taken 2 
percent of some useful material (he didn’t tell me what) and 98 
percent of sterile material, which was piled up in a nearby valley. In 
this sterile material there was nickel; very little, but its price was 
so high that its recovery should be given some thought. He had an 
idea, in fact a cluster of ideas, but he was in the military service 
and had little free time. I was supposed to replace him, test his 
ideas  in  the  lab,  and  then,  if  possible,  together with  him, realize 
them industrially. It  was clear that; this required my transfer to 
that “ some place,” which was then  sketchily  described.  The 
transfer  would  take  place  under a  double  seal  of secrecy.  In  the 
first place, for my protection, nobody should know my name nor 
my abominable origin, because the “ some place” was under the 
control of the military  authorities; and in the second place, to 
protect his idea, I would

have to swear on my honor not to mention it to anyone. Besides, it 
was  clear that one secret would reinforce the other and  that 
therefore, to a certain degree, my condition as an outcast couldn’t 
have been more opportune.
What  was  his  idea,  and  where  was  this “some  place”? The 
lieutenant bowed out there; until my final acceptance he could 
not tell me much, that was obvious. In any case, the idea consisted 
in an attack on the sterile material in a gaseous phase, and the 
“some  place” was a  few  hours’ journey  from  Turin.  I quickly 
consulted with my parents. They agreed: with my father’s illness 
the house had an urgent need of money. As for me, I had not 
the slightest doubt: I felt sapped by my inactivity, certain of my 
chemistry, and eager to put it to the test. Besides, the lieutenant 
had aroused my curiosity and I liked him.
One could  see that he wore the uniform with revulsion; his 
choice of  me must not have been dictated solely by practical 
considerations. He talked about Fascism and the war with reticence 
and a sinister gaiety that I had no trouble interpreting. It was the 
ironic  gaiety  of  a  whole  generation  of  Italians,  intelligent and 
honest  enough to reject Fascism, too skeptical to  oppose it 
actively, too young to passively accept the tragedy that  was 
taking shape and to despair of the future; a generation to which I 
myself would have  belonged  if the  providential  racial  laws  had 
not intervened to bring me to a precocious maturity and guide 
me in my choice.
The lieutenant acknowledged my consent and without wast-
ing time gave me an appointment at the railroad station for the 
next day.  Preparations? I  didn’t need very  much:  certainly  no 
documents (I  would begin  work incognito,  without a  name or 
with a false name—we’d see about that later on); a few heavy 
suits  (my climbing outfits would go very well), a shirt, books if I 
wished. As for the rest, no problem: I would find a heated room, a 
lab, regular meals with a family of workers, and my colleagues were 
good people with whom, however, he advised me not to become 
too intimate for obvious reasons.
We left, got off the train, and reached the mine after a climb

of five  kilometers surrounded by a forest sparkling with hoar- 
frost. The lieutenant, who was briskly businesslike, introduced 
me summarily to  the  director, a young,  tall, vigorous engineer 
who was even more businesslike and who evidently had already 
been told about  me. I was taken into the lab, where a singular 
creature awaited me: a rather raw-boned girl of eighteen, with 
fiery red hair and green, slanting, mischievous, alert eyes. I learned 
that she would be my assistant.
During the meal which, exceptionally, was offered to me on 
the office’s premises, the radio broadcast the news of the Japanese 
attack on  Pearl Harbor and Japan’s declaration of war  on  the 
United States. My fellow diners (a number of clerks, besides the 
lieutenant) greeted the announcement in various ways: some, and 
among  these  the  lieutenant  himself,  with  reserve and cautious 
glances at me; others, with worried comments; still others, 
belligerently insisting  on the by now proven  invincibility of the 
Japanese and German armies.
So the “ some place” had become localized in space, 
without,  however, losing any of its magic. Yes, all mines are 
magical per se, and always have been. The entrails of the earth 
swarm with  gnomes,  kobolds  (cobalt!),  nickel,  German  “little 
demon” or  “sprite,”  and from which we derive the word 
nickel, creatures who can be generous and let you find a treasure 
beneath the tip  of your  pickax,  or  deceive  and bedazzle  you, 
making modest pyrites glitter like gold, or disguising zinc in the 
garb of tin: and in fact, many are the minerals whose names have 
roots that signify “deception, fraud, bedazzlement.”
This  mine too had its  magic, its wild enchantment.  On a 
squat,  bleak  hill,  all  jagged  rocks  and  stumps,  was  sunk a 
cyclopean, cone-shaped gorge, an artificial crater, four hundred 
meters in diameter: it was in every way similar to the schematic 
representations of Hell in the synoptic tables of Dante’s Divine 
Comedy. Along the encircling tiers, day by day, were exploded 
dynamite charges: the slope of the cone’s walls was graded at 
the indispensable minimum so that the material shaken loose

would roll down to the bottom but without gaining too much 
speed. At the bottom, in Lucifer’s place, stood a ponderous rolling 
shutter; beneath this was a shallow vertical pit which led into a 
long horizontal tunnel; this in turn debouched in the open air on 
the side of the hill,  just above the mine’s main  building. In  the 
tunnel an armored train shuttled  back and forth: a small but 
powerful locomotive positioned the cars one by one under the 
shutter so that they could be filled, then dragged them out to look 
again at the stars.
The  plant was built  in a  tier along the  slope of the  hill  and 
beneath the tunnel’s opening; in it the mineral was shattered in 
a huge crusher that the director described to me and demonstrated 
with  almost childlike  enthusiasm.  It  was  a  bell  turned  upside 
down, or, if one wished, the corolla of a bindweed, four meters 
in  diameter  and  constructed  of  massive  steel:  at  its  center, 
suspended from above and guided from below, swung a gigantic 
clapper. The oscillation was slight, barely visible, but was enough 
to split in the blink of an eye the mass of rock which poured down 
from the train: the rocks were split, pressed together lower down, 
split again, and came out below in fragments as large as a man’s 
head. The operation proceeded in  the midst of an apocalyptic 
uproar, a cloud of dust which could  be seen down on the plain. 
The material was crushed again until it became gravel, then dried 
out and sifted; and it wasn’t difficult to figure out that the final 
purpose of  that gigantic labor  was to extract a miserable 2 
percent of asbestos which was  trapped in those rocks. All the 
rest, thousands of tons a day, was dumped at random into the 
valley.
Year after year, the valley was being filled by a slow avalanche 
of dust and gravel. The asbestos that still was in it made the mass 
of material slightly slippery, sluggishly sticky, like a glacier:  the 
enormous gray tongue, dotted with blackish rocks, crept 
laboriously, ponderously downhill, about ten meters a  year; it 
exerted so much pressure on the walls of the valley as to produce 
deep transverse fissures in the rock; yearly it moved a

few inches several of the buildings erected too far down. I lived 
in one of them, called the “submarine” precisely because of its 
quiet downward drift.
There was asbestos everywhere, like ashy snow. If you left a 
book for a  few  hours on the table  and  then picked it  up,  you 
found its profile in negative; the roofs were covered by a thick 
layer of dust, which on rainy days soaked through like a sponge, 
and then suddenly would slide and crash violently to the ground. 
The head foreman in the mine, called Antaeus, was an obese giant 
with a thick black beard who actually seemed to draw his strength 
from Mother Earth. He told me that, years before, a persistent rain 
had washed many tons of asbestos from the walls of the mine; the 
asbestos  had  accumulated  at  the  bottom of the  cone over the 
open valve, secretly setting like a plug. Nobody had attached 
much importance to the matter, but it had continued to rain, the 
cone acted as a funnel, a lake of twenty thousand cubic meters of 
water  had  formed  over  the  plug, and still nobody had given the 
matter  any thought. He,  Antaeus,  saw  trouble  coming  and  had 
insisted  that  the  then  director do  something about  it:  being  the 
good  mine  foreman  that he was he favored a nice big dynamite 
charge exploded  without ado on the bottom of the lake; but 
what with this and  that, it might be dangerous, you could 
damage the valve, best to  get the advice of the administrative 
council, nobody wanted to  decide, and meanwhile the mine, 
with its malign genius, decided by itself.
While the wise men were deliberating, a dull roar was heard, 
the  plug had given way,  the  water sank  in  the  pit  and tunnel, 
swept  away the train with all its cars, and laid waste the plant. 
Antaeus showed me the marks left by the flood, a good two meters 
above the inclined plane.
The workers and miners (who in the local jargon were called 
“minors”) came from the neighboring villages, walking perhaps 
two hours over the mountain paths. The clerks lived on the spot. 
The plain was only five kilometers away, but for all purposes the 
mine was a small autonomous republic. At that

time of rationing and black market there were no supply problems 
up  there;  nobody 
knew  how  this  was,  but  everyone  had 
everything. Many clerks had their own truck gardens, around the 
square  villa  that  housed  the  offices; some  of them  even  had 
chicken  coops. Several  times  one  clerk’s  chickens  would invade 
the truck garden of another, damaging it, and this  produced 
tiresome disputes and feuds, which were ill-suited to  the 
serenity of the place and the director’s curt, no-nonsense nature. 
He had cut  through the  tangle  in a  manner worthy of  him: he 
had ordered a Flobert shotgun and hung it on a nail in  his 
office. Anyone who from the window saw a foreign chicken 
scratching around in his truck garden had the right to take the 
shotgun and shoot it twice: but the chicken had to be caught in 
the act. If the chicken died on the field, the corpse belonged to 
the shooter; this was the law. During the first days after the ruling, 
there had been many dashes for the gun and shootings, while all 
those not involved bet on the outcome, but then the trespassing 
stopped.
Other marvelous stories were told to me, like the story about 
Signor Pistamiglio’s dog. This Signor Pistamiglio, when I got there, 
had been gone for years, but his memory was still alive and, as 
often happens, had acquired a gilded patina of legend. So  then 
this Signor Pistamiglio  was an excellent section chief, no  longer 
young, a bachelor, full of common sense, esteemed by all, and his 
dog  was a  very  beautiful  German  shepherd,  equally  upright and 
esteemed.
There came a certain Christmas and four of the fattest turkeys in 
the  town down  in  the  valley disappeared. Too  bad:  thieves had 
been  suspected, a  fox, and  that  was  the  end  of it.  But another 
winter  came and  this  time  seven  turkeys  disappeared  between 
November  and  December.  The  thefts  were  reported to  the  local 
carabinieri,  but  nobody would have  ever solved the mystery if 
Signor Pistamiglio himself had not let slip  one  word  too  many 
one evening when he’d drunk a bit. The turkey thieves were the 
two of them, he and his dog. On Sunday he took his dog to the 
town, roamed about among the farms,

and showed him which were the most beautiful and least guarded 
turkeys; case by  case he explained  to  him  the  best  strategy; then 
they came back to the mine and at night he would set him free, 
and the dog arrived invisibly, slithering along the walls like a 
real wolf, jumped over the fence around the chicken coop or dug 
a passage under it, killed the turkey silently, and brought it back 
to his accomplice. It does not appear that Signor Pistamiglio sold 
the turkeys; according  to the most accredited  version, he gave 
them as gifts to his lovers, who were numerous, old, ugly, and 
scattered throughout the foothills of the Piedmontese Alps.
But  many,  many  stories  were  told;  from  what  could  be 
gathered, all fifty of the mine’s inhabitants had reacted on each 
other, two by two, as in combinatorial analysis, that is to say, 
everyone with all the others, and especially every man with all 
the women, old maids or married, and every woman with all the 
men. All I had to do was select two names at random, better if 
of different sex, and ask a third person: “ What happened with 
those two?” and lo and behold, a splendid story was unfolded 
for me, since everyone knew the story of everyone else. It is not 
clear why these events, often quite complicated  and always 
intimate, were told so offhandedly, particularly to me of all people, 
who on the contrary could tell nothing to anyone, not even my 
real name. But it appears that this is my fate (and I’m definitely not 
complaining about it): I am one of those people to whom many 
things are told.
I recorded in various versions a remote saga going back to a 
period much before Signor Pistamiglio’s. There had been a time 
when, in the mine’s offices, they had had a real Gomorrah. During 
that  legendary  season,  every  evening,  when  the five-thirty  siren 
sounded, none of the clerks went home. At that signal, liquor and 
mattresses suddenly popped up from among the desks, and an 
orgy erupted that embraced  everything and  everyone, young 
pubescent  stenographers and balding accountants,  starting with 
the then director all the way down to the

disabled doormen: the sad round of mining paperwork gave way 
suddenly,  every evening, to a boundless interclass fornication, 
public and variously intertwined. No survivors had lived down 
to  our  day  to  provide  direct  testimony:  a  series  of disastrous 
balance sheets had forced the board of governors in Milan to carry 
out a drastic, purifying intervention. Nobody except for Signora 
Bortolasso,  who,  I  was  assured,  knew  everything,  had  seen 
everything, but was not talking because of her extreme shyness.
Signora Bortolasso, in any  case, never  talked with anyone, 
outside the strict necessities of work. Before she had her present 
name she was called Gina delle Benne: at nineteen, already a typist 
in the office, she had fallen in love with a young, slim, red-headed 
miner who, without really reciprocating, showed  himself 
nevertheless  ready  to  accept  her  love;  but  her “folks” had  been 
adamant. They had spent money on her studies and she had to 
show her gratitude by making a good marriage and  not 
hooking up with just anybody; and what’s more, since the girl 
refused to be reasonable, they would see to it: either drop that 
redhead or get out of the house and the mine.
Gina was willing to wait until her twenty-first birthday (which 
was only two years away):  but the redhead didn’t wait  for 
her.  He showed up one Sunday with another woman, then 
with a third, and wound up marrying a fourth. Gina then 
made a cruel decision: if she couldn’t bind herself to the man 
she cared for, the only one, well then, there would not be any 
other. Not a nun; she had modern ideas: but she forbade herself 
marriage forever in a refined and merciless manner, that is, by 
getting married. She was by now almost an executive, needed 
by  the management, endowed with an iron memory and 
proverbial diligence: and she let everyone know, her parents and 
her  bosses,  that  she  intended  to  marry  Bortolasso,  the  mine’s 
simpleton.
This Bortolasso was a middle-aged laborer, strong as a mule 
and dirty as a pig. He most likely was not a real simpleton: it is

more probable that he belonged to that species of human being 
of whom one says in Piedmont that they play the fool so as not 
to pay for the salt: sheltering behind the immunity granted the 
weak-minded, Bortolasso performed with extreme negligence the 
job of gardener—with a negligence that verged on rudimentary 
cunning. Very well, the world had declared him irresponsible and 
now it had to tolerate him as such, indeed give him a living and 
take care of him.
Asbestos drenched by rain is hard to extract, so the rain gauge at 
the  mine  was  very  important.  It  was  placed  in  the  middle  of a 
flowerbed, and the director himself took the readings. Bortolasso, 
who every  morning  watered  the flowerbed, got  the  habit  of  also 
watering the rain gauge, severely falsifying the data for the costs 
of extraction. The director (not  immediately) realized this and 
gave him orders to stop. “So then  he  likes  it  dry,“ Bortolasso 
reasoned; and after every  rain  he  would go and open the valve 
under the instrument.
When I arrived at the mine the situation had been stabilized 
for some time. Gina, now Signora Bortolasso,  was about thirty- 
five: the modest beauty of her face had grown stiff and fixed in a 
tense, alert mask and bore the manifest stigma of a protracted 
virginity. For a virgin she had remained, they all knew it because 
Bortolasso told it to everyone. This had been the agreement at 
the time of the marriage; he had accepted it, even if later, almost 
every night, he tried to violate the woman’s  bed. But she had 
defended herself  furiously and still defended herself—never, 
never would a man, and most of all  that  one, be permitted to 
touch her.
These nightly battles of the sad couple had become the talk of 
the mine, and one of its few attractions. On one of the first mild 
evenings, a group of aficionados invited me to come along with 
them to hear what happened. I refused  and they returned 
disappointed soon after: they had heard only a trombone playing 
“Faccetta Nera.” * They explained to me that sometimes this
*”Little Black Face, “ a Fascist song popularized at the time that Italy invaded
Ethiopia, in 1936—TRANS.

happened: he was a musical simpleton and would blow off steam 
in that way.
I fell in love with my work from the very first day, although it 
entailed nothing more at that stage than quantitative  analysis of 
rock  samples:  attack  with  hydrofluoric acid,  down comes  iron 
with ammonia, down comes nickel (how little! a pinch of  red 
sediment) with dimethylglyoxime, down comes magnesium with 
phosphate, always the same, every blessed day—in itself, it was not 
very stimulating. But stimulating and new was another sensation: 
the  sample  to  be  analyzed  was  no  longer  an  anonymous, 
manufactured powder, a materialized quiz: it was a piece of rock, 
the earth’s entrail, torn from the earth by the explosive’s force; and 
on  the  basis  of the  daily  data  of the  analysis  little by little was 
born a map, the portrait of the subterranean veins. For the first 
time after seventeen years of school work, of Greek verbs and the 
history of the Peloponnesian War , the things I had learned were 
beginning to be useful to me. Quantitative analysis, so devoid of 
emotion, heavy as granite, came alive, true, useful, when part of 
serious and concrete work. It was useful: it was part of a plan, a 
tessera  in a  mosaic.  The  analytical method I followed was no 
longer a bookish dogma, it was put to the test every day, it could 
be refined, made to conform with our aims, by a subtle play of 
reason, of trial and  error.  To  make a  mistake  was  no  longer a 
vaguely  comic  accident that  spoils  an  exam for you or affects 
your marks:  to  make  a  mistake  was  similar  to  when  you  go 
climbing— a contest, an act of attention, a step up that makes you 
more worthy and fit.
The girl in the lab was called Alida. She watched my neophyte’s 
enthusiasms without sharing them; she was in fact surprised and 
somewhat annoyed. Her presence was not unpleasant. She was a 
liceo graduate, quoted Pindar and Sappho,  the  daughter  of  a 
completely innocuous small local Fascist official, was cunning and 
slothful, and didn’t give a damn about anything, least of all the 
analysis of rock, which she had learned to perform mechanically 
from the lieutenant. She too, like all

the people up there, had interacted with several persons and did 
not make a mystery of it with me, thanks to that curious gift for 
garnering confessions which I mentioned before. She had fought 
with many women because of vague rivalries, had fallen in love a 
little with many men, a great deal with one, and was engaged to 
still another, a gray, unpretentious fellow, an employee  in the 
Technical Office who came from her town and whom her family 
had picked for her. About this, too, she didn’t give a damn. What 
could she do about it? Rebel? Leave? No, she was a girl from a 
good family, her future was children and the kitchen stove, Sappho 
and Pindar were things of the past and nickel an  abstruse 
stopgap. She worked listlessly in the lab while waiting for that 
so little longed-for marriage, negligently washing the precipitates, 
weighing  the  nickel  dimethylglyoxime, and  I  had  hard work 
convincing her that it was not quite the thing to pad the results 
of the analyses: something she tended to do, in fact  she 
confessed to having done often, since, she said, it didn’t cost 
anybody anything, and pleased the director, the lieutenant, and 
myself.
What, after all, was that chemistry over which the lieutenant 
and I racked our brains? Water and fire, nothing else, like in the 
kitchen. A less appetizing kitchen, that’s all: with penetrating or 
disgusting smells instead of the domestic kind; for the rest, there 
too aprons, mixing, burned hands, and washing up at the end of 
the  day.  No  escape  for 
Alida.  She  listened  with  devout 
compunction and at the same time Italian skepticism to my tales 
of life in Turin: these were heavily censored because in fact both 
she and I had to play the game of my anonymity. Nevertheless 
something  did  emerge:  if  nothing  else,  from  my  reticences 
themselves. After some weeks I realized that I was no longer a 
nameless person: I was a certain Doctor Levi who must not be 
called Levi, neither in the second nor the third person, due to 
good manners, and in order to avoid a mess. In the mine’s gossipy 
and easygoing atmosphere, a disparity between my indeterminate 
state as an outcast and my visible mildness of

manner leaped to the eye, and—Alida admitted this to me—was 
lengthily discussed and variously interpreted: I was everything 
from an agent of the OVRA, the Fascist secret police, to someone 
with high-class connections.
Going down into the valley was uncomfortable, and for me not 
very prudent; since I could not visit anyone, my evenings at the 
mine were interminable. Sometimes  I stayed in the lab past 
quitting time or went back there after dinner  to study, or to 
meditate on the problem of nickel. At other times I shut myself 
in to read Mann’s  Joseph stories in my monastic cell in the 
submarine. On nights when the moon was up I often took  long 
solitary walks through the wild countryside around the mine, all 
the way up to the brim of the crater, or halfway up on the back 
of the gray, craggy dump chute, shaken by mysterious creaks and 
shivers as if some busy gnomes really nested there: the darkness 
was punctuated by the distant howls of  dogs in the invisible 
valley bottom.
These roamings granted me a truce from the grim awareness 
of my father dying in Turin, of the American defeats at Bataan, 
the German victories in the Crimea, in short, of the open trap 
which was about to spring shut: it gave birth in me to a new bond, 
more  sincere than the rhetoric about nature learned at  school, 
with  those  brambles and  stones  which were my  island  and  my 
freedom, a freedom I would perhaps soon lose.
For  that  rock  without  peace  I  felt  a  fragile  and  precarious 
affection:  with  it  I  had  contracted a  double  bond, first  in  the 
exploits with Sandro, then here, trying as a chemist to wrest away 
its treasure.  From this rocky love and these asbestos-filled 
solitudes, on some other of those long nights were born two stories 
of islands and freedom, the first I felt inclined to write after the 
torments of compositions in liceo: one story fantasized  about  a 
remote precursor of mine, a hunter of lead instead of nickel; the 
other, ambiguous and mercurial, I had taken from a reference to 
the  island of Tristan da Cunha that I  happened to  see  during 
that period.

The lieutenant, who was doing his military service in Turin, came 
up to the mine only one day a week. He would check my work 
and give me instructions and advice for the coming week, and 
proved to be an excellent chemist and a tenacious and acute 
researcher. After a short period of  orientation, alongside the 
routine of daily analyses, a project with much higher aims began 
to take shape.
In  the  mine’s  rock there  was  indeed nickel,  but  very little: 
from our analyses it showed an average content of 0.2 percent. 
Ridiculous, in comparison to the minerals mined by my antip-
odal colleague-rivals in Canada and New Caledonia. But perhaps 
the raw material could be enriched? Under the lieutenant’s 
guidance I tried all possible methods: by magnetic separation, by 
flotation, by levigation, by sifting, with heavy  liquids, with the 
shaking plate. I did not get anywhere: nothing concentrated; in 
all the fractions the percentage of nickel remained obstinately the 
same as the first. Nature was not helping us: we concluded that 
the nickel accompanying  the bivalent iron took its place 
vicariously, followed  it like an evanescent shadow, a minuscule 
brother: 0.2 percent of nickel, 8 percent of iron. All the reagents 
imaginable for nickel should have been employed in doses forty 
times greater, even without taking into account the magnesium. 
An economically desperate enterprise. At moments of weariness I 
perceived the rock that encircled me, the green serpentine of 
the Alpine foothills, in all its sidereal,  hostile, extraneous hard-
ness: in comparison, the trees of the valley, by now already dressed 
for spring, were like us, also people who do not speak but feel 
the heat and the frost, enjoy and suffer, are born and die, fling 
out pollen with the wind, obscurely follow the sun in its travels. 
Not the rock: it does not house any energy, it is extinguished since 
primordial  times, pure  hostile passivity; a massive fortress that I 
had to pull down bastion by bastion to get  my hands on the 
hidden sprite, the capricious kupfernickel which  jumps out now 
here, now  there, elusive and malign, with long  perked ears, 
always ready to flee from the blows of the investigating pickax, 
leaving you with nothing to show for it.

But this is no longer the time for sprites, nickel, and kobolds. We 
are  chemists, that  is,  hunters:  ours  are “the  two  experiences of 
adult life” of which Pavese spoke, success and failure, to kill the 
white whale or wreck the ship; one should not  surrender  to 
incomprehensible matter, one must not just sit down. We are here 
for this—to make mistakes and to correct ourselves, to stand the 
blows and hand them out. We must never feel disarmed: nature is 
immense and complex, but  it  is  not impermeable  to the 
intelligence; we must circle around it, pierce and probe it, look 
for the opening or make it. My weekly  conversations with  the 
lieutenant sounded like war plans.
Among the many attempts we had made there also was that 
of reducing the rock with hydrogen. We had placed the mineral, 
finely ground, in a porcelain boat; had placed this in turn in a 
quartz tube; and through the tube, heated from the outside, we 
had pushed a current of hydrogen in the hope that this would 
strip the oxygen bound to the nickel and leave it reduced, that 
is, naked, in its metallic state. Metallic nickel, like iron, is magnetic, 
and therefore, according to this hypothesis, it would have been 
easy to separate it from the rest, alone or with the iron, simply by 
means of a small magnet. But, after the treatment, we had vainly 
agitated a powerful  magnet in the watery  suspension of our 
powder:  we had only gotten a  trace of iron.  Clear and sad: 
hydrogen, under these conditions, did not reduce  anything;  the 
nickel,  together  with  the  iron,  must  be  firmly  lodged in the 
serpentine’s structure, combined with the silicate and water, 
satisfied  (so to speak) with its state and averse to  assuming 
another.
But say one tried to pull that structure apart. The idea came 
to me as one switches on a light, one day when by chance there 
fell into my hands an old dusty diagram, the work of  some 
unknown predecessor of mine; it showed the loss of weight in 
the  mine’s asbestos as a  function of temperature.  The  asbestos 
lost a little water at 150° centigrade, then remained  apparently 
unaltered until about 800° centigrade; here one noted an abrupt 
step down with a fall in weight of 12 percent, and the author

had remarked: “ becomes fragile.” Now serpentine is the 
father  of asbestos:  if asbestos decomposes at  800°  centigrade, 
serpentine should do so also; and, since a chemist does not think, 
indeed  does not live, without models, I idly went about 
representing them for myself, drawing on paper long chains of 
silicon,  oxygen,  iron,  and  magnesium,  with a  little  nickel  caught 
between their links, and then the same chains  after the smash 
reduced to short stubs, with the nickel flushed out of its den and 
exposed to attack; and I did not feel much different from  the 
remote hunter of Altamira who painted an antelope on the rock 
wall so that the next day’s hunt would be lucky.
The propitiatory ceremonies did not last long: the lieutenant 
was not there, but he could arrive from one hour to the next, 
and I was afraid that he would not accept, or would not readily 
accept, my very unorthodox hypothesis of work. But I felt it itch 
all over my skin: what’s done is done, best  get to work 
immediately.
There is nothing  more vivifying than a hypothesis. Watched 
with an amused and skeptical expression by Alida, who, since it 
was now late in the afternoon, kept looking ostentatiously at her 
wristwatch, I set to work like a whirlwind. In a moment  the 
apparatus was mounted, the thermostat set at 800° centigrade, 
the pressure regulator on the tank set, the fluxmeter put in order. I 
heated the material for half an hour, then reduced the 
temperature and passed the hydrogen through for another hour: 
by now it was dark, the girl had gone, all was silence against the 
backdrop of the grim  hum  of the  Grading  Department,  which 
also worked at night. I felt part conspirator, part alchemist.
When the time came, I took the porcelain boat out of the quartz 
tube,  let  it  cool  off in  the  vacuum,  then  dispersed  in  water the 
powder, which had turned from  greenish to a dirty  yellow: a 
thing which seemed to me a good sign. I picked up the magnet 
and set to work. Each time I took the magnet out of the water, 
it brought with it a tuft of brown powder: I removed it 
delicately with filter paper and put it aside, perhaps a milligram 
each time; for the analysis to be well-founded at least a half

gram of  material was needed, that is, several hours of  work. I 
decided to  stop  about  midnight:  to  interrupt  the  separation, I 
mean to say, because at no cost would I have put off the beginning 
of the analysis.  For this, since it involved a magnetic  fraction 
(and therefore presumably poor in silicates), and yielding to my 
haste, I there and then tried a simplified variant. At three in the 
morning I had the result: no longer the usual pink little cloud 
of  nickel-dimethylglyoxime but 
rather a 
visibly 
abundant 
precipitate. Filtered, washed, dried, and weighed. The final datum 
appeared to me written in letters of fire on the slide  rule: 6 
percent of nickel, the rest iron. A victory: even without a further 
separation, an alloy to be sent to the electric oven as is. I 
returned to the submarine when it was almost dawn with an acute 
desire to go immediately and wake the director, telephone  the 
lieutenant, and  roll  around on the  dark fields, which were 
dripping wet with dew. I was thinking many foolish things, and 
I was not thinking of anything sensible and sad.
I was thinking of  having opened a door with a key, and of 
possessing the key to many doors, perhaps to all of them. I was 
thinking of having thought of something that nobody else had yet 
thought, not even in Canada  or New Caledonia, and I felt 
invincible and untouchable even when faced  by close enemies, 
closer each month.  Finally,  I  was  thinking of having  had  a  far 
from ignoble revenge on those who had declared me biologically 
inferior.
I was not thinking that if the method of extraction I had caught 
sight  of  could  have  found  industrial  application,  the  nickel 
produced would have entirely ended up in Fascist Italy’s  and 
Hitler Germany’s armor plate and artillery shells. I was not 
thinking that during those very  months there had been dis- 
covered in Albania deposits of nickel mineral before which ours 
could go and hide, and along with it every project of mine, the 
director’s,  and the lieutenant’s. I did not foresee that my 
interpretation of  the magnetic separability of  nickel was sub-
stantially mistaken, as the lieutenant showed me a few days later, 
as soon as I told him of my results. Nor did I foresee that

the director, after having shared my enthusiasm for a few days, 
threw a wet blanket on mine and his when he realized that there 
did not exist in commerce  any magnetic selector capable of 
separating a material in the form of a fine powder, and that on 
cruder powders my method could not function.
And yet this story does not end here. Despite the many years 
that have passed, the liberalization of exchanges, and the fall in 
the international price of nickel, the news of the enormous wealth 
that lies in that valley in the form of rubble accessible to 
everyone still sets fire to the imagination. Not far from the mine, 
in cellars, stables, on the borderline between chemistry and white 
magic, there are still people who go at night to the rubble heaps 
and come back with bags of gray gravel, grind it, cook it, treat it 
with ever new reagents. The fascination of buried wealth, of two 
kilos of a noble silvery metal bound to a thousand kilos of sterile 
stone which is thrown away, has not yet died out.
Nor have the two mineral tales which I wrote then disappeared. 
They have had a troubled fate, almost as troubled as my own: 
they have suffered bombings and escapes, I had given them up for 
lost,  and  I  found  them  recently  while  going  through  papers 
forgotten for decades. I  did not want to abandon them:  the 
reader will find them here in the succeeding pages, inserted, like 
a prisoner’s dream of escape, between these tales of militant 
chemistry.

L E A D
My name is Kodmund and I come from far away. My country is 
called Thiuda; at least we call it that, but our neighbors, that is, 
our enemies, use different names for us—Saksa, Nemet, Alaman. My 
country is different  from this one; it has great forests and rivers, 
long winters, swamps, mists and rain. My people— I mean those 
who speak my language—are shepherds, hunters, and warriors: they 
do not like to cultivate the land, indeed they scorn those who do  
cultivate it, drive their flocks on their fields, sack their villages, and 
make  slaves  of  their women.  I am  neither a shepherd nor a 
warrior; I am not even a hunter, although my trade is not very 
different from a

hunter’s. It ties me to the land, but I am free: I am not a peasant.
My father and all of us Rodmunds in the paternal line have 
always plied this trade, which consists in knowing a certain heavy  
rock, finding it in distant countries, heating it in a certain way that  
we know, and extracting black lead from it. Near my village there 
was a large bed; it is said that it had been discovered by one of my  
ancestors whom they called Rodmund Blue Teeth. It is a village of 
lead-smiths; everyone there knows how to smelt and work it, but 
only we Rodmunds know how to find the rock and make sure it is  
the real lead rock, and not one of the many heavy rocks that the 
gods have strewn over the mountain so as to deceive man. It is the 
gods who make the veins of metals grow under the ground, but 
they keep them secret, hidden; he who finds them is almost their 
equal, and so the gods do not love him and try to bewilder him. 
They do not love us Rodmunds: but we don’t care.
Now, in five or six generations the bed has been exhausted: 
someone  has  suggested following  it  below  the ground,  digging 
tunnels, and even tried to do it and lost by it; finally the opinion of 
the more prudent prevailed. All the men have resumed their former 
trades,  but not I: just as the lead,  without us, does not see the 
light, so we cannot live without lead. Ours is an art that makes us 
rich, but it also makes  us die young. Some say that this happens 
because  the  metal enters our  blood and  slowly  impoverishes  it; 
others think instead that it is a revenge of the gods, but in any case it 
matters little to us Rodmunds that our lives are short, because we are 
rich, respected,  and  see  the  world.  In fact  the  case  of my  ancestor 
with the blue teeth is  exceptional, because the deposit he had 
discovered was exceptionally rich: in general, we prospectors are

also travelers. He himself, they told me, came from far away, from 
a country where the sun is cold and never sets, the people live in 
houses made of ice, and in the sea swim monsters a thousand strides 
long.
So, after six generations in one place, I began traveling again, in  
search of rock to smelt or to be smelted by other people; teaching  
them the art in exchange for gold. We Rodmunds are wizards, that’s  
what we are: we change lead into gold.
I left by myself, heading southward, when I was still young. I 
traveled for four years, from region to region, avoiding the plains, 
climbing  up  the  mountain  valleys,  tapping  with  my  hammer,  
finding little or nothing: in the summer I worked in the fields; in 
the winter I wove baskets or spent the gold I had brought with 
me. By myself, I have said: for us, women serve to provide a male 
child, so that the race does not die out, but we don’t take them 
along. What use would they serve? They don’t learn how to find 
the rock, and in fact, if they touch it when (hey have their period it 
crumbles into dead sand and ashes. Better the girls you meet along 
the way, good for a night or a month, with whom you can make 
merry without thinking of tomorrow, as instead wives do. It is 
better to live our tomorrows  alone: when the  flesh begins to 
become loose and pale, the belly pains, hair and teeth fall out, 
gums turn gray, then it is better to be alone.
I arrived at a place from which, on clear days, you could see a 
chain  of  mountains to  the south.  In  the spring  I  began  walking 
again, determined to reach them: I was completely fed up with that 
sticky, soft earth, good for nothing, good for making clay ocarinas, 
lacking both secrets and virtue. In the mountains it is different: the 
rocks, which are the bones of the

earth, can be seen uncovered, they ring out under your hobnailed  
boots, and it is easy to distinguish the different qualities: the plain 
is not for us. I would ask around where the easiest mountain pass 
was. I also asked if they had lead, where they bought it, and how 
much they paid for it: the more money they paid, the more I 
searched in the vicinity. Sometimes they didn’t even know what 
lead was; when I showed them the chunk of it that I always carry in 
my bag they laughed at feeling it so soft, and derisively asked me 
if in my country lead is also used to make ploughs and swords. 
Most times, however, I could not understand them or make them 
understand me: bread, milk, a cot, a girl, the direction to take the 
next day, and that’s all.
I got through a broad pass at the height of the summer, with a 
sun that at midday was almost perpendicular over my head, and yet 
there were still splotches of snow on the upland meadows. Just a 
bit lower down were flocks, shepherds, and paths: you could see the 
bottom  of the  valley, so deep that it still seemed immersed in  the 
night.  I  descended,  found  villages, one  rather large  village on  a 
stream,  where  the  mountain folk came  down  to  barter livestock, 
horses,  cheese,  pelts,  and a  red liquid they called wine.  I almost 
burst out laughing whenever I heard them speak: their language 
was a crude and indistinct gurgle, an animal-like gur-gur, so much 
so that it was surprising to see that they nevertheless actually had 
weapons and tools like ours, some of them even more ingenious and 
elaborate.  The  women spun,  as they did back home.  They build 
houses of  rock, not so pretty but solid; some houses, though, were 
made  of  wood,  suspended  a  few  feet  above  the  ground since they 
rested on four or six wooden blocks topped by disks of

smooth stone; I believe these stones served to prevent the invasion of  
mice, and this seemed to me an intelligent invention. The roofs 
were not made of straw hut of broad, flat stones. They did not know 
beer.
I immediately saw that on high, along the valley’s sides, there  
were holes in the rock and cascades of rubble: the sign that in these 
parts too some people were prospecting. But I did not ask any 
questions  to  avoid  arousing  suspicion;  a foreigner  like  myself 
aroused too much already. I went down to the stream, which was 
rather swift (I remember that its water was turbid and a dingy 
white, as if it had been mixed with milk, something which in my 
parts was unheard of), and I set about patiently examining the 
stones: this is one of our tricks, the stones in a stream come from 
afar and speak clearly to him who understands. There was a little 
of everything flint stones, green stones, lime stones, granite, iron-
bearing stones, even a little of what we call galmeida, all stuff that 
did not interest me; and yet I had the fixed idea that in a  valley 
formed like that, with certain white striations on the red rock and 
with so much iron thereabouts, lead rocks could not be missing.
I walked down along the stream, partly on the boulders, partly 
wading wherever I could, like a hunting dog, with my eyes glued to 
the ground,  when lo and behold! a little below the confluence 
with another, smaller stream, I saw a stone among millions  of 
other stones, a stone almost the same as all the others, a dingy white 
stone with small black speckles, which brought me to a halt, tense 
and motionless, exactly like a hunting dog pointing. I picked it up. 
It was heavy. Next to it was another like it but smaller. We rarely 
make mistakes:  but  just to  be sure  I crushed it and took a 
fragment as big as a nut

along with me to test it. A good prospector, a serious one, who 
does not want to tell lies either to others or himself, should not 
trust in appearances, because the rock, which seems dead, instead is 
full of deception: sometimes it changes its nature even while 
you‘re digging, like certain snakes that change color so you won’t 
see them. A good prospector, therefore, carries everything with him: 
a clay crucible, pieces of charcoal, touchwood and steel, and another 
instrument that is secret and I can’t mention and is used precisely 
to find out whether the rock is good or not.
That evening I found an out-of-the-way spot, built a hearth, on  
which I put the well-layered crucible, heated it for half an hour, and 
then let it cool. I broke it open and there it was—the shiny heavy 
little disk which can be scored by your fingernail, which makes your 
heart leap with joy and the fatigue of the long walk vanish from your 
legs, and which we call “the little king.”
At this point we are far from finished; on the contrary, most of 
the work is still to be done. You have to go back up the stream, and 
at every branching look around to see  whether the good stone 
continues to right or left. I went up for quite a distance along the big 
stream and the stone was always there but became more and more 
sparse; then the valley narrowed to a gorge so profound and steep 
that  climbing  it  was  out  of the question.  I  asked  the  shepherds 
thereabouts and they gave me to understand by dint of gestures and 
grunts that there really was no way of getting around that gorge, 
but if you went back down to the big valley you would find a small 
road, about so wide, which ran through a pass they called something 
like Tringo and descended just above the gorge, ending up in a 
place where there were horned beasts that mooed and therefore

(I thought) also grazing land, shepherds, bread, and milk. I started 
walking,  easily found  the  road  and  Tringo,  and from there  went 
down to a very beautiful country.
Straight in front of me in a long tunnel-like view I saw a valley 
green with larches, and in the distance mountains white with snow 
at the height of the summer: the valley ended at my feet in a vast 
meadow dotted with huts and flocks. I was tired; I walked farther 
down and stopped by the shepherds. They were distrustful, but they 
knew (even too well) the value of gold, and they put me up for a few 
days without bothering me. I took advantage of this to learn a few 
words of their language— they called mountains “pen,” meadows  
“tza,” the snow of summer “roisa,” sheep “fea,” their houses “bait,”  
which are made of rock in the lower part, where they keep the 
livestock, and of wood above, with stone rests as I have already said,  
where  they  live  and  store  hay  and  provisions.  They  were  
cantankerous people, who spoke little, but they had no weapons and 
did not treat me badly.
When  I  was  rested  I  resumed  my  search,  still  with  the stream 
system,  and I wound up slipping into a valley parallel to the 
larch  valley,  long,  narrow,  and deserted,  without meadows  or 
woods. The stream which ran through it was rich in good rock: I 
felt I was close to what I was searching for. It took me three days, 
sleeping  in  the  open:  in fact, without  sleeping  at all,  I was that 
impatient, passing the night staring at the sky so that  dawn 
would break soon.
The deposit was quite out of the way, in a very steep gully: 
the white rock cropped out here and there amid sickly grass, within 
a hand’s reach, and all you had to do was dig two or three feet to 
find the black rock, the richest of all, which I had never yet seen but 
which my father had described to me. A

compact rock without slag, to put a hundred men to work for a 
hundred years. What was strange was that someone must have 
already been there: you could see, half hidden behind a rock (which 
certainly had been put there on purpose), the opening to a tunnel, 
which  must  have  been  very old,  because  from  its  vault  hung 
stalactites as long as my fingers. On the ground there were stakes of 
rotted wood and a few corroded bone fragments; the rest must have 
been carried off by the  foxe s—in  fact there were footprints of 
foxes and perhaps of wolves: but a half skull that protruded from 
the mud was certainly human. This is a difficult thing to explain, 
but it has already happened more than once that someone, who 
knows when, coming from who knows where, at some remote time, 
perhaps before the Flood,  finds a vein, does not say anything to 
anyone, tries by himself to dig out the rock, leaves his bones there, 
and then the centuries pass. My father told me that in whatever 
tunnel or cave you may dig you find the bones of the dead.
In short, the deposit was there: I made my tests, I built as 
best I could a furnace there in the open, I went down and came 
back up with wood, I melted down as much lead as I could carry on  
my back, and I returned to the valley. I didn’t say anything to the  
people on the pastureland; I continued down the Tringo and came 
to the large village on the other side, which was called Sales. It was 
market day, and I put myself on show with my piece of lead in 
my hand. A few people began to stop, to weigh it and ask me 
questions, of which I only understood half; it was clear that they 
wanted to know what it was good for, how much it cost, and 
where it came  from. Then an alert-looking fellow with a plaited 
woolen cap came up to me, and we understood each other pretty 
well. I showed him that you could beat that stuff with a hammer: in 
fact, right

there and then I found a hammer and a curbstone and showed him 
how easy it is to fashion it into slabs and sheets: then I explained 
to him that with the sheets, welding them on one side with a red-
hot iron, you could make pipes. I told him that wooden pipes, for 
example, the rainpipes in that town Sales, leak and rot; I explained 
to him that bronze pipes are hard to make and when they are used 
for drinking water cause stomach trouble, and that instead lead 
pipes last forever and can be joined together very easily. Putting on a  
solemn face, I also took a random shot and explained to him that 
with a sheet of lead you can also line coffins for the dead, so that they 
don’t grow worms but become dry and thin, and so the soul too 
is not dispersed, which is a fine advantage; and still with lead you 
can cast small funeral statues, not shiny like bronze, but in fact a 
bit dark, a bit subdued, as is suitable to objects of mourning. Since I 
saw that these matters interested him greatly, I explained that, if one 
goes beyond appearances, lead is actually the metal of death: because 
it brings on death, because its weight is a desire to fall, and to fall is a 
property of corpses, because its very color is dulled-dead, because 
it is the metal of the planet Tuisto, which is the slowest of the 
planets, that is, the planet of the dead. I also told him that, in my 
opinion, lead is a material different from all other materials, a metal 
which you feel is tired, perhaps tired of transforming itself and that 
does not want to transform itself anymore: the ashes of who knows 
how  many  other  elements full  of life,  which  thousands  upon 
thousands of years ago were burned in their own fire. These are 
things I really think; it is not that I invented them to close the 
deal. That man, whose name was Borvio, listened to all this with 
his mouth agape, and then he told me that it really must be as I 
said, and that that planet is sacred to a god

who in his town was called Saturn and is depicted with a scythe. 
This was the moment to get down to brass tacks, and while he was 
still there mulling over my blandishments, I asked him for thirty 
pounds  of gold for handing over  the  deposit,  the  technique  of 
smelting the lead, and precise instructions on the principal uses of 
the metal. He made me a counter offer of bronze coins with a boar 
imprinted on  them, coined God knows  where,  but  I  made  the 
motion of spitting on them: gold, and cut the nonsense. Anyway, 
thirty pounds are too much for someone traveling on foot, everyone 
knows  that, and I knew that Borvio knew it: so we  concluded the 
deal for twenty pounds. He insisted that I accompany him to the 
deposit, which was only right. When we got back to the valley, he 
gave me the  gold:  I  checked all  twenty ingots,  found  them 
genuine and of good weight, and we got beautifully drunk on wine 
to celebrate.
It was also a farewell drunk. It is not that that country did 
not please me, but many reasons impelled me to continue my 
journey. First: I wanted to see the warm countries, where they 
say olives and lemons grow. Second: I wanted to see the sea, not 
the stormy sea from which came my ancestor with the blue teeth, 
but the tepid sea, from which comes salt. Third: there’s no point in 
having gold and carrying it on your back, with the continuous 
terror that at night or during a drinking bout someone will steal it 
from you. Fourth, and to sum up: I wanted to spend the gold on a 
sea voyage, to get to know the sea and sailors, because sailors need 
lead, even if they do not know it.
So  I left:  I  walked for  two  months,  descending a large sad 
valley until it opened out on a plain. There were meadows and 
wheatfields and a sharp smell of burnt brushwood which filled

me with nostalgia for my country: autumn, in all the countries of 
the world, has the same smell of dead leaves, of resting earth, of 
bundles of burning branches, in short, of things which are ending, 
and you think “forever.” I came across a fortified city—there are 
none as large back home—at the confluence of two rivers; there was 
a market fair with slaves, meats, wine; filthy, solid, disheveled girls; 
a tavern with a good fire—and I spent the winter there: it snowed 
as it does back home. I left in March, and after a month of walking 
I found the sea, which was not blue but gray, bellowed like a bison, 
and hurled itself on the land as though it wanted to devour it: at 
the  thought  that it  never rested,  never had rested since  the 
beginning of the world, my courage failed me. But I still continued 
down  the  road to  the east,  along  the  beach,  because  the sea 
fascinated me and I could not tear myself away from it.
I found another city, and I stopped there, also because my gold  
was beginning to come to an end. They were fishermen and strange 
folk, who came by ship from various, very distant countries: they 
bought and sold; at night they fought over the women and knifed 
each other in the alleyways. Then I too bought a heavy knife made of 
bronze in a leather sheath, to carry tied to my waist under my 
clothes. They knew gloss but not mirrors; that is, they only had 
small mirrors of polished bronze, cheap things, the kind that get 
scratched immediately and distort the colors. If you have lead it is 
not difficult to make a glass mirror, but I made a fuss about 
parting with the secret, I told them that it is an art which only we 
Rodmunds know, that a goddess named Frigga taught it to us, and 
other foolishness which they swallowed hook, line, and sinker.
I needed money: I looked around me, found near the port a 
glazier who seemed rather intelligent, and made a deal with him.

From him I learned several things—first of all, that glass can be 
blown: I liked that system a great deal, and I even had him teach 
it to me, and one day or another I will also try to blow lead or 
melted  bronze (but they are too liquid, I doubt whether I’ll 
succeed). I, however, taught him that on a still-hot pane of glass 
you can pour melted lead and obtain mirrors not so large but 
luminous, without flaws, which last for many years. He in fact was 
rather adept: he had a secret for making colored glass and fashioned 
variegated glass panes that were beautiful to look at. I was full of 
enthusiasm for the collaboration and invented a process of making 
mirrors also with the rounded caps of blown glass, pouring the lead 
into it or spreading it on the outside: if you looked into them you see 
yourself either very large or very small, or even all crooked: these 
mirrors are not liked by women, but all children insist on getting 
them.  Through the summer and fall we  sold  mirrors  to  the 
merchants, who paid well for them; but meanwhile I was talking 
with them and tried to gather as much information as I could on 
a region which many of them knew.
It was astounding to see how those people, who actually spent 
half their lives on the sea, had such confused notions about the 
cardinal points and distances; but, in short, on one point they were 
all agreed: that is, that by sailing south, some said a thousand 
miles, others said ten times farther than that, you came to a land 
which the sun had burnt to dust, rich in unusual trees and animals,  
and inhabited by ferocious men with black skin. But many stated 
as a certainty that halfway along you encountered a large island 
called Icnusa, which was the island of metals: they told  the 
strangest stories about this island, which was inhabited by giants, 
whereas the horses, oxen, even rabbits and chickens were tiny; 
that the women gave orders and fought the wars, while the men 
watched over the livestock and spun the wool; that these

giants were devourers of men, especially foreigners; that it was a 
land of utter whoredom, where the husbands exchanged wives and 
even the animals coupled haphazardly, wolves with cats, bears with 
cows; that the women’s period of pregnancy lasted only three days, 
then the women gave birth and immediately told the infant: “Get 
moving, bring me the scissors and turn on the light, so I can cut 
your umbilical cord.” Still others said that along its coasts there 
are fortresses built of rock, big as mountains; that everything on 
that island is made of rock—the points of the spears, the wheels of 
the wagons, even the women’s combs and sewing needles: also 
the pots to cook with, and that they actually have stones which 
burn and they set them alight under these pots; that along their 
roads,  to  guard  the  crossroads,  there  are  petrified  monsters  
frightening to look at. I listened to all these things with a grave 
face, but  within  myself I was  laughing loud enough to  burst, 
because by now I have roamed the world enough and know that 
all is just like your hometown: for the rest, I too, when I get back 
and tell stories about the countries I’ve been in, amuse myself by 
inventing weird tales; indeed, here they tell fantastic stories about 
my country—for example, that our buffalo do not have knees and 
all you have to do to slaughter them is saw through the trees 
against which they lean at night to rest: their weight breaks the 
tree; they fall down and cannot get up again.
As  to  metals,  however,  they  were  all  in  agreement:  many  
merchants and sea captains had brought loads of raw or finished 
metal from the island to land, but they were crude folk and from 
their accounts it was hard to understand what metal they were 
referring to; also because not all spoke the same language and no 
one spoke mine, and there was a great confusion of terms. They 
said, for example, “kalibe” and there was absolutely no way to 
figure out whether they meant iron, silver, or bronze. Others called

“sider” either iron or ice, and they were so ignorant as to insist 
that the ice in the mountains, with the passing of the centuries 
and beneath the weight of the rock, hardens and first becomes rock 
crystal and later iron-bearing rock.
To put it bluntly, I was fed up with these female occupations 
and wanted to go and see this Icnusa. I handed over to the glazier 
my share in the business, and with that money, plus the money I 
had made from the mirrors, I got passage on board a cargo ship; 
but you don’t leave in the winter, there is the north wind, or the 
west wind, or the south wind, or the southwest wind—in brief, it 
appears that no wind is good, and that until April the best thing is 
to stay on land, get drunk, bet your shirt on the dice games, and 
get some girl in the port pregnant.
We left in April. The ship was loaded with jugs of wine; besides 
the owner there was the crew chief, four sailors, and twenty rowers 
chained to their benches. The crew chief came from Kriti and was 
a big liar: he told stories about a country where there lived men 
called Big Ears, who have ears so huge that they wrap themselves 
in them to sleep in the winter, and about animals called Alfil with 
tails in the front who understand the language of men.
I must confess that I had trouble accustoming myself to life 
aboard ship: it dances under your feet, leans a bit to the right and a 
bit to the left, it is hard to eat and sleep, and you step on each 
other’s feet due to the lack of space; besides, the chained rowers 
stare at you with such ferocious eyes as to make you think that, if 
they weren’t in fact chained, they would tear you to pieces in a flash: 
and the owner told me that sometimes it happens. On the other 
hand, when the wind is favorable, the sail billows out, the rowers 
lift their oars, and you think you are flying in an enchanted silence; 
you see dolphins leap out of the water, and the sailors claim that they 
can discover, from the expression on their snouts

the weather we will have the next day. That ship was well plastered 
with pitch and yet the entire keel was riddled with holes; they were 
ship worms, they explained. In port, too, I had seen that all the 
moored ships were worm-eaten: there was nothing to be done, said 
the owner, who was also the captain. When the ship is old, it’s 
broken up and burnt; but I had an idea, and the same for the 
anchor. It’s stupid to make it out of iron; the rust devours it, and 
it doesn’t last two years. And fishing nets? Those sailors, when the 
wind is good, dropped a net that had wooden floats and rocks as 
ballast. Rocks! If they had been lead they could have been four 
times less cumbersome. Of course I did not say a word to anyone, 
but—as you too will understand—I was already thinking of the 
lead I would dig out of Icnusa’s entrails, and I was selling the 
bearskin before I had shot the bear.
We came in sight of the island after eleven days at sea. We 
entered a small harbor by rowing; around us there were granite 
cliffs and slaves who were carving columns. They were not giants 
and they did not sleep in their own ears; they were made like us 
and communicated well enough with the sailors, but their guards 
did not let them speak. This was a land of rocks and wind, which I 
liked on sight: the air was full of the smell of herbs, bitter and 
wild, and the people seemed strong and simple.
The land of metals was two days’ walk away: I hired a donkey 
with a driver, and this is actually true, they are small donkeys 
(though not like cats, as they say on the mainland) but robust and 
tough; in short, in all rumors there may be some truth, perhaps a 
truth hidden beneath veils of words, like a riddle. For example, I 
saw that the story of the rock fortresses was quite correct; they are 
not as big as mountains, but solid, regular in shape, with hewn 
stones fitted together with precision. And what is curious is that 
everyone says that “they have always been there,” and nobody

knows by whom, how, why, and when they were built. That the 
islanders devour foreigners, however, is a great lie. Going in stages 
they  led  me  to  the  mine  without  making  any  difficulties  or 
indulging in mysteries, as if their land belonged to everyone.
The land of metals is enough to make you drunk, as happens 
when a hound enters a wood full of game and jumps from scent to 
scent, shivering all over and going half crazy.
It is near the sea, a line of hills which on high become rocky 
crags, and near and far, all the way to the horizon, one sees plumes 
of smoke from the foundries, surrounded by people working, free 
and slaves: and the story of the stone that burns is also true; I 
could scarcely believe my eyes. It doesn’t catch fire easily, but 
then it produces a great deal of heat and lasts for a long time. 
They brought it there from God knows where, in baskets on donkeys’ 
backs—it is black, greasy, fragile, and not very heavy.
So, as I was saying, there are marvelous stones, certainly heavy 
with metals never seen, which surface in white, violet, and blue 
streaks: beneath that land there must be a fabulous tracery of veins. 
I would willingly have lost myself in it,  tapping, digging, and 
testing; but I am a Kodmund, and my rock is lead. I immediately set 
to work.
I found a deposit on the country’s western border, where I 
believe nobody had ever searched: in fact, there were no pits, nor 
tunnels, nor heaps of rubble, and there weren’t even any signs on 
the surface; the rocks on the surface were like all the other rocks. 
But just below, the lead was there: and this is a thing of which I had 
often thought, that we prospectors believe we find the metal with 
our eyes, experience, and skill, but in reality what guides is 
something more profound, a force like that which guides the salmon 
to go back up our rivers, or the swallows to return to the nest. 
Perhaps it happens with us as with the water diviners, who

do not know what guides them to the water, but something does 
guide them and twists the wand in their hands.
I can’t say how, but right there was the lead: I felt it under my 
feet, turbid, poisonous, and heavy, stretching for two miles along a 
brook in a wood where wild bees nest in the lightning-struck tree 
trunks. In a short time I had bought slaves who dug for me, and as 
soon as I had laid aside a bit of money I also bought myself a 
woman. Not just to have a good time: I chose her carefully, not 
looking so much for beauty but rather that she be healthy, wide in 
the hips, young, and merry. I chose her like that, so that she gives 
me a Rodmund, and our art does not perish; and I haven’t been 
behindhand, because my hands and knees have begun to shake, 
and my teeth are loose in my gums and have turned blue like those 
of my ancestor who came from the sea. This Rodmund will be born 
at the end of the coming winter, in this land where palms grow, 
salt condenses, and at night you can hear the wild dogs baying on 
the track of a bear. In this village I have founded near the brook of 
the wild bees, and to which I would have liked to give a name in 
my language, which I am forgetting, Bak der Binnen, meaning 
Brook of the Bees”: but the people here have accepted the name 
only in part, and among themselves, in their language, which by 
now is mine, they call it Bacu Abis.

M E R C U R Y
With my wife, Maggie, I the undersigned Corporal Abrahams have 
lived on this  island for fourteen years. I had been sent here as 
garrison: it seems that on a nearby island (I mean to say “the 
nearest”: it is northeast from this one, not less than 1,200 miles, 
and is called St. Helena) was exiled an important and dangerous 
person, and it was feared that his supporters might help him to 
escape and take shelter down here. This is a story which I have 
never believed: my island is called Desolation, and never was an 
island’s name better chosen; so I could never understand what such 
an important person would come looking for here.
The rumor went around that he was a renegade, an adulterer,

a  Papist,  rabble-rouser,  and braggart.  As long as he  was alive, 
there were with us another twelve soldiers, young, merry fellows, 
from Wales and Surrey; they were also good farmers and gave us a 
hand in  the  work.  Then  the rabble-rouser died,  and after that a 
gunboat came to take us all home: but Maggie and I remembered 
certain old debts and preferred to remain here to watch over our pigs. 
Our island has the shape you can see below.
It is the loneliest island in the world. It was discovered more 
than once, by the Portuguese, the Dutch, and even before that by 
savages who carved signs and idols in the rocks of Mount 
Snowdon; but nobody has ever stayed on, because it rains here 
half the year and the soil is good only for sorghum and potatoes. 
Nevertheless, those who are not choosy certainly won’t die of 
hunger, because the northern coast for five months of the year 
swarms with seals, and the two small islands to the south are full 
of seagulls’ nests: all you have to do is get a boat and you can find 
as many  eggs as you  want.  They  taste  of fish,  but  they are 
nourishing and kill your

hunger; everything here tastes of fish, even the potatoes and the 
pigs who eat them.
On the slopes east of Snowdon grow holm oaks and other trees 
whose names I do not know: in the autumn they bloom with light 
blue, fleshy flowers that smell like unwashed people; in the winter, 
hard, sour berries, not good to eat. They are strange trees: they 
suck up water from the deep earth and throw it up in rain from 
the tops of their branches; even on dry days, the land beneath this 
forest is humid. The water that pours down from the branches is 
good to drink, and indeed has a soothing effect on inflammations, 
although it tastes of moss: we gather it with a system of gutters 
and basins.  This  forest,  which,  in  fact,  is  the only one on  the 
island, we called the Weeping Forest.
We live at Aberdare. It is not a town—there are  only four 
wooden huts, two of which are caved in; but one of the Welshmen 
insisted on calling it that, since he himself came from Aberdare. 
Duckbill is the island’s northernmost point: the soldier Cochrane, 
who suffered from homesickness, went there often and spent whole 
days amid the salty mist and wind because it seemed to him that 
he was closer to England. (He also built a beacon there, which 
nobody ever bothered to light.) It is called Duckbill because, when 
seen from the east, it really has the shape of a duck’s bill.
Seal Island is flat and sandy; the seals go there in the winter to 
have their pups. Holywell Cave was given that name by my wife, 
and I don’t know what she saw in it. At certain periods, when we 
were alone, she went there almost every night, with a torch, even 
though it was almost two miles from Aberdare. She would sit there 
to spin or knit, waiting for God knows what. I asked her about it 
more than once: she told me some confused things, that she heard 
voices and saw shadows, and that down there, where not even the 
thunder of the sea reached, she felt less alone and more protected.

I, however, feared that Maggie was leaning toward idolatry. In 
that cave there were boulders that looked like figures of men and 
animals; one boulder, right in the back, was a horned skull. Certainly 
these shapes were not made by human hands: and so who did 
them? I, on my account, preferred to give them a wide berth; also 
because in the cave one sometimes heard stifled rumbles, like attacks 
of colic in the earth’s entrails, the floor was hot under your feet, 
and from certain fissures in the back came jets of steam with a 
sulfurous smell. In short, I would have given an entirely different 
name to that cave: but Maggie said that the voice she claimed to 
hear would one day pronounce our fate, and the island’s and all 
humanity’s.
Maggie and I remained alone for several years; each year, at Easter, 
Burton’s whaler would pass by bringing news of the world  and 
provisions and take on the small amount of smoked pork that we 
had produced; but  then everything changed.  Three years ago 
Burton set ashore here two Dutchmen: Willem was still nearly a 
child, shy, blond, and pink-skinned; on his forehead he had a silvery 
sore which looked like leprosy and no ship wanted him  aboard. 
Hendrik was older; he was thin and had gray hair and a wrinkled 
brow: he told a not very clear story of a brawl in which  he 
supposedly bashed in his quartermaster’s head, and the gallows 
was waiting for him in Holland; but he did not speak like a sailor 
and had gentleman’s hands, not the hands of someone who bashes 
in heads. One morning a few months later we saw smoke rise from 
one of the Egg Islands. I took the boat and went over to look. I 
found two shipwrecked Italians, Gaetano of Amalfi and Andrea of 
Noli. Their ship had split on the Plowshare rocks, and they had 
swum  to  safety;  they  did  not  know  that  the  large  island  was 
inhabited; they had lit afire of brushwood and guano to dry o f f. I

told them that in a few months Burton would pass by again and 
he could land them in Europe, but they refused with terror. After 
what they had seen that night, never again would they set foot on 
a  ship;  and  it  took  a great  deal of persuading  on  my  part  to 
convince them to come on my small boat and cross the hundred
yards of sea that separated us from Desolation. As far as they 
were concerned, they would have stayed on that miserable rock 
eating seagulls’ eggs until their natural death.
Not that Desolation lacks for space. I put up the four men in 
one of the huts abandoned by the Welshmen; they had quite enough 
room, also because their luggage was modest. Only Hendrik had a 
wooden trunk, closed with a lock. Willem’s sore was not leprosy at 
all; Maggie cured it in a few weeks with compresses of an herb she 
knows—it is not actually watercress, it’s a succulent herb which 
grows at the borders of the forest and is good to eat, even if then it 
gives you strange dreams: but we call it watercress. To tell the 
truth, she did not only treat him with compresses: she shut herself 
up with him in the bedroom and sang him chants like lullabies, 
with pauses that seemed to me too long. I was glad and less worried 
when Willem was cured, but immediately  after began another 
annoying business with Hendrik. He and Maggie took long walks 
together, and I heard them talk about the seven keys, Hermes 
Trismegistus, the union of contraries, and other rather obscure 
matters. Hendrik built himself a sturdy hut without windows, put 
his trunk in it, and spent whole days there, sometimes with Maggie: 
you could see smoke rising out of the chimney. They would also go 
to the cave and return with colored stones, which Hendrik called 
“cinnabars.”
The two Italians worried me less. They too looked at Maggie 
with shining eyes, but they did not know English and could not 
talk with her. What’s more, they were jealous of each other and

spent their days keeping an eye on each other. Andrea was very 
devout, and in a short time had filled the island with saints made 
of wood and baked clay: he had given a terracotta Madonna as a 
gift to Maggie, who, however, did not know what to do with it 
and put it in a corner of the kitchen. In short, it would have been 
clear to anyone that these four men needed four women. One day 
I brought them all together and without beating around the bush 
told them that if one of them touched Maggie he would end up in 
Hell, because one should not lust after another man’s woman: but
I would send him there myself, at the cost of ending up there too. 
When Burton came by again, with his hold brimming with whale 
oil, all of us in agreement solemnly commissioned him with the 
task of finding four wives, but he laughed in our faces. What did 
we think? That it was easy to find women ready to settle down 
among the seals, on this forgotten island, to marry four good-for- 
nothings? Perhaps if we paid them, but with what? Certainly not 
with our sausages, half pig and half seal, which stank of fish more 
than his whaler. He left and immediately after hoisted his sails.
That very evening, just before nightfall, we heard a great rumble 
of thunder, as though the island itself was being shaken to its 
roots. In a few minutes the sky darkened and the black cloud that 
covered it was lit from below as by afire. From the top of Mount 
Snowdon we saw first rapid red flashes leap out and climb up into 
the sky,  then a broad, slow stream of burning lava: it did not 
descend toward us but to the left, the south, pouring from ridge to 
ridge, hissing and crackling. After an hour it reached the sea and 
there it was doused with a roar, lifting up a column of vapor. 
None of us had ever thought that Mount Snowdon could be a 
volcano; and yet the shape of its summit, with a round hollow at least 
two hundred feet deep, could have made us suspect this.
The spectacle continued all through the night, calming down

every so often, then picking up again with a new series of explosions; 
it seemed that it would never end.  Yet, toward dawn, a  hot wind 
blew  from  the east,  the sky cleared off again,  and the uproar 
gradually died down  until it  was reduced to a  murmur, then 
silence. The  mantle  of lava, which had  been yellow  and dazzling, 
turned reddish like smoldering coals, and by daylight it was 
extinguished.
My preoccupation was the pigs. I told Maggie that she should go 
to sleep, and asked the four men to come with me; I wanted to see 
what had changed on the island.
Nothing had happened to the pigs, but they ran to meet us like  
brothers (I can’t stand people who speak badly of pigs: they arc animals  
who are quite conscious, and it pains me when I have to slaughter them).  
On the northeastern slope several cracks had opened, two large ones  
whose bottoms cannot be seen. The south- western edge of the Weeping  
Forest was buried, and the strip alongside for a breadth of two hundred  
feet was dried out and had caught fire; the earth must have been hotter  
than the sky, because the fire followed the trunks all the way to the roots,  
scooping out passages where they had been. The mantle of lava was all  
dotted I with burst bubbles with edges as sharp as splinters of glass, and  
it i looked like a gigantic cheese grater: it issued from the southern lip of 
the crater, which had collapsed, while the northern lip, which formed the  
top of the mountain, was now a rounded crest that seemed much higher  
than before.
When we looked into the Holywell Cave we were petrified with 
astonishment. It was another cave, completely different, as when 
one shuffles a deck of cards—narrow where before it had  been  broad, 
high where it had been low: at one point the ceiling had collapsed 
and the stalactites instead of pointing down now pointed

sideways, like storks’ beaks. At the rear, where before there had 
been the Devil’s Skull, there was now an enormous chamber, like 
the dome of a church, still full of smoke and crackling sounds, so 
much so that Andrea and Gaetano wanted at all costs to turn back. 
I sent them to call Maggie so that she too would come and see 
her cave, and, as I expected, Maggie arrived gasping from the run 
and emotion, and the two Italians stayed outside, presumably to 
pray to their  saints and to say their  litanies. Inside the cave 
Maggie ran back and forth like a hunting dog, as if those voices 
she said she heard were calling to her; suddenly she let out a scream 
which made all our hairs stand on end. There was in the sky of 
the cupola a crack, and drops were falling from it, but not of 
water: shiny, heavy drops, which plunked on the rock floor and 
burst into a thousand spattering drops that rolled far away. A little 
lower down a pool had formed, and then we understood that it 
was mercury: Hendrik touched it, and I did too: it was a cold, 
lively material, which moved in small, irritated, and frenetic waves.
Hendrik seemed transfigured. He exchanged swift glances with 
Maggie whose significance I could not catch, and he said some 
obscure, mixed-up things to us, which, however, she seemed to 
understand: that it was time to initiate the Great Work; that, like 
the sky, the earth too has its dew; that the cave was full of the 
spiritus mundi. Then he turned openly to Maggie and said to her: 
“Come here  this evening; we will make the beast with  two 
backs.” He took from his neck a chain with a bronze cross and 
showed it to us: on the cross a snake was crucified, and he threw 
the cross on the mercury in the pool, and the cross floated.
If you looked around, mercury was oozing from all the cracks 
of the new cave, like beer from new vats. If you listened you heard 
a sonorous murmur, produced by thousands of metallic droplets

which fell from the cave’s vault and splattered on the ground, and 
by the sound of the trickles vibrating, like melted silver, before 
sinking in the crevices in the rock floor.
To tell the truth, I had never liked Hendrik—of the four men, 
he was the one I liked the least; but at that moment he filled me 
with fear, rage, and revulsion. He had a crooked, fleeting light in 
his eyes, like that of mercury; it seemed that he had turned into 
mercury, that it was running in his veins and shone through his 
eyes. He scurried about the cave like a ferret, dragging Maggie by 
the wrist, plunging his hands into the pools of mercury, spraying it 
over himself and pouring it on his head, as a thirsty man would do 
with water: one step more and he might have drunk it. Maggie 
followed him, spellbound. I stood it for a while, then I flipped open 
my knife, grabbed him by the chest, and pushed him against the 
rock wall: I am much stronger than he is, and he went slack like a 
sail when the wind drops. I wanted to know who he was, what he 
wanted of us and the island, and what about that business of the 
beast with two backs.
He looked like a man who has awakened from a dream, and he 
spoke out right away. He confessed that the story of the murdered 
quartermaster was a lie, but not that of the gallows that awaited 
him in Holland: he had proposed to the States General to trans- 
form the sand of the dunes into gold, had obtained a fund of one 
hundred thousand florins, and had spent a few of them in experi-
ments and the rest in riotous living, then he had been asked to 
execute before the judges what he called the experimentum cruris; 
but from a  thousand pounds of sand he had succeeded in 
obtaining only two  flakes of gold, so he had jumped  from  the 
window, had hidden in his girlfriend’s house, and then had embarked 
secretly on the first ship leaving for the Cape. He had in his trunk 
his alchemist’s paraphernalia. As for the beast, he said it

was not something that could be explained in a few words. Mer-
cury, for their work, would be indispensable, because it is a fixed 
volatile spirit, that is, the female principle, and combined with 
sulfur,  which  is  hot  male  earth,  permits you  to  obtain  the 
philosophic Egg, which is precisely the Beast with Two Backs, for 
in it are united and commingled male and female. Quite a tale this 
was, clear, straight talk, truly that of an alchemist, of which I 
didn’t believe a word. The two of them, he and Maggie, were the 
beast with two backs: he gray and hairy, she white and smooth, 
inside the cave or God knows where, or perhaps in our very own 
bed while I was taking care of the pigs; they were preparing to do 
it, drunk with the mercury as they were, if they hadn’t done it 
already.
Perhaps the mercury was already coursing through my veins 
too, for at that moment I was really seeing red. After twenty years 
of marriage, Maggie didn’t mean all that much to me, but at that 
moment I was burning with desire for her and would have mur-
dered for her. But I managed to control myself; indeed, I was still 
holding Hendrik tightly pressed against the wall when I got an 
idea, and I asked him how much mercury was worth: he, with his 
craft, ought to know that.
“Twelve English guineas a pound,” he replied in a whisper. 
“Swear!”
“I swear,” he replied, lifting up his two thumbs and spitting on 
the ground between them; perhaps it was their way of swearing, 
these transmuters of metals: but he had my knife so close to his 
throat that certainly he was telling the truth. I let him go, and he, 
still completely terrified, explained to me that raw mercury like 
ours is not worth much, but that it can be purified by distilling it, 
like whiskey, in cast-iron or terracotta retorts; then the retort is 
broken and in the residue you find lead, often silver, and some-

times gold; that this was their secret; but he would do it for me if I
promised to spare his life.
I promised absolutely nothing and instead told him that with  
the mercury I wanted to pay for the four wives. Making clay retorts 
and jars must surely be easier than changing the sand of Holland 
into gold: so get cracking, since Easter was approaching and so 
also Burton’s visit. I wanted to have ready for Easter forty pint 
jars of purified mercury, all the same, each with a fine cover, 
smooth and round, since the eye wants its share too. He should get 
help also from the other three, and I too would give him a hand. 
He needn’t worry about the baking of retorts and jars: there already 
was the furnace in which Andrea baked his saints.
I learned how to distill immediately, and in ten days the jars 
were ready: they were for a single pint, but each pint of mercury 
weighed seventeen abundant pounds, so heavy that it was hard to 
lift one with your outstretched arms, and when you shook one it 
seemed that inside writhed a living animal. As for  finding the 
crude mercury, that was a cinch: in the cave you wallowed in 
mercury, it dripped on your head and shoulders, and when you 
went home you found it in your pockets, your boots, even in the 
bed, and it went a bit to everyone’s head, so much so that it began 
to seem natural to us that we should exchange it for some women, 
It is truly a bizarre substance: it is cold and elusive, always restless, 
but when it is quite still you can see yourself in it better than in a 
mirror. If you stir it around in a bowl it continues to twirl for 
almost half an hour. Not only does Hendrik’s sacrilegious crucifix 
float on it but also stones, even lead. Not gold: Maggie tried it 
with her ring, but it immediately sank to the bottom, and when 
we  fished it up again  it had turned into tin. In short, it is  a
material I do not like, and I was in a hurry to close the deal and 
get rid of it.

At Easter, Burton arrived, carried off the forty jars carefully 
sealed with wax and clay, and left without making any promises. 
One evening toward the end of autumn we saw his sail loom up in 
the rain, grow larger, and then disappear in the murky air and 
darkness. We thought he was  waiting for the light to enter the 
small anchorage, as he usually did, but in the morning there was 
no trace of Burton or his whaling ship. There were instead, standing 
on the beach, drenched and stiff with the cold, four women plus two 
children, all clustered tightly together in a heap due to cold and 
shyness; one of them silently delivered a letter from Burton. A few 
lines—that to find four  women for four unknowns on a desolate 
island, he had had to hand over all the mercury and nothing had 
been left for the brokerage; that he would claim it, in mercury and 
smoked pork, to the tune of 10 percent on his next visit; that they 
weren’t first-choice women, but he had not found anything better; 
that he preferred to land them quickly and return to his whaler to 
avoid witnessing disgusting brawls and because he was neither a go-
between nor a pimp, nor even a priest to officiate  at a wedding; 
that nevertheless he advised us to perform the weddings ourselves, as 
best we could, for the health of our souls, which at any rate he 
already considered somewhat ailing.
I called out the four men and wanted to propose that we draw 
lots, but I immediately saw that there was no need for that. There 
was a middle-aged mulatto, plumpish, with a scar on her fore- head, 
who stared insistently at Willem, and Willem looked at her with 
curiosity: the  woman could have been his mother.  I said to 
Willem: “Do you want her? Take her!”—he took her and I married 
them as best I could; that is, I asked her if she wanted him and him 
if he wanted her, but the little speech about “for rich or poor, in 
sickness or in health” I could not recall exactly and so I invented 
it there and then, winding up with “until death overtakes

you,” which seemed to me to have a good sound. I was just finish-
ing up with these two when I saw that Gaetano had chosen a 
young, one-eyed girl, or perhaps she had chosen him, and they were 
running away together in the rain, holding hands, so much so 
that I had to pursue them and marry them from a distance as I too 
was running. Of the two who remained, Andrea took a black 
woman about thirty, pretty and even elegant, with a plumed hat 
and a boa of ostrich feathers that was dripping wet, but with a 
rather equivocal manner, and I married them too, although I was 
still gasping for breath because of the race I had just run.
Hendrik was left and a small, thin girl who was in fact the 
mother of the two children. She had gray eyes and looked around 
her as though the scene did not concern her but amused her. She 
was not looking at Hendrik but was looking at me; Hendrik was 
looking at Maggie, who had just come out of the hut and had not 
taken out her curlers, and Maggie was looking at Hendrik. Then it 
popped into my head that the two children could help me take 
care of the pigs; Maggie would certainly not give me children; that 
Hendrik and Maggie would get along very well together, making 
the beast with two backs and their distillations; and that the girl 
with the gray eyes did not displease me, even if she was much 
younger than I; on the contrary, she made me feel gay and light-
hearted, like a tickle, and brought to mind the idea of catching her 
on the wing like a butterfly. So I asked her her name and then I 
asked myself in a loud voice, in the presence of witnesses: “Do you 
wish, Corporal Daniel K. Abrahams, to take as  wife  the  here 
present Rebecca Johnson?” and I answered myself yes, and since 
the girl too was agreed, we got married.

P H
O S P H
O R U S
In June 1942 I spoke frankly to the lieutenant and the director: I 
realized that my work was becoming useless, and they too realized 
this and advised me to look for another job, in one of the not 
too many niches the law still granted me.
I was futilely looking when one morning, a very rare event, I 
was called to the mine’s telephone: from the other end of the 
line a Milanese voice, which seemed to me crude and energetic, 
and which said that it belonged to a Dr. Martini, summoned me 
to an appointment on the following Sunday at the Hotel Suisse 
in Turin, without vouchsafing me the luxury of any details. But 
he had said “Hotel Suisse” and not “Albergo Svizzera” as a loyal 
citizen would be obliged to say: at that time, which was the time

of Starace,* one was very attentive to such piddling details, and 
one’s ears were expert at intercepting certain nuances.
In the foyer (oh, pardon me, in the lobby, which isn’t a French 
word) of the Hotel Suisse, an anachronistic oasis of plush 
upholstery, velvets, shadows, and draperies, Dr. Martini, who was 
prevalently a commendatore, as I had learned just before from the 
doorman,  was waiting  for  me.  He  was a  thickset  man  of  about 
sixty, of medium height, tanned, almost bald: his face had heavy 
features, but his eyes were small and astute, and his mouth, a trifle 
twisted to the left as in a grimace of contempt, was thin as a cut. 
This commendatore revealed himself from his first remarks to be 
also a no-nonsense, all-business type; and I understood at that 
point  that  this  strange  haste  of “Aryan” Italians  in  dealing  with 
Jews  was  not  accidental.  Whether  intuition or calculation,  it 
served a purpose: with a Jew, at a  time of the Defense of the 
Race, one could be polite, one could even help him, and even 
boast (cautiously) about having helped  him, but it was not 
advisable to have human relations with him, nor to compromise 
oneself too  deeply,  so  as  not  to  be  forced  later  to  offer 
understanding or compassion.
The  commendatore asked only a few questions, responded 
evasively to my many questions, and proved to be a very down- 
to-earth person on  two fundamental points:  the  starting salary 
that he offered me came to a sum that I would never have dared 
ask for, and left me dumbfounded; his industry was Swiss, indeed 
he himself was a Swiss (he pronounced it “ Sviss”) , so for my 
possible hiring there was no difficulty. I found strange—in fact, 
frankly comic—his Swiss-ism expressed in such a virulent 
Milanese accent; I found, however, his many reticences  quite 
justifiable.
The factory of which he was the owner and director was on 
the outskirts of Milan, and I would have to move to Milan. It
*A Starace was for many years secretary of the Fascist National Party. He distinguished 
himself by the stupid zeal with which he strove to “ purify” the customs of the Italians, 
combating the use of foreign words (in fact, such words as “hotel “ or “foyer”) .

produced hormonal extracts: I, however, would have to deal with a 
very precise problem, that is, research into a new cure for 
diabetes  which  would  be  effective  if taken  orally.  Did  I  know 
anything about diabetes? Not much, I replied, but my maternal 
grandfather had died of diabetes, and also on my paternal side 
several of my  uncles,  legendary devourers of pasta,  had  shown 
symptoms  of  the  disease  in  their  old  age.  Hearing  this,  the 
commendatore became more attentive and his eyes smaller: I realized 
later that, since the tendency to diabetes is hereditary, it would 
not  have  displeased  him  to  have  at  his  disposal  an  authentic 
diabetic, of a basically human race, on whom he could test certain 
of his ideas and preparations. He told me that the offered salary 
was subject to rapid raises; that the laboratory was modern, well 
equipped, and spacious; that in the factory there was a library 
with more than ten thousand volumes; and, finally,  like a 
magician extracting a rabbit from his tall silk hat, he added that, 
perhaps I did not know it (and indeed I didn’t), but already 
working in his laboratory, and on the same problem, was a person I 
knew  well, a  classmate of mine and a  friend,  who  in  fact had 
spoken of me: Giulia Vineis. I should decide with calm: I would 
find him at the Hotel Suisse two Sundays from today.
The very next day I quit the mine and moved to Milan with 
the few things I felt were indispensable:  my bike, Rabelais, the 
Macaronaeae, Moby Dick translated by Pavese, a few other books, 
my pickax, climbing rope, logarithmic ruler, and recorder.
The commendatore’s lab was not inferior to his description of it: 
a palace in comparison to the mine’s lab. I found already set out 
for my arrival a  workbench, a  ventilation hood, a desk, a closet 
filled with glassware, and an inhuman silence and orderliness. 
“My” glassware was  countersigned with  a  small  dot  in  blue 
enamel glaze, so that it would not be confused with glassware from 
other closets, and also because “here with us breakages have to be 
paid for.” This, at any event, was only one  of the many 
regulations that the commendatore had transmitted to  me  on  the 
day of my arrival: he passed them off to me as examples of “ Swiss 
precision,” the soul of the laboratory and

the entire factory, but to me they seemed a collection of witless 
impediments bordering on persecution mania.
The  commendatore explained to me that the factory’s work, 
particularly  the problem he had entrusted to me, had to be 
attentively protected from possible industrial spies. These spies 
could be outsiders but also clerks and workers in the factory itself, 
despite all the precautions he used in hiring. Therefore I must 
not talk with anyone about the subject that had been proposed to 
me, nor of its possible developments: not even with  my 
colleagues, in fact with them even less than with others. For this 
reason,  every  clerk  had  his  particular  schedule  of hours,  which 
coincided with a single pair of tram runs coming from the city: A 
had to come in at 8, B at 8:04, C at 8:08, and so on, and the 
same for quitting times, in such a manner that never would two 
colleagues have the opportunity to travel in the same tramcar. For 
people who came to work late and for those who  left  before 
quitting time there were heavy fines.
The last hour of the day, even if the world came to an end, 
must be dedicated to dismantling, washing, and putting away the 
glassware,  so  that  no  one  entering  outside  the  lab  hours  could 
reconstruct  what  work  had  been  done  during  the  day.  Every 
evening a daily report must be compiled and handed in in a 
sealed envelope to him personally or to Signora Loredana, who 
was his secretary.
I could  eat lunch where I wished; it was not his intention to 
sequester  the clerks in the factory during the midday break. 
However, he  told  me (and  here  his  mouth  twisted more  than 
usual and became even thinner) there were no good cheap trattorie 
thereabouts, and his advice was to equip myself for lunching in 
the lab; if I brought the raw materials from home, a  worker 
there would see to cooking it for me.
As for the library, the regulations that had to be followed were 
singularly  severe.  Books  could  not  be  taken  out  of the  factory 
under any circumstances; they could be consulted only  with 
the consent of the librarian, Signorina Paglietta. Underlining a 
word, or just making a mark with pen or pencil, was a very

serious offense: Paglietta was expected to check every book, page 
by page, when returned, and if she found a mark, the book had 
to be destroyed and replaced at the expense of the culprit. It was 
forbidden even to leave between the sheets a bookmark, or turn 
down the corner of a page: “someone“ could have drawn clues 
from this about the  factory’s interests and activities—in  short, 
violate its secret. Within this system, it is logical that keys were 
fundamental: in  the evening, everything had to be locked  up, 
even the analytical balance, and the keys then deposited with the 
custodian. The commendatore had a key that opened all the locks.
This viaticum of precepts and prohibitions would have made 
me permanently unhappy if on entering the lab I had not found 
Giulia Vineis, quite calm, seated beside her workbench. She was 
not working—instead she was darning her stockings, and seemed 
to be waiting for me. She greeted me with affectionate familiarity 
and a meaningful grimace.
We had been classmates at the university for four years, and 
had attended together  all the lab courses, which are wonderful 
matchmakers, without ever becoming particular  friends. Giulia 
was a dark  girl, minute and quick; she had eyebrows with an 
elegant arc, a smooth, pointed face, a lively  but precise way of 
moving. She was more open to practice  than to theory, full of 
human  warmth,  Catholic  without  rigidity,  generous  and  slap- 
dash;  she  spoke  in  a  veiled,  distracted  voice,  as  if  she  were 
definitely tired of living, which she was not at all. She had been 
there for nearly a year—yes , she was the person who mentioned 
my  name  to  the  commendatore:  she  knew  vaguely  about  my 
precarious situation  at  the  mine,  thought  that I  would  be  well 
suited for that research work, and besides, why not admit  it, 
she was fed up with being alone. But I shouldn’t get any ideas: she 
was 
engaged, 
very 
much 
engaged, 
a 
complicated 
and 
tumultuous business that she would explain to me later. And what 
about me? No? No girls? That’s bad: she would try to help me 
out there, forget the racial laws; a lot of nonsense anyway, what 
importance could they have?

She advised me not to take the commendatore’s strange ideas too 
seriously. Giulia was one of  those people who, apparently 
without asking questions or going to any trouble, immediately 
knew everything about everybody, which to me, God knows why, 
never happens; so she was for me a tourist guide and a first-class 
interpreter.  In a  single  session  she  taught  me  the  essentials, the 
pulley-lines hidden behind the factory’s scenery and the roles of 
the main characters. The commendatore was the  boss,  although 
subjected  to  obscure  other  bosses  in  Basel;  however, the  person 
who gave the orders was Loredana (and she pointed her out to 
me from the  window on the courtyard:  tall, brunette, shapely, 
rather vulgar, a bit faded), who was  his  secretary and mistress. 
They had a  villa on the lake,  and h e—“who was old but 
horny”—took her sailing. There were photos of this in the main 
office,  hadn’t I  seen  them?  Also  Signor Grasso, in the Personnel 
Office, was after Loredana, but for the moment she, Giulia, had 
not yet been able to ascertain whether he’d already been to bed 
with her or not: she would keep me posted. Living in that factory 
was not difficult; it was difficult to  work there because of all 
those entanglements. The solution was simple—just don’t work: 
she had realized this immediately, and in a year, modesty aside, 
she had done hardly anything—all that  she did was set up the 
apparatus in the morning, just enough to satisfy  the  eye, and 
dismount it  in  the  evening  in  accordance  with regulations. The 
daily report she created out of her imagination. Apart from that, 
she  prepared  her  trousseau,  slept a  great deal, wrote torrential 
letters to her fiance, and, against regulations, started conversations 
with  everyone  who  came  within earshot: with Ambrogio, half 
dazed, who took care of  the  rabbits  for  the  experiments; with 
Michela,  who  watched  over  the  keys  and  probably  was a  Fascist 
spy;  with  Varisco,  the  woman  worker  who,  according to  the 
commendatore, was supposed to prepare my lunch; with Maiocchi, 
a fighter on Franco’s side in Spain, pomaded and a womanizer; 
and, impartially, with Moioli, pallid and gelatinous, who had nine 
children, had been a

member of the People’s Party, and whose back the Fascists had 
broken with their clubs.
Varisco, she explained, was her creature: she was attached and 
devoted and did everything she was ordered to do, including 
certain expeditions into the department for the  production  of 
organo-therapeutics (forbidden to those not working there), from 
which she returned with livers, brains, suprarenal capsules, and 
other rare innards. Varisco was also engaged, and between the 
two of  them there was profound solidarity and an intense 
exchange of intimate confidences. From Varisco, who, since she 
was in charge of cleaning, had access to all departments, she had 
found out that production too was enveloped in closely meshed 
anti-spy trappings: all pipes for water, vapor, vacuum,  gas, 
naphtha, etc., ran in underground passages or were sheathed in 
cement, and only the valves were accessible; the machines were 
covered with complicated gear-cases and locked. The dials of the 
thermometers  and  manometers  were  not  graduated;  they  bore 
only conventional colored marks.
Of course, if I wanted to work and the research into diabetes 
interested  me, go right ahead and do it, we would be friends 
anyway; but I shouldn’t count on her collaboration because she 
had other things to think about. I could, however, count on her 
and Varisco when it came to cooking. They, both of them, had 
to start training, in view of their coming marriages, and so they 
would offer me some feeds which would make me forget all about 
ration cards and rationing. It did not seem to me rule-abiding that 
complicated feats of  cuisine should take place in the lab,  but 
Giulia  told  me  that  in  that  laboratory,  outside  of  a  certain 
mysterious  consultant  from  Basel who  seemed  mummified, came 
once a month  (in any case, abundantly preannounced), looked 
around as though he were in a museum, and  left without 
breathing a word, no living being ever entered, and you could do 
whatever you liked, so long as you left no traces behind. In the 
memory of man, the commendatore had never set foot there.

A few days after I was hired, the commendatore summoned me 
to the main office, and on that occasion I noticed that the photos of 
the sailboat—actually very chaste—were really there. He told me 
that the moment had come to begin the real work. The first thing I 
had  to  do  was  go  to  the  library,  ask  Paglietta for  the Kerrn, a 
treatise on diabetes. I knew German, didn’t I? Good, so I could 
read it in the original text and not in a  very  poor French 
translation which the people in Basel had commissioned. He, he 
admitted, had read only the latter, with-  out understanding 
much of it, but nevertheless gaining from it the conviction that 
Dr.  Kerrn  was a  fellow who  knew  plenty  and that  it  would be 
wonderful to  be  the first to  translate his ideas into practice: 
certainly, he wrote in a rather involuted manner, but the people 
in Basel were very keen on this business of an oral anti-diabetic, 
especially the mummified consultant, so I should get Kerrn, read 
him attentively, and then we would discuss it. But meanwhile, so 
as not to waste time, 
I 
could begin  work.  His 
many 
preoccupations had not allowed him to devote  to  the  text  the 
attention it deserved, but he had nonetheless gotten from it two 
fundamental ideas, and we should try to test them in practice.
The first idea concerned anthocyanins. Anthocyanins, as you 
know very well, are the pigments of red and blue flowers: they 
are substances easy to oxidize and deoxidize, as is also glucose, 
and diabetes is an anomaly in the oxidizing of glucose: “ hence, “  
with the anthocyanins  one could try to reestablish a normal 
oxidizing of glucose. The petals of the cornflower are very rich 
in anthocyanins; in view of the problem, he had put a whole field 
under  cultivation  with  cornflowers  and  had  the  petals  harvested 
and dried in the sun: I should try to make extracts from them, 
administer them to rabbits, and check their glycemia.
The second idea was just as vague, and at once simplistic and 
complicated. Still according to Dr. Kerrn, in the commendatore’s 
Lombardian interpretation, phosphoric acid had a fundamental 
importance in the metabolism of carbohydrates: and up to this

point there was nothing to object  to; less convincing was the 
hypothesis elaborated by the commendatore himself  on Kerrn’s 
rather misty fundamentals,  namely, that it would suffice to 
administer to the diabetic a little phosphorus of vegetal origin to 
correct his subverted metabolism. At that time I was so young as 
to think that it might be possible  to change a superior’s ideas; 
therefore I  put forth two or three objections, but I  saw 
immediately that  under their blows  the commendatore  hardened 
like a sheet of copper under a hammer. He cut me short and, 
with a certain peremptory tone of  his that transformed his 
suggestions into commands, advised me to analyze a good number 
of  plants,  select  the  richest  in  organic  phosphorus,  make  from 
them  the  usual  extracts,  and  stick  them  into  the usual  rabbits. 
Enjoy your work and good afternoon.
When I told Giulia about the outcome of this colloquy, her 
judgment was immediate and angry: the old man is crazy. But I 
had provoked him, descending to his level and showing him from 
the start that I took him seriously: I’d asked for it, and I should 
see now what I could do with those cornflowers, phosphorus, and 
rabbits.  In  her opinion, that mania of mine  about  work,  which 
even went to the point of prostituting myself to the commendatore’s 
senile fairy tales, resulted from the fact that I didn’t have a girl 
friend: if I had one, I would have thought about her instead of 
anthocyanins.  It was truly a pity that  she,  Giulia, was not 
available, because she realized the sort of person  I was, one of 
those who do not take the initiative, indeed run away, and must 
be  led  by  the  hand,  solving  little  by  little  all  their complicated 
conflicts. Well, in Milan there was a cousin of hers, also rather 
shy; she would arrange for me to meet her. But what the deuce, 
I  too, by heavens, should get busy; it hurt her  heart to see 
someone like me throw away the best years of his  youth  on 
rabbits. This Giulia was a bit of a witch—she read palms, went to 
mediums, and  had  premonitory dreams—and  sometimes I have 
dared to think that this haste of hers  to free  me of an old 
anguish and procure for me immediately a modest

portion of joy came from a dark intuition of hers about what fate 
had in store for me, and was unconsciously aimed at deflecting it.
We went together to see the movie Port of Shadows and thought 
it marvelous, and we confessed to each other that we’d 
identified with the main actors: slim, dark Giulia with the ethereal 
Michele Morgan and her ice-green eyes, and I, mild and recessive, 
with  the  deserter Jean  Gabin, a  fascinator  and  tough  guy,  killed 
dead—ridiculous, and  besides, those  two loved each other and 
we didn’t, right?
When the movie was about to end, Giulia announced that I 
would have to take her home. I had to go to the dentist, but Giulia 
said: “If you don’t take me, I’ll yell, ‘Get your hands off me, you 
pig!’”  I tried to object, but Giulia took a deep breath and in the 
darkness of the movie house began, “ Get your . . .” :  so I 
phoned the dentist and took her home.
Giulia was a lioness, capable of traveling for ten hours standing 
up in a train packed with people running away from the bombings 
to spend two hours with her man, happy and radiant if she could 
engage in a violent verbal duel with the commendatore or Loredana, 
but she was afraid of insects and thunder. She called me to evict a 
tiny spider from her workbench (I wasn’t allowed to kill it, but 
had to put it in a weighing  bottle and carry it outside to the 
flowerbed), and this made me  feel  virtuous  and  strong  like 
Hercules  faced  by  the  Hydra  of  Lerna,  and  at  the  same  time 
tempted,  since  I  perceived  the  intense feminine charge in the 
request. A furious storm broke, Giulia stood fast for two strokes 
of lightning and at the third ran  to me for shelter. I felt the 
warmth of  her body against mine, dizzying and new, familiar in 
dreams, but I did not return her  embrace; if I had done so, 
perhaps her destiny and mine would have gone with a crash off 
the rails, toward a common, completely unpredictable future. The 
librarian, whom I had never seen before, presided over the 
library like a watchdog, one of those poor dogs who are

deliberately made vicious by being chained up and given little to 
eat; or better, like the old, toothless cobra, pale because of centuries 
of  darkness,  who  guards  the  king’s  treasure  in  the  Jungle Book. 
Paglietta, poor woman, was little less than a lusus naturae:  she 
was  small, 
without 
breasts 
or  hips,  waxen,  wilted,  and 
monstrously myopic: she wore glasses so thick and concave that, 
looking at her head-on, her eyes, light blue, almost white, 
seemed very far away, stuck at the back of her cranium. She gave 
the  impression of never having been  young,  although  she  was 
certainly not more than thirty, and of having been born there, in 
the shadows, in that vague odor of mildew and stale air. Nobody 
knew anything about her, the commendatore himself talked about 
her with irritated impatience, and Giulia admitted  that she 
hated her instinctively, without knowing why, without pity, as a 
fox hates a dog. She said that she stank of mothballs and looked 
constipated.  Paglietta  asked me why  I  wanted  the  Kerrn  in 
particular, insisted on seeing my identity card, inspected it with a 
malevolent air,  made 
me 
sign 
a  register,  and  reluctantly 
surrendered the book.
It was a strange book: it would be hard to think of its being 
written and published in any other place than the Third Reich. 
The author was not without a certain ability, but every one of 
his pages gave off the arrogance of someone who knows that his 
statements will not be disputed. He wrote, indeed harangued, like 
a possessed prophet, as though the metabolism of glucose, in the 
diabetic and the healthy person, had been revealed to him  by 
Jehovah  on Sinai or, rather, by Wotan on Valhalla. Perhaps 
wrongly, I immediately conceived for Kerrn’s theories a resent-
ful distrust; but I have not heard that the thirty years that have 
passed since then have led to their reevaluation.
The adventure of the anthocyanins soon ended. It had begun 
with a picturesque invasion of cornflowers, sacks upon sacks of 
delicate pale blue petals, dry and fragile like tiny potato chips. 
They  produced extracts  of changeable colors,  also picturesque, 
hut extremely unstable: after a few  days’ attempts, still before 
having recourse to the rabbits, I received from the commendatore

the authorization to file the whole subject away. I continued to 
find it strange that this man, a Swiss with his feet on the ground, 
had let himself be convinced by that fanatical visionary, and when 
I got the chance, I cautiously hinted at my opinion, but he 
answered  quite brutally that it was not for me to criticize the 
professors. He made it clear to me that I wasn’t paid to do nothing, 
and urged me not to waste time but begin immediately with the 
phosphorus:  he  was  convinced  that  the  phosphorus  would 
certainly lead us to a brilliant solution. So on to the phosphorus.
I set to work, not at all convinced, though convinced that the 
commendatore, and most likely Kerrn himself, had given in to the 
cheap spell of names and cliches; in fact, phosphorus has a very 
beautiful
 name 
(it
 means  “bringer 
of 
light”),
 it
 is 
phosphorescent,  it’s  in  the  brain,  it’s also in  fish,  and therefore 
eating fish makes you intelligent; without phosphorus plants do 
not grow; Falieres developed phosphatine, glycerophosphates for 
anemic  children one hundred years ago; it is in the tips of 
matches, and girls driven desperate by love ate them to commit 
suicide; it is in will-o’-the-wisps, putrid flames fleeing before the 
wayfarer. No, it is  not an emotionally neutral element: it was 
understandable that a Professor Kerrn, half biochemist and half 
witch doctor, in the environment impregnated with black magic 
of the Nazi court, had designated it as a medicament.
Unknown hands left on my bench at night all sorts of plants, 
a species a day; they were all singularly domestic plants, and I do 
not  know  how  they  had  been  chosen:  onion,  garlic,  carrot, 
burdock, blueberry, yarrow milfoil, willow,  garden sage, rose-
mary, dog rose, juniper.  I,  day by day,  determined their  inor-
ganic and total phosphorus content, and I felt like the donkey 
tied to a bucket pump. Just as much as the analysis of nickel in 
the rock had exalted me, elemental in my previous incarnation, 
so  was  I  humiliated  now  by  the  daily  dosage  of phosphorus, 
because to do work in which  one does not believe is a great 
affliction; the presence of Giulia in the next room barely did 
anything to cheer me up, singing in a muted voice “ it’s spring,

wake up,“ and cooking away with the thermometer in the pretty 
little Pyrex beakers. Every so often she came to contemplate my 
work, provocative and mocking.
We had noticed, Giulia and I, that the same unknown hands 
left in the lab, in our absence, barely perceptible signs. A closet, 
locked in the evening, was open  in the morning. A stand had 
changed places. The hood, left open, had been lowered. One rainy 
morning, like Robinson Crusoe, we found on the tile floor the 
print  of a  rubber  sole:  the  commendatore  wore  shoes  with  rubber 
soles. “He comes at night to make love with Loredana,” Giulia 
decided; I thought instead that that lab, obsessively tidy, must be 
used
 for 
some 
other 
impalpable 
secret 
Swiss 
activity. 
Systematically we stuck toothpicks on the inside part of the doors, 
always locked by key, which led from the Production Department 
into the laboratory: every morning the toothpicks had fallen out.
After two months I had about forty analyses: the plants with 
a higher phosphorus content were sage, celandine, and parsley. I 
was thinking at this point that it would be a good idea to determine 
in what form the phosphorus was bound, and try to isolate the 
phosphoric component, but the commendatore called Basel and then 
declared that there wasn’t time for such subtleties: continue with 
the extracts, done without too much fuss, with hot water and the 
press, and then concentrated under vacuum: stick them into the 
rabbits’ esophaguses and measure their glycemia.
Rabbits  are  not  attractive  animals.  They  are  among  the 
mammals most distant from man, perhaps because their qualities 
are  those of humanity when humiliated and outcast:  they  are 
timid, silent, and evasive, and all they know is food and sex. 
Except  for some country cat in  my distant childhood, I  never 
had touched an animal, and faced with the rabbits I felt a distinct 
revulsion: Giulia  had the same reaction.  Luckily,  however, 
Varisco was on intimate terms both with the little beasts and 
with Ambrogio, who took care of them. She showed us that, in a 
drawer, there was a small assortment of appropriate

instruments;  there was a tall narrow box without a cover: she 
explained that rabbits like to hide in a den, a small space, and if 
one takes them by the ears (which are their natural handle) and 
sticks them in a box, they feel safer and stop moving. There was 
a  rubber sound and a  small wooden spindle with a  transverse 
hole: you had to force the spindle between the animal’s teeth, 
and then, through the hole, slip the sound down the throat quite 
firmly, pushing it down until you could feel it touch the bottom of 
the stomach; if you don’t use the wood, the rabbit cuts the sound 
with his teeth, swallows it, and dies. Through the  sound it was 
easy to inject the extracts into the stomach, using an ordinary 
syringe.
Then you have to measure the glycemia. What the tail is to 
mice, the ears are to rabbits, also in this instance: they have thick, 
prominent veins, which immediately become swollen if the ears 
are rubbed. From these veins, perforated by a needle, you take a 
drop of blood, and, without asking any questions about the various 
manipulations,  you  proceed  according  to  Crecelius-Seifert. The 
rabbits either are stoic or not very sensitive to pain: none of these 
abuses seemed to make them suffer—as soon as they were freed 
and put back in the cage they calmly returned to munching on the 
hay, and the next time they did not show any fear. After a month I 
could have performed the glycemia test with my eyes closed, but 
it did not seem to me that our phosphorus had any effect; only one 
of the rabbits reacted to the extract of celandine with a lowering of 
its glycemia, but a few weeks later a big tumor grew on its neck. 
The commendatore told me to operate on it—I operated, with a 
bitter sense of guilt and vehement disgust, and it died.
Those rabbits, by order of the commendatore, lived each in its
own  cage,  males and  females,  in  strict  celibacy. But there was a
night  bombing  which,  without  causing  many  other  damages 
bashed all the cages, and in the morning we found the rabbits 
intent on a meticulous and general campaign of copulation: the 
bombs had  not  frightened  them at all.  When set free they had
immediately dug in the flowerbeds the tunnels from which they

derive their names,* and at the slightest alarm broke off  their 
nuptials  halfway through  and  ran  for  shelter.  Ambrogio had a 
hard  time  rounding them up  and  shutting them in new  cages; 
the work of the glycemia tests had to be interrupted because only 
the cages were marked, not the animals, and after the dispersion 
it was impossible to identify them.
Giulia came between one rabbit and the next, and told me point-
blank that she needed me. I had come to the  factory on  my 
bike, right? Well, that very afternoon she had to go immediately 
all the way to Porta Genova, and to get there you had to take 
three  different  trams,  she  was  in a  hurry,  it  was  an  important 
business: would I please carry her on the crossbar, agreed? I, who 
according to the commendatore’s maniacal staggered schedule quit 
twelve minutes before she did, waited for her around the corner, 
settled her on the bike’s crossbar, and we left.
Traveling around Milan on a bike was not at all daring in those 
days, and to carry a passenger on the crossbar at a time of 
bombings and with people leaving their homes to spend the night 
in a safer place was just about normal: sometimes, especially at 
night, it would happen that strangers would ask for this service, 
and for being transported from one end of the city to the other 
they would pay four or five lire. But Giulia, rather restless as a rule, 
that evening endangered  our stability; she  convulsively  clutched 
the handlebar, making it hard to steer, suddenly  changing her 
position with a jerk, illustrating her  conversation with violent 
gestures of her hands and head, which shifted our common center 
of  gravity  in  an  unpredictable  manner.  Her  conversation was  at 
the start somewhat generic, but Giulia was not the type to bottle 
up her secrets and so harbor bile; halfway down Via Imbonati 
she had already left generalities  behind,  and  at  Porta  Volta  she 
spoke in quite explicit terms: she was furious because his parents 
had said no and she
*A rabbit in Italian is a coniglio and a tunnel is a cunicolo. Hence Levi’s co mmen t —
TRANS.

was flying to the counterattack. Why had they said it?—for them 
I am not pretty enough, understand?—she snarled, shaking the 
handlebar.
“What idiots! You look pretty enough to me, “ I said seriously.
“Get smart. You don’t know what it’s all about.”
“I only wanted to pay you a compliment; besides, that’s what
I think.”
“This is not the moment. If you’re trying to court me now, 
I’ll knock you down. “
“You’ll fall, too. “
“You’re a fool. Go on, keep pedaling, it’s getting late.”
By the time we reached Largo Cairoli I already  knew  every- 
thing: or better, I possessed  all the factual elements, but so 
confused and jumbled in their temporal sequence that it was not 
easy for me to make sense of them.
Above all, I could not understand how his will was not enough 
to overcome the problem—it was inconceivable, scandalous. 
There was this man, whom Giulia had at other times described to 
me as generous, solid, enamored, and serious; he  possessed that 
girl, disheveled and splendid in her anger, who  was  writhing 
between my forearms intent on steering; and, instead of rushing 
to Milan to present his arguments, he was  holed up in some 
border barracks to defend the nation. Because,  being a goy, he 
was of course doing his military service: and as I was thinking 
like this and as Giulia continued to fight with me as if I were her 
Don Rodrigo,* I felt myself overcome by an absurd hatred for 
this never encountered rival. A goy, and she was a goyá, according 
to my atavistic terminology: and they could have gotten married. 
I felt growing within me, perhaps for the first time, a nauseating 
sensation of emptiness: so this is what it meant to be different: this 
was the price for being  the  salt of the earth. To carry on your 
crossbar a girl you desire and be so far from her as not to be able 
even to fall in love with her,
*A character in Manzoni’s historical novel The Betrothed—TRANS.

carry her on your crossbar along Viale Gorizia to help her belong to 
someone else, and vanish from my life.
In front of No. 40 Viale Gorizia there was a bench: Giulia told 
me to wait for her there and flew through the street door like a 
gust of wind. I sat down and waited, battered and sorrowful. I 
thought that I ought to be less of a gentleman, indeed less inhibited 
and foolish, and that for the rest of my life I would regret that 
between myself and her there had been nothing but a few school 
and company memories; and that maybe it was not too late, that 
maybe  the  no  of  those  two  musical  comedy  parents  would  be 
adamant, that Giulia would come down in tears and I then could 
console her; and that these were infamous  hopes, a  wicked 
taking advantage of the misfortunes of others. And finally, the 
way a  shipwrecked person  tired  of struggling  lots himself sink 
straight to the bottom, I fell back on what was  my  dominant 
thought during those years: that the existing fiancé and the laws 
of racial separation were only stupid alibis, and that my inability 
to approach a woman was a condemnation  without appeal 
which would accompany me to my death, confining me to a life 
poisoned by envy and by abstract, sterile, and aimless desires.
Giulia came out after two hours, in fact burst through the street 
door like a shell from a mortar. It was not necessary to question 
her to find out how things had gone: “I made them  look that 
high,” she said, all red in the face and still gasping. I made an 
effort to  congratulate her in a believable fashion.  But  it’s 
impossible to make Giulia believe things you don’t really think, or 
hide things you do think. Now that she had thrown off  that 
weight, and was shining with victory, she looked me straight in the 
eye, saw the shadow there, and asked, “What were you thinking 
about?”
“Phosphorus,” I replied.
Giulia got married a few months later and said goodbye to me, 
snuffing tears up her nose and giving Varisco detailed alimentary 
instructions. She has had many hardships and many children; we

have remained friends, we see each other every so often in Milan 
and  talk  about  chemistry  and  other  reasonable  matters.  We are 
not dissatisfied with our choices and with what life has given 
us, but when we meet we both have a curious and not unpleasant 
impression (which we have both described to each other several 
times) that a veil, a breath, a throw of the dice deflected us onto 
two divergent paths, which were not ours.

G O L D
It is well known that people from Turin transplanted to Milan 
do not strike root, or at least do it badly. In the fall of 1942 there 
were seven of us friends from Turin, boys and girls, living  in 
Milan, having arrived for different reasons in the large city which 
the  war had  rendered inhospitable; our parents—those  of us 
who still had them—had moved to the country to avoid  the 
bombings, and we were living an amply communal life. Euge was 
an architect, he wanted to do Milan over, and declared that the 
best city planner had been Frederick Barbarossa. Silvio had a law 
degree,  but  he  was  writing a  philosophical  treatise  on  minuscule 
sheets of onionskin and had a job with a shipping company. Ettore 
was an engineer at Olivetti’s. Lina was sleeping  with  Euge  and 
had some vague involvement with art galleries.

Vanda was a chemist like me but could not find a  job, and was 
permanently irritated by this because she was a feminist. Ada was 
my cousin and worked at the Corbaccio Publishing House; Silvio 
called her the bi-doctor because she had two degrees, and Euge 
called her cousimo, which meant cousin of Primo, which Ada rather 
resented. After  Giulia’s  marriage, I had  remained  alone with my 
rabbits; I felt a widower  and an orphan and  fantasized about 
writing the saga of an atom of carbon, to make  the people 
understand the solemn poetry, known only to chemists, of 
chlorophyll photosynthesis: and in fact I did eventually write it, 
but many years later, and it is the story with which this  book 
concludes.
If I am not mistaken we were all writing poetry, except for 
Ettore, who said it was undignified for an engineer. Writing sad, 
crepuscular poems, and  not all  that  beautiful, while  the  world 
was in flames, did not seem to us either strange or shameful: we 
proclaimed ourselves the enemies of Fascism,  but  actually  Fas-
cism had had its effect on us, as on almost all Italians, alienating 
us and making us superficial, passive, and cynical.
We bore with spiteful gaiety the rationing and the freezing cold 
in houses without coal, and we accepted with irresponsibility the 
nightly bombings by the  English; they were  not  for us,  they 
were a brutal sign of force on the part of our very distant allies, 
they didn’t bother  us. We thought what all humiliated  Italians 
were  then  thinking:  that  the  Germans  and  Japanese  were 
invincible, but the Americans  were too, and that the war  would 
plod on like this for another twenty or thirty years, a bloody and 
interminable but remote stalemate, known only through doctored 
war bulletins, and sometimes, in certain of my contemporaries’ 
families, through funereal, bureaucratic letters which spoke such 
words as “ heroically, in the fulfillment of his duty.” The danse 
macabre  up  and  down  the Libyan coast,  back  and forth on the 
steppes of the Ukraine, would never come to an end.
Each of us did his or her work day by day, slackly, without 
believing in it, as happens to someone who knows he is not

working for his own future. We went to the theater and concerts, 
which sometimes were interrupted halfway through because the 
air-raid siren would start shrieking: and this seemed  to  us a 
ridiculous  and  gratifying  incident;  the  Allies  were  masters  of  the 
sky, perhaps in the end they would win and Fascism would end—
bu t it was their business, they were rich and powerful, they had 
the airplane carriers and the Liberators. But not us, “ they” had 
declared us “ different,” and different we would be; we took sides 
but kept out of the stupid and cruel Aryan games, discussing the 
plays of O’Neill and Thornton Wilder, climbing the Grigne slopes, 
falling a bit in love with each other, inventing intellectual games, 
and singing the lovely songs Silvio had learned from some of his 
Waldensian friends. As to what was happening during those same 
months in all of Europe occupied by the Germans, in Ann Frank’s 
house in  Amsterdam, in the pit of  Babi Yar near Kiev, in the 
ghetto of  Warsaw,  in  Salonika,  Paris,  and  Lidice:  as  to  this 
pestilence  which was 
about to 
submerge us no precise 
information had reached us, only vague and sinister hints dropped 
by soldiers  returning  from  Greece  or  from  the  rear areas  of the 
Russian  front,  and which we  tended  to censor.  Our ignorance 
allowed us to live, as when you are in the mountains and your 
rope is frayed and about to break, but you don’t know it and 
feel safe.
But in November came the Allied landing in North Africa, in 
December  came the Russian resistance and finally victory at 
Stalingrad, and we realized that the war had drawn closer and 
that history had resumed its march. In the space of a few weeks 
each  of us  matured, more  so  than during the  previous  twenty 
years. Out of  the shadows came men whom Fascism had not 
crushed—lawyers, professors, and workers—and we recognized 
in  them  our  teachers,  those  for  whom  we  had  futilely  starched 
until then in the Bible’s doctrine, in chemistry, and on  the 
mountains. Fascism had reduced them to silence for twenty 
years, and they explained to us that Fascism  was not only a 
clownish and improvident misrule but the negator of justice; it 
had not only dragged Italy into an unjust and ill-omened war,

but it had arisen and consolidated itself as the custodian of a 
detestable legality and order, based on the coercion of those who 
work, on the unchecked profits of those who exploit the labor of 
others, on the silence imposed on those who think and do not 
want to be slaves, and on systematic and calculated lies. They 
told  us  that  our  mocking,  ironic  intolerance  was  not  enough; it 
should turn into anger, and the anger should be channeled into a 
well-organized and timely revolt, but they did not teach us how 
to make bombs or shoot a rifle.
They  talked  to  us  about  unknowns:  Gramsci,  Salvemini, 
Gobetti, the Rosselli brothers—who were they? So there actu-
ally existed a second history, a history parallel to the one which 
the liceo had administered  to us from on high? In those few 
convulsed months we tried in vain to reconstruct, repopulate the 
historic  blank  of  the  last  twenty  years,  but  those  new  characters 
remained “heroes,” like Garibaldi and Nazario Sauro,  they  did 
not have thickness or human substance. The time to consolidate 
our education was not granted us: in March came the strikes in 
Turin, indicating that the crisis was near at hand:  on July 25 
came the internal collapse of  Fascism, the piazzas  jammed with 
happy, fraternal crowds, the spontaneous and precarious joy of a 
country to which liberty had been given by a palace intrigue; and 
then  came  the  eighth  of September, the  gray-green serpent of 
Nazi divisions on the streets of Milan and  Turin, the brutal 
reawakening: the comedy was over,  Italy was  an occupied 
country, like Poland, Yugoslavia, and Norway.
In this way, after the long intoxication with words, certain of 
the rightness of our choice, extremely insecure about our means, 
our hearts filled with much more desperation than hope, and 
against the backdrop of a defeated, divided country, we went into 
battle  to  test  our  strength.  We  separated  to  follow  our destinies, 
each in a different valley.
We were cold and hungry, we were the most disarmed partisan! 
in the Piedmont,  and probably also the most unprepared. We 
thought we were safe because we had not yet moved out of our

refuge buried under three feet of snow: but somebody betrayed 
us, and on the dawn of December 13, 1943, we woke surrounded 
by the Fascist Republic:* they were three hundred and  we 
eleven, equipped with a tommy gun without bullets and a few 
pistols. Eight of us managed to escape and scattered among the 
mountains; three of us did not get away: the militiamen captured 
Aldo, Guido, and myself, still half asleep. As they came  in  I 
managed to hide in the stove’s ashes the revolver I kept under my 
pillow, and which in any case I  was not sure I knew  how to 
use: it was tiny, all inlaid with mother of pearl, the kind used in 
movies  by ladies  desperately  intent  on  committing  suicide. Aldo, 
who was a doctor, stood up, stoically lit a cigarette, and said: “Too 
bad for my chromosomes.”
They  beat  us  up  a  bit,  warned  us  “not  to  do  anything  ill- 
advised,” promised to  question  us  later  in a  certain  very con-
vincing manner of  theirs and shoot us immediately afterward, 
ranged themselves with great pomp around us, and began walking 
us down toward the mountain pass. During the march,  which 
lasted for several hours, I did two things that were very important 
to me: I ate bit by bit the much too false identity card I had in 
my wallet (the photograph was particularly disgusting),  and, 
pretending to stumble, I slipped into the snow the notebook full of 
addresses I  carried  in  my  pocket.  The  militiamen  were singing 
intrepid war songs, shooting at hares with their tommy guns, and 
flinging grenades into the streams to kill the trout. Down in the 
valley several buses were waiting for us. They made us get on and 
sit separately, and I had militiamen all  around, seated and 
standing, who were not concerned about us  and kept on 
singing. One of them, right in front of me, had his back to me 
and from his belt hung a hand grenade, one of those  German 
hand grenades with a wooden handle. I could easily have lifted the 
safety pin, pulled the cord, and done away with  myself and 
several of them, but I didn’t have the courage. They
*This was the Republic of Salo, the puppet government set up by the Fascists in the 
north of Italy at Salo and under the protection of the Nazi army.

took us to the barracks, which were on the outskirts of Aosta. 
Their centurion was called Fossa, and it is strange, absurd, and 
sinisterly comic, given the situation at that time, that he lies now 
for decades in some out-of-the-way war cemetery and I am here, 
alive and substantially unharmed, writing this story. Fossa was a 
stickler for legality and set about rapidly organizing in our favor 
a prison regime which was in conformity with regulations. So he 
put us in the barracks’ basement, one man per cell, with a cot 
and a pail, rations at eleven, an hour of open-air exercise, and the 
prohibition of talking to each other. This prohibition was painful 
because among us, in each of our minds, weighed an ugly secret: 
the  same  secret  that  had  exposed  us  to  capture,  extinguishing in 
us, a few days before, all will to resist, indeed to live. We had been 
forced by our consciences to carry out a sentence and had carried 
it out, but we had come out of it destroyed, destitute, waiting for 
everything to finish and to be finished ourselves; but also wanting 
to see each other, to talk, to  help each other exorcize that so 
recent memory. Now we were  finished, and we  knew it:  we 
were in the trap, each one in his  own  trap, and  there was  no 
way out except down. It did not take me long to be convinced of 
it, examining my cell inch by inch, since the novels on which for 
years I had fed were full of  miraculous escapes; but  here  the 
walls were half a yard thick, the door was massive and guarded on 
the  outside,  the  small  window was furnished with iron bars. I 
had a nail file, I could have sawn through one bar, perhaps 
even all of them; I  was so  thin that perhaps I could have 
squeezed through: but up against  the window I discovered a 
large cement block to protect against bomb fragments during the 
air raids.
Every so often they came to get me for the interrogations When 
Fossa was the interrogater, it wasn’t too bad: Fossa was the sort 
of man I had never met until then— a Fascist by the book, stupid 
and courageous, whom the trade of soldiering (He had fought in 
Africa and Spain and boasted about it to us) had sheathed in solid 
ignorance and folly but had not corrupted n o r  made inhumane. 
He had believed and obeyed all of his life and

was naively convinced that the persons guilty for the catastrophe 
were just two: the King and Galeazzo Ciano, who during those 
very days had been shot by a firing squad at Verona: not Badoglio, 
he too was a soldier, he had sworn loyalty to the King and he 
had kept faith with his oath. If it had not been for the King and 
Ciano,  who  had  sabotaged the  Fascist war from  the  start, 
everything  would  have  gone  well and  Italy  would have  won.  He 
regarded  me  as  scatterbrained,  spoiled  by  bad  company;  deep 
down in his class-oriented soul he was convinced that a man with 
a university degree could  not really be “a  subversive.” He 
questioned me out of boredom, in order to indoctrinate me and 
give  himself importance, but  without  any  serious inquisitional 
intent: he was a soldier, not a cop. He never  asked  me 
embarrassing questions, nor did he ever ask me whether I was a 
Jew .
On the other hand, Cagni’s interrogations were something to 
be afraid of. Cagni was the spy who had  gotten us captured: a 
complete spy, in every ounce of his flesh, a spy by nature and 
tendency more than by Fascist conviction or for monetary gain; 
a spy to hurt, out of a kind of sporty sadism, as the hunter shoots 
free game. He was a skillful man: he had come with good 
credentials to a partisan formation next to ours, had passed himself 
off  as  the  depository  of  important  German  military  secrets, had 
revealed 
them,  and 
later 
they 
proved artfully 
false  and 
fabricated by the Gestapo.  He organized the defense of the 
formation, put them through painstaking  firefight exercises (in 
which he managed to get them to use up a good part of  their 
ammunition), then fled to the valley and reappeared at the head 
of the Fascist platoons assigned to round up partisans. He was 
about  thirty,  with  a  pallid,  flabby  complexion;  he  began  the 
interrogation by placing a Luger  on his desk, prominently 
displayed, then hammered  away for hours without a letup; he 
wanted to know everything. He continually  threatened us with 
torture and the firing squad, but fortunately for me I knew almost 
nothing, and the few names I did know I kept to myself.  He 
alternated moments of simulated cordiality with equally

simulated explosions of rage; he told me (probably bluffing) that 
he knew I was a Jew , but that it was good for me: I was either a 
Jew or a partisan: if a partisan, he would put me against a wall; if 
a Jew, fine, there was a collection camp at Carpi, they were not 
bloody butchers, and I would remain there until the final victory. I 
admitted to being a Jew: partly because I was tired, partly out 
of an  irrational  digging in  of pride,  but  I  absolutely  did not 
believe in his words. Had not he himself said that the control of 
that very barracks would within a few days be taken  over by 
the SS?
In my cell there was a single dim bulb, which remained lit also 
at night; it was barely enough to read by, but all the same I read 
a great deal, because I thought the time left me was short. The 
fourth day, during the hour of open-air exercise, on the sly I put 
in my pocket a large stone because I wanted to try to communi-
cate with Guido and Aldo, who were in adjoining  cells. I suc-
ceeded, but it was exhausting: it took an hour to transmit a 
sentence, tapping it out in code on the wall between us, like the 
miners in Germinal buried in the mine. Pressing my ear against 
the  wall to  catch the  reply, I heard  instead the joyous, robust 
songs of the militiamen seated in the mess hall over our heads: 
“the vision of. . . Aligheri” or “but I do not leave the tommy gun behind” 
or, tearful among all of them, “Come, there is a road in the woods.”
In my cell there was also a mouse. He kept me company, but 
at night he chewed my bread. There were two cots: I dismantled 
one of them and removed its long, smooth bar; I set it up vertically, 
and at night stuck the loaf of bread on its point, but  would 
leave some of the crumbs on the floor for the mouse. I  felt 
more like a mouse than he; I was thinking of the road in the 
woods, the snow outside, the indifferent mountains, the hundred 
splendid things which if I could go free I would be able to do, 
and a lump rose in my throat.
It was freezing. I knocked on the door until the militiaman 
came who was acting as a prison guard and asked him to let me

see Fossa; the guard was actually the man who had beaten me 
when I was captured, but when he found out that I was a “doctor“  
he had begged my pardon: Italy is a strange country. He did 
not get me an interview, but he got blankets for me and  the 
others and permission to warm up for a half hour every evening 
before lights-out by standing next to the boiler.
The new regime began that very evening. A militiaman came 
to get me, and he was not alone; with him was another prisoner 
whose existence I was unaware of. A pity: if it had been Guido 
or Aldo it would have been much better; however, he was a human 
being I could talk with. He took us to the boiler room, which was 
murky with soot, squeezed  by a low ceiling, almost  entirely 
encumbered by the boiler—but hot: a relief. The militiaman made 
us sit on a bench and took up a position himself on a chair in the 
door’s opening, in order to obstruct it: he held his tommy gun 
upright between his knees, yet a few  minutes later he was 
already dozing and had lost interest in us.
The prisoner looked at me with curiosity: “Are you the rebels?” 
he asked. He was perhaps thirty-five, was thin and a bit stooped, 
had kinky, unruly hair, a badly shaved beard, a large hooked nose, 
a 
lipless 
mouth, 
and 
shifty 
eyes. 
His 
hands 
were 
disproportionately large, gnarled,  baked by  sun and  wind,  and 
always moving: now he scratched himself, now he drummed on 
the bench or on his thigh; I noticed that they shook slightly. His 
breath smelled of wine, and from this I deduced that he had just 
been arrested; he had the accent of the valley thereabouts, but 
did not look like a peasant. I answered  him, speaking in 
generalities, but he wasn’t discouraged.
“He’s asleep: you can talk if you want to. I can get news out 
of here: and anyway I may get out soon.”
He didn’t seem to me all that trustworthy. “Why are you here?” 
I asked.
“Contraband. I didn’t  want  to share it with  them, that’s all. 
We’ll end up coming to an agreement, but meanwhile they keep 
me here. It’s bad, with my trade.”
“It’s bad for all trades!”

“But I have a special trade. I also do contraband, but only in 
the winter, when the Dora freezes over : so I do many different 
kinds of work, but none under a boss. We are free people: my 
father also was like this and my grandfather and all my great- 
grandfathers since the beginning of time, back to when the Romans 
came. “
I had not understood the allusion to the frozen Dora and asked 
him to explain it: Was he a fisherman perhaps?
“You know why it’s called the Dora?” he answered. 
“ Because it’s made of gold. Not all, of course, but it carries gold, 
and when it freezes over you can no longer take it out.”
“Is there gold on the bottom?”
“Yes, in the sand: not everywhere, but in many stretches. It’s 
the water that drags it down from the mountain and piles it up 
at random, there’s some in one bend of the river and none in 
another. Our particular bend, which we have passed from father 
to son, is the richest of all: it is well hidden, very much out-of- 
the-way, but just the same it’s best to go there at night so that 
nobody can  come  and  poke  around.  Because of this, when  it 
freezes over solid, as it did for instance last year, you can’t work, 
because as soon as you’ve cut a hole in the ice more ice forms, 
and besides your hands can’t stand it. If I were in your place and 
you in mine, on my word of honor, I’d even tell you where it is
—our place.”
I felt wounded by this sentence of his. I knew very well how 
things stood with me, but I didn’t like to hear it said to me by a 
stranger. The other man, who realized his blunder, tried awk-
wardly to make amends:
“Well,  what  I  meant  to  say  is  that  these  are  confidential 
matters, which you don’t even tell to your friends. I live on this, I 
have nothing else in this world, but I wouldn’t change places with 
a banker. You see, it’s not that there is so much gold: there is in 
fact very little, you wash it for a whole night and you manage to 
get two or three grams out of it: but it never ends.  You  can go 
back when you wish: the next night or a month later, whenever 
you feel like it, and the gold has grown back;

and it’s that way forever and ever, like grass comes back in the 
fields. And so there are no people who are freer than us: that’s 
why I feel I’m going crazy, staying inside here.
“Besides, you  must  understand that  not  everyone is  able  to 
wash sand, and that gives you satisfaction. My father taught me , 
just me, because I was the smartest; my other brothers work in 
the  factory.  And  only  to  me  he  left  the  pan”—and  with  his 
enormous right hand slightly curled into a cup, he sketched the 
professional rotary movement.
“Not all days are good: it goes better when the weather is good 
and the moon in its last quarter. I couldn’t say why, but that’s 
how it is, in case it ever should occur to you to try.”
I appreciated the good omen in silence. Of course I would try 
it: What wouldn’t I try? During those days, when I was waiting 
courageously enough for death, I harbored a piercing desire for 
everything, for all imaginable human experiences, and I cursed 
my previous life, which it seemed to me I had profited from little 
or badly, and I felt time running through my fingers, escaping from 
my body minute by minute, like a hemorrhage that can no longer 
be stanched. Of course I would search for gold: not to get rich 
but to try out a new skill, to see again the earth, air, and water 
from which I was separated by a gulf that  grew larger every 
day; and to find again my chemical trade in its  essential and 
primordial form, the Scheidekunst, precisely, the art of separating 
metal from gangue.
“I don’t sell it all,” the man continued. “I am too fond of it. I 
keep a little on the side and melt it down, twice a year, and work it: 
I am not an artist but I like to have it in my hands, hit it with the 
hammer, score it, scratch it. I’m not interested in getting rich; 
what counts for me is to live free, not to have a collar like a dog, to 
work like this, when I wish, and nobody who can come and say, 
‘Come on, get moving.’ That’s why I hate staying in here; 
besides, on top of everything else, you lose a day’s work.”
The militiaman jerked in his sleep and the tommy gun that he 
held between his knees fell to the floor with a crash. The

stranger and  I  exchanged a  quick glance;  we  understood each 
other in a flash and rose with a jump from the bench: but we 
barely had time to take a step and already  the militiaman had 
picked up his gun. He sat up, looked  at his watch, cursed in 
Venetian dialect, and told us roughly that it was time to return 
to our cells. In the corridor we met Guido and Aldo, who, escorted 
by another guard, were on their way to take our place in the 
dusty fug of the boiler room: they greeted me with a nod of the 
head.
In the cell I was welcomed by the solitude, the freezing, pure 
breath of the mountains which came through the small window, 
and the anguish of tomorrow. I listened—in the silence of curfew 
one could hear the murmur of the Dora, lost friend, and  all 
friends  were  lost, and  youth  and  joy,  and  perhaps  life:  it  flowed 
close by but  indifferent, dragging  along the gold in its womb of 
melted ice. I felt gripped by a painful envy for my ambiguous 
companion,  who would soon return to his precarious  but 
monstrously free life, to his inexhaustible trickle of gold, and an 
endless series of days.

C E R I U M
The fact that  I,  a  chemist, engaged here  in  writing my  stories 
about chemistry, have lived a different season, has been narrated 
elsewhere.*
At a distance of thirty years I find it difficult to reconstruct 
l be sort of human being that corresponded, in November 1944 , 
to my name or, better, to my number: 174517. I must have by 
then overcome the most terrible crisis, the crisis of having become 
part  of  Lager  system,  and  I  must  have  developed  a  strange 
callousness if I then managed not only to survive but also to think, 
to  register  the  world  around  me,  and  even  to  perform rather 
delicate work, in an environment infected by the
*My two books on Auschwitz: If This Is a Man and The Truce (Penguin Modern
Classics, 1979).

daily presence of death and at the same time brought to a frenzy 
by the approach of the Russian liberators, who by now were only 
eighty kilometers away. Desperation and hope alternated at a 
rate that would have destroyed almost any normal person in an 
hour.
We were not normal because we were hungry. Our hunger at 
that time had nothing in common with the well-known (and not 
completely disagreeable) sensation of someone who has missed a 
meal and is certain that the next meal will not be missed: it was 
a need, a lack, a yearning that had accompanied us now for a 
year, had struck deep, permanent roots in us, lived in our cells, 
and conditioned our behavior. To eat, to get something to eat, 
was our prime stimulus, behind which, at a  great distance, 
followed all the other problems of survival, and even still farther 
away the memories of home and the very fear of death.
I was a chemist in a chemical plant, in a chemical laboratory 
(this too has been narrated), and I stole in order to eat. If you do 
not begin as a child, learning how to steal is not easy; it had taken 
me 
several 
months 
before 
I 
could 
repress 
the 
moral 
commandments and acquired the necessary techniques, and at a 
certain point I realized (with a flash of laughter and a pinch of 
satisfied  ambition) that I was reliving—me, a respectable little 
university graduate—the  involution-evolution of a  famous  re-
spectable dog, a Victorian, Darwinian dog who is deported and 
becomes a thief in order to live in his Klondike Lager—the great 
Buck of The Call of the Wild. I stole like him and like the foxes: at 
every favorable opportunity  but with sly cunning and without 
exposing myself. I stole everything except the bread of  my 
companions.
From the point of view, precisely, of substances that you could 
steal with profit, that laboratory was virgin territory, waiting to be 
explored.
 There
 was 
gasoline 
and 
alcohol,
 banal
 and 
inconvenient loot: many stole them, at various points in the 
plant, the offer was high and  also the risk, since liquids require 
receptacles. This is the great problem of packaging, which every 
experienced chemist knows: and it was well known to God

Almighty, who solved it brilliantly, as he is wont to, with cellular 
membranes, eggshells, the multiple peel of oranges, and  our 
own skins, because after all we too are liquids. Now, at that 
time, there did not exist polyethylene, which would have suited 
me perfectly since it is flexible, light, and splendidly imperme-
able: but it is also a bit too incorruptible, and not by chance God 
Almighty himself, although he is a master of  polymerization, 
abstained from patenting it: He does not like incorruptible things.
Since I lacked the proper packaging materials, the ideal loot 
would  therefore have had to be solid, not perishable, not 
cumbersome, and above all new. It had to be of high unitary value, 
that is, not voluminous, because we were often searched at the 
camp’s entrance after work; and it should finally be useful to or 
desired by at least one of the social categories that composed the 
Lager’s complicated universe.
I had  made various attempts in the lab. I had stolen a few 
hundred grams of fatty acids, laboriously obtained by the oxida-
tion of paraffin from some colleagues of mine on the other side 
of the barrier: I had eaten half of it and it really took the edge off 
my hunger, but it had such a nasty taste that I gave up the idea 
of selling the remainder. I had tried to make fritters with sanitary 
cotton, which I pressed against an electric hot plate; they had a 
vague taste of burnt sugar, but they looked so awful that I did 
not consider them marketable. As for selling the cotton directly to 
the Lager’s infirmary, I had tried this once, but  it was too 
cumbersome and not much sought after. I also forced myself to 
ingest  and  digest  glycerin,  basing  myself  on  the  simplistic 
reasoning that, since it is a product of the splitting of  fats, it 
must after all in some way be metabolized  and furnish  calories: 
and perhaps it did furnish  them, but at the cost of  extremely 
unpleasant side effects.
There was a mysterious jar on one of the shelves. It contained 
about twenty gray,  hard,  colorless, tasteless little rods  and  did 
not have a label. This was very strange, because it was a German 
laboratory. Yes, of course, the Russians were a few kilometers

away,  catastrophe was in the air, almost  visible; there were 
bombings every day; everybody knew the war was about to end: 
but finally some  constants must  still  subsist,  and  among these 
were our hunger, that that laboratory  was German, and that 
Germans never forget the labels. In fact, all the other  jars and 
bottles in the lab had neat labels, written on the typewriter or 
by  hand  in  beautiful  Gothic  characters—only that  jar  lacked a 
label.
In the situation I certainly did not dispose of the equipment 
and  tranquility  necessary to  identify  the  nature  of those  small 
rods. Just to be sure, I hid three in my pocket and carried them 
with me that evening into the camp. They were about twenty- 
five millimeters long and had a diameter of four or five.
I showed them to my friend Alberto. Alberto took a penknife 
out of his pocket and tried to cut into one of them: it was hard, 
resisted  the blade. He tried to scrape it: we heard a slight 
crepitation and saw a spray of yellow sparks. At this point diagnosis 
was easy: it was iron-cerium, an alloy from which the common 
flints of cigarette lighters are made. But why were they so large? 
Alberto, who for some weeks had worked as a laborer with a 
squad of welders, explained to me that they were mounted on the 
tips of oxyacetylene torches to ignite the flame. At this point I 
felt skeptical about the commercial possibilities of  my stolen 
goods: they could perhaps be used to light a fire, but  in  the 
Lager matches (illegal) were certainly not scarce.
Alberto  reproached  me.  For  him  renunciation,  pessimism 
discouragement were abominable and culpable: he did not accept 
the concentration camp universe, he rejected it both instinctively 
and with his reason, and he did not let himself be tainted by it 
He was a man of good and strong will, and miraculously he had 
remained free, and his words and his acts were free: he had not 
bowed his head, he had not bent his back. A gesture of his, a 
word, a smile had a liberating virtue, they were a rip in the rigid 
fabric of the Lager, and all those who had contact with him felt 
this, even those who did not understand his language. I believe 
that nobody, in that place, was loved as much as he was.

He  reproached me:  you  should  never  be  disheartened,  be- 
cause it is harmful and therefore immoral, almost indecent. I had 
stolen the cerium: good, now it’s a matter of launching it. He 
would take care of it, he would turn it into a novelty, an article of 
high commercial value. Prometheus had been foolish to bestow 
fire  on men  instead  of selling it  to  them:  he  would have made 
money,  placated Jove,  and avoided all  that  trouble  with  the 
vulture.
We must be more astute. This speech, about the necessity of 
being astute, was not new between us; Alberto had often made 
it to me, and before him others in the free world, and still many 
others repeated it to me later, an infinite number of times down 
to today, with a modest result; indeed, with the paradoxical result 
of developing in  me a  dangerous  tendency of symbiosis  with a 
truly astute person, who obtained (or felt he obtained) temporal 
or spiritual advantages from his companionship with me. Alberto 
was an ideal symbiont, because he refrained from being astute at 
my  expense.  I  did  not  know,  but  he  did  (he  always knew 
everything about everyone, and yet he didn’t know German, or 
Polish, and had very little French), that in the plant there was a 
clandestine industry of cigarette lighters: unknown craftsmen, at 
spare moments, made them for important persons and  civilian 
workers. Now flints are needed for lighters, and they had to be of 
a certain size: we had to thin down the rods I  had.  But  how 
could  we  thin  them  down,  and  how  much?  “Don’t make 
difficulties,” he told me. “ Leave it to me. You just worry about 
stealing the rest of them.”
The next day I had no trouble in following Alberto’s advice. 
Along about ten in the morning the siren of the Fliegeralarm— the 
air-raid alarm—burst out. It was nothing new by now, but each 
time this happened we felt—we and everyone—struck by 
anguish to the marrow of our bones. It did not seem an earthly 
sound, it was not a siren like those in the factories, it was a sound of 
enormous  volume  which,  simultaneously 
and
 in  cadence 
throughout  the  entire  zone,  rose  to a  spasmodic, acute  note and 
redescended to a thunderous grumble. It could not

have  been a  chance invention,  since  nothing  in  Germany took 
place by chance, and in any case it was too much in conformity 
with the goal and background: I have often thought that it had 
been elaborated by some malevolent musician, who locked in it 
fury and weeping, the wolf’s howling at the moon and the breath 
of a typhoon: Astolfo’s horn must have sounded like that.  It 
provoked panic, not only because it announced the bombs to 
come but also because of its intrinsic horror, almost the lament 
of a wounded beast as all-encompassing as the horizon.
The  Germans  were  more  frightened  than  we  were  by  the 
bombings: we, irrationally, did not fear them, because  we knew 
that they were not aimed at us but at our enemies. In the space 
of a few seconds I found myself alone in the lab, pocketed all the 
cerium, and went out into the open to join my Kommando: the 
sky  already resounded with  the  rumble  of bombers,  and  from 
them fell, swaying softly, yellow leaflets which  bore atrocious 
words of derision:
Im Bauch kein Fett, 
Ache Uhr ins Bett;
Der Arsch kaum warm, 
Fliegeralarm!
which, translated, ran:
No lard in the gut
At eight on the cot;
Soon as the arse is warm
Air-raid alarm!
We were not permitted  to enter the air-raid shelters: we 
gathered in the vast areas not yet built up, around the rim of the 
plant. As the bombs began to fall, lying on the frozen mud and the 
sparse grass I felt the small rods in my pocket and meditated on 
the strangeness of my destiny, of our destinies as leaves on a 
branch,  and on  human destinies in general.  According to  Al-
berto, the price of a lighter flint was equivalent to a ration of

bread, that is, one day of life; I had stolen at least forty rods, from 
each of which could be obtained three finished flints. The total: 
one hundred and twenty flints, two months of life for me and 
two  for  Alberto,  and  in  two  months  the  Russians  would  have 
arrived and liberated us; and finally the cerium would have 
liberated us, an element about which I knew nothing, save for 
that single practical application, and that it belongs to the equivocal 
and  heretical  rare-earth  group  family,  and  that  its  name has 
nothing to do with the Latin and Italian word for wax (icera), and 
it was not named after its discoverer; instead it celebrates (great 
modesty of the chemists of past times!) the asteroid Ceres, since 
the metal and the star were discovered in the same year, 1801; 
and this was perhaps an affectionate-ironic homage to alchemical 
couplings: just as  the  Sun was gold and Mars iron, so Ceres 
must be cerium.
That evening I brought into camp the small rods and Alberto 
a metal plate with a round hole: it was the prescribed caliber to 
which we had to thin down the rods in order to transform them 
into flints and therefore bread.
What then occurred should be judged with caution. Alberto 
said that the rods must be reduced by scraping them with a knife, 
on the sly, so that no competitor could steal our secret. When? 
At night. Where? In the wooden hut, under the blankets and on 
top of the pallet full of shavings—thus running the risk  of 
starting a fire and, more realistically, of being hanged: for this 
was the punishment meted out, among other transgressions, to 
all those who lit a match in the hut.
One always hesitates to judge foolhardy actions, whether one’s 
own  or  those  of  others,  after  they  have  proven  to  be  successful: 
perhaps therefore they were not foolhardy enough? Or perhaps it 
is  true  that  there  exists a  God  who  protects  children, fools, and 
drunks? Or perhaps again  these  actions  have  more  weight  and 
more  warmth than  those  innumerable  other  actions that  have 
ended badly, and one tells them more willingly? But we did not 
ask ourselves such questions: the Lager had

given us a crazy familiarity with danger and death, and risking 
the noose to eat more seemed to us a logical, indeed an obvious 
choice.
While our companions slept, we worked with the knife, night 
after night. The scene was so sad you could weep: a single 
electric light bulb weakly lit the large wooden hut, and in the 
shadows, as in a vast cave, the faces of other men were visible, 
wracked  by sleep and dreams: tinged with death, they worked 
their jaws furiously, dreaming of eating. Many of them had an 
arm or a naked, skeletal foot hanging over the side of the bunk, 
others moaned or talked in their sleep.
But we two were alive and did not give way to sleep. We kept 
the blanket raised with our knees and beneath that improvised 
tent scraped away at the small rods, blindly and by touch:  at 
each stroke you heard a slight crackle and saw a spray of yellow 
sparks spurt up. At intervals we tested to see if the rod passed 
through the sample hole: if it didn’t, we continued to scrape; if it 
did, we broke off the thinned-down stub and set it  carefully 
aside.
We worked for three nights: nothing happened, nobody noticed 
our activity, nor did the blanket or pallet catch fire, and this is 
how we won the bread which kept us alive until the arrival of the 
Russians and how we comforted each other in the  trust and 
friendship which united us. What happened to me is described 
elsewhere. Alberto left on foot with the majority of the prisoners 
when the front drew near: the Germans made them walk for days 
and nights in the snow and  freezing cold,  slaughtering all  those 
who could not go on: then they loaded them on open freight cars, 
which transported the few survivors  to a new chapter of 
slavery, Buchenwald and Mauthausen. Nor more than a fourth 
of those who left survived the march.
Alberto did not return, and not a trace remains of him; after 
the end of the war a man from his town, half visionary and hall 
crook, lived for a number of years on the money he made telling 
his mother false consolatory tales about him.

C H R O M I U M
The  entree  was  fish,  but  the  wine  was  red.  Versino,  head  of 
maintenance, said that it was all a lot of nonsense, provided the 
wine and fish were good; he was certain that the majority of those 
who  upheld  the  orthodox  view  could  not,  blindfolded,  have 
distinguished a glass of white wine from a glass of red. Bruni, from 
the  Nitro  Department,  asked  whether  somebody  knew  why fish 
goes  with  white  wine: various joking  remarks  were made but 
nobody was able to answer properly. Old man Cometto added 
that life is full of customs whose roots can no longer be traced: 
the color of sugar paper, the buttoning from different sides for 
men  and  women,  the  shape  of a  gondola’s  prow,  and  the 
innumerable  alimentary  compatibilities  and  incompatibilities,  of 
which in fact the one in question was a

particular case: but in any event, why were pig’s feet obligatory 
with lentils, and cheese on macaroni.
I made a rapid mental review to be sure that none of those 
present had as yet heard it, then I started to tell the story of the 
onion in the boiled linseed oil. This, in fact, was a dining room 
for a  company of varnish manufacturers, and it  is  well  known 
that boiled linseed  oil has for many centuries constituted the 
fundamental raw material of  our art. It is an ancient art and 
therefore noble: its most  remote testimony is in Genesis 6:14, 
where it is told how, in conformity with a precise specification 
of the Almighty, Noah coated (probably with a brush) the Ark’s 
interior and exterior with  melted pitch. But it is also a subtly 
fraudulent  art, like that which  aims at  concealing the substratum 
by conferring on it the color and appearance of what it is not: 
from this point of view it is related to cosmetics and adornment, 
which are equally ambiguous and almost  equally  ancient  arts 
(Isaiah  3:16). Given  therefore  its  pluri-millenial  origins, it is not 
so strange that the trade of manufacturing varnishes retains in 
its crannies (despite the innumerable solicitations  it  modernly 
receives  from  kindred  techniques)  rudiments of customs and 
procedures abandoned for a long time now.
So, returning to boiled linseed oil, I told my companions at 
table that in a prescription book published about 1942 I had found 
the advice to introduce into the oil, toward the end of the 
boiling, two slices of onion, without any comment on the purpose 
of this  curious additive. I  had spoken about it in  1949  with 
Signor Giacomasso Olindo, my predecessor and teacher, who was 
then  more  than  seventy  and had  been  making  varnishes  for  fifty 
years,  and  he,  smiling benevolently  behind  his  thick white 
mustache, had explained to me that in actual fact, when he was 
young and boiled the oil personally, thermometers had not yet 
come into use:  one judged the temperature of the  batch  by 
observing  the  smoke,  or  spitting  into  it,  or,  more  efficiently, 
immersing a slice of onion in the oil on the point of a skewer; 
when  the onion began to fry, the boiling was finished. 
Evidently, with the passing of the years, what had been a crude

measuring  operation  had  lost  its  significance  and  was  trans- 
formed into a mysterious and magical practice.
Old  Cometto  told  of  an  analogous  episode.  Not  without 
nostalgia he recalled his good old times, the times of copal gum: 
he  told  how  once  boiled  linseed oil  was  combined with  these 
legendary resins to make fabulously durable and gleaming var-
nishes. Their fame and name survive now only in the locution 
“copal shoes,” which alludes precisely to a varnish for leather at 
one time very widespread that has been out of fashion for at least 
the  last  half century.  Today  the  locution  itself is  almost  extinct. 
Copals  were  imported  by  the  British  from  the  most  distant and 
savage 
countries, 
and 
bore 
their 
names, 
which 
in 
fact 
distinguished  one  kind  from  another:  copal  of  Madagascar or 
Sierra Leone or Kauri (whose deposits, let it be said parentheti-
cally, were exhausted along about 1967), and the very well known 
and noble Congo copal. They are fossil resins of vegetable 
origin, with a rather high melting point, and in the state in 
which they are found and sold in commerce are insoluble in oil: 
to render them soluble and compatible they were subjected to a 
violent,  semi-destructive boiling,  in  the  course  of which  their 
acidity  diminished (they  decarboxylated)  and  also  the  melting 
point  was  lowered.  The  operation  was  carried out  in  a  semi- 
industrial manner by direct fire in modest, mobile kettles of four 
or six hundred pounds; during the boiling they were weighed at 
intervals, and when the resin had lost 16 percent of its weight in 
smoke, water vapor, and carbon dioxide, the solubility in oil was 
judged to have been reached. Along about 1940, the archaic copals, 
expensive and difficult to supply during the war, were supplanted 
by  phenolic  and  maleic  resins,  both  suitably  modified, which, 
besides costing less, were directly compatible with the oils. Very 
well: Cometto told us how, in a factory whose name shall not be 
uttered,  until  1953 a  phenolic  resin,  which  look  the  place  of the 
Congo copal in a formula, was treated exactly like copal itself—
that is, by consuming  16 percent of it  on the fire, amid 
pestilential phenolic  exhalations—until it had  leached that 
solubility in oil which the resin already possessed.

Here at this point I remembered that all languages are full of 
images and metaphors whose origin is being lost, together with 
the  art  from  which  they  were  drawn:  horsemanship  having 
declined to the level of an expensive sport, such expressions as 
“belly  to  the  ground” and “taking  the  bit  in  one’s  teeth” are 
unintelligible and sound odd; since mills with superimposed stones 
have disappeared, which were also called millstones, and  in 
which for centuries wheat (and varnishes) were ground, such a 
phrase as  “to  eat like  four millstones” sounds odd and even 
mysterious  today. In the same way, since Nature too is con-
servative, we carry in our coccyx what remains of a vanished tail.
Bruni told us about an episode in which he himself had been 
involved, and as he told the story, I felt myself invaded by sweet 
and tenuous sensations which later I will try to explain. I must 
say first of all that Bruni worked from  1955  to  1965  in a large 
factory on the shores of a lake, the same one in which I had learned 
the rudiments of the varnish-making trade during the years 1946
—47. So he told us that, when he was down there in charge of the 
Synthetic Varnishes Department, there fell into his  hands a 
formula of a chromate-based  anti-rust paint that contained an 
absurd component: nothing less than ammonium chloride, the old, 
alchemical sal ammoniac of the temple of Ammon, much more apt 
to corrode iron than preserve it from  rust.  He  had  asked  his 
superiors and the veterans in the department about it: surprised and 
a  bit  shocked,  they  had  replied that in that formulation, which 
corresponded to at least twenty or thirty tons of the product a 
month and had been in force for at least ten years, that salt “had 
always been in it,” and that he had his nerve, so young in years 
and new  on the job,  criticizing  the factory’s experience, and 
looking for trouble by asking silly hows and whys. If ammonium 
chloride was in the formula, it was evident that it had some sort of 
use. What use it had nobody any longer knew, but one should be 
very careful about taking it out because “one never knows.” Bruni is 
a rationalist, and he took all this very badly, but he is a prudent 
man, and so he accepted the advice, according to which in that

formulation and in that lakeshore factory, unless there have 
been further developments, ammonium chloride is still being 
put in; and yet today it is completely useless, as I can state from 
firsthand  experience because it was I  who introduced it into 
the formula.
The  episode cited  by  Bruni,  the  rustproof formula with 
chromates and ammonium chloride, flung me back in time, all 
the way to the freezing cold January of 1946, when meat and 
coal were still rationed, nobody had a car, and never in Italy had 
people breathed so much hope and so much freedom.
But I had returned from captivity three months before and 
was living badly. The things I had seen and suffered were burning 
inside of me; I felt closer to the dead than the living, and felt 
guilty at being a man, because men had built Auschwitz,  and 
Auschwitz had gulped down millions of human beings, and 
many of my friends, and a woman who was dear to my heart. 
It seemed to me that I would be purified if I told its story, 
and I felt like Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner, who waylays on the 
street the wedding guests going to the feast, inflicting on them 
the  story of his misfortune. I was writing concise  and bloody 
poems, telling the story at breakneck speed, either by talking to 
people or by writing it down, so much so that gradually a book 
was later born: by writing I found peace for a while and felt 
myself become a man again, a person like everyone else, neither 
a  martyr nor debased nor a saint: one of those people who 
form a family and look to the future rather than the past.
Since one can’t live on poetry and stories, I looked 
feverishly for work and found it in the big lakeshore factory, still 
damaged from the war, and during those months besieged by mud 
and  ice. Nobody was much concerned with me: colleagues, the 
director, and workers had other things to think about—the son 
who wasn’t returning from Russia, the stove without wood, the 
shoes  without soles,  the warehouses without supplies, the 
windows  without panes, the freezing cold which split the 
pipes, inflation, famine, and the virulent local feuds. I had been 
benignly granted a lame-legged desk in the lab, in a corner full

of crashing noise, drafts, and people coming and going carrying 
rags and large cans, and I had not been assigned a specific task. I, 
unoccupied as a chemist and in a state of utter alienation (but 
then  it  wasn’t called that),  was  writing in a haphazard fashion 
page after page of the memories which were poisoning me, and 
my colleagues watched me stealthily as a harmless nut. The book 
grew under my hands, almost spontaneously, without plan  or 
system, as intricate and crowded as an anthill. Every so often, 
impelled by a feeling of professional conscience, I would ask to 
see the director and request some work, but he was much too 
busy to worry about my scruples. I should read and study; when 
it came to paints and varnishes I was still, if I didn’t mind his 
saying so, an illiterate. I didn’t have anything to do? Well, I should 
praise God and sit in the library; if I really had the itch to  do 
something useful, well, look, there were articles to translate 
from German.
One day he sent for me and with an oblique glint in his eyes 
announced that he had a little job for me. He took me to a corner 
of the factory’s yard, near a retaining wall: piled up at random, 
the lowest crushed  by the highest, were thousands of  square 
blocks  of a  bright  orange  color.  He  told  me  to  touch  them:  they 
were gelatinous and softish; they had the disagree-  able 
consistency of slaughtered tripes. I told the director that, apart 
from the color, they seemed to me to be livers, and he praised me: 
that’s just how it was described in the paint manuals! He explained 
that the phenomenon which had produced them was called just 
that in English, “livering”; under  certain conditions certain 
paints turned from liquids into solids,  with the consistency 
precisely of the liver or lungs, and must be thrown out. These 
parallelepiped shapes had been cans of paint:  the  paint  had 
livered,  the cans had  been  cut  away,  and  the  contents had been 
thrown on the garbage dump.
That paint, he told me, had been produced during the war and 
immediately after; it contained a basic chromate and alkyd 
resin. Perhaps the chromate was too basic or the resin too acidic: 
these were exactly the conditions under which a “livering”

can take place. All right, he made me the gift of that pile of old 
sins; I should think about it, make tests and examinations, and 
try  to  say  with  precision  why  the  trouble  had  occurred,  what 
should be done so that it was not repeated, and if it were 
possible to reclaim the damaged goods.
Thus set forth, half chemistry and half police work, the problem 
attracted me: I was reconsidering it that evening (it was Saturday 
evening) as one of the sooty, freezing freight trains of  that 
period lugged me to Turin. Now it happened that the next day 
destiny reserved for me a different and unique gift: the encounter 
with a  woman, young and made of flesh and blood,  warm 
against my side through our overcoats, gay in the humid mist of 
the avenues, patient, wise and sure as we were walking down 
streets still bordered with ruins. In a few hours we knew that 
we belonged to each other, not for one meeting but for life, as in 
fact has been the case. In a few hours I felt reborn and replete with 
new powers, washed clean and cured of a long sickness, finally 
ready to enter life with joy and vigor; equally cured was suddenly 
the  world  around me,  and  exorcized  the  name and face of the 
woman who had gone down into the lower depths with me and 
had 
not 
returned. 
My 
very 
writing 
became  a 
different 
adventure, no longer the dolorous itinerary of a convalescent, no 
longer a begging for compassion  and friendly  faces,  but  a  lucid 
building,  which now was  no longer solitary:  the work of  a 
chemist who weighs and divides, measures and  judges on the 
basis of  assured proofs, and strives to answer  questions. 
Alongside the liberating relief of the veteran who tells his story, I 
now felt in the writing a complex, intense, and new  pleasure, 
similar to that I felt as a student when penetrating the solemn 
order of differential calculus. It was exalting to search and find, or 
create, the right word, that is, commensurate, concise, and strong; 
to dredge up events from my memory and describe them with the 
greatest rigor and the least clutter. Paradoxically,  my  baggage  of 
atrocious  memories  became  a  wealth, a seed; it seemed to me 
that, by writing, I was growing like a plant.

In the freight train of the following Monday, squeezed in a sleepy 
crowd bundled in scarfs, I felt full of joy and alert as never before or 
after. I was ready to challenge everything and  everyone, in  the 
same way that I had challenged and defeated  Auschwitz  and 
loneliness: disposed, especially, to engage in joyous battle with the 
clumsy pyramid of orange livers that awaited me on the lakeshore.
It is the spirit that dominates matter, is that not so? Was it 
not this that they had hammered into my head in the Fascist and 
Gentile liceo? I threw myself into the work with the same intensity 
that, at not so distant a period, we had attacked a rock wall; and the 
adversary was still the same, the not-I, the Button  Molder,* the 
hyle: stupid matter, slothfully hostile as human stupidity is hostile, 
and  like  it  strong  because  of  its  obtuse  passivity.  Our  trade  is  to 
conduct and win this interminable battle: a livered paint is much 
more  rebellious,  more refractory  to your will than a lion in its 
mad pounce; but, let’s admit it, it’s also less dangerous.
The first skirmish  took place  in  the archives.  The  two part-
ners, the two fornicators from  whose embrace had sprung our 
orange-colored monsters, were  the chromate and the resin. The 
resin was fabricated on the spot: I found the birth certificate of 
all the batches, and they did not  offer anything suspicious; the 
acidity was variable, but always inferior to 6, as prescribed. One 
batch that was found to have a pH of 6.2 had been dutifully dis- 
carded by an inspector with a  flowery signature. In the first in- 
stance the resin could not be faulted.
The chromate had been purchased from different suppliers, and 
it too had been duly inspected batch by batch. According to 
Purchase Specification 480/0 it should have contained not less than 
28 percent of chromium oxide in all; and now here, right before 
my eyes  I had the interminable  list of tests from January  1942 
until today (one of the least exciting forms of reading imaginable), 
and all the values satisfied the specification, indeed
*A character in Ibsen’s Peer Gynt.

were equal among themselves: 29.5 percent, not one percent more, 
not one less. I felt my inner being as a chemist writhe, confronted 
by that abomination; in fact, one should know that the natural 
oscillations in  the  method of preparation of such a  chromate, 
added to the inevitable  analytical errors, make it  extremely 
improbable that the many values found in different batches and on 
different days could coincide so exactly. How come nobody had 
gotten suspicious? But in fact at that time I did not yet know 
the frightening anesthetic power of company  papers, their 
capacity to hobble, douse, and dull every leap of  intuition  and 
every  spark  of  talent.  It  is  well  known  to  the  scholarly that all 
secretions can be harmful or toxic: now under  pathological 
conditions it is not rare that the paper, a company  secretion,  is 
reabsorbed to an excessive degree, and puts to sleep, paralyzes, or 
actually kills the organism from which it has been exuded.
The story of what had happened began to take shape. For some 
reason, some analyst had been betrayed by a defective method, or 
an impure reagent, or an incorrect habit; he had diligently totted 
up those so obviously  suspicious but formally  blameless results; 
he had punctiliously signed each analysis, and  his signature, 
swelling like an avalanche, had been consolidated  by the 
signatures of the lab chief, the technical director, and the general 
director. I could see him, the poor wretch, against the background 
of those difficult years: no longer young, since all the young men 
were in the military services; perhaps chivied by  the  Fascists, 
perhaps  himself a  Fascist being  looked for  by  the  partisans; 
certainly frustrated, because being an analyst is a young man’s job; 
on guard in  his  lab within the fortress of his  minuscule 
specialty, since the analyst is by definition infallible; and derided 
and regarded with a hostile eye outside the lab just because of 
his virtues as an incorruptible guardian, a severe,  pedantic, 
unimaginative little judge, a stick poked in the wheels  of 
production. To judge from the anonymous, neat handwriting, his 
trade must have exhausted him and at the same time brought him 
to a crude perfection, like a pebble in a mountain

stream that has been twirled  over  and over  all the way to the 
stream’s mouth. It was not surprising  that, with time, he had 
developed a certain insensitivity to the real significance of  the 
operations he was performing and the notes he was writing. I 
planned to look into his particular case but nobody knew anything 
more about him; my questions were met with dis- courteous or 
absentminded replies. Moreover, I was beginning to feel around 
me and my work a mocking and malevolent curiosity: who was 
this Johnny-come-lately,  this pipsqueak  earning  7,000  lire  a 
month, this maniac scribbler who was disturbing the nights of the 
guest quarters typing away at God knows what, and sticking his 
nose into past mistakes and washing a generation’s dirty linen? I 
even had the suspicion that the job that had been assigned me had 
the  secret  purpose of  getting me to bump  into  something or 
somebody; but by now this matter of the livering absorbed me 
body and soul, tripes et boyaux—in short, I was enamored of  it 
almost as of that  aforementioned girl,  who in fact was a  little 
jealous of it.
It  was  not  hard  for  me  to  procure,  besides  the  Purchase 
Specification (the PS), also the equally inviolable CS, the Check-
ing Specifications: in a drawer in the lab there was a packet of 
greasy file cards, typewritten and corrected several times by hand, 
each of which contained the way to carry out a check of a 
specific raw material. The file card on prussian blue was stained 
with blue, the file card on glycerine was sticky, and the file card 
on  fish  oil  smelled  like  sardines.  I  took  out  the  file  card  on 
chromate, which due to long use had become sunrise, and read it 
carefully. It was all rather sensible and in keeping with my not-so-
far-off scholastic notions; only one point seemed strange to me. 
Having achieved the disintegration of the pigment, it p rescribed 
adding twenty-three drops of a certain reagent. Now, a drop is 
not so definite a unit as to entail  so definite a numerical 
coefficient; and besides, when all is said and done, the prescribed 
dose was absurdly high: it would have flooded the analysis, leading 
in any case to a result in keeping with the specification. I looked 
at the back of the file card; it

bore the date of  the last review, January 4,  1944; the birth 
certificate of the first livered batch was on the succeeding February 
22.
At this point I began to see the light. In a dusty archive I found 
the CS collection no longer in use, and there, lo and behold, the 
preceding edition of the chromate file card bore the direction to 
add “2  or 3” drops, and not “ 23”:  the fundamental “or”  was 
half erased and  in  the  next  transcription had gotten  lost.  The 
events meshed perfectly: the revision of the file card had caused a 
mistake  in  transcription,  and  the  mistake  had  falsified  all 
succeeding  analyses,  concealing  the  results  on  the  basis  of a 
fictitious value due to the reagent’s enormous excess and thus 
bringing about the acceptance of shipments of pigment  which 
should have been discarded; these, being too basic, had brought 
about the livering.
But there is trouble in store for anyone who surrenders to the 
temptation of mistaking an elegant hypothesis for a certainty: the 
readers of detective stories know this quite well. I got hold of 
the sleepy man in charge of the storeroom, requested from him 
all the samples of all the shipments of chromate from January 1944 
on, and barricaded myself behind a workbench for three days in 
order to analyze them according to the incorrect  and  correct 
methods.  Gradually,  as  the  results  lined  up  in a  column  on  the 
register, the boredom of repetitious work was being transformed 
into nervous gaiety, as when as children you play hide and seek 
and discover your opponent clumsily squat- ting behind a hedge. 
With the mistaken method you constantly found the fateful 29.5 
percent;  with  the  correct  method,  the  results were widely 
dispersed, and a good quarter, being inferior  to  the  prescribed 
minimum,  corresponded  to  the  shipments  which should have 
been rejected. The diagnosis was confirmed, the pathogenesis 
discovered: it was now a matter of defining the therapy.
This  was  found  pretty  soon,  drawing  on  good  inorganic 
chemistry, that distant Cartesian island, a lost paradise, for us 
organic chemists, bunglers, “students of gunks”: it was necessary

to neutralize in some way, within the sick body of that varnish, the 
excess of basicity due to free lead oxide. The acids were shown 
to be noxious  from other aspects: I thought of  ammonium 
chloride, capable of combining stably with lead oxide, producing 
an insoluble and inert chloride and freeing the ammonia. Tests 
on  a  small  scale  gave  promising results:  now  quick, find the 
chloride, come to an agreement with the head of  the  Milling 
Department, slip into a small ball mill two of the livers disgusting 
to see and touch, add a weighed quantity of the  presumed 
medicine, start the mill under the skeptical eyes of the onlookers. 
The mill, usually so noisy, started almost grudgingly, in a silence 
of bad omen, impeded by the gelatinous mass which stuck to the 
balls.  All that was left was to go back to Turin to  wait for 
Monday, telling the patient girl in whirlwind style the hypotheses 
arrived at, the things understood at the lakeshore, the spasmodic 
waiting for the sentence that the facts would pronounce.
The following Monday the mill had regained its voice: it was 
in fact crunching away gaily with a full, continuous tone, without 
that  rhythmic roaring that 
in  a  ball 
mill 
indicates bad 
maintenance or bad health. I stopped it and cautiously loosened 
the  bolts  on  the  manhole;  there  spurted  out  with  a  hiss  an 
ammoniacal puff, as it should. Then I took off the cover. Angels 
and  ministers  of  grace!—the  paint  was  fluid  and  smooth, 
completely normal, born again from its ashes like the Phoenix. I 
wrote out a report in good company jargon and the management 
increased my salary. Besides, as a form of recognition, I received 
the assignment of two tires for my bike.
Since the storeroom contained several shipments of perilously 
basic chromate, which must also be utilized because they had 
been accepted by the inspection and could not be returned to 
the supplier, the chloride was officially introduced as an anti- 
livering preventive in the formula of that varnish. Then I quit my 
job: ten years went by, the postwar years were over, the 
deleterious, too  basic chromates disappeared from  the  market, 
and my report went the way of all flesh: but formulas are as holy

as prayers, decree-laws, and dead languages, and not an iota in 
them can be changed. And so my ammonium chloride, the twin 
of a happy love and a liberating book, by now completely useless 
and probably a bit harmful, is religiously ground into the chromate 
anti-rust paint on the shore of that lake, and nobody  knows 
why anymore.

S U L F U R
Lanza hooked the bike to the rack, punched the time card, went 
to the boiler, put the mixer in gear, and started the motor. The 
jet  of  pulverized  naphtha  ignited  with  a  violent  thud,  and  a 
perfidious backfire shot out (but Lanza, knowing that furnace, 
had gotten out of the way in time): then it continued to burn 
with a good, taut, full roar, like continuous  thunder, which 
covered the low hum of the motors and transmissions. Lanza was 
still heavy with the sleep and cold of a sudden awakening, he 
remained squatting in front of the furnace, whose red blaze, in a 
succession  of  rapid  gleams,  made  his  enormous,  crazed  shadow 
dance on the back wall, as in some primitive movie house.
After half an hour the thermometer began to move, as it

should: the hand of burnished steel, slithering like a snail over 
the dark yellow face, came to a stop at 95 degrees. This too was 
right, because the thermometer was off by five degrees; Lanza 
was satisfied and obscurely  at peace with the boiler, the ther-
mometer, and,  in  short,  the  world and  himself because all  the 
things which should happen were happening, and because in the 
factory he alone knew that the thermometer  was off: perhaps 
another man would have given a boost to the fire, or would have 
started to figure  out who knows what to make it rise to  100 
degrees, as it was written on the worksheet.
So the thermometer halted for a long time at 95 degrees and 
then began to climb again. Lanza remained close to the fire, and 
since, with the warmth, sleep began pressing in on him again, he 
permitted  it  softly  to  invade  some  of  the  rooms  of  his  con-
sciousness. But not that which stood behind his eyes and watched 
the thermometer: that must remain wide awake.
With  a  sulfodiene  one  never  knows,  but  for  the  moment 
everything was going properly. Lanza enjoyed the quiet rest, going 
along with the dance of thoughts and images that is the prelude 
to sleep, yet avoiding being overcome by it.  It was hot,  and 
Lanza saw his hometown—his  wife, his son, his  field, the 
tavern. The warm breath of the tavern, the heavy breath of the 
stable. Water trickled into the stable with every rainstorm, water 
that came from above, from the hayloft—perhaps from a crack 
in the wall, because all the roof tiles (he had checked them 
himself at Easter) were in perfect condition. There is room for 
another cow, but (here everything became fogged over by a mist 
of sketchy and  unfinished calculations).  Every minute  of work 
put ten lire into his pocket: now he felt as if the fire was roaring 
for him, that the mixer was turning for him, like a machine to 
make money.
On your feet, Lanza, we have arrived at 180 degrees, we’ve 
got to unbolt the kettle hatch and throw in the B 41: but to go 
on  calling it B  41  is  really a  big joke when  the  whole factory 
knows that it is sulfur, and in time of war, when everything was 
lacking, many took it home and sold it on the black market to

the peasants who dust the vines with it. But if that’s how the boss 
wants it, that’s what he gets.
He switched off the fire, slowed up the mixer, unbolted the 
hatch, and put on the protective mask, which made him feel like 
half a mole and half a wild boar. The B 41 was already weighed 
out, in three cardboard boxes: he put it in cautiously and, despite 
the mask, which may have leaked a bit, immediately smelled the 
dirty, sad smell that emanated from the mixture, and thought that 
maybe the priest was right too, when he said that in Hell there 
is a smell of sulfur: after all, even the dogs don’t like it, everyone 
knows that. When he was finished, he shut the door and started 
everything up again.
At three in the morning the thermometer stood at 200 degrees: 
it was  time  for the  vacuum.  He  lifted the  black lever  and the 
high, sharp racket of the centrifugal pump was superimposed on 
the deep thunder of the burner. The needle of the vacuum gauge, 
which stood vertical at zero, began to fall, sliding  to  the left. 
Twenty degrees, forty degrees: good. At this point you can light 
a cigarette and take it easy for more than an hour.
Some are fated to become millionaires, and some are fated to 
drop dead. He, Lanza, was fated (and he yawned noisily to keep 
himself company) to  make  night  into  day.  As  if they  too  had 
guessed it, during the war they had immediately shoved him into 
the great job of staying up nights on the rooftops to shoot 
planes out of the sky.
With a jump he was on his feet, his ears listening tensely and 
all his nerves in alarm. The clatter of  the pump had suddenly 
become slower and more clogged, as though constrained: and in 
fact, the needle of the vacuum gauge, like a threatening finger, 
rose up to zero, and, look! degree by degree, it began to slide to 
the right. That was it, the kettle was building up pressure.
“Turn it off and run.” “ Turn everything off and run.” But he 
did not run: he grabbed a wrench and banged the vacuum pipe 
along its entire length: it had to be obstructed, there could be no 
other reason. Bang again and bang again: nothing, the pump

continued to grind away, and the needle bounced around at about 
a third of an atmosphere.
Lanza felt all his hairs standing on end, like the tail of an enraged 
cat:  and  he  was  enraged,  in  a  murderous,  wild  rage  against the 
kettle, against that ugly, reluctant beast crouched on  the fire, 
which lowed like a bull: red hot, like an enormous hedgehog with 
its quills standing straight up, so that you do not know where to 
touch and seize it and you feel like jumping on it and kicking it to 
pieces. His fists clenched and his head bursting, Lanza was in a 
frenzy to open the hatch and let the pressure escape; he began to 
loosen the bolts, and, look! a yellowish slime  squirted  hissing 
from the crack together with puffs of foul smoke: the kettle must 
be full of foam.  Lanza slammed it shut,  filled with an 
overwhelming desire to get on the phone and call the boss, call 
the fireman, call the Holy Ghost to come out of the night and 
give him a hand or at least advice.
The kettle was not built for pressure and could explode from 
one moment to the next; or at least that’s what Lanza thought, 
and perhaps, if it had been during the day or he hadn’t been alone, 
he would not have thought that.  But his fear had turned  into 
anger, and when his anger had simmered down it left his head 
cold and uncluttered. And then he thought of the most obvious 
thing: he opened the valve of the suction fan, started it going, 
closed the vacuum breaker, and stopped the pump. With relief 
and pride because he had correctly figured it out, he saw the 
needle rise up all the way to zero, like a stray sheep that returns 
to the fold, and then slide gently down on the vacuum side.
He looked  around, with a great need to laugh and tell it to 
somebody and with a feeling of lightness in all his limbs. He saw 
on the floor his cigarette reduced to a long thin cylinder of ash: 
it had smoked itself. It was five twenty, dawn was breaking behind 
the shed of empty barrels,  the thermometer pointed to  210 
degrees.  He took a sample from the boiler, let it cool, and 
tested it with the reagent: the test tube remained clear for a few

seconds and  then  became white as  milk. Lanza turned off the 
fire,  stopped the mixer and the fan, and opened the vacuum 
breaker:  he  heard  a  long,  angry  hiss,  which gradually  calmed 
down into a rustle, a murmur, and then fell silent. He screwed 
in the siphon pipe, started the compressor,  and, gloriously, 
surrounded by white puffs of  smoke and the customary sharp 
smell, the dense jet of resin came to rest in the collection basin, 
forming a black shiny mirror.
Lanza went to the main gate and met Carmine, who was coming 
in. He told him that everything was going well, left him  the 
work orders, and began pumping up his bike’s tires.

T I T A N I U M
To Felice Fantino
In the kitchen there was a very tall man dressed in a way Maria 
had never seen before. On his head he wore a boat made out of 
a newspaper, he smoked a pipe, and he was painting the closet 
white.
It was incomprehensible how all that white could be contained 
in so small a can, and Maria had a great desire to go over and 
look inside it. Every so often the man rested his pipe on the 
closet and whistled; then he stopped whistling and began to sing; 
every so often he took two steps back and closed one eye, and 
also at times he would go and spit in the garbage can, then he

rubbed his mouth with the back of his hand. In short he did so 
many strange and new things that it was very interesting to stay 
there and watch him: and when the closet was white, he picked 
up the pot and many newspapers that were on the floor and car-
ried everything next to the cupboard and began to paint that too.
The closet  was so shiny, clean, and white that it was almost 
indispensable to touch it. Maria went up to the closet, but the 
man noticed and said, “Don’t touch. You mustn’t touch.”
Maria stopped in amazement and asked, “Why?” to which the 
man replied, “ Because you shouldn’t.” Maria thought about 
that, and then asked again, “ Why is it so white?” The man also 
thought for a while, as if the question seemed difficult to him, 
and then said in a deep voice, “ Because it is titanium.”*
Maria felt a delicious shiver of fear run through her, as when 
in the fairy tale you get to the ogre; so she looked carefully and 
saw that the man did not have knives either in his hand or near 
him: but he could have one hidden. Then she asked, “ Cut what 
on me?”—and at this point he should have replied, “ Cut your 
tongue.” Instead, he only said, “ I’m not cutting anything: this 
is titanium.”
In conclusion, he must be a very powerful man: but he did 
not seem to be angry, but rather good-natured and friendly. Maria 
asked him, “Mister, what’s your name?” He replied, “Felice. “ He 
had not taken his pipe out of his mouth, and when he spoke his 
pipe danced up and down but did not fall. Maria stood there for 
a while in silence, looking alternately at the man and the closet. 
She was not at all satisfied by that answer and  would have 
liked to ask him why he was named Felice, but then she did not 
dare, because she remembered that children must  never ask 
why. Her friend Alice was called Alice and was a child,
*There are two untranslatable plays on words on this page. When the man says “titanium” 
Maria hears the Italian words Titaglio due to the slurring caused b y  h i s  pipe; the words mean “I 
cut you.”  When she muses over the similarity of Alice and Felice, it is because small anchovies 
are called alice and because the two names have a similarity to this and each other due to their 
Italian pronunciation , thus ahh-lee-chay, fay-lee-chay—TRANS.

and it was really strange that a big man like that should be called 
Felice. But little by little, however, it began to seem natural to 
her that the man should be called Felice, and in fact she thought 
he could not have been called anything else.
The painted closet was so white that in comparison all the rest 
of the kitchen looked yellow and dirty. Maria decided there was 
nothing wrong in going to look at it up close, only look, without 
touching. But as she was approaching on tiptoe an unexpected 
and terrible thing happened: the man turned, and in  two  steps 
was beside her; he took out of his pocket a white chalk and drew a 
circle on the floor around Maria. Then he said, “You must stay in 
there.” After which he struck a match, lit his pipe, making many 
strange  grimaces with his mouth, and resumed painting  the 
cupboard.
Maria sat on her heels and considered the circle for a long time 
and attentively:  but she became convinced that there  was  no 
way out. She tried to rub it at one spot with her finger and saw 
that the chalk line actually disappeared; but she understood very 
well that the man would not have regarded that system as valid.
The circle was evidently magical. Maria sat on the floor silent 
and quiet; every so often she tried to reach far enough to touch 
the circle with the tips of her feet and leaned forward so far that 
she almost lost her balance, but she soon realized that there still 
was a good hand’s breadth before she could reach the closet or 
wall with her fingers. So she just sat there and watched as gradually 
the cupboard, chairs, and table also became white and beautiful.
After a very long time the man put down his brush and paint 
pot and took the newspaper boat off his head, and then you could 
see that he had hair like all other men. Then he went out by the 
balcony and Maria heard him rummaging  around and  tramping 
up and down in the next room. Maria began to call, “Mister!”—
first in a  low voice, then louder, but not  too loud  because  at 
bottom she was afraid that the man might hear.
Finally the man returned to the kitchen. Maria asked, “Mister,

can I come out now?” The man looked down at Maria in the 
circle, 
laughed loudly,  and 
said many things that were 
incomprehensible, but he didn’t seem angry. At last he said, “Yes, 
of course, now you can come out.” Maria looked at him 
perplexed and did not move; then the man picked up a rag and 
wiped  away the circle very  carefully, to undo the enchantment. 
When the  circle had disappeared, Maria got  up and left,  skip- 
ping, and she felt very happy and satisfied.

A R S E N I C
He had an unusual appearance for a customer. To our humble 
and enterprising laboratory, hiring us to analyze the most dispa-
rate materials, came all sorts of people, men and women, old and 
young, but all visibly members of the large, ambiguous, and 
cunning network of  commerce. Anyone who has the trade of 
buying and selling is easily recognized: he has a vigilant eye and a 
tense face, he fears fraud or considers it, and he is on guard like 
a cat at dusk. It is a trade that tends to destroy the immortal soul; 
there have been 
courtier philosophers, lens-grinding  phi-
losophers, and even engineer and strategist philosophers; but no 
philosopher, so far as I know, was a wholesaler or storekeeper.
I received him, since Emilio was not there. He could have been 
a peasant philosopher: he was a robust and rubicund old

man, with heavy hands deformed by work and arthritis; his eyes 
looked clear, mobile, youthful, despite the large delicate bags that 
hung slackly under his eye sockets. He wore a vest, from whose 
small pocket dangled a watch chain. He spoke Piedmontese, 
which immediately made me ill at ease: it is not good manners to 
reply in Italian to someone who speaks in dialect, it  puts you 
immediately on the other side of a barrier, on the side  of the 
aristos, the respectable folk, the “Luigini,” as they were called 
by  my  illustrious  namesake;* but  my  Piedmontese, correct  in 
form and sound, is  so smooth and enervated, so polite  and 
languid,  that  it does not seem very authentic.  Instead of a 
genuine atavism it seems the fruit of diligent study, burning the 
midnight oil over a grammar and dictionary.
So in excellent Piedmontese with witty Astian tones he told 
me he had some sugar he wanted “ chemistried”: he wanted 
to know whether it was or was not sugar, or if perhaps there 
was  some “ filth” in  it.  What filth? I  explained that if he  was 
more specific about his suspicions it would facilitate my job, but 
he  replied that he didn’t want to influence me, that I should 
make the analysis as best I could, he would tell me about his 
suspi-cions later. He left in my hands a paper parcel containing a 
good half kilo of sugar, told me that he would return the next 
day, said goodbye, and left: he did not take the elevator but 
walked calmly down the four flights of stairs. He appeared to be 
a man without anxieties and without haste.
We  didn’t  have  many  customers,  we  didn’t  make  many 
analyses, and we didn’t make much money: so we couldn’t buy 
modern and rapid instruments,  our findings were slow, out 
analyses lasted much longer than normal; we didn’t even have a 
sign on the street, so the circle closed  and there were fewer 
customers yet. The samples left us for analysis constituted a far 
from negligible contribution toward our sustenance: Emilio and 
I took care not to let them know that in general a few grams
*In other words , the respectable , subservient middle class. The “illustrious namesake” is 
the writer , Carlo Levi, who expresses himself on this score quite eloquently and vividly in his 
book The Watch—TRANS.

was enough and willingly accepted a litre of wine or milk, a kilo 
of spaghetti or soap, a packet of agnolotti.
However,  given the patient’s history, that is, the old man’s 
suspicions, it would have been imprudent to consume that sugar 
blindly, even just taste it. I dissolved a little in distilled water: 
the solution was turbid—there was certainly something wrong 
with it. I weighed a gram of sugar in the platinum crucible (the 
apple of our eyes) to incinerate it on the flame: there rose in the 
lab’s polluted air the domestic and childish smell of burnt sugar, 
but immediately afterward the flame turned livid and there was 
a much different smell, metallic, garlicky, inorganic, indeed contra-
organic: a chemist without a nose is in for trouble. At this point 
it is hard to make a mistake: filter the solution, acidify it, take 
the Kipp, let hydrogen sulfide bubble through. And here is the 
yellow precipitate of sulfide, it is arsenious anhydride—in short, 
arsenic, the Masculinum, the arsenic of Mithridates and Madame 
Bovary.
I spent the rest of the day distilling pyruvic acid and speculat-
ing on the old man’s sugar. I do not know how pyruvic acid is 
prepared  now  with  modern  methods;  at  that  time  we  melted 
sulfuric acid and soda in an enameled saucepan, obtaining bisulfate 
which to solidify we threw on the bare floor, and then ground 
it in a coffee grinder. Then we heated at 250 degrees centigrade a 
mixture of the aforementioned bisulfate and tartaric acid, so that 
the latter dehydrated into pyruvic acid and was distilled. First we 
attempted this operation in glass receptacles, bursting a prohibitive 
number;  then  we  bought  from a  junk  man  ten  metal  cannisters, 
which  came  from  the  Allied  Army  Surplus,  the  kind  which  were 
used  for  gasoline  before  the  advent  of  polyethylene, and  which 
proved  to  be  suited to this purpose; since the customer was 
satisfied with the quality of the product and promised further 
orders, we took the  plunge  and had  the  local  blacksmith  build a 
crude cylindrical  reactor of sheet iron, equipped with a hand-
powered mixer. We set it in a well of solid bricks, which had on 
the  bottom  and  sides four resistors of 1,000 watts connected 
illegally upstream

to the meter. If a fellow professional is reading this, he should 
not be too surprised by this pre-Columbian and  junk-shop 
chemistry: during those years we weren’t the only ones, nor the 
only chemists, to live like this, and throughout the world six years 
of war and destruction had brought about a regression in many 
civil  habits  and  attenuated  many  needs, first  of all  the  need  for 
decorum.
From the end of  the condenser coil the acid fell into the 
collector in heavy  golden drops, refracting like gems: drop by 
drop, every ten drops one lira of earnings. And meanwhile I kept 
thinking of the arsenic and the old man, who did not seem to me 
the type to plot poisonings or even undergo them, and I couldn’t 
figure it out.
The man returned the next day. He insisted on paying the fee, 
even before knowing the result of the analysis. When I told him 
his face lit up with a complicated, wrinkled smile, and he said 
to me, “I’m glad. I always said it would end up like this.” It was 
evident that he only waited for the slightest solicitation from me to 
tell the story. I did not disappoint him, and this is the story, a 
trifle faded due to the translation from Piedmontese,  an 
essentially spoken language.
“I am a cobbler by trade. If you start as a young man, it is not 
a bad trade: you sit, you don’t work hard, and you meet people 
you can talk to. Certainly you don’t make a fortune, you’re all 
day long with other people’s shoes in your hands: but you gel 
used to this, even to the smell of old leather. My shop is on Via 
Gioberti at the corner of Via Pastrengo: I’ve been working as a 
cobbler there for thirty years. I am the cobbler of San Secondo; I 
know all the difficult feet, and to do my work all I need is my 
hammer and some twine. Well, a young man came, not even from 
hereabouts: tall, good-looking, and full of ambition; he set up a 
shop a stone’s throw away and filled it with machines. To 
lengthen, to enlarge, to sew, to hammer out soles, and who knows 
what else— I never went to look, they told me about it, He put 
cards with his address and telephone number in all the

letter boxes of the neighborhood: yes, sir, even a phone, as if he 
were a midwife.
“You’re sure to think that his business went well right away. 
It did the first months— a little out of curiosity, a little to give us 
some competition, some customers went to him; also because at 
the start he kept his prices low: but then he had to raise them when 
he saw he was losing money. Now, mind, I’m saying all this 
without wishing him ill, I’ve seen plenty like him, starting off at a 
gallop and breaking their heads, cobblers and not only cobblers. 
But he, they told me, wished me ill: they tell me everything, and do 
you know who? The little old ladies, whose feet hurt and who no 
longer enjoy walking and have only one pair of shoes; they come to 
me—sit down, waiting for me to take care of the problems, and 
meanwhile they keep me informed, tell me all the ins and outs.
“He wished me ill and was going around telling a lot of lies 
about me. That I resoled with cardboard. That I get drunk every 
night.  That I  made my wife  die for the  insurance. That a  nail 
came through the shoe of one of my customers and then he died 
of tetanus. And so, with things at this point, you can understand 
that I wasn’t surprised too much when one morning, among the 
day’s  shoes, I  found  this  parcel. I  immediately understood the 
scheme, but I wanted to make sure: so I gave a little of it to the 
cat, and after two hours he went in a corner and vomited. Then I 
put another bit of it in the sugar bowl and yesterday my daughter 
and I put it in the coffee, and two hours later we both vomited. 
And now I also have your confirmation and I’m satisfied.”
“Do you want to bring charges? Do you need a declaration?”
“No , no. I told you, he’s only a poor devil and I don’t want 
to  ruin  him.  For this  trade,  too,  the world  is  large and  there’s  a 
place for everyone: he doesn’t know it, but I do.”
“So? “
“So tomorrow I’ll send back the parcel by one of my little old 
ladies, together with a note. In fact, no— I think I’ll bring it back 
myself, so I can see the face he makes and I’ll explain two

or three things.” He looked around, as one would in a museum, 
and then added, “Yours too is a fine trade: you need an eye and 
patience. And he who hasn’t got them, it’s best that he look for 
something else.”
He said  goodbye, picked up the parcel, and walked down 
without taking the elevator, with the tranquil dignity that was 
his by nature.

N I T R O G E N
. . . and finally there came the customer we’d always dreamed 
of, who wanted us as consultants. To be a consultant is the ideal 
work, the sort from which you derive prestige and money without 
dirtying your hands, or breaking your backbone, or running the 
risk of ending up roasted or poisoned: all you have to do is take 
off your smock, put on your tie, listen in attentive silence to the 
problem, and  then  you’ll  feel  like  the  Delphic  oracle. You must 
then weigh your  reply very carefully and  formulate it in 
convoluted, vague language so that the customer also considers 
you an oracle, worthy of his faith and the rates set  by the 
Chemists’ Society.
The dream client was about forty, small, compact, and obese;
he wore a thin mustache like Clark Gable and had tufts of black

hairs everywhere—in his ears, inside his nostrils, on the backs 
of his hands, and on the ridge of his fingers almost down to his 
fingernails. He was perfumed  and pomaded and had a vulgar 
aspect: he looked like a pimp or, better, a third-rate actor playing 
the  part  of  a  pimp;  or a  tough  from  the  slummy  outskirts.  He 
explained to me that he was the owner of a cosmetics factory and 
had trouble with a certain kind of lipstick. Good, let him bring us 
a sample; but no, he said, it was a particular problem, which had 
to be examined on the spot; it was better for one of us to visit 
and see what the problem was. Tomorrow at ten? Tomorrow.
It would have been great to show up in a car, but of course if 
you were a chemist with a car, instead of a miserable returnee, a 
spare-time writer, and besides just married, you wouldn’t spend 
time here sweating pyruvic acid and chasing after dubious lipstick 
manufacturers. I put on the best of my (two) suits and thought 
that it was a good idea to leave my bike in some courtyard nearby 
and pretend I had arrived in a cab, but when I entered the factory I 
realized
 that
 my
 scruples 
about
 prestige
 were 
entirely 
inappropriate. The factory was a dirty, disorderly shed, full of 
drafts, in which a dozen impudent, indolent, filthy, and showily 
made up girls crept about. The owner gave me some explanations, 
exhibiting  pride  and  trying to  look  important:  he called the 
lipstick “ rouge,” the aniline “ anelline,” and  the benzoic 
aldehyde “adelaide.” The work process was simple: a girl melted 
certain waxes and fats in an ordinary  enameled pot,  adding a 
little perfume and a little coloring, then poured the lot  into a 
minuscule ingot mold. Another girl cooled off the molds under 
running water and extracted from each of the molds twenty small 
scarlet cylinders of lipstick; other girls took care of  the assembly 
and packing. The owner rudely grabbed one of the girls, put his 
hand behind her neck to bring her mouth close to my eyes, and 
invited me to observe carefully the outline of her lips—there, you 
see, a  few  hours  after  application,  especially  when it’s hot, the 
lipstick runs, it filters up along the very thin  lines that even 
young women have around their lips, and so it

forms an ugly web of red threads that blurs the outline and ruins 
the whole effect.
I peered, not without embarrassment:  the red threads were 
indeed there, but only on the right half of the girl’s mouth, as 
she  stood  there  impassively  undergoing  the  inspection  and 
chewing American gum. Of course, the owner explained: her left 
side, and the left side of all the other girls, was made up with an 
excellent French product, in fact the product that he was vainly 
trying to imitate. A lipstick can be evaluated only in this way, 
through a practical comparison: every morning all the girls had 
to make up with the lipstick, on the right with his, and on the 
left with the other, and he kissed all the girls eight times a day to 
check whether the product was kiss-proof.
I asked the tough for his lipstick’s recipe, and a sample of both 
products. Reading the recipe, I immediately got the suspicion as 
to where the defect came from, but it seemed to me more advisable 
to make certain and let my reply fall a bit from on high, and I 
requested two days’ time “for the analyses.” I recovered my bike, 
and as I pedaled along I thought that, if this business went well, 
I could perhaps exchange it for a motorbike and quit pedaling.
Back at the lab, I took a sheet of filter paper, made two small 
red dots with the two samples, and put it in the stove at 80 degrees 
centigrade. After a quarter of an hour the small dot of the left 
lipstick was still a dot, although surrounded by a greasy  aura, 
while the small dot of the right lipstick was faded and spread, had 
become a pinkish halo as large as a coin. In my man’s recipe there 
was a soluble dye; it was clear that, when the  heat of the 
woman’s skin (or my stove) caused the fat  to melt,  the dye 
followed it as it spread. Instead, the other lipstick must contain 
a red pigment, well dispersed but insoluble and there- fore not 
migrant: I ascertained this easily by diluting it with benzene and 
subjecting it to centrifugation, and there it was, deposited on the 
bottom  of  the  test  tube.  Thanks  to  the  experience I  had 
accumulated at the lakeshore plant I was able to identify it: it was 
an expensive pigment and not easy to

disperse, and besides, my tough did not have any equipment suited 
to dispersing pigments. Fine, it was his headache, let him figure 
it  out,  him  with  his  harem  of girl  guinea  pigs  and  his  revolting 
metered kisses. For my part, I had performed my  professional 
services; I made a report, attached an invoice with  the 
necessary tax stamps and the picturesque specimen of filter 
paper, went back to the factory, handed it over, took my fee, and 
prepared to say goodbye.
But the tough detained me: he was satisfied with my work and 
wanted to offer me a business deal. Could I get him a few kilos 
of alloxan? He  would pay a good price for it,  provided I 
committed myself by contract to supply it only to him. He had 
read, I no longer remember  in what magazine, that alloxan in 
contact with the mucous membrane confers on it an extremely 
permanent red color, because it is not a superimposition, in short 
a layer of varnish like lipstick, but a true and proper dye,  as 
used on wool and cotton.
I gulped, and to stay on the safe side replied that we would 
have to see: alloxan is not a common  compound nor very well 
known, I don’t think my old chemistry textbook devoted more 
than  five  lines  to  it,  and  at  that  moment  I  remembered only 
vaguely that it was a derivative of urea and had some connection 
with uric acid.
I  dashed  to  the  library  at  the  first opportunity; I  refer  to  the 
venerable library of the University of Turin’s Chemical Institute, at 
that time, like Mecca, impenetrable to infidels and even hard to 
penetrate for such faithful as  I.  One had to think  that the 
administration followed the wise principle according to which it 
is good to discourage the arts and sciences: only someone impelled 
by absolute necessity, or by an overwhelming  passion, would 
willingly subject himself to the trials of abnegation  that  were 
demanded of him in order to consult the volumes. The library’s 
schedule was brief and irrational, the lighting dim, the file cards 
in disorder; in the winter, no heat; no chairs but uncomfortable 
and noisy metal stools; and finally, the  librarian was an 
incompetent, insolent boor of exceeding ugliness,

stationed  at  the  threshold  to  terrify  with  his  appearance  and his 
howl those aspiring to enter. Having been let in, I passed  the 
tests, and right away I hastened to refresh my memory as to the 
composition and structure of alloxan. Here is its portrait:
in which O is oxygen, C is carbon, H hydrogen, and N nitrogen. 
It is a pretty structure, isn’t it? It makes you think of something 
solid, stable, well linked. In fact it happens also in chemistry as 
in architecture that “ beautiful” edifices, that is, symmetrical 
and  simple,  are  also  the  most  sturdy:  in  short,  the  same  thing 
happens with molecules as with the cupolas of cathedrals or the 
arches of bridges. And it is also possible that the explanation is 
neither remote nor metaphysical:  to say “beautiful” is to say 
“desirable,” and ever since man has built he has wanted to build 
at the smallest expense and in the most durable fashion, and the 
aesthetic enjoyment he experiences when contemplating his work 
comes afterward. Certainly, it has not always been this way: there 
have been centuries in which “beauty” was identified  with 
adornment, the superimposed, the frills; but it is probable that 
they were deviant epochs and that the true beauty, in which every 
century recognizes itself, is found in upright stones, ships’ hulls, 
the blade of an ax, the wing of a plane.
Having  recognized  and  appreciated  the  structural  virtue  of 
alloxan, it is urgent that my chemical alter ego, so in love with 
digressions, get back on the rails, which is that of fornicating with 
matter  in  order  to  support  myself—and  today,  not  just  myself.  I 
turned with respect  to the shelves of the Zentralblatt and began to 
consult it year by year. Hats off to the Chemisches Zentralblatt : it 
is the magazine of magazines, the magazine which,  ever  since 
Chemistry existed, has reported in the form of

furiously  concise  abstracts  all the articles  dealing  with chemistry 
that appear in all the magazines in the world. The first years are 
slender volumes of 300 or 400 pages: today, every year, they dish out 
fourteen volumes of 1,300 pages each. It is endowed with a majestic 
authors’ index, one for subjects, one for formulas, and you can find 
in it venerable fossils, such as the legendary memoir in which our 
father Wohler tells the story of the first organic synthesis or Sainte-
Claire Deville describes the first isolation of metallic aluminum.
From the Zentralblatt I ricocheted to  Beilstein, an equally 
monumental encyclopedia continually brought up to date in which, 
as in an Office of Records,  each new chemical compound  is 
described as it appears, together with its methods of preparation. 
Alloxan  was  known  for  almost  seventy  years,  but  as  a  laboratory 
curiosity:  the  preparation  method  described  had  a  pure  academic 
value, and proceeded from expensive raw materials which (in those 
years right after the war) it was vain to hope to find on the market. 
The sole accessible preparation was the oldest: it did not seem too 
difficult to execute, and consisted in an oxidizing demolition of uric 
acid. Just that: uric acid, the stuff connected with gout, intemperant 
eaters, and stones  in the  bladder.  It  was a  decidedly  unusual  raw 
material, but perhaps not as prohibitively expensive as the others.
In fact subsequent research in the spick and span shelves, smelling 
of  camphor,  wax, and  century-old  chemical  labors,  taught  me  that 
uric  acid,  very scarce  in  the  excreta  of man  and  mammals, 
constitutes,  however,  50 percent  of the  excrement  of  birds  and  90 
percent  of  the  excrement  of  reptiles.  Fine.  I  phoned  the  tough  and 
told him that it could be done, he just had to give me a few days’ time: 
before  the  month  was  out  I  would  bring  him  the  first  sample  of 
alloxan, and give him an idea of the cost and how much of it I could 
produce  each  month.  The fact  that  alloxan,  destined  to  embellish 
ladies’ lips, would come from the excrement of chickens or pythons 
was a thought which didn’t trouble me for a moment. The trade of 
chemist (fortified, in my case, by the experience of Auschwitz)

teaches you to overcome, indeed to ignore, certain revulsions that 
are neither necessary or congenital: matter is matter, neither noble 
nor vile, infinitely transformable, and its proximate origin is of no 
importance 
whatsoever. 
Nitrogen 
is 
nitrogen,
 it 
passes 
miraculously from the air into plants, from these into animals, 
and from animals to us;  when  its  function in our  body is 
exhausted, we eliminate it, but it still remains nitrogen, aseptic, 
innocent.  W e —I  mean to  say  we  mammals—who  in  general  do 
not have problems about obtaining water, have learned to wedge it 
into the urea molecule, which is soluble in water, and as urea we 
free ourselves of it; other animals, for whom water is precious (or 
it was for their distant progenitors),  have made the  ingenious 
invention of packaging their  nitrogen  in the form of  uric acid, 
which is insoluble in water, and of eliminating it as a solid, with 
no necessity of having recourse to  water as a vehicle. In an 
analogous fashion one thinks today of eliminating urban garbage 
by pressing it into blocks, which can be carried to the dumps or 
buried inexpensively.
I will go further: far from scandalizing me, the idea of obtaining 
a cosmetic from excrement, that is, aurum de stercore (“gold from 
dung”),  amused me and  warmed my  heart  like a  return  to  the 
origins, when alchemists extracted phosphorus from urine. It was 
an  adventure  both  unprecedented and gay  and  noble  besides, 
because it  ennobled,  restored, and  reestablished. That is what 
nature does: it draws the fern’s grace from the putrefaction of 
the forest floor, and pasturage from manure, in Latin laetamen—
and does not laetari mean “to rejoice”? That’s what they taught 
me in liceo, that’s how it had been for Virgil, and that’s what it 
became for me. I returned home that evening,  told my very 
recent wife the story of the alloxan and uric acid, and informed 
her that the next day I would leave on a business trip: that is, I 
would get  on  my bike  and  make a  tour  of the  farms on  the 
outskirts of town (at that time they were still there) in search of 
chicken shit. She did not hesitate; she likes the countryside, and a 
wife should follow her husband; she would come along with me. It 
was a kind of supplement to our

honeymoon trip, which for reasons of economy had been frugal 
and hurried. But she warned me not to have too many illusions: 
finding chicken shit in its pure state would not be so easy.
In fact it proved quite difficult. First of all, the pollina—that’s 
what the country people call it, which we didn’t know, nor did 
we know that, because of its nitrogen content, it is highly valued 
as a fertilizer for truck gardens—the chicken shit is not given 
away free, indeed it is sold at a high price. Secondly, whoever 
buys  it  has  to go  and gather it,  crawling on  all  fours  into the 
chicken coops and gleaning all around  the threshing floor. And 
thirdly, what you actually collect can be used directly as a fertilizer, 
but lends itself badly to other uses: it is a mixture of dung, 
earth, stones, chicken feed, feathers, and chicken lice, which nest 
under the chickens’ wings. In any event, paying not a  little, 
laboring and dirtying ourselves a lot, my undaunted wife and I 
returned that evening down Corso Francia with a kilo of sweated-
over chicken shit on the bike’s carrier rack.
The next day I examined the material: there was a lot of gangue, 
yet 
something
 perhaps 
could 
be 
gotten 
from 
it. 
But 
simultaneously I got an idea; just at that time, in the Turin subway 
gallery an exhibition of snakes had opened: Why not go and see it? 
Snakes are a clean species, they have neither feathers nor lice, and 
they don’t scrabble in the dirt; and besides, a python is quite a bit 
larger than a chicken.  Perhaps  their excrement, at 90 percent 
uric acid, could be obtained in abundance, in sizes not too minute 
and in conditions of reasonable purity. This time I went alone: my 
wife is a daughter of Eve and doesn’t like snakes.
The director and the various workers attached to the exhibition 
received me with stupefied scorn. Where were my credentials? 
Where did I come from? Who did I think I was showing up 
just like that, as if it were the most natural thing, asking for 
python shit? Out of the question, not even a gram; pythons are 
frugal, they eat twice a month and vice versa; especially when 
they don’t get much exercise. Their very scanty shit is worth its 
weight in gold; besides, they—and all exhibitors and owners of

snakes—have permanent and exclusive contracts with big phar-
maceutical companies. So get out and stop wasting our time.
I devoted a day to a coarse sifting of the chicken shit, and another 
two trying to oxidize the acid contained in it into alloxan. The virtue and 
patience of ancient chemists must have  been superhuman, or perhaps 
my inexperience with organic preparations was boundless. All I got were 
foul vapors, boredom, humiliation, and a black and murky liquid which 
irremediably plugged up the filters and displayed no tendency to 
crystallize, as the text declared it should. The shit remained shit, and 
the alloxan and its resonant name remained a resonant name. That was 
not the way to get out of the swamps: by what path would I therefore 
get out, I the discouraged author of a book which seemed good to me but 
which nobody read? Best to return among the colorless but safe schemes 
of inorganic chemistry.

T I N
It’s bad to be poor, I was brooding as I held an ingot of tin from 
the Straits over the flame of the gas jet. Very slowly the tin melted, 
and the drops fell with a hiss into the water of a basin: on the 
basin’s bottom a fascinating metallic tangle of ever new shapes 
was forming.
There are friendly metals and hostile metals. Tin was a friend
—not only because, for some months now, Emilio and I were 
living on it, transforming it into stannous chloride to sell to the 
manufacturers  of  mirrors,  but  also  for  other,  more  recondite 
reasons: because it marries with iron, transforming it into mild 
tin plate and depriving it on that account of its sanguinary quality 
of nocens Jerrum; because the Phoenicians traded in it and it is to 
this day extracted, refined, and shipped

from fabulous and distant  countries (the Straits, precisely: one 
might say the Sleepy Sonda Islands,  the Happy Isles and Archi-
pelagos); because it forms an alloy with copper to give us bronze, 
the respectable material par excellence, notoriously perennial and 
well established; because it melts at a low temperature,  almost 
like  organic  compounds,  that  is,  almost  like  us;  and finally, 
because of two unique properties with picturesque,  hardly 
credible names, never seen or heard (that I know) by human eye 
or 
ear,  yet  faithfully 
handed 
down 
from 
generation  to 
generation by  all  the  textbooks—the “weeping” of tin  and  tin 
pest.
You have to granulate tin so that afterward it can be easier to 
attack with hydrochloric acid. So you asked for it. You were living 
under the wings of that lakeshore factory, a bird of prey but 
with broad, strong wings. You decided to get out from under its 
protection, fly with your own wings: well, you asked for it. So 
fly now: you wanted to be free and you are free, you wanted to 
be a  chemist and you are one.  So now grub among  poisons, 
lipsticks, and chicken shit; granulate tin, pour hydrochloric acid; 
concentrate,  decant, and  crystallize if you  do  not  want  to  go 
hungry, and you know hunger. Buy tin and sell stannous chloride.
Emilio  had  managed  to  carve  a  lab  out  of  his  parents’ 
apartment, pious, ill-advised, long-suffering  people. Certainly, 
when they let him take over their bedroom, they had not foreseen 
all the consequences, but there’s no way back: now the hallway 
was a  storeroom jammed with  demijohns full  of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid, the kitchen stove (outside of mealtime) was 
used to concentrate the stannous chloride in beakers and six-
liter Erlenmeyer  flasks, and the entire apartment was invaded 
with our fumes.
Emilio’s father was a majestic, benign old  man with a white 
mustache and a thunderous voice. He had had many different 
trades  during  his  life,  all  adventurous or  at  least  odd,  and  at 
seventy he still had a preoccupying avidity for experimentation. 
At that period he held the monopoly of the blood of all the

cattle  slaughtered  at  the old  Municipal  Slaughterhouse  on  Corso 
Inghilterra: he spent many hours of the day in a filthy cavern, its 
walls brown from dried-up blood, its floor soaked with putrefied 
muck, and frequented by rats as large as rabbits; even his invoices 
and  ledgers  were  stained  with  blood. The  blood  was  turned  into 
buttons,  glue,  fritters,  blood  sausages,  wall paints, and polishing 
paste. He read exclusively Arabic  newspapers  and  magazines, 
which  he  had  sent  from  Cairo,  where he had lived many  years, 
where he had had three sons,  where he had defended, rifle in 
hand, the Italian Consulate from an enraged mob, and where his 
heart remained. He went every  day on his bicycle to Porta 
Palazzo to buy herbs, sorghum flour,  peanut fat, and sweet 
potatoes: with these ingredients and the slaughterhouse blood he 
cooked experimental dishes, a different  one each day; he 
bragged about them and made us taste them.  One day he 
brought home a rat, cut off its head and paws, told his wife that 
it was a guinea pig, and had her roast it. Since his bicycle did 
not have a guard over the chain and the small of his back had 
become a bit stiff, he would put clips on the cuffs of his pants 
in the morning and wouldn’t take them off all day. He and his 
wife, the sweet and imperturbable Signora Ester, born in Corfu 
of a Venetian family, had accepted our laboratory in their house, 
as if keeping acids in the kitchen was the most natural thing in 
the world. We would carry the demijohns of acid to the fourth 
floor in the elevator; Emilio’s father looked so respectable  and 
authoritative that no tenant dared object.
Our laboratory looked like a junk shop and the hold of a whaler. 
Apart  from  overflows  that,  as  I  said,  invaded  the  kitchen, the 
hallway, and even the bathroom, the lab consisted  of a single 
room and the terrace. On the terrace were scattered the parts of 
a  DKW motorcycle which Emilio had bought dismantled  and 
which, he said, he would put  together again someday; the scarlet 
gas tank was perched on the railing, and the motor, inside a fly 
net,  rusted away,  corroded  by  our  exhalations.  There were also 
some tanks  of ammonia left  over  from an epoch preceding my 
arrival, during which Emilio made

ends meet by dissolving gaseous ammonia in demijohns of potable 
water, selling them, and befouling the neighborhood. Everywhere, 
on  the  terrace  and  inside  the  apartment,  was  scattered an 
incredible amount of junk, so old and battered as to prove almost 
unrecognizable: only after a more attentive examination could you 
distinguish the professional objects from the domestic ones.
In the middle of the lab was a large ventilation hood of wood 
and  glass, our pride and our only protection against death by 
gassing. It is not that hydrochloric acid is actually toxic: it is one 
of those frank enemies that come at you shouting from a distance, 
and from which it is therefore easy to protect yourself.  It has 
such a penetrating odor that whoever can wastes no time  in 
getting out of its way; and you cannot mistake it for anything 
else, because after having taken in one breath of it you expel from 
your  nose  two  short  plumes  of  white  smoke,  like  the  horses in 
Eisenstein’s movies, and you feel your teeth turn sour in your 
mouth, as when you have bitten into a lemon. Despite our quite 
willing hood, acid fumes invaded  all the rooms: the  wallpaper 
changed color, the doorknobs and metal fixtures became dim and 
rough, and every so often a sinister thump made us jump: a nail 
had been corroded through and a picture, in some corner of the 
apartment, had crashed to the floor. Emilio hammered in a new 
nail and hung the picture back in its place.
So we were dissolving tin in hydrochloric acid: then the solution 
had to be concentrated to a particular specific weight and left to 
crystallize by cooling. The stannous chloride separated in small, 
pretty prisms, colorless and transparent. Since the crystallization 
was slow, it required many receptacles, and since hydrochloric 
acid  corrodes  all  metals,  these  receptacles  had to be glass or 
ceramic. In the period when there were many orders, we had to 
mobilize reserve receptacles, in which for that  matter Emilio’s 
house was rich: a soup tureen, an enameled iron pressure cooker, 
an Art Nouveau chandelier, and a chamber pot.
The morning after, the chloride is gathered and set to drain:

and you must be very careful not to touch it with your hands or 
it saddles you with a truly disgusting smell. This salt, in itself, is 
odorless, but it reacts in some manner  with the skin, perhaps 
reducing the keratin’s disulfide bridges and giving off a persis-
tent metallic stench that for several days announces to all that 
you are a chemist. It is aggressive but also delicate, like certain 
unpleasant sports opponents who whine when they lose: you can’t 
force it, you have to let it dry out in the air in its own good time. 
If you try to warm it up, even in the mildest manner, for 
example, with a hair dryer  or on the radiator, it loses its 
crystallization water, becomes opaque, and foolish customers no 
longer want it. Foolish because it would suit them fine: with less 
water there is more tin and therefore more of a yield; but that’s 
how it is, the customer is always right, especially when he knows 
little 
chemistry, 
as 
is 
precisely
 the 
case 
with 
mirror 
manufacturers.
Nothing of the generous good nature of  tin, Jove’s metal, 
survives in its chloride (besides, chlorides in general are rabble, 
for the most part ignoble by-products, hygroscopic, not good for 
much: with the single exception of common salt, which is a 
completely different  matter). This salt is an energetic reducing 
agent, that is to say, it is eager to free itself of two of its electrons 
and does so on the slightest pretext, sometimes with  disastrous 
results: just a single splash of the concentrated solution, which 
dripped down my pants, was enough to cut them cleanly like the 
blow of a scimitar; and this was right after the war, and I had 
no other pants except my Sunday best, and there wasn’t much 
money in the house.
I  would never have left  the lakeshore factory,  and I  would 
have
 stayed
 there
 for
 all
 eternity
 correcting 
varnishes’ 
deformities, if Emilio had not insisted, praising adventure and the 
glories of a free profession. I had quit my job with absurd self-
assurance, distributing to  my colleagues and superiors a 
testament written in quatrains full of gay impudence: I was quite 
aware of the risk I was running, but I knew that the license to 
make mistakes becomes more limited with the passing of the

years, so he who wants to take advantage of it must not wait too 
long. On the other hand, one must not wait too long to realize 
that a mistake is a mistake: at the end of each month we did our 
accounts, and it was becoming ever more obvious that man does 
not live by stannous chloride alone; or at least I did not, since I had 
just married and had no authoritative patriarch behind me.
We didn’t surrender right away; we racked our brains for a 
good month in an effort to obtain vanillin from eugenol with an 
output that would permit us to live, and didn’t  succeed; we 
secreted several hundred kilos of  pyruvic acid, produced with 
equipment for troglodytes and a work schedule for slaves, after 
which I hoisted the white flag. I had to find a job, even if it meant 
going back to varnishes.
Emilio accepted  the common defeat and my desertion with 
sorrow but like a man. For him it was different: in his veins ran 
the paternal blood, rich in remote piratic ferments,  mercantile 
initiatives, and a restless frenzy for the new. He was not afraid of 
making mistakes, nor of changing his trade, the place, and the 
style of his life every six months, nor of becoming poor; nor did 
he have any caste hang-ups, nor did he feel ill at ease about going 
around on his tricycle and in gray overalls to deliver our laborious 
chloride to customers. He accepted, and the next day he already 
had  in  mind  other  ideas,  other  deals  with  people more 
experienced than I, and immediately  set about  dismantling  the 
laboratory, and he wasn’t even all that sad, whereas I was and felt 
like crying, or of howling at the moon as dogs do when they see 
the suitcases being closed. We proceeded  to  carry out  the 
melancholy task  helped (or,  better,  distracted  and impeded) by 
Signor Samuele and Signora Ester. There came  to light family 
utensils, sought in vain for years, and other exotic objects, buried 
geologically in the apartment’s recesses: the  breechblock of a 
Beretta  38  tommy gun  (from  the  days  when  Emilio  had been a 
partisan and roamed the mountain valleys,  distributing spare 
parts to the bands), an illuminated Koran, a very long porcelain 
pipe, a damascened sword with a hilt inlaid with silver, and an 
avalanche of yellowed papers. Among these

rose to the surface—and I appropriated it greedily—a procla-
mation decree of 1785 in which F. Tom. Lorenzo  Matteucci, 
General Inquisitor of  the Ancona District, especially delegated 
against the heretical depravity, with much complacency and little 
clarity, “ orders, prohibits, and severely commands, that no Jew 
shall have the temerity to take Lessons from Christians for any 
kind of Instrument, and much less that of Dancing.” We put off 
until the next day the most anguishing job, the dismantling of the 
ventilation hood.
Despite Emilio’s opinion, it was immediately  clear that our 
efforts would not be sufficient. It was painful to draft a couple 
of carpenters, whom Emilio ordered to build a contraption fit to 
uproot the hood from its anchorage without dismembering it: in 
sum,  this  hood  was  a  symbol,  the  sign  of  a  profession  and 
condition, indeed an art, and should have been deposited in the 
courtyard intact and in its integrity, so as to find a new life and 
use in a still undefined future.
A scaffolding  was built, a block and tackle were set up, and 
guide ropes were strung. While Emilio and I watched the funereal 
ceremony from the courtyard, the hood issued solemnly from the 
window, hovered ponderously, outlined sharply against the gray 
sky of Via Massena, was skillfully hooked onto the chain of the 
block and tackle, and  the  chain groaned once  and broke.  The 
hood plunged four floors to our feet and was reduced to shards 
of wood and glass; it still smelled of eugenol and pyruvic acid, 
and with it our will and daring for enterprise was also reduced 
to shards.
In the  brief instants of the flight the  instinct of self- 
preservation  made  us  take  a  leap  backward.  Emilio  said,  “I 
thought it would make more noise.”

U R A N I U M
One cannot employ just anyone to do the work of Customers’ 
Service. It is a delicate and complex job, not much different from 
that of diplomats: to perform it with success you must infuse faith 
in the customers, and therefore it is indispensable to have faith in 
yourself and in the products you sell; it is therefore  a salutary 
activity, which helps you to know yourself and strengthens your 
character.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  hygienic  of  the  specialities  that 
constitute the decathlon of the factory chemist: the speciality that 
best  trains  him  in  eloquence  and  improvisation,  prompt  reflexes, 
and  the  ability  to  understand  and make  yourself understood; 
besides, you get a chance to travel about Italy and the world, and 
it brings you into contact  with  all  sorts  of people. I  must also 
mention another peculiar

and beneficent consequence of CS: by pretending to esteem and 
like your fellow men, after a few years in this trade you wind up 
really doing so, just as someone who feigns madness for a long 
time actually becomes crazy.
In the majority of cases, at the first contact you have to acquire 
or  conquer a  position  superior  to  that  of your  interlocutor:  but 
conquer it  quietly, graciously, without  frightening  him or 
pulling rank.  He must feel you are  superior, but just a  little: 
reachable, comprehensible. Never, but never, for instance,  talk 
chemistry with a non-chemist: this is the ABC of the trade. But 
the  opposite  danger  is  much  more  serious,  that  the  customer 
outranks  you: and  this  can  easily  happen,  because  he  plays at 
home, that is, he puts the products you’re selling him to 
practical use, and so he knows their virtues and defects as a wife 
knows  her  husband’s,  while  usually  you  have  only  a  painless, 
disinterested, often  optimistic  knowledge  of them,  acquired in 
the lab or during their production. The most favorable constel-
lation is that in which you can present yourself as a benefactor, 
in whatever way: by convincing him that your product satisfies 
an  old  need  or  desire of his,  perhaps overlooked; that,  having 
taken everything into account, at the end of the year it would 
prove to cost less than the competition’s product, which more- 
over, as  is  known, works well  at  first but,  well, I  don’t really 
want to go into it. You can, however, assist him also in different 
ways (and here the imagination of the CS candidate is revealed): 
by solving a technical problem for him that has little or nothing 
to do with your business: furnishing him with an address; inviting 
him to dinner in a typical restaurant; showing him your city and 
helping him  or advising him  on the purchase of souvenirs for his 
wife  or  girlfriend;  finding him  at  the  last  moment a  ticket  in  the 
stadium for the local soccer match (that’s right, we do this too). 
My Bologna colleague has a collection of dirty stories continually 
brought up to date, and reviews them diligently together with the 
technical bulletins before setting out on his sales trip in the cities 
and province’s; since he has a faulty memory, he keeps a record of 
which he has

told to whom, because to administer the same joke twice to the 
same person would be a serious mistake.
All these things are learned through experience, but there are 
technical salesmen who seem born to it, born CS like Athena. This 
is not my case, and I am sadly conscious of it: when it falls to me 
to work in CS, at the office or traveling, I do it  unwillingly, with 
hesitation, compunction, and little human warmth. Worse: I tend 
to  be  brusque  and  impatient  with  customers who are impatient 
and brusque, and to be mild and  yielding with suppliers who, 
being in their turn CSs, prove to be just that, yielding and mild. 
In short, I am not a good CS, and I fear that by now it is too 
late for me to become one.
Tabasso had  said  to  me,  “Go  to  __________ and  ask for  Bonino, 
who is the head of the department. He’s a fine man, already knows 
our products, everything has always gone well, he’s no genius, we 
haven’t called on him for three months. You will see that you 
won’t have any technical difficulties; and if  he begins to  talk 
prices, just keep to generalities: tell him that you’ll report to us 
and it’s not your job. . .”
I had myself announced; they gave me a form to fill out and 
handed me a badge to stick to my lapel, which characterized you 
as an outsider and immunized you against reactions of rejection 
on the part of the guards. They had me sit down in a waiting 
room; after not more than five minutes Bonino appeared and led 
me to his office. This is an excellent sign, and it doesn’t always 
go like this: there are people who, coldly, make a CS wait for 
thirty or forty minutes even if there is an appointment, with 
the deliberate aim of putting him down and imposing their 
superior rank; it is the same goal aimed at, with more ingenious 
and more obscene techniques, by the baboons in the big ditch 
in the zoo. But the analogy is more general: all of a CS’s strategies 
and tactics can be described in terms of sexual courtship. In both 
cases it’s a one-to-one relationship; a courtship or negotiation 
among three persons would be unthinkable.  In  both  cases  one 
notes at the beginning a kind of dance or

ritualized opening in which the buyer accepts the seller only if 
the latter adheres rigidly to the traditional ceremonial; if this takes 
place, the buyer joins the dance, and if the enjoyment is mutual, 
mating is attained, that is, the purchase, to the visible satisfaction 
of the two partners. The cases of unilateral violence are rare; not 
by  chance  are  they  often  described  in  terms  borrowed from  the 
sexual sphere.
Bonino  was a round little man, untidy, vaguely canine, care-
lessly shaved, and with a toothless smile. I introduced myself and 
initiated the propitiatory dance, but right off he said, “ Ah yes, 
you’re the  fellow who wrote a  book.” I  must  confess my 
weakness: this irregular opening does not displease me, although 
it is not very useful to the company I represent; indeed, at this 
point the conversation tends to degenerate, or at least lose itself 
in anomalous considerations, which distract from the purpose of 
the visit and waste professional time.
“It’s really a fine novel,” Bonino continued. “I read it 
during my vacation, and I also got my wife to read it; but not the 
children, because it might frighten them.“ These opinions 
usually irritate me, but when one is in the CS role one must not 
be too discriminating: I thanked him urbanely and tried to bring 
the conversation back on the proper tracks, that is, our varnishes. 
Bonino put up some resistance.
“Just as you see me, I also risked finishing up like you did. 
They had already shut me up in the barrack’s courtyard, on Corso 
Orbassano: but at a certain point I saw him come in, you know 
very well who I mean, and then, while nobody saw me, I 
climbed the wall, threw myself down on the other side, which 
was a good five meters, and took off. Then I went to Val Susa 
with the Badogliani.”*
I had never heard a Badogliano call the Badogliani Badogliani, 
I set up my defenses and, in fact, caught myself taking a deep 
breath, as someone does when preparing for a long immersion.
*The group, after the collapse of Mussolini’s government in September 1943 , that 
supported General Badoglio, who in turn supported the King—TRANS.

It was clear that Bonino’s story would  be far from brief: but I 
remembered how many long stories I myself  had inflicted on 
people, on those who wanted to listen  and those who didn’t. I 
remembered that it  is  written (Deuteronomy  10:19): “Love  ye 
therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt,” 
and I settled back comfortably in my chair.
Bonino was not a good storyteller: he roamed, repeated himself, 
made long digressions, and digressions inside digressions. Besides, 
he  had  the  curious  bad  habit  of omitting  the  subject of  some 
sentences and replacing it with a personal  pronoun, which 
rendered his discourse even more nebulous. As he was speaking, 
I  distractedly examined  the  room  where  he  had received me: 
evidently his office for many years, because it looked neglected 
and untidy like him. The windows were  offensively dirty,  the 
walls  were  grimy  with  soot,  the  gloomy  smell  of stale  tobacco 
stagnated in the air. Rusty nails were driven into the walls: some 
apparently useless, others holding up  yellowed sheets.  One  of 
these, which could be read from  my observation post, began like 
this: “S U B J E C T : Rags. Wit h ever greater frequency. . . . “ Elsewhere 
you  could  see  used  razor  blades, soccer pool slips, medical 
insurance forms, picture postcards.
“. . . so then he told me that I should walk behind him, no in 
fact ahead of him: it was he who was behind me, a pistol pointed 
at me. Then the other guy arrived, his crony, who was waiting 
for him around the corner; and between the two of them they 
took  me to Via Asti, you know  what I mean, where there was 
Aloisio Smit. He would send for me every so often and say talk 
talk because  your pals have already talked and there’s no point 
playing the hero. . . .”
On Bonino’s desk there was a horrible reproduction in a light 
alloy  of the  Leaning Tower of Pisa.  There was  also  an  ashtray 
made from a seashell, full of cigarette butts and cherry pits, and 
an alabaster penholder shaped like Vesuvius. It was a pathetic 
desk, not more than 0.6 square meters at a generous estimate. I 
here is not a seasoned CS who does not know this sad science

of the desk: perhaps not at a conscious level, but in the form of a 
conditioned  reflex, a scanty desk inexorably proclaims a lowly 
occupant; as for that clerk who, within eight or ten days after 
being hired, has not been able to conquer a desk, well, he is a 
lost man: he cannot count on more than a few weeks’ survival, 
like a  hermit crab without a  shell.  On  the  other hand, I  have 
known  people  who  at  the  end  of their  careers  disposed  of a 
surface of  seven or eight square meters with a polyester gloss, 
obviously excessive but a proper expression in code of the extent 
of their power. What objects rest on the desk is not important 
quantitatively: there is the man who expresses  his  authority by 
maintaining on its surface the greatest disorder and the greatest 
accumulation of stationery; there is on the contrary  the man 
who, more subtly, imposes  his rank by a void and  meticulous 
cleanliness: that’s what Mussolini did, so they say, at  Palazzo 
Venezia.
“. . . but all these men were not aware that in my belt I had a 
pistol too. When they began to torture me, I pulled it out, made 
them all stand facing the wall, and I got out. But he . . .”
He  who? I  was  perplexed;  the  story was getting more  and 
more garbled, the clock was running, and though it is true that 
the customer is always right, there’s also a limit to selling one’s 
soul and to fidelity to the company’s orders: beyond this limit 
you make yourself ridiculous.
“. . . as far as I could: a half hour, and I was already in the 
Rivoli section. I was walking along the road, and there what do I 
see landing in the fields nearby but a German plane, a Stork, the 
kind that can land in fifty meters. Two men get out, very polite, 
and ask me please which way to Switzerland. I happen to know 
these places and I answered right off: straight ahead, like that, to 
Milan and then turn left. ‘Danke,’ they answer, and get back in 
the plane; then one of them has a second thought, rummages 
under his seat, gets out, and comes over to me holding some 
thing like a rock in his hand; he hands it to me and says, ‘This is for 
your trouble: take good care of it, it’s uranium.’ You understand, 
it was the end of the war, by now they felt lost

they no longer had the time to make the atomic bomb and they 
didn’t need uranium anymore. They thought only of saving their 
skins and escaping to Switzerland.”
There is also a limit to how much you can control your facial 
muscles: Bonino  must have caught some sign on my face of 
incredulity, because he broke off in a slightly offended tone and 
said, “Don’t you believe me?”
“Of course I believe you,” I responded heroically. “ But was it 
really uranium?”
“Absolutely: anyone could have seen that. It had an incred-
ible weight, and when you touched it, it was hot. Besides, I still 
have it at home: I keep it on the terrace in a little shed, a secret, 
so the kids can’t touch it; every so often I show it to my friends, 
and it’s remained hot, it’s hot even now. “ He hesitated a moment, 
then added, “You know what I’ll do? Tomorrow I’ll send you a 
piece so you’ll be convinced, and maybe, since you’re a  writer, 
along  with  your  stories  one  of these  days  you’ll  also  write  this 
one.”
I thanked  him, dutifully did my number, explained a certain 
new product, took a rather large order, said  goodbye, and 
considered the case closed. But the next day, on my 1.2-square- 
meter  desk,  sat  a  small  package  addressed to  my  attention.  I 
opened it,  not  without  curiosity:  it contained a  small  block of 
metal, about half a cigarette pack in size, actually quite heavy and 
with an exotic look about it. The surface was silvery white, with 
a light yellowish glaze: it did not seem hot, but it was not to be 
confused with any of the metals that a long everyday experience 
also outside chemistry had made familiar to me, such as copper, 
zinc, and aluminum. Perhaps an alloy?  Or perhaps  actually 
uranium? Metallic uranium in our parts has never been seen by 
anyone, and in the treatises it is described as silvery white; and a 
small block like that would not be permanently hot: perhaps only a 
mass as big as a house can remain hot at the  expense  of 
disintegrating energy.
As soon as it was decently possible I popped into the lab, which 
for a CS chemist is an unusual and vaguely improper

thing to do. The lab is a place for the young, and returning there 
you feel young again: with the same longing for  adventure, 
discovery,  and the unexpected that you have at seventeen. Of 
course, you haven’t been seventeen for some  time now, and 
besides, your long career as a para-chemist  has mortified  you, 
rendered you atrophied, handicapped, kept you ignorant as to 
where reagents and equipment are stored, forgetful of everything 
except the fundamental reactions: but precisely for these reasons 
the lab revisited is a source of joy and exerts an intense 
fascination, which is that of  youth, of an indeterminate future 
pregnant with possibilities, that is, of freedom.
But the years of non-use don’t make you forget certain pro-
fessional tics, a certain stereotyped behavior that marks you out 
as a chemist whatever the situation: probing the unknown material 
with your fingernail, a penknife, smelling it, feeling it with your 
lips whether it is “ cold” or “ hot,” testing whether it scratches 
the windowpane  or not, observing it under reflected  light, 
weighing it in the palm of your hand.  It is not so easy to 
estimate the specific weight of a material without a scale, yet after 
all  uranium has a  specific weight  of  19,  much more  than  lead, 
twice as much as copper: the gift given to Bonino by the Nazi 
aeronaut-astronauts could not be uranium. I was beginning  to 
discern,  in  the  little  man’s  paranoic  tale,  the  echo  of a  tenacious 
and recurrent local legend of UFOs in the Val Susa, of  flying 
saucers, carriers of omens like  the comets in  the  Middle  Ages, 
erratic and devoid of results like the spirits of the spiritualists.
But if it wasn’t uranium, what was it? I cut off a slice of the 
metal with the handsaw (it was easy to saw) and offered it to the 
flame of the Bunsen burner: an unusual thing took place: a thread 
of brown smoke rose from the flame, a thread which curled into 
volutes. 
I 
felt, with an instant of voluptuous nostalgia, 
reawaken in me the reflexes of an analyst, withered by long 
inertia: I  found a  capsule of enameled porcelain, filled  it  with 
water, held it over the sooty flame, and saw form on the bottom 
a brown deposit which was an old acquaintance. I touched the

deposit with a drop of silver nitrate solution and the black-blue 
color that developed confirmed  for me that the metal was 
cadmium, the distant son of Cadmus, the sower of dragon’s teeth.
Where Bonino had found the cadmium was not very interest-
ing: probably in the cadmium-plating department of his factory. 
More interesting but undecipherable was the origin of his story: 
profoundly his, his alone, since, as I found out later, he told it 
often and to everyone, but without substantiating  it with the 
support of material, and with details that gradually became more 
colorful and less believable with the passing of the years. It was 
clearly impossible to get to the bottom of it: but I, tangled in the 
CS net of duties toward society, the company, and veri-
similitude, envied in him the boundless freedom of invention of 
one who has broken through the barrier and is now free to build 
for himself the past that suits him best, to stitch around him the 
garments of  a hero and fly like Superman across centuries, 
meridians, and parallels.

S I L V E R
A mimeographed circular is generally tossed into the wastebas-
ket without even being read, but I realized immediately that this 
one did not deserve the common fate: it was an invitation to a 
dinner celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of our graduation 
from college. Its language got me to thinking: the addresser was 
treated to the intimate tu, and the amanuensis paraded a series of 
outdated  student  expressions, as  if those  twenty-live  years had 
not passed. With involuntary comedy, the text concluded by 
saying,“. . . in an atmosphere of renewed comradeship, we will 
celebrate our  silver wedding with  Chemistry by  telling  each 
other  the  chemical  events  of our  everyday  life  What chemical 
events? The precipitation of sterols in our fifty year-old arteries? 
The equilibrium of membrane in our membranes

Who  could  the  author be? I  mentally  passed in  review my 
surviving twenty-five or thirty classmates: I mean to say not only 
those alive but those who have not disappeared behind the 
headland of other professional activities. First of all, cross off all 
the women: all mothers of families, all demobilized, none of them 
any longer in possession of “events” to be narrated. Cross  off 
the  climbers,  the  climbing,  the  proteges,  the  ex-proteges turned 
protectors: these are people who do not like  comparisons. Cross 
off the frustrated, too, who do not like comparisons either: at a 
meeting of this kind a shipwrecked man might even show up, but 
only to solicit sympathy or help; it is unlikely that he would take 
the  initiative to  organize  it. From  the meager list that was left a 
probable name popped up: Cerrato—the honest, clumsy, eager 
Cerrato, to whom life had given so little and who had given so 
little to life. I had met him at intervals and fleetingly after the war, 
and he was an inert man, not shipwrecked: a shipwrecked man is 
he who departs and sinks, who sets himself a goal, does not reach 
it, and suffers  because of it; Cerrato had never set himself 
anything, he had not  exposed himself  to anything, he had 
remained safely shut up in his house, and certainly must have 
clung to the “ golden” years  of his  studies since all  his  other 
years had been years of lead.
Faced by the prospect of that dinner I had a two-sided reaction: 
it was not a neutral event, it attracted and repelled me  at the 
same time, like a magnet brought close to a compass. I wanted to 
go and I didn’t want to: but the motivations for both decisions, 
closely examined, were not very noble. I wanted to go because it 
flattered me to compare myself to and feel myself more available 
than  the  others, less  tied  to  money  and  the  common  idols, less 
duped, less worn out. I did not want to go because I did not want 
to be the same age as the others, that is, my age: I didn’t want 
to see wrinkles, white hair, didn’t want to count how many we 
were, nor count the absent, nor go in for calculations.
And yet Cerrato aroused my curiosity. At times we had studied 
together: he was serious and had no indulgence for

himself, he studied without inspiration and without joy (he did 
not seem to know joy), successively boring through the chapters 
of the texts like a miner in a tunnel. He had not been compro-
mised by Fascism, and he had reacted well to the reagent of the 
racial laws. He had been an opaque but reliable boy in whom one 
could  trust: and experience teaches us that just this, trust- 
worthiness, is the most constant virtue, which is not acquired or 
lost with the years. One is born worthy of trust, with an open 
face and steady  eyes, and remains such for life. He who is born 
contorted and lax remains that way: he who lies to you at six, 
lies to you at sixteen and sixty. The phenomenon is striking and 
explains how certain friendships and marriages survive for several 
decades, despite habit, boredom, and the wearing out of subjects 
of discussion: I was interested in verifying this through Cerrato. 
I paid my contribution  and wrote to the anonymous  committee 
that I would be at the dinner.
His  appearance  hadn’t changed very much:  he  was  tall,  bony, 
with an olive complexion;  his hair was still thick, his face well 
shaven, his forehead, nose, and chin heavy, as if roughly molded. 
Now as then he moved awkwardly, with those abrupt and at the 
same time uncertain gestures which in the lab had made him the 
proverbial smasher of glassware.
As is the custom we dedicated the first minutes of our con-
versation to a reciprocal bringing up to date. I learned that he 
was  married  without  children, and  simultaneously understood 
that this was not an agreeable subject. I learned that he had always 
worked  in  photographic  chemistry:  ten  years  in  Italy,  four  in 
Germany, then  again  in  Italy. He had,  yes, been the  promoter of 
the dinner and the author of the letter of invitation. He was not 
ashamed to admit it; if I would allow him a professional 
metaphor, his years of study were his Technicolor, the remainder 
was  black  and  white.  As  to  the  “events” (I  kept  myself from 
pointing out to him the clumsiness of this expression),  they 
really interested him. His career had been rich in events, even if 
for the most part they had indeed only been in

black and white: Was that true of mine too? Of course, I agreed: 
whether chemical or not, though in recent  years the chemical 
events had prevailed, in frequency and intensity. They give you a 
sense of Nicht dazu gewachsen, of impotence, inadequacy, isn’t that 
so? They give you the impression of fighting an interminable war 
against an obtuse and slow-moving enemy, who, however,  is 
fearful in terms of number and bulk; of losing all the battles, one 
after the other, year after  year; and to salve your  bruised pride 
you must be satisfied with the few occasions when  you catch 
sight of a break in the enemy front and you pounce on  it  and 
administer a quick single blow.
Cerrato also knew this never-ending  battle: he too had 
experienced the inadequacy of our preparation, and the need to 
make up for it with luck, intuition, stratagems, and a river of 
patience. I told him that I was in search of events, mine and those 
of others, which I wanted to put on display in a book, to see if I 
could convey to the layman the strong and bitter flavor of our 
trade, which is only a particular instance, a more strenuous version 
of the business of living. I told him that it did not seem fair to me 
that the world should know everything about  how the doctor, 
prostitute, sailor, assassin,  countess, ancient  Roman, conspirator, 
and  Polynesian  lives  and  nothing  about  how  we  transformers  of 
matter live: but that in this book I would deliberately neglect the 
grand chemistry, the triumphant chemistry of colossal plants and 
dizzying output, because this is  collective work and therefore 
anonymous. I was more interested in the stories of the solitary 
chemistry, unarmed and on foot, at the measure of man, which 
with few exceptions has been mine:  but it has also been the 
chemistry of the founders, who did not work in teams but alone, 
surrounded by the indifference of their  time,  generally  without 
profit, and who confronted matter without aids, with their brains 
and hands, reason and imagination.
I asked him if he would like to contribute to this book. If 
he would, he should tell me a story and, if he would allow me to 
make a suggestion, it should be our kind of story, in which you

thrash about in the dark for a week or a month, it seems that it 
will be dark forever, and  you feel like throwing it all up and 
changing your trade; then in the dark you espy a glimmer, proceed 
groping  in  that  direction, and  the  light  grows, and  finally  order 
follows chaos. Cerrato said seriously that indeed  sometimes 
things went like that, and that he would try to come up with 
something; but in general it was really dark all the time.  You 
couldn’t  see  the  glimmer,  you  beat  your  head  again and  again 
against an ever lower ceiling, and ended by coming out of the 
cave on your hands and knees and backward, a little older than 
when you went in. While he was interrogating his memory, his 
gaze fixed on the restaurant’s presumptuously frescoed ceiling, 
I  took a quick glance at him and saw that he had aged  well, 
without deformations, on the contrary growing and maturing: he 
had 
remained heavy, 
as  in 
the 
past, 
incapable 
of the 
refreshment of  malice and laughter, but this was no longer 
offensive, and more acceptable in a fifty-year-old than in a youth 
of twenty. He told me a story of silver.
“I’ll tell you the essentials: the trimmings you can put in yourself
—for example, how an Italian lives in Germany; after all, you’ve 
been  there yourself. I  was  in  charge of the  department where 
they manufactured the papers for X-rays. Do you know anything 
about  that  stuff?  Never  mind:  it’s  not  very  sensitive  material, 
which  doesn’t  give  you  trouble  (sensitivity  and trouble are 
proportional): so the department was also rather  tranquil.  But 
you  must  remember  that  if a film  for  amateurs  functions badly, 
nine times out of ten the consumer thinks it’s his fault; or else, 
at  the most, he  sends you a  few insults  that don’t  reach  you 
because  of insufficient address.  On  the  other  hand,  if an  X-ray 
goes  bad, after all  that  barium  pap or the  retrograde urography; 
and  then a  second goes  bad,  and the  whole  package  of sheets; 
well, then that’s not the end of it: trouble makes its own ascent, it 
grows  as  it  climbs, and  then  drops on you like an affliction. All 
things which my predecessor  had explained to me, with the 
typical didactic talent of the Germans, in order to justify in my 
eyes the fantastic ritual of cleanliness which must be observed in 
the department, from  beginning to end of the work process. I 
don’t know if you’re interested; just think t h a t . . . “

I interrupted him: minute precautions, maniacal cleanliness, purity 
with eight  zeroes, are things which  make me suffer. I  know very well 
that in some cases it is a matter of  necessary  measures, but I also 
know that, more often mania  prevails over  common sense, and 
alongside five sensible precepts or prohibitions  lurk  ten  senseless, 
useless ones, which nobody dares rescind only out of mental laziness, 
superstition, or morbid fear of complications: even when it does not 
go so far as in military service, in which regulations serve to smuggle 
in a repressive discipline. Cerrato poured a drink for me: his big hand 
moved  hesitantly to the neck of the bottle, as if the bottle was 
fluttering about the table to escape him; then he tilted it over my glass, 
banging against  it  several times. He  agreed that  things  were often  like 
that:  for example,  the  women  in  the  department of  which he was 
telling me were forbidden to use face powder, but one time a compact 
had fallen out of a girl’s pocket and opened, and quite a bit of powder 
had been wafted into the air; that day’s production had been inspected 
with particular care, but it was perfect. Well, the prohibition against 
face powder still remained.
“. . . but  I  have to  tell  you  one  detail,  otherwise you  won’t 
understand the story. There is the religion of the hair (this is justified, I 
can assure you): the department is always slightly pressurized, and the 
air that is pumped in is carefully filtered. Over your clothes you wear 
a special overall and a cap over your hair: overalls and caps must be 
washed every day to remove lint or accidentally picked up hair. Shoes 
and stockings must be taken off at the entrance and are replaced by 
dustproof slippers. “So there, that’s the setting. I should add that for 
five or six  years there had been no major accidents: an isolated 
complaint  here and there from a few hospitals about altered 
sensitivity, but it was almost always a matter of products already past 
the

expiration date. Troubles, I don’t have to tell you, don’t come at 
a  gallop, like the Huns, but arrive quietly, stealthily, like epi-
demics. It began with a special-delivery letter from a diagnostic 
center in Vienna; it was couched in very civil terms. I would call 
it more a warning than a complaint, and attached as proof was 
an X ray: regular as regards grain and contrast  but dotted with 
white, oblong spots the size of beans. We replied with a contrite 
letter in which we begged their pardon for  the unintentional, 
etcetera, but after the first Landsknecht* had died of the plague it 
is best not to entertain illusions: the plague is the plague, there’s 
no point in playing the ostrich. The next week there were another 
two letters: one from Liège hinting at damages to be reimbursed, 
the other from the Soviet Union; I no longer remember (perhaps I 
have  blocked  it  out)  the  complicated  initials of the commercial 
agency that had sent it. When it was translated, everyone’s hair 
stood on  end.  The  fault,  of course,  was always the same, those 
dots shaped  like beans, and the letter  was very, very heavy: it 
spoke of three operations which had had to be postponed, of shifts 
lost, of tons of disputed sensitive paper, of an expert examination 
and  an  international  controversy at the court of God knows 
where; and it enjoined us to send a Spezialist immediately.
“In  such cases  you  try  at least to  lock the stable  door after 
some of the cattle have escaped, but you don’t always succeed. 
It  being  established  that  all  the  paper  had  passed  the  exit 
inspection, we therefore were dealing with a delayed defect that 
showed up while in the warehouse, ours or the customer’s, or 
during transportation. The director called me in, discussed the 
case with me, very courteously, for two hours, but to me it seemed 
that  he  skinned me  alive,  slowly, methodically, and  enjoyed 
doing it.
“We accepted the results of the laboratory inspection, and 
checked all the paper in stock batch by batch. The paper less
*Reference to the German soldiers who die of the plague in Manzoni’s historical novel 
The Betrothed—TRANS.

than two months old was all right. In the rest the defect was found, 
though not in all: there were hundreds of batches, and about one-
sixth showed the bean problem. My assistant, who was a young 
chemist  and  not  very  sharp,  made  a  curious  observation:  the 
defective batches followed each other with a certain regularity, five 
good and one bad. It seemed to me a clue, and I tried to get to the 
bottom of it; that’s how it was, exactly: almost all the spoiled paper 
was produced on Wednesday. “I don’t have to tell you that delayed 
troubles are by far the most pernicious. While you’re searching for 
the causes, you still have to continue producing: but how can you be 
sure that the cause or causes are not still at work and the material 
you’re producing is not the carrier of further disasters. Obviously you 
can keep it in quarantine for two months and inspect it again: But 
what are you going to tell the warehouses the world over that are not 
receiving the goods? And what about passive interests? And the 
name, the Good Name, the Unbestrittener Ruj , the unblemished 
reputation? And there’s another complication: any change you might 
make in composition or technology must wait for two months before 
you know whether it helps or doesn’t, whether it gets rid of the defect 
or accentuates it.
I  felt innocent, naturally: I had observed all the rules, I had 
not been lax in any way. Above me and below me, all the others 
felt just as innocent: those who had passed the raw materials as 
good, who had prepared and tested the emulsion of silver bromide, 
those  who  had  wrapped,  packed,  and  stored  the  packages of 
paper. I felt innocent, but I wasn’t: I was guilty by definition, 
because  the  head  of a  department 
must  answer 
for  his 
department, and because where there’s damage there’s sin, and 
where there’s sin there’s a sinner. It’s something exactly like 
original sin: you haven’t done anything, but you’re guilty and you 
must pay. Not with money, but worse: you lose sleep, lose your 
appetite,  get  an  ulcer  or  shingles,  and  take a  huge  step  toward 
terminal managerial neurosis.
“While complaining letters and telephone calls kept coming 
in, I persisted in trying to puzzle out that business of the

Wednesdays: it must surely have some significance. On Tuesday 
night a guard I didn’t like had his shift—he had a scar on his 
chin and the face of a Nazi. I did not know whether or not to 
mention it to the director: to try to unload the blame on others 
is always bad policy. Then I had them bring me the payroll and 
saw that the Nazi had been with us only three months, while the 
bean trouble had begun to manifest itself on the paper produced 
ten months before. What new thing had occurred  ten months 
before?
“About  ten  months  before  there  had  been  accepted,  after 
rigorous checks, a new supplier of the black paper which is used 
to protect the sensitive papers from light: but the defective material 
was  proved  to  have  been  packed  promiscuously  in  black paper 
coming from both suppliers. Also ten months before (nine, to be 
exact) a group of Turkish women workers had been  hired; I 
interviewed them one by one, to their great amazement: I wanted 
to establish whether on Wednesday or Tuesday evening they did 
something different from usual. Did they wash, or did they not 
wash? Did they use some special cosmetic? Did they go dancing, 
and as a result sweat more than usual? I did not dare ask whether 
on Tuesday night they made love; in any event,  I  didn’t get 
anywhere either directly or through the interpreter.
“Obviously, in the meanwhile the affair had become known 
throughout the factory, and people were looking at me in strange 
ways; also because I  was the only Italian  department  head, and I 
could 
very 
well  imagine  the 
comments 
they  must  have 
exchanged behind my back. The decisive help came to me from 
one of the guards, who spoke a little Italian because he had 
fought in Italy: in fact he had been taken prisoner by the partisans 
around  Biella  and  then  exchanged  for  someone.  He  held no 
grudge, was loquacious, and spoke at random about a little of 
everything without ever coming to a conclusion: well, it  was 
precisely his silly gabble that acted as Ariadne’s thread. One day 
he told me that he was a fisherman, but that for almost a year 
now he no longer caught any fish in the small river nearby: ever 
since they had opened a tannery five or six kilometers

upstream. He then told me that on certain days the water actually 
turned brown. There and then I didn’t pay attention to  his 
remarks, but I thought about them a few days later when from the 
window of my room in the guest house I saw the small  truck 
bringing back the overalls from the laundry. I asked about it: the 
tannery  had  begun  operating  ten months  before,  and  in  fact the 
laundry washed the overalls in the water of the stream where the 
fisherman could no longer catch fish. However, they filtered it and 
made it  pass  through an  ion  exchange  purifier.  The overalls  were 
washed  during the day, they  were  dried  at  night in a dryer, and 
sent back early in the morning before the plant opened.
“I went  to the tannery: I wanted to know when, where, how 
often, and on  what days they emptied their vats. They sent me 
packing, but I returned two days later with the doctor  from the 
Sanitation Office. Well, the largest of the tanning vats was emptied 
every week,  on  the night  between  Monday  and Tuesday.  They 
refused to tell me what it contained, but you know very well, organic 
tans are polyphenols and there is no ion exchange resin that can trap 
them, and what a polyphenol  can  do  to silver  bromide even  you 
who are not in the field can imagine. I got a sample of the tanning 
solution, went to the  experimental lab, and atomized a 1:10,000 
solution in the dark- room in which was exposed a specimen of 
X-ray paper. The effect could be seen a few days later: the paper’s 
sensitivity had  disappeared,  literally.  The head  of the  lab  did  not 
believe his eyes. He told me that he had never seen so powerful an 
inhibitor. We tested it  with increasingly diluted solutions, as 
homeopathic  doctors  do:  with  solutions  of about  one  part  to a 
million; we obtained bean-shaped spots, which, however, appeared 
only  after  two  months  of  rest.  The  bean  effect —  Bohneffekt—had 
been reproduced in full: when all was said and done, it became 
obvious that a few thousand molecules of polyphenol absorbed by 
the  fibers  of  the  overalls  during  the  wash and carried by an 
invisible piece of lint from the overall to the paper were enough to 
produce the spots.”

The  other  dinner guests  around us  were  talking  noisily about 
children, vacations, salaries. We ended up by going off to the bar, 
where gradually we became sentimental and promised each 
other to renew a friendship  that actually had never existed 
between us. We would keep in contact, and each of us would 
gather  for the other more stories like this one, in which stolid 
matter manifests a cunning intent upon evil and obstruction, as 
if it revolted against the order dear to man: like those reckless 
outcasts, thirsting more for the ruination of others than for their 
own triumph, who in novels arrive from the ends of the earth to 
thwart the exploits of positive heroes.

V A N A D I U M
Varnish is an unstable substance by definition: in fact, at a certain 
point in its career it must turn from a liquid into a solid. But this 
must occur at the right time and place. If it doesn’t, the effects 
can be unpleasant or dramatic: it can happen that a varnish hardens 
(we 
say brutally 
“ monkeys”) during its 
sojourn  in  the 
warehouse, and in that case the merchandise must be thrown out; 
or that the base resin hardens during the synthesis, in a ten- or 
twenty-ton reactor, which amounts to a tragedy; or  even that 
the varnish does not harden at all, even after application, and 
then one becomes a laughingstock, since varnish that doesn’t dry 
is like a gun that doesn’t shoot or a bull that can’t impregnate.
In many cases the oxygen in the air plays a part in the

hardening process. Among the various exploits, vital or destruc-
tive,  which oxygen  can  perform, we  varnish makers are  inter-
ested above all in its capacity to react with certain small molecules 
such as those of certain oils, and of creating links between them, 
transforming them into a compact and therefore solid network. 
That is how, for example, linseed oil dries in the open air.
We had imported a shipment of resin for varnishes, indeed one 
of those resins which harden at an ordinary temperature by 
simple exposure to the atmosphere, and we were worried. Tested 
by itself, the resin dried as expected, but after having been ground 
up with a certain (irreplaceable) kind of lampblack, its ability to 
dry fell off to the point of disappearing: we had already set aside 
several tons of black paint which, despite all attempts to correct 
it, after application remained  indefinitely  sticky,  like  lugubrious 
flypaper.
In cases like these, before formulating accusations, one must 
proceed cautiously. The supplier was W., a large and respect- 
able German company, one of the large segments into which, after 
the war,  the Allies had dismembered the omnipotent IG- 
Farben: people like this, before admitting their guilt, throw on 
the scales all the weight of their prestige and all their ability at 
wearing you down. But there was no way to avoid  the contro-
versy: other shipments of resin behaved well with that same batch 
of lampblack, the resin was a special type that only W. produced, 
and we were bound by contract  and absolutely had to  continue 
supplying that black paint, without missing any due dates.
I wrote a well-mannered  letter of protest, setting forth the 
terms of the problem, and a few days later the answer came: it 
was long and pedantic, advised  obvious expedients and proce-
dures which we had already adopted  without result, and con-
tained a superfluous and deliberately confused description of the 
mechanism  of the resin’s oxidation: it ignored our need for 
immediate action, and on the essential point simply stated that 
the relevant tests were under way. There was nothing left for us

to do but immediately order another shipment, urging W. to check 
with particular care the resin’s behavior with that kind of 
lampblack.
Together  with  the  confirmation of this  last  order a  second 
letter arrived, nearly as long as the first, and signed by the same 
Doktor L.  Müller. It  was a  trifle  more  to  the  point  than  the  first, 
recognized (with many qualifications and reservations) the 
justness of  our grievance, and contained a piece of  advice less 
obvious than the previous: “ganz unerwarteterweise,”  that is, in a 
completely unexpected fashion, the gnomes of  their lab had 
discovered that the protested shipment was cured by the addi- 
tion of 0.1 percent of vanadium naphthenate—an additive that 
until then had never been heard of in the world of varnishes. The 
unknown Dr. Müller urged us to check immediately on the truth 
of their statement; if the effect was confirmed, their observation 
could avoid for both parties the annoyances and hazards of an 
international dispute.
Müller. There was a Müller in my previous  incarnation, but 
Müller is a very common name in Germany, like Molinari in Italy 
or  Miller  in  English,  of which  it  is  an  exact  equivalent.  Why 
continue to think about it? And yet, rereading the two letters with 
their heavy, lumbering phrasing  encumbered with  technical 
jargon, I could not quiet a doubt, the kind that refuses  to be 
pushed aside and rasps slightly within you,  like termites.  Oh, 
come now,  there  must be  two  hundred thousand Müllers  in 
Germany, forget it and think about the varnish that has to be 
corrected.
. . . and then, all of a sudden, there rose before my eyes a detail 
of the  last  letter  which  had  escaped me:  it  was  not  a  typing 
mistake,  it was repeated  twice; it said “naptenate,” not 
“naphthenate” as it should be. Now I conserve  pathologically 
precise memories of my encounters in that by now remote world: 
well, that other Müller too, in an unforgotten lab full of freezing 
cold, hope, and fear, used  to  say “beta-Naptylamin” instead  of 
“ beta-Naphthylamin.”

The Russians were knocking at the door, two or three times a 
day Allied planes came to shake apart the Buna plant: there was 
no water, steam, or electricity; not a single pane of glass was intact; 
but the order was to begin producing Buna rubber, and Germans 
do not discuss orders.
I was in a laboratory with two other skilled prisoners, similar 
to those educated  slaves that the rich Romans imported  from 
Greece. To work was as impossible as it was futile: our time was 
almost entirely spent dismantling the apparatus at every air-raid 
alarm and putting them together again at the all-clear. But as I 
said, orders are not discussed, and every so often some inspector 
burrowed through the rubble and snow all the way to us to make 
sure that the lab’s work proceeded  according to instructions. 
Sometimes an SS with a stone face would come, at other times 
a little old soldier from the local militia who was timid as a mouse, 
and at other times still a civilian. The civilian who appeared most 
often was called Dr. Müller.
He must have been a person of  some authority because 
everybody saluted him first. He was a tall, corpulent man of about 
forty, more  coarse  than  refined  in  appearance. He  had  spoken  to 
me  only  three  times,  and  all  three  times  with a  timidity rare in 
that place, as if he were ashamed of something. The first time 
only about the work (the dosage of the “ Naptylamin, “ in fact); 
the second time he had asked me why I had so long a beard, to 
which I had replied that none of us had a razor, in fact not even 
a handkerchief, and that our beards were shaved officially every 
Monday; the third time he had given me a note, written neatly 
on a typewriter, which authorized me to shave also on Thursday 
and to be issued by the Effektenmagazin a pair of leather shoes and 
had asked me, addressing me formally, “ Why  do  you  look  so 
perturbed?” I, who at that time thought in German, had said to 
myself, “Der Mann hat keine Ahnung” (This fellow hasn’t got an 
inkling).
Duty first. I hastened to track down among our usual suppliers a 
sample of vanadium naphthenate, and found out that it wasn’t

easy: the product was not in regular production, was prepared 
only in small quantities and only on order; I put through an order.
The return of that “ pt “ had thrown me into a state of violent 
agitation. To find myself, man to man, having a reckoning with 
one of the “others” had been my keenest and most constant desire 
since I had left the concentration camp. It had been met only in 
part by letters from my German readers: they did not satisfy me, 
those 
honest, 
generalized 
declarations 
of repentance  and 
solidarity on the part of people I had never seen, whose other face 
I did not know, and who probably were not implicated except 
emotionally.  The  encounter I  looked  forward  to  with so much 
intensity as to dream of it (in German) at night,  was  an 
encounter with one of them down there, who had disposed of 
us, who had not looked into our eyes, as though we didn’t have 
eyes. Not to take my revenge: I am not the Count of 
Montecristo. Only to reestablish the right proportions, and to say, 
“Well?” If  this  Müller  was  my  Müller,  he  was  not  the  perfect 
antagonist, because in some way, perhaps only for a moment, he 
had felt pity, or just only a rudiment of professional  solidarity. 
Perhaps even less: perhaps he had only resented the fact that the 
strange  hybrid  of colleague and  instrument  that  after  all  was a 
chemist frequented a laboratory without the Anstand, the decorum, 
that the laboratory demands; but the others around him had not 
even felt this. He was not the perfect antagonist: but, as is known, 
perfection belongs to narrated events, not to those we live.
I got in touch with W.’s representatives, whom I knew quite 
well, and asked him to look with discretion into Dr. Müller: How 
old was he? What did he look like? Where had he been during 
the war? The answer was not long in coming: his age and 
appearance coincided, the man had worked first at Schkopau to 
get  experience in  rubber  technology,  then  at  the  Buna factory 
near Auschwitz. I obtained his address  and sent him, from one 
private person to another, a copy of the German edition of If This 
Is a Man, with an accompanying letter in which I asked him

if he was really the Müller of Auschwitz, and if he remembered 
“the three men of the laboratory”; well, I hoped he would pardon 
this crude intrusion and return from the void but I was one of 
the three, besides being the customer worried about the resin 
that did not dry.
I began to wait for the reply, while on the company level there 
continued, like  the oscillation of an enormous, very slow 
pendulum, the exchange of chemico-bureaucratic  letters con-
cerning the Italian vanadium  that did not work as well as the 
German. Would you please in the meantime be so kind as to send 
us urgently the specifications of the product and ship to us by air 
freight 5 0  kilograms, whose cost you will deduct, etc.? On the 
technical level the matter seemed set on the right course, but the 
fate of the defective shipment was not clear: to hold on to it at 
a discount, or return it at W.’s expense, or ask for arbitration. 
Meanwhile, as is the custom, we threatened each other with legal 
action, “gerichtlich vorzugehen.”
The “ private” reply still kept me waiting, which was 
almost  as  irritating and  nerve-racking as  the  company dispute. 
What did I know about my man? Nothing—in all probability he 
had blotted everything out, deliberately or not; for him my letter 
and my book were an ill-mannered  and irksome intrusion, a 
clumsy invitation to stir up a by now well settled sediment, an 
assault on Anstand. He would never reply. A pity: he was not a 
perfect German, but do perfect Germans exist? Or perfect Jews? 
They are an abstraction: the transition  from the  general to the 
particular always has stimulating  surprises in store, when the 
interlocutor without contours, ghostly, takes shape before you, 
gradually or at a single blow, and becomes the Mitmensch, the co-
man, with all his depth, his tics, anomalies, and incoherences. By 
now almost  two months had passed: the reply would  no longer 
arrive. Too bad.
It  arrived  dated  March  2,  1967,  on  elegant  paper  headed  with 
vaguely Gothic characters. It was a preliminary letter, brief and 
reserved. Yes, the Müller of Buna was indeed he. He had read my 
book, recognized with emotion persons and places; he

was happy to know that I had survived; he asked for information 
about the other two “men of the laboratory,” and up to this point 
there was nothing strange, since they were named  in the  book: 
but  he  also  asked  about  Goldbaum,  whom I  had  not  named. He 
added that he had reread, for the occasion, his notes  on  that 
period:  he  would  gladly  discuss  them  with  me  in  a  hoped-for 
personal meeting, “ useful both to myself and to you,  and 
necessary for the purpose of overcoming that terrible past” (“im 
Sinne der ftewaltigung der so jurchtbaren Vergangenheit”). He declared 
at the end that, among all the prisoners he had met at 
Auschwitz, I was the one who had made the strongest and most 
lasting impression, but this could well be flattery: from the tone 
of the letter, and especially from that sentence about “ overcom-
ing, “ it seemed that the man expected something from me.
Now it was up to me to reply, and I felt embarrassed. You 
see, the undertaking had succeeded, the adversary was snared; 
he  was there  before me,  almost a  colleague varnish maker,  he 
wrote  like me on paper  with a letterhead, and he even remem-
bered Goldbaum. He was still quite blurred, but it was obvious 
that he wanted from me something like an absolution, because 
he had a past to overcome and I didn’t: I wanted from him only 
a discount on the bill for the defective resin. The situation was 
interesting but atypical: it coincided only in part with that of the 
reprobate hauled before a judge.
First of all: In what language should I reply? Certainly not in 
German; I would have made ridiculous mistakes, which my role 
did not permit. Bette r always to fight on your terrain: I wrote to 
him in Italian. The two men of the laboratory were dead, I did 
not know where or how; the same for Goldbaum, who died of 
cold and hunger during the evacuation march. As for me, he knew 
the 
essentials
 from 
my 
book, 
and 
from 
my 
business 
correspondence about the vanadium.
I had many questions to ask him: too many, and too heavy for 
him  and  for  me.  Why  Auschwitz?  Why  Pannwitz?  Why  the 
children in the gas chambers? But I felt that it was not yet the 
moment to go beyond certain limits, and I asked him only

whether he accepted the judgments, implicit and explicit, of my 
book. Whether he felt that IG-Farben had spontaneously taken 
on the slave labor  force. Whether he knew then about 
Auschwitz’s “installations,” which devoured ten thousand lives a 
day only seven kilometers away from the Buna rubber plant. And 
finally, since he had talked about his “ notations of that 
period,” would he send me a copy?
About the “hoped-for meeting” I said nothing, because I was 
afraid of it. No point in having recourse to euphemisms, to talk 
about shyness, disgust, reticence. Fear was the word: just as I 
didn’t feel myself to be a Montecristo, so I didn’t feel myself to 
be Horatius-Curiatius. I did not feel capable of representing the 
dead of Auschwitz, nor did it seem to me sensible to see in Müller 
the representative of the  butchers.  I  know myself:  I  do  not 
possess any polemical skill, my opponent distracts me, he interests 
me more as a man than as an opponent, I take pains to  listen 
and  run  the  risk  of believing  him;  indignation  and  the  correct 
judgment  return  later,  on  the  way  downstairs,  when  they  are  no 
longer of any use. It was best for me to stick to writing.
Müller wrote to me on the company level that the fifty kilos 
had been shipped, and that W. was sure of a friendly settlement, 
etcetera. Almost simultaneously  there arrived at my house the 
letter I expected; but it was not what I expected. It was not a 
model letter, paradigmatic: at this point, if  this story were 
invented, I would have been able to introduce only two kinds of 
letters: a humble, warm, Christian letter, from  a redeemed 
German; a  ribald,  proud, glacial letter from an  obdurate  Nazi. 
Now this story is not invented, and reality is always more complex 
than invention: less kempt, cruder, less rounded out. It  rarely 
lies on one level.
The letter was eight pages long and contained a photograph 
that shook me. The face was that face: grown old and at the same 
time ennobled by a skillful photographer; I could hear him again 
high above me pronounce those words of  distracted and 
momentary compassion: “ Why do you look so perturbed?”

It was visibly the work of an inept writer: rhetorical, sincere 
only by half, full of  digressions and farfetched praise, moving, 
pedantic, and clumsy: it defied any summary,  all-encompassing 
judgment.
He attributed the events at Auschwitz  to Man, without 
differentiation; he deplored them and found consolation in the 
thought of the other men spoken of in my book, Alberto, Lorenzo, 
“ against whom the weapons of the night are blunted”:  the 
phrase was mine, but repeated by him it struck me as hypocritical 
and  jarring.  He  told  his  story:  “dragged  initially  along  by  the 
general  enthusiasm 
for  Hitler’s  regime,” he  had  joined a 
nationalistic student  league, which soon after was by  mandate 
incorporated  in the SA; he had managed to be discharged and 
observed  that “this  too  was  therefore  possible.” When  the  war 
came he had been mobilized in the antiaircraft corps, and only 
then, confronted by the ruins of the city, had he  experienced 
“ shame and indignation” about the war. In May of 1944 he had 
been able (like me!) to have his status as a chemist recognized, 
and he had been assigned to the Schkopau factory of IG-Farben, 
of which  the  plant  at  Auschwitz  was  an  enlarged  copy: at 
Schkopau he had trained a group of Ukrainian girls for work in 
the lab, girls whom in fact I had met again in Auschwitz  and 
whose strange familiarity with Dr. Müller I could not then explain. 
He had been transferred to Auschwitz together with the girls only 
in November 1944: at that time the name of  Auschwitz  did not 
have any significance, either for him or his acquaintances; on his 
arrival, he had had a brief  introductory  meeting  with  the 
technical director (presumably Engineer Faust), who warned him 
that “the  Jews  in  Buna  must  be  assigned  only the most menial 
tasks, and compassion was not tolerated.”
He had been assigned to work directly under Dr. Pannwitz, 
the  man  who  had  put  me  through a  peculiar “ state  exam” to 
ascertain my professional abilities. Müller made it clear that he 
had a very low opinion of his superior, and informed me that the 
man had died of a brain tumor in 1946. It was he, Müller,

who had been in charge of the organization of the Buna lab; he 
stated  that he had known nothing  about that exam, and that he 
himself had chosen us three specialists, and me in particular; 
according to this information, improbable but not impossible, I 
was therefore in debt to him for my survival. He affirmed that 
he had had a relationship with me almost of friendship between 
equals; that he had conversed with me about scientific problems 
and had meditated, on this occasion, on what “ precious human 
values are destroyed by other men out of pure brutality.” Not 
only did I not remember any such conversations (and my mem-
ory of that period, as I have said, is excellent), but against the 
background of  disintegration, mutual distrust, and mortal 
weariness, the mere supposition of them was totally outside real-
ity, and could  only be explained  by a very naive ex post facto 
wishful thinking; perhaps it was an incident he told a lot of people 
and did not realize I was the one person in the world who could 
not  believe  it.  Perhaps  in  good  faith  he  had  constructed a 
convenient past for himself. He did not remember the two details 
about the shaving and the shoes, but he remembered  others, 
similar and, in my opinion, quite plausible. He had heard about 
my scarlet fever  and had worried about my survival,  especially 
when he learned that the prisoners were being evacuated on 
foot. On January 26, 1945, he had been assigned by the SS to the 
Volkssturm,  the  tatterdemalion  army  of rejects,  old  men,  and 
children who were supposed to block the Soviet advance. Luckily, 
he had been saved by the aforementioned technical director, who 
had authorized him to run off to a rear area.
To my question about IG-Farben he answered curtly that, yes, it 
had employed prisoners, but only to protect them: actually, he put 
forward  the  (insane!)  opinion  that  the  entire  Buna-Monowitz 
plant,  eight  square  kilometers  of giant  buildings, had been 
constructed with the intention of “protecting the  Jews and 
contributing to their survival,” and that the order not  to have 
compassion for them was “eine Tarnung” (“camouflage”). Nihil de 
principe, no accusation against IG-Farben: my man was

still an employee of W. , which was its heir, and you do not spit 
into your  own  dish.  During  his  brief sojourn at  Auschwitz he 
“had never gained knowledge of any proviso that seemed aimed 
at  the  killing  of Jews.“ Paradoxical,  offensive,  but  not  to  be 
excluded: at that time, among the German silent  majority, the 
common  technique was to try to know as little as possible,  and 
therefore not to ask  questions. He too, obviously, had not 
demanded  explanations from anyone, not even from himself, 
although on clear days the flames of the crematorium were visible 
from the Buna factory.
A little before the final collapse he had been captured by the 
Americans and locked up for a few days in a camp for prisoners 
of war that he, with unwitting irony, described as being “ primi-
tively equipped”; just as at the time of our meeting in the lab, so 
now  as he wrote, Müller apparently continued not to have an 
inkling—“keine Ahnung.” He had returned to his family at the end 
of June  1945. And this, substantially, was the content of his 
notations, which I had asked to see.
He perceived in my book an overcoming of Judaism, a fulfill-
ment of  the Christian precept to love one’s enemies, and a 
testimony of faith in Man, and he concluded by insisting on the 
necessity of a meeting, in Germany or Italy, where he was ready 
to join me when and where I wished: preferably on the Riviera. 
Two days later, through company channels, a letter arrived from 
W. which, surely not by chance, bore the same date as the long 
private  letter, and also the same signature; it was a conciliatory 
letter, they recognized  that the fault was theirs, and declared 
themselves open to any proposal. They implied that all is well 
that ends well; the incident had brought to light the virtues of 
vanadium  naphthenate, which from now on would be incor-
porated directly into the resin for all customers.
What to do? The Müller character was “entpuppt,” he had come 
out  of his  chrysalis,  he  was  sharply  defined,  in  perfect  focus. 
Neither infamous nor a hero: after filtering off the rhetoric and the 
lies  in  good  or bad  faith  there  remained a  typically gray human 
specimen, one of the not so few one-eyed

men in the kingdom of the blind. He did me an undeserved honor 
in attributing to me the virtue of loving my enemies: no, despite 
the distant privileges he had reserved for me, and although he had 
not been an enemy in the strict sense of the word, I did not feel 
like loving him. I did not love him, and I didn’t want to see him, 
and yet I felt a certain measure of respect for him: it is not easy 
to be one-eyed. He was not cowardly, or deaf, or a cynic, he 
had not conformed, he was trying to settle his accounts with the 
past and they didn’t tally: he tried to make them tally, perhaps 
by cheating a little bit. Could one ask much more from an ex-
SA? The 
comparison, which 
so 
many 
times 
I  had  the 
opportunity to  make,  with other honest Germans met  on the 
beach or in the factory, was all in his favor: his condemnation of 
Nazism was timid and evasive, but he 
had not sought 
justifications. He sought a colloquy: he had a conscience, and he 
struggled to soothe it. In his first letter he had spoken  of 
“overcoming the past,” “ Bewaltigung der Vergangenheit”: I later 
found out that this is a stereotyped phrase, a euphemism in today’s 
Germany, where it is universally understood as “redemption from 
Nazism”;  but the root wait that it contains also  appears  in  the 
words that express “domination,” “violence,” and “rape,” and I 
believe  that  translating  the  expression with “distortion of the 
past” or “violence done to the past” would not stray very far from 
its
 profound
 meaning.
 And
 yet
 this
 taking 
shelter 
in 
commonplaces was better than the florid obtuseness of the other 
Germans: his efforts to overcome were clumsy, a bit ridiculous, 
irritating and sad, and yet decorous. And didn’t he get me a pair of 
shoes?
On  my first free Sunday I  set about, full  of perplexity,  pre-
paring a  reply as sincere as  possible, balanced and  dignified. I 
made a draft: I thanked him for having taken me into the lab; I 
declared myself ready to forgive my enemies, and perhaps even 
to love them, but only when they showed  certain signs of 
repentance, that is, when they  ceased being enemies. In the 
opposite case, that of  the enemy who remains an enemy, who 
perseveres in his desire to inflict suffering, it is certain that one

must not forgive him: one can try to salvage  him, one can (one 
must!) discuss with him, but it is our duty to judge him, not to 
forgive him. As to the specific judgment on his behavior, which 
Müller implicitly asked of me, I tactfully cited two cases known to 
me of his German colleagues who in their actions toward us had 
done something much more courageous than what he claimed to 
have done. I admitted that we are not all born heroes, and that a 
world in which everyone would be like him, that is, honest and 
unarmed, would be tolerable, but this is an unreal world. In the 
real world the armed exist, they build Auschwitz, and the honest 
and  unarmed  clear  the  road  for  them;  therefore  every  German 
must  answer  for  Auschwitz,  indeed every man, and after 
Auschwitz it is no longer permissible to be unarmed. I did not 
say a word about the meeting on the Riviera.
That same evening Müller called  me on the telephone from 
Germany. The connection was bad, and in any event by now it is 
no longer easy for me to understand German on the telephone: 
his voice was labored and seemed  broken, his tone tense and 
agitated. He announced that for Pentecost, within six weeks, he 
would come to Finale Ligure: Could we meet? Taken unawares, I 
said yes. I asked him to let me know beforehand the details of 
his arrival and put aside my now superfluous draft.
Eight days later I  received from Mrs.  Müller the  announce-
ment of  the unexpected death of Doktor Lothar Müller in his 
sixtieth year of life.

C A R B O N
The reader, at this point, will have realized for some time now 
that this is not a chemical treatise: my presumption does not reach 
so far— “ma voix est foible, et même un peu profane.” Nor is it an 
autobiography, save  in  the  partial  and symbolic limits  in  which 
every piece of writing is autobiographical, indeed every human 
work; but it is in some fashion a history.
It is—or would have liked to be— a micro-history, the history 
of a trade and its defeats, victories, and miseries, such as 
everyone wants to tell when he feels close to concluding the arc 
of his career, and art ceases to be long. Having reached this point 
in life, what chemist, facing the Periodic  Table, or the 
monumental indices of  Beilstein or Landolt, does not perceive 
scattered among them the sad tatters, or trophies, of his own

professional past? He only has to leaf through any treatise and 
memories rise up in bunches: there is among us he who has tied 
his destiny, indelibly, to bromine or to propylene, or the -NCO 
group, or glutamic acid; and every chemistry student, faced by 
almost any treatise, should be aware that on one of those pages, 
perhaps in a single line, formula, or word, his future is written 
in indecipherable characters, which, however, will become clear 
“afterward”: after success, error, or guilt, victory or defeat. Every 
no longer young chemist, turning again to the verhängnisvoll page 
in  that  same  treatise,  is  struck  by  love  or  disgust,  delights  or 
despairs.
So it happens, therefore, that every element says something 
to someone (something different to each) like the mountain valleys 
or beaches visited in youth. One must perhaps make an exception 
for carbon, because it says everything to everyone, that is, it is 
not specific,  in the same way that  Adam is not specific as an 
ancestor—unless  one discovers today (why not?) the chemist- 
stylite who has dedicated his life to graphite or the diamond. And 
yet it is exactly to this carbon that I have an old debt, contracted 
during what for me were decisive days. To carbon, the element 
of life, my first literary dream was turned, insistently dreamed in 
an  hour and a  place when my life  was  not  worth  much:  yes, I 
wanted to tell the story of an atom of carbon.
Is it right to speak of a “ particular” atom of carbon? For 
the chemist there exist some doubts, because until 1970 he did 
not  have  the  techniques  permitting him  to  see,  or  in  any  event 
isolate, a single atom; no doubts  exist  for the narrator, who 
therefore sets out to narrate.
Our  character lies  for  hundreds of millions of years,  bound  to 
three  atoms  of  oxygen  and  one  of  calcium,  in  the  form  of 
limestone: it already has a very long cosmic history behind it, but 
we shall ignore it. For it time does not exist, or exists only in the 
form of sluggish variations in temperature, daily or seasonal, if, 
for the good fortune of this tale, its position is not too far

from the earth’s surface. Its existence, whose monotony cannot 
be thought of without horror, is a pitiless alternation of hots and 
colds, that is, of oscillations (always of equal frequency) a trifle 
more restricted and a trifle more ample: an imprisonment, for 
this potentially living personage, worthy of the Catholic Hell. To 
it, until this moment, the present tense is suited, which is that of 
description, rather than the past tense, which is that of narration
—it is congealed in an eternal present, barely scratched by the 
moderate quivers of thermal agitation.
But, precisely for the good fortune of the narrator, whose story 
could otherwise have come to an end, the limestone rock ledge 
of which the atom forms a part lies on the surface. It lies within 
reach of man and his pickax (all honor to the pickax and  its 
modern  equivalents; they are still the most important inter-
mediaries  in  the millennial  dialogue  between  the  elements  and 
man): at any moment—which I, the narrator, decide out of pure 
caprice to be the year 1840— a blow of the pickax detached it and 
sent it on its way to the lime kiln, plunging it into the world of 
things that change. It was roasted until it  separated from the 
calcium, which remained so to speak with its feet on the ground 
and  went  to  meet  a  less  brilliant  destiny,  which  we  shall  not 
narrate. Still  firmly  clinging  to  two  of its  three  former oxygen 
companions, it issued from the chimney and took the path of the 
air. Its story, which once was immobile, now turned tumultuous.
It was caught by the wind, flung down on the earth, lifted ten 
kilometers high. It was breathed in by a falcon, descending into 
its precipitous lungs, but did not penetrate its rich blood and was 
expelled. It dissolved three times in the water of the sea, once in 
the water of a cascading torrent, and again was expelled.  It 
traveled with the wind for eight years: now high, now low, on 
the sea and among the clouds, over forests, deserts, and limitless 
expanses of  ice; then it stumbled into capture and the organic 
adventure.
Carbon, in fact, is a singular element: it is the only element 
that can bind itself in long stable chains without a great expense

of energy, and for life on earth (the only one we know so far) 
precisely long chains are required. Therefore  carbon is the key 
element of living substance: but its promotion, its entry into the 
living world, is not easy and must follow an obligatory, intricate 
path, which has been clarified (and not yet definitively) only in 
recent years.  If the  elaboration of carbon were  not  a  common 
daily occurrence, on the scale of billions of tons a week, wherever 
the  green  of  a  leaf  appears,  it  would  by  full  right  deserve to be 
called a miracle.
The atom we are speaking of, accompanied by its two satel-
lites which maintained it in a gaseous state, was therefore borne 
by the wind along a row of vines in the year 1848. It had the good 
fortune to brush against a leaf, penetrate it, and be nailed there 
by a ray of the sun. If my language here becomes imprecise and 
allusive, it is not only because of my ignorance: this decisive 
event, this instantaneous work a tre—of the carbon dioxide, the 
light, and the vegetal greenery—has not yet been described in 
definitive  terms, and perhaps  it  will  not be  for a  long  time  to 
come, so different is it from that other “organic” chemistry which 
is the cumbersome, slow, and ponderous work of man: and yet 
this refined, minute, and quick-witted chemistry was “invented” 
two or three billion years ago by our silent sisters,  the plants, 
which  do  not  experiment  and  do  not  discuss,  and  whose 
temperature is identical to that of the environment in which they 
live. If to comprehend is the same as forming an image, we will 
never form an image of a happening* whose scale is a millionth 
of a millimeter, whose rhythm is a millionth of a second, and 
whose  protagonists  are  in  their  essence  invisible.  Every verbal 
description must be inadequate, and one will be as good as the 
next, so let us settle for the following description.
Our atom of carbon enters  the  leaf, colliding with other in- 
numerable (but here useless) molecules of nitrogen and oxygen. 
It adheres to a large and complicated molecule that activates it, 
and simultaneously receives the decisive message from the sky,
*English in original—TRANS.

in the flashing form of a packet of solar light: in an instant, like 
an insect  caught by a spider, it is separated from its oxygen, 
combined with hydrogen and (one thinks) phosphorus, and finally 
inserted in a chain, whether long or short does not matter, but it is 
the  chain  of life.  All  this  happens  swiftly,  in  silence, at the 
temperature and pressure of the atmosphere, and  gratis: dear 
colleagues, when we learn to do likewise we will be sicut Deus, 
and we will have also solved the problem of hunger in the world.
But there is more and worse, to our shame and that of our 
art. Carbon dioxide, that is, the aerial form of the carbon of which 
we have up till now spoken: this gas which constitutes the raw 
material of life, the permanent store upon which all that grows 
draws, and the ultimate destiny of all flesh, is not one of  the 
principal components of air but rather a ridiculous remnant, an 
“impurity,” thirty times less abundant than argon, which nobody 
even notices. The air contains 0.03 percent; if Italy was air, the 
only Italians fit to build life would  be, for example, the  fifteen 
thousand inhabitants of Milazzo in  the province of Messina. 
This, on the human scale, is ironic acrobatics, a juggler’s trick, 
an incomprehensible display of  omnipotence-arrogance,  since 
from this  ever renewed impurity of the air we come, we 
animals and we plants, and we the human species, with our four 
billion discordant opinions, our milleniums of history, our wars 
and shames, nobility and pride. In any event, our very presence 
on the planet becomes laughable in geometric terms: if  all of 
humanity, about 250 million tons, were distributed in a layer of 
homogeneous thickness on all the emergent lands, the “ stature 
of man“ would not be visible to the naked eye; the thickness one 
would obtain would be around sixteen thousandths of  a 
millimeter.
Now our atom is inserted: it is part of a structure, in an 
architectural sense; it has become  related and tied to five 
companions so identical with it that only the fiction of the story 
permits me to distinguish  them. It is a beautiful ring-shaped 
structure, an almost regular hexagon, which however is

subjected to complicated exchanges and balances with the 
water in which it is dissolved; because by now it is dissolved in 
water,  indeed in  the  sap of the  vine, and this,  to remain 
dissolved, is  both the obligation and the privilege of  all 
substances that are destined (I was about to say “wish”) to change. 
And if then anyone really wanted to find out why a ring, and why a 
hexagon, and why soluble in water, well, he need not worry: these 
are among the not many questions to which our doctrine can 
reply with a persuasive discourse, accessible to everyone, but out 
of place here.
It has entered to form part of a molecule of glucose, just to 
speak plainly: a fate that is neither fish, flesh, nor fowl, which is 
intermediary, which prepares it for its first contact with the animal 
world but does not authorize it to take on a higher responsibility: 
that of becoming part of a proteic edifice. Hence it travels, at the 
slow pace of vegetal juices, from the leaf through the pedicel and 
by the shoot to the trunk, and from here descends to the almost 
ripe  bunch  of grapes.  What  then  follows  is  the  province of the 
winemakers: we are only interested in pinpointing the fact that it 
escaped (to our advantage, since we would not know how to put 
it in words) the alcoholic  fermentation, and reached the wine 
without changing its nature.
It is the destiny of wine to be drunk, and it is the destiny of 
glucose to be oxidized. But it was not oxidized immediately: its 
drinker kept it in his liver for more than a week, well curled up 
and tranquil, as a reserve aliment for a sudden effort; an effort 
that  he  was  forced  to  make  the  following  Sunday,  pursuing  a 
bolting horse. Farewell to the hexagonal structure: in the space 
of a  few  instants  the  skein  was  unwound and  became glucose 
again, and this was dragged by the bloodstream all the way to a 
minute muscle fiber in the thigh, and here brutally split into two 
molecules of lactic acid, the grim harbinger of fatigue: only later, 
some minutes after, the panting of the lungs was able to supply 
the oxygen necessary  to quietly oxidize the latter. So a new 
molecule of carbon dioxide returned to the atmosphere, and a 
parcel of the energy that the sun had handed to the vine-shoot

passed from the state of chemical energy to that of mechanical 
energy, and thereafter settled down in the slothful condition of 
heat, warming up imperceptibly the air moved by the running 
and the blood of the runner. “ Such is life,” although rarely is 
it described in this manner: an inserting itself, a drawing off to 
its  advantage, a  parasitizing  of  the  downward  course  of  energy, 
from its  noble  solar form to the  degraded one  of low- 
temperature heat. In this downward  course, which leads to 
equilibrium and thus death, life draws a bend and nests in it.
Our atom is again carbon dioxide, for which we apologize: this 
too  is  an  obligatory  passage; one  can  imagine  and  invent  others, 
but on earth that’s the way it is. Once again the wind, which 
this time travels far; sails over the Apennines and the  Adriatic, 
Greece, the Aegean, and Cyprus: we are over Lebanon, and the 
dance is repeated. The atom we are concerned with is  now 
trapped in a structure that promises to last for a long time: it is 
the venerable trunk of a cedar, one of the last; it is passed again 
through the stages we have already described, and the glucose of 
which it is a part belongs, like the bead of a rosary, to a long 
chain of cellulose. This is no longer the hallucinatory and 
geological fixity of rock, this is no longer millions of years, but 
we can easily speak of centuries because the cedar is a tree of 
great longevity. It is our whim to abandon  it for a year or  five 
hundred years: let us say that after twenty years (we are in 1868) a 
wood worm has taken an interest in  it.  It has  dug its  tunnel 
between the trunk and the bark, with the obstinate and blind 
voracity of its race; as it drills it grows, and its tunnel grows with 
it. There it has swallowed and provided a setting for the subject 
of this story; then it has formed a pupa, and in the spring it has 
come out in the shape of an ugly gray moth which is now drying 
in the sun, confused and dazzled by the splendor of the day. Our 
atom is  in  one  of the  insect’s thousand eyes, contributing  to  the 
summary and  crude  vision  with  which  it  orients itself in space. 
The insect is fecundated, lays its eggs, and dies: the small cadaver 
lies in the undergrowth of the woods, it

is emptied of its fluids, but the chitin carapace resists for a long 
time, almost indestructible. The snow and sun return above it 
without injuring it: it is buried by the dead leaves and the loam, 
it has become a slough, a “thing,“ but the death of atoms, unlike 
ours, is never  irrevocable. Here are at work the omnipresent, 
untiring, and invisible gravediggers of  the undergrowth, the 
microorganisms of the humus. The carapace, with its eyes by now 
blind, has slowly disintegrated, and the ex-drinker, ex-cedar, ex-
wood worm has once again taken wing.
We will  let  it fly three times  around the  world, until  1960, 
and in justification of so long an interval in respect to the human 
measure we will point out that it is, however, much shorter than 
the average: which, we understand, is two hundred years. Every 
two hundred years, every atom of carbon that is not congealed in 
materials by now stable (such as, precisely, limestone, or coal, or 
diamond, or certain plastics) enters and reenters the cycle of life, 
through the narrow door of photosynthesis. Do other doors exist? 
Yes, some syntheses created by man; they are a title of nobility for 
man-the-maker,  but  until  now their quantitative importance is 
negligible. They are doors  still  much  narrower  than  that  of the 
vegetal greenery; knowingly or not, man has not tried until now to 
compete with nature on this terrain, that is, he has not striven 
to draw from  the  carbon  dioxide  in  the  air  the  carbon  that  is 
necessary  to  nourish him, clothe him, warm him, and for the 
hundred other more sophisticated needs of modern life. He has 
not done it because he has not needed to: he has found, and is 
still finding (but for how many more decades?) gigantic reserves 
of carbon  already organicized,  or  at  least  reduced.  Besides  the 
vegetable  and animal worlds, these reserves are constituted by 
deposits of  coal and petroleum: 
but these too 
are the 
inheritance of photo-  synthetic activity carried out in distant 
epochs, so that one can well affirm that photosynthesis is not only 
the sole path by which carbon becomes living matter, but also the 
sole path by which the sun’s energy becomes chemically usable.

It is possible to demonstrate that this completely arbitrary story 
is nevertheless true. I could tell innumerable other stories, and 
they would all be true: all literally true, in the nature of  the 
transitions, in their order and data. The number of atoms is so 
great that one could always be found whose story coincides with 
any capriciously invented story. I could recount an endless number 
of stories about carbon atoms that become colors or perfumes in 
flowers; of others which, from tiny algae to small crustaceans to 
fish, gradually return as carbon dioxide to the waters of the sea, 
in a perpetual, frightening round-dance of  life  and death, in 
which every devourer is immediately devoured; of others which 
instead attain a decorous semi-eternity  in the  yellowed  pages  of 
some  archival document, or the canvas  of a famous painter; or 
those to  which fell  the  privilege of forming  part of a grain of 
pollen and left their fossil imprint in the rocks for our curiosity; 
of others still that descended to become part of the mysterious 
shape-messengers  of  the human seed, and  participated in the 
subtle process of  division, duplication, and  fusion from which 
each of us is born. Instead, I will tell just one more story, the 
most secret, and I will tell it with the humility and restraint of 
him who knows from the start that his theme is desperate, his 
means feeble, and the trade of clothing facts in words is bound 
by its very nature to fail.
It is again among us, in a glass of milk. It is inserted in a very 
complex, long chain, yet such that almost all of  its links are 
acceptable to the human body. It is swallowed; and since every 
living structure harbors a savage distrust toward every contribu-
tion of  any material of living origin, the chain is meticulously 
broken apart and the fragments, one by one, are accepted  or 
rejected. One, the one that concerns  us, crosses the intestinal 
threshold and enters the bloodstream: it migrates, knocks at the 
door of a nerve cell, enters, and supplants the carbon which was 
part of it.  This  cell belongs  to a  brain,  and it  is my brain,  the 
brain of the me who is writing; and the cell in question, and within 
it the atom in question, is in charge of my writing, in a 
gigantic minuscule game which nobody has yet described. It is 
that which at this instant, issuing out of a labyrinthine tangle of yeses 
and nos, makes my hand run along a certain path on the paper, mark 
it with these volutes that are signs: a double snap, up and down, 

between two levels of energy, guides this hand of mine to impress on 
the paper this dot, here, this one.

