Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others
and to Others
JOS EPH A. BRACKEN, SJ
Xavier University in Cincinnati
Human personhood should be understood as a gift from and to others as well as a perma-
nent and unchanging attribute of what it means to be a human being, for this understand-
ing of human personhood fits better within a contemporary systems-oriented approach to
reality. Likewise, for Christians it can also be seen as derivative from a more contemporary
process-oriented understanding of the doctrine of the Trinity, namely, as co-constitutive
members of a transcendent community or archetypal life-system. Finally, given the individ-
ualistic character of contemporary Western culture, an emphasis on the interdependence of
entities on one another rather than on their independence from one another seems to be
more needed at the present moment.
Keywords: Trinity, system vs. substance, reciprocal vs. unilateral causality, Thomas Aquinas,
Alfred North Whitehead, Colin Gunton, Terrence Deacon
T
HE proper understanding of human personhood, as I have argued in
previous issues of this journal, is highly controversial because it
impacts so heavily on other key issues in contemporary society, most
notably questions regarding sexual ethics (e.g., artificial contraception and
abortion).Likewise, the argument over the personal rights of women in
this area was presumably a significant factor in the outcome of the 
Joseph A. Bracken, SJ, Professor Emeritus of Theology at Xavier University in Cincinnati, Ohio,
has specialized over the years in linking the metaphysical scheme of Alfred North Whitehead
with classical Roman Catholic Church doctrine, above all, in dealing with the philosophical
presuppositions of interreligious dialogue and the proper relation between religion and
science. His latest book publications are Does God Roll Dice? Divine Providence for a
World in the Making (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, ) and The World in the
Trinity: Open-Ended Systems in Science and Religion (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, ).
See Joseph A. Bracken, SJ, “Personhood and Community in a New Context,” Horizons ,
no. (): –; Bracken, “Personhood in Classical and Process-Oriented
Metaphysics,” Horizons , no. (): –.
Horizons, , pp. –. © College Theology Society, 
doi:10.1017/hor.2018.57

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

presidential campaign here in the United States. For these and other reasons,
I offer in this article a new systems-oriented approach to the issue of human
(and divine) personhood as a possible way to achieve relatively neutral
ground for continued discussion of this all-important issue. I have used this
systems-oriented approach with some measure of success elsewhere to
deal with problematic issues in systematic theology.This article would rep-
resent a tentative foray into the area of moral theology, likewise using a
systems-oriented model or paradigm. In brief, I argue that systems (both in
the world of nature and humanly contrived) come into existence and are sus-
tained in existence only because of some well-defined ongoing interaction
between their constituent parts or members. When and if this dynamic rela-
tion between the parts or members no longer takes place, the system col-
lapses. At the same time, the constituent parts or members of the system
are themselves heavily dependent upon the continued smooth working of
the system both for their individual well-being and in some cases for their
very survival as individual entities.
Perhaps the clearest example of what I have in mind here is derived from
Christian belief in the doctrine of the Trinity. Because the divine persons exist
as “subsistent relations” vis-à-vis one another, they co-constitute a unified
divine life-system or community that allows them to exist as one God.If
they ever reneged on their mutual commitment to one another, they would
cease to exist both as divine persons and as the one God of Christian belief.
Similarly, in human interpersonal relations overemphasis on one person’s
rights at the expense of the rights of other persons on a given issue puts
stress on the proper functioning of the community and the continued well-
being of everyone involved therein. Finally, even in the natural order the
overall well-being of an organism depends heavily on the smooth working
of all its constituent bodily parts. When this harmony in the body’s normal
functions is seriously disrupted for any length of time, the organism first
becomes ill and, if not somehow remedied, dies.
In what follows, I set forth my argument for this systems-oriented
approach to human personhood both as constitutive of personal identity
and yet as inherently limited by the rights of other human beings and the
pattern of community life in which they all share. First, however, I review
the efforts of three other contemporary Christian theologians to interpret
See Joseph A. Bracken, SJ, The World in the Trinity: Open-Ended Systems in Science and
Religion (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, ); also Bracken, “Incarnation, Panentheism,
and Bodily Resurrection: A Systems-Oriented Approach,” Theological Studies , no. 
(): –.
Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae I, q. , a. .

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

human personhood as a social and developmental reality as well as a perma-
nent attribute of a human being simply as an individual. Then I set forth a
systems-oriented understanding of the doctrine of the Trinity and indicate
how it fits into a contemporary systems-oriented model of the God-world
relationship in which networks of creatures exist within God and yet
remain distinct from God in terms of their own finite mode of existence
and activity. Finally, I propose that this systems-oriented understanding of
physical reality can also be applied to the understanding of human person-
hood as a fully relational and process-oriented reality, an ongoing gift from
others and to others, as well as an attribute proper to a human being
simply as an individual.
Human Personhood within a Social and Evolutionary Context
In her recent book Ask the Beasts, Elizabeth Johnson dedicates a
chapter to what she calls the “community of creation.”Therein she argues
that all life on earth forms one community: “Historically, all life results from
the same biological process; genetically, living beings share elements of the
same basic code; functionally, species interact without ceasing. Human
beings belong to this community and need other species profoundly, in
some ways more than other species need them.”In even greater detail,
Celia Deane-Drummond in The Wisdom of the Liminal makes clear that
what were previously thought to be specifically human thought and behavior
patterns are likewise found among other higher-order animal species.For
example, there is a continuity between human reason and animal cognition:
cognition and memory in human beings “are not new powers but the same
powers, more perfect than they are in other animals.”Similarly, there is a con-
tinuity between human freedom and animal agency, between human morality
and what Deane-Drummond calls animal virtue (cooperation as opposed to
competition), human language and animal communication, human justice
and animal fairness. Accordingly, like Johnson, Deane-Drummond endorses
the notion of the community of all the creatures of this world with one
another; likewise, she acknowledges with Johnson the historical dependence
of the human species for its proper growth and development upon earlier
Elizabeth A. Johnson, Ask the Beasts: Darwin and the God of Love (London: Bloomsbury,
), –.
Ibid., .
Celia Deane-Drummond, The Wisdom of the Liminal: Evolution and Other Animals in
Human Becoming (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, ).
Ibid., . Deane-Drummond cites here Aquinas, ST I, q. , a. .
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

stages of the cosmic process in which other animal species have played and
still play a key role. Finally, Kathryn Tanner in her book God and Creation
in Christian Theology claims that God does not overpower but instead empow-
ers created reality to be active in its own right within the world of creation:
“Created beings are the executors of the order for the world that God
ordains but only as God’s creative agency is at work every step of the way
by which such an order is produced.”Thus God acts as the Primary Cause
of whatever happens; the finite entity acts as the Secondary Cause of what
happens. The finite entity truly contributes to the created effect but only in
accord with the antecedent will of God for the order of creation.
Johnson, Deane-Drummond, and Tanner all share the conviction that
Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics is well qualified to serve as the underlying
philosophical conceptuality for an evolutionary understanding of human per-
sonhood that allows for the coworkings of divine and human causality.
Johnson, for example, lists various theories for the influence of God upon
the workings of the cosmic process, but she herself has recourse to the dis-
tinction between primary and secondary causality in the writings of
Thomas Aquinas.God as Primary Cause acts in and through the agency of
secondary causes. That is, God as the Power of Being gives to finite entities
both existence and the power to act: “It is characteristic of the creative
power of God to raise creatures who participate in divine being to such a
degree that they are also creative and sustaining in their own right.”God,
accordingly, is not one cause among many causes at work in the evolutionary
process. Rather, God as the pure Act of Being is the transcendent Cause of all
finite causes operative in the world of creation. Deane-Drummond borrows
from Hans Urs von Balthasar the notion of theo-drama to give her theological
interpretation of the evolutionary process. That is, she presupposes the exis-
tence of God and God’s active presence in the evolutionary process, above all,
in and through Jesus Christ as God Incarnate.Thus, in line with such a spe-
cifically
Christian
interpretation
of
the
evolutionary
process,
Deane-
Drummond makes frequent reference to the teachings of Aquinas on
human nature as elevated by divine grace to a role higher than that of
other animal species in the evolutionary process.Tanner also endorses
the Thomistic distinction between God as the Primary Cause of what
Kathryn Tanner, God and Creation in Christian Theology: Tyranny or Empowerment?
(New York: Blackwell, ), .
Johnson, Ask the Beasts, –.
Ibid., .
Deane-Drummond, The Wisdom of the Liminal, .
Ibid., –, –, –.

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

happens in this world and creatures as the secondary or instrumental cause of
those same events.
I myself am less confident that Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics is an
appropriate philosophical conceptuality for setting forth an evolutionary
understanding both of the God-world relationship in general and of the “com-
munity of creation” to which Johnson refers in Ask the Beasts. Admittedly,
Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics guards against the danger of a purely nat-
uralistic approach to evolution in which the existence of God and the provi-
dential activity of God within the workings of the evolutionary process are
ignored or even expressly denied. But, as I see it, Aristotelian-Thomistic
metaphysics still involves philosophical presuppositions that are difficult to
reconcile with an evolutionary worldview. For example, according to
Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics, substance is the first category of
being.That is, Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics is focused on the interac-
tion of individual entities (substances) on one another in terms of unilateral
cause-and-effect relations within a relatively fixed world order. An evolution-
ary approach to reality focuses instead on networks or systems of entities
engaged in ongoing reciprocal relations with one another that thereby indi-
rectly make possible the emergence of still higher-order systems or more
complex networks of entities within the cosmic process.Likewise, the key
relationship between the metaphysical principles of matter and form is differ-
ent in the two worldviews. Within Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics, form is
active, that is, possesses agency, and matter is passive as that which is recep-
tive of form. Within an evolutionary metaphysical scheme, however, matter is
active and the form is passive; that is, the form is no longer an agent produc-
ing change but the moment-by-moment objective result of change in the
ongoing dynamic interaction of material constituents within systems and
between systems.Finally, the term being is ambiguous. It can be a noun
(e.g., God as the Supreme Being) or a verb (the activity of existing). Thus to
claim that God is the Power of Being or the Pure Act of Being is ambiguous.
God as the Supreme Being completely transcends all created beings. God as
the Pure Act of Being, however, is in the first place not an entity but the foun-
dational activity of existing that God in the act of creation chooses to share
with creatures, thereby bringing them into existence. God is thus not only
Tanner, God and Creation in Christian Theology, –; see also Aquinas, ST I, q. ,
a. , ad .
Aristotle, Metaphysics b; Aquinas, ST I, q. , a. .
See here Terrence W. Deacon, Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter
(New York: W. W. Norton, ), –.
Deacon, Incomplete Nature, –.
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the ontological source of the power of being within creatures, but also a par-
ticipant like them in that same foundational activity of existing. The power of
being is then equivalently the divine nature that empowers not only creatures
but also God to exist.
A Systems-Oriented Approach to the God-World Relationship
I begin with some introductory remarks on my use of the term system
within a systems-oriented approach to reality. That is, system much like sub-
stance in Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics is an analogical term with a
generic meaning that is necessarily further specified in different contexts.
The term substance, for example, applies to individual entities as long as the
entity in question retains the same basic identity even with various accidental
changes in its appearance and mode of operation over time.The term system
can apply to the inner workings of an inanimate entity (e.g., a machine), of an
individual organism, or of a complex network of animate and inanimate enti-
ties such as an environment or a community. In each case, the system in ques-
tion is a dynamic unity-in-diversity of interrelated parts or members. Yet
whereas in Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics the term substance refers
only to individual entities, the term system refers equally well to individual
entities and to the corporate realities (communities or environments) in
which individual entities tend to aggregate. Hence, in my view system is a
more comprehensive term for philosophical analysis of physical reality than
substance. Likewise, a systems-oriented approach to reality provides a new
understanding of human and divine personhood as both a process-oriented
reality and as an ontologically fixed reality. To establish that point, I begin
with Thomas Aquinas’ proposal that the divine persons are subsistent rela-
tions vis-à-vis one another, and then indicate how human persons are likewise
constituted by the social context in which they find themselves.
The Divine Persons as Subsistent Relations
In his Summa Theologiae, Thomas proposes that the divine persons
are “subsistent relations” vis-à-vis one another.But, whereas Aquinas
Cf. Alfred North Whitehead, Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology, ed. David Ray
Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne, rev. ed. (New York: Free Press, ), . Whitehead
substitutes Creativity for the Power of Being, but otherwise the relationship between
God and this primordial activity is virtually the same. See also my article “Being: An
Entity, an Activity, or Both an Entity and an Activity,” Journal of Religion , no. 
(): –.
Aristotle, Metaphysics a.
Aquinas, ST I, q. , a. .

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

conceived the divine persons as equivalently nouns (subsistent relations), I
conceive the divine persons as equivalently verbs (subsistent ways of relat-
ing). I prefer to think of the divine persons in process-oriented terms
because then there is no problem with the three divine persons being
together one God, not three gods in close collaboration. For, unlike individual
entities, which by definition are distinct from one another, processes can be
readily combined to constitute even more complex processes. Within the
physical world, for example, lower-order processes (e.g., atoms and mole-
cules) routinely co-constitute higher-order processes (e.g., a cell or entire
physical organism) as a normal result of their ongoing dynamic interrelation-
ship. Applied analogously to the doctrine of the Trinity, this process-oriented
approach to reality would mean that the three divine persons are dynamically
interrelated individual life-systems that together co-constitute a corporate
life-system, namely, the reality of God as an indissoluble divine community.
Hence, a process-oriented belief in God as triune seems to be more rationally
plausible than the classical explanation of the Trinity provided by Aquinas
with his claim that the three divine persons are subsistent relations. For,
within Aristotle’s metaphysical scheme, relations are “accidents,” contingent
attributes of substances as individual entities. They do not exist in their own
right.Hence, the term “subsistent relation” is at the very least paradoxical.
The God-World Relationship as a Systems-Oriented Reality
At the same time, one cannot propose a systems-oriented understand-
ing of the divine persons in their ongoing reciprocal relation to one another
without setting forth an overall understanding of the God-world relationship
in system-oriented terms. Earlier I suggested that the process-oriented term
system is more comprehensive than the classical notion of substance, since
system can be used to explain the workings of corporate realities like physical
environments and human communities as well as the normal mode of oper-
ation of individual entities. But further explanation of how systems actually
work in both contexts is still needed so as to make clear the nature of
human personhood as a fully relational reality or an ongoing gift from and
to others. Here I appeal to the philosophical cosmology of Alfred North
Whitehead in his book Process and Reality. Therein he sets forth his under-
standing of societies, that is, organized groups of individual entities, which
by their continuous dynamic interrelation co-constitute a higher-order
social reality with a “common element of form” or consistent mode of oper-
ation.Hence, there is an ongoing reciprocal causal relation between the
Aristotle, Metaphysics a–.
Whitehead, Process and Reality, .
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

individual entities among themselves and a corresponding reciprocal relation
of these individual entities with the society to which they belong. The key
passage in Process and Reality runs as follows:
The causal laws which dominate a social environment are the product of
the defining characteristic of that society. But the society is only efficient
through its individual members. Thus in a society, the members can
only exist by reason of the laws which dominate the society, and the
laws only come into being by reason of the analogous characters of the
members of the society.
A Whiteheadian society, accordingly, is a system with a governing structure
that continues to evolve in tandem with the dynamic interaction of its constit-
uent parts or members from moment to moment. To be specific, the parts or
members of a Whiteheadian society are actual entities, that is, dynamically
interrelated momentary self-constituting subjects of experience. Through
their interaction from moment to moment they co-constitute the ever-
changing “defining characteristic” or governing structure of the society to
which they belong.
This, however, is the precise reversal of the understanding of matter and
form in classical metaphysics. Whereas in Aristotelian metaphysics the imma-
terial substantial form is active in giving order and intelligibility to the mate-
rial constituents of a given physical reality, in Whitehead’s metaphysical
scheme the actual entities as self-constituting subjects of experience are the
agents of change for the society or system.The form or structure of the
society is the objective ongoing result of the intersubjective activity of its con-
stituent actual entities in their dynamic interrelationship. Furthermore, the
defining characteristic or governing structure of the society/system (unlike
an unchanging Aristotelian-Thomistic substantial form) evolves. New sets
of constituent actual entities by their dynamic interrelationship have the
option either to repeat the governing form of the society produced by prede-
cessor actual entities or to modestly change it in line with their current rela-
tionship to one another and to a changing external environment. In brief then,
within a Whiteheadian society or system, causation is basically bottom-up
rather than top-down as in the relationship between matter and form in
Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics. Yet the governing structure or “defining
characteristic” of the society/system still provides top-down causation insofar
as it constrains or limits the otherwise independent activity of its ever-new
constituent actual entities.
Ibid., –.
Aristotle, Metaphysics a–b.

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Accordingly, the relation between spirit and matter in Whitehead’s meta-
physics is nondual in that it expresses a “both-and” rather than an “either-or”
relation. That is, spirit (i.e., self-constituting subjects of experience) cannot
exist without self-expression in some material form (the governing structure
of a society or system). Yet the governing structure of the society cannot
come into existence and remain in existence without the dynamic intersub-
jective activity of its constituent actual entities. Whitehead makes this recip-
rocal causal relation between matter and form especially clear in the way
that he contrasts his understanding of the mind-brain-body relation within
human beings in comparison to Aquinas’ understanding of the relation
between soul and body. Whereas for Aquinas the immaterial soul unilaterally
informs the physical body so as to regulate and control bodily functions, for
Whitehead there is ongoing reciprocal causation between the mind, the
brain, and the body. The human body is an integrated set of hierarchically
ordered subsystems of actual entities that continually feeds information to
the brain; the brain organizes that physical data and communicates it to
the mind or what Whitehead calls the “presiding personality” at every
moment within the workings of the brain. A decision vis-à-vis that physical
data is then made by the mind and communicated to the lower-order
systems of the body through their ongoing connection with the brain.
But how does this reciprocal causal relation between the mind, brain, and
body within a human being apply to the proper understanding of the God-
world relationship as a whole? In my judgment, such a systems-oriented
approach to the God-world relationship is best expressed in what has been
called panentheism, namely, the hypothesis that everything finite exists
within God but still maintains its own finite mode of existence and activity.
Admittedly, as the Danish philosopher/theologian Neil Henrik Gregersen
comments, “There may be as many panentheisms as there are ways of qual-
ifying the world’s being ‘in God.’”But, by the same token, some explana-
tions of panentheism are presumably better than others; some make more
sense in the long run than others. For example, a systems-oriented approach
to panentheism seems to make more sense than an appeal to the Thomistic
doctrine of participation as a rational ground for the notion of creaturely par-
ticipation in the divine life.For, within the Thomistic approach, creaturely
Whitehead, Process and Reality, –.
Cf. Philip Clayton and Arthur Peacocke, eds., In Whom We Live and Move and Have Our
Being: Panentheistic Reflections on God’s Presence in a Scientific World (Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, ).
Neils Henrik Gregersen, “Three Varieties of Panentheism,” in Clayton and Peacocke, In
Whom We Live and Move and Have Our Being, .
Johnson, Ask the Beasts, –.
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

participation in Divine Being is the result of unilateral efficient causality on
the part of God. In creating a finite entity, God gives the entity a limited
share in the Act of Being. The creature thereby acquires an ontological rela-
tion to God as its necessary principle of being, but the creature is thereby not
intrinsically changed in its own creaturely mode of existence and activity.
Likewise, God as Subsistent Being (Esse Subsistens) is not intrinsically affected
by the existence and activity of the creature.This is in my judgment a rather
weak form of panentheism, since nothing like ongoing reciprocal causation
between God and the creature is thereby established.
A systems-oriented approach to the hypothesis of panentheism, however,
allows for reciprocal causation between God and creatures. For, as noted
above, the divine persons when understood as individual life-systems contin-
ually interact with one another so as to co-constitute a still more complex cor-
porate life-system representing the reality of God as a dynamic unity in
diversity of constituent parts or members. Moreover, the three divine
persons brought into existence and continue to sustain a finite world from
within the resources of their corporate reality as a divine life-system. That
is, from within the energy-field generated by the ongoing dynamic relation-
ship of the divine persons to one another, the so-called Big Bang proper to
the initial moment of creation presumably took place. This dramatic explo-
sion of energy from within the energy-field proper to the divine persons
thus placed the world of creation from its first moment of existence onward
within God as the creative source of its own existence and activity.
Furthermore, since the world of creation thus functions as a lower-order
process within the higher-order process of the divine life, the cosmic
process is necessarily influenced or “constrained” in its ongoing existence
and activity by the directionality and structural principles already present in
the workings of the higher-order divine life-system from which it originated.
In turn, the cosmic process as a lower-order system within the divine life-
system limits the ways in which Divine Providence can function within the
world of creation. That is, Divine Providence is itself “constrained” by the
autonomy that must be granted to finite entities, above all human beings,
who “live, work and have their being” (Acts :) within the divine life-
system and yet pursue their own goals and values here and now.
Aquinas, ST I, q. , a. .
Ibid., q. , a. .
Cf. Nancey Murphy and George F. R. Ellis, On the Moral Nature of the Universe: Theology,
Cosmology, and Ethics (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, ), –.
Ibid., –.

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Confirmation for this notion of reciprocal interaction in the workings of
higher-order and lower-order systems vis-à-vis one another is provided by
Terrence Deacon in his book Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from
Matter. Deacon claims that the classical understanding of the relation
between form and matter is more a hindrance than a help in understanding
the relationship between higher-order and lower-order levels of existence and
activity within the life sciences: “The phenomena we are interested in explain-
ing are intrinsically historical and dynamic. Being alive does not merely
consist in being composed in a particular way. It consists in changing in a par-
ticular way.”In Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics, however, the substan-
tial form does not change; its material constituents undergo transformation as
a consequence of being informed by a relatively fixed and unchanging substan-
tial form. Yet in evolutionary theory the reverse is true. The basic material
constituents of an organism (e.g., atoms and molecules) are quite active in
their ongoing interaction, but never change in their individual self-constitution.
Only their customary pattern of self-organization changes as a result of
unexpected changes in their internal relations to one another and in response
to changes in the external environment. Thus, while there might be a
superficial resemblance of the governing pattern of self-organization within
an organism to an Aristotelian substantial form, upon closer examination
they are quite different in their basic mode of operation.
Deacon, however, has much in common with Whitehead in terms of his
basic understanding of the relationship between matter and form in physical
reality. Yet they differ on one key point. Whitehead understands the material
constituents of a society or system to be self-constituting subjects of experi-
ence; Deacon presumes that they are inanimate minithings (atoms or mole-
cules). As a result, Deacon seemingly cannot further explain how inanimate
atoms and molecules are capable of spontaneous self-organization into
ever more complex physical systems. His explanation of evolution, in other
words, lacks the reciprocal relationship between matter and spirit that is char-
acteristic of Whiteheadian societies or systems. Yet, for both Deacon and
Whitehead, the material constituents of an entity are the agents of change
within that entity. The form or governing structure of the entity acts only as
a constraint on the workings of the material constituents even as this govern-
ing structure itself gradually evolves in line with an ever-changing pattern of
relations among the material constituents in their dealings with one another
and with the external environment.
Deacon, Incomplete Nature, .
Ibid., –.
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Deacon clarifies what he has in mind with his own understanding of
formal causality as objective constraint rather than as subjective agency
through reference to the notion of habit in the metaphysics of Charles
Sanders Peirce: “Habit was Peirce’s general term referring to regularities of
behavior arising in both physical and organic contexts.”According to
Peirce, Nature is necessarily “habit-taking” in its continuous historical devel-
opment from virtual chaos at the moment of the Big Bang to greater and more
complicated patterns of order and intelligibility over the millennia.It pro-
duces regularities of organization in inanimate matter and regularities of
behavior in organisms through conscious or unconscious repetition of pat-
terns of self-organization. But in both cases habit-taking on the part of the
entity in question is strictly the result of the interrelated activity of its material
constituents and not a consequence of the introduction of a new substantial
form by some external agency (e.g., God as Creator and Sustainer of the evo-
lutionary process). This is not to deny divine influence on the evolutionary
process but only to deny that it happens in the way indicated by
Aristotelian-Thomistic metaphysics, that is, evolution through the introduc-
tion of new substantial forms by God at every advanced stage of the
process. Divine influence is presumably more subtle than that. God operates
in the universe through God’s provision of mechanisms like habit-taking in
the existential mode of operation of the cosmic process from the moment
of the Big Bang onward or, as Whitehead proposes in Process and Reality,
through God’s provision of “initial aims,” feeling-level inspirations and initia-
tives to the constituent actual entities of a society in their dynamic relation to
one another.
Ibid., (emphasis in the original).
Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, eds., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ), :.
See here Simon Conway Morris, The Runes of Evolution: How the Universe Became Self-
Aware (West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, ). He explains the inbuilt direc-
tionality of the cosmic process toward self-awareness through convergence, i.e., use of
the same basic patterns of self-organization and growth among divergent species
widely separated in space and time: “When evolution needs an arm, then there really
is an ‘optimal design.’ That’s the way the world works” (); also Whitehead, Process
and Reality, . The provision of divine initial aims to material constituents presup-
poses, of course, that they are actual entities, momentary self-constituting subjects of
experience that can be internally influenced in this way. Deacon and other naturalisti-
cally inclined philosophers of science tend to reject the Whiteheadian concept of
actual entity because for them it is too close to the suspect notion of panpsychism
(Deacon, Incomplete Nature, –). But how else is one to explain the unexpected
emergence of new forms of existence and activity within nature except through pure
chance (which is really no explanation at all)?

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Other philosophers of science besides Deacon likewise appeal to the
notion of mutual constraint among the material constituents of a life-
system and of neighboring life-systems on one another. Stuart Kauffman in
his book At Home in the Universe claims that “life is a natural property of
complex chemical systems, that when the number of different kinds of mole-
cules in a chemical soup passes a certain threshold, a self-sustaining network
of
reactions—an
autocatalytic
metabolism—will
suddenly
appear.”
Similarly, Jesper Hoffmeyer in his book Biosemiotics traces the way in which
individual life-systems (e.g., cells) pick up signs from other living systems
and from their common external environment and respond to those signs
in terms of their own mode of operation. Thereby each life-system constrains
the independent existence and activity of other life-systems in its environment
so that together they provide the existential context for the unexpected emer-
gence of a higher-order level of existence and activity within nature than
previously existed.
Admittedly, still other philosophers of science who embrace the general
concept of the dynamic interplay between higher-order and lower-order
levels of existence and activity within nature have reservations about
whether human personhood can also be explained as a purely natural phe-
nomenon within an overall systems-oriented approach to the God-world rela-
tionship. Mirko di Bernardo at the Pontifical University of the Holy Cross in
Rome, for example, distinguishes between structural genes and functional
genes within an organism: “Besides the structural gene (genetic information
resulting from the DNA sequence), there is the functional gene, which has
no fixed nature; its transitory and contingent existence depends on the func-
tional dynamics of the whole organism.”Yet human beings “are not just
made of genes because something emerges from them that cannot be
reduced to mere matter, namely, culture, symbolic language, self-awareness,
self-control and the capacity for abstraction, as well as the idea of perfection,
truth, infinity (concepts that have no material referents in the reality experi-
enced every day).”Accordingly, “the human Self is promise, the need for
totality, an expectation of the infinite and explains itself through acts which
Stuart Kauffman, At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of Self-Organization
and Complexity (New York: Oxford University Press, ), .
Jesper Hoffmeyer, Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of
Signs, trans. Jesper Hoffmeyer and Donald Favereau, ed. Donald Favereau (Scranton,
PA: Scranton University Press, ), –.
Mirko di Bernardo, “Complexity and the Emergence of Meaning in the Natural Sciences
and Philosophy,” Theology and Science (): –, at (emphasis in the
original).
Ibid., .
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

transcend both the second principle of thermodynamics [entropy], and
the cause-effect rules that are at the root of natural phenomena.”
Di Bernardo’s understanding of human personhood and personal agency is
then fully in accord with the classical Aristotelian-Thomistic understanding
of formal causality as the agency of a substantial form vis-à-vis its material
constituents. As a result, he concludes that “metaphysics, and to some
extent theology, are not in contradiction with science, which investigates a
different level of reality.”
Philip Clayton in his book Mind and Emergence explains the emergence of
life from nonliving components by espousing a theory of strong emergence;
that is, “evolution in the cosmos produces new, ontologically distinct levels,
which are characterized by their own distinct laws or regularities and
causal forces.”He is thus opposed to theories of weak emergence or any
kind of physical reductionism in which the elemental physical entities that
are governed by deterministic laws of interaction would also explain the
mode of operation of systems at all levels of existence and activity within
nature. But at the level of human personhood Clayton adopts a different strat-
egy: “Personhood is therefore a level of analysis that has no complete trans-
lation into a state of the body or brain—no matter how complete our
neuroscience might be. Of course, it presupposes such states; yet personhood
represents an explanatory level that is distinct from explanations at the level of
our ‘hardware.’”Clayton, accordingly, likewise allows for “agent-causation”
at the level of human personhood on the grounds that “agent-based explana-
tions are compatible, at least in principle, with the determining influence of
biological causes.”There could be, however, some residual dualism (an
ontological difference between spirit and matter) still present in that state-
ment. As noted above, I myself prefer to think of the relation between spirit
and matter as nondual. That is, spirit and matter are ontologically interdepen-
dent. Spirit always seeks self-expression in some objective material form:
matter without an internal immaterial principle of self-organization would
be not only lifeless but absolutely formless. Implicit in my thinking here, of
course, is Whitehead’s presupposition that an actual entity is not only an
immaterial subject of experience but a “superject,” a material reality that
can
be
“prehended”
by
subsequent
actual
entities.
In
Mind
and
Ibid., .
Ibid., .
Philip Clayton, Mind and Emergence: From Quantum to Consciousness (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, ), .
Ibid., .
Ibid., .
Whitehead, Process and Reality, –.

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Emergence, Clayton contests that point: “The evidence for spontaneity in
atoms is rather more spotty than it is in the case of animal behavior studies.”
Personhood as Gift from Others and to Others
In this third part of the article, I argue for an understanding of human
personhood as a gift from others and to others both in the context of a fully
relational understanding of reality that is characteristic of a systems-oriented
approach to reality and as derivative from a new understanding of Christian
belief in the doctrine of the Trinity as one God in three persons. That is, the
unity of the triune God can be understood as the unity of a corporate life-
system or community that the three divine persons sustain by their
ongoing dynamic interrelationship. Thereby they achieve their personal iden-
tity as individual divine persons only in and through their relation to one
another within the divine community/divine life-system. Similarly, human
beings are persons in the full sense of the word only if they hold themselves
responsible for maintaining interpersonal relations with other human beings
so as to co-constitute functioning local communities and ultimately the all-
embracing community of humankind on this earth. Human beings also exer-
cise their personhood by holding themselves responsible for maintaining and
fostering the continued well-being of the “community of creation,” as
Elizabeth Johnson proposed above.The reciprocal causation that governs
the relations of the divine persons with one another within the divine life-
system is thus reproduced in the dealings of human beings with one
another, with the other creatures of this world, and with the divine persons
insofar as human beings share with the divine persons responsibility for
maintaining and fostering the growth of the community of creation.
Yet human personhood is not only a gift to others but a gift from others in
the sense that no human being exists as a person simply in his or her own
right. That is, a human being comes into this world and begins to exercise
her or his personhood in the first place only in virtue of the decision of the
divine persons to create the world and over time to bring into existence
every finite creature within it, including oneself. But reciprocal relations
between one’s parents also made possible one’s existence and activity as a
person. They too, of course, received the gift of human existence and the exer-
cise of personhood directly from earlier generations of human beings and
indirectly from the reciprocal relations between the innumerable nonhuman
Clayton, Mind and Emergence, .
Johnson, Ask the Beasts, .
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

creatures of this world over the millennia in sustaining and fostering the
ongoing growth and development of the cosmic process.
As should be obvious from this quick overview of the responsibilities of
what it means to be a person, human personhood is a nondual reality. That
is, being a person and simultaneously becoming a person are two interdepen-
dent features of one’s personal identity. For, at any given moment in one’s
life, one is a person with inalienable rights that other human beings cannot
logically deny without implicitly calling into question their own personhood.
Yet one also will spend a lifetime becoming the person that one ultimately
wants to be. One is never fully satisfied with what one already has become;
there is always something more to be achieved. In addition, whether one
likes it or not, one has still unmet responsibilities to the divine persons by
way of an appropriate response to their ongoing offer of life and love to
oneself. The divine persons, in other words, presumably created each of us
for a reason, that is, for a specific role in the cosmic process that only each
of us (and not someone else) can best play within the divine plan for the
“recapitulation of all things in Christ” (Eph :). Thus at every moment of
one’s life, one is not simply one person among many others in some
generic sense; instead, one is ever becoming a more individuated person,
either for better or for worse.
Colin Gunton in his book The One, the Three, and the Many likewise
claims that a return to the classical doctrine of the Trinity could be an antidote
to the ills of excessive individualism in contemporary Western society. In
thinking through this proposal, however, he has recourse, not to the
Western church’s understanding of the divine persons as subsistent relations
vis-à-vis one another within the unity of one God, but to the notion of pericho-
resis as employed by the Greek-speaking Fathers of the Eastern church: “God
is not God apart from the way in which Father, Son and Spirit in eternity give
and receive from each other, what they essentially are. The three do not
merely coinhere but dynamically constitute one another’s being.”He
further claims that perichoresis is empirically verified in the way that
human beings deal with one another. He cites the philosopher John
Macmurray to the effect that persons mutually constitute one another,
make each other to be what they are.He also indicates how in the world
of contemporary culture a perichoresis of past, present, and future is
As mentioned above, in note , Deane-Drummond makes this point clear in her book
The Wisdom of the Liminal.
Colin E. Gunton, The One, the Three, and the Many: God, Creation, and the Culture of
Modernity (New York: Cambridge University Press, ), .
Ibid., . See also John Macmurray, Persons in Relation (London: Faber, ), , .

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

needed in order not to privilege unfairly one time-dimension over the others
in the understanding of how human nature has evolved and in what direction
it might be headed.Finally, he points to the way in which physicists and
other natural scientists increasingly recognize that “for an interaction to be
real, the ‘nature’ of the related things must derive from these relations,
while at the same time the relations must derive from the ‘nature’ of the
things.”
Here I am completely in agreement with Gunton. His return to the notion
of perichoresis within the classical Greek understanding of the doctrine of the
Trinity provides a very worthwhile framework for thinking through and
resolving many of the problems associated with excessive individualism in
contemporary Western society. What I do not find in his presentation,
however, is a sufficiently articulated metaphysical explanation of the notion
of perichoresis. For example, how does one explain perichoresis so that the
three divine persons by virtue of their perichoretic relation to one another
are still only one entity? If divine dancing (perichoresis) involves three
persons, is their unity as one God to be found in the activity of dancing, in
themselves as dancers, or both in dancing as a common activity and in the
dancers as individual entities at the same time? Likewise, if, as Aristotle main-
tained, causes necessarily exist prior to what they cause, how can one justify
the claim that human beings in and through their perichoretic relations with
one another simultaneously co-constitute one another? By the same token,
how do past, present, and future interpenetrate so as to produce the
ongoing unity of the evolutionary process? Finally, in the subatomic world
of quantum physics as well as with the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, it
is one thing to say that everything “may be what it is and not another
thing, but it is also what it uniquely is by virtue of its relation to everything
else.”But how is one to explain that statement? Is the relationship ontolog-
ically prior to the things related or vice versa? Or are the relationship and the
things related causally interdependent, so that neither can exist without the
other?
Gunton by his own admission is working with analogical rather than univ-
ocal concepts.But these analogical concepts demand further metaphysical
articulation if they are to be taken seriously as indicative of the way that the
God-world relationship actually works. For example, if Gunton had conceived
Gunton, The One, the Three, and the Many, .
Ibid., . Reference is to Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Order Out of Chaos: Man’s
New Dialogue with Nature (London: Fontana, ), .
Gunton, The One, the Three and the Many, .
Ibid., –.
Personhood as Ongoing Gift from Others and to Others

https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the God-world relationship along the lines of a systems-oriented Trinitarian
panentheism, such as I have presented in this article, then he could have log-
ically claimed that perichoresis governs not only the relations of the divine
persons to one another within the divine life-system but also the relation of
all finite entities to one another within the cosmic process. For perichoresis
is in the first place the governing principle or mode of operation for the
divine persons. But, insofar as the cosmic process is an active participant in
the divine life-system from the moment of the Big Bang onward, it too is gov-
erned by the workings of perichoresis at every level of existence and activity.
That is, in relating to one another perichoretically, individual entities every-
where within the cosmic process co-constitute systems that in turn are peri-
choretically related to one another. That is, lower-order systems provide the
indispensable infrastructure of higher-order systems, and the higher-order
systems in turn provide the superstructure or necessary boundaries for the
proper workings of the lower-order processes. As Whitehead points out in
Process and Reality, a “structured society” or society composed of multiple
subsocieties “provides a favorable environment for the subordinate societies
which it harbors within itself.”The divine life-system unobtrusively provides
the “favorable environment” for the independent workings of the cosmic
process. The One (the divine life-system) thereby conditions but does not
fully determine the dynamic relation of the Many (the multiple systems of
interrelated entities within the cosmic process) to one another.
In conclusion, then, I propose that human personhood should be under-
stood as a gift from and to others as well as a permanent and unchanging attri-
bute of what it means to be a human being. For this understanding of human
personhood fits better within a contemporary systems-oriented approach to
reality such as I have laid out above. Likewise, for Christians it can also be
seen as derivative from a more contemporary process-oriented understand-
ing of the doctrine of the Trinity, namely, as co-constitutive members of a
transcendent community or archetypal life-system. Finally, given the individ-
ualistic character of contemporary Western culture, an emphasis on the inter-
dependence of entities on one another rather than on their independence
from one another seems to be more needed at the present moment.
Whitehead, Process and Reality, .
I have used this model for the understanding of the relation between the One and the
Many in many earlier publications, but perhaps most notably in The One in the Many:
A Contemporary Reconstruction of the God-World Relationship (Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans,
)
and
Subjectivity,
Objectivity,
and
Intersubjectivity
(West
Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, ).

J O S E P H A. B R A C K E N
https://doi.org/10.1017/hor.2018.57 Published online by Cambridge University Press

